The Brand 
Bubble
The Looming Crisis in Brand 
Value and How to Avoid It
John Gerzema
Ed Lebar
Foreword by Peter Stringham, CEO 
Young & Rubicam Group


Praise for The Brand Bubble
“The 21st century business will see two types of winners: the low-
price/low-cost products and services, and strong brands. Today, 
margins, proﬁ ts, and equities are driven by powerful brands. The 
grave danger is that brands are losing their way. The Brand Bubble 
explains the greatest risk to world business and how to avoid it. If 
you are in the brand business, only the intuitive geniuses should 
get dispensation from reading this brilliant, analytical, data-rich 
guide to sustained proﬁ table growth in what will continue to be 
an extraordinarily competitive and challenging environment.”
— Peter Georgescu, chairman emeritus, Young & Rubicam, and 
author, The Source of Success
“With a subject written about ad nauseam by both practitioners 
and academics, in The Brand Bubble John Gerzema and Ed Lebar 
have identiﬁ ed a signiﬁ cant trend that leaves most of the other 
theories in the dust. Building off the ﬁ fteen-year investment 
Young & Rubicam has made into the proprietary Brand Asset 
Valuator, John and Ed have captured the concept of energized 
differentiation in an easily understood and recognizable fashion. 
They have reinforced that although brands are ‘owned’ by the 
consumer, the ﬁ nancial rewards to the manufacturer or service 
provider are signiﬁ cantly greater when their brands are continu-
ally energized through creativity, innovation, and well-paced 
change. The book provides a well-thought-out approach to 
 keeping brands vibrant and relevant in today’s highly competi-
tive environment.”
—Jim Murphy, chairman and CEO, Murphy & Co., and retired 
chief marketing and communications ofﬁ cer, Accenture

“After reading this book, you’ll never think of brands the same way 
again. It will open your eyes to a new way of thinking and executing.”
—Dermot Boden, chief marketing ofﬁ cer, LG
“This book is a must for anyone interested in the strategy and value 
of brands—a riveting read with serious implications for investors, 
corporate strategists, and brand managers. The intersection of 
brand strategy and shareholder value has been underserved by the 
literature, but these authors serve up something that is timely, big, 
and useful, with new thinking based on their research and real-
world experience.”
—Justin Pettit, partner, Booz & Company
“This book is a must-read for anyone who manages brands or 
invests in companies that manage brands. Through a brilliant 
analysis that charts shareholder value to brand value, Gerzema 
and Lebar identify a brand bubble that puts most companies at 
signiﬁ cant downside risk, and they then chart a path that the 
more savvy companies could follow to ﬁ nd their way through to 
the other side when the bubble almost inevitably bursts.”
— Mark Penn, worldwide president and CEO, Burson-Marsteller, 
and president, Penn, Schoen & Berland
“This is a business book that happens to be about brands. Any 
manager in any line of business must learn how to protect and 
nurture their most cherished asset. Brands are under attack, and 
boardrooms need to pay attention.”
— John Rose, senior vice president and managing director, the 
Boston Consulting Group
“Gerzema and Lebar propose a startling idea—that the value of a 
brand lies not in the stability and consistency of its promise, but in 
its constancy of motion. The implications are profound, and will 
keep even the most seasoned brand managers up late at night.”
—Chris Trimble, coauthor, Ten Rules for Strategic Innovators

“This book is an indispensable tool for brand stewards who 
 compete in today’s dynamic, global, and digital marketplace, 
where the paths that lead to brand performance are ever more 
complex.”
— Chris Shimojima, vice president, global digital commerce, 
Nike, Inc.
“The Brand Bubble will help companies navigate the complexity of 
driving consumer delight in an ever more complex and crowded 
world where media and messages can blur into a collage of con-
fusion. Their insights provide a stimulating guide to building 
brand value through sound analysis and execution.”
— Michael Tatelman, vice president and general manager, sales 
and marketing, Dell Consumer
“John Gerzema and Ed Lebar offer very creative and innovative 
insights about how to establish consistency between the ﬁ nancial 
market performance measure of a brand and the measure of the 
customers’ esteem toward a brand, thus avoiding the fallout of 
a brand bubble. Empirical evidence provided for their concerns 
about current brand management and for their prescribed rem-
edies is indeed impressive and well founded. It is an excellent 
book for brand managers to read and refer to for a successful 
brand management career.”
— C.W. Park, professor of marketing, USC Marshall School of 
Business
“This book has been meticulously researched to provide a com-
prehensive yet accessible understanding into how great brands 
are built today to sustain competitive advantage and generate 
asset value.”
— Cammie Dunaway, executive vice president, sales and 
 marketing, Nintendo

“John Gerzema and Ed Lebar lay out a very dynamic way to think 
about brands and shareholder value. We are convinced that the 
Brand Asset Valuator is a valuable tool to assess the ﬁ nancial 
impact of your brand and the power of its marketing.”
— Joseph Plummer, chief research ofﬁ cer, Advertising Research 
Foundation
“The Brand Bubble raises thought-provoking challenges and 
paradoxes. Can a company meet its demise through misguided 
efforts at brand building? Providing a compelling argument that 
long-term ﬁ nancial success is closely linked to what  consumers 
truly perceive about your brand, the authors offer valuable 
insights on how to refocus brand building on fulﬁ lling your 
brand promise to consumers.”
— Anne-Flore Goldsberry, vice president of worldwide 
 marketing, Logitech

The Brand 
Bubble
The Looming Crisis in Brand 
Value and How to Avoid It
John Gerzema
Ed Lebar
Foreword by Peter Stringham, CEO 
Young & Rubicam Group

Copyright © 2008 by Young & Rubicam Brands
Published by Jossey-Bass
A Wiley Imprint
989 Market Street, San Francisco, CA 94103-1741—www.josseybass.com
No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted in any form 
or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, scanning, or otherwise, except as 
permitted under Section 107 or 108 of the 1976 United States Copyright Act, without either the prior 
written permission of the publisher, or authorization through payment of the appropriate per-copy fee 
to the Copyright Clearance Center, Inc., 222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923, 978-750-8400, fax 
978-646-8600, or on the Web at www.copyright.com. Requests to the publisher for permission should 
be addressed to the Permissions Department, John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 111 River Street, Hoboken, NJ 
07030, 201-748-6011, fax 201-748-6008, or online at  www.wiley.com/go/permissions.
IKEA material is used with the permission of Inter IKEA Systems B.V.
Amazon, Amazon.com, and the Amazon.com logo are registered trademarks of Amazon.com, Inc., 
or its afﬁ liates.
VODAFONE and the Vodafone logo are trademarks of the Vodafone Group.
Limit of Liability/Disclaimer of Warranty: While the publisher and author have used their best efforts 
in preparing this book, they make no representations or warranties with respect to the accuracy 
or completeness of the contents of this book and speciﬁ cally disclaim any implied warranties of 
merchantability or ﬁ tness for a particular purpose. No warranty may be created or extended by sales 
representatives or written sales materials. The advice and strategies contained herein may not be 
suitable for your situation. You should consult with a professional where appropriate. Neither the 
publisher nor author shall be liable for any loss of proﬁ t or any other commercial damages, including 
but not limited to special, incidental, consequential, or other damages.
Jossey-Bass books and products are available through most bookstores. To contact Jossey-Bass directly 
call our Customer Care Department within the U.S. at 800-956-7739, outside the U.S. at 317-572-3986, 
or fax 317-572-4002.
Jossey-Bass also publishes its books in a variety of electronic formats. Some content that appears in 
print may not be available in electronic books.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Gerzema, John.
 The brand bubble : the looming crisis in brand value and how to avoid it / John Gerzema, Ed Lebar ; 
foreword by Peter Stringham.
   p. cm.
 Includes bibliographical references and index.
 ISBN 978-0-470-18387-8 (cloth)
 1.  Brand name products—Valuation. 2.  Branding (Marketing) 3.  Brand name products—Case 
studies.  I. Lebar, Ed. II. Title.
 HD69.B7G43 2008
 658.8'27—dc22 
                                                             2008027384
Printed in the United States of America
first edition
HB Printing  10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1

Contents
  
Foreword 
ix
By Peter Stringham, CEO, Young & Rubicam Group
PART ONE: INTRODUCTION 
1
 1 
Tulipmania and Inﬂ ated Brands 
5
 2 
Can You Say “Irresistible”? 
32
 3 
Wall Street, Meet Main Street 
57
 4 
The Postmodern Craving for Creativity 
77
 5 
Welcome to ConsumerLand 
87
PART TWO: APPLICATION 
113
 6 
Stage One—Exploration: Performing 
an Energy Audit 
119
Case study: LEGO—Play Well
 7 
Stage Two—Distillation: Identifying the 
Energy Core 
153
Case study: Virgin Atlantic—Brilliant Basics, 
Magic Touches
 8 
Stage Three—Ignition: Creating an Energized 
Value Chain 
179
Case study: Xerox—The Energy Inside
 9 
Stage Four—Fusion: Becoming an Energy-Driven 
Enterprise 
199
Case study: Mumbai Tifﬁ n Box Suppliers—Human Energy
vii

viii  Contents
 10 
Stage Five—Renewal: Active Listening and Constant 
Refreshing of Brand Meaning 
218
Case study: UNIQLO—Seeing Farther
  
Epilogue: A Brand May Be Famous, But Is It 
Creating Return for Shareholders? 
233
  
Notes 
235
  
Acknowledgments 
241
  
The Authors 
243
  
Index 
245

ix
 Foreword  
 This book has an important message — not just for marketers, 
but also for CEOs, ﬁ nancial analysts, and anyone who invests in 
consumer - facing companies. Every professional today must be acutely 
aware of the creative and management efforts required to launch a 
brand and sustain its proﬁ tability in the marketplace. We live and 
die on the strategic decisions that we must invent each day to ensure 
that our products capture not only dollars but also imaginations. 
 
 That ’ s why the theories in this book are so critical. The mes-
sage of  The Brand Bubble  will no doubt be as much of a shock to 
you as it was to me: that many, many brands are in serious trouble. 
I have no doubt that this bubble is already occurring, and it will 
probably continue. I applaud John and Ed for bringing this story 
out and making sense of it all. Their analysis of the problems 
devaluing brands today and their recommendations for possible 
solutions are insightful and worthy of attention. 
 
 Those who read this book will need to interpret its thesis in terms 
of the metrics they use to assess their own brand ’ s performance. The 
same is true for the management and marketing recommendations 
presented in the second half of the book. No one knows for certain 
how to transform a brand caught in the brand bubble. While this 
book gives you some remedies, we are entering a whole new area of 
marketing thought. Discovering what solutions are right for you will 
require some testing and learning. Frankly, we do not have all the 
answers, but what we do have is the ability to assess how much indi-
vidual brands are affected by this worrisome trend. 
 
 If there is one thing I can conﬁ rm, it is that this book is based 
on evidence from an amazingly accurate research tool that Y & R has 
maintained for more than ﬁ fteen years, BrandAsset ® Valuator, 
(BAV). I can attest to the BAV ’ s accuracy from personal experi-
ence as an agency executive and as a CMO. 
 
 I ﬁ rst learned of BAV in 1997 when Peter Georgescu and Alex 
Kroll, the original champions of BAV recruited me for a position 

x  Foreword
at Y & R. I was, ﬁ rst of all, very impressed that an agency would 
invest tens of millions of its own dollars researching brands and 
consumer attitudes. But then I was even more impressed by the 
fact that it was the only analysis of how brands are built that had 
been tested against the ﬁ nancial metrics that create enterprise 
value. In the end, the BAV was one of the factors that led me to 
accept a job with Y & R as CEO of its North American operations. 
 
 Then, in 2001, I left to join HSBC in London as CMO, 
responsible for global marketing and brand development. Prior 
to my arrival, HSBC had been struggling to create a uniﬁ ed 
brand message in the minds of the millions of customers the 
company had picked up through dozens of acquisitions. Having 
originated as the Hong Kong and Shanghai Banking Corpora-
tion, HSBC was by this time the world ’ s second - largest bank, com-
posed of individual banks in dozens of countries around the 
world, all rebranded with the HSBC livery. To understand what 
the brand needed, I contacted one of my old colleagues at Y & R 
and asked him for the BAV proﬁ le on the banking industry. 
 
 The data and insights in that proﬁ le revealed what had to be 
done to make a world - class brand for HSBC. With the BAV data 
setting the guideposts, coupled with qualitative research that gave 
insight into what I call the DNA of HSBC, we created the posi-
tioning of  “ The world ’ s local bank. ” The results were remarkable. 
In ﬁ ve years, HSBC went from a brand value of $100 million to 
$11 billion! 
 
 When I returned to Y & R in 2007 as its worldwide CEO, I dis-
covered that in my absence, the company had discovered some-
thing new in the BAV data — the rumblings of the brand bubble 
described in this book. It proved to me that BAV is a living, evolv-
ing study. It constantly throws out new ways of looking at brands. 
It is a marvelous sieve that dredges up some amazing nuggets, if 
you have the right people to assay them and the determination 
to apply their advice. John and Ed lay out some very intriguing 
and challenging dilemmas in this book, which should occupy us 
all for some time. I hope you enjoy the challenge! 
 New York City 
 Peter Stringham 
 July 2008 
 CEO, Young  & Rubicam Group  

The Brand Bubble


1
 Part One  
Introduction  
 Today, a dilemma faces marketing and the larger enterprise. The 
tried - and - true formulas to create sales and market share behind 
brands are becoming irrelevant and losing traction with consum-
ers. We know this through extensive research we ’ ve been conduct-
ing through our BrandAsset ® Valuator (BAV), an empirical model 
that, based on global consumer research, is designed to explain 
how brands grow, decline, and recover. 
 Between 1993 and today, BAV has grown into one of the most 
respected brand models based on its construction of the largest 
brand and financial databases in the world. In speaking at the 
Leaders in Dubai Business Forum in November 2007, professor 
Philip Kotler said,  “ There are few effective ways to measure the 
value of a brand, but one of the best is Y & R ’ s Brand Asset Valua-
tor. ”  We ’ ve watched brands achieve popularity, blaze like comets, 
and come crashing to earth. We ’ ve seen brands build slowly from 
humble beginnings, and we ’ ve seen others that weakened, only to 
be resurrected. We ’ ve marveled as still others have changed the 
way consumers see in the world in which they live. 
 In the summer of 2004, we discovered several curious trends 
that took us by surprise. Our research clearly established that con-
sumer attitudes about all sizes and segments of brands were 
severely declining. Across the board, we saw signiﬁ cant drops in 
consumer top - of - mind awareness, trust, regard, and admiration 
for not a few but thousands of brands. We found that most brands 
were not adding to intangible value of their enterprises. Instead, 
the majority of brands were stalled in the consumer marketplace, 
like cars on a Friday afternoon on the 405. 

2  The Brand Bubble
 At the same time, however, brands were creating more and 
more value for their companies and shareholders. Our economet-
ric models demonstrated this value creation was evident in 
increased share prices and signiﬁ cant bursts in intangible value. 
Because bullish investors believed that brands were growing, they 
expected future revenue growth and an increase in share prices, 
driving their value even higher. Why? 
 When all the facts were put together, we discovered that yes, 
there is an increasing expansion of intangible value, but this value 
is actually the by - product of  fewer and fewer brands.  The number of 
high - performance, value - creating brands is diminishing across the 
board. Sure you can say Google, Apple, and Nike and think all 
brands are ﬁ nancial juggernauts. But the reality is that while brand 
valuations on the whole keep appreciating, brand perceptions and 
actual value creation are crumbling. 
 This is a recipe for ruin. 
 This book lays out credible evidence that points to a develop-
ing problem that, if not corrected, could drive down valuation 
multiples and stock prices around the world. We ’ ve concluded 
from a detailed analysis of a decade ’ s worth of brand and ﬁ nancial 
data that business is riding on yet another bubble: a  brand bubble. 
 Why is this happening? 
 It ’ s clear to us that the traditional business models and strate-
gies marketers have used for generations no longer work. Their 
failure is not simply the result of living in a world of high technol-
ogy, it stems from the birth of a fundamentally different consumer. 
Consumer behavior has changed so rapidly and so profoundly it 
requires an entirely new vision of brand management. While most 
managers still see metrics like trust and awareness as the backbone 
of how brands are built, our analysis shows they ’ re dead wrong —
 these metrics do not add to increased asset value. In fact, the effort 
to follow them leads marketers astray, actually hastening the 
declining value of their brands. 
 The good news, however, is that our research also helped us 
identify the way to jump - start the power of branding again. 
Through our studies, we began noticing a new dimension coalesc-
ing around a few brands that were successfully performing. In 
BAV, we observed consumers being captivated by a certain prop-
erty in successful brands — a quality that reﬂ ected a more exciting, 

Introduction  3
dynamic, and creative experience. In essence, they ’ re concentrat-
ing their passion, devotion, and purchasing power on an increas-
ingly smaller portfolio of special brands — brands that keep 
exciting and evolving. 
 We now know the brands that are thriving already — and 
will succeed in the future — have an insatiable appetite for creativ-
ity and a questing spirit for change. What they have is a more 
powerful form of differentiation, one that is constantly evolving 
and leading consumers forward. It ’ s something we call  Energized 
Differentiation.  Brands with this quality become irresistible to con-
sumers by offering a palpable sense of movement and direction. 
We ’ re now able to demonstrate the economic value of  irresistible 
brands and explain how they break out to impact the future ﬁ nan-
cial performance of their ﬁ rms. 
 The implications are far - reaching: We ’ re at the dawn of a new 
age in brand management and marketing. Both must undergo a 
great transformation in business today. Only in learning new rules 
of brand management will enterprises broaden the impact of their 
innovation and more closely align their brand and marketing 
efforts to desired outcomes in their overall business strategy. 
 We wrote this book to be valuable and practical for anyone 
involved in managing a company or a brand, or working in any 
capacity in product management, marketing, and sales. We are 
speaking to a wide assortment of people, from CEOs and chief 
marketing ofﬁ cers to brand managers to entrepreneurs and small 
company owners who may be launching brands of their own. 
 The literature on branding is extensive, but we promise you 
will find in this book significant new thinking to inspire your 
brand and, we hope, shift the foundation of your business and 
marketing models. Our analysis and recommendations pertain to 
companies of all sizes and degrees of reach. You can be a local 
grocer or a global conglomerate, it doesn ’ t matter; if you have a 
brand, this book ’ s for you. Cheers. 
  The Brand Bubble  provides both analysis and prescription. The 
ﬁ rst half explains the research we performed at Y & R that caused 
us to recognize the existence of the brand bubble and to identify 
the attributes of energy infusing irresistibility into today ’ s leading 
brands. We analyze the new consumer behaviors, expectations, 
and mind - set we call  ConsumerLand,  which demands that brands 

4  The Brand Bubble
embrace speed, openness, and a commitment to constant 
change. 
 In the second half of the book, we guide you in detail through 
a ﬁ ve - stage model to show you how to develop an irresistible brand 
as well as how to completely alter your organization to become 
consumer - centric and embrace the brand as an organizing prin-
ciple. These are the keys to ensure sustainable, proﬁ table perfor-
mance. 
 As you think about your brand management going through 
these stages, we offer a free invitation to assess your brand using 
our research. We have thousands of brands on hand, and chances 
are we have yours. Please visit www.thebrandbubble.com, where 
you can gather deeper, more comprehensive online data about 
your brand, along with reading additional information and 
updates to this book. 
 Our goal is to inspire you to ﬁ nd the energy in your brand and 
make it irresistible through new brand management rules that are 
in synch with today ’ s world. Not only do we believe that you will 
ﬁ nd bigger proﬁ t and greater success following our principles, we 
also think that irresistible brands can help change the world to 
make life easier, more creative, and happier for people everywhere 
on this planet. 

5
 Chapter One  
Tulipmania and Inflated 
Brands   
 Men, it has been well said, think in herds; it will 
be seen that they go mad in herds, while they only 
recover their senses slowly, and one by one! 
 — Charles Mackay 
 In 1841, Charles Mackay wrote his famous book  Extraordinary Pop-
ular Delusions and the Madness of Crowds  to describe various market-
ing phenomena. Of special note was his passage on  “ Tulipmania, ”  
an occurrence that took place in Holland in the early decades of 
the 1600s. The madness began when tulip bulbs imported from 
Turkey were found to grow extremely well in Dutch soil. The 
Dutch aristocracy acquired an immense taste for their beauty, and 
seeing how much could be made from tulips, thousands of average 
citizens sold their assets and began buying the bulbs. People from 
all economic classes began trading in tulip bulbs at exorbitant 
prices. Speculators even took out futures contracts on unplanted 
bulbs, convinced that some varieties were slated to become the 
most expensive objects in the world. But at the height of the hys-
teria, which ﬁ nancial records trace to a few months between 1636 
and 1637, the craze for tulips suddenly withered, leaving thou-
sands of Holland ’ s most successful businessmen holding worthless 
contracts while the less afﬂ uent who had invested in the ﬂ ower 
lost entire life savings over a bunch of dried bulbs. 

6  The Brand Bubble
 Tulipmania might have been no more than a footnote in 
Dutch history were it not such a clear example of something that 
has happened time and time again around the globe over the last 
several centuries. As recently as the past decade, modern business 
analysts using econometric models and computer algorithms 
acted as blind to irrational investing as their counterparts in 
 seventeenth - century Holland. Financial busts stemming from 
the dot - coms, Internet equipment manufacturers, and subprime 
mortgages are but a few examples of recent market tumbles 
after which investors, like the Dutch and their shriveled bulbs, 
were left with inordinate losses. The bubbles of 1929, 2000, and 
most recently, Northern Rock, Countrywide, and the litany of 
credit - crunch - inducing banks, hedge funds, pension funds, and 
public trusts all over the world — continually prove that even 
the most intelligent analysts and savvy consumers can be every 
bit as susceptible to self - deception as giddy ﬂ ower speculators 
in clogs. 
 A bubble is a curious thing. In hindsight, it seems so obvious 
and predictable, while anyone caught up in the middle of one is 
blind to its potential for disaster. In all bubbles, one constant 
always predicates a collapse. That is the optimistic assumption that 
someone else will always be willing to buy what you are selling, 
regardless of how irrationally high the price is relative to the bare 
facts of the product ’ s underlying value. 
  The Impending Brand Bubble 
 Now, another bubble is hiding in our economy. This bubble rep-
resents $4 trillion in S & P market capitalization alone. It ’ s twice 
the size of the subprime mortgage market. And it accounts for 
over one - third of all shareholder value. Credible evidence suggests 
that  ﬁ nancial markets think brands are worth more than the consumers 
who buy them. The constantly rising valuation of major brands is 
creating a brand bubble, one that could erase large portions of 
intangible value in ﬁ rms and send a shockwave through the global 
economy. 
 Figure 1.1 illustrates the typical value exchange between 
brands and consumers. In essence, the multiples that markets 
place on brand value overstate actual consumer sentiment, so the 

Tulipmania and Inflated Brands  7
value creation that brands bring is greatly exaggerated. That is, 
Wall Street is long on brands; consumers are short on brands. 
 Fissures are forming in the pillars of brand equity. This con-
clusion is based on our research of fifteen years of brand and 
ﬁ nancial data from Y & R ’ s BrandAsset Valuator (BAV), the world ’ s 
largest study of consumer attitudes and perceptions on brands. 
Working with professors from several leading business schools, 
we ’ ve identiﬁ ed a growing divergence between brand valuation 
and brand speculation. Our data indicates that investors are irra-
tionally overvaluing brands, and that if leading companies don ’ t 
take steps to change their approach, more than a few of them 
might soon experience dramatic declines in market value. 
 Of course, this is not to suggest that some stellar brands are 
not genuinely outperforming the market and setting new stan-
dards in customer loyalty and ﬁ nancial performance. But in most 
cases, these are precisely the brands that serve as examples of what 
other companies must do to inject value back into their own 
brands. These are the brands consumers swoon over, tell their 
friends about, and buy time and time again. These are the brands 
that drive a company ’ s stock beyond the estimates of financial 
experts. These are the brands that create surprise earnings quar-
ter after quarter. 
 The problem is these stellar brands are becoming fewer in 
number. In today ’ s changing consumer climate, exceptional 
brands are just that — exceptions. Most of the brands lining our 
supermarket shelves, hanging from department store racks, or 
touting their superiority on television are experiencing a rapid 
The Brand Bubble
Wall Street’s Estimation of
Perceived Consumer Utility
Consumers’ Actual Perceived Utility
Price
Cost
Value to Consumer
Value to Company
 FIGURE 1.1. THE NATURE OF THE BRAND BUBBLE. 

8  The Brand Bubble
diminution of perceived value. Consumers are simply falling out 
of love with a majority of brands they buy. 
 This warning about the prices of assets such as brands being 
in decline is, without doubt, contrary to what most people 
believe. Just as with equities and property in past bubbles, the 
market values of brands have been consistently rising for decades. 
Even in today ’ s recessionary climate, brand valuations reports 
continue to proclaim consistently rising brand values each year. 
How then is a brand value collapse possible? Thousands of brands 
have experienced large and long - term successes driving their cor-
porate stock in a continuous upward pattern, enriching execu-
tives and investors alike. What exactly is the nature of this bubble? 
Are we talking about a simple market correction that will be for-
gotten in a few months or a year? And, if that is so, then why 
bother with it? 
 In reality, this is not a simple market correction. Our research 
foretells a signiﬁ cant loss of value for many brands that will jolt 
business and investors alike. Markets, being about expectations, 
have pushed brand values to unsustainable levels, where the earn-
ings potential imputed to thousands of brands far outstrips their 
value to the consumer. These expected future cash flows that 
brands are expected to account for have grown to become a dom-
inant force in driving total business value. But their future value is 
unsustainable when we uncover and analyze the true state of most 
brands today. 
 As CEOs search for future pathways to growth, their brands 
now account for a growing proportion of total enterprise value. 
This means their brands are making bigger promises of future 
earnings. Are those earnings going to be there in the future? Have 
most companies properly discounted the risk on their rising brand 
values? 
 When future earnings are in question, it ’ s more than a brand 
problem; it ’ s  a business problem.  Most of the discussion surrounding 
the tectonic shifts in the digital, consumer, and media landscape 
has been held at the marketing and brand level. By examining 
these phenomena through the lens of brand value, we can see 
how new consumer behaviors are causing widespread perceptual 
damage to the values of all but a handful of brands. Let ’ s begin by 
examining the origins of the brand bubble . . . . 

Tulipmania and Inflated Brands  9
 Measuring the Worth of an Enterprise 
in Intangible Value 
 Every bubble presents an appearance of value that is eventu-
ally contradicted by reality. In the case of the brand bubble, it 
begins with the value business places on intangibles. Today, they 
are a signiﬁ cant driver of overall enterprise and market value of 
a ﬁ rm, contributing far more than the value of sales and proﬁ ts. 
It ’ s an inexact science to pinpoint how much, because traditional 
accounting practices still don ’ t have a precise method to estimate 
the contribution intangibles make to enterprise value. However, 
most accounting models recognize that brand names, logos, and 
other intellectual property are part of a company ’ s overall intan-
gible worth. The investor community has long acknowledged the 
market value of a company includes not just invested capital and 
tangible hard assets but also intangible soft assets. 
 Intangibles include the estimated value of effects like brands, 
market position, operational advantages, proprietary processes, 
franchise agreements, customer lists, patents, copyrights, and com-
pany reputation. Intangibles have no physical presence, but they 
are nonetheless powerful elements on the balance sheet. In this 
sense,  “ brand value ”  is one of four major elements of intangible 
value (Figure 1.2). 
 In the last five decades, the intangible value of firms has 
formed a larger and larger proportion of overall enterprise value. 
(Intangible value is estimated as the difference between enterprise 
Intangible
Assets
Knowledge
Business System
Market Position
Brand
Brands, customer goodwill,
trademarks, company reputation
Contracts, licenses,
legal monopolies, customer lists
Organizational models, software
investment, proprietary processes,
franchisee rights
R&D, patents, human capital,
intellectual property
 FIGURE 1.2. WHAT ARE INTANGIBLE ASSETS? 

10  The Brand Bubble
value and book value, the formula being  “ debt  market capital-
ization   book value  intangible value. ” ) As we move further 
into an ideas - driven economy, the measure of a firm ’ s worth 
revolves more and more around its inventiveness and intellectual 
capabilities, and less around its hard assets. 
 In 2006,  Fortune  magazine conducted a survey indicating that 
72 percent of the Dow Jones Market Cap is now intangible. Accen-
ture estimated that intangibles accounted for almost 70 percent of 
the value of the S & P 500 in 2007, up from 20 percent in 1980. 
SAP reported intangibles to be as high as 80 percent prior to the 
Internet bubble of 2000. Brand Finance plc stated that the market -
 to - book ratio (market capitalization divided by book value) of 
the S & P 500 grew from around 3 in the early 1990s to nearly 
6.6 prior to the dot - com bust, dropping back to around 5 today, 
a growth indicative of a rise in intangible value. Our own esti-
mates show intangibles playing a greater role in overall ﬁ rm value. 
(Figure 1.3.)  
 This rise in intangible value is also a worldwide phenomenon. 
A twenty - year trend reveals the entire global economy is increas-
ingly powered by imagination and ideas. Brand Finance recently 
completed an extensive study of global intangible value, estimating 
that the value of every quoted company among the world ’ s twenty -
 five leading stock markets reflected 99 percent of the world ’ s 
60
Enterprise Value
30
1950s
2000s
1990s
1980s
1970s
Years
1960s
50
40
 FIGURE 1.3. INTANGIBLE ASSETS ARE MAKING UP A LARGER 
PROPORTION OF ENTERPRISE VALUE. 
 Source: BAV databases and Y & R historical research.

Tulipmania and Inflated Brands  11
global GDP. This analysis demonstrated that 62 percent of the value 
of the world ’ s business is now intangible, representing $19.5 trillion of 
the $31.6 trillion of global market value (Figure 1.4). When we 
look at fast - growing markets that have incredible growth rates, 
they especially exhibit an increasing proportion of their enterprise 
value largely due to intangibles. In India, for instance, where GDP 
growth rates approach 9.4 percent annually, intangible value rep-
resents a whopping 76 percent of enterprise value. 
 Brands as Drivers of Intangible Value 
 Brands have become an independent force in the modern econ-
omy. David Haigh, CEO of Brand Finance, told us in a phone 
interview,  “ The total worth of the 250 most valuable global brands 
is $2.197 trillion. ”  To put this in perspective, these brands collec-
tively exceed the GDP of France. 1 Even the value of the world ’ s 
top ten most valuable brands exceeds the market capitalization 
of 70 percent of U.S. public companies, according to Booz  & 
Company. 
FIGURE 1.4. TWO-THIRDS OF THE GLOBAL ECONOMY IS NOW INTANGIBLE.
Source: Brand Finance, 2007.
 
Intangible Value of Businesses Internationally
 
Value of intangibles (billions) 
% of enterprise value
India 
$251 
76%
Switzerland 
$643 
74%
France 
$1,213 
73%
Australia 
$461 
72%
USA 
$9,201 
71%
Canada 
$795 
68%
UK 
$2,010 
66%
Spain 
$506 
60%
Italy 
$507 
59%
South Africa 
$217 
60%
Brazil 
$158 
47%
Singapore 
$92 
45%
Total Global 
$19,500 
62%

12  The Brand Bubble
 According to Joanna Seddon, EVP of Millward Brown Optimor, 
who oversees the BrandZ Top 100 Most Powerful Brands survey, 
 “ Brands account for approximately 30 percent of the market 
 capitalization of the S & P 500. The S & P ’ s market cap is about 
$12 trillion, meaning that brands represent about $4 trillion, on 
a pure stock market valuation basis. ”  Joanna urges caution that 
this is not the total value of all brands in the world or even in the 
United States, only the brands owned by the ﬁ ve hundred compa-
nies included in the index. And while these companies are also 
U.S. based, they ’ re often global as well. But regardless, the num-
ber is big — and growing: Brand values rose in their contribution 
to shareholder value from 5 to 30 percent over the past thirty 
years, as Figure 1.5 illustrates.  
 While estimates vary based on sector and company, David 
Haigh also found that in some cases, brand value constituted the 
bulk of enterprise value. Nike ’ s brand value accounted for 84 percent 
of its total company value. Prada ’ s brand represented 73 per-
cent. In 2007 alone, the aggregate value of the brands in the 
600.00
0.00
Year
Market Capitalization of the S&P 500
1978–2010E
Market Capitalization
(index 100 = book value of equity)
1978
2010E
1982
1986
1990
1994
1998
2002
2006
500.00
400.00
300.00
200.00
100.00
“Irrational exuberance”
Other intangibles
Brand value
Book value of equity, indexed
 FIGURE 1.5. BRAND IS A CRITICAL AND GROWING DRIVER OF SHAREHOLDER VALUE. 
 Source: Bloomberg,  BrandZ, MB Optimor analysis,  © Millward Brown 
Optimor, 2007.

Tulipmania and Inflated Brands  13
BrandZ Top 100 report increased by 21 percent to $1.94 trillion, 
more than double the increase of the preceding year. A robust 
assessment of brands is also evident in many of the recent  “ big 
bang ”  deals, like News Corporation ’ s acquisition of MySpace at a 
multiple of minus 514.5 times earnings, indicating that the brand 
and its potential to throw off future cash flows was the driving 
force in the deal. Google was running at a P/E ratio of ﬁ fty - four 
times earnings when we wrote this, and our Y & R BAV ’ s last esti-
mate of Google ’ s brand value was 50 percent of its market capital-
ization. PepsiCo shows a tangible book value of $9.8 billion against 
a market value of $108 billion. Even if we include in PepsiCo ’ s 
book value the intangible assets like goodwill that are actually 
quantiﬁ ed on its balance sheet, the Wall Street value is still more 
than $95 billion over the company ’ s worth, indicating that inves-
tors are banking on the brand. 
 Based on careful scrutiny and analysis, it would be difﬁ cult not 
to conclude that sound brands are the single most valuable assets a 
company can possess. John Stuart, former chairman of Quaker 
Oats, put it well when he said,  “ If the businesses were split up, I 
would take the brands, trademarks, and goodwill, and you could 
have all the bricks and mortar — and I would fare better than you. ”  
 Snap, Crackle, Pop Goes Brand Value 
 But as with Tulipmania, the belief that brands are worth so much 
is really only as sound as the credulity of the Wall Street inves-
tors, pundits, and executives who are driving up market prices. 
Beneath their belief is another story. While the last two decades 
have witnessed incredible intangible growth, the reality shows a 
precipitous decline in consumer respect and loyalty for brands. 
While brand value has been increasing, brand components that 
impact current performance have been decreasing. Lost in the 
discussion of new media, channel fragmentation, and the digitiza-
tion of the world is the fact that the changing consumer landscape 
has hollowed out brand value. 
 To illustrate the basis for our prediction, we need to present 
the differences in brand metrics that drive intangible value and 
stock price versus those that drive current performance and sales. 
While these are both measures of the success of brands, they are 

14  The Brand Bubble
based on different methods of assessment, which in turn leads to 
different results in evaluating a brand ’ s future potential and sus-
tainability. When the two measures correspondingly rise, a brand 
is achieving the results its management is working toward — growth 
in asset value and sales. But when the two measures don ’ t jibe, 
there ’ s something rotten in Brandville . . . . 
 The traditional goal of marketing is to create and capture con-
sumer value. Marketers use brands to build consumer interest, 
esteem, and respect. Marketers know that when consumers stop 
respecting and trusting brands, their loyalty diminishes and they 
either stop buying or expect incentives such as price discounts to 
recapture their loyalty. Lost consumer interest can turn a brand 
into a commodity or destroy it completely. The time lag between 
a drop in consumer perceptions and lost market value will vary 
with the brand, but the correlation is undeniable. 
 Since 1993 we ’ ve conducted extensive statistical and attitudi-
nal research through our proprietary research tool, BrandAsset® 
Valuator (BAV). Working with leading academics and undertaking 
enormous waves of consumer studies, we ’ ve produced one of the 
most stable ﬁ nancial models for valuing brands and branded busi-
nesses in the world. Y & R has invested more than $113 million to 
track forty thousand brands across forty - four countries on more 
than seventy - ﬁ ve brand metrics. With our headquarters in New 
York and key research centers in London, S â o Paulo, Tokyo, 
Madrid, Shanghai, Mumbai, Singapore, Moscow, Milan, Paris, and 
Sydney, each year we interview almost 500,000 customers around 
the world with surveys in more than forty languages. From Arabic 
to Zulu, we ask consumers how they feel about local, regional, and 
multinational brands, media, and celebrities. We also measure the 
political status of countries as brands. In the United States, we 
assess brands and companies by talking to thirteen thousand cus-
tomers quarterly. Collectively, the information we obtain forms 
the world ’ s most comprehensive and longest - running global data-
base on brands. To contextualize our data we conduct ethnograph-
ies, focus groups, consumer juries, and online panels in more than 
ninety countries each year. Because of its scale, longevity, and vali-
dation, BAV is recognized as a powerful diagnostic tool for under-
standing how successful brands are built and managed. BAV is 
constantly enriched with each new wave of research, and, as a 

Tulipmania and Inflated Brands  15
result, has shifted over time to reﬂ ect the changing nature of con-
sumers and their relationship to brands. 
 In 2004, we were examining the correlations between changes 
in various brand measures in BAV and changes in the future ﬁ nan-
cial performance of companies. At the time, we were trying to 
measure how brands impact the current and future ﬁ nancial per-
formance of their enterprises. We were studying a universe of nine 
hundred multinational  “ mono - brands, ”  that is, companies that 
stake their market value on a single powerful brand and derive 
more than 80 percent of their annual revenue from that brand. 
This included ﬁ rms like Intel, McDonald ’ s, and Microsoft. 
 Much as meteorologists analyze the various forces of nature to 
assess which combination causes hurricanes, we began analyzing 
many consumer variables based on our years of BAV data to see if 
we could tell which group of brand attributes came closest to 
explaining unanticipated changes in stock price, especially upward 
valuations. Our emphasis was on unanticipated stock price 
changes, because market values already anticipate a wide range of 
corporate ﬁ nancial and performance factors. We mapped forty -
 eight different brand attribute scores in BAV against the brands ’  
stock prices, trying to pinpoint which combination of attributes 
created the greatest market movement. We didn ’ t doubt that 
brand values were rising, nor were we trying to prove they 
shouldn ’ t. We were believers in brand value as a driver of intangible 
value — and we still are. But while doing that research, however, we 
discovered an enormous anomaly, a huge gap in valuations. 
  While Wall Street has been bidding brand values ever higher, consumer 
perceptions toward brands are substantially eroding. To our astonishment, 
as we were not even looking for it, we found that the consumer rat-
ings on four key classic attitudes toward brands — awareness, trust, 
regard, and esteem — were tumbling! 
 These four measures are nothing more complicated than what 
is found in Marketing 101 textbooks. Generations of marketing 
professionals have long accepted them as the deﬁ ning measures 
of brand health. These are the classic metrics that drive current 
brand performance and sales and account for brand equity. If the 
metrics of awareness, trust, regard, and esteem are high, it indi-
cates a positive sign that consumers are likely to continue purchas-
ing and remain loyal to their brands. 

16  The Brand Bubble
 But according to the data, consumer attitudes toward brands 
were in double - digit decline. And this erosion did not pertain to 
just a few brands, but to thousands. We saw large numbers of 
well - respected brands that had, on average, lower scores on these 
metrics — results low enough that marketers would consider them 
indicative of  “ commoditized attitudinal patterns. ”  These are num-
bers that basically say consumers know the brands well, but they 
are hardly inspired to buy them. 
 This discrepancy was enormously puzzling. We couldn ’ t under-
stand how brand values could be rising during this entire period 
when the data showed sharply falling consumer perceptions. If 
brand values were rising, why weren ’ t the traditional metrics 
of brand equity as seen by consumers rising with them? The sane 
marketing professional would expect a positive correlation 
between brand value and the classic metrics of performance and 
sales. Instead, we found a signiﬁ cant negative correlation, as illus-
trated in Figure 1.6. 
FIGURE 1.6. THE “VALUATION GAP” ACCORDING TO CONSUMERS.
Source: BAV 1993–2007 brand data. Copernicus, Jack Trout, and Kevin Clancy.
 
Perception 
Reality
If brand value is increasing, so should 
brand trust.
Brands are less trusted than ever.
Trustworthy ratings dropped almost 
50% over the last 9 years.
If brand value is increasing, brands 
should be more liked and admired.
Brands are less liked and respected.
Esteem and regard for brands fell 
by 12% in 12 years, and very few 
brands are widely regarded across the 
general population.
If brand value is increasing, brands 
should be better known.
But brands are less salient than ever.
Awareness of brands fell by 20% in 
13 years.
If brand value is increasing, quality 
perceptions of brands should be 
increasing as well.
Consumers feel brands are less quality.
Brand quality perceptions fell by 24% 
over the past 13 years.
If brand value is increasing, 
more brands should be clearly 
differentiated.
Brand differentiation declined in 40 of 
46 categories studied by Copernicus/
Market Facts. And only 7% of prime 
time commercials were found to have 
a differentiating message.

Tulipmania and Inflated Brands  17
 This inconsistency became a burning incentive for our analysts 
to look around to conﬁ rm if our measurements and conclusions 
were sound. Sure enough, we found other market researchers 
around the world noting some early signs of the same brand melt-
down. The Henley Centre highlighted an erosion of big brands 
beginning in 1999 in the United Kingdom. In their annual study of 
the seventeen largest, most iconic British brands, sixteen showed a 
decline in consumer trust. Their research attributed this to the 
brands ’  inability to evolve their offerings to keep pace with public 
expectations. In successive studies between 2000 and 2007, the 
 Carlson Marketing Group found a decline in consumer loyalty to 
brands. In 2000, four in ten consumers showed a genuine prefer-
ence for or commitment to only one brand, but that dropped to one 
in three consumers in 2001, and crashed further in 2007 to less than 
one in ten consumers feeling committed to a single brand. 
 Since that original 2004 analysis, we have continued to witness 
erosion in traditional brand perceptions. Even as we write, the 
numbers persist in a downward spiral of declining awareness, trust, 
regard, and esteem among consumers. In July 2008, just as we 
were ﬁ nishing this book, we found further evidence of the bubble 
when we examined the highest - performing brands in BAV on 
the basis of their contribution to intangible value creation. In that 
analysis,  we found an increasingly smaller number of brands accounting 
for a disproportionate share of the value being created. 2 While the aggre-
gate contribution of brands to intangible value creation was once 
distributed fairly evenly across our database, now it ’ s becoming 
more like the 80/20 rule: Consumers are reserving their devotion 
and dollars for a basket of truly  “ irresistible ”  brands, leaving the 
rest to ﬁ ght for existence on a hostile terrain of promotion and 
discounting. Fewer and fewer brands are actually creating the busi-
ness value, leaving more brands on the bubble. 
 Meanwhile, markets trade on thousands of branded compa-
nies with inﬂ ated values relative to the future performance we pre-
dict them to have. While Wall Street is happily running away with 
the idea that all or most brands are increasingly valuable, the 
underlying facts show that most brands are simply riding along, 
relying on a dwindling number of exemplary brands to prop up 
their respective values. Yet cadres of business, ﬁ nance, marketing, 
media, and advertising consultants seem to believe in a brand 
folly: that their brands are forever bankable and will continue 

18  The Brand Bubble
rising. Their rosy forecasts sound like the makings of another 
Tulipmania. 
 These overstated assumptions of future brand earnings also 
lead us to wonder, Why has no one bothered to ask the consumer? 
Surely an asset as vital as a brand is best measured against the 
value attributed to it by the buyer, rather than by a speculator? It 
also begins to reveal how little the ﬁ nancial markets (and many 
businesses for that matter) really understand brands and brand 
building. This is something we explore in great detail in this book, 
in an effort to help you understand how consumers actually build 
desire in brands and how this passion creates future value. 
 Marketing ’ s Perfect Storm 
 We aren ’ t Chicken Little saying,  “ The sky is falling, ”  but there 
are macroeconomic implications when aggregate brand values, 
according to consumers, are overstated. Our extensively collected 
data is reliable cause for us to caution that the underlying infra-
structure of most brands is weakening, portending potential dam-
age to the enterprise values of many companies across various 
economies and regions of the world. 
 Thinking of brands collectively as an industry, such as real 
estate, is useful for underscoring our concerns. Residential 
real estate represents only 16 percent of the U.S. economy, but 
the ripple effect of the U.S. credit crunch has created widespread 
volatility in the global markets. Analysts at UBS now estimate the 
financial fallout from mortgage - backed securities to be nearly 
$600 billion. In the United States, the drop in home prices in 
the first quarter of 2008 was the largest in three decades. New 
home sales hit a record low, while mortgage foreclosures hit an 
all - time high in the fourth quarter of 2007. For the ﬁ rst time since 
1945, the amount of debt tied up in American homes is now 
greater than the equity homeowners have built up. No wonder 
consumer conﬁ dence according to the Reuters and University of 
Michigan survey is at a sixteen - year low. 3 
 We collected and analyzed this data for the years 1993 – 2007, a 
period of overall robust economic growth. But now we ﬁ nd our-
selves in a value - driven economy. We expect further downward 
consumer sentiment in an environment where (as of this writing) 

Tulipmania and Inflated Brands  19
commodity inﬂ ation is rampant: Wheat prices have doubled in 
the last year alone, global food prices have risen 77 percent since 
2005, and oil edges to an all - time high of $140 a barrel, while the 
number of Americans who declared bankruptcy last year increased 
by 40 percent. 4 In previous recessions we had low energy and food 
prices. This time around we have the twin impacts of signiﬁ cantly 
higher costs and limited supply of both commodities affecting 
consumers ’  purchasing decisions, the implications of which few 
have inclination to grasp in their entirety. Brands will come under 
greater practical consumer scrutiny and the bubble is likely to 
envelop more and more brands. 
 The big question, of course, is what ’ s behind this brand bub-
ble? What explains why brands have lost consumers ’  trust and 
respect? What are brand marketers supposed to do about the fall-
ing metrics of performance and sales, the most meaningful signs 
that predict the future of their brands? 
 Needless to say, we have pondered these questions long and 
hard, seeking to identify causes. We have formulated many 
answers, most based on our BAV data (which we will be detailing 
throughout this book), but some are theoretical — though they 
reﬂ ect our substantive real - world marketing experience with thou-
sands of brands. Clearly the issues are complex, with many diverse 
factors dragging down brand perceptions among consumers. 
These include a world of graying august products, whose market-
ability is running up against growing consumer boredom; the loss 
of consumer loyalty and emotional attachment to any one brand 
in increasingly competitive categories; dramatically changing con-
sumer attitudes and purchasing patterns — which we are going to 
cover extensively in Chapters Three, Four, and Five. 
 For now, we distill our analysis to just three fundamental 
causes that we see as collectively diminishing consumer desire for 
brands. These causes are singular but interlocking, with each one 
intensifying the others, creating a bad cocktail that consumers are 
no longer interested in drinking. The question you may ask is, 
Why now? While none of these factors are entirely new, they ’ ve 
never before happened simultaneously, and against the dramatic 
backdrop of profound changes of a new digital, media, and con-
sumer landscape. Collectively, as Figure 1.7 shows, they ’ re taking 
a far greater toll on brands than anyone had previously thought. 

20  The Brand Bubble
 Excess Capacity 
 Every marketer is up against this new reality: the world is teeming 
with brands, and consumers are having a hard time assessing the 
differences among them. The average supermarket today holds 
30,000 distinct items, almost three times as many as in 1991. In 
2006, the U.S. Patent and Trademark Ofﬁ ce issued 196,400 trade-
marks, almost 100,000 more than in 1990. And according to a 
Datamonitor report, 58,375 new products were introduced world-
wide in 2006, more than double the number in 2002. This report 
points out that  “ despite the fact that advertising spending was up 
from $271 billion in 2005 to $285 billion in 2006, 81% of consum-
ers could not name one of the top 50 new products launched in 
2006, an all - time high for lack of recognition and a huge leap up 
from 57% in the previous year. ” 5 
Any way you view it, there ’ s a glut of brands.  Paradox of Choice 
author Barry Schwartz vividly demonstrated a shopping trip to the 
average supermarket where he found 285 varieties of cookies, 275 
types of cereals, and 175 different salad dressings. (Fortunately he 
also found 80 different pain relievers.) In the  “ Decline of Brands ” 
article for  Wired back in 2004,  Wisdom of the Crowds  author James 
Surowiecki ﬁ rst reported a veritable dumping of brands on the 
market:  “ The average American sees 60% more ad messages per 
day than when the ﬁ rst President Bush left ofﬁ ce. A handful of years 
ago, David Foster Wallace fantasized in  Infinite Jest  about an 
Sources of
Consumer
Malaise Toward
Brands
Loss of
Trust
Excess
Capacity
Lack of
Creativity
 FIGURE 1.7. THE TRIPLE THREAT. 

Tulipmania and Inflated Brands  21
America in which corporations sponsor entire years — the Year of 
the Whopper, the Year of the Depend Adult Undergarment. The 
fantasy seems more reasonable by the day. ” 6 
 There are so many brands today that many companies have 
begun to rid themselves of poor performers and unnecessary line 
extensions. Unilever has cut almost four hundred brand SKUs 
from its holdings. Some companies are even divesting leading mar-
ket position brands, succumbing to the pressure to drive growth, 
even if it has to be found in their lower - end brands. This is a grow-
ing problem for established brands in developed markets, where 
top - line growth can ’ t keep pace with shareholders ’ expectations. 
 Consumers are not moving away from brands for want of 
choice; they have more choice than they could ever know what to 
do with. There ’ s more of everything. More channels. More tech-
nology. More messages. More devices. More networks. The effect 
of excess capacity in media fragmentation, multi - channel distribu-
tion and ways to personalize content has resulted in more types of 
consumer behaviors, creating less differentiation among the waves 
of products on the market. Brands have blurred into a sea of same-
ness. A study by Copernicus and Market Facts reported that in 
more than ﬁ fty product and service categories, none became more 
differentiated over time and 90 percent declined in differentia-
tion. 7 An Ernst  &  Young study of new brands showed over 80 per-
cent failing due to lack of differentiation. Jack Trout and Kevin 
Clancy, writing for  Harvard Business Review,  said that only two cat-
egories of brands were becoming more distinct (soft drinks and 
soap), but forty other categories are homogenizing, as the brands 
within them become indistinguishable. They also found that  “ only 
7 percent of ads out of a study of 340 prime - time commercials 
included a  ‘ differentiating ’  message. ” 8 
 This lack of brand difference ultimately leads to commoditiza-
tion. Barring meaningful distinction, brands enter into a transac-
tional relationship with consumers, letting price dictate the 
purchase decision. Whenever marketing turns on the price pro-
motion faucet, consumers begin to commoditize products. And 
why wouldn ’ t they? If price becomes all the marketer has to say 
about a brand, why wouldn ’ t consumers come to expect more of 
it? After all, if brands descend into comparative advertising and 
everyday low prices, it only encourages consumers to play along 

22  The Brand Bubble
and shop for deals. If no bargain arises, they are quite willing to 
switch to retailer brands with increasingly comparable quality. 
 Another study undertaken by Clancy found that brand name 
trumps price in importance only in the categories of automobiles, 
liquor, and beer. In twenty - eight of thirty - seven other categories, 
consumers buy on low price, not brand name. 9 In a 2006  Harvard 
Business Review  article, Leonard Lodish and Carl Mella noted, 
 “ Price premiums have eroded, and margins are following suit. 
Consumers are 50% more price sensitive than they were 25 years 
ago. In recent surveys of consumer - goods managers, seven out of 
ten cited pricing pressure and shoppers ’ declining loyalty as their 
primary concerns. ” 10 
 In the end, price promotions erode margins and proﬁ table 
growth, inviting even faster commoditization. It ’ s a bad cycle, 
especially for established brands. When a brand in this type of 
competitive position begins to say the same thing repeatedly (low 
price), consumers begin to think they already know everything 
there is to know about the brand, and it becomes even more 
challenging to build differentiation. As our BAV data demon-
strates (Figure 1.8), consumers are largely sleepwalking through 
Average Differentiation % Gain
2006 –2007
25.0
0.0
0–10
90–100
10–20
20–30
21.0
14.5
13.8
13.5
8.8
8.5
9.8
8.8
11.8
12.0
30–40
40–50
50–60
60–70
70–80
80–90
20.0
15.0
5.0
10.0
Knowledge Rank in 2007
 FIGURE 1.8. THE MORE CONSUMERS KNOW A BRAND — THE LESS 
THEY FEEL IT ’ S DIFFERENT. 
 Source: BAV, 2006 – 2007; All Adults.

Tulipmania and Inflated Brands  23
their relationships with familiar brands from too many rational 
appeals and too much repetitive marketing that shows up in all 
the same old familiar channels and doesn ’ t say anything new or 
exciting.  
 Historically, preference for brands in BAV was always greater 
than usage. In 2000, on average, this preference was 25 percent 
greater than actual usage for any given brand. This reﬂ ected con-
sumers ’  passion, interest, and even lust for brands, regardless of 
whether or not they currently used or purchased them. This desire 
to engage with a brand epitomized its potential beyond the prod-
uct it offered. 
 Recently, something interesting has occurred. Brands are now 
used more than they are preferred. Functional beneﬁ ts and rele-
vance now outweigh the intangible and emotional allure of a 
brand. Today average usage of a brand is 8 percent greater than its 
preference. In a world where choices and distribution options are 
increasing dramatically, at a time where consumers are much 
more informed, the result is a more commoditized market. Ulti-
mately, commoditization is the beginning of the end for a brand. 
As soon as a brand competes on price, consumer loyalty takes a 
walk. Citing retail industry tracking ﬁ rm NPD Group, Surowiecki 
also noted,  “ Nearly half of those [consumers] who described 
themselves as highly loyal to a brand were no longer loyal a year 
later. Even seemingly strong names rarely translate into much 
power at the cash register. ”  And, worse, he referenced another 
study that said,  “ just 4% of consumers would be willing to stick 
with a brand if its competitors offered better value for the same 
price. ”  Did you hear that: just 4 percent. With numbers like that, 
there ’ s not much of a brand left. 
 Lack of Creativity 
 Why do so many brands exist? One good reason is it doesn ’ t take 
much today to launch a me - too brand. Technology has democ-
ratized industry, making it easy for anyone to imitate just about 
any product or service within weeks and market to millions. The 
Internet enables distribution costs to move toward zero. And 
many of the products being created today are more intellectual -
 capital - intensive than physical - capital - intensive. In some industries, 

24  The Brand Bubble
so many copycat products have appeared that it takes an Excel 
spreadsheet to keep track of them all. 
 But it ’ s not just a matter of more products — more of them 
are better made. Personal computing power is ten times faster in 
only five years. You can buy a $59 cocktail dress designed by 
Madonna at H & M. Muji can ﬁ ll your apartment with incompa-
rable style, at low prices. Mobile phones in Japan, Korea, and 
Scandinavia have so much functionality they practically make 
love to you. Even a $2 toy from China has a high - quality sound 
chip inside. Meanwhile, the shift in power over two decades to 
the retailer has eroded manufacturer margins and cut invest-
ments in innovation. Venerable brands are then forced to com-
pete with these same retailer brands that are now anything but 
generic. As competition for available business intensiﬁ es and 
investors push companies to drive market performance beyond 
the organic levels of demand, quality levels continue to rise 
beyond the mean level of customer tolerance. Now even the lowest -
 priced goods exceed the average acceptable quality levels for 
most people. With high quality meeting surplus demand, con-
sumers become more demanding while less willing to pay more, 
so highly innovative products tip faster into the mass market, 
whether it ’ s a $.99 razor blade or a $29.99 Razr. When brands 
can ’ t differentiate by simply being better and more affordable, 
the pressure to be more creative is even greater. Real creativity 
is the only way to break through the clutter. 
 Consumers are looking for highly creative brands to simplify 
choice. But much of what passes for creativity is imitative and 
incremental, and unduly rational. (Sometimes a brand can be 
downright unpleasant, like the ﬂ ashing image of the 2012 London 
Olympics brand identity that turned out to induce epileptic sei-
zures.) Back in the day when products were scarcer, a category 
might comprise just three brands, and marketing was a simpler, 
more linear process, it was easy to construct rational arguments 
and be top of mind. Production, distribution, and sales were more 
local, or regional at most. There was less media, channels, messag-
ing, and competition for consumer eyeballs. 
 But today, escalating volumes of messaging compete for 
shorter and more distracted attention spans among consumers. 
As the 2006  International Television and Video Almanac points out, 

Tulipmania and Inflated Brands  25
 “ Americans are currently bombarded with an estimated 5,000 
marketing messages each day, up from 3,000 in 1990 and only 
1,500 in 1960. ” 11 As more and more information, brands, media, 
technology, and selling are squeezed into less space for consum-
ers to make a decision, it gets increasingly unlikely an ordinary 
brand can consistently sit top of mind with a majority of people 
for very long. 
 Even brands that once enjoyed near - universal awareness now 
live in a world where consumers move quickly through consump-
tion, chewing up brands and spitting them out when they no lon-
ger satisfy. Today ’ s consumers are expedient, cycling through 
technology, information, products, media, and brands quickly. If 
a brand isn ’ t heading somewhere with velocity and purpose, dem-
onstrating creativity at every turn, it loses its distinction and place 
in the memory. 
 In the end, the lack of creativity shows up in a decline in brand 
awareness, differentiation, and saliency, the ironic consequence of 
giving consumers overwhelming choice. Sometimes people really 
can have too much of a good thing. 
 Loss of Trust 
 Brands originated as trust marks during a time when quality, safety, 
and reliability were big issues. In this pre - regulatory world, brand 
name products offered assurance that they were better made and 
more durable. People needed to know things as fundamental as 
 “ eating this brand won ’ t kill you. ” 
 Now it seems that while quality permeates many categories 
and price points, buyers are quickly losing expectations of having 
good product experiences. Indeed, we found through BAV that 
product quality ratings among many leading brands have declined 
24 percent since 1993. 
 The facts show that the amount of trust resting on a brand 
today is a ghost of what it was ten years ago. In 1997, the majority 
of brands (52 percent) enjoyed exceedingly high levels of con-
sumer trust. But society ’ s faith in institutions, corporations, and 
leaders has been severely rocked with scandals and mistrust, from 
Mad Cow disease in our livestock to human growth hormones in 
our baseball players. One by one, scandal after scandal has 

26  The Brand Bubble
knocked corporate credibility, leaving few brands immune. By 
2006, consumers voted only 25 percent of brands as trustworthy, 
halving the number of trusted brands in less than one decade 
(Figure 1.9). 
 In recent years, a variety of politically motivated movements 
have also begun to challenge the integrity of brands and consumer-
ism. Naomi Klein ’ s popular book  No Logo  explored the collateral 
damage of globalization in brands. One British man, Neil Boorman, 
attempted to live a year without brands and launched his campaign 
with a publicity stunt where he torched his Nike trainers and Gucci 
loafers. A year later, he wrote a book about his experiences,  Bonﬁ re 
of the Brands: How I Learned to Live Without Labels,  which sought to 
denigrate brands and their value to commerce and society. His 
insurrection against brands continued with  Brand - aid  (brand -
 aid.info), which provides tips and guidance on de - branding your 
life, including how to  “ diagnose brand addiction and how best 
to beat it. ”  There ’ s also antiadvertisingagency.com, a blog devoted 
Percent
60
0
1997
2006
52%
46%
33%
26%
25%
2005
2003
Year
Percentage of Trustworthy Brands Over Time
2001
50
40
30
20
10
All Brands
 FIGURE 1.9. CONSUMER TRUST IN BRANDS HAS DECLINED 
BY 50 PERCENT IN TEN YEARS. 
* Deﬁ ned as brands with   20 percent endorsement on Trustworthy attribute.
 Base: BAV 1997, 2001, 2003, 2005, 2006; All Adults.

Tulipmania and Inflated Brands  27
to attacking  “ out of home ”  advertising in order to  “ democratize the 
outdoors and return it to people, not corporations. ”  
 These anti - brand attitudes might be written off as fringe, but 
they are increasingly moving into the mainstream. Consider Face-
book ’ s beacon debacle, where ﬁ fty thousand members signed a 
petition on MoveOn.org within days to protest the company ’ s con-
troversial plan to track their movements. Even a cherished brand 
like Facebook is no longer immune from consumer backlash. 
 And when it comes to trust, most brands face a growing gen-
eration gap: In our discussions, Millennials soundly criticized mar-
keters for being controlling and resisting change. We realized that 
like a wiki page, the concept of  “ what is the truth ”  is open to cri-
tique and always changing. Because Millennials live in an open 
source culture, they expect to co - create truths and accept they will 
evolve. They feel a brand ’ s integrity is earned through openness 
and embracing ﬂ ux, but since very few brands act this way, they 
have an even smaller repertoire of brands they truly respect. 
 Consumers also think brands are more disposable due to tech-
nology, mergers, and acquisitions. MindSpring was a beloved ISP of 
the late nineties; then EarthLink gobbled it up and retired the 
brand name. Cingular developed into a powerful brand, only to be 
reduced to the orange backdrop behind the blue AT & T logo. So 
many brand disappearances have occurred that consumers now 
actively contemplate the concept of  “ permanence ”  in a brand. 
Because without it, what ’ s their reward? Why should they feel a 
brand is going to be there for them in the future, when corpora-
tions eradicate brands or change how they operate in the name of 
corporate synergies? Who wants to be loyal to a 128K modem or left 
waiting at the door for an undelivered movie from Kozmo.com? 
 The brand marketer ’ s most cherished tool, advertising, has 
also taken a big hit in consumer trust. According to the Newspaper 
Advertising Bureau, 34 percent of American consumers in 1965 
could name the brand of a commercial aired during a show. Thirty 
years later only 8 percent can do so. 12 A recent Forrester study also 
shows consumers ﬁ nd advertising less useful and inﬂ uential, with 
significant drops in their assessment of advertising ’ s ability to 
inform or persuade them, or to build respect for companies. State-
ments like  “ I buy products because of their ads ”  declined from 
29 percent to 13 percent between 2002 and 2006. And  “ Companies 

28  The Brand Bubble
generally tell the truth in ads ”  fell from 13 percent to a paltry 6 
percent over the same period. 13 
 This is because consumers are interrogating brands on their 
own, thank you very much. This behavioral shift from passive 
receiver to active investigator is growing. And it ’ s remaking con-
sumers as self - reliant, practical, and tribal. (See Figure 1.10.) 
 Instead of traditional advertising, consumers are increas-
ingly turning to nontraditional sources of information such as 
search engines and peer - to - peer interactions. This information, 
2006
27%
2005
25%
2004
19%
2006
15%
2005
18%
2004
19%
“I like to research
products online and
purchase them offline.”
“Advertisements help 
me decide what to buy.”
“Price is more important 
to me than brand names.”
“I would pay more 
for products that save 
me time and hassles.”
Base: U.S. Households
30
0
Percent
25
20
15
10
5
Consumers are driven by research, not advertising
Consumers focus more on price
2006
50%
2003
60
Percent
10
Years
50
40
30
20
2004
2005
47%
48%
48%
43%
42%
32%
34%
 FIGURE 1.10. CONSUMERS ARE BECOMING HARDER TO SATISFY. 
 Source:  “ Topic Overview: Customer Experience, ” Forrester Research, 
September 2007.

Tulipmania and Inflated Brands  29
collected from their social networks and ratings and reviews 
sites, is often more inﬂ uential than the millions pumped into 
traditional marketing. Even though this is well known, a 2007 
McKinsey survey found that over one - third of McKinsey clients 
still devoted less than 10 percent of their marketing budgets to 
nontraditional media. 14 Perhaps this explains why the ANA Mar-
keting Accountability Study found that 42 percent of ﬁ rms are 
dissatisﬁ ed with their ROI measurements: The world is dramati-
cally changing and most companies aren ’ t yet certain how to mar-
ket to consumers and what criteria to use to measure  marketing 
success.  
 Not the Way to Escape the Bubble 
 Now you know why we believe there ’ s a bubble. On one hand, Wall 
Street, investors, and brand executives all believe that brands have 
limitless potential that will continue to drive already burgeoning 
enterprise and market values. On the other, consumers are send-
ing out clear signals that they are no longer enamored of many of 
our brands and are not committed to future loyalty. Consumers are 
overwhelmed with undifferentiated brands and excessive choice; 
they are left uninspired by the lack of creativity in many brands, 
and they have lost their trust in brands to be unique and special 
enough to attract their emotional and ﬁ nancial commitment. The 
advent of social media and new communications technologies is 
dramatically empowering consumers, while upending the natural 
order of brand valuations at a terrifying rate of speed. 
 Where does this leave those of us who are responsible for mar-
keting and managing brands? How can brands build sustainable 
long - term value to bring them back into alignment with Wall 
Street ’ s expectations and valuations? 
 The answer is not found in simply redoubling efforts to 
win back consumer awareness, esteem, and respect. Too much 
has changed in the world to just return to the old methods of 
marketing and expect better results. As Einstein said, you can ’ t 
get out of a problem using the same kind of thinking that created 
the problem. 
 A chess player who is suddenly confronted with a three -
 dimensional board will ﬁ nd the game disorienting. Even though 

30  The Brand Bubble
the same basic rules still apply, the new dimension of play 
requires a quantum leap in conceptualization and strategy. Mar-
keters and brand managers today are facing a similar challenge. 
New market realities require a fundamentally new approach to 
manage a brand as a moving target. 
 Yet much of conventional marketing continues to operate in a 
time warp. Most marketers keep striving to build consumer per-
ceptions that only drive current sales today. They happily skip 
along, stressing reason over emotion and persuasion over inspira-
tion, still believing that customers can be programmed to lifetime 
relationships, and that brands can forever maintain their intangi-
ble elixir of attraction and lasting cachet. 
 This manner of marketing pays too much deference to the 
brand ’ s existing equities. Past as Prelude thinking in marketing 
and brand management has been the norm in many companies 
for decades. But the consumer is now clearly telling us a brand ’ s 
reputation is only what it did yesterday. Brand equity is simply a 
reﬂ ection of  past accomplishments. The images, emotions, and feel-
ings form an accumulated impression of the brand right up to this 
moment in time. They can create a false sense of security, as though 
past recognition can continue to generate an endless stream of 
future proﬁ ts. This creates a  “ brand as statue ”  mentality — and we 
know what pigeons do to statues! 
 The collapsing aggregate brand measures of awareness, trust, 
regard, and esteem reﬂ ect the complacent manner with which too 
many marketers are thinking about brand equity. With account-
ability for brand performance under increased scrutiny, working 
to improve metrics like trust, saliency, and regard is simply no lon-
ger enough to create lasting brand value. That old marketing par-
adigm has made us passive and unresponsive to the new world 
brands live in. Consumers no longer buy brands for the reasons 
marketers think are important. Marketers who continue to look at 
traditional metrics are missing what consumers are really after. 
Continuing the same marketing strategy will only further com-
moditize your brand. 
 Today, brands are in peril if they stand still. Currencies 
and market caps ﬂ uctuate constantly, and brand reputation is sub-
ject to the same market forces. Brand strategies have to evolve and 
adapt to meet the needs of consumers who care little for what the 

Tulipmania and Inflated Brands  31
brand used to be. However much they knew it, liked it, or trusted 
it — that ’ s all water under the bridge. Many famous brands are now 
in ﬁ nancial straits, and quite a few are even in Chapter 11. Look 
around at the airline and automotive industries — where brands 
regularly go belly up, despite 90 percent awareness. 
 Brand equity isn ’ t the protective insulation it once was. Today, 
brands are decaying in compressed cycles of time. Every successful 
brand must be permanently leading, adapting, surprising, innovat-
ing, involving, and responding — behaving differently at different 
times with different customers, and collaborating, not just per-
suading. With limitless choice and expanding consumer power, 
nothing can stay the same, as consumer focus is now on what ’ s 
moving and what comes next. 
 If marketing ’ s role is to create value for the consumer, many 
marketers have forgotten the definition of marketing. They 
have replaced the word  value  with  sales.   Consumers then value 
brands less because business has forgotten what a brand really is. 
A brand is, after all, a promise. A brand offers a contract that’s 
immensely emotional and personal. A brand reinforces our iden-
tity and self-worth. It offers a more opportunistic way to see our 
world. A brand makes us feel special and different. A brand makes 
our future more hopeful.
So we have in brands promises of future earnings to share-
holders that now comprise a third of a company’s value—but the 
promises brands make to consumers are now in doubt.  Any bubble 
inevitably bursts. And all bubbles leave winners as well as losers. 
The next chapter holds the key to understanding how to be like 
those winning brands, those who are building true business value 
and making themselves irresistible to consumers. 

 Chapter Two 
 Can You Say 
 “ Irresistible ” ?   
 Things in motion sooner catch the eye than 
what not stirs. 
 — Shakespeare,  TROILUS AND CRESSIDA, Act III, Scene III  
 Despite the presence of the bubble, $775 billion was invested in 
marketing communications across the globe in 2008. Compa-
nies are spending an astonishing $19 billion annually on mar-
ket research, with very different results. There can hardly be six 
people in Uzbekistan who haven ’ t met in a focus group for fruit 
yogurt. What are so many marketers missing? Why despite our best 
efforts are consumers falling out of love with so many brands? 
  Finding Links Between Brand 
Performance and Stock Return 
 In the ﬁ rst chapter, we told you a portion of our story about the 
research we were performing in 2004. The rest of the story is even 
more fascinating, because it led us to identify the most important 
brand dimension, which has heretofore gone undetected in driv-
ing brand performance and sustainability. 
 As we said, we were scouring our BAV data in 2004, seeking 
to ﬁ nd the key correlation between various brand attributes and 
unanticipated stock market returns. In that process, we started 
32

Can You Say “Irresistible”?  33
working with a number of brilliant economists, academics, and 
brand strategists. Two of these people were professors Robert 
Jacobson and Natalie Mizik. Jacobson is the Evert McCabe Distin-
guished Professor of Marketing at the University of Washington, 
where he has been a faculty member since 1984. Mizik is Gantcher 
Associate Professor of Business at the Columbia University Gradu-
ate School of Business, where she has been on the faculty since 
2002. 1 Both also did much of their early breakthrough brand 
equity research with branding guru David Aaker. 
 We need to retrace Jacobson ’ s history as a professor and 
researcher to explain the origin of our work to correlate our BAV 
data with market values. In the early 1980s, he was studying how 
factors like market share and product quality inﬂ uence accounting 
variables like ROI. In the course of his investigation, he uncovered 
that in certain cases, the ﬁ nancial markets anticipate the effects 
of these variables and react to them prior to the release of any 
accounting data. 
 “ As it turns out, ” Jacobson told us,  “ a lot of things can explain 
changes in stock returns other than just accounting data. There ’ s 
extensive information released by companies, voluntary and invol-
untary. A lot of that content is non - ﬁ nancial information, such as 
marketing and brand measures. But because this information has 
proﬁ t implications, if the market sees it changing, they realize it 
can have long - term impact on accounting measures. The markets 
then actually form their expectations of future performance from 
any type of  changing brand data, ahead of when future proﬁ ts are 
actually affected. ” 
 Translation: Brands signal important information, and inves-
tors and analysts look closely at this data for hints of performance 
and act on these expectations. The presumption of brand growth 
drives up current stock prices immediately. 
 Professor Jacobson then said,  “ We could also trace how 
changes in brands related to ﬁ nancial changes in the next two 
quarters. It seemed like, with the right research, we might be able 
to explain how ﬁ nancial markets react to changes in brand atti-
tudes because, in fact, they do show a relationship with future 
long - term accounting variables. So while brand imagery changes 
have a current term inﬂ uence, they also have a future inﬂ uence in 
sales related dimensions. ” 

34  The Brand Bubble
 Translation: Brand attitude changes are also valuable informa-
tion about the future. Like the ﬁ rst winds of a distant typhoon, 
they can have a predictive value on future sales, earnings, and 
stock prices one or two quarters down the road. 
 As market researchers, we became very interested in his work 
and decided to test his hypothesis on several high - tech and Inter-
net brands. Together we examined if changes in brand attitudes 
had early predictive effects on the market in explaining their stock 
returns, and, to our pleasant surprise, the ﬁ ndings were consistent 
with his hypothesis. For companies like Yahoo, Amazon, and eBay, 
in each case we found that attitude changes toward the brand 
were more predictive than other measures like brand awareness. 
In each case, we could actually see how attitude changes not only 
affected the current stock price but were predictive of a future 
upward swing. 
 Then, as we pondered over our weakening brand data in 
2004 like doctors confounded by a mysterious illness, we for-
mally teamed up with Jacobson and Mizik to perform the larger, 
more formal and comprehensive research project on those nine 
hundred multinational mono - brands we told you about. We cre-
ated an analytic model using complex statistical regressions on 
more than ten years ’  worth of brand data from BAV, along with 
1988 – 2003 ﬁ nancial data from Standard and Poor ’ s COMPUT-
STAT and the University of Chicago ’ s Center for Research in 
Security Prices from 1993 through 2003. Using the BAV con-
sumer attitude data we had gathered between 1993 and 2004, we 
began comparing brand attributes across forty - eight dimensions 
with the brand ’ s market performance, seeking to identify which, 
if any, combination of variables best explained unanticipated 
changes in stock price. 2  
 From this, we noticed that, in terms of driving ﬁ nancial value, 
not all brands performed equally. Some brands, it turned out, 
constantly created  exceptional attitude change that kept driving their 
ﬁ nancial numbers upward. They pulsed with a kind of creative life 
force that pushed their values upward even in declining markets. 
They continued evolving over time, providing a steady forward -
 looking vision and continuous excitement among the customers 
they served. We realized they had something unique we had never 
detected before. We named this dimension  energy. 

Can You Say “Irresistible”?  35
 Isolating the Nature of Energy 
 Precisely what is energy? The simplest answer is that  energy is 
the consumer perception of motion and direction in a brand. Energy 
can be found in any brand, large or small, new or old, in any 
category. And regardless of how much energy a brand has, 
a change in energy forecasts a change in ﬁ nancial performance 
of the ﬁ rm. 
 Intuitively, we know that if something contains energy, it 
moves, or has the potential to move. It has power and motion. In 
people, energy makes them attractive, admirable, and worth fol-
lowing. Issues and causes that galvanize us to come together and 
act have an energy of their own. We get energized by ideas that 
reframe our view of the world, or help us reach deeper inside our-
selves. Energy develops when there is conviction, creativity, inspi-
ration, optimism, and hope. And just as in the human condition, 
there is energy in brands. 
 The fact is, isolating and identifying this brand dimension, 
which acts as a predictive force for unanticipated market value, 
required a sophisticated research process — and a fair amount of 
research dollars. Our intuition alone didn ’ t detect this character-
istic behind the reasons why certain brands were leaping ahead of 
so many others. We performed extensive computations to isolate 
the variables of energy from our enormous database of consumer 
attitudes. 
 Our BAV research showed us a set of upwardly moving atti-
tudes that consumers ascribe to high - energy brands. These 
brands create a constant sense of interest and excitement. Con-
sumers sense they move faster, see farther, and are highly expe-
riential and more responsive to their future needs. In terms of 
our correlations, we saw a deﬁ nite pattern: the more energy a 
brand has, the greater consideration, loyalty, elasticity, pricing 
power, and brand value (as a percentage of ﬁ rm value) it com-
mands. This unique measure establishes a direct link between 
brand momentum and creativity, ﬁ nancial earnings, and stock 
performance. We can explain, and even predict, the movement 
in their stock prices. The brands shown in the collage in Figure 2.1 
are examples of some brands that currently have energy in vast 
quantities.  

FIGURE 2.1. AN ASSORTMENT OF BRANDS WITH HIGH ENERGY 
ACCORDING TO BAV.

Can You Say “Irresistible”?  37
 Add Energy, Become Irresistible 
 As we kept poring over the data it began to dawn on us that the 
reason why brand valuations were askew from what consumers 
really think and feel is that consumers themselves simply refuse 
to be commoditized. Brands still mean things — sometimes great 
things — to the people who buy them. People continue to pay a 
premium for brands that offer more than their competitors. And 
they gravitate toward brands that, despite having little different to 
offer, seem to have a certain thing about them. 
 What is this thing? It ’ s the ability of a brand to be  “ irresistible. ” 
The brands accountable for disproportionate value creation have 
a palpable and measurable energy that make them so compelling 
that they foster an irrational ﬁ delity. Through our research we 
distilled our learning down to six key principles that identify the 
essential characteristics of an irresistible brand:
 Principles of an Irresistible Brand: 
 Irresistible brands are highly irrational and yet entirely irrefut-
able. They create lust, envy, and badge value. They are provoca-
tive and daring while pleasing and reassuring. They let people 
feel good about themselves (and good about  paying more).  
 Irresistible brands move with innate purpose and conviction. 
They convey the sense there ’ s something more to them, which 
makes people join in, shape them, and share them with others. 
They create armies of evangelists. 
 Irresistible brands constantly reinvent themselves; they have 
an insatiable appetite for change. They are restless and can ’ t 
sit still. They despise idleness and fear getting stale. They see 
things from endlessly different and surprising new angles. 
They keep refreshing their meaning, bringing new innovation 
and surprise to the marketplace. 
 Irresistible brands engage consumers on their own terms. They 
speak in a language all their own. They change how people 
see their world while hanging the rules around other brands, 
creating an unlevel playing ﬁ eld. They talk not of attribute but 
of ethos. They have a point of view on the world beyond proﬁ t 
making. These brands are often a category of one.  
•
•
•
•

38  The Brand Bubble
 Irresistible brands don ’ t force devotion — they compel it. These 
brands have a magnetism that attracts without chasing. They 
are galvanizing, affecting, even moving. They create an imper-
ative and an invitation to join. Their presence extends to a 
wider group of people without marketing. They have greater 
freedom to try new things and expand into new frontiers and 
reach places other brands can ’ t. 
 Irresistible brands move culture as well as categories. Often, 
these brands ’ actions have a disproportional impact on society. 
They act as a social catalyst, a spark of something that can be 
passed along. Their presence extends to a wider social radius, 
while often spending less on marketing.
It is not essential that consumers sense all six of these percep-
tions; one is sufﬁ cient, provided it is unique to the brand. But as 
with any recipe for success, the more energy consumers derive 
from a brand, the more irresistible it becomes and the more pow-
erful it becomes as an agent of creating future value.  
 The Role of Energy In Creating 
Irresistible Brands 
 Once we identiﬁ ed energy, we naturally asked, how does it make 
these brands more irresistible to consumers? What role does it 
play in keeping consumers fascinated with these brands? As a pre-
dictor of sales and sustainability, what function does energy serve 
to bolster brand value? 
 The answer: Energy boosts brand differentiation. In fact, its role 
is so critical that we have renamed this essential construct of mar-
keting. Brands that keep moving, keep changing, keep innovating 
create an entirely new form of differentiation, which we call  Ener-
gized Differentiation.  We know Energized Differentiation isn ’ t easy 
to say and doesn ’ t sound very sexy, but understanding it is crucial 
to understanding why consumers feel some brands are irresistible, 
while others are merely acceptable or worse growing in discontent. 
 Every marketer knows that brand differentiation has always 
been pivotal to capturing consumer respect and loyalty and ensur-
ing sustainability. All our original BAV studies bore this out. Differ-
entiation is key to helping brands capture pricing power, remove 
•
•

Can You Say “Irresistible”?  39
excess capacity, and clear products off retail shelves. But like a 
fuse that ignites its charge, energy launches differentiation into 
new territory. 
 In Chapter One, we talked about the classic metrics of aware-
ness, trust, regard, and esteem. These four metrics have long 
been the accepted measures of brand equity, contributing heav-
ily to how marketers differentiate their brands one from another. 
Successful brands have long relied on a differentiated image to 
persuade their way into the consumer ’ s consideration. These four 
measures came about over time, evolving naturally with the rise 
of brands. 
 In the early days of brands, simple  awareness  was sufﬁ cient to 
create product differentiation, especially when brands were small 
and regional. Back in the ﬁ rst decades of industrialized produc-
tion, any enterprise that could invest in mass awareness could 
make itself stand out from the locals. We can still witness this 
dynamic playing out in many fast - growing markets, where compe-
tition is still limited and a simple mass awareness campaign can be 
effective to differentiate a brand. (But this is changing fast.) 
 However, in developed economies, simple awareness soon 
became insufficient to drive a brand ’ s differentiation forward. 
With increasing competition came a greater need to differenti-
ate because every brand in a category had to ﬁ ght for the same 
awareness factor. If you ’ re standing in a pack of penguins, it takes 
something more than a black - and - white suit and a two - step shufﬂ e 
to get noticed. (Even penguin movies suffer from differentiation 
challenges: Do the kids watch  Surf ’ s Up or  Happy Feet? ) 
 Branding was forced to evolve, and companies began high-
lighting other qualities to differentiate themselves in the con-
sumer mind. Two of these became  trust  and  regard — indicators 
of superiority that leading brands tapped into to persuade con-
sumers of their preferential value. Marketers sought to educate 
consumers that their products were consistently of high quality 
and would never disappoint (trust). Television ads highlighted the 
professional endorsements of doctors, dentists, hair stylists, or any 
other pertinent experts to build a brand ’ s authority and credibility 
(regard). Some marketing measurement paradigms, including our 
own at Y & R, also measured a brand ’ s  esteem, that is, how the public 
thought about the brand in terms of its conﬁ dence and aura. 

40  The Brand Bubble
 For years, the classic method of differentiation created from 
awareness, trust, regard, and esteem worked well enough. Nothing 
seemed to be able to budge this formula from its lofty pedestal. 
Brands could do well by following those simple principles. Despite 
frontal assaults and even guerilla attacks, the leading brands 
fought off loss of market share, and consumers seemed unwilling 
to change their attitude toward brands regardless of their experi-
ences. Most leading brands were solidly impervious to attack. 
 But as we now know from our BAV research, that world is chang-
ing. Consumers are no longer buying brands based on these consid-
erations alone, and that ’ s partially why those metrics are tumbling. 
Numerous forces — such as the excess capacity, lack of creativity, 
and lack of trust that we discussed earlier — are reshaping brand 
marketing. All around us, established brands are losing ground to 
upstarts that are making inroads into conservative and stable cat-
egories, changing the rules and dynamics of consumer value as they 
go along. As we now see, at the head of the charge are these brands 
with energy. Consciously or unconsciously, they are deﬁ ning them-
selves in a different way and building a new relationship with con-
sumers that is more visionary, unconventional, and creative.  
 What Energy Adds to Brands 
 In  Annie Hall  Woody Allen said,  “ A relationship, I think, is like 
a shark. It has to constantly move forward or it dies. And what I 
think what we got on our hands is a dead shark. ” This Woody - ism 
captures exactly what energy adds to brands. 
 Energy keeps brands constantly moving forward — and this pre-
vents them from dying. It ensures that brands don ’ t just sit still, rest-
ing on their past laurels and stagnating. While traditional marketing 
emphasizes building awareness, trust, regard, and esteem, those 
measures do not help brands keep pace with the ongoing future as 
it screams past. They help brands manage for today, but do little to 
prepare them for tomorrow. Energy keeps brands constantly evolv-
ing, refreshing, and staying in step with consumers. If you go back 
and review the ﬁ ve key characteristics of energy, you will see that they 
all relate to being future oriented and responsive to consumers. 
 Energy brands can escape the bubble because they know 
how to stand out in today ’ s world — a world in which most brands 

Can You Say “Irresistible”?  41
perform identically, any product can be imitated within months 
or days, and your experienced staff could be working for your 
competitor in six months. Ordinary differentiation does little 
good when the slightest competitive advantage soon evapo-
rates because everything can be reverse engineered and copied 
immediately. 
 Simply put, marketing based on  “ unique selling proposi-
tions ”  — USPs — no longer works. Other than an occasional ﬂ uke, 
parity in high - performance brands exists across the spectrum of 
price points. Six Sigma manufacturing reduces defects to less than 
one per million, while Wal - Mart drives prices lower and lower. 
Expert consultants and business schools disseminating leading -
 edge learning across the economy are duplicated as soon as the 
concepts have been defined. Disaggregated business models, 
offshoring, and lean management practices mean warp speed 
business. In a world where change is the only constant, the tried -
 and - true elements of brand differentiation along with two bucks 
won ’ t buy you a nonfat latte at Starbucks. 
 The lesson for today ’ s brand world is that  for a brand to sustain 
consumer interest, it can ’ t just be different; it has to keep being different. 
Today, consumers are constantly reevaluating their purchasing 
habits and choices, day by day, even moment by moment. Bom-
barded with waves of me - too choices, they are drawn toward that 
which is new and exciting. Consumers head for brands that are 
continuously innovating and reengaging them, because these 
brands help them live in a constantly changing and increasingly 
uncertain future. The brands that stand out are those that are 
moving, adapting, and leading the market. 
 Brands that stand the test of time are willing to battle time. 
They protect and nourish their differentiation by furiously redeﬁ n-
ing it, inventing new ways to give it meaning and keeping it vibrant. 
Jacobson concluded,  “ The one thing that keeps cropping up over 
and over and over [in our data] is that it ’ s not awareness, it ’ s not 
knowledge, it ’ s not how much consumers know about a brand, it ’ s 
what they believe. They want to believe a brand is different, and 
will keep being different. They want brands that will satisfy their 
needs in the future. They must have something in them that says 
we ’ re going to be around and we ’ re going to be good, not just now, 
but tomorrow. They ’ re looking for a brand to have energy. ”  

42  The Brand Bubble
 Not Just Differentiation  . . .  
Energized Differentiation 
 We then began tracking various success measures to determine what 
beneﬁ ts energy brings to a brand. When we compared brands with 
merely strong differentiation to those with Energized Differentia-
tion, we observed substantial differences in their ability to connect 
with consumers. The brands with Energized Differentiation com-
manded greater usage, consideration, loyalty, and pricing power, 
and they brought greater future value through growth in operat-
ing earnings and future stock performance (Figure 2.2). 
 The data also showed that energy is not a function of brand 
maturity. We found many established brands having as much 
energy as younger, ﬂ ashier brands. Both Dr Pepper and Red Bull 
are highly energized. So are eBay and Zappos. The same goes for 
Bacardi and Svedka, as well as Dove and Method. We plotted the 
effects of Energized Differentiation across multiple categories and 
sectors and saw that it pertains equally. 
40%
0
Regular Usage
Top
Consideration
Behavioral
Commitment
Emotional
Commitment
Pricing Power
Gaining
in Popularity
Incremental Impact of Energized Differentiation
Compared to Differentiation Alone
Percent Increase in Energized Differentiation
Versus Differentiation Alone
35%
30%
25%
20%
15%
10%
5%
FIGURE 2.2. ENERGY BOOSTS THE POWER OF DIFFERENTIATION.
Source: BAV 2006 USA, Top 100 Differentiated Brands with Strong Energy 
Component vs. Top 100 Differentiated Brands with Weak Energy Component.

Can You Say “Irresistible”?  43
 One result that struck us as especially interesting was how 
energy plays a powerful role in a commoditized arena where 
brands usually struggle to build loyalty, hampered by their lack 
of a meaningful point of difference. For example, in one of the 
most highly commoditized sectors, the airline industry, energized 
brands far surpass their peers. This is an industry that is driven 
predominantly by price, convenience, and availability, with cus-
tomer satisfaction ratings so low you have to bend down to ﬁ nd 
them. So it ’ s no surprise that airline travel would normally be 
seen as a low - energy category, with dismal levels of emotional and 
behavioral commitment from customers. 
 Yet our data indicated that a few airlines have established 
relatively high levels of energy compared to their competition. 
These included Virgin, JetBlue, and Southwest — each in its own 
way highly innovative and customer focused in its business model, 
product and service delivery, and marketing. We found that all 
had a level of Energized Differentiation that translated to loyalty 
almost twice as high as the rest of the airline category, helping 
them transcend the cycle of commoditization that continually 
plagues other airlines, as shown in Figure 2.3. 
80
0
18
Percent Brand Loyalty
0
Brand Strength (Energized Differentiation and Relevance)
Airlines
Low
High
High
Low
JetBlue
Southwest
Airlines
British 
Airways
American Airlines
Delta Air Lines
United Airlines
Continental 
Airlines
Virgin
Atlantic
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
FIGURE 2.3. HIGH-ENERGY BRANDS HAVE GREATER LOYALTY.
Base: BAV USA 2006 Full Year; All Adults.

44  The Brand Bubble
 The Plotting Thickens 
 Energy ’ s role in keeping brands constantly forward thinking and 
evolving is critical to maintaining ongoing consumer appeal, loy-
alty, and enduring success. To understand this, you need some 
background on the methodology we use to measure brands. Our 
model has become well known in numerous marketing venues 
and is cited in many marketing textbooks. Many major marketers 
rely on the validity of our research methodology and its powers of 
measurement and prediction. 
 BAV is constructed around four  “ pillars ”  that help us identify 
the movement and success of a brand. These four pillars originally 
were Differentiation, Relevance, Esteem, and Knowledge. Need-
less to say, once we discovered the attributes of energy, we recog-
nized those scores too, evolving our differentiation pillar into the 
more comprehensive measurement, Energized Differentiation. 
(See Figure 2.4.) 
Energized
Differentiation
A brand’s unique
meaning, with motion
and direction
Relates to margins and
cultural currency
Knowledge
An intimate
understanding
of the brand
Relates to awareness
and consumer
experience
Esteem
How you regard
the brand
Relates to
perceptions of
quality
and loyalty
Relevance
How appropriate
the brand
is to you
Relates to
consideration
and trial
Brand Strength
Leading Indicator
Future Growth Value
Brand Stature
Lagging Indicator
Current Operating Value
FIGURE 2.4. FOUR PILLARS ASSESS BRAND HEALTH, DEVELOPMENT, 
MOMENTUM, AND COMPETITIVE ADVANTAGE.

Can You Say “Irresistible”?  45
 You ’ ll notice in Figure 2.4 that the four pillars are paired in 
two categories:  Brand Strength,  composed of Energized Differentia-
tion and Relevance, and  Brand Stature,  composed of Esteem and 
Knowledge. The logic of this reﬂ ects the signiﬁ cance that each 
pillar reveals about a brand ’ s health, as follows: 
•   Brand Strength, a leading indicator, predicts the future growth value 
of the brand.  Energized Differentiation reﬂ ects the brand ’ s motion 
and direction in the marketplace. It impacts the brand ’ s ability 
to capture loyalty and drive margins, both determinants of the 
brand ’ s future. Relevance indicates how appropriate consumers 
perceive the brand to be. The greater the Relevance, the greater 
the potential market penetration. When combined, brands that 
excel on Energized Differentiation and Relevance have greater 
lasting Brand Strength and are more likely to differentiate them-
selves from the rest of the pack. 
•   Brand Stature, a lagging indicator, shows the current operat-
ing value of the brand. The measure of a brand ’ s Esteem shows 
how consumers regard the brand. The greater the Esteem, the 
higher quality consumers perceive in the brand and the more 
they respect it. The measure of a brand ’ s Knowledge indicates its 
degree of consumer awareness and understanding. The higher 
the Knowledge, the more consumers believe they know what the 
brand stands for. When combined, Esteem and Knowledge tend 
to reﬂ ect more how consumers feel about a brand today than what 
they may think about the brand tomorrow. For this reason, Brand 
Stature reﬂ ects a brand ’ s current operating performance. 
 Before we go into the way Brand Strength and Stature help 
us form a comprehensive view of a brand ’ s present and future 
health, it ’ s worth noting that the way the four pillars interact with 
each other yields valuable information about a brand at any given 
moment. Figure 2.5 shows the various relationships that can exist 
between the pillars within each pair of measures. 
 More important, when we use and plot a brand ’ s scores for 
measures of both Strength and Stature, we can paint a very accu-
rate holistic picture of its status as a  forward - looking measure of per-
formance.  We accomplish this by charting a PowerGrid of Brand 
Strength against Brand Stature. This can be done for a single 
brand at a time or even for thousands of global brands, creating a 

Brand Strength
Brand Stature
High levels demonstrate that the
brand stands out to consumers in a
meaningful way. It is a leader
commanding high margins, loyalty,
and volume.
Examples:
iPhone
MINI
Red  Bull
Innocent
Havaianas
Gucci
While the brand may still be vital, its
uniqueness is fading and price or
convenience is becoming a
dominant reason to buy. It may also
be more rational than creative.
The brand has captured attention,
interest, and now can build relevance
and penetration. This reflects a new
niche or luxury brand. This type of
brand has more creativity than
functionality.
0
DE
REL
DE
R
>
100
80
60
40
20
Examples:
Apple
Disney
Google
Starbucks
IKEA
Nike
0
DE
REL
DE
R
100
80
60
40
20
Examples:
Blockbuster
Exxon
Hanes
Midas
American
Airlines
Amtrak
0
DE
REL
DE
R
<
100
80
60
40
20
When strong on both dimensions,
the brand has successfully established
itself in the hearts and minds of
consumers.
Examples:
Trader Joe’s
Coach
Product Red
Wii
Commerce
Bank
Glacéau
Vitamin Water
The brand has become too familar,
and consumers are not interested in
knowing it better. They are probably
looking for better options.
The brand is liked but not well-known.
Consumers are curious to find out
more. There is growth potential in
this brand.
0
EST
KNO
E
K
>
100
80
60
40
20
Examples:
Home Depot
Visa
Coca-Cola
McDonald’s
Colgate
Ford
0
EST
KNO
E
K
100
80
60
40
20
Examples:
Spam
Slim Fast
TV Guide
Yellow Pages
Budget
Rent a Car
Folger’s
0
EST
KNO
E
K
<
100
80
60
40
20
FIGURE 2.5. EACH PAIR OF PILLARS TELLS MANY STORIES.

Can You Say “Irresistible”?  47
sort of  “ brand constellation, ”  something that almost resembles a 
star - gazer map showing where all brands are at any given moment 
when compared to each other without regard to their category. 
This is because BAV is a category - agnostic study; it measures attri-
butes on universal dimensions that apply to all brands, not just to 
brands within a given sector. 
 It is impossible to show all the brands we track, but Figure 2.6 
presents a PowerGrid illustrating how a sampling of 125 brands 
from our study related one to another in 2007. 
Glacéau Vitamin Water
POM
Grameen Bank
Shiseido
Bit
Torrent
W Hotels
Starbury
Method
(PRODUCT) RED
Flickr
Facebook
Lindt
Palm
Garnier
iPhone
Absolut
Axe
Craigslist
YouTube
Crocs
Wikipedia
Kashi
Tazo
Odwalla
AMD
100
50
0
100
50
New/Unfocused
Niche/Momentum
Leadership
0
Brand Stature
(Esteem and Knowledge)
SanDisk
Burt’s Bees LG
Nintendo Wii
MINI
Red Bull
IKEA
Dyson
Trader Joe’s
SIRIUS
TiVo
Pixar
Dr Pepper
Microsoft
Disney
Nike
Target
Google
GE
Toyota
Starbucks
Harley-Davidson
Apple HBO
Amazon
BlackBerry
Adidas
ESPN
BMW
Dove
Nordstrom
NASCAR
Xerox
TYLENOL
Verizon
Mattel
Xbox
Whole Foods
Netflix
SnackWell’s
DIRECTV
Burger King
Staples
Nikon
Blockbuster
AOL
American Express
7-Eleven
NBA
Radisson
Casio
Buick
Advil
American Airlines
Bank of America
Denny’s
Sprint Nextel
Amtrak
Gerber
Bausch & Lomb
Midas
Orkin
H&R Block
Merrill Lynch
Greyhound
Avon
Century 21
National Car Rental
Luvs
Prudential
Alpo
Moet & Chandon
Lacoste
Patagonia
L’Occitane
Zara
Pret à Manager
ASICS
Vespa
Silk Soymilk
Viacom
Benetton
Lenovo
Kia
Autotrader
Michelob
Finesse
Vonage
Kayak.com
Joost
H&M
Ricoh
Napster
Camper
Second Life
Fiji
Schlitz
Dristan
Diners Club
Efferdent
Taster’s Choice
Brand Strength
(Energized Differentiation and Relevance)
Eroding/Declined
Mass Market
FIGURE 2.6. THE BAV POWERGRID 2007.
Base: All Adults 18–49.

48  The Brand Bubble
 As Figure 2.6 illustrates, the PowerGrid naturally plots brand 
performance as falling into one of four quadrants, each indicative 
of a brand ’ s status in a very speciﬁ c and accurate way. Starting at 
the lower left and moving clockwise, we have: 
•   The New and Unfocused Quadrant: Brands that fall into this 
quadrant have little Brand Strength, with low scores in both Rel-
evance and Energized Differentiation. This signifies that they 
haven ’ t yet established meaningful knowledge among the general 
consumer population. Many brands falling into this quadrant are 
new entrants, trying to break into the market; others are lethargic 
brands that are being re - staged. Still others are poorly deﬁ ned, 
middling brands that have lost their way. There is largely con-
sumer misunderstanding or indifference to these brands. 
•   The Niche/Momentum Quadrant: These brands have low earn-
ings but high potential. They have built some Energized Differen-
tiation and Relevance, but only a small audience knows of them 
or considers them relevant. These brands are ready to pounce if 
they can build up their energy to launch into leadership positions. 
Here consumers are gravitating to these brands, expressing curios-
ity and interest. Their attraction is building. 
•  The Leadership/Mass Market Quadrant:  These brands are sim-
ply irresistible. They have high earnings, high margin power, and 
the greatest potential to create future value. They ’ ve built both 
Brand Strength and Stature. If they slip down below the diagonal, 
their Stature has become greater than their Strength. Brands in 
this position often maintain their category leadership, but they 
are losing pricing power and future growth potential. 
•   The Erosion Quadrant:  These brands are probably becoming 
commodities. Or they may be companies that do not rely on 
their brands as a driver of their growth, such as low - cost pro-
viders who create sales velocity at low margins. Consumers may 
know their brands well but regard them as less unique or rele-
vant. These brands often struggle to overcome what consumers 
already know and expect from them. Attraction and irresistibility 
has turned into fatigue and discontent.  
 Most models explain how customers move from a state of 
awareness to the highest levels of commitment to a brand. They ’ re 

Can You Say “Irresistible”?  49
often diagrammed as funnels or pyramids that portray a snapshot 
in time. In contrast, BAV is a ﬂ uid, developmental model, allowing 
us to identify clear patterns of growth, health, decay, or recovery 
over time. As we plot brand PowerGrids, we can literally study and 
track the evolution of brands through their movements as clearly 
as astronomers can learn from star and galaxy movement in the 
nighttime sky. 
 And like comets in their orbits, brands change in relative 
intensity through their life cycle, creating opportunities to maxi-
mize different ﬁ nancial metrics. In general, a brand that is niche, 
when brand strength is greater than stature, can maximize return 
on capital. As it develops into a leadership brand, managers can 
maximize margins and valuation multiples. And when the brand 
begins to decline and commoditize, managers can maximize its 
dividends and transactions. This points to the importance of 
matching brand development and business development strate-
gies. When they ’ re not aligned, bubbles happen. 
 Irresistible Brands Elevate 
from Their Category 
 In regard to plotting movement, one revealing exercise is to plot 
high - energy brands against their category averages. Not surpris-
ingly, some brands are so irresistible they transcend their catego-
ries and redeﬁ ne their own market (Figure 2.7): 
 The BAV data driving this graph are related to the specific 
scores these brands received that attest to the multiples they have 
over their category averages. For example: 
 Axe has 3.6 times the level of Energized Differentiation 
 Dove has 1.6 times the pricing power 
 eBay has 3.2 times the emotional commitment 
 Geico has 2.8 times the momentum 
 Google has 2 times the behavioral commitment 
 iPod has 2.5 times the emotional commitment 
 Orange has 1.6 times the usage and preference 
 Starbucks has 2 times the pricing power 
 Subway has 2.4 times the usage and preference 
 Target has 2.3 times the emotional commitment 
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

50  The Brand Bubble
 W Hotels: 1.4 times the category pricing power 
 Whole Foods: 2 times its category ’ s pricing power (ah, but 
they ’ re beautiful organic tomatoes!) 
 Irresistible brands are packed with energy. They become true 
leaders who set new expectations for the ways things should be. 
They don ’ t hope for something as paltry as awareness. They upend 
ideologies and challenge convention. They market to value sys-
tems. They tap into mind - sets that source business from a broader 
cross - section of the marketplace, attracting new users and growing 
their categories. And they go where the money is, creating greater 
margin power and future value creation. 
•
•
Hotels
Supermarkets
Internet Commerce
Soaps
Department Stores
Consumer Electronics
Dove
Subway
Target
Google
Orange
W Hotels
Axe
Fast Food
Coffee
Whole
Foods
Internet
Search
Deodorants
Geico
Insurance
UK Mobile Networks
Starbucks
iPod
eBay
100
50
0
100
50
New/Unfocused
Eroding/Declined
Niche/Momentum
Leadership
Mass Market
0
Brand Stature
(Esteem and Knowledge)
Brand Strength
(Energized Differentiation and Relevance)
FIGURE 2.7. IRRESISTIBLE BRANDS BREAK OUT OF THEIR CATEGORIES.
Base: BAV USA 2007 Q3; All Adults.

Can You Say “Irresistible”?  51
 Irresistible Brands Also 
Create Magnetism 
 When a brand generates energy, it becomes more irresistible, 
which creates greater preference and usage, attracting new users. 
We analyzed over two thousand brands in BAV over a four - year 
period and found that brands with higher energy - to - equity ratios 
showed substantial growth in usage and preference over the fol-
lowing year. But those brands that had low ratios, or did not have 
the levels of energy to support the stature of their brand, suffered 
from virtually no growth in preference and usage over the follow-
ing twelve months (Figure 2.8). 
 High energy - equity ratios demonstrate that passion can be 
rekindled in a well - established brand with a substantial near -
 term impact. This also means that consumers aren ’ t closed 
off from hearing new ideas from a brand they may have once 
written off. In fact, they are willing to easily discard past brand 
impressions and open themselves up to seeing even a highly 
familiar brand in new ways. We see this in  “ Lazarus brands ”  
Average Yearly Change
Top usage
Top preference
–0.4%
+0.4%
Average Yearly Change
Top usage
Top preference
+6.4%
+4.8%
100
0
100
Brand Strength (Energized
Differentiation and Relevance)
0
Brand Stature
(Esteem and Knowledge)
Momentum
80
60
40
20
80
60
40
20
FIGURE 2.8. BRANDS WITH HIGH ENERGY-TO-EQUITY RATIOS DRIVE 
INCREMENTAL BEHAVIOR AND ATTITUDES.
Source: BAV USA 2002–2008. Full Year; All Adults.

52  The Brand Bubble
like Puma, Adidas, and Converse, as well as Gucci, Coach, and 
Burberry. Consumers also granted the resurrection of Marks  & 
Spencer  , IZOD, and Cadillac, which all came back as strong as 
John Travolta. 
 A prime example of a brand gaining energy and becoming 
irresistible once more is Dove. Like Southwest Airlines, Dove 
lives in one of the most established commoditized categories 
(soap), yet it has become one of the highest - energy brands. 
The brand elevated itself from a memorable product attribute 
focus ( “ one quarter cleansing cream ” ) to engaging in a cultural 
conversation with consumers (reframing societal perceptions 
of beauty). In so doing, Dove proves that everything old can 
be new again, and the most ordinary of objects can again feel 
extraordinary.   
 Stagnant Brands: Proof 
of the Brand Bubble 
 Now let ’ s examine further proof of a brand bubble. Recall that 
a brand ’ s position on our PowerGrid actually relates to level of 
intangible value. We measure this as  “ intangible value as per dollar 
of sales. ”  (The circle in each quadrant shows the multiple factor 
analyzed across ten years of data and a thousand brands.) So only 
the brands that are moving toward greater Brand Strength (future 
value creation) and Brand Stature (current performance mea-
sures) are signiﬁ cantly performing for their companies. But move-
ments of more than 2,500 brands across the PowerGrid found that 
 most brands showed little movement in Brand Strength between 2001 and 
2006.  In Figure 2.9, the top number in each quadrant shows the 
percentage of brands that remained in the same quadrant after 
one year. The bottom number shows the percentage after three 
years. The overwhelming majority of brands in our study are 
standing still — or declining. 
 Despite Wall Street ’ s ever - rising brand valuations, less than 
one brand in ten showed any positive movement over three years. 
After three years, 77 percent of brands were essentially motionless. 
Even after ﬁ ve years, 74 percent of all brands showed no sign of 
development. While brand valuations keep rising, the BAV brand-
scape looks like a parking lot of idling brands. 

Can You Say “Irresistible”?  53
 And of the few brands that did move, they were as likely to decline 
as to grow. Among brands in the niche/momentum quadrant, they 
were twice as likely to decline as become leadership brands. Let ’ s 
call this the  “ Von Dutch ” effect: Emerging brands more frequently 
emerge, only to disappear before they take hold in the culture. 
The patterns averaged out across all quadrants to suggest brand 
decay was occurring in those rare instances where brand attitudes 
were changing at all. 
 Once again, the data forces us to ask how it is possible that, 
with so few brands actually growing, the ﬁ nancial value of brands 
Percent of Brand Movement by Quadrant Over One Year
Multiple of 
intangible value 
for dollar of sale
Percent of brands 
in the same quadrant 
after one year
Brand Strength
(Energized Differentiation and Relevance)
Brand Stature
(Esteem and Knowledge)
1.7×
75.2%
79.4%
1.1×
80.3%
81.3%
0.5×
77.1%
77.4%
0.9×
85.4%
88.3%
Percent of brands 
in the same quadrant 
after three years
1.4×
57.5%
70.1%
FIGURE 2.9. THE BRAND “PARKING LOT.”
Base: BAV USA 2001–2006 Full Year; All Adults.

54  The Brand Bubble
continues to experience such precipitous growth? Brands are 
accounting for a growing percentage of intangible value creation. 
Yet, from a consumer perspective, most brands are not deliver-
ing against expectations. A brand must be constantly evolving 
to increase in real value, but most have reached a plateau, if not 
stepped onto a steep slope. 
 This analysis should be a wake - up call. Why are we disregard-
ing the realities of what consumers perceive and experience? Are 
brands really worth that much? Consumers seem to be offering a 
different opinion. 
 Putting Our Money 
Where Our Data Is 
 Why are brands stalling? Why is energy important? A brand with 
higher levels of energy creates greater shareholder value. In 2004 
we started an energy index fund that allowed us to track whether 
the markets actually pick up on nonfinancial attitudinal data 
concerning changes in brands. We created this fund in order to 
validate exactly how much higher consumer expectations for the 
greatest energy - gaining brands translated into actual ﬁ nancial per-
formance over the long term. 
 Deciding to play our own  “ what - if ” game, we invested a hypo-
thetical $10,000 in the top ﬁ fty energy - gaining brands. 3 We com-
pared our investment against an equal one in the S & P 500 index 
fund between December 31, 2001, and June 30, 2007. This time 
frame encompassed varying market conditions, including high, 
modest, and low growth periods in the S & P 500. We spread our 
$10,000 investment in each portfolio on a semi - annual basis, allow-
ing six months for the energy to work its way through the price of 
the stock. 
 Since the second half of 2002, we have regularly compared 
our fund results with the performance of the S & P 500 — and over 
the ﬁ ve - year period, our energy portfolio cumulatively beat the 
S & P 500 by 30 percent. On an annualized basis, the S&P 500 
gained 5.02 percent, while the energy fund gained 10.15 percent 
(Figure 2.10).  

The Energy Top 50 Index
S&P 500
S&P 500
30-Dec-01
$10,000.00
30-Jun-02
$8,621.52
30-Dec-02
$7,663.40
30-Jun-03
$8,488.08
30-Dec-03
$9,685.04
30-Jun-04
$9,936.94
BAV Top
50 Index
$10,000.00
$9,103.06
$7,951.63
$9,181.12
$10,857.64
$11,857.18
S&P 500
30-Dec-04
$10,556.06
30-Jun-05
$10,376.72
30-Dec-05
$10,872.85
30-Jun-06
$11,063.69
30-Dec-06
$12,353.67
30-Jun-07
$13,094.47
BAV Top
50 Index
$13,034.74
$13,142.69
$13,709.51
$13,847.13
$15,574.70
$17,014.23
19,000
7,000
17,000
15,000
13,000
11,000
9,000
The BAV fund of the top fifty energy-gaining brands netted $17,014 (+70%), 
versus S&P 500 $13,094 (+30%) on $10,000 investment made in 2001.
Dec
2001
Jun
2002
Jun
2007
Dec
2002
Jun
2003
Dec
2003
Jun
2004
Dec
2004
Jun
2005
Dec
2005
Jun
2006
Dec
2006
FIGURE 2.10. IRRESISTIBLE BRANDS OUTPERFORM THE S&P 500.
Source: Top ﬁ fty energy gainers (in a six-month period) identiﬁ ed from Y&R 
BAV (December 2001—June 2007); ﬁ nancial metrics from Yahoo Finance.

56  The Brand Bubble
 The Key to Differentiation: 
Keep Being Different 
 Management gurus constantly assert that innovation resides at 
the heart of successful companies (although their starting point 
is often operational innovation, not consumer - side innovation). 
Michael E. Porter, perhaps the seminal thinker in innovation 
theory and author of  Competitive Advantage: Creating and Sustain-
ing Superior Performance,  probably said it best when he argued that 
to have sustainable competitive advantage, you have to go way 
beyond operations (total quality management) to develop a com-
petitive strategy difﬁ cult to imitate. This is how value is created, 
he insisted. 
 We agree. Porter puts his ﬁ nger on why energy must be added 
to brand differentiation. In today ’ s fast - changing world,  brands do 
not have lasting differentiation unless they have Energized Differentiation. 
Real brand innovation and real brand value are driven by energy. 
Today, a brand must be constantly moving and shaped by the 
accelerated pace of marketplace and consumer change.  
 Since our discovery of energy and building our theory of an 
irresistible brand, we ’ ve spent many hours ﬂ eshing out our under-
standing of its nature and role, gathering insights into how energy 
is built and how it emanates from the brand into the marketplace. 
We ’ re going to take the rest of the book to elaborate on the con-
cepts and principles we ’ ve developed and teach you how to infuse 
energy into your brand and extend it through the value chain into 
your entire enterprise. We ’ ve created very precise steps, processes, 
and laws that can be applied to any product or service. 
 Before we get to that, however, the remainder of Part One 
delves further into the forces driving the necessity for Energized 
Differentiation. These forces are deeply embedded in the new 
world in which we live, a world that redeﬁ nes consumer behav-
ior and the business models brands must follow. We call this new 
world  “ ConsumerLand, ”  and it ’ s a place where consumers act like 
investors, crave creative products, and hold power over brands. 
The analysis presented in the next three chapters will nourish a 
more contemporary understanding of how consumers feel and 
experience brands — and of why your brand needs to infuse itself 
with energy. 

57
 Chapter Three 
 Wall Street, Meet 
Main Street   
 Consumers always choose to move forward, 
rewarding the companies that anticipate their 
demands and punishing those that don ’ t. 
 — Steve Hughes, Director, Cambridge Group 1 
 Each year since 1985, tens of thousands of Apple devotees ﬂ ock to 
Macworld, eager to learn more about the company ’ s present and 
future products. For attendees, the event is inspiring and excit-
ing. As Macworld ’ s Web site proclaims,  “ Macworld isn ’ t just a hall 
full of exhibitors or rooms of conference sessions; it ’ s a series of 
calibrations of the world as you know it. Your perspective will be 
jolted. Your creativity will be ramped up. You will walk away real-
izing it ’ s not just the world that ’ s changed. It ’ s you, too. ” 
 Macworld ’ s success and popularity provide insight into a new 
truth about consumers today: they don ’ t just buy brands — they 
invest in them. Faced with so much choice in the marketplace, 
 consumers now select brands based on the same principles investors use to 
select stocks.  In choosing a brand, consumers now seek to maximize 
the return on their investment, whether that return comes to 
them in enjoyment, knowledge, security, appearance, or social 
currency. And in doing so, they project out to imagine a brand ’ s 
potential usefulness. They want to invest in a brand with a plan, 
one that brings them beneﬁ ts tomorrow, not just today. 

58  The Brand Bubble
 This is a familiar concept to marketers, who think of the  “ life-
time value of a customer. ”  Only now the tables have turned. 
Instead, consumers think of  the lifetime value of a brand. To even 
contemplate a future relationship, a brand must have built - in 
expectations that entice customers to come back again and again. 
Most ﬁ rms don ’ t recognize this new  “ consumer as investor ”  behav-
ior. Instead they focus the majority of their time and effort on 
managing their shareholders, whose needs are more immediate, 
tangible, and demanding. Consumers, by contrast, are ﬁ ckle, ever 
changing, and their motivations are often unclear. The result 
often becomes that consumers are viewed with the purpose of 
stimulating the immediate bottom line through hard - nosed, per-
suasive sales appeals. 
 But what business has not realized is that consumers and inves-
tors are more alike than not. The qualities consumers look for in a 
brand are increasingly similar to what investors seek in a company. 
Just as enterprise value reﬂ ects investor conﬁ dence in the company ’ s 
ability to deliver future earnings, brand value reﬂ ects consumer 
conﬁ dence in a brand ’ s ability to deliver future enjoyment and utility. 
This explains the disparity between business and consumers when 
it comes to perceived brand value: Consumers are no longer conﬁ -
dent in the future performance of most brands they buy. 
 Five Parallel Behaviors 
of Consumers and Investors 
 We observed that consumers apply ﬁ ve of the same thought pro-
cesses in choosing what brands to buy as investors use to choose 
what assets they hold. Like stock buyers, consumers evaluate a 
brand based on the utility they expect to receive today, as well as 
in the future. Figure 3.1 lays out the ﬁ ve core traits that align con-
sumer and investor behavior. 
 Let ’ s examine in detail the similarities between investor and 
consumer behaviors you ’ ll need to begin understanding in order 
to build energy into your brand. Being marketers, not psycholo-
gists, we are making some generalizations in describing these 
behaviors, but we ’ re conﬁ dent you will ﬁ nd them more accurate 
about consumers than most mutual fund managers are about your 
investments. 

Wall Street, Meet Main Street  59
 Parallel #1: Consumers and Investors 
Seek Future Benefits 
 Today ’ s consumers are voracious planners. Almost nothing they 
touch goes unplanned. The planning craze is equally characteris-
tic of Baby Boomers, Gen Xers, and Millennials. 
 Throughout the country, parents anxiously conﬁ gure their 
children ’ s lives as soon as the tykes can walk. They choose homes 
based on school district, or they evaluate private elementary 
schools as if they were sending their ﬁ ve - year - old to Harvard. The 
 New York Times  reported  “ ﬁ erce competition for private preschool 
in New York City has been propelled to such frenzy  . . .  by the 
increased numbers of children vying for scarce slots that it could 
be mistaken for a kiddie version of  ‘ The Apprentice. ’  ”  2 College 
consultants, SAT prep classes, and internships have all become big 
business in preparing kids to get out of the gate early and stay 
ahead. And minors pick majors in Florida, Mississippi, and New 
York by committing to career paths in coursework as early as the 
sixth grade. 
 Futurist thinking sometimes goes to wacky extremes. BioEden 
is a company that extracts and preserves baby teeth for parents 
FIGURE 3.1. INVESTORS AND CONSUMERS THINK ALIKE.
 
Behavior 
Investors 
Consumers
1. Seek future beneﬁ t
Investors evaluate an asset 
based on the cash ﬂ ows they 
expect to receive in the future.
Consumers assess brands based 
on beneﬁ ts they expect to 
receive in the future.
2.  Maximize current 
return
Investors aim to maximize 
current earnings. They 
discount cash ﬂ ows, placing a 
higher value on cash today.
Consumers have greater 
expectations for brands to 
instantly gratify, surprise, and 
delight.
3.  Accumulate 
information and 
knowledge before 
investing
Investors rely on a variety 
of information and market 
indicators.
Consumers are now expert 
interrogators of company and 
brand intentions.
4.  Seek movement and 
innovation to simplify 
choice
Investors follow the movements 
of innovative and  visionary 
companies to inform their 
investment decision making.
Consumers examine brand 
movement and creativity as a 
way to decide which brands to 
hold in their portfolio.
5.  Demand 
transparency and 
accountability
Investors demand ever more 
transparency in all aspects of a 
company’s performance.
Consumers make brands and 
companies accountable for their 
actions, not just their words.

60  The Brand Bubble
who bank on potential stem cell therapies for their kids. Other com-
panies store everything from umbilical cord blood to the head of 
baseball great Ted Williams. Kids and adults alike purchased 1.5 mil-
lion copies of  Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows from Amazon 
before it hit the shelves. Wine lovers buy Bordeaux, Rhone, and 
Italian futures to plan dinner parties ten years hence. 
 The point is, today ’ s consumers decide their future  now,  and 
this extends to their brand choices. They contemplate their brand 
choices with a keen eye to long - term horizons, and they evaluate 
products and services based on the future benefits they might 
derive. They project onto brands their expectations and hopes 
about tomorrow ’ s performance. Like investors picking blue - chip 
stocks, consumers select brands that will be around for years. If 
they are going to afﬁ liate with a brand, they have to believe it will 
produce more value for them beyond today. 
 Consumers especially want to feel a sense that a brand has 
more to come down the line. They look for a  “ Version 2.0 ”  for 
virtually every aspect of life, a perpetual hunt for the next upgrade. 
This behavior does not derive from a concern about depreciation 
or product failure. Today ’ s products are actually built to last 
 longer than they were ten years ago, but consumers replace them 
more quickly. From laptops to cell phones and car leases to 
adjustable - rate mortgages, consumers cycle through consump-
tion faster than ever before. This means that brands must be 
forward thinking and innovative, not only in their offerings but 
in their conversations with consumers. 
 Think back to professor Jacobson ’ s research about consumer 
attitudes having a future impact on brands. Like investors, con-
sumers have no desire to buy a company with ﬂ at earnings and 
poor prospects. They want brands that demonstrate staying power 
by creating anticipation for the future. 
 Parallel #2: Consumers and Investors 
Want to Maximize Current Returns 
 While one eye is on the future, the other is on the here and now. 
Like investors, today ’ s consumers also want as much immediate 
return as they can get. We ’ re talking impulsive, live - in - the - moment 
behavior and instant gratiﬁ cation. That ’ s why, according to Paco 

Wall Street, Meet Main Street  61
Underhill in  The Science of Shopping, two - thirds of all purchases are 
unplanned. 
 Anyone who minored in psychology understands why consum-
ers behave this way. At least 95 percent of all cognition occurs 
in the subconscious. People subconsciously ﬁ lter and rationalize in 
order to justify their behaviors. Scientists have identiﬁ ed at least 
sixty - seven cognitive biases in the human brain. These biases dis-
tort the way people perceive reality, which, in turn, affects the for-
mation of beliefs and decisions. Many cognitive biases are coping 
strategies that help maximize current happiness: 
 Conﬁ rmation bias  supports our tendency to search for or 
 interpret information in a way that conﬁ rms our current 
 preoccupations.  
 Self - serving bias supports our tendency to claim more respon-
sibility for our successes than our failures, and to evaluate 
ambiguous information in a way beneﬁ cial to our interests. 
 Choice - supportive bias supports our tendency to remember our 
choices as being better and wiser than they actually were. 
 Our subconscious wills us to constantly crave and live in the 
moment, so our coping strategies are structured to reafﬁ rm our 
happiness and keep us believing we ’ re making the right decisions. 
Buying for the moment follows the same psychology as investors. 
You have to believe what you ’ re investing in is a good choice that 
will pay off big, hopefully both now and later. Think back again to 
Figure 1.1 (The Nature of the Brand Bubble). Consumers will 
select brands with the most  “ added value, ” but their expectations 
increasingly aren ’ t being met by most brands. So when it comes to 
long - term brand loyalty, consumers are nearsighted. 
 Parallel #3: Consumers and Investors Accumulate 
Information and Knowledge Before Investing 
 Today ’ s consumers behave like analysts: they have an endless appe-
tite for information, and now they have access to it. They pre - search 
their product purchases, evaluating in - depth product innovation 
and collecting brand feedback from ratings and consumer review 
sites, trying to spot its growing or weakening potential. They judge 
•
•
•

62  The Brand Bubble
customer experience and the retail environment where transactions 
occur. And they will gladly share their knowledge with others. 
 One of the forces behind this new appetite for information is 
simply that people are savvier today and can absorb more data. A 
higher level of education in most of the Western world and Asia 
has produced hundreds of millions of literate, discerning, intelli-
gent consumers who are hungry to understand their surround-
ings. In  The Average American,  Kevin O ’ Keefe points to the GI bill 
after World War II, which enabled millions of returning soldiers to 
go to college. 3 That generation then encouraged their Baby 
Boomer children to reach ever higher for more degrees, and 
Boomers are now doing the same with their kids. In 2006, 85 per-
cent of the U.S. population over age twenty - ﬁ ve had a high school 
diploma, while 27 percent had a bachelor ’ s degree (Figure 3.2). 
 Through education, people have developed intellectual capa-
bilities, becoming more conceptual and able to juggle more data. 
Our perpetual multitasking trains us to store and process vast 
amounts of information at once. Today 70 percent of media 
users consume more than one medium at a time. 4 Millennials, in 
2006
1940
100
Population (percent)
0
Year
80
60
40
20
1950
1960
1970
1980
1990
2000
Less than high school completion
High school completion or higher
Bachelor’s or higher degree
FIGURE 3.2. PERCENTAGE OF POPULATION TWENTY-FIVE YEARS OLD AND OLDER, 
BY HIGHEST LEVEL OF EDUCATIONAL ATTAINMENT—1940–2006.
Source: U.S. Department of Commerce, Census Bureau, “U.S. Census of 
Population,” 1960, Vol. 1, Part 1. Current Population Reports, Series P-Z0: 
“Current Population Survey (CPS),” March 1961 through March 2006. 
“Education of the American Population,” 1960 Census Monograph, John 
K. Folger.

Wall Street, Meet Main Street  63
particular, are the ﬁ rst generation to grow up with multitasking as 
a dominant form of behavior and communication. Many popular 
television shows feed into this newly developed tolerance for mul-
tiplicity, packing a dozen storylines and scores of characters into 
complex  “ procedural dramas ”  that demand a level of intelligence 
and cognitive engagement never asked of TV viewers before. When 
 CSI  was presented for review to ABC in 1999, it was dismissed as 
too confusing for the average viewer. Hit movies like  Memento  and 
 The Da Vinci Code  prove the more complexity, the better. 
 The rise of video gaming equally speaks to a growing fascina-
tion for rigorous mental workouts. In  Everything Bad Is Good for You: 
How Today ’ s Popular Culture Is Actually Making Us Smarter, author 
Steven Johnson explains,  “ The ﬁ rst and last thing that should be 
said about the experience of playing today ’ s video games, the thing 
you almost never hear in mainstream coverage, is that games are 
fiendishly, sometimes maddeningly, hard. ”  5 And as games get 
harder and harder, more people, not fewer, want to get involved. 
Nearly 60 percent of households with adults age eighteen to forty -
 four now own a video game system. When Halo 3 came out, it sig-
niﬁ cantly disrupted summer movie box ofﬁ ce receipts. 
 Like today ’ s investors, today ’ s consumers have a growing apti-
tude for organizing and reducing complex information, and that 
has increased the amount of data storage they can handle from 
brands. As a result, providing open and ready access to informa-
tion is now one of the most important aspects of brand building. 
This  “ information democracy ”  is equally likely to grow a brand —
 or to kill it. We ’ ve returned to a John Stuart Mill world of perfectly 
competitive markets, where the Internet blasts apart traditional 
barriers, giving unprecedented opportunities for brands to 
develop in new markets around the world — across political barri-
ers, and with less investment and scale required to compete. Peo-
ple can help a new brand or a new idea find millions of new 
consumers with little or no media investment. Today, new brands 
have just as much chance of being discovered as established 
brands have of being maimed. 
 Perhaps brands are becoming overvalued because a lot of big 
businesses still believe they have barriers to competitive entry in 
their markets. In fact, such barriers no longer exist, courtesy of 
digitization, media fragmentation, and globalization. In the past, 

64  The Brand Bubble
media costs were the biggest barrier to entry in most markets. In 
most cases, the only organization with signiﬁ cant customer impact 
was the brand leader. All the others had the same media costs but 
much lower sales to pay for them. Therefore number two, three, 
four brands either lost money or died off altogether. But today 
this is no longer true. Now the interrupt - and - repeat model is 
gone. And big brands are increasingly vulnerable to attack from 
niche brands that weren ’ t proﬁ table yesterday — but today can be 
very proﬁ table indeed. 
 The brand that satisﬁ es the growing consumer thirst for infor-
mation is exploring new technologies such as smart bar codes, click -
 and - know, point - and - know, text - and - know, video billboards, talking 
house - for - sale signs — anything with potential educational value.  
 Parallel #4: Consumers and Investors 
Watch for Movement to Simplify Choice 
 With more than ﬁ fty thousand public companies traded on stock 
exchanges around the world, investors need reliable methods of 
sifting out the leaders from the laggards. One of the key techniques 
they employ is watching for movement. They notice hot stocks based 
on how many others are buying or selling them, how fast the stock 
is rising or falling, and which stocks lead their industry pack. The 
Internet and newspapers have responded with daily, hourly, and 
minute - by - minute lists of the most active stocks, the biggest gainers 
and biggest losers, the biggest percentage winners and losers, and 
so on. Meanwhile TV screens feature the ubiquitous bottom scroll 
banner as a constant reminder that the market moves. 
 Today ’ s consumers do exactly the same thing to select brands 
and form a portfolio of winners. Like investors, they constantly 
track brands, share information and ask each other,  “ Is this a hot 
brand? ”    “ Where is this brand heading? ”    “ Is it worth sticking with? ” 
With so many brands roaming the landscape, they are swayed by the 
motion of brands that change, create, and innovate. The products, 
services, and ideas that thrive are the ones that catch the eye. 
 The search for motion explains why consumers love blogs, 
dashboards, and widgets — tools that help them track movement 
and spot winners. They help each other ﬁ nd the leaders through 
Web sites like Tripadvisor, where 6 million consumers post travel 
reviews. Epinions.com hosts more than 2 million reviews from 

Wall Street, Meet Main Street  65
400,000 - plus members, while FlyerTalk posts 4.5 million reviews 
that report on the airline industry. 
 It ’ s not just consumers watching brands for movement; brands 
watch each other for movement, too. Pricenoia monitors the best 
prices across the various international Amazon.com Web sites. 
Scanbuy will return to your phone the best price on any given 
brand when you send a photo of its barcode. 
 Given the speed at which things change, today ’ s consumers 
believe they cannot sit back and miss out on something new. They 
constantly debate and revise their choices in an effort to stay on 
top of the brand world. Their selection radar is always turned on, 
assessing the brand horizon, then adopting and adapting as 
needed — to stay ahead and in control. 
 Marketers often talk like they can hunt consumers, using terms 
like  targeting, captive audience,  and so on, but the deer now have the 
riﬂ es. Consumers act as their own V - Chips. Around 160 million 
phone numbers in the U.S. are on the  “ do not call ”  list, 43.6 mil-
lion U.S. households have some form of DVR, and 73 percent of 
online consumers use spam blockers. Brands simply no longer dic-
tate the terms of the relationship. Consumers constantly assess a 
brand ’ s motion, momentum, and direction as a prerequisite to 
future consideration. 
 Parallel #5: Consumers and Investors Demand 
Transparency and Accountability 
 Since the Enron debacle and the parade of corporate scandals that 
followed it, investors have little tolerance for executive chicanery. 
The Sarbanes - Oxley Act and the Federal Sentencing Guidelines 
hold corporations and their directors responsible for truthful and 
timely accounting practices, implementing a corporate code of 
conduct, and overseeing ethical employee behavior at every level. 
 The same corporate scrutiny has worked its way into the 
consumer mind - set. A brand ’ s integrity is emerging as a critical 
purchasing factor for consumers. Evidence of ethical behavior, 
social responsibility, and concern for sustainability now weigh 
heavily on consumer choices. The Conference Board conducted a 
poll of twenty - ﬁ ve thousand people in twenty - three countries, and 
two - thirds agreed that they want business to  “ expand beyond the 
traditional emphasis on proﬁ ts and contribute to broader social 

66  The Brand Bubble
objectives. ”  6 In the United States, 81 percent of consumers say 
they are likely to switch brands to support a cause if price and 
quality are equal. 
 Corporate and brand responsibility are so intertwined with brand 
image now that when consumers feel an incongruity, they react 
swiftly. Best Buy came under scrutiny for hosting a secret employee 
intranet site that blocked customers from getting the best prices 
advertised on their regular site. Sure enough, a retaliatory Web site 
called  “ Goodbyebestbuy.com ”  enlisted individuals to boycott the 
brand.  Ghetto Big Mac  was a popular video on YouTube that attacked 
McDonald ’ s nutritional and social values. Just typing the word  scandal 
retrieves more than thirty thousand videos on YouTube. 
 Today ’ s consumer is armed with technological advances that 
allow no misinformation or scandal to remain hidden for long. Any-
one can instantly ﬁ nd and expose almost any brand or company 
secret. It ’ s pointless to think otherwise. As consumers increasingly 
look for a commitment to ethics, transparency, and accountability, 
brands need to practice complete disclosure with consumers. That ’ s 
why many companies now act swiftly by voluntarily announcing 
problems to their customers and offering apologies or product 
rebates. JetBlue apologized to customers caught in the winter storm 
ﬁ asco and Apple made good to the early adopters of iPhones after 
it dropped its original $599 price tag. To be a high - energy brand 
today, you have to be open, helpful, and compliant — because your 
actions speak louder than your words.  
 A Historical Perspective 
 When you put all these behaviors together, the result is a con-
sumer who bases decisions on a psychology not all that different 
from the savvy investor ’ s. This behavior is relatively new, a reﬂ ection 
of the increasing sophistication today ’ s consumers bring to the 
buying process. Historically, consumers based their purchasing 
choices on which price segment best fit their earnings. Lower -
 income households purchased entry - or economy - level goods and 
services, while middle - class households traded up to mainstream 
goods, and the upper class exclusively bought luxury. 
 This made sense in a  Jeffersons  kind of world. In that era, com-
panies created an offering for every income and a purchase path 

Wall Street, Meet Main Street  67
for those who were  “ moving on up. ”  Different brand segments 
functioned to simplify choice, guarantee quality (reduce risk), and 
create aspiration for people to climb from their current station in 
the world. 
 That model has changed. Consumers routinely break through 
the old brand management caste system. The performance and 
styling of products has ﬂ attened, and democratization of quality 
now permeates fashion, retail, hotels, automotive, and most con-
sumer goods. Traditional mass brands are left struggling to main-
tain existing levels of market share as consumers buy brands based 
on their passions, rather than simply price. 
 And if a consumer can now buy a brand with the necessary fea-
tures and beneﬁ ts (utility) in the lower or even lowest price tier — and 
if these goods meet or exceed quality expectations — then utility 
and risk are no longer points on which brands can sustain competi-
tive advantage. Brands that stand only for trust, reassurance, and 
simpliﬁ cation of choice are no longer positioned for long - term suc-
cess. This too begins to explain the declining brand measures from 
Chapter One. Consumers are looking for something more.  
 The Rational Consumer: 
Maximizing Value 
 When we put together the ﬁ ve behavior parallels, today ’ s  “ irratio-
nal consumer ” is better understood by examining the mind - set of 
a  “ rational investor. ” 
 We know that investors base their purchasing decisions on 
three steps: assessing the net present value of the company, evalu-
ating its option value, and considering the risk factors. Investors 
seek to maximize total potential value while minimizing risk. In 
the end, the ﬁ nancial asset with greater net present value, most 
option value, and least risk is usually the most desirable. 
 Today, consumers implicitly evaluate brands by the same for-
mula. They estimate which brands will return the greatest value 
for the least risk both today  and  tomorrow. The  “ net present 
value ”  equals the expected functional and emotional enjoyment 
from usage. The  “ option value ”  equals the potential future mean-
ing of choosing this brand today. And the  “ risk adjustment ”  is the 
brand ’ s perceived level of quality, its innovation, and in essence 

68  The Brand Bubble
its permanence. The brand with the greatest net present value, 
most option value, and least risk is usually the most desirable. 
 The option value of an investment is higher when it offers 
greater future potential. An asset with higher option value will 
have a higher net present value and can sell for a higher price 
today. The same is true for brands. Even if the product is con-
sumed or disposed of, a brand has option value if consumers 
believe it brings future beneﬁ ts to them, is planning new innova-
tions, and will take them to new places.  The perception of option value 
is what consumers feel in an irresistible brand. 
 An irresistible brand is worth more today because it has greater 
potential to do more tomorrow. Consumers can envision greater 
options by selecting it. They can imagine future experiences and 
possibilities that are more expansive and exciting than those 
offered by other brands. Here ’ s a short quiz to prove this point. In 
each pair, which brand has more option value in your mind? 
 Toyota or GM? 
 Netﬂ ix or Blockbuster? 
 Wikipedia or Britannica? 
 Google or AOL? 
 Puma or Reebok? 
 Whole Foods or Safeway? 
 Virgin Atlantic or Delta Air Lines? 
 Craigslist or Yellow Pages? 
 Geico or State Farm? 
 Best Buy or Circuit City? 
 Just as investors choose ﬁ nancial assets that give them the greatest 
upside with the most ﬂ exibility, consumers will search for high -
 energy, irresistible brands because they seem to assure the greatest 
long - term upside. Consumers — time - pressed and inundated from 
all sides — are searching for beacons that provide order and direc-
tion. Their loss of trust, coupled with the urgency of adjusting to a 
rapidly changing world, creates the need for that scarce signal of 
certainty and help that is found in an irresistible brand. As the 
future looks even more uncertain to navigate, these special brands 
create an irresistible force of gravity and grounding. 
 This need for managing the future translates into a new con-
sumer purchasing behavior. Even when today ’ s consumers can get 
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

Wall Street, Meet Main Street  69
 “ good enough ” and  “ works ﬁ ne ” for less money — and where risk 
has been largely removed from most transactions — they are willing 
to spend more on a brand that promises more down the road. 
They want brands that come with compliments, envy, and desire; 
brands that point the way to a more hopeful future; brands that 
are so creative — so full of possibilities — have such momentum — feel 
so in the moment — they attract a following. These brands bring badge 
value, narcissism, social currency, belongingness, aesthetic beauty, and 
other dynamic, fulﬁ lling, positive feelings. They ’ re irresistible. 
 And herein lies another discovery:  Consumers have already ﬁ g-
ured out the brand bubble.  As we ’ ve seen with past bubbles, ordinarily 
rational investors can turn a blind eye to risk if they see enormous 
returns on the horizon. But in this instance, even when risk has 
been nulliﬁ ed, consumers see fewer rainbows in the brands they 
buy today. They ’ ve concluded that brands in their repertoire have 
various levels of emotional and ﬁ nancial investment, with most of 
them not worth the effort. Across the myriad purchases they make 
in their daily lives, consumers are pruning their portfolio to a spe-
cial set of brands that help them feel they are moving forward and 
offering new ideas, hope, and optimism. These are brands with an 
abundance of energy. These are the ones we ’ ve found that are 
driving disproportionate future value in the BAV index fund. 
 How is this future value created? Let ’ s reveal another interest-
ing dynamic we found in consumer behavior. 
 The Delayed Impact of Energy on Sales 
 Remember that one of the key tip - offs about energy found in 
Jacobson ’ s research related to how brand attitude changes were 
predictive of unanticipated market changes one or two quarters 
later. We ’ ve talked about how the classic marketing methods of 
building trust, awareness, regard, and esteem are insufficient 
in today ’ s world because they deal only with today, while Ener-
gized Differentiation helps brands build for tomorrow. And we ’ ve 
emphasized how energy functions to keep brands moving forward 
and in step with consumers. 
 This future - orientation is a constant theme about Energized 
Differentiation, and we can see it play out in the marketplace in a 
pattern that reinforces the insight that consumers act like inves-
tors. We found that when a brand asset improves, indicated by 

70  The Brand Bubble
rising Brand Strength and Stature, one - third of the effect is directly 
recognized in the current period as sales increases. This indicates 
that some number of customers perceive the brand momentum 
and go out and buy the brand right away. 7 But there is also a lag 
effect; two - thirds of the effects of the brand improvement appear 
in future sales, often two to three quarters later. For example, if 
thirty people feel more favorably toward Puma today, ten of them 
will go out and buy new sneakers, while twenty will buy Pumas in 
the not - so - distant future. Both groups feel the brand has improved 
in their estimation, they just behave differently: twenty more pairs 
of sneakers will ring up in cash registers one to two quarters hence. 
Figure 3.3 illustrates the timing on returns.  
 Both these effects reinforce the point that Energized Differen-
tiation not only has a predictive value in the market, it inspires 
additional future performance. 
 This also means that the intangible brand can be made more 
tangible. Our composite measure of Brand Strength (Energized 
Differentiation plus Relevance) reflects an impressive level of 
explanatory power relative to future earnings. We determined that 
it is 81 percent as effective as sales growth and 53 percent as pow-
erful as earnings - to - assets ratios in explaining changes in a brand ’ s 
market value. It also adds an incremental 64 percent to sales 
growth and 61 percent to earnings - to - assets in explanatory power 
in understanding future financial performance. We ’ re able to 
quantify a brand ’ s impact in creating both current and future 
One-Third Realized
in Current Sales
Brand Stature
(Esteem and Knowledge)
Two-Thirds Realized
in Future Sales
(+) Change in Brand
Brand Strength
(Energized Differentiation
and Relevance)
FIGURE 3.3. WHEN A BRAND IMPROVES ITS ENERGY, TWO-THIRDS 
OF THE VALUE IS CREATED IN THE FUTURE.

Wall Street, Meet Main Street  71
ﬁ nancial value for a ﬁ rm. Our measure explains more than 16 
percent of enterprise value movement across almost a thousand 
brands. We ’ re beginning to establish a statistically valid bridge 
between brand momentum and ﬁ nancial success metrics. 
 Overall, there ’ s an important lesson here. Given the tendency 
to measure marketing ’ s effectiveness in the current period for 
quarterly sales, firms are erroneously missing two - thirds of the 
value they are creating from successful brand building. It ’ s neces-
sary to look further ahead to see what value the brand asset 
changes will bring beyond today. Today ’ s brand decisions actually 
have twice the impact on the future as on the present. You can 
build future value by creating Energized Differentiation today. 
 Tyson Foods Discovers Brand 
Immortality 
 To demonstrate just how much future value creation is possible, 
we turned to Justin Pettit, a partner at Booz  &  Company, to study 
the effects further. Pettit works with businesses of all kinds who 
are seeking growth strategies through acquisitions, new products, 
M & As, and the like. Often these firms are capital constrained, 
credit ratings are tight, and margins are slipping, and that comes 
through in their evaluation. Pettit is looking for something he 
calls  “ brand immortality, ”  where multiple layers in the revenue 
line exist in a business, and to achieve this, Justin is bullish on 
brands. He told us,  “ Often the biggest asset a company has is right 
under its nose. ” Witness his investigation of Tyson. 
 In 2002, Tyson Foods (trading at about six times EBITDA) began 
a journey that would eventually lead to a dramatic revaluation 
of the company, manifesting in a much higher multiple — about 
thirteen times EBITDA. The company signaled its new strategy 
with the announcement to extend its well - known poultry brand 
into other proteins. This was followed by actions over the next ﬁ ve 
years that also added meal kits, prepared meals, and canned 
chicken, beef, and pork to the Tyson brand. Pettit says,  “ This new 
strategy required analysts to view the stock in a whole new light. 
Rather than a single stream of revenue, with an outlook, and ulti-
mately a ﬁ nite life, the brand represented a portfolio of multiple 
streams of cash ﬂ ow of varying size, outlook, and life span, such 

72  The Brand Bubble
that in aggregate the franchise represented something with no 
obvious endpoint — an inﬁ nite stream of cash ﬂ ows and a much 
greater proportion of the enterprise value now attributable to 
growth. ”  Tyson ’ s brand had achieved a greater degree of immor-
tality and the stock ’ s valuation reﬂ ected this. (See Figure 3.4.) 
$12,000
Enterprise Value ($Bn)
$0
250
0
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
$10
Enterprise Value ($Bn)
$0
Enterprise Value
$10,000
$8,000
$6,000
$4,000
$2,000
200
150
100
50
Disaggregation of TSN Valuation
Present value
of current
cash flow
(44%)
Present value
of +NPV
growth
(56%)
Accounts for 44% of Tyson’s
13× EBITDA multiple (5.7×)
Accounts for 56% of Tyson’s
13× EBITDA multiple (7.3×)
$8
$6
$4
$2
Future Growth Value
Current Operations Value
TSN
S&P
500
August 2002: Tyson
announces it will extend
the Tyson brand into
other proteins and
product categories
Tyson extends into meal kits,
prepared meals, and canned
chicken, beef, and pork
FIGURE 3.4. MARKET REWARDS FOR BRAND IMMORTALITY STRATEGY.
Note: Share price adjusted to include dividends.
Source: CapitalIQ, Booz & Company analysis; peer group includes Pilgrim’s 
Pride, Smithﬁ eld, Hormel, and ConAgra.

Wall Street, Meet Main Street  73
 Power of Brands to Change 
Industry Valuation Multiples 
 The success of our index fund and Tyson ’ s expanding value cre-
ation actually underscores the exceptional predictive market pow-
ers of a high - energy, irresistible brand. In a recent exploration of 
data, we found that Energized Differentiation plays a powerful 
role in driving up the multiple between sales and market value in 
industry valuations. The multiple is deﬁ ned in this case as  “ the log 
of enterprise value over sales. ” 
 Given that every industry follows a different multiple, we 
examined a wide range of industries, looking at dozens of brands 
within each industry to assess which factors most strongly affect 
the industry multiple. In common thinking, it is usually perceived 
that ﬁ nancial results are the driver of an industry ’ s multiple, but 
our data showed that the Energized Differentiation can change 
the multiple signiﬁ cantly: 
 Financial and insurance industry: The Energized Differentiation 
of a brand had 40 percent of the power of ﬁ nancial results to 
increase the multiple. 
 Manufacturing industry: The Energized Differentiation of a 
brand had 27 percent of the power of ﬁ nancial results to 
increase the multiple. 
 Travel industry: The Energized Differentiation of a brand had 
43 percent of the power of ﬁ nancial results to increase the 
multiple. 
 Technology and Internet industry: The overall Brand Stature 
(including Energized Differentiation and Relevance) of a 
brand had 27 percent of the power of ﬁ nancial results to 
increase the multiple. 
 In all these industries, data like this provides weighty support 
that brands can protect their future earnings by constantly reinventing 
themselves. What are the consequences of resting? If we think back 
to ten years ago, was there a brand bubble in Sony? As they were 
enjoying the vaunted  “ Sony premium, ”  did they properly discount 
the risk of their enormous brand value? Now they exist in a world 
where LG, Samsung, and Apple are equally dominant forces in 
•
•
•
•

74  The Brand Bubble
consumer electronics. Consumers are investors looking forward, 
and your future earnings rely on servicing their future expecta-
tions of your brand. 
 Impacting Pricing Power 
and Volume, Today 
 What we also saw from the Tyson example is that well - disciplined 
and carefully managed brands can travel across categories and cre-
ate future value, often far more efﬁ ciently than speculative merg-
ers, acquisitions, and other growth strategies. And for the C - suite 
that is focused on putting energy into the brand to energize busi-
ness valuations, there ’ s also this good news:  Energy drives margins 
and volume simultaneously. 
 Whenever an overﬂ ow of consumer choice and ease of imita-
tion meet technology and globalization, there ’ s a tendency for 
brands, products, and services to commoditize. As that happens, 
managers face a choice between  differentiation  (be special and 
cling to a niche to hold up pricing power) and  relevance  (have 
mass appeal to drive volume generation through lower pricing). 
It ’ s usually a no - win trade - off: go for the volume with lower pric-
ing, or take the higher price point position at the expense of 
market share. 
 An energized brand is able to bridge this chasm. Energy drives 
both margin and volume. It can boost market share with proﬁ t-
able growth. 
 How is this possible, especially when (according to Economics 
101) the volume of goods sold increases only as the price of a 
product decreases? It ’ s usually a negative pricing relationship from 
niche to commodity. The answer: While a brand ’ s differentiation 
traditionally stimulates pricing power, and its relevance impacts 
potential units sold, energy has an uncanny ability to boost both. 
Energy creates greater net present value, so its pricing power 
remains strong in the present. But in addition, its option value, 
derived from its Energized Differentiation, also creates greater 
pricing power at each level of quantity demanded. The net effect 
is that a brand with energy shifts the demand curve outward, 
improving pricing power for each incremental unit of product 
sold without diluting the quantity of units sold (Figure 3.5.)  

Wall Street, Meet Main Street  75
Compare this behavior to that of a hot stock whose price and 
demand both rise. With energized brands, the same phenomenon 
happens: as demand increases, the brand’s pricing power also 
rises. Its greater energy means greater option value, so more con-
sumers are willing to pay more for the brand. (This means these 
brands ﬁ ght the forces of today’s commoditization by driving mar-
gin power today, while stimulating demand and expectations for 
tomorrow.) Even small increments of Energized Differentiation 
can enhance market share and margin in any  category and in any 
type of brand. Look at Herman Miller’s Aeron chairs, which have 
become the default choice in corporations today, even at the hefty 
price of $750 (and even though they bombed in focus groups). 
The option value of these chairs is clearly a lesson to sit on.  
 Building Future Value 
 There ’ s simply no doubt that the market value of a brand is 
influenced by its energy, which raises its irresistible quotient, 
which affects its future earnings and creates its future value today. 
Consumers react to this energy well in advance of actual sales. 
When Apple announced the iPhone, its shares shot up $7.10 
in one day on the NASDAQ, adding over $6 billion to its market 
Volume
(Relevance)
Differentiation
(Pricing Power)
Energy
FIGURE 3.5. ENERGY SHIFTS THE DEMAND CURVE OUTWARD.
Note: Across the U.S. brandscape, energy signiﬁ cantly drives relevant 
differentiation, r  .59.
Source: BAV, 2007. All adults 18 and over.

76  The Brand Bubble
capitalization. Meanwhile, shares of RIM (BlackBerry) lost $11.16, 
and Palm, Nokia, and Motorola slipped as well. Apple ’ s energy 
clearly signiﬁ ed future value in the minds of both investors and con-
sumers. Not surprisingly, this brings us back full circle to Macworld, 
as Apple is certainly one company that treats all its stakeholders —
 consumers and investors — with equal regard. 
 By showing your organization how consumers think like inves-
tors, you can urge everyone to look at brand management through 
a familiar lens — creating shareholder value. Since basic principles 
of investor management now apply to brand management, cus-
tomer relations become remarkably similar to investor relations, 
making it possible to unify various ideologies about how brands 
and companies should be managed. 
 Ultimately, investors in a brand must now be managed with 
the same emphasis as investors in the company. We can no longer 
afford to ignore consumers or exclude them from the board-
room. If anything, the strong link between changing consumer 
sentiments toward a brand and that brand ’ s stock price demands 
we see consumers ’  opinion of our brands as being at least as 
important as that of shareholders ’  impressions of our stocks. 
Brands with energy have the greatest chance to turn their inves-
tors into consumers — and their consumers into investors.  
  

77
 Chapter Four  
 The Postmodern Craving 
for Creativity   
 Happiness is not in the mere possession of money; 
it lies in the joy of achievement, in the thrill of 
creative effort. 
 — Franklin D. Roosevelt 
 Anyone with children of middle school age or younger will know 
that Radiator Springs is the ﬁ ctional town just off Route 66 fea-
tured in the animated movie  Cars.  It ’ s the place where rookie 
race car  “ Lightning ”  McQueen works out his community service, 
while falling in love with the tired old town and its big - hearted 
inhabitants. This pixilated dot on the map sprang from the imagi-
nation of those clever people at Pixar — the animation house that ’ s 
given traditional studios a stop - frame lesson in entertaining the 
American public. Pixar achieved its dominance by making aston-
ishing shifts in what was thought possible in animated ﬁ lmmaking. 
And in Radiator Springs, we see pure creativity exemplified in 
reviving the fortunes of a small town by finding new creative 
avenues to lure people and businesses back to what had become 
a ghost town. 
 Two hundred years ago, creativity, art, and culture were con-
sidered diversions for those engaged in industrial activity: unpro-
ductive recreations offering no more value than a little R & R. We 
can ’ t blame people for seeing things that way. The Victorian Age 
was all about moving physical objects around in the physical world, 

78  The Brand Bubble
of natural resources mechanically hewn from the earth, converted 
into goods, and transported to the consumer ’ s door. After all that 
activity, people needed to relax in front of the latest Renoir or 
Rodin: the LCD TVs of their day. 
 Today there ’ s growing recognition that creativity, art, and cul-
ture are far more than just decorative. Creativity is now an eco-
nomic force, reshaping the work world, putting the Industrial Age 
to bed. Creative invention and creative work are now understood to 
be essential drivers of jobs and wealth. Richard Florida argues in 
 The Creative Class  that those cities that cater to creative individuals 
working in high technology, education, publishing, medicine, law, 
and artistic endeavors will be the ones to succeed in the future. 
Like Radiator Springs, old factory cities like White River Junction, 
Vermont, and Pittsﬁ eld, Massachusetts, once thought dead and 
depopulated, have started a revival process based on bringing in 
creative industries. 
 The U.S. economy is changing so radically that the Bureau of 
Labor Statistics estimates that workers employed in industry now 
make up less than 10 percent of the workforce, the lowest level since 
1850. Similarly, the United Kingdom has shifted its focus away from 
manufacturing and now proclaims itself the world leader in cre-
ative services. The British estimate their creative and cultural indus-
tries such as architecture, ﬁ lmmaking, and advertising account for 
7.1 percent of their overall economy, employing almost 2 million 
and placing this type of work on a par with the ﬁ nancial industry. 
The creative edge is now where competitive advantage is achieved 
through startling innovation and paradigm - shifting thought. 
 It ’ s only reasonable to wonder, What is making creativity the 
driving force of the modern world? Why has it become so crucial, 
not just to our economy and social structure but to our well - being 
as well? And what role does creativity play in energy brands and 
how does it drive consumers to gravitate toward them? 
 The growing societal attraction to creativity has its roots in 
the postmodern world ’ s existential angst and our need to real-
ize the human search for meaning. Modernism romanced us with 
the idea that things can only get better. Modernism promised our 
whites can be whiter, our cars can be faster, and our houses can be 
bigger. It perpetuated the idea that progress is our birthright and 
that we can buy improvement through material acquisition. 

The Postmodern Craving for Creativity  79
 So what about postmodernism? It happens when someone 
points out that modernism can no longer conceal the truths 
made all too apparent by contemporary life. After all these years, 
maybe  “ progress ”  isn ’ t all that it ’ d been made out to be? Since 
World War II, the dawn of the postmodern era, Western culture has 
been roiling with the loss of a centralized organizing principle 
(for example, God). The simplicity and the natural cycles of life 
that formerly brought stability and reassured people have been 
replaced with complex systems, cynicism, and doubt. Intellectually 
and spiritually, we no longer feel we understand the human purpose; 
deriving meaning out of life eludes many of us day by day. Blind 
consumerism is hollow, and material possessions seem to provide 
little help in knowing why we exist on this planet. 
 Like nine - year - olds wrestling with the question of Santa Claus, 
we believe, consumers are torn between wanting to believe mod-
ernist promises and being too savvy to suspend disbelief. As wit-
ness, note how consumers have grown less fascinated by marketing 
and have begun to shift their relationship to it. Marketing can 
no longer fool consumers — but who wants to buy a straightfor-
ward, albeit honest product? It ’ s a conﬂ ict that few marketers can 
recognize. Yet we ’ ve found that creative brands transcend their 
skepticism of marketing, allowing them to believe with no sense of 
hypocrisy, thus resolving the conﬂ ict. 
 At its most primal level, creativity promises  happiness, honesty, 
and hope. Creativity counteracts the lack of meaning. Creativity 
promises guidance. Creative people and innovative ideas are inspi-
rational. Creativity subliminally signals numerous beneﬁ ts to our 
well - being, qualities like youthfulness, immortality, conﬁ dence, 
truth, freedom, and self - determination. We admire creative peo-
ple, companies, brands, products, and services because they pro-
duce a positive and often unﬁ ltered vision of human existence, 
which brings added meaning in small or even large ways to our 
lives. Creativity is embedded in the spirit of irresistible brands. 
 In this chapter, we provide a brief analysis of how creativity 
functions to provoke these feelings in consumers and drive people 
to invest in a select portfolio of brands. These high - energy brands 
now account for the majority of the value creation for consumers 
and business. Our intent is not to present a formal treatise link-
ing creativity with marketing strategy, but rather to paint in broad 

80  The Brand Bubble
strokes how consumers feel about and interpret creativity and why 
they constantly crave innovation and uniqueness as elements of 
energy found in the world ’ s most admired brands. 
 Fountain of Youth 
 You ’ ve no doubt noticed that when you ’ re in a creative mood 
you ’ re apt to be feeling happy and engaged. Equally, when you ’ re 
happy, you ’ ll ﬁ nd creativity ﬂ ows more easily; it ’ s easier to day-
dream and play. Young children prove this. Creativity is part of 
how they learn and grow; they are inquisitive, playful, experi-
mental, and always willing to try new things. These qualities are 
expressed in lots of different ways: singing, drawing, dancing, 
skipping, acting silly, dressing up, improvising, and playing make -
 believe. 
 As we grew older, that youthful creativity gets beaten out of us, 
replaced by pragmatic behaviors we must emulate to assume the 
mantle of adulthood. By the time we are working adults, most peo-
ple lose most of their natural tendency to be creative and playful. 
 But something intriguing about creative brands can make 
us feel like kids again. When we encounter creative brands, they 
seem to have simplicity and playfulness that we ﬁ nd refreshing 
or even liberating. They have a kind of magic, and this creates a 
desire to reclaim both our buried creativity and perhaps our own 
happiness. Just watch adults loitering around an Apple store, get-
ting their hair cut in the Virgin Atlantic Clubhouse, or imperson-
ating Axl Rose in a game of Rock Band, and you will witness signs 
of playfulness, joy, and wonder. Encountering brands with energy, 
consumers resonate to a creative pulse emanating from within, 
and that rekindles a desire to reclaim just a little bit of lost youth. 
 The word  creative  comes from the Latin  creare,  to make or pro-
duce, and is related to  crescere,  to grow. This seems appropriate, 
given that consumers are seeking brands that seem birthed out 
of brilliance and likely to grow into experiences that surprise and 
delight. It ’ s this quality of being reborn into a new life that con-
sumers are drawn to when they see brands swathed in creativity. 
It ’ s no coincidence that purchasers of goods are called  consumers. 
When we buy brands with energy, it may be that we are looking to 
consume the creativity they possess to have it inside ourselves. 

The Postmodern Craving for Creativity  81
 Creativity: Elixir of Happiness 
 In our postmodern era of amazing technology and knowledge -
 based progress, there is nevertheless a signiﬁ cant negative correla-
tion between happiness and wealth. Many studies have shown that 
the world ’ s richest countries contain the unhappiest people, while 
poor countries tend to have the happiest. Economists and govern-
ment policymakers are beginning to understand that material pos-
sessions are no guarantee of a smooth - functioning, nonviolent, 
happy society. The Japanese are much better off now than in 1950, 
but the proportion of citizens who say they are  “ very happy ”  has not 
budged. Americans have remained much as Alexis de Tocqueville 
found them in the nineteenth century:  “ So many lucky men, restless 
in the midst of abundance. ”  Researchers for World Values Survey 
even go so far as to describe the desire for material goods as  “ a 
happiness suppressant ” ! 
 As the road to happiness, material wealth is starting to look 
more like a cul - de - sac. Pondering that potential dead end forces 
us to question the role of brands and what they contribute to our 
lives. Brands have always reﬂ ected the times in which they ’ ve oper-
ated, and the issues they reﬂ ect today are nothing new — they ’ re 
just different. In today ’ s world, it seems that energy brands feel 
irresistible — and we only want more of them. Energy brands draw 
people in, make them smile with delight, and renew the feeling 
that life is good. They inspire, uplift, encourage, and entertain. 
The creativity in energy brands may not have the answers to the 
world ’ s problems, but it at least brings consumers a sense of well -
 being and a brighter future ahead. 
 Recent research in psychology and neuroscience shows a close 
link between creativity and happiness. Mihaly Csikszentmihalyi, a pro-
fessor of psychology at Claremont Graduate University and author 
of the book  Flow, studied high - performance workers and deter-
mined that when people are fully involved in tasks they ﬁ nd engag-
ing and challenging, they enter into a  “ ﬂ ow ”  state of mind that 
results in higher levels of creative thinking, productivity, and 
emotional happiness. 
 Perhaps an energized brand induces the same state of ﬂ ow in 
people. It offers a sort of elixir — a potion that keeps people going 
forward, even in bad times. Within these brands is the subtle 

82  The Brand Bubble
promise of personal growth, of solutions to current problems, of 
overcoming life ’ s difﬁ culties through new ideas. In some fashion, 
creativity acts as a quality or ingredient that, when sprinkled over 
life, inexplicably makes it more joyous. 
 The Wow Factor 
 Buckminster Fuller once said:  “ You never change things by ﬁ ght-
ing the existing reality. To change something, build a new model 
that makes the existing model obsolete. ”  That ’ s what energized 
brands do. They don ’ t take their reference from the past; they 
take it from the future, where anything is possible. Their creativity 
produces innovations that surprise, delight, and produce squeals 
of  “ Wow ” from consumers. 
 Arthur Koestler offered what is widely considered to be the 
best deﬁ nition of creativity, giving us insight into where the Wow 
comes from. He introduced the concept of  “ bisociation, ”  which 
posits that creativity arises as a result of bringing two previously 
unrelated frames of reference together to create a third, new one. 
When done right, the resulting innovation is far greater than the 
two inputs alone. Something truly creative proposes new solutions 
that were previously unimaginable. You know you have innovation 
when you can look at something and feel a sense that 1 plus 1 
equals 3. That ’ s the Wow factor. 
 The world is full of examples of bisociation as the origin of 
creative innovation. Perhaps the most proﬁ table in recent times 
is Apple ’ s bringing together two previously unrelated frames of 
reference — an MP3 Player and an online music store — resulting 
in the iPod. David Byrne from the  Talking Head  s  demonstrates 
the remarkable creative potential of PowerPoint. Or more cru-
cially, when American soldiers in Iraq wrote home asking for Silly 
String. As it turns out, this staple of fourth - grade birthday parties 
can reveal bomb trip wires in a dark room. If the soldiers spray 
Silly String and it hangs in the air, there ’ s nothing silly about the 
situation. That ’ s bisociation putting together a toy and the reality 
of warfare to save lives. 
 Consumers love the Wow factor they ﬁ nd in creative brands. 
Innovation experts like Michael Porter and Gary Hamel have long 
beat the drum that innovation must drive corporations of the 

The Postmodern Craving for Creativity  83
future. What ’ s important is that the Wow factor is not just some 
peripheral added advantage, and it almost never emerges without 
big thinking and even bigger collaboration. David Aaker put it 
best:  “ The difference between an incremental and exponential 
idea lies in the ability of the organization to break down the barri-
ers that hinder creative thinking. ” 
 To the consumer who ’ s thinking like an investor, creativity 
offers people the perception of a more interesting future. If we 
had to live in a world populated exclusively by products lacking 
differentiation, offering little creativity, and instilling no enthu-
siasm, we ’ d be living in a dingy, gray world. Creativity calls out to 
people everywhere to follow the allure of energy brands. 
 It ’ s also not surprising that these brands seem to cause people 
to become more active in their involvement as consumers.  Our 
research shows that people actually become smarter curators of their own 
consumption.  They play a more active role in making brand choices 
and they seek out deeper, more meaningful brand relationships. 
Brand loyalty moves from a passive to active state. Consumers 
place greater emphasis on selecting brands that continuously sur-
prise, inspire, and lead them forward. 
  Irresistible Brands Tell the Truth 
 One of the hallmarks of superior creative works is that they ring 
true to audiences. Great creative work has an authenticity and 
honesty that resonates with the public and gives off a feeling that 
it couldn ’ t have been otherwise. Pablo Picasso ’ s  “ Art is a lie that 
tells the truth ”  equally says a lot about creative brands — they don ’ t 
lie; people feel that they can ’ t resist the truth shown before their 
eyes. Despite creative brands ’  being, in part, exercises in market-
ing, they provide an insight into a truth we all want to believe. 
These brands give consumers a window into the meaning they 
ultimately want to ﬁ nd. 
 As any kid who wrote away for Sea - Monkeys from  Boy ’ s Life 
knows, consumerism and marketing have not always been about 
truth. The history of selling brands to consumers is peppered 
with white lies, falsehoods, and generous doses of manipulation. 
One can trace it back to the early 1800s, as formal brands began 
emerging in the days when mass consumerism originated and 

84  The Brand Bubble
populations demanded a guarantee of consistent product quality. 
In the next century, brands began to differentiate themselves, and 
companies discovered that, by suggesting psychological superiority 
such as status or prestige, they could command signiﬁ cant premi-
ums. In the coming decades, marketers made ever more elaborate 
claims about brands, and many crossed the line beyond truthful. 
It was an evolution of marketing that went virtually unchecked 
throughout most of the twentieth century. 
 It was not really until the early 1990s that consumers started 
to question the claims marketers were making. Seriously, was 
the Subaru Impreza really like punk rock? Consumers could no 
longer be cajoled by marketing; they organized to strike back, 
even soliciting attorneys general to quash false advertising. They 
wanted honest brands, stripped of hype. We see this in the success 
of several new brands like Starbury, NBA star Stephan Marbury ’ s 
sneaker that sells for just $14.98 — one - tenth the cost of Nike Air Zoom.
Tesco ’ s baby club acts more like an au pair for new moms than 
a supermarket. In these types of brands, consumers feel they are 
buying authenticity. 
 The revolt in consumer tolerance for marketing results in 
large part from the  “ perfect information ”  that has become avail-
able in the fragmenting media landscape. This term comes out 
of game theory and refers to the state of being when an oppo-
nent has complete knowledge about other players, such that com-
petitive information is instantly updated as it arises. In terms of 
marketing and advertising, the sudden availability of perfect infor-
mation evened the score and provided consumers the wherewithal 
to disprove inﬂ ated product claims. The rise of the Internet, in 
particular, has given consumers opportunities to blast through the 
hype using their own research and by sharing data. 
 One of the most important by - products of perfect informa-
tion has been a conﬁ rmation of the postmodernist perspective 
that no amount of spin and CGI can mask the fact that no one 
really knows where we are heading. Consumers began to see that 
the institutions they once placed so much faith in were far less in 
control than they thought. Increasing numbers of insoluble issues 
presented themselves, from ideological conﬂ ict to climate change, 
from global migration to the depletion of natural resources. No 
truth seemed to last long. People bought shares in Enron, which 

The Postmodern Craving for Creativity  85
 Fortune  named  “ America ’ s Most Innovative Company ”  six years 
running, only to discover accounting fraud. People thought 
food and cars were safe, only to learn about deadly strains of 
 E. coli  and submit to auto recall after recall. Parents discovered 
they couldn ’ t even trust Thomas the Tank Engine, or other toys 
made in China. 
 This has been the state of marketing up till today. But the fact 
is, whether consumers know it or not,  postmodernism is now main-
stream.  Pretty much everyone everywhere accepts as a given that 
politicians lie, business is greedy, and science fails regularly. When 
it comes to marketing and brands, consumers are left feeling vul-
nerable, cynical, and detached. 
 Marketers conducting research receive constant conﬁ rmation 
of this when consumers tell them that they want X but they also 
want its opposite Y. Consumers don ’ t want inauthentic, overdone 
products sold through inﬂ ated, hyped - out advertising. But at the 
same time they don ’ t want unexciting, generic products that strip 
out all emotion and passion. 
 But there seems to be a growing willingness to concede that 
some brands deserve respect. We believe that  with creativity, brand 
integrity becomes believable. Consumers are attracted to brands they 
see making the effort to transcend the mundane as being more 
earnest, straightforward, and authentic. These brands transcend 
consumer skepticism of marketing, allowing consumers to believe 
without feeling a sense of hypocrisy. They resolve the consumer 
conﬂ ict because they deliver on what they promise. They add qual-
ity, esteem, improvement, and hope to a future otherwise ﬁ lled 
with cynicism and doubt. 
  Creativity and Irresistible Brands 
 When taken together, the role that creativity plays in the brand 
bubble is becoming clearer. Consumers are short of expectations 
in most brands. Creativity of thought offers hope in a way that ’ s 
never been more important. As consumers move past adjusting to 
exploiting the radical changes of a very young century, the thirst 
for creativity is growing in their everyday lives. In a world of limit-
less broadband, virtually any idea is within a keystroke ’ s reach, 
fueling an explosion of entertainment and self - expression, most 

86  The Brand Bubble
brands look incredibly literal and uninteresting. They are unable 
to keep up with the creative IQ of their customer. 
 Sufﬁ ce it to say, for now, creativity is the new must - have of the 
marketplace because it offers honesty, progress, and a place to 
turn to ﬁ nd answers to life ’ s uncertainties. Innovation and new 
ideas, whether in media, consumer content, products, architec-
ture, design, or science — or other pursuits — is in such demand 
because it comforts like never before. Consumers are on a con-
tinuous journey, seeking new ideas, innovation, and a direction 
in which to go. It ’ s creativity that encourages people to dream 
about tomorrow and nurtures their efforts to do so. It ’ s a kind of 
magic. 
 But in focusing on the present, most brands aren ’ t painting a 
canvas of hope and new ideas. They don ’ t have time to consider 
their future promises, and as a result, consumers (as investors) are 
discarding them in droves, accounting for declining brand percep-
tions and stagnation, fueling the bubble. In contrast, brands that 
are constantly thinking about tomorrow — that believe in creativity 
and inspiration in everything they do — are capable of being an 
integral part of people ’ s lives for years to come. 

87
 Chapter Five  
 Welcome to 
ConsumerLand  
 Moore ’ s Law is a violation of Murphy ’ s Law. 
Everything gets better and better. 
 — THE ECONOMIST, March 2003  
 Meet Alex Tew, a nineteen - year - old in Wiltshire, England, who 
harnessed the power of blogs to scale a business quickly. Beset by 
tuition expenses, Alex came up with an idea to sell ads on a Web 
site he created called the  “ Million Dollar Homepage. ”  His site is 
the equivalent of a billboard made up of 1,000,000 pixels, each 
costing $1. Initially he asked his friends and family to buy space, 
but he also spread the word over blogs. He began receiving press 
requests, and a whirlwind media tour in Britain, Europe, and the 
United States ensued. Trafﬁ c to the site skyrocketed, and his home 
page now looks like an online Times Square. Within a matter of 
months, he sold all 1 million pixels, culminating with an auction 
of the last thousand pixels on eBay. 
 Who is Alex? 
  a.   A consumer?  
  b.   An advertiser? 
  c.   A media entrepreneur? 
  d.   An Internet destination? 
  e.   All of the above? 

88  The Brand Bubble
 The correct answer is  “ e ” — and that ’ s the crux of this chapter. 
In many ways, Alex personiﬁ es other important characteristics of 
the new world we call  “ ConsumerLand, ”  a magical place where 
fantasy meets reality, creativity meets commerce, and technology 
meets passion. This is a land where consumers have unprece-
dented technology at their ﬁ ngertips to envision more ambitious 
dreams and express themselves more vividly, which in turn gives 
them unprecedented power to alter their relationship with brands. 
The broadband world has ampliﬁ ed consumer behavior as critics, 
creators, parents, buyers, and citizens. And it has heightened their 
expectations of brands and putting air into the brand bubble. 
 Only a radical consumer metamorphosis can explain statistics 
like these:  All in the Family  had a 34.0 household rating in 1972 
compared to 14.6 for  American Idol  in 2008. Crazy Frog, a ring 
tone, became a U.K. top ten single. China ’ s version of  Idol, called 
 Super Girl,  attracted one - third of the country ’ s population for the 
season ﬁ nale and 8 million people texted in a vote. A study by 
the Fortino Group predicts that current ten -  to seventeen - year -
 olds will spend one - third of their lives (twenty - three years) on the 
Internet. According to Nielsen ’ s SoundScan, CD sales declined by 
19 percent in 2007. The global PC market will double by 2010. 
More than 17 billion devices will be connected to the Internet 
by 2012. 
 In ConsumerLand, people may behave differently, but 
they ’ re still pursuing timeless human wants and needs. We ’ ve 
always had friends; now we log on to Facebook and MySpace. 
We ’ ve always let our ﬁ ngers do the walking; now we use Google 
and craigslist. We ’ ve always shared memories; now we have Flickr and 
Shutterﬂ y. We ’ ve always kept lists, now we use del.icio.us. We ’ ve 
always phoned our kids; now we text. And we ’ ve always watched 
movies from Hollywood; now we stream them direct from studios 
on sites like ABC On Demand. 
 The problem is, many companies still operate their marketing 
departments according to the old thinking of persuasion, metrics, 
and an  “ us - them ”  landscape. They ’ re blind to the behavioral shifts 
transforming customers right in front of their eyes. As a result, 
consumers drift further away, and we continue to see brand mea-
sures decay and crack. It ’ s those enterprises that can ’ t see the 
brand bubble blowing up around them. 

Welcome to ConsumerLand  89
 Our goal in this chapter is to describe this new terrain wherein 
consumers have co - opted the brand government. We suspect 
you ’ re not only familiar with the media and digital trends we 
cite, you ’ re dealing with their impacts on your marketing strate-
gies. But change is happening so fast that most of us are struggling 
to understand the overall impact, to see the forest through the 
gigabytes, so to speak. You may have speciﬁ c thoughts but no uni-
ﬁ ed theory regarding how to market to this new ConsumerLand. 
Fixing that is our intention here. 
 Of Computer Mice and Men: 
Innovation and Human Nature 
 When we first began writing this chapter, it was going to be 
about the speed of innovation and brands needing to keep up. 
We planned to cite the now well - known prescient prediction of 
Intel co - founder Gordon E. Moore, who back in 1965 predicted 
that the number of transistors on a silicon chip would probably 
double every two years or so, a geometric growth pattern that has 
largely proven true. Moore ’ s Law became the metaphor epitomiz-
ing the accelerated rate of change in this increasingly fast world. 
The same nonlinear speed explains why, while it took radio thirty -
 eight years to reach an audience of 50 million people, TV took 
only thirteen years — and the Internet just four years. And why the 
work that took Britannica almost two hundred years, Wikipedia 
accomplished in six. 
 However, due to the very speed of change, even that topic fell 
by the wayside. Speed was no longer the issue. The more salient 
distinction about today ’ s ConsumerLand is that  the nature of 
change itself has changed.  Change is no longer linear or geometric: 
it ’ s gone holographic. One change impacts all others. Everything 
is now so tightly interconnected, it ’ s hard to put your arms 
around what a single individual change means. Each alteration 
reverberates through the cosmos and later you are perplexed 
when some distant, unconnected mechanism also changes. How 
did that happen? 
 Go back in your mind to the consumer marketplace just ﬁ ve 
years ago, in the period of the dial - up modem. In those early Inter-
net years, sending e - mail and browsing static text Web pages was 

90  The Brand Bubble
the marketing equivalent of the discovery of copper. It allowed 
brand managers to create some new tools, but we were still doing 
our work according to largely the same old paradigms for creat-
ing our messages and using the media to talk to consumers. The 
Internet added some excitement to our marketing, but it wasn ’ t a 
fundamental revolution. 
 Then broadband came along, and it was like inventing the 
wheel. Big pipes opened the flow of vast potential. Broadband 
brought storage, transportation, and communication. Suddenly 
content was essentially free and readily available. In simple eco-
nomic terms, this development placed content in servitude to the 
market. Now, if content isn ’ t instantly engaging, creative, and dif-
ferentiated, it ’ s worthless. 
 These three factors have had a critical transformative effect, 
heightening how people experience and use the Web, how people 
go about communicating and entertaining themselves, and how 
companies market and bring their brands to life. The very same 
forces that forever altered our experience of the Web created a 
catalyst for the powerful social change among consumers that the 
rest of this chapter will cover. Broadband connected the world, 
not just with speed, but also with a bigger capacity to carry the 
lifeblood of the human race: energy in the form of ideas and 
expression. 
 One of the outcomes of this change is that innovation becomes 
unpredictable in its effects. Today we can ’ t even imagine what fur-
ther innovations might appear and what effect they may have on 
society. We usually don ’ t even know we need an innovation until 
its beneﬁ ts are demonstrated in our own lives. The German physi-
cist Max Planck once said:  “ A new truth does not triumph by con-
vincing its opponents and making them see the light, but rather 
because its opponents eventually die, and a new generation grows 
up that is familiar with it. ”  That ’ s probably how most of us feel 
these days about the ﬂ ood of innovations we ’ ve had to contend 
with in just ﬁ ve years. 
 Even when we try to imagine innovation using the best tools 
and knowledge we can put our hands on, we are as likely to be 
wrong as right. If you ’ re a Baby Boomer, think back on what you 
might have said if you ’ d been asked in the 1960s how we might 
be traveling to work in the year 2000. You might reasonably have 

Welcome to ConsumerLand  91
suggested the personal jet pack (or a similar sort of  Jetsons  fantasy). 
You were wrong, but at least you were close, given that the gizmos 
have been invented and tested. But ask yourself the same question 
now: How do you think we ’ ll be traveling to work in 2050? There ’ s 
no way to know this time around; anything is plausible, including 
the possibility that we won ’ t go to work at all, it will come to us, or 
that we ’ ll be working on the moon. 
 Innovation today makes an ass of us all. It used to be that inno-
vation went just a teeny baby step beyond whatever had gone 
before, but now innovation tends to take huge leaps, making it 
impossible to predict the future based on past experience. If you 
think you understand how things are going to change, you really 
are in trouble, because now things change in ways you don ’ t rec-
ognize, let alone understand. 
 The lesson for brands is that the  “ what ’ s ”  of innovation are no 
longer predictable or constant. You can ’ t prepare for innovation 
anymore, you can only be flexible and loose, and try to dance 
around it. And be aware that every generation has its own refer-
ence point of what ’ s normal. Twittering is endemic among ﬁ fteen -
 year - olds, but forty - somethings would probably wonder why we ’ re 
saying kids act like birds. (Feed  “ Twitter ”  to a search engine if 
you ’ re wondering.) This points out the lesson  “ Don ’ t follow the 
technology, follow the behavior. ” 
 While some have suggested that innovation drives the advance-
ment of human nature, we suggest that more often, it ’ s the other 
way around — technology advances largely in response to human 
desire. The Wright brothers would not have invented the airplane 
if humans had not wanted to travel faster and further. Wozniak 
and Jobs would not have created the ﬁ rst Apple if humans didn ’ t 
seek to have personal computing power at their ﬁ ngertips. Tim 
Berners - Lee and others would not have developed the World Wide 
Web if people hadn ’ t wanted faster ways to share information. 
 We emphasize this point because the remainder of the chapter 
is devoted to describing numerous newfound consumer powers 
and attitudes that require brands to alter how they engage with 
customers. It ’ s important to keep in mind that although broad-
band and mobile technology enable consumers to grab onto these 
powers, it was human nature that drove innovators to create that 
technology. 

92  The Brand Bubble
 So if you were still resisting and fuming that brands wouldn ’ t 
be in this pickle if technology hadn ’ t come along, you ’ re dead 
wrong. Consumers are simply following their nature and that will 
constantly drive more innovation to help them. 
 Consumers as Producers of Content 
 One of the most fundamental changes in the new ConsumerLand 
is the incessant consumer desire to be heard and to participate. 
People are no longer willing to sit back and consume the content 
brands feed them. They blog, vlog, tag, mebo, podcast, twitter, 
wiki, and ning to make their voices known about everything. They 
spend hours gardening their MySpace, Bebo, and Facebook pages 
to deﬁ ne themselves and make statements about life, the world, or 
your brand. They legally or illegally  “ borrow ”  content from thou-
sands of professional and nonprofessional sources, including your 
brand ’ s Web site, to create mashups, music videos, or movie take-
overs of their MySpace page. If you need proof the old world of 
media has been turned upside down, note a recent survey of users 
of Bolt Media, a youth networking site, which found that only one 
out of three users were able to name even one of the four American 
TV networks. 
 Blogging and mobile chatter have eliminated the distance 
between an individual and a mass audience. Today, a laptop and a 
cell phone are the equivalent of a printing press. Blogs are noth-
ing more than a timeless expression of diaries; a need to express 
oneself, even if no one is listening — but now, people may be listen-
ing. Consumers have become citizen journalists, media channels, 
brand creators, and entrepreneurs. The growth of blogging surely 
reﬂ ects an enormous consumer desire to speak up and be heard. 
Today, 26 million  “ active ”  blogs are read by 57 million people in 
the United States. The greatest impact of blogs occurs in Asia, 
where China leads the way in creating and sharing content with 
42 million bloggers. 1 
 While most of the 110 million blogs worldwide don ’ t offer 
much more than innocuous content for friends and relatives, 
thousands of bloggers attract wider audiences, and a small cadre 
like Gawker, Engadget, Perez Hilton, Apartment Therapy, and 
Huffington Post have built genuine mass readership. Bloggers 

Welcome to ConsumerLand  93
have (for the time being) become the new opinion makers, the 
advance guard of truth that consumers are increasingly trusting to 
report honestly, without spin. 
 Blogging suggests a content meritocracy. Whereas before, con-
tent needed to ﬁ nd its structure, be it advertisers or network exec-
utives, now people decide what rises to the top. Blogging has 
grown credible enough that it is no longer ignored as a communi-
cations strategy for brands. Category blogs like Gizmodo and 
Engadget are increasingly vital to the success of consumer elec-
tronics. The British comedian Stephen Fry dresses up in drag and 
blogs about the latest gadgets. Companies everywhere are launch-
ing blogs of their own, written by CEOs or corporate thought lead-
ers. The most forward - thinking brands are designing strategies to 
tap into the opinion - making power of popular bloggers, seeding 
them with advance information or product samples to create buzz 
in the marketplace. 
 Meanwhile, when blogging met its cousin, vlogging (video blog-
ging), it took only a short step to invent YouTube, adding another 
new tool to consumers ’  power to participate. With its library of 
over 78 million videos, and over 150,000,000 new ones uploaded 
each day, YouTube quickly became the third - most - recognized 
digital brand, after Apple and Google, and the fastest - growing Web 
site in the history of the Internet. YouTube ’ s popularity attracts a 
major share of the estimated $36 billion online ad market, which 
itself is growing fast within the overall $446 billion global ad mar-
ket. But we felt this way about Yahoo and Netscape. It ’ s likely way 
too early for the digital fat lady to sing. 
 Consumers are also airing their voices via podcasting. People 
are programming their own talk radio with commentary, product 
reviews, music, and news  . . .  without being subject to the same 
regulations as terrestrial radio. Companies are no longer overlook-
ing the utility and ease of pod and v casting. Microsoft discovered 
a groundswell of interest in its developer forum  “ Channel 9, ” 
which connects the Microsoft community. Ford uses podcasting to 
sell quality, and Vanguard disseminates a popular series called 
 “ plain talk on investing. ” 
 Consumer - generated media (CGM) has become a nonstop, 
multifarious, and multimedia channel of consumer communica-
tion over which brands have no control. Video streaming, music 

94  The Brand Bubble
and photo sharing, real simple syndication (RSS), personal 
enriched content, collaborative searching, product reviewing, and 
social networking are all technologies that give consumers tools to 
route around brands. CGM gives consumers a pass around the 
traditional business models to talk back to brands — or, like Alex, 
to create their own enterprise. 
 Examples of successful CGM - originated business models are 
growing. The pioneers in music were British pop star Lily Allen 
and The Arctic Monkeys, who built followings and sold albums 
through their MySpace pages. Newer artists like Kate Nash and 
Jamie T. are using the same model and gaining acclaim. Gnarls 
Barkley ’ s single  “ Crazy ”  was the first song to reach the U.K. 
charts based on downloads, 20 percent of the audience access-
ing it via mobile cell phones. Radiohead offered its new album 
online with no list price, asking consumers instead to set their 
own price for what they think the music is worth. (Brands, are 
you listening?) 
 The signiﬁ cance of CGM is more than its effect on changing 
business models; it is altering the  “ trust equation ”  for brands. The 
reality is,  consumers now trust each other more than they trust brands. 
Mediaedge:CIA found that 76 percent of people rely on what 
 others say versus 15 percent on advertising. Ninety - two percent of 
consumers now cite word of mouth as the best source for product 
and brand information, up from 67 percent in 1977. Also, nearly 
80 percent of people surveyed in AOL ’ s Brand New World 
research reported they would think twice about buying a product 
or brand if they saw a negative review about it on the Internet. 
And they ’ re likely to ﬁ nd a lot of brand chatter: 74 percent of all 
global Internet users have reported writing a review online. 2 
Another e - commerce study found that 75 percent of people con-
sult blogs before they buy, and consumer - generated reviews 
resulted in a 77 percent increase in reported trafﬁ c, 56 percent 
improved conversion rates, with 42 percent having higher dollar 
values in their purchase basket. 3 No wonder reviews sites, such as 
Digg and Reddit, have become the third - most - common use of the 
Internet after e - mail and search. 
 Retailers are responding fast to the trend. The survey ﬁ rms 
E - consultancy and Bazaarvoice researched the effect of customer -
 generated ratings and reviews among online retailers in the 

Welcome to ConsumerLand  95
United Kingdom, the United States, and Europe in June and July 
2007 and found that nearly eight in ten online sellers agree that 
consumer - generated reviews increase site trafﬁ c, while 56 percent 
saw improved conversion rates and 42 percent higher average 
order values. 
 As unbelievable as it is, the high level of faith people put in 
what complete strangers think explains why a single negative 
review from a guy in Texas named Jack S. can sit on a retail Web 
site like an eight - hundred - pound gorilla, carrying an enormous 
chilling effect on a product. But is CGM incorruptible? Could its 
credibility withstand a Jack S. who is really an advertising copy-
writer working for a competing brand? Ultimately CGM will need 
the same ﬁ lters as every other trust - based institution. 
 As we ’ ve said, our research indicates that trust in brands is 
declining; now there ’ s no doubt that CGM is ﬁ lling the vacuum. 
With tools like search, collaborative ﬁ ltering, blogs, podcasting, 
YouTube, and epinions abounding, consumers are redefining 
where they will go to ﬁ nd the truth. CGM is the ultimate mega-
phone, proving that one person can make or break a reputation 
by videotaping or writing about a single blemish in a brand and 
letting it reverberate in waves to ever - larger audiences. 
 A good example of CGM affecting a brand ’ s reputation is 
the unfortunate fate of Kryptonite bike locks in 2004. For years, 
Kryptonite rode along with an invincible reputation for the most 
secure locks in the world, until a blogger showed up in an online 
bike forum with a video showing the new Kryptonite Evolution 
2000 lock being picked with a Bic ballpoint pen. For the next six 
days, the behind - the - story meta - dialogue between Kryptonite 
executives and the bike blogging world went something like 
this: 
 Day 1 
 Kryptonite:  Our bike locks are the best. 
 The Market: Yes, your bike locks are the best. 
 Day 2 
 Kryptonite:  Our bike locks are the best. 
 The Market: Yes, your bike locks are still the best. 

96  The Brand Bubble
 Day 3 
 Kryptonite: Our bike locks are the best. 
 The Market: Ummm  . . . yeah I ’ m sure they are, but what ’ s all this 
about some recent video on the net that ’ s supposed 
to show how you can crack your locks in ten seconds 
using a Bic pen? 
 Day 4 
 Kryptonite: Our bike locks are the best. 
 The Market: Hey, I just saw that video on a friend ’ s Web site. And 
I ’ m kinda ticked off because I just paid $60 for one of 
your new locks three weeks ago, and I ’ m wondering 
if a Bic pen can crack my lock or not  . . .  does the pen 
crack all Kryptonite locks or just one or two models? 
 Day 5 
 Kryptonite: Our bike locks are the best. 
 The Market: Hey, I just visited your Web site and saw no mention 
of the Bic pen problem. What are you doing about 
it? Are you going to ﬁ x the locks? Are you going to 
give me a refund? 
 Day 6 
 Kryptonite: Our bike locks are the best. 
 The Market: No, they ’ re not. My bike just got stolen! A whole 
bunch of my friends are going to hear about this. 
 Kryptonite executives claimed they were listening, but the 
damage was done when it took them eight days to respond; that ’ s 
dog years in ConsumerLand. Marketers are in effect now like the 
World War II code breakers. They must constantly monitor con-
versations and chatter, looking for trafﬁ c levels and patterns in 
chatter in order to decipher insights from the general noise in the 
marketplace. And if you don ’ t track conversations and respond 
swiftly, the community will do it for you. 
 The sheer force of CGM means brands have to invent their 
own new business models that marry CGM with brand content, or 

Welcome to ConsumerLand  97
even to completely hand over some aspect of it to consumers, as 
now happens with viral content. Brands can beneﬁ t by harnessing 
the wisdom of crowds, by giving consumers applications and 
opportunities to rank, rate, vote, tag, review, comment, detract, 
and support the brand. They must allow consumers to meet oth-
ers and have  “ experiences ” through their brands. 
 An inspiring example of the successful merger of CGM with 
brand strategy is the campaign Doritos conducted for the 2007 
Super Bowl. Doritos invited consumers to submit their own video 
spots highlighting the brand, with the grand prize being an airing 
of the spot on the Super Bowl broadcast. Contestants were invited 
to post their videos on Yahoo, the others voted on their favorites. 
Doritos was not involved in the selection. 
 The company received more than a thousand spots, produc-
ing hundreds of thousands of pre - game impressions plus huge 
amounts of publicity both on- and ofﬂ ine. The ﬁ ve top winners 
each received $10,000, and two top spots aired during the Super 
Bowl. The ﬁ rst spot ranked fourth among all spots in a  USA Today 
poll following the game. In 2008, they extended the competition 
to consumer - generated music with the prize being a recording 
contract and a sixty - second music video during the Super Bowl. 
 Numerous other brands are inviting consumers to produce 
video spots in favor of their brands. Some praise, while others 
attack. Yet many brands are learning to help consumers, giving 
them partial content to integrate into their videos or letting people 
borrow brand and product hero pages to integrate into their Face-
book aps. As long as it ’ s good content, consumers will pinch it.  
 We Don ’ t Want to Be  “ Herd, ”  
Just Personally Seen 
 Picture a herd of zebras, roaming the plains of Africa. A lion 
approaches, and together — as one massive group — all the zebras 
ﬂ ee, swerving to the left, then to the right, in lockstep unison to 
protect each other and save themselves from certain destruction. 
But despite their behavior as a herd, each zebra is unique, with 
its own pattern of stripes. If you were to zoom in closely with your 
digital camera, you could actually tell one zebra from another 
because each is different, as different as  . . . well, you and me. 

98  The Brand Bubble
 While mass marketing will always have some level of appeal, 
many consumers also want brands to see their individual stripes, 
not their  “ herdiness. ” This shows up in many different ways. 
 First, micro - addressability and mass customization is building 
in appeal. What started out three decades ago at Burger King as 
 “ Have it your way ”  has transformed into a massive movement to 
personalize. Starbucks is perhaps the leader here, offering more 
than 87,000 combinations of drinks (and thus requiring baristas 
to get Ph.D. ’ s at Starbucks University). Other companies are mov-
ing fast to accommodate this trend. At Nike ID.com, our digital 
chief strategist at VML, Mike Lundgren, was able to design his 
own shoes with the logo  “ Nike ”  turned into  “ Mike. ”  Such build -
 your - own sites are both e - commerce and brand engagement. 
 Wunderman CEO Daniel Morel says marketing must now 
make  “ Unique Selling Propositions ”  truly unique. He says,  “ Today, 
no one message can have ubiquitous appeal. Consumers need to 
be able to view a brand from the lens of their own wants and 
needs. Think of Georges Seurat ’ s painting  ‘ A Sunday on La 
Grande Jatte. ’ That work of art is a composite of miniature little 
dots of various color and emphasis. A brand today can be looked 
at in a multitude of personal ways. The more intimate and custom-
ized a message is, the more relevant and differentiating your 
brand experience is to each individual level. And each customer 
builds part of the canvas that is your brand. ” 
 What ’ s interesting about micro - addressability is that more con-
sumers are willing to give out information to get it. Eighty percent 
of people want meaningful personalized content, and up to 58 
percent will pay more to get it, according to ChoiceStream. The 
same study found that 57 percent of U.S. adults over the age of 
eighteen are willing to share their demographic data and 47 per-
cent will actually let you track them. 4 With greater consumer will-
ingness to reveal personal habits, along with more advanced 
tracking technology, brands will increasingly be able to do narrow-
cast ads based on highly individualized factors such as hobbies, 
size of backyard, or type of blender in the kitchen. The question 
is, When is too much choice debilitating? 
 Not in music, it seems. The online radio station Pandora 
exempliﬁ es how a brand can even be built from the ground up to 
appeal to personalization. We sat down with founder and CEO 

Welcome to ConsumerLand  99
Tim Westergen and learned that the company originated when he 
and his partners sought to discover the  “ genome ”  in songs. They 
painstakingly analyzed and  “ deconstructed ”  songs to ﬁ nd their 
musical DNA, which allowed them to classify music according 
to deep inner similarities and differences. A listener who goes to 
Pandora.com enters a single artist or a song; Pandora then plays a 
stream of highly related songs that contain the same genome. 
Consumers effectively end up with a totally personalized radio sta-
tion that airs only the types of songs they like, while introducing 
them to new artists they may not have known. 
 In many ways, the rise of innovations that allow consumers to 
watch TV on their own schedule or location also reflects the 
demand for personalized control over brands. Mimicking the soft-
ware  PC Anywhere that lets people use their ofﬁ ce computer from 
home, a whole slew of  “ shifting ”  technologies now exists to put 
consumers in the driver ’ s seat. Chief among these is time shifting, 
which is done using digital video recorders (DVRs) that let people 
become their own program directors, determining their own 
lineup of shows and viewing schedules. Then there ’ s platform 
shifting, which takes content originally intended for one medium 
such as television and plays it on another such as the Internet. All 
the networks now run episodes on the Internet for download. And 
ﬁ nally, there ’ s place shifting, such as Slingbox, which lets consum-
ers launch their home cable signal or satellite set box or personal 
video recorder programming over a broadband connection to 
another location so they can watch their TV subscription else-
where. And soon you ’ ll be able to program your DVR from your 
cell phone. 
 What is radically different about all these shifting technologies 
is that viewers have the power to create their own channel, allow-
ing them to watch whatever and whenever they please. This has 
forced the media and advertisers to rethink the entire medium of 
television, and recognize that  TV is just another form of video.  Programs 
are just digital entities that exist in time and space, each one ready 
to be viewed only when the consumer wants, not when the net-
works choose to show it. The myriads of media options suggest 
 “ the message is now the medium. ”  President and chief strategist 
Ernest Simon at MindShare says,  “ Media is dissolving to the point 
where the boundaries are so vague, they ’ re essentially worthless. 

100  The Brand Bubble
What does  ‘ TV ’  really mean? Is it an appliance? A program to 
watch on your iPod? A Web site where you can interact with the 
characters from  Grey ’ s Anatomy? Today we can place messages into 
virtually just about any medium. ” 
 Rob Norman from Mediaedge:CIA says we ’ re at the begin-
ning of the  “ post - broadcast age ” :  “ Media will be more addressable 
to households or individuals, resulting in better targeting and 
requiring far more speciﬁ c messaging. Media will also be more 
portable across time, device, and place, leaving events like the Super 
Bowl and The Academy Awards among the few known time and 
place audience aggregators. ” Consumers are increasingly drawn to 
these changes. A 2007 survey by the Conference Board and TNS 
Media Intelligence indicated that 16 percent of consumers now 
view entire television episodes on the Internet, double the number 
from 2006. Online viewers cite convenience and the lack of com-
mercials as their top reasons for watching TV on the Internet 
according to the  “ Consumer Internet Barometer ”  survey, con-
ducted in the third quarter of 2007. As Max Planck suggested, 
what ’ s changing is the generational comfort level with technology 
solutions. It ’ s just how life is. 
 Researchers are also exploring the implications of platform 
shifting for brands. In one study from Millward Brown ’ s Futures 
Group, researchers tracked how consumers reacted to a thirty -
 second ad from a leading brand in each of the quick service res-
taurant, consumer packaged goods, and financial services 
categories. The ads were viewed across three platforms: a prime - time 
network TV show viewed at air time, the same episode time - shifted 
via DVR, and the same show aired at the network ’ s Web sites. The 
study found that the advertising performed positively across all 
three platforms, but the results attested to a higher level of engage-
ment among online viewers, who showed increased awareness, 
brand favorability, and consideration. Overall, the online viewers 
were 53 percent more likely to pay attention to the ads during 
commercial breaks than the live TV viewers were. The time - shifted 
viewers were the worst prospects, being 30 percent less likely to 
pay attention to the ads than even live TV viewers. 
 The online viewers also had the greatest ad recall, four times 
higher compared to the live and time - shifted viewers. In large 
part, though, the online success may be skewed, given that only 

Welcome to ConsumerLand  101
that single ad aired three to six times during the online program. 
In contrast, ads on a network TV are shown once within a pod of 
several commercials, and several commercial pods interrupt a 
single program. 
 Despite the uncertainty about which format is best for brands, 
the research conﬁ rms that personalization is vital for consumers. 
Even the viewers who watched the repetitive ads online stated that 
the advertising needed to be made more relevant to them and 
that it was boring to watch the same ad over and over again. That ’ s 
a bit of a reminder that too much knowledge begins to erode dif-
ferentiation. 
 Seeking Community and 
Experiences Among Friends 
 In 1623, the English poet John Donne wrote,  “ No man is an 
island. ”  Little did he realize how apt his phrase would be nearly 
four centuries later. Consumers are more attached to each other 
than ever before. 
 While consumers crave micro - addressability and personaliza-
tion, the desire to be part of a community is not going away — in 
fact, it is growing. This yearning may derive from that postmod-
ernist existential angst we talked about earlier, from which people 
try to take solace by having close friends with whom they can talk 
and share. Modern people have become unhinged by dissolution 
of community. Over several decades subtle shifts began to isolate 
society. In the 1960s and 1970s, houses were designed with the 
porch in the back rather than on the front. Urban planning elim-
inated sidewalks and malls replaced main streets. Automobiles, 
suburbs, shifts in economic bases across the United States all 
impacted families, communities, and social structures. 
 Today, this duality in the consumer mind creates a two - headed 
beast — one head seeks belonging, the other uniqueness — causing 
people to perform funny, antithetical behaviors, like buying the 
exact same brand of jeans all their friends have, but then inking or 
drawing on them to personalize them and leave their own mark. 
 Of course, people have always been social creatures. Consum-
ers ’ gathering, sharing, and talking about products and services is 
not new. They did it in Colonial times, meeting at the supply store. 

102  The Brand Bubble
They did it throughout the twentieth century, using the telephone 
and the shopping mall. What ’ s different about socializing now is 
the wealth of broadband - related innovations like IMs, social net-
works, and alternative worlds that give people tools and unprece-
dented immediacy to connect and share. People can contact in 
real time almost anyone anywhere in the world, across political 
and cultural boundaries, while forming widely diversiﬁ ed networks 
that have clout. 
 Social networking creates a newfound power in numbers. 
Originally designed for people to meet each other and just have 
fun, social networking sites have blossomed into vast communi-
ties whose sharing of knowledge and opinions can alter the for-
tunes of political candidates, companies, and brands. These 
online communities have the capacity to change the future of a 
brand faster, more effectively, and with less bloodshed than any 
revolution ever did. 
 Consider MySpace. Were it a country, it would be the eleventh 
largest in the world. And it ’ s not just for kids; nearly half of its 
users are over thirty - ﬁ ve and one in three is over forty - ﬁ ve. More 
than 85 percent of its members are of voting age and 42 percent 
of them listen to online political messages. The company receives 
more than 36 billion page views per year, more than Google and 
eBay combined, making it the most popular site in the United 
States. 
 Coming up fast behind MySpace is Facebook. Scores of social 
networking sites exist outside the United States, such as Cyworld 
in South Korea, Mop.com in China, and Habbo Hotel in Finland, 
all of which are expanding throughout Europe, South and Central 
America, and Asia. 
 Part of what makes social networks so inviting to consumers is 
that search for purpose discussed earlier. People seek to create 
meaning for themselves, and what better way to do it than to join 
an online community that lets you deﬁ ne yourself to the world, 
write and blog your thoughts, link up with friends, and decorate 
the walls of your proﬁ le page with the artifacts of your existence. 
These are ways to build a community and enrich life, which instills 
the sense of purpose people seek. 
 But the other aspect is that popular culture is increasingly 
influenced by the behavior of the Millennial Generation. Jack 

Welcome to ConsumerLand  103
MacKenzie of Frank N. Magid Associates, who runs the Millen-
nial Strategy Program, told us,  “ MySpace exists in part because of 
Gymboree. Thirty years ago parents ﬂ ocked to these play centers 
to nurture interaction among their kids. This generation has 
been so socialized, they don ’ t just want contact — they need it. ” 
Their research found Millennials work together to dismantle the 
ediﬁ ce of any institution, be it a politician, company, or brand. 
Jack says,  “ Millennials believe that there isn ’ t a  ‘ truth, ’  only a 
series of facts that can be spun in different ways. They ﬁ nd the 
concept of an anchorman to be ridiculous: one person who 
holds all the information? Forget it. The voice of the community 
 is the community. ”  
 And because Millennials have always been encouraged to 
believe that they are right, that there are no bad questions, and 
that everything matters — they ’ re bred to sculpt the truth and press 
their positions, especially on parents. According to MacKenzie ’ s 
research, 29 percent of twenty - three -  to twenty - eight - year - olds live 
with a parent, which is reshaping Gen - Xer and Boomer attitudes 
toward technology, and often their own opinions. Witness Caroline 
Kennedy, who said her kids convinced her to back Barack Obama. 
This generation is closer to their parents as well as their friends, 
creating a social network with vast power and many strands of 
inﬂ uence. 
 But the most successful social networks give consumers not 
just the ease of uploading photos and videos or blogging capabil-
ity; they give them a powerful creative opportunity to deﬁ ne them-
selves as a unique entity in the world. One might view social 
networking sites as lowering the barrier for every individual to 
become a personal brand. Consumer demand for connection, 
conversation, and experience also helps explain the proliferation 
of alternative reality sites, such as Second Life, a virtual commu-
nity in which real people go online as avatars to imitate real life 
online. Players convert real dollars into Linden Dollars to buy and 
sell virtual property, conduct virtual businesses, and eventually 
exchange back for U.S. dollars. With its economy growing by a 
red - hot 10 – 15 percent a month, Second Life is keen to avoid the 
hyperinﬂ ation that can taint both real economies and their virtual 
one. The company keeps an especially close eye on the Lindex, 
the booming currency exchange, where U.S. dollars and Linden 

104  The Brand Bubble
dollars are bought and sold. Second Life, however, has proven cor-
ruptible. Are the marketers driving down real estate values? 
Increasingly this virtual world looks more like a virtual mall. 
 Gaming is another story entirely. Ninety percent of teens play 
online games, yet adults outnumber them by more than 6:1. Accord-
ing to the Yankee Group, 130 million gamers are in the U.S. alone, 
and 38 percent of them are women. The average age of a gamer is 
thirty - three. Video game revenues grew 19 percent (to $125 billion) 
in 2007, and are expected to double every few years. 
 With numbers and demographics like these, brands need to 
begin eyeing opportunities in gaming, ranging from advertising 
around the games, contests and promotions, in - game advertising, 
product placement, and the new hybrid, advergaming. One of the 
most fascinating aspects about gaming as a medium is the prolif-
eration of MMOs, or Massively Multiplayer Online Games, that 
host up to hundreds of thousands of gamers simultaneously. These 
are intensely competitive and highly social online global commu-
nities in their own right. 
 So far, we ’ ve looked at social networking and alternative reality 
sites, but the  “ killer AP ”  of consumer interest is the  mobile phone. 
Without question mobility is becoming the most far - reaching tech-
nological innovation ever. Research in mobile phones always high-
lights that more people around the world have access to a hand 
phone than to any other medium. Today, there are twice as many 
mobile phones as Internet connections — around 2.3 billion versus 
1.2 billion, and by 2011, analysts expect about 3.3 billion mobile 
subscribers. In many countries, cell phones are the only way peo-
ple can connect to the Internet because there is no infrastructure 
for cable or DSL. 
 The key to future growth in mobile technology exists in the 
adoption rate of cell phones for data exchange beyond simple text 
messaging (SMS), such as multimedia messages (MMS) and video 
reception. Mobile subscribers in Europe and Asia are far ahead of 
U.S. subscribers, but 4G is ushering in a new marketing galaxy for 
brands. The bright stars include incredible opportunities like text 
and video message campaigns delivering special alerts, contest 
offers, interactive voting, and links to Web sites; specially designed 
mobile phone Web pages called WAP (wireless application plat-
form) that can be viewed in the phone ’ s online browser; specially 

Welcome to ConsumerLand  105
made - for - mobile videos and brand - sponsored  “ mobisodes, ”  short 
videos with advertising or that include product placements; Quick 
Response (QR) code reading and receiving back data (video, info, 
coupons) directly to the handset; applications that cell phone users 
can download and install directly on their phone without having to 
go online; and location - based services using mini - GPS devices, allow-
ing marketers to know who the consumer is, where that consumer is, 
and what help is needed, like OnStar for your cell phone.  
 Seeking Conversation and Dialogue 
 Yet another characteristic of ConsumerLand is that consumers 
now insist on being part of the marketing conversation with their 
brands. Brands have always lived or died by the way people were 
talking about them. But consumers have never before had the 
ease of conversation nor the reach of connection they have now 
through e - mail, blogs, videos, social networks, and cell phones. 
Old - fashioned referral marketing had just two basic precepts: if 
people talked about a product, it was word of mouth; if a company 
talked about a product, it was advertising. 
 Today ’ s word of mouth (WOM) is far more sophisticated and 
richer, which makes it more important to know how to use. Con-
sumers are driven by a fascination for interacting with their 
brands; they use their social networks, blogs, and message boards 
to share information vociferously. Ninety - two percent of people 
cite WOM as the best source of product purchase information, up 
from 67 percent in 1977. 
 Another dynamic of today ’ s WOM is that consumers are 
increasingly bored with the ordinary. Just as people made eye 
candy a requirement on early Web sites, they equally crave  “ expe-
riences ”  when it comes to making WOM stick. They want brands 
to help them discover chatter that is fun, exciting, interesting, and 
different to talk about. Such as when George Lucas released 250 
video clips from  Star Wars to eager fans to create their own mashups 
with no fee. 
 The essential difference in twenty - ﬁ rst - century WOM versus 
the old stuff is that modern consumers are highly motivated to 
positively represent the things they love. When there ’ s something 
they ’ ve experienced or content they value, they will voluntarily 

106  The Brand Bubble
spend hours blogging, vlogging, chatting, e - mailing, posting, shar-
ing, ranking, and rating their brands. The brands that help con-
sumers start conversations will be the winners. One caveat about 
today ’ s sophisticated, super - fast WOM world is that, in exchange 
for their contribution, consumers also expect brands to make 
them look good. Most brands don ’ t get this; their ﬁ rst impulse is 
to make themselves look good. 
 ConsumerLand is a nasty world when a brand fails at facilitat-
ing good WOM. If a consumer has a bad experience with your 
brand, technology has exponentially increased the number of peo-
ple who will soon know about it. Research shows that following a 
single negative shopping experience, 6 percent of consumers tell 
the retailer, but 31 percent tell friends, family, and colleagues. And 
worse, 8 percent tell one person, 8 percent tell two people, and 6 
percent tell six or more people. Putting those numbers together, it 
means that if a hundred people have a bad experience at a retailer, 
the shop has a chance to lose between thirty - two and thirty - six cur-
rent or potential customers. (Think  Snakes on a Plane. ) 
 Most important, brands are a belief system. All belief is based 
on trust, honesty, and transparency. Brands must also avoid all 
appearances of falsifying or faking WOM, which only angers con-
sumers and makes them ﬂ ee. Out with stealth marketing, shilling, 
inﬁ ltration, and comment spam — be honest with your consumer. 
 Paraphrasing what Mao Tse - Tung said in  Strategies and Convic-
tions,  the best defense is to be consistent and stand for something, 
whereas the best offense is to find contradictions and exploit 
them. Words to think about when you practice your own guerilla 
marketing warfare. As illustrated by the rising criticism of  “ anony-
mous blogging, ”  the terrain is very dangerous for an insincere or 
scheming brand. 
 Wanting Information 
and a Sense of Discovery 
 By now, you are developing a good picture of why brands are living 
in a different ConsumerLand today, but here ’ s another important 
characteristic: Today ’ s consumers have morphed into information -
 hungry machines. While humans have always pursued knowledge, 
now innovation and technology have put enormous amounts of 

Welcome to ConsumerLand  107
data instantly at everyone ’ s ﬁ ngertips. Numerous research stud-
ies have attempted to calculate how much information the aver-
age person can get access to today, but there ’ s only one word to 
express it: mind - boggling. 
 If one company personiﬁ es the human quest for information 
in the modern era, it ’ s Google. The importance of comprehen-
sive, searchable information that Google imparted to the world is 
as critical to brands today as the old one - sheet ﬂ ier was to brands 
ﬁ fty years ago. Over 80 percent of all consumer Web sessions start 
at a search engine; 85 percent of all visits to Web sites originate at 
the major search engines, and 91 percent of Internet users report 
conducting searches daily. 5 And the future is likely to boost those 
percentages, because increased broadband usage will only drive 
greater search activity. 
 One could assert that search engines have created another 
communications medium. Brands now have to think as strategi-
cally about optimizing their online presence for search engines as 
they do about their television spots, radio ads, and press advertising. 
Successful searches contribute to a brand ’ s visibility to in - market 
consumers; they improve or maintain brand positioning; they 
drive self - qualiﬁ ed trafﬁ c to the Web site, capture responses to 
ofﬂ ine advertising, and help brands acquire new leads and cus-
tomers. The value of search engine optimization is so signiﬁ cant to 
brands that companies will probably soon be insisting that univer-
sities offer Ph.D. ’ s in SEO and SEM. What we have today is the 
equivalent of the Library of Congress and no librarian! 
 We believe the fascination for search engines has to do with 
the aura that has always surrounded human discovery. Finding a 
fact hidden amid a sea of information billions of documents deep 
is a little like Magellan discovering . . .  . (Wait a minute, we have 
to Google this . . .  . ) Like Magellan discovering All Saint ’ s Channel to 
get around the tip of South America (now renamed the Strait of 
Magellan, of course). It ’ s a natural human desire to discover, but 
curiosity can be a beneﬁ t or a curse to brands. It ’ s a beneﬁ t when 
consumers seek something very speciﬁ c and your brand has put in 
place the online architecture that allows them to easily ﬁ nd the 
data. Look at the great results brands like Dell, eBay, and Geico 
achieved because they built info - rich Web sites providing consum-
ers with extensive searchable product knowledge. 

108  The Brand Bubble
 But today ’ s easy search and discovery can also be a curse when 
brands try to hide bad news or a major screw - up. Given the omnip-
otence of search engines today, a single consumer acting alone 
can usually ﬁ nd the necessary information to expose any decep-
tion. The search engines are forcing honesty on you. 
 Consumers are no longer willing to sit back and passively 
absorb information companies feed them. Their natural curiosity 
will always take over when they are seeking product information, 
criticism, reviews, and ancillary facts. Search engines are effec-
tively a natural extension of the mind, and must therefore be fac-
tored into the business models brands use to connect with their 
customers. 
 Today ’ s ConsumerLand Is an Ecosystem 
 The ﬁ nal distinguishing characteristic of the new ConsumerLand 
is that, despite growing diversity and fragmentation of popula-
tions, it is nevertheless a highly connected data ecosystem. (What 
is DNA, after all?) Everything touches and is connected. Leisure 
and work, home and mobility, time and place of consumption all 
morph together into a blurred hodge - podge of life, as consumers 
ﬂ ow seamlessly between multiple contact points. Consumers do 
business at home, take their home life to their business, and act 
like kids and adults at the same time, while multitasking hundreds 
of different things each day. 
 In this ecosystem, people don ’ t deﬁ ne themselves according 
to strict economic barriers or tidy demographics. They have the 
freedom to travel the landscape and camp out wherever they 
want. Earlier in the book, we raised this same point in the context 
of consumers being like investors, no longer tied to thinking of 
themselves as part of a single socioeconomic group, feeling instead 
that they can be stakeholders in any way they please. In the same 
way, consumers today see themselves as living a lifestyle and seek-
ing products that ﬁ t their view of the world. You have to recognize 
the interconnections among diverse consumers, within a single 
deﬁ ned lifestyle. 
 The secret to communicating with lifestyle consumers is to 
build multiple pathways to reach them across the wide spectrum 
of their activities. You need to create hundreds of touch points, 

Welcome to ConsumerLand  109
not just one or two. The words  holographic  and  holistic  are key here. 
You seek to build holistic strategies that approach consumers holo-
graphically from every angle. And then keep refreshing them. In 
practical terms, it means you need to learn to deal with all those 
bloggers, epinion makers, YouTubers, social networks, search 
engines, buzz WOMers, viral e - mailers, spammers, mobile compa-
nies, and content producers all at the same time. 
 Like all ecosystems, ConsumerLand is complex. We ’ re sure a 
lot of fundamentals about how to best manage it for optimum 
health are still misunderstood. What ’ s clear, however, is that too 
many brands are not engaging with consumers as ecosystem inhab-
itants. They are still stuck in believing that consumers are just, well, 
consumers. 
 Lessons Learned 
 Once upon a time, business models lasted a lifetime. Blue chip 
companies built shareholder value for generations of investors 
from models that remained essentially unchanged. Competition 
was restrained. Choice was limited. Large manufacturers con-
trolled retail channels. Physical assets provided scale and insula-
tion. Audiences tuned in religiously to the six o ’ clock news. It was 
a Newtonian world that ran like clockwork, and from the 1950s 
through the early 1990s, the market leader could sell its product 
by simply telling people that it was the solution to their nervous 
headache using 10,000 GRPs a year. 
 In that mechanical branding universe, consistency was cele-
brated because familiarity was important to consumers. Firms 
deﬁ ned excellence through endurance. Best practices celebrated 
what worked yesterday and brand managers were more like main-
tenance engineers. During this time, doing things differently was 
not a friend to business, or desired in a brand. 
 Now what ’ s happening in ConsumerLand challenges almost 
all our accumulated learning about business, marketing, and 
brands. What percentage of marketing dollars should be allocated 
to digital and online activities? What should those activities look 
like? How much should our brand marketing emphasize search, 
awareness building, eCRM — electronic customer relationship 
 marketing  —  social networking, mobile, gaming, or interactive 

110  The Brand Bubble
 television? How do we measure the effectiveness of various media 
elements? Can one measure be applied universally or do we need 
different criteria and benchmarks based on objectives, efﬁ ciency, 
and engagement scores? 
 Ultimately, the opportunities are endless and the challenges 
may feel daunting. Worse, everything is constantly changing. 
Rishad Tobaccowala, CEO of media consultancy Denuo, says, 
 “ Three years ago, if you were planning things, you would not have 
thought about iTunes, YouTube, MySpace, Google . . .  . Now you ’ ve 
got a new world, and this whole idea of planning is becoming very, 
very difﬁ cult. In fact, what we basically say is we now have classical 
structures in a jazz age. ” 
 We are all grappling with a world where the rules have 
changed — the rules about when, where, and how people con-
sume content and advertising messages, and how they discover, 
engage with, and either endorse or reject brands (and then 
amplify that decision to their peers). It ’ s changing the business 
models for companies, the skill sets needed for marketers, the 
roles for creating and distributing content for media companies, 
and the rules for how agencies think about creativity for brands. 
 The problem is, many marketers are applying much of the 
same old thinking to today ’ s new challenges.  They try to adapt their 
formulas to the increasingly fractal landscape, rather than rethink them 
altogether.  As a result, consumers sail further away, while we con-
tinue to see brand measures decay and crack. ConsumerLand is 
taking a harsh and critical look at your business and your brands, 
creating new principles to abide by: 
 We don ’ t control our brands anymore; we simply guide them 
through the marketplace of consumers. This is especially true 
of Millennials, who have never known a world where they 
didn ’ t control the experience. 
 We no longer have a linear communication path to consum-
ers. They have unprecedented ability to route around market-
ers to hear whatever they want, whenever they want, if at all. 
You can ’ t just go to them. You must attract them. 
 Consumers are no longer passive recipients waiting for marketing 
monologues. Brands must seek out ways to engage. Marketers, 
long accustomed to being tellers, must also become listeners.  
•
•
•

Welcome to ConsumerLand  111
 Some consumers will produce content for brands, regardless 
of whether we want them to or not. Many want to participate 
in the creative process. Edit them, tag them — but attempt to 
exclude them at your peril. 
 People trust other people more than they trust brands. They 
will read blogs, watch videos, search consumer reviews and 
rating sites, and report on anything they ﬁ nd that is not up to 
their standards of honesty, fairness, and truth. 
 ConsumerLand is a world of personalization. Consumers want 
to customize products to enhance their own personal brand. 
Experiences are what matter. 
 Consumers want excitement and dynamism out of their 
brands. They will actively drive WOM, if the content is cre-
ative, novel, unique, and makes them look good. 
 As consumers interact online, they take on community identi-
ties, which lead to more global brand strategies. Ever - larger 
communities will develop along languages and lifestyles, 
rather than economic, political, or market boundaries. 
 Consumers want information and discovery, and we must 
allow them to search inside the deepest realms of our brands. 
Nothing can be hidden from consumers, and there ’ s no use 
trying to hide anything. 
 Consumers live in a vast uniﬁ ed ecosystem that blurs time, 
space, class, background, and all the usual theories of market 
segmentation. They live in a fast - paced world with ubiquitous 
connections. To succeed we need to be there when they are, 
with relevant content that they might want or need. 
 No speciﬁ c formula will guide your operations in Consumer-
Land; marketers must instead experiment with various approaches. 
 Marketing communications need to be marketing conversations. The 
good news is that the same technology and social behaviors con-
sumers are using to reverse the tables on brands — all those tools —
 are available to marketers as well. They can engage consumers in 
dialogue and recapture their attention with even a small piece of 
great content. If someone takes the time to respond, or pass that 
content along, or mash it up, that ’ s to your advantage. After all, 
participation leads to longer engagement times and begins to sug-
gest someone cares enough to do so in the ﬁ rst place. Perhaps 
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

112  The Brand Bubble
you ’ re more like a brand therapist. You need to get the patient to 
drop those defenses and simply begin to open up. 
 The ﬁ nal piece of advice is that you can ’ t participate in this 
new ConsumerLand unless you honestly feel it. There ’ s a universe 
of difference between rationally knowing about this landscape and 
personally experiencing how these innovations make consumers 
feel and behave. They cannot be understood from a purely intel-
lectual perspective. They need to be felt emotionally and kines-
thetically, by living in the same world as your consumer. Do you 
have a page on Facebook? Have you played virtual basketball with 
a kid in Finland? What about ordering from Pizza Hut while in 
character playing EverQuest II? You don ’ t need a ticket to get into 
ConsumerLand, but you ’ ll never experience the rush unless you 
ride the rides. 

 Part Two  
 Application  
 What does the brand bubble teach us? How can brands bring con-
sumer perceptions back into line with Wall Street ’ s valuations? 
What actions can enterprises and their brands take to treat con-
sumers as investors, focus on creativity, and meet the expectations 
and behaviors of customers inhabiting this new ConsumerLand? 
 The answers to these questions are clear: Many of the old con-
cepts of brand management no longer apply; brands must be man-
aged according to new rules. Brands must become engines of 
continuous differentiation, fueled by energy and propelled for-
ward by constant creativity and evolution. At the same time, com-
panies must transform themselves around the concept of the 
brand as an organizing principle. Everyone must become a brand 
manager. Accountability for the brand must reside in every depart-
ment. This requires brand leadership in the C - suite, new skills for 
CMOs and marketing managers, greater openness with consum-
ers, and dismantling old silos of territory and responsibility that 
inhibit collaboration. The entire company must transform itself 
into a marketing - driven ﬁ rm, rather than a ﬁ rm with a marketing 
department. 
 Remember that the brand bubble is built on market expecta-
tions. Creating continuous consumer value is inextricably linked 
with sound brand valuations and future ﬁ nancial performance. 
For brands to keep pace with consumers, we can no longer accept 
a static view of their existence. A brand is a constantly evolving 
idea in the mind of the consumer. We have to work harder, smarter, 
and faster than ever before. We can ’ t settle for soft brand essences 
or narrow expressions of brand meaning. Brand strategies have to 
113

114  The Brand Bubble
do more than evoke what a brand stands for. They must provide 
direction for where a brand has to go. 
 Yet too much time is spent on thinking about what a brand is, 
rather than what it can be. We think of a brand as something that 
can be evaluated and directed as though it were an inert object. 
We liken brands to trust marks and badges of reassurance. We 
build brand architectures, pyramids, boxes, and funnels. Thinking 
like this invariably implies an element of stasis and permanence, 
which is incompatible with ConsumerLand. 
 Today, sustaining a meaningful point of difference is more 
elusive than ever before. The pace of change is accelerating expo-
nentially. Consumers quickly discard derivative brands. After all, it 
wasn ’ t that long ago that Prodigy and CompuServe were battling 
for Internet domination; Kodak, Oldsmobile, and MCI were blue 
chips, Puma, Adidas, and Cadillac were nostalgic. It seems only 
yesterday that China didn ’ t shop at Wal - Mart and America didn ’ t 
know of Lenovo. That Cingular was more prominent than AT & T. 
And that GM was bigger than Toyota. 
 Our research suggests that only a small number of truly irre-
sistible brands are in existence. They command positions of 
leadership by constantly reinventing the world as they see it, 
thrilling their customers and creating future value. As for the 
rest, their booming brand values are portending a large - scale 
brand bust. 
 This is a time of reckoning for business. Collectively, brands 
make up a massive sector of the global economy. Business has an 
obligation to shareholders to rebuild brand value by recasting 
their brands for the new marketplace. For many, there ’ s no time 
to lose before their bubble bursts. 
 A Framework to Energize the Brand 
and the Organization 
 In Part Two, we walk you through a comprehensive five - stage 
framework to build an irresistible brand by infusing it with energy 
and instilling a new vision in your brand management. We show 
how to identify the energy in your brand, distill it into three 
fundamental consumer - facing touch - points and ignite creativity 
throughout your organization. We explain step by step practical 

Application  115
ways to become a brand - led, consumer - driven organization that 
adopts the brand into its being. 
 As you implement the five stages, the needs of the brand 
should move to the center of the organization. Brand imperatives 
become business imperatives. A rigorous focus on creating an irre-
sistible, high - energy brand can transform your entire organization, 
letting the brand act as a catalyst for collaboration, innovation, and 
accountability. By looking at the business through the lens of the 
brand, your management can articulate a stronger creative vision 
for the company, and people throughout the organization can 
begin to internalize the company ’ s mission as their own. When this 
happens, you will create what we call the  “ Energy - Driven Enter-
prise. ” This type of ﬁ rm sustains its competitive advantage by gen-
erating brand, operational, organizational, and cultural energy. 
 The ﬁ ve stages of our transformation framework were devel-
oped from reverse engineering the practices of the highest - energy 
brands from the nine hundred companies we modeled. We also 
incorporated learning about consumer behaviors we gleaned from 
ethnographies conducted in London, Moscow, Mumbai, New 
York, S â o Paulo, Shanghai, Singapore, Sydney, Tokyo, and Warsaw. 
We know that transforming years, if not decades, of traditional 
brand management does not come easy. By no means is this a for-
mulaic process; what we ’ re describing is a suggestion of steps that 
will take you toward more brand - centric managerial thinking. For 
each of the ﬁ ve stages, we address not only the process that must 
be adopted but also the leading obstacle we have witnessed in 
companies that undermines the brand - consumer relationship. 
Many of these challenges will be all too familiar to you as an exec-
utive, marketer, or manager, and you may recognize yourself and 
your enterprise in our analysis of these barriers. 
 To counter the obstacles, we have developed corollary Laws of 
Energy. Like gravity, these laws become management tools to con-
trol the forces that operate on brands in today ’ s world. The Laws 
of Energy naturally lead to the corresponding New Rules for 
Brand Management, which translate each law into practical 
actions, strategies, and tactics for leaders and managers to induce 
energy in their brands and transform their brand management to 
create consumer - centric, energy - driven enterprises. 
 The illustration on the next page provides a visual overview of 
the ﬁ ve stages.  

“The Law
of Reflex”
Tactics
are strategy,
strategy is tactics
“The Law
of Averages”
Creativity
spreads out risk
“The Law
of Openness”
Brands
don’t control,
they enhance
and extend
“The Law
of Direction”
A brand
is not a place,
it’s a direction
“The Law
of Immunity”
Brands with
remarkable
marketing access
remarkable
privileges
Active Listening
and Constant
Refreshing of
Brand Meaning
Performing an
Energy Audit
Identifying
the Energy Core
Creating an
Energized
Value Chain
Becoming an
Energy Driven
Enterprise
Act accurately,
but by all means
“act”
Everything
is media,
and everything
communicates
Treat consumers
like investors
Drive the brand
back through
the organization
Return marketing
back upstream
into business
strategy
Reliance on
brand strategy
slows market
response time
Creativity doesn’t
flow effortlessly
across the
organization
Consumer
insights are not
applied and shared
throughout the
company
Management’s
focus is
primarily on
today’s
profitability
Marketing is
distintermediated
from the C-suite
5. Renewal
1. Exploration
2. Distillation
3. Ignition
4. Fusion
Stages
Apply Laws
of Energy
New Rules
for Brand
Management
Obstacles

Application  117
 The transformation in brand management called for will take 
long - term commitment and hard work in your enterprise. But 
these recommendations have worked in companies to renew their 
brands and generate positive changes in their organizations, set-
ting them up for a sustainable future. The thinking and behaviors 
we recommend will move you from simply brand building to pow-
erful brand activation. 
 Finally, our ﬁ ve - stage brand management plan treats brands as 
engines of business momentum, because brands are only truly valu-
able assets when they are leveraged against business challenges —
 and put to work. Working brands are those with energy. They 
become so irresistible they change behavior. They move consumers 
beyond the singular action of buying, into sharing, evangelizing, 
future contemplation and, of course, buying again and again with a 
commitment and loyalty that reenergizes the brand, the consumer, 
and the organization to continuously evolve. In this feedback loop, 
the company builds momentum in the marketplace and creates 
brand values worthy of Wall Street analyst expectations.  


119
 Chapter Six  
 Stage One — Exploration 
 Performing an Energy Audit  
 The point is not  “ how creative are you ” but  “ how are 
you creative. ” 
 — Sir Ken Robinson,  “ Power of the Imagination, ” 
speech at the TED conference, 2006 
 The first important thing to know when attempting to instill 
energy in a brand and alter your brand management is that the 
process is not random or uncontrollable. Energy can be generated 
for brands as reliably as it can be generated for homes. Energy can 
be consciously developed, augmented, channeled, and utilized for 
your beneﬁ t and reward. 
 Changing your brand management is equally a conscious 
process, one that can be managed and directed. New skills can 
be learned. A more inclusive form of brand management can be 
developed, one that recognizes that everyone in the organization 
is accountable for the dynamic relationship between the consumer 
and the brand. 
 The process starts with an  “ Energy audit ” to assess the level of 
energy currently present in your brand. Your goal is to capture a 
baseline measure that identiﬁ es the current sources of energy so 
you can understand your brand ’ s strengths and weaknesses and 
detect how well your brand management is aligned with the 
dynamics of the new marketplace. Equally important, the Energy 
audit allows you to identify potential pathways for building even 
higher levels of energy. As results come into focus, you ’ ll begin to 

120  The Brand Bubble
understand how people respond to your brand ’ s imagery, offer-
ings, creativity, and overall character. These insights will then allow 
you to inspire ideas that channel energy back into your brand, 
then across your organization and out into the market. 
 What ’ s crucially different about an Energy audit, though, is that 
it is not a simple marketing department exercise to survey what con-
sumers think about the brand. It is an interrogation of the brand 
experience from every vantage point. The audit reveals the brand ’ s 
composite perception not only in the marketplace but inside the 
organization as well. People from all divisions and disciplines must 
participate because you are setting the stage for creating a more 
inclusive form of enterprise brand management. Managers across 
the organization need to get at deep customer insights of who is 
using their products and why they must uncover the underlying 
 perceptions of their company and brands so that in later stages they 
have the perspective necessary to connect disparate ideas and offer 
possible solutions that may otherwise lie hidden inside an operating 
unit or a function of the business. 
 As an entry point to an Energy audit with regard to what 
 consumers think of your brand, we invite you to draw upon our 
proprietary Y & R BAV database, which includes over forty thou-
sand brands. We are opening limited access to readers to see the 
consumer data Y & R has collected over the years about the energy 
in their brands — or in any brands, including the leading brands in 
the world and perhaps even those of competitors. 
 However, before instructing you how to perform the Energy 
audit and log in to our BAV, we need to provide some background 
on how we measure brands so you can understand the scores you 
will ﬁ nd in our database. Like biology teachers, who need to give 
students a lesson in cell structure before sending them off to peer 
into the microscope, we have to give you a brief lesson about the 
components and subcomponents that make up a brand ’ s equity 
before letting you run loose in our BAV lab. 
 The Anatomy of Brand Strength 
 If you were to look through a microscope at how brands build 
equity, the ﬁ rst level of magniﬁ cation zooms in on the elements 
of brand growth. As explained in Chapter Two, the BAV measures 

Stage One—Exploration  121
and categorizes consumer attitudes toward brands according to 
two constructs — Brand Strength and Brand Stature. These two sets 
of measures form the X -  and Y - axes of a grid by which we plot a 
brand ’ s current status in the market against its potential for future 
growth (see Figure 6.1).  
 Brand Stature forms the X - axis and is built upon two pillars that 
demarcate a brand ’ s current position,  Esteem and  Knowledge, 
each of which is measured from consumer attitudes. Esteem 
reﬂ ects consumer regard, while Knowledge reﬂ ects consumer 
awareness of a brand. 
 Brand Strength forms the Y - axis and is derived from two addi-
tional supporting pillars:  Energized Differentiation and  Relevance. 
Energized Differentiation reﬂ ects consumer attitudes about 
the brand ’ s unique meaning, with future motion, which 
affect a brand ’ s ability to capture loyalty and margin power. 
Relevance indicates how appropriate consumers perceive the 
brand to be for them, which affects market penetration. 
 High levels of both Energized Differentiation and Relevance 
are required to achieve sustainable growth and broad market pen-
etration. Without Energized Differentiation, even a relevant brand 
will stall, lost in the forest of competitors or trapped in the thickets 
•
•
Brand Strength
Brand Stature
BrandAsset® Valuator
Energized
Differentiation
Relevance
Leading Indicator
Future Operating Value
Esteem
Knowledge
Lagging Indicator
Current Operating Value
 FIGURE 6.1. BRAND STRENGTH IS THE FIRST LEVEL OF MEASUREMENT 
IN ASSESSING A BRAND ’ S ENERGY. 

122  The Brand Bubble
of consumer disregard. Without Relevance, an energized brand 
languishes, starving for customers. These two qualities are faster 
to build than Knowledge or Esteem, but they are also quicker to 
erode if not constantly nurtured. 
 The Anatomy of Energized Differentiation 
 Now let ’ s adjust the microscope to magnify one more level down, 
probing deeper within the nucleus of Energized Differentiation 
itself. Here is where the brand attributes that contribute specif-
ically to energy reside. In this view, we now see that Energized 
Differentiation itself is formed from two dimensions, with each 
having three elements (Figure 6.2).  
 Energy:  This quality reﬂ ects more speciﬁ cally the consumer ’ s 
perception of motion and direction in the brand. It  sustains 
•
Brand Strength
Brand Stature
Leading Indicator
Future Value
Lagging Indicator
Current Value
BrandAsset® Valuator
Energized
Differentiation
Relevance
Esteem
Knowledge
Differentiation
Uniqueness
Offering
Distinction
Energy
Vision
Invention
Dynamism
 FIGURE 6.2. THE ANATOMY OF ENERGIZED DIFFERENTIATION. 

Stage One—Exploration  123
the brand ’ s velocity. Three attribute clusters comprise 
energy:  
 Vision: The brand ’ s purpose and aspirations, often origi-
nating from the leadership, convictions, and reputation 
of the company behind the brand. 
 Invention:  The most tangible dimension, demonstrat-
ing the brand ’ s perceptions through product or service 
 innovation, design, content, and other tactile brand 
 experiences.  
 Dynamism:  How the brand expresses itself in a dynamic 
way in the marketplace to create persona, emotion, 
advocacy, and evangelism through its marketing and 
other forms of conversations with consumers.   
 Differentiation: This quality represents the consumer ’ s impres-
sions of the brand ’ s point of difference. It creates the 
meaning, margin, and competitive advantage in the brand. 
Differentiation is made up of: 
 Offering: The measure of the brand ’ s special characteristics 
in terms of products, services, and other content that the 
consumer experiences. 
 Uniqueness: The brand ’ s essence, positioning, and brand 
equity. 
 Distinction: The reputation the brand has earned through 
existing communications and brand image created up to 
this point.  
 Peering into the Nucleus of Energy 
 Increasing the magnification yet again, we finally arrive at the 
deepest core to pierce the atomic level of energy. Here we explore 
in detail the three dimensions —  Vision, Invention,  and  Dynamism —
 that define an energized brand for consumers. The three ele-
ments, a brand ’ s  “ VID pattern, ” to use our abbreviation for it, are 
the actual fuel rods from which brands source their energy and 
build more of it. Let ’ s zoom in to these energy - building elements 
to examine each one in detail. 
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

124  The Brand Bubble
 Vision 
 Brands with Vision espouse a clear direction and point of view on 
the world. They know what they ’ re on this planet to achieve. Some 
brands espouse a vision to change the way people think; others 
seek to shift expectations on the way things are done. They see the 
world a certain way and encourage consumers to join in. Vision -
 driven brands see farther; they galvanize and inspire, allowing 
the brand to travel into new categories and create new meaning. The 
Vision element of energy reﬂ ects breakthrough, category - reframing 
ideas and higher - order benefits. Vision - driven brands excel in 
leadership and prescience. They bring more than innovation to 
consumers: they change behaviors by impacting and improving 
the way people live their lives. 
 A parent company ’ s reputation can also play a significant 
role in driving brand Vision: How does the company act and 
behave toward its consumers, employees, or the world beyond 
commerce? Does the company have inspiring leadership that 
consumers admire? Is the company a great place to work? Does 
it care about social issues? Is there a unique and powerful cul-
ture? Does it operate against a  “ triple bottom line ” ? In a trans-
parent society, consumers don ’ t divorce their perceptions of the 
brand from overarching company values and conduct. They 
expect visionary brands to stand for higher - order beneﬁ ts — and 
that also goes for the company  behind the brand.  For example, 
Mei - ying, a twenty - two - year - old graduate student we met in 
Shanghai, told us,  “ China Mobile is very progressive. Not only 
are they reaching out to provide coverage in rural areas, they are 
very active in social issues. ”  That ’ s the type of admiration a visionary 
brand receives. 
 Brand Vision in Practice.   Here are some brands with notably strong 
Vision (90th percentile of all brands in our study). They include 
Amazon, American Express, Apple, BBC, Ben  &  Jerry ’ s, The Body 
Shop, Disney, Dove, eBay, easyJet, General Electric, Goldman Sachs, 
Google, Grameen Bank, Habitat for Humanity, HBO, Hewlett 
Packard, IBM, Innocent, LeapFrog, Leica, LEGO, Orange, Pixar, 
Patagonia, Product Red, Rough Guides, Tata Motors, Tesco, 
Timberland, Wal - Mart, Whole Foods, Wikipedia, Vanguard, and 

Stage One—Exploration  125
Zara. The visions they express cut across a spectrum of beneﬁ ts 
from making work more enjoyable for their employees to chang-
ing the world we live in. Let ’ s look at a few examples of Vision in 
greater detail: 
 One Laptop per Child ’ s stated goal is  “ to provide children 
around the world with new opportunities to explore, experi-
ment and express themselves. ” The company has yet to 
achieve manufacturing laptops for only $100 each, but it has 
inspired the competition. 
 Visa Green automatically measures and offsets the carbon 
footprint of consumer purchases through use of its card.  
 General Electric, Wal - Mart, and Toyota have led their catego-
ries in energy savings, hybrid technology, reduced - emission 
products, and affordable pharmaceuticals. 
 Grameen Bank created  “ microcredit ” : small loans without 
 collateral in Bangladesh to help impoverished people. The 
bank won the Nobel Peace Prize in 2006. 
 Southwest Airlines says — and means — “ Employees are our ﬁ rst 
customer. ” The company sends out birthday cards to each of 
its thirty - four thousand employees annually. 
 IKEA was named one of the world ’ s most ethical companies in 
2007 for its employee practices and its promotion of environ-
mental issues and children ’ s welfare. 
 Accenture offers paid sabbaticals for its employees to work for 
nonproﬁ ts.  
 Cranium has industry - leading recruitment practices that 
screen and hire future  “ Craniacs. ” Cranium has won Game 
and Toy of the Year awards three straight years. 
 American Apparel was named one of the Millennial genera-
tion ’ s favorite brands from social networking feedback origi-
nating from its staff. Respondents cited they have friends who 
work there and love their jobs. 1 
 Joost and BitTorrent are revolutionizing the way content is dis-
tributed over the net. BitTorrent is now responsible for over 
one - third of all Internet trafﬁ c.  
 SUBWAY invented an entirely new category of quick - service 
 restaurant: healthy fast food. 
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

126  The Brand Bubble
 Fisher-Price promoted children ’ s heath by creating a  “ smart 
cycle, ” marrying active play and learning. The cycle plugs into 
the TV so kids learn, play, and exercise at the same time. 
 Zillow, the online real estate ﬁ rm, allows buyers and sellers to 
negotiate directly, bypassing agents and providing access to all 
home values, not just those for sale. 
 Barack Obama was the ﬁ rst truly digital candidate, with easy -
 to - create personal pages for social networking and fundrais-
ing, blogging tools, RSS feeds, and extensions to Facebook, 
YouTube, MySpace and Flickr. 
 Colgate sponsors in - store reading events with its  “ Reading Is 
Fundamental ” program to promote children ’ s literacy and 
healthy brushing and washing habits among children. 
 Invention 
 Brands with Invention change how people feel and the way they 
behave. Invention captures the experiential and tangible proper-
ties of the brand. The most functional element of energy, Inven-
tion is built on the tactile and sensory associations that come from 
product and service experiences and other physical brand interac-
tions. Invention can be built through innovation, brand iconog-
raphy, packaging design, applied technology, retail environments, 
and customer service excellence. 
 Invention reinforces the brand ’ s presence when there is no 
other messaging around. Invention energy reinforces product 
quality and removes dissonance, while stimulating WOM and 
repurchase considerations. A brand ’ s invention can never remain 
static. Maintaining consistently high levels of invention require a 
commitment to continuous innovation, service excellence and 
new forms of brand experience. A comment from Amandeep, a 
forty - one - year - old strategist with an Internet portal in Delhi, illus-
trates the invention energy felt about the new Indian car, the Tata 
Nano:  “ This car only costs 100,000 rupees [about 2,000 U.S. dol-
lars], but it ’ s sleek and stylish. This car is changing India. ”  When a 
brand can change an entire country of more than a billion people, 
it ’ s clearly commanding invention energy. 
 Brand Invention in Practice.   Brands can demonstrate invention in 
products, services, and overall brand experiences. The brands 
•
•
•
•

Stage One—Exploration  127
that possess demonstrably strong invention include Apple, Bang 
 &  Olufsen, BlackBerry, Bose, Callaway, Commerce Bank, Costco, 
Crocs, Dyson, Febreeze, IKEA, iPhone, JetBlue, Kashi, Land Rover, 
Lenovo, LG, Method, Microsoft, Netﬂ ix, Nordstrom, Pinkberry, 
Pr ê t à Manger, SanDisk, SIRIUS, SUBWAY, Shutterﬂ y, Simplehuman, 
Singapore Airlines, Slingbox, Swiffer, TiVo, Trader Joe ’ s, 3M, 
UNIQLO, vitaminwater, Vitra, W Hotels, Wii and Zappos.  
 Along with WiFi and a bar in the hotel lobby, guests at W Hotels 
ﬁ nd fashion emergency kits by Diane von Furstenberg and 
products from Bliss Spa.  
 Nintendo ’ s Wii turned gaming into an active social experience 
with its physical interactive technology that connects millions 
online. 
 Louis Vuitton and Japanese artist Takashi Murakami handbags 
were sold as part of an installation with Murakami ’ s art exhibi-
tion at the Museum of Contemporary Art in Los Angeles. 
 Each Four Seasons hotel has a  “ customer historian ” account-
able for keeping up a portfolio of every guest ’ s preferences 
and needs. 
 JCDecaux secured the rights to post billboards in Paris by 
 creating a low - cost bicycle rental program. Tens of thousands 
of Parisians now rent bikes each month. 
 Tesco turned its grocery carts into body workout machines 
with motion - resistant handles.  
 Commerce Bank ’ s philosophy is to act more like a retailer, 
with seven - day service, a penny arcade coin exchange, and dog 
biscuits in the drive - through. 
 MTV.com/overdrive lets the user become program director 
by controlling content like  Real World, music videos and artist 
interviews. 
 Nike and iPod teamed up to create NIKEiD, where Nike shoes 
transfer data to the Nano, including time, distance, and calo-
ries burned. It even customizes play lists to a given workout. 
 Kidfresh introduced nutritious fast food for kids with playful 
food presentation and packaging. 
 Pinkberry ’ s frozen yogurt groupies have their own corner on 
Pinkberry ’ s Web site. Their stores are designed to  “ kindle the 
senses. ” 
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

128  The Brand Bubble
 Neiman Marcus ’ s philosophy is that every one of its stores 
should feel different. Its new Boston store conjures up the 
images of a ﬂ owing silk dress. 
 Simplehuman ’ s products are focused on efﬁ cient design to 
make life easier and simpler, like ﬁ ngerprint - proof trash cans; 
its blog gives tips on  “ efﬁ cient living. ” 
 Whole Foods reduced waiting time by creating a single - line system 
and adding thirty cashiers in its New York supermarkets.  
 Webkinz, the plush pet toys, have their own codes that allow 
kids to adopt and interact with them virtually on their Web 
site, Webkinz World.  
 Dynamism 
 Brands with Dynamism create excitement in the marketplace by 
how they present themselves to consumers. Dynamism is the most 
emotional and immediately visible of the three components. The 
driver of brand imagery and personality, Dynamism reflects 
the brand ’ s ability to inspire consumer afﬁ nity. Traditionally the 
outcome of a big ad campaign, guerilla marketing event, or highly 
visible marketplace event, today ’ s Dynamism is increasingly com-
plex and can span a variety of forms of brand engagement — analog 
or digital, traditional or viral, customized user experience or social 
media. 
 Brands with high levels of Dynamism create persona, commu-
nity, and evangelism among their users. Dynamic brands penetrate 
popular culture. They give consumers something to talk about, 
facilitating enthusiastic WOM across consumer social networks and 
brand ecosystems. Aleksandra, a twenty - eight - year - old retail sales-
person from Warsaw, typifies how consumers are inspired by a 
brand ’ s dynamism:  “ I saw the Honda Cogs commercial on YouTube 
or somewhere. It was a really cool clip, so we passed it around. ” As 
this statement shows, if a brand stimulates, evokes feelings, and 
starts conversations among consumers, it has Dynamism. 
 Brand Dynamism in Practice.   This list illustrates the many ﬂ avors of 
brand dynamism: Audi, Axe, American Apparel, Bebo, Best Buy, 
BitTorrent, BMW, Boost, Burger King, Burton Snowboards, Cobra 
Beer, Converse, Diesel, Digg, Ducati, ESPN, Facebook, Green  & 
Blacks, Halo 3, Harley - Davidson, H & M, iTunes, Kingﬁ sher, MUJI, 
•
•
•
•

Stage One—Exploration  129
MySpace, Nascar, Nike, Patron, PlayStation, PUMA, Prada, Red 
Bull, Rock Band, 7 For All Mankind, Shiseido, Stella Artois, The-
ory, Twitter, Under Armor, Victoria ’ s Secret, Virgin Atlantic, Xbox, 
and YouTube.  
 Each August marks the largest concentration of Harley - Davidson 
motorcycles in one place on the planet: The annual Harley 
rally in Sturgis, South Dakota. 
 Mozilla Firefox, the open source browser, created a user -
 generated advertising campaign, using viral clips posted 
online at Firefox Flicks. 
 Twitter has taken SMS to a ﬂ uid form of social networking. 
Millions of kids use this microblogging site to send short text 
updates to friends across the world. 
 An Ecko  “ Still Free ” branded viral for grafﬁ ti artists drama-
tized an artist creating grafﬁ ti on Air Force One, amassing 
more than 130 million views. 
 Design Barcode in Tokyo patented its idea to turn ordinary 
barcodes on products into forms of visual communications.  
 Edoc laundry extended alternate reality games through clues 
woven into its clothing. To play, players had to wear the cloth-
ing and could then spot each other wearing the collection and 
work together to solve the puzzle. 
 American Express ’ s  “ My Life, My Card ” Web site hosted a long -
 form ad from director Wes Anderson, inviting others to create 
short ﬁ lms and submit them to the site. 
 Nike ’ s RunLondon.com created a running community who 
registered in store or online and then received mobile content, 
a digital running chip to upload photos, log times, and access 
to course information to run with forty thousand others.  
 Smirnoff Raw Tea concocted a hip hop on Martha ’ s Vineyard 
to create a hilarious viral music video that more than 2 million 
people watched on YouTube. 
 MINI Cooper drivers were mailed RFID chips with customiz-
able messages that ﬂ ash up on Mini billboards when they 
pass by. 
 “ Black Balloons ” viral PSA video was posted on YouTube 
where it became available 24/7 and integrated into key global 
warming – related search words. 
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

130  The Brand Bubble
 Adidas created mobile wrap - enabled outdoor boards, where 
pedestrians with Bluetooth were offered a mobile mini - movie 
to download directly to their phone. 
 Old Spice Red Zone designed changeable advertising within 
networked games, included in - game billboards where gamers 
were allowed to apply grafﬁ ti.  
 Burger King created customized games for the release of the 
BK Xbox game series. More than two million copies were sold 
within four weeks, equal to the top ten best - selling videogames 
of 2006. 
 Diesel promoted its intimates collection through a fake hijacking 
of its dot - com site featuring live 24/7 streaming video  coverage.   
 The Yin and Yang of Energy 
and Differentiation 
 Like the tightly integrated duality of yin and yang, energy and dif-
ferentiation exist inseparably and behave symbiotically. The two 
forces work together to propel a brand forward. Differentiation 
grounds the brand, solidifying where it is at this very moment, 
while energy acts as a catalyst, leading the brand to where it can 
be tomorrow. Energy accelerates differentiation, while Differentia-
tion gives meaning to energy. Differentiation is more or less static, 
whereas energy can be reckless and erratic. 
 When the two work together, the brand achieves both forward 
progress and strategic accuracy. (See Figure 6.3.) 
 Brands can find competitive advantage from the energy 
 generated by one of these dimensions — Vision, Invention, or 
Dynamism — or by all of them combined. For years, Apple has a 
balanced VID pattern in which its Vision, Invention, and Dyna-
mism all rank equally high. But that hasn ’ t always been the case 
for everything Apple does, especially the iPod. Apple ’ s culture is 
legendary for creativity and continuous innovation, as evidenced 
by such category - redeﬁ ning products as its computers and even 
the iPod. This boosted Apple ’ s Invention to the point where, in 
2002, the iPod was seen as one of the top 1 percent most inventive 
brands in BAV. However, according to our research, when it ﬁ rst 
came out, the iPod was only among the top 30 percent most 
visionary brands, and the top 20 percent most dynamic brands. 
•
•
•
•

Stage One—Exploration  131
 Apple employed tactics that grew and balanced the energy 
behind the iPod, striving to complement its inventive foundation 
with a greater sense of Dynamism, further establishing itself as a 
visionary leader. The results paid off. Today, the iPod sits among 
the top most energized brands in the U.S. market. 
 How did Apple accomplish this? One tactic that clearly height-
ened the iPod ’ s overall VID was when Apple partnered with the 
band U2, a high - energy brand in its own right. While iPod ’ s energy 
was built around Innovation, U2 ’ s energy was grounded in Dyna-
mism. The two brands worked together in 2004 to launch U2 ’ s 
album,  How to Dismantle an Atomic Bomb.  The ﬁ rst single,  “ Vertigo, ”  
made its way into the market via an Apple commercial for iPod, 
while Apple designed a limited - edition U2 iPod complete with the 
band ’ s entire catalog. What ’ s particularly interesting is that, 
according to our tracking, the two brands literally swapped energy: 
Over the six - month period of the partnership, U2 increased con-
sumer perceptions of its inventiveness by over 8 percent, while 
much of U2 ’ s Dynamism transferred over to iPod, which saw 
a 10 percent gain. While maintaining its inventive spirit, iPod is 
now among the top 4 percent most dynamic brands in America 
and among the top 2 percent most visionary. 
 As this story demonstrates, some brands may begin with one 
strong energy dimension, which then, if managed well, can ignite 
Differentiation
Vision
Invention
Dynamism
 FIGURE 6.3. DIFFERENTIATION AND ENERGY INTERACT TO THRILL CONSUMERS. 

132  The Brand Bubble
the others. When they ’ re successfully balanced, they blend into 
big brand ideas from big - thinking ﬁ rms. 
 Nevertheless, in some sectors, we ’ ve also seen that a single ele-
ment is sufﬁ cient to power a leading brand in that category. For 
example, we ’ ve noted that each attribute cluster, when strong, can 
completely power brands in the following categories: 
 Vision: Financial services, pharmaceuticals, and B2B 
 Invention: Consumer electronics, personal computing, and 
mobile handsets 
 Dynamism: Automotive, alcoholic beverages, and fashion  
 Performing Your Energy Audit 
 You ’ re now ready to put away the microscope and move out of 
the classroom. You ’ ve seen how assessing Brand Strength is the 
key to understanding your brand ’ s sustainable future. To build 
that strength, a brand must develop Energized Differentiation, 
through the separate components of Vision, Invention, and Dyna-
mism, each of which can then boost the others, generating even 
greater energy. 
 Armed with this background, you can now perform an Energy 
audit on your own brand. To initiate the audit, we invite you to tap 
into Y & R ’ s BAV database of more than forty - two thousand brands. 
Some brands have a long record in our database, having been 
tracked for more than a dozen years, while others are more recent. 
For each brand, we have collected and analyzed consumer attitu-
dinal information that allows us to formulate measures of sustain-
ability, including a cumulative  “ Energy Index, ” along with separate 
Vision, Invention, and Dynamism scores. 
 Your brand ’ s scores provide a top - line perspective of the busi-
ness issues facing you, and may suggest strategic pathways forward. 
Your brand ’ s VID pattern especially reveals its strengths and weak-
nesses, while your competitors ’  VID patterns can help you identify 
opportunities to exploit competitive weaknesses. You can also do 
research to identify unmet consumer needs that might be interpo-
lated from the VID scores of everyone in a category. 
 These benchmarks can set the stage for you to do your own 
comparisons between different audiences (for example, your 
•
•
•

Stage One—Exploration  133
brand loyalists versus users of competing brands). The data also 
gives you clues about opportunities where you can look for growth 
and development. And because BAV contrasts all brands against 
each other, you can go outside your own category to enhance your 
learning about such areas as customer service, community build-
ing, or company cultures. You can also study  “ stretch ”  brands you 
might seek to emulate for insights and opportunities. 
 How to Access Y & R ’ s BAV 
 To gain entry into a special section of Y & R ’ s proprietary brand 
database, go to www.thebrandbubble.com. We ’ ll ask you to pro-
vide some basic information in order to get a password but you 
will not be solicited for any follow - up. (You are welcome to contact 
us though if you want a personal discussion of your brand.) If your 
brand is not included in our database, you can still use our data 
to model your own Energy audit based on related brands in your 
industry or on leading consumer brands you seek to emulate. 
 The Energy Index 
 In the BAV database, the ﬁ rst data point provided for every brand 
is its Energy Index. This score relates to the brand ’ s overall Brand 
Strength, derived from the sum of its Energized Differentiation 
and its Relevance. 
 Keep in mind that the Energy Index is a snapshot; it reveals 
only how the brand scored when our BAV took its last measure-
ment, whereas a brand ’ s energy level is constantly shifting. But just 
as a ﬁ nancial balance sheet is useful to provide evidence of an enter-
prise ’ s general health, the Energy Index likewise constitutes a pow-
erful measure of a brand ’ s probable energy level and sustainability. 
The Index is also useful because it yields a comparative value of the 
brand ’ s stature relative to the thousands of brands the BAV tracks. 
 Collectively, the energy indexes for all brands in our study 
result in a relative distribution of scores, using an absolute ranking 
from 100 down to 0. A higher score indicates greater Brand 
Strength. We ’ ve come to visualize the Energy Index as a thermom-
eter showing how  “ hot ”  a brand is, and we ’ ve categorized brands 
into seven levels of heat, from  “ volcanic ”  to  “ inert. ”  Figure 6.4, 

OVERALL ASSESSMENT: The Energy Index
We’ve talked about brand value from the perspective of business experts. But what about consumers? 
The Energy Index is a distribution of Brand Strength (Energized Differentiation and Relevance) from 
across our brandscape of 2,500 brands we survey in BAV in North America. Since this is derived from 
stock performance, it gives us a snapshot of greater to lesser potential brand value creation. There are 
seven levels: (For a specific brand, go to thebrandbubble.com).
100
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
VOLCANIC: Energy Index of 90–100
These are the top 10% of all brands in our study. These supernovas have unleashed
luminous Energy on the marketplace. They are weapons of mass devotion. They own
the popular consciousness, driving both volume and margin. Of those that have much,
will much be demanded: consumers expect brands with this much presence to keep 
up in spectacular fashion. They must also monitor attitudes of their early adopters 
carefully. Many could leave the franchise as the mainstream enters. These brands have 
to prove to their loyalists they still have the heart of an insurgent.
BURNING: Energy Index of 75–89
These brands are sizzling in the marketplace. They’ve created allure and fandom.
Consumers feel their presence in their lives. Now that greatness is thrust upon them,
they need to act differently. Brands in this position need to keep converting energy
into new forms of surprise and delight. They can’t rest now because many brands in
this position lose Energy as fast as they gain it. 
KINETIC: Energy Index of 60–74
Brands with kinetic Energy are taking notice, and their velocity keeps accelerating.
Advocates are forming and chatter is happening. These brands have already come
a long way. Perhaps now is the time to think beyond the confines of the market, and
the functionality of the product, and consider how to give the brand a wider social
relevance.
CHARGED: Energy Index of 45–59
These are brands where Energy is converting from one form to another. Growing
sales leads to more marketing. A hot new product inspires a concept store. Often
these brands lack a central catalyst for integration. Brands at this stage need more
than basic product functionality. They need a champion to infuse emotion and
creativity into the brand.
PULSING: Energy Index of 30–44
These brands have latent Energy. They may be doing all the right things in terms
of image, saliency and share in tracking, but they still trail the marketplace. They
are an upstart challenger brand, or a brand in decline. The firm needs to raise its
sights and get its brand to drive the business. It needs to put the brand first.
DORMANT: Energy Index of 15–29
These brands require urgency if they’re going to help retain and grow the business.
No matter what category, these brands could do with a rethink. Is the existing brand
and marketing strategy differentiating enough? Is the brand focused on a sharp target?
INERT: Energy Index of 0–14
These brands are really just a name that people have heard of rather than a brand
with real, added value. Now is the time to take a fundamental look at the brand
and work out why differentiation levels are so low. Is the firm serious in its efforts to 
support the brand and bring innovation to consumers? Many are so weak, they are 
vulnerable to private label, or outright consumer indifference. 
 FIGURE 6.4. THE ENERGY INDEX. 

100
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
VOLCANIC BRAND
Disney, Pixar, Crocs, Google, IKEA, Victoria’s Secret, iPod, Harley-Davidson, Swiffer, 
Nike, eBay,  Wikipedia, Starbucks, Target, Dyson, Coca-Cola, Leap Frog, BMW, 
LEGO, Best Buy, Apple, Sirius Satellite Radio, Toyota, Hewlett-Packard, BlackBerry, 
Nintendo Wii, Kohler, IBM, Kashi, Microsoft.com, Trader Joe’s, ESPN, TiVo, Boeing, 
Crayola, HBO, General Electric, Dr Pepper, MTV, NASCAR, YouTube, Pepsi, MINI, 
Amazon.com
BURNING BRAND
POM, Cadillac, Snickers, Advanced Micro Devices (AMD), Whole Foods, UPS, LG, 
FedEx, craigslist, V8, Adidas, John Deere, Pepperidge Farm Goldfish, Tazo, Dove 
(beauty products), Canon, Polo/Ralph Lauren, Xbox 360, Cranium, Sam’s Club, 
Ray-Ban, Linux, DEWALT, Timberland, Nordstrom, MySpace, BitTorrent, Axe, 
Motorola, Skype, Glacéau Vitaminwater, VISA, PlayStation 3
KINETIC BRAND
McDonald’s, Mattel, EA Sports, Tumi, Godiva, L.L. Bean, Diet Coke, Starbury 
(sneakers), Weight Watchers, MasterCard, Madden NFL, Red Bull, Dasani, Facebook, 
NFL.com, Costco, Ecko Unlimited, Applebee’s, ING Direct, Converse, Abercrombie & 
Fitch, 7 for all Mankind, Curves, Chipotle, Soutwest Airlines, Careerbuilder.com
CHARGED BRAND
Nokia, PUMA, Jack Daniel’s, Guinness, Firefox, Jamba Juice, Expedia.com, Evian, 
Method (hand soap), Blockbuster, Staples, Patagonia, Bacardi, Neiman Marcus, 
Burberry, Foot Locker, Absolut, friendster.com, Weber, Zara, Smirnoff, Marriott, 
Dunkin’ Donuts, Lucent Technologies, Chase, Bulgari, Degree, Comcast, Four Seasons 
Hotels, Zappos
PULSING BRAND
Bausch & Lomb, SnackWells, Planters, Kimberly-Clark, Quicken, Aflac, Vespa, Aquafina,
Ann Taylor, ChevronTexaco, Equal, 2(x)ist, Tang, Hush Puppies, Parkay, Heineken, 
Pampers, Fendi, The North Face, Yoplait, Ritz-Carlton, NutraSweet, Perrier, Long John 
Silver’s, Frosted Flakes, Samsonite, Siemens, 7-Eleven, Goldman Sachs, Ericsson
DORMANT BRAND
ASICS, Holiday Inn, Huggies, Sweet ‘N Low, Kayak.com, Wachovia, Bratz, American 
Airlines, Papa John’s, Fruit of the Loom, AXA, United Airlines, Prilosec, Midas,
Ball Park, Oscar Mayer, Michelob, Progressive Insurance, Alcatel, Celebrity Cruises, 
Hampton Inn, Cap’n Crunch, Gant
INERT BRAND
EDS, American Apparel, Esprit, SpaghettiOs, The Athlete’s Foot, Commerce Bank, 
American Tourister, State Farm, Prêt à Manger, Kyocera, AIG, Greyhound, 
The Hartford, SAP, Foster Farms, Luvs, Motel 6, Haier, Bufferin, One-A-Day, Lipitor, 
Chef Boyardee, LendingTree, Rolaids, U-Haul, Prell, DRISTAN, Allstate, Taster’s 
Choice, Fab, Prudential, Enterprise Rent-A-Car, Wella, National Car Rental
 FIGURE 6.4. (CONTINUED) 

136  The Brand Bubble
which shows how BAV scored a sampling of popular brands as of 
December 2007, gives you a quick look at the Energy Index. 
 Interpreting the Energy Index 
 In general, the Brand Strength score indicates a brand ’ s future 
potential. Greater overall Brand Strength means greater ability to 
create future value. More speciﬁ cally, it ’ s the changes in Energized 
Differentiation that foretell a brand ’ s true marketplace power. 
We can see this correlation happening in fast - growing brands like 
Dr Pepper, Lacoste, Crayola, Method, Heineken Light, and Face-
book. Conversely, a drop in Energized Differentiation is a serious 
warning sign of the eventual loss of overall Brand Strength. 
 However, note that a single measurement of Brand Strength 
can be deceiving. A brand may appear momentarily strong to the 
enterprise, but its specific Energized Differentiation might be 
stalled or weakening in the consumer ’ s mind. Think of Sun Micro-
systems, Blockbuster, Sony, and Motorola. This is because differen-
tiation and relevance often take longer to build and are slower to 
erode, while energy can be volatile. The perception of Energy is 
the most salient indicator of brand attitude changes, and thus 
future growth or decline in a brand ’ s differentiation or rele-
vance. 
 This situation is evident in what appear to be weaker brands 
where differentiation or relevance trails energy because the brand 
is new or niche, or its resurgence has not reached the mainstream. 
Picture Zara, Converse, Pr ê t à Manger, Samsonite, Gant, or Per-
rier. In another deceptive reading, energy may appear weak 
because of limited market penetration and understanding, result-
ing in low differentiation and relevance — even though the brand 
is high in energy. Examples are Lenovo, Kayak.com, Commerce 
Bank, and American Apparel. And Brand Strength can be lowered 
because pricing or image excludes many customers, thus driving 
down relevance. Notable examples are Neiman Marcus, Four Sea-
sons, Prada, Fendi, Bally, and e - harmony. For greater accuracy on 
these brands, study a more speciﬁ c target audience segment for 
the brand, rather than just  “ all adults. ” 
 You also need to factor in the  size and category effects that can 
impact Brand Strength. Just like the principles of physics, bigger 

Stage One—Exploration  137
brands (with greater mass) require more energy to move dif-
ferentiation and relevance, whereas smaller and newer brands 
with low levels of differentiation and relevance can grow at a 
faster pace. Citibank, Delta, Burger King, Coca - Cola, and Bud-
weiser need greater energy than Vespa, Ecko, POM, ING, and 
deli.cio.us. 
 A brand ’ s category also accounts for differences in the effects 
of energy. Categories such as computers, gaming, electronics, and 
automotive are higher - energy to begin with, reflecting greater 
consumer involvement and interest, compared to low - energy cat-
egories such as ﬁ nancial services, quick service restaurants, and 
household products. In the Energy Index against all brands, cat-
egory effects often restrain highly energized brands like Aﬂ ac, 
Method, Washington Mutual, Virgin, and Geico. Also, brands in 
business - to - business, niche industries, or technology often lack 
familiarity and widespread understanding as well. Think of 
 Siemens, Lucent, Goldman Sachs, Cisco, and Second Life. Yet 
when we look at their performance within their sectors, these 
brands ’ performance is noticeably stronger. 
 Tracking and Visualizing a Brand ’ s VID Scores 
 In addition to the overall Energy Index, BAV scores each brand 
on its three individual components of Vision, Invention, and 
Dynamism, called its VID profile. It makes it possible to detect 
whether a brand ’ s three sources of energy are balanced in con-
sumer minds or are based on one dimension being stronger 
than the other two. It can also reveal a starting point to find 
competitive leverage. Perhaps your brand has high Vision, 
while this component is a deficit in your competitors. You 
might aim to find other sources of energy to harness to drive 
your vision and thus increase your differentiation over those 
competitors. 
 From this audit we can begin to interrogate our product inno-
vation pipeline to determine where to source innovation as well as 
how to ladder up products to benefits to enhance the brand ’ s 
equity. As with iPod, brands tend to build one dimension, which 
then impacts the others. Thus a strong and balanced VID proﬁ le 

138  The Brand Bubble
is indicative of a highly creative and consistently expressed 
brand. 
 The Obstacle to Beat Back 
 Energy is generated at all points throughout an organization. For 
energy current to ﬂ ow across the entire brand experience, each 
part of the company must not only innovate, it must collaborate. 
The enterprise must connect consumer insights with new com-
munications, products, services, and other forms of innovation. 
Ideas must come from anywhere and everywhere. When people 
come together to think beyond the conventions of their current 
function, they enhance marketing capabilities of the entire orga-
nization. Collectively they can create big - platform brand ideas that 
reframe consumer expectations and competitors accordingly. As 
we ’ ve learned, limitless forms of engagement have opened up 
in ConsumerLand. Each of the three drivers of energy — Vision, 
Invention, and Dynamism — can act as a driver of creativity across 
their entire brand experience. 
 Managers often face paralysis.  What actions should I take? 
Which decisions take priority?  We have observed the barrier to get-
ting big brand ideas off the ground often rests in how firms 
think about creativity in the ﬁ rst place. Top management may 
not set a high enough bar at the outset for innovation, customer 
service, advertising, media and digital, design and retail experi-
ence, and so on. Or creativity is applied brilliantly but narrowly. 
Great one - off ideas happen all the time, but too frequently, they 
fail to be expressed as a total brand experience. And often what 
passes for creativity ends up being simply incremental, not 
 exponential. 
 In many organizations, not enough people contribute to the 
creative process because most of the workforce lacks access to 
the creative process, and people can ’ t collaborate with each 
other. This is precisely the obstacle holding back managers in 
Stage 1. 
 Stage 1 Obstacle: Creativity doesn ’ t ﬂ ow effortlessly across the 
organization. 
 Time and again, we ’ ve learned that the breakthrough brand 
ideas that make our top VID list require an organizational philosophy 

Stage One—Exploration  139
that fosters open - source thinking, as well as champions who can 
make them happen. Creativity of this sort is still quite rare because 
structure, P & L statements, reporting lines, and individual key per-
formance indicators hinder big ideas. Top management is too 
often detached from brand management and fails to stay close to 
the creative process. The demands of running the daily business 
can dilute the energy people have available for collaborating. 
Ideas sit in silos, scattered across the company and difﬁ cult for 
others to access and amplify. 
 Josep Isern and Caroline Pung are doing some interesting 
research on what they call  “ organizational energy ” for McKinsey, 
out of the consultancy ’ s Madrid and London ofﬁ ces, respectively. 
They wrote,  “ Just as a car won ’ t move without its engine, so too a 
combination of energy and ideas is crucial if an organization is to 
undergo sustained and successful change. Many projects falter 
because of a dearth of good ideas. Others never make good on 
their aspirations because the change agents spearheading them, 
exhausted by the demands piled on top of their day jobs, run out 
of steam. ” 2 
 We posit that building creativity in an organization is under-
mined by that fact that  many companies confuse risk avoidance with risk 
management.  We have examined many instances in which conserva-
tive management chases out experimentation as well as collabora-
tion. Few in the organization are willing to take up the mantle of 
creativity if it is not deﬁ ned as a managerial imperative. Creativity 
requires lateral thought and a fair bit of intuition. But many com-
panies aren ’ t built to take creative risks. Managers must meet earn-
ings expectations, and breakthrough ideas are tested against 
“norms.” 
 But the new reality is that consumers respect brands that are 
willing to take risks, especially those that push hard on the enve-
lope of creativity. Like investors willing to take on more risk in a 
bull market because they believe the expected payoff more than 
compensates them, consumers are willing to accept more uncer-
tainty in a brand in exchange for the greater rewards it might 
deliver in the future. They ’ re seeking out more innovative and 
immersive brand experiences. They applaud risk taking because 
a courageous brand offers more grounding in a groundless 
world.  

140  The Brand Bubble
 When enterprises spread out creativity across their brand, they 
actually mitigate risk. That ’ s because almost nothing restricts the 
consumers ’  deﬁ nition of creativity. People can sense energy in 
large, established companies that excel in management and busi-
ness models, as well as in small, niche companies that stand out 
for product or service innovation or R & D. 
 This is precisely the page that business must steal from the 
playbook of ConsumerLand: The opportunity for creativity today 
is limitless. No longer constrained by geography, media distribu-
tion restrictions, or production resources, creativity can be sourced 
in any location — and can travel anywhere, to be shared by anyone 
and imbued with meaning almost instantly. Companies now have 
a multitude of exciting new ways to have marketplace conversa-
tions. Channels for communicating have atomized, while hun-
dreds of millions of consumers access, create, and share content 
like one global currency. 
 In a world where consumer creativity has exploded and 
democratized, the last bastion to fully embrace creativity as a com-
petitive advantage is business itself. Creativity has an economic 
value that most companies do not understand: a demonstrable 
 The Laws of Energy 
 1.   The Law of Averages: Creativity spreads out risk. 
 2.   The Law of Openness: Brands don ’ t control, they enhance and 
extend.  
 3.   The Law of Direction: A brand is not a place, it ’ s a direction. 
 4.   The Law of Immunity: Brands with remarkable marketing 
access remarkable privileges. 
 5.   The Law of Reﬂ ex: Tactics are strategy, strategy is tactics. 
 The First Law of Energy 
 Getting past risk avoidance is possible if you are willing to believe 
the statistics. The numbers supporting risk taking are convincing 
and can help overcome management anxiety if you let them. The 
statistics are embedded in the ﬁ rst Law of Energy, the Law of Aver-
ages: Creativity spreads out risk. 

Stage One—Exploration  141
multiplier effect on intangible value. Given the dearth of irresist-
ible brands, even the smallest risk taking makes creativity one of 
the safest investments a business can make to build brand and 
overall intangible value. 
 Not Just for Niche Players 
 A common myth about outside - the - box thinking and creative 
risk taking is that it is the sole domain of iconoclasts and small, 
challenger brands. Once a company gains size, complexity, and 
shareholders, the argument goes, there ’ s more downside. Large 
companies had better play the game not to lose. 
 But in our research, we ’ ve found statistical evidence demon-
strating how creativity correlates with both size of company and 
amount of energy generated on behalf of the brand. And the sur-
prising news is, when it comes to creativity — big is better. 
 We ﬁ rst cross - analyzed our BAV data of the leading energized 
brands with the Forbes Global 2000, a list of the fastest - growing 
and largest multinational companies in the world.  Forbes  says this 
list represents  “ the world ’ s largest companies based on a compos-
ite ranking of sales, proﬁ ts, assets and market value  . . .  big compa-
nies that aren ’ t just ponderous behemoths . . .  . These fast - growing, 
adroit and well - managed companies help set the benchmark for 
their respective industries. ”  3 We found that the  Forbes  list of top 
companies corresponded very closely with our BAV list of brands 
with substantially higher energy than their categories. The degree 
of crossover between top  Forbes  companies and Energized Brands 
(shown in Figures 6.5 and 6.6) is striking. 
 Then we compared the  Business Week /Boston Consulting Group ’ s 
2007 survey of the world ’ s twenty - ﬁ ve most innovative companies 4 
with the leading energized brands in BAV. (See Figure 6.7.)  
 Look carefully at these two lists: Are these ﬁ rms small? Are 
they primarily private companies without shareholders? Are they 
insurgents operating on the fringe of their categories? No, they ’ re 
big, layered, complex, and well - respected enterprises that aren ’ t 
afraid to put some of their (blue) chips on the table to generate 
energy and growth by embracing creativity in their brands. 
 These leading companies intuitively understand that  consumers 
now examine brands from every vantage point  for clues to their velocity 

 FIGURE 6.5. FORBES GLOBAL 2000: THE FASTEST - GROWING, LARGEST MULTINATIONAL COMPANIES. 
 
5-Year Average Growth
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5-Year 
Estimated
 
 
 
 
Market   
 Annualized 
EPS 
Debt/
Company 
Sales 
Proﬁ ts 
Assets 
Value 
Sales 
Net Income 
Total Return 
Growth 
Capital Country
Apple 
20,681 
2,428 
19,461 
72,923 
30.5% 
NM 
50.8% 
20% 
0% 
US
Google 
10,605 
3,077 
18,473 137,602 118.1% 
158.3% 
80.9% 
33% 
0% 
US
Starwood 
5,979 
1,115 
9,280 
14,126 
6.5% 
36.8% 
20% 
15% 
37% 
US
Coach 
2,402 
580 
2,001 
17,468 
30.1% 
53.5% 
49.9% 
20% 
0% 
US
Whole Foods 
5,811 
199 
2,149 
6,716 
20.1% 
23.2% 
17.8% 
20% 
0% 
US
Starbucks 
8,209 
612 
4,528 
23,205 
24.4% 
28.5% 
21.8% 
22% 
0% 
US
Harley Davidson 
6,186 
1,043 
5,532 
16,962 
10.9% 
18.7% 
6.0% 
13% 
25% 
US
Nike 
15,634 
1,361 
9,822 
26,326 
10.2% 
19.8% 
13.5% 
14% 
5% 
US
Hewlett-Packard 94,081 
6,518 
81,314 106,265 
15.0% 
25.9% 
16.0% 
12% 
6% 
US
Toyota 
179,024 11,677 243,598 217,689 
10.2% 
16.5% 
22.1% 
n/a 
34% 
JA
Pepsi Cola 
35,137 
5,642 
29,930 103,425 
8.5% 
16.5% 
6.3% 
11% 
14% 
US
Tesco 
69,218 
2,754 
39,563 
67,048 
19.3% 
17.0% 
21.9% 
12% 
28% 
UK
China Mobile 
29,792 
6,564 
51,353 185,314 
28.7% 
19.0% 
28.9% 
14% 
12% 
HK

Stage One—Exploration  143
and future potential. Just as they route around traditional market-
ing appeals, consumers use a myriad of feelers to sense ideas about 
a brand — often from channels that have nothing to do with the 
actual advertising the company sponsors. These impressions 
form a composite of brand meaning that impacts the brand ’ s over-
all levels of energy. In our research we found that consumers can 
sense the strong presence of energy in new products, PR, CSR, 
and other non - advertising - driven initiatives like GE ’ s Ecomagina-
tion, Google ’ s project aimed at digitizing medical records, Dell ’ s 
direct - to - consumer business model, Microsoft ’ s Gates Foundation, 
Amazon ’ s Kindle, and Toyota ’ s Prius. 
Mass Market
Sportswear
Soft Drinks
Motorcycles
Automobile
Brand Strength
(Energized Differentiation and Relevance)
Brand Stature
(Esteem and Knowledge)
Starwood
Coach
Whole Foods
Computers
Hotels
Luggage Supermarkets
Fast
Food
UK Supermarket
China Telecom
Internet
Search
Google
Apple
Starbucks
Harley-Davidson
Nike Hewlett-
Packard
Toyota
Pepsi-Cola
Tesco
China
Mobile
100
50
0
100
50
New/Unfocused
Eroding/Declined
Niche/Momentum
Leadership
0
 FIGURE 6.6. FORBES GLOBAL 2000 AND THEIR POSITION 
ON THE BAV POWERGRID, 2007. 
 Base: BAV USA 2006, All Adults; BAV UK 2006; BAV PRC 2005. 

100
Brand Strength
(Energized Differentiation and Relevance)
0
Disney
Microsoft
Sony
Wal-Mart
Intel
eBay
BMW
Target
Dell
IBM
GE
Starbucks
Apple
Toyota
3M
Amazon
Nokia
Honda
P&G
Boeing
Google
Cisco
Samsung
Virgin
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
 FIGURE 6.7. BUSINESS WEEK ’ S TWENTY - FIVE MOST INNOVATIVE COMPANIES AND BAV BRAND STRENGTH. 

Stage One—Exploration  145
 The New Rule of Brand Management 
 If this stage ’ s Law of Energy is that  “ Creativity spreads out risk, ” 
the corollary take - away is that brands have unrivaled opportuni-
ties to stand out, and just about anything can show progress. In 
ConsumerLand, brand performance is no longer black and white. 
It is no longer above or below the line. There is no ofﬂ ine versus 
online. There are no lines anywhere, especially between a brand 
and the consumer, or a company and its marketplace. This leads 
us to the Stage I New Rule of Brand Management, which reads: 
 Stage 1 New Rule of Brand Management: Everything is media 
and everything communicates. 
 Companies must embrace the concept that everything is now 
media and therefore a marketing channel. Today, media isn ’ t just 
something advertisers pay for. Media is any point where the con-
sumer engages with a brand, or with its company, for that matter. 
Consumers look everywhere and see everything. The enterprise 
itself is a series of touch - points, offering endless ways to inspire 
brand conversations and channel energy back to consumers. 
These new pathways often detour past traditional marketing prac-
tices, but they ’ re still media, and they ’ re perceived by consumers 
as energy. 
 Indeed, the very sources of energy in its Vision, Invention, and 
Dynamism reﬂ ect the fact that the entire company itself is effec-
tively a media outlet for the brand. Think back to the VID exam-
ples in this chapter: Everything about a company ’ s creativity 
potentially speaks for its brand: 
 A business model is media (JCDecaux) 
 Happy employees are media (American Apparel) 
 Corporate behavior is media (IKEA) 
 Product is media (Louis Vuitton handbags) 
 Retail space is media (Pinkberry) 
 Clothing is media (edoc laundry) 
 Online experience is media (Mattel) 
 R & D is media (NIKEiD) 
 Architecture is media (Neiman Marcus) 
 Distribution is media (Zillow) 
 Thought leadership is media (Grameen Bank) 
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

146  The Brand Bubble
 The lessons of energy — Vision, Invention, and Dynamism —
 also teach us that the consumer now has a holistic and unﬁ ltered 
view of a brand and its company. To survive, brands must reﬂ ect 
the entire reassurance process that consumers go through before 
buying anything. 
 In this everything - is - media world, the burden of creativity 
no longer rests solely on advertising, because now everything —
 or even just one thing — communicates to consumers. Swiffer ’ s 
impressive energy score (98) is due in large part to brilliant 
product innovation. Glacéau vitaminwater ’ s energy score (82) 
is driven by product, packaging, and brand identity. We spoke 
in Singapore with Guangyo, an investment banker who picked 
up Boeing ’ s energy score (93) on the news of the 787 Dream-
liner:  “ They had been kind of quiet, but this new plane is amaz-
ing. I ’ m going to ﬂ y SQ [Singapore Airlines] to Sydney to check 
it out. ”  
 This suggests that the creative canvas inside your company is 
vast. Ideas can be harnessed from everywhere in the firm — in 
operations, product development and R & D, business systems and 
knowledge, customer relationships, investor relations, design, 
technology, retail experience, and supply chain logistics. 
 But a company can get misled thinking that brand creativity 
is simply communications, something to be outsourced to exter-
nal partners. Creativity not only spreads risk, it spreads responsibility. 
There ’ s far more creative potential in your own people and the 
contributions they can make to the creative process. Right from 
the outset, management must set creativity as the new brand 
mandate. Creativity requires a lot of effort and discipline. You 
have to will it to happen at the highest levels in the company. 
You have to create an environment where it can ﬂ ourish — which 
means clear - cutting bureaucracies to enable big - brand platform 
ideas. Your consumers collaborate through wikis and writing 
online reviews, so why not your employees? Your consumers are 
creating Super - Bowl - worthy ads, so who ’ s to say your managers 
don ’ t have a creative eye? Big ideas won ’ t make it through unless 
you open things up and push your people past their current 
behaviors. Your creative capital resides in your employees, your 
partners, and as The LEGO Group learned, your consumers as 
well.    

Stage One—Exploration  147
 Energized Brand Case Study for Exploration: 
The LEGO Group 
 BILLUND, DENMARK: Performing an Energy audit to understand 
your brand ’ s Vision, Invention, and Dynamism is critically important 
to any enterprise, even when the brand is well established and 
has a loyal following. The Danish toy company LEGO, a respected 
household name among parents for almost eighty years, was able 
to capture new momentum that helped it launch into new areas 
and skyrocket to enormous new proﬁ ts once it understood how 
to evaluate its energy and tap into the perception of inventiveness 
that consumers long held about the ﬁ rm ’ s products, despite the 
huge changes in childhood play brought on by electronic toys. 
 
 Today, the LEGO image as the maker of hugely popular 
interlocking toys hides its humble beginnings. Its founder, Ole Kirk 
Christiansen, a Danish carpenter, opened his ﬁ rst workshop in 
1932, producing wooden toys in the classic European tradition. He 
delighted children for more than a decade before expanding into 
plastics, introducing the famous LEGO interlocking blocks in 1949. 
These improved upon his original wooden design, because instead 
of loosely stacking one upon another, the plastic blocks could be 
locked to create sturdy structures and objects that wouldn ’ t fall apart. 
(Continued )

148  The Brand Bubble
 
 Through its decades of history, LEGO has consistently improved 
upon the original design. From 1962 to 1966, small motors and 
wheels were introduced to the LEGO world, allowing for mobility. 
In 1974, LEGO launched tiny ﬁ gurines that allowed children to 
make more lifelike toy worlds. With the creation of characters, 
LEGO expanded to theme - centered products. In subsequent 
years, LEGO created complete mini - worlds, from medieval castles 
to ﬁ lm - inspired sets from  Batman, Harry Potter, and an astonishing 
array of other popular cultural phenomena. 
 
 The strength of the LEGO brand has always been its ability to 
inspire ﬂ ights of imagination. The company name itself suggests 
how Ole thought of his toys: the word  LEGO comes from the 
Danish words  leg godt, “ play well. ” The toys were always created 
for kids, whose job was to add value to their use through play. 
 “ Since the days of the carpenter, each toy — from the simplest to 
the most elaborate — has left the workshop unﬁ nished. To come 
to life, each one needs the touch and the imagination of a child. ” 5 
LEGO thus became a helpful tool for child development, as the 
toys encourage creativity and invention. 
 
 The LEGO Group ’ s energy hit the wall, however, in the 1990s, 
with the dawning of the virtual age. Children everywhere began 
turning to technology for their entertainment, and LEGO toys 
were quickly becoming a thing of the past. Trying to keep pace 
with the changing tastes in children ’ s play, LEGO expanded into 
new dimensions such as apparel and amusement parks, but they 
quickly learned that irrelevant diversiﬁ cation is dangerous. Still, 
these experiments persisted despite lackluster results. 
 
 One major barrier to growth for the company became its 
unbending dislike of selling anything construed as violent. But 
in the new era of video and computer where most electronic 
games were built around ﬁ ghting to the death, LEGO remained 
steadfastly opposed to the concept of toys simulating harmful 
actions. Even when it was tapped to create tie - in products for the 
 Star Wars ﬁ lms, merely having the word  “ war ” in the title of the 
products caused conﬂ ict within the company. Longtime employees 
feared selling the merchandise would violate the LEGO Group ’ s 
core values of peace and goodness. These views made it nearly 
impossible for LEGO to ﬁ gure out new ways to reach an audience 
who spent their time playing Mortal Kombat, the original explicitly 
graphic violent video game, and its successors. 

Stage One—Exploration  149
 
 In time, LEGO began losing traction, desperately clinging to 
a world that was just as rapidly moving away from the ideals 
the company held most dear. With an increasing multitude of 
options for entertainment, the LEGO traditional young male 
target was not interested in plain creative building. Children 
no longer came home from school to play imaginatively with 
toys; they headed straight to their gaming systems or logged 
on to their computers. LEGO had to take serious action or be 
vanquished as the old guard and remembered fondly as a relic 
from the  “ good old days. ”  
 
 In 1999, LEGO endeavored to adapt by ﬁ nally creating a toy 
that appealed to the sensibilities of modern children. In what 
seems like a direct response to the virtual gaming craze, LEGO 
launched the Throwbot — a collection of eight characters who 
came from different planets to battle forces that threatened the 
safety of their respective worlds. The toy picked up on the themes 
of many video games of the era — ﬁ ghting games in which the 
object was to protect one ’ s realm, with characters that fought 
each other in incarnations of good and evil. The Throwbot and 
its successor, the RoboRider — a Transformers - esque series 
of vehicles sent to save the universe — lured children back to 
LEGO toys. It helped that some RoboRider packages revealed 
secret codes that were linked to online games. These toys were 
affordable and easy to create. 
 
 But still, 2001 saw massive ﬁ nancial setbacks — LEGO proﬁ ts 
declined by $120 million. Even following the trends was not 
enough — LEGO needed something more to keep its momentum 
on the rise. Its fortunes took a turn for the better when its 
designers began understanding that its customers responded to 
more intelligent toys. In 2001, it launched BIONICLE®, targeted 
to ﬁ ve - to twelve - year - old boys. BIONICLE was a line of 
characters based on Polynesian mythology, using ancient 
historical storylines so popular in many video and computer 
games. The company also released multiple direct - to - video ﬁ lms 
based on the ongoing BIONICLE stories, the company ’ s ﬁ rst foray 
onto the big screen. There were also books and comic books 
to further engage children in the story and to create a complete 
consumer experience. 
 
 In this strategy, LEGO took the opposite route from the majority 
of virtual games. While the gaming companies took their inspiration 
(Continued )

150  The Brand Bubble
from comic books, LEGO created its own product and storyline, 
and then launched its own comic books. LEGO owned these 
products from start to ﬁ nish, and was able to pursue a successful 
multi - channel entertainment strategy to fulﬁ ll consumers ’ ongoing 
appetite for more stories. 
 
 LEGO ’ s real turnaround came when it partnered with the 
Massachusetts Institute of Technology to create MINDSTORMS®, 
a product that allowed users to create and program robots that 
hooked up to computers. MINDSTORMS was ﬁ rst released 
in 1998, parallel to the Throwbot and RoboRiders — but this 
invention truly captured the LEGO emerging technological 
genius. The product blended motors, touch -  and light - sensory 
mechanics, and computer technology to create a kit essentially 
made of programmable bricks that could fashion a programmable 
robot. 
 
 Not only was the invention responsive to changing consumer 
tastes, the product became a prime example of how users can 
take hold of and modify a product beyond the wildest dreams 
of its corporate creator. MINDSTORMS not only attracted 
attention — it also brought on a cult following. Within a very short 
time, MINDSTORMS acquired a loyal community of enthusiasts, 
who took it upon themselves to improve upon the toy. Though 
MINDSTORMS wasn ’ t originally targeted toward older users, 
it caught the attention of experienced techies, and in 2001, a 
computer hacker created a program for the robots that proved to 
be better and more advanced than the original. This was an eye -
 opening event that caused LEGO to see the strength and wisdom 
of its passionate users. 
 
 The rise of MINDSTORMS caused a sensation in educational 
communities. In 1999, the FIRST LEGO League kicked off a 
competition in which entrants used MINDSTORMS kits to build 
robots to complete certain tasks. Teams of students converged 
to compete in the contest, with 9,500 participants in total. Each 
year, the competition sported a different theme, from arctic 
terrains to ocean odysseys, and in 2006, a mind - blowing 90,000 
students took part in the competition. LEGO had created a 
phenomenon. 
 
 LEGO communities had long existed in the shadows, with a few 
adult hobbyists creating a group called Adult Fans of LEGO (AFOL) 
who fashioned a Web site to plan events and bring the group 

Stage One—Exploration  151
together. But MINDSTORMS caused a massive inﬂ ux of people 
interested in LEGO products as a hobby. When decided that it 
was time for a new version of MINDSTORMS, designers realized 
that no one knew more about the products than their devoted 
fans, so in September 2004, LEGO chose four active members 
of the MINDSTORMS world to help test the latest version of the 
robot kit. 
 
 With constant feedback from loyal fans, the product began 
to morph into something the company never dreamed of. By 
November 2005 the panel of four became fourteen, and by 
March 2006, after an application process almost as selective as 
that of an elite college, LEGO had selected a hundred volunteers 
who played crucial roles in developing the new MINDSTORMS 
product, the LEGO Mindstorm NXT, from start to ﬁ nish. The 
NXT comprised an  “ intelligent ”  computer brick with inputs for 
sensors and motors, an LCD display, and an easily navigable 
user interface with root menus. This ultra - sophisticated device 
was a smash hit for LEGO — in fact, the success of the product 
resulted in winning the 2006 Popular Mechanics  “ Breakthrough 
Award ” and the International Toy Fair Committee ’ s  “ Toy Innovation 
Award. ”  
 
 Although LEGO ’ s passionate users continue to come together 
of their own accord, LEGO has introduced a number of measures 
to keep fans involved with the brand and connected to each 
other. Twice a year, the company opens its doors to a select 
group of die - hard LEGO lovers for a tour of one of its facilities 
and introductions to designers, developers, and model makers. 
LEGO has also created interactive Web sites such as LEGOfactory.
com to give enthusiasts a chance to build and share virtual LEGO 
worlds, which can then be shipped to their homes and created in 
reality. LEGO.com, the brand ’ s main Internet portal, allows visitors 
to create a LEGO universe, and offers online games involving 
LEGO characters. In 2006, the Web site was named one of the 
top twenty - ﬁ ve  “ Lifestyle and Children ’ s Web sites ” in the United 
States. 
 
 Back in 2004, LEGO tapped Jurgen Vig Knudstorp to help 
restore its former glory. Vig Knudstorp restructured the company 
by selling LEGO theme parks and other superﬂ uous brand 
extensions that were not channeling energy directly back to 
the brand. Most important, he put an emphasis on consumer 
(Continued )

152  The Brand Bubble
input — consumers now have a voice on which products are 
launched, and the company takes such opinions seriously. Today, 
LEGO ranks as the ﬁ fth - largest toy manufacturer in the world, with 
revenues of $1.42 billion in 2007. 
 
 By making its brand more elastic, LEGO was able to return 
to the place it was originally built to live — in the imaginations 
of today ’ s children. It spread out its risk by innovating across a 
range of initiatives. And it found ways to use its inner culture as 
media and open new channels to its brand enthusiasts. LEGO 
persevered to reinterpret its precious ideals of inspiring creative 
play to adapt and thrive in a new consumer age. 

153
 Chapter Seven 
 Stage Two — Distillation 
 Identifying the Energy Core  
 We live in a moment of history where change is so 
speeded up that we begin to see the present only when 
it is already disappearing. 
 — R. D. Laing 
 The Stage 1 Energy audit encouraged you to look inside and out 
at your brand, gathering data about its overall energy — as an indi-
cation of how consumers and everyone within the enterprise per-
ceive the brand ’ s Vision, Invention, and Dynamism. Now it ’ s time 
to begin looking forward to planning a strategy for energizing 
your brand, and your company as well. 
 The audit may have forced some questions: If Energy Index 
scores are low, what immediate actions can a company take? What 
does it mean if VID scores are unbalanced, and more important, 
what should be done about it? Regardless of the state of the 
brand ’ s health, this stage urges a fundamental change in thinking 
about the brand inside the enterprise. 
 Branding endeavors are often done in a vacuum. They ’ re initi-
ated as  “ marcom ”  exercises, with little input from others in the 
organization or oversight from top management. This stage of dis-
tillation urges collective brand thinking to begin the process of 
becoming more consumer - driven and more aligned around the 
needs of the brand. The core of brand thinking is,  To achieve our 

154  The Brand Bubble
goals, we need to make the brand an organizing principle for the business. 
This requires ﬁ nding a central brand thought that everyone can 
buy into, so they can all work to make it real. We ’ re not referring 
simply to an advertising idea but to a galvanizing brand idea that 
creates unity in the organization while bringing the consumer and 
the brand alive for everyone. 
 We call this process building an  Energy Core.  The goal is to syn-
thesize a single energy pulse that has the power to infuse and 
inform every aspect of the enterprise ’ s activities, a Core that can 
radiate ideas to further enhance the brand ’ s Vision, Invention, 
and Dynamism. The Energy Core is, in its purest form, the brand ’ s 
raison d ’  ê tre. It captures the essential idea behind the brand ’ s 
existence. It defines the brand ’ s role in the marketplace and 
within the organization. (See Figure 7.1.) 
 Often it can be difﬁ cult for employees to understand their 
own impact on the marketplace. How does operating the call cen-
ter or designing the packaging affect the brand, the consumer, 
or the share price? The Energy Core is a coalescing expression of 
the brand ’ s positioning. It helps institutionalize culture and sys-
tems around the one powerfully deﬁ ned idea that underpins the 
brand. It achieves a common foundation for one operating phi-
losophy and point of reference. A strong, solid Energy Core 
becomes the central organizing idea that people embrace and 
mobilize into action. 
Energy Core
Vis
io
n
D
y
n
a
m
i
s
m
I
n
v
e
n
ti
o
n
FIGURE 7.1. THE ENERGY CORE RADIATES IDEAS OUT 
TO THE ENTERPRISE.

Stage Two—Distillation  155
 Speaking of companies he admires, Rob White, CEO of Zeus 
Jones (a digital strategy company), says, 
 It starts on the inside. The corporate culture, working environ-
ments, and human resources practices are all based on a clear 
perspective, set of values, and personality (closely aligned with 
the founders and CEO in most cases). Then there are the prod-
ucts themselves. Whether retail experience, a piece of software, 
an electronic device, or a consumable, these types of organi-
zations all share obsessive attention to detail in the way their 
brands are presented. Design is important at a strategic rather 
than tactical level. It ’ s as if everyone in the company feels like a 
brand ambassador. By contrast, companies with weaker brands 
leave branding practice in the siloed domain of the marketing 
department. Not only will these brands never reach the same 
heights, the companies will also suffer from inefﬁ ciency since 
their actions often contradict and at best don ’ t reinforce their 
communications.   
 Rob then explains, 
 When you ask marketing professionals which brands they admire 
these days, names like Apple, Starbucks, and Google are often the 
ﬁ rst mentioned. What ’ s interesting about these companies is that 
their brands are more an embodiment of their executive leader-
ship than an artifact of their marketing departments. But the con-
sistency and ﬂ air with which they present their company to their 
many publics are remarkable.  
 This reveals that an Energy Core isn ’ t about advertising — or 
even marketing. In fact, it ’ s quite the opposite.  An Energy Core is 
about building a company that acts on what it says. Which is why a 
great Core comes from the inside out and needs the imprint of 
top management. Often the leaders ’  ambitions, whether expressed 
as a vision, mission statement, or a form of objective setting, are 
interpreted as obtuse and difﬁ cult to apply by the people in the 
organization. But placing management ’ s aspirations for the com-
pany squarely within the context of the brand creates a message 
that everyone can relate to and understand. The brand imperative 
becomes the business imperative. Objectives such as driving proﬁ t-
able growth, enhancing productivity, or improving market share 

156  The Brand Bubble
become clearer when expressed in brand language that ’ s consumer -
 focused. 
 The Energy Core must be simple yet inspirational. Given the 
speed and complexity of change, it acts as the brand ’ s  “ true 
north, ” the reference for every turn and change of strategy and 
tactics in the future. It is the lens through which every aspect 
of the customer experience, including products, services, and 
communications, is deﬁ ned. A strong core allows a brand to seg-
ment on attitudes and values, reorganizing its products and ser-
vices around customer insights and deeper emotional needs. In 
this manner a brand can unite different target demographics 
and user behaviors as well as different lines of business. It also 
reﬂ ects a shared sense of meaning that binds together manage-
ment and employees, business units and their larger obligations, 
the company with its supply chain partners, customers and share-
holders. A powerful Core aligns the organization and allows it to 
more aggressively shape its future. It brings together the dispa-
rate mind - sets and silos around key performance metrics and 
common goals. It makes the brand fully operational across all 
business, marketing, and communication channels. In this man-
ner, the brand can travel up through management hierarchy and 
across lines of business, ensuring greater brand consistency and 
the selling of potentially bigger, more robust brand platform 
ideas. 
 A great Energy Core puts the consumer at the heart of the 
organization. The organization can begin identifying itself and 
its markets according to the needs it addresses rather than sim-
ply the products it makes or how and where it makes them. By 
deﬁ ning customer needs around how the brand exists and oper-
ates in people ’ s lives, rather than in terms of the existing prod-
ucts, the Core liberates the organization from the potential of 
obsolescence. Managers are free to continually reinvent the 
brand and product offerings as consumer needs and technology 
change. 
 And because today ’ s consumer assesses a brand for its future 
potential, the Core underscores permanence. It helps ﬁ lter ideas 
and maintain clarity of the brand positioning as it experiments, 
innovates, and evolves. It allows the business to provide what 
today ’ s consumers seek: perpetual brand reinvention. 

Stage Two—Distillation  157
 Right on Target 
 The retailer Target offers a useful model for how a once - ordinary 
company found and exploited a powerful Energy Core of innova-
tions and quality in new merchandise at amazing prices. Think 
back on the Target of the 1990s and contrast that image with what 
we see today. Target has transformed from a mass merchandiser 
to a forward - thinking retail brand, part of sparking a colossal cul-
tural trend:  masstige — that is, mass prestige. 
 In our analysis, Target built up its Vision into a strong inner 
expression of the brand that everyone in the ﬁ rm understands. Its 
commitment to upward mobility and style also plays out in its 
extensive philanthropic work on behalf of its customer base. The 
retailer led all corporations on a cash - giving basis in 2005, espe-
cially in donations to schools. From its Energy Core, Target also 
built out its reputation for Invention, creating exclusive product 
partnerships with noted designers such as Isaac Mizrahi, Philippe 
Starck, and Michael Graves, who produced moderately priced 
clothing lines, housewares, and everyday necessities infused with a 
bit of chic. Target also garnered distinction among seniors with its 
convenient Clear Rx, a reengineered prescription bottle that is 
color coded, turned upside down and ﬂ attened to make the label 
more easily visible. The product was named one of  Time  maga-
zine ’ s most amazing inventions of 2005. And finally, Target ’ s 
Energy Core inspired a stirring new Dynamism that appears in its 
highly stylized advertising and especially in its back - to - school pro-
motions with Facebook, where Target allowed college students to 
design their ideal dorm rooms with Target products. 
 Target gathered its energy around its Core to create impres-
sive results in a relatively short time. (Figure 7.2 shows the signiﬁ -
cant increases and rebalancing of its VID profile against its 
category.) 
 Between 1999 and 2007, BAV found that Target increased its 
Vision by 210 percent, its Invention by 166 percent and its Dyna-
mism by 170 percent. People everywhere began pronouncing the 
store name as if it were French, calling it  “ Targ é  ”  to reflect a 
sophisticated, fashionable, yet practical brand experience. Target ’ s 
upward trajectory in brand growth and brand value between 1993 
and 2007 is demonstrated in Figure 7.3. 

100
80
60
40
20
0
Vision
Invention
Dynamism
Target’s Vision up 21 percent since 1999
Target’s 
Dynamism 
up by 
170 percent
Target’s 
Invention 
up 
166 percent
Target FH2007
Mass Retailer Category
Average FH2007
FIGURE 7.2. A MASSIVE SURGE IN VISION DROVE TARGET’S INCREASE IN ENERGY.
Target’s energy and brand performance
• Energy— +44 percent
• Preference— +69 percent
• Innovativeness— +36 percent
• Trendiness— +32 percent
• Stylishness— +22 percent
• Value compared to 
   competition— +20 percent
Target’s revenue rose from $11.7 billion 
to $63.7 billion from 1993–2006
Target’s stock price rose from $16 to 
$62 over same time period
100
50
Brand Strength
0
100
50
0
Brand Stature
1993
1999
2002
2007
FIGURE 7.3. TARGET’S BRAND GROWTH OVER TIME.

Stage Two—Distillation  159
 A First Pass at Your Energy Core 
 Deﬁ ning an Energy Core is an iterative process, a matter of trial 
and error. The task must be consumer - driven and enterprise - wide, 
and the result must articulate management ’ s aspirations. The 
Core can arise from the internal culture, proprietary innovation, 
communications, or many other places. Here are a few examples 
of Energy Cores fueling successful brands: 
 Advertising as mission:  “ Just Do It ” — Nike 
 A proprietor ’ s vision:  “ Be the third place ” to spend time —
 Starbucks  
 Technology - led innovation promise:  “ Organize the world ’ s 
information and make it universally accessible ” — Google 
 From the DNA of the product:  “ The Ultimate Driving 
Machine ” — BMW 
 Inverting a category belief:  “ Household cleaning should be 
like personal skin care ” — Method 
 An image of the future:  “ Imagine a world in which every single 
human being can freely share in the sum of all knowledge ” —
 Wikipedia 
 Espousing social values:  “ Environmentally conscious makers of 
quality outdoor clothing ” — Patagonia 
 Remaking a category for consumers:  “ Be a challenger 
brand ” — Virgin 
 Creating a sustainable corporate social business model:  “ All 
you have to do is upgrade your choice ” — Product Red  
  Brand aspiration that binds a community:  “ Freedom ” — Harley -
 Davidson 
 An Energy Core might evolve from an existing brand position 
or the company ’ s mission or vision statement. Or it might be a 
completely new thought. If you don ’ t have a strong core already, 
look over your Brand Strength and VID attributes in our BAV for 
clues. Is there a single energized attribute for which your brand is 
already recognized among consumers? If so, you might fashion a 
ﬁ rst draft Energy Core loosely around this to see if its essence can 
be extrapolated into the two weaker VID dimensions. 
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

160  The Brand Bubble
 For example, OLPC has an Energy Core built on a Vision of 
 “ providing children access to inexpensive laptop computers, ”  even 
though its actual product reality hasn ’ t reached that Vision; 3M 
wraps its core around its Invention; while Apple ’ s marketing Dyna-
mism ( “ Think Different ” ) served as an internal and external mis-
sion that preceded actual innovations like iPod, iTunes, and 
iPhone. 
 Some brands discover their Energy Core in the sweet spot 
between a marketplace insight and their brand ’ s inner truth. Uni-
lever ’ s Axe deodorant research uncovered that, in the dating 
world, young males discussed the perils of other guys who inter-
fere, or in their words,  “ kill their game. ”  Axe was positioned on 
the insight:  “ If you keep your cool, you get the girl. ”  The creative 
articulation became  “ Game Killers, ” how to navigate those poten-
tial enemies that inhibit effective dating. Gamekillers.com led to a 
viral interactive, animated short, as well as to a  Game Killer  reality 
show launched on MTV, which became the fourth - most - watched 
program on cable in early 2007. Axe is now the number one 
deodorant among young males. 
 The Energy Core can be based on the brand ’ s desire to buck 
a trend, break a convention, or create a rupture in the usual mar-
ketplace. Occasionally, a brand manages to break out from its cat-
egory by changing the rules of the game. Trader Joe ’ s started out 
as a chain of convenience stores, then recognized a need to dif-
ferentiate. Noting a growing appetite for international cuisine, the 
store stocked its shelves with hard - to - ﬁ nd gourmet items sourced 
from around the world. It established direct relationships with 
smaller vendors and obtained unique products, which it could 
then private label. By avoiding national brands and skipping the 
middleman, TJ ’ s let consumers enjoy high - quality, gourmet foods 
without breaking the bank. Miranda, a twenty - seven - year - old New 
York schoolteacher, says,  “ I love the home - made signs around the 
store. They give TJ ’ s the feel of a local food co - op and remind me 
I ’ m saving money. ” 
 TJ ’ s Energy Core translates to strong ethics in the way it deals 
with suppliers (not stocking genetically modiﬁ ed foods or charg-
ing its suppliers a stocking fee), how it values its employees (pay-
ing employees above - union wages, funding a company retirement 
plan, and frowning upon special treatment for executives), and 

Stage Two—Distillation  161
the way it treats its customers (adapting its stores to local  markets 
and striving to impart transparent, helpful in - store experiences). 
Even as it taps into new consumer trends such as organic and 
locally grown foods, TJ ’ s does it in a way designed to maintain 
accessibility and support its principles, always seeking to keep 
prices relatively low and avoiding suppliers whose organic stan-
dards are not as stringent as they should be. Sales in 2006 were an 
estimated $5 billion, up from $2.6 billion in 2005, with triple the 
sales per square foot of the average supermarket. 
 The impetus for an Energy Core can come from a cultural 
insight into a new collective consciousness in society. Orange Tele-
com, Whole Foods, and SUBWAY also rode powerful seismic shifts 
in society to create momentum for their brands, by building around 
social optimism and community, quality organic foods, and readily 
available, healthy fast food. Finally, an Energy Core can reconnect 
a company with its values, as Howard Shultz is doing in returning 
Starbucks to its  “ coffeehouse roots, ” attacking the problem that its 
coffee experience is becoming commoditized.  
 Using the Energy Core to Symbolize 
a Purpose - Driven Business 
 Looking at high - energy brands, it is striking how many have 
deﬁ ned themselves more by their point of view and values than 
by any speciﬁ c product beneﬁ t. At their best, these brands have a 
truly individual voice and a sense of real individual choice having 
been made. Above all, they reﬂ ect two beliefs: First, basic needs 
are being met, so there is a need to reach beyond them. Second, 
that it is increasingly difﬁ cult to maintain a competitive edge solely 
by focusing on a national product advantage. 
 Many iconic brands originated with a values - driven purpose. 
In the case of Lever Brothers, the factory at Port Sunlight was part 
of a large community with child care, carefully thought - out hous-
ing, and beneﬁ ts that those employed by a multinational today 
could only marvel at. The makers of Sunlight (and in a later itera-
tion, Persil), ﬁ rmly believed that they were engaged on a moral 
mission: cleanliness is next to godliness. When Unilever expanded 
the footprint of its washing powder in India by working with local 

162  The Brand Bubble
government to bring water to new rural areas, it gave the brand a 
power among Indian consumers. The company ’ s purpose enabled 
a better life for people. 
 Unilever began with a deeply held point of view. Its founders 
had conviction and strong and singular cultural beliefs underpin-
ning their brand. This insight led us to examine how consumers 
identify with brands that hold powerful values - driven core beliefs. 
The idea behind the study emerged from an excerpt we found in 
Whole Foods CEO John Mackey ’ s blog (www.wholefoodsmarket.
com/blogs/jm). In one thesis, John discussed the importance of 
organizing a business around a core idea that serves a higher mas-
ter than shareholder value. He wrote: 
 Whole Foods has another purpose besides maximizing 
profits . . .  . I believe that most of the greatest companies in the 
world also have great purposes which were discovered and/or cre-
ated by their original founders and which still remain at the core 
of their business models. Having a deeper, more transcendent 
purpose is highly energizing for all of the various interdependent 
stakeholders, including the customers, employees, investors, 
 suppliers and the larger communities in which the business partici-
pates . . . . While these deeper, more transcendent purposes have 
unique expressions at each business they also can be grouped into 
certain well known and timeless categories: 
•  The Good: a Core centered around  “ service to others, ” e.g. Southwest 
Airlines, JetBlue, Wegmans, Commerce Bank, Nordstrom, REI and the 
Container Store 
•  The True: a Core about  “ the excitement of discovery and the pursuit 
of truth, ” i.e. discover what no one has ever discovered before, e.g. 
 Genentech, Amgen, Medtronic 
•  The Beautiful: a Core focused on  “ excellence and the quest for perfection, ” 
e.g. Apple, Berkshire Hathaway and Four Seasons Hotels 
•  The Heroic: a Core seeking  “ to change the world, ” e.g. the Ford Company 
when Henry Ford ﬁ rst created it, Grameen Bank in Bangladesh 
 We tested John ’ s framework to correlate it with the presence of 
energy. We created a factor analysis of the top 10 percent most 
energized brands, totaling approximately three hundred brands. 
The factor analysis reduced the forty - eight independent imagery 
variables to a smaller number of factors, effectively discriminating 

Stage Two—Distillation  163
the four ways brands build Brand Strength. By identifying the 
imagery variables that load into each of the four factors, we could 
better understand the nuances of the factors, and moreover, 
ascribe factor values to any brand in our database. (For example, 
Whole Foods scores 12.4 points on  “ Good, ”  9.1 on  “ True, ”  8.1 on 
 “ Beautiful, ” and 7.8 on  “ Heroic. ” ) 1 
 Figure 7.4 shows the types of factors we ascribed to each cate-
gory. This allowed us to quantitatively evaluate consumer percep-
tions of brands using John ’ s construct. 
 As portrayed in Figure 7.5, we plotted select brands that John 
cited and additional brands that met his classiﬁ cation in order to 
visualize the interrelationships between energy in brands and the 
timeless factors. In large part, consumer perceptions mirrored 
John ’ s observations: Southwest Airlines, JetBlue, and Commerce 
Bank are certainly  “ Good, ”  and Four Seasons is perceived to be 
 “ Beautiful. ”  A few of our ﬁ ndings differ, but this may be the result 
of the category - agnostic approach that consumers take when eval-
uating brands. For example, Nordstrom, when viewed as part of 
the entire brandscape rather than just department stores, may 
actually be more  “ Beautiful ” than  “ Good. ” 
 This study demonstrates that consumers unconsciously 
 borrow social structures to organize brands into archetypes 
Beautiful
Heroic
Cares about Customers, Community Minded, 
Down to Earth, Eco-Friendly Friendly, Helpful, 
Kind, Original, Reliable, Social, Socially Responsible,
Straightforward, Trustworthy
Authentic, Best Brand, High Performance, 
Innovative, Up to Date, Worth More
Distinctive, Glamorous, High Quality, Prestigious, 
Sensuous, Stylish, Unique, Upper Class
Daring, Dynamic, Independent, Intelligent, 
Leader, Progress, Visionary
Good
True
FIGURE 7.4. BAV FACTOR ANALYSIS OF JOHN MACKEY 
PURPOSE BRANDS FRAMEWORK.

Bluetooth
Intel
Microsoft
TiVo
DreamWorks
Pixar
iPod
Dell
Texas Instruments
Apple
Heroic
True
Harley-Davision
Bose
Bang & Olufsen
Ferrari
BMW
Nordstrom
Four Seasons Hotels
Pier 1 Imports
Oakley
Google
eBay.com
Amazon.com
Wikipedia
craigslist
Leap Frog
Virgin
JetBlue
General Electric
National Geographic
Disney
The Oprah Winfrey Show
PBS
UPS
Costco
Commerce Bank
Southwest Airlines
Doctors Without Borders
Home Depot
Breast Cancer 
Research Foundation
IKEA
Starbucks
Ben & Jerry’s
Hallmark
Whole 
Foods
Good
Newman’s Own
Salvation Army
Habitat for Humanity
Beautiful
FIGURE 7.5. THE TOP 10 PERCENT MOST ENERGIZED BRANDS CLUSTER AROUND TIMELESS IN SOCIETAL ARCHETYPES.

Stage Two—Distillation  165
based on human qualities they find appealing or desirable. 
Brand  personality is therefore far more complex than tonality. 
A highly energized brand has a deep narrative meaning. Like a 
highly principled person, a brand with a vibrant Energy Core 
withstands competitors, product cycles, and inevitable consumer 
change.  
 Journey to the Center of the Brand 
 A brand ’ s search for its Energy Core is a challenging task that 
cries out for unfettered collaboration. With the VID pattern in 
hand, you can interrogate your consumers and your organiza-
tion. Extended reﬂ ection and questioning will help you deepen 
your assessment of your brand and company. Evaluate potential 
themes for an Energy Core from every point of view, including 
top management, employees, supply chain partners, sharehold-
ers, consumers, external inﬂ uencers, and value chain partners. 
Assess how everyone views and interacts with the brand, what 
they perceive as special. Look at the brand through the lens of 
each function. Is there a core embedded in a distinct operational 
advantage? (Zara ’ s fast - fashion.) Is the product a catalyst to com-
pany ’ s values? (Innocent ’ s  “ do some good. ” ) Your customers 
may do as much to express who you are as anything you can say. 
(MINI ’ s motoring clubs.) 
 As you work to distill a strong, unified Energy Core, you ’ ll 
need constant feedback and reﬁ nement, which you can obtain by 
inviting a consumer panel into the process.  “ Brand fans ” — as the 
case history of LEGO shows — are a highly useful means to gain 
insight and inspiration. Through an iterative process, you can 
expose them to new ideas as you get closer to the center of the 
brand. 
 Testing Your Core for Potency 
 An Energy Core must be vibrant enough to inspire the wide range 
of people and ideas within most enterprises. Once you have devel-
oped a draft of your Core, you can use the following checklist 
to test its suitability to detect if it can lead to both strategy  and 
tactics. 

166  The Brand Bubble
Energy Core Test
Here’s a short test to check out if the Core can drive ideas and 
tactics related to furthering your brand’s VID or its corporate ethos 
among consumers.
 
Can the Energy Core . . .
Change the way business is being done currently?
Transform the corporate culture?
Inspire partners throughout the value chain?
Shape and drive the customer experience?
Create advocacy and community?
Encourage consumer participation?
Expand the business model or distribution channel?
Integrate the brand into popular culture?
Guide product innovation and R&D?
Inform the retail experience and service offering?
Inﬂ uence the “Inﬂ uential”? (Shareholders, analysts, and so on.)
Reach an attitudinal mind-set that transcends demographics?
Be made personal to individual customer selling propositions?
Inform strategic alliances and partnerships?
Translate into promotions, events, and loyalty programs?
❏
❏
❏
❏
❏
❏
❏
❏
❏
❏
❏
❏
❏
❏
❏
 Since the Core has to be a company - adopted brand position-
ing, the best test is simply asking,  “ Can we execute tactics against 
this? ”  The Core is robust if the entire company can get behind it 
and come up with sources of energy in the form of ideas that keep 
the brand continually refreshed. 
 As you move through the process, your team must continually 
reﬁ ne the Energy Core to infuse it with the most meaning. Keep 
stretching it to be certain that your Energy Core is as robust as it can 
be. The more the Core can force connections among ideas and stim-
ulate tactics, the more energy it will generate in the marketplace.  
 The Obstacle to Beat Back 
 An Energy Core is ﬁ rst and foremost a contract between the brand 
and the consumer. Peter Drucker said,  “ The purpose of business is 
to create and keep a customer. ”  But often ﬁ rms focus the majority of 

Stage Two—Distillation  167
their time and effort on their shareholders. We allow investors to 
see the furthest horizons of our corporate visions, business models, 
and innovation, while we fail to show that same side of our brand 
to consumers. To one group we promise returns tomorrow; to the 
other group we seek to sell stuff today. Other than Macworld, can 
you name a  “ customer as investor ” conference? 
 A narrow, short - term perspective can lead to a common obsta-
cle that negates the hard work needed to fashion an inspiring 
Energy Core behind the brand: 
 Stage 2 Obstacle: Consumer insights are not applied and shared 
throughout the company. 
 Shareholders permeate the thinking of most companies, 
but what ’ s the group that generates the shareholder value in 
the ﬁ rst place? It ’ s consumers! The ability of an Energy Core 
to stick is clearly predicated on the enterprise becoming more 
consumer - centric and opening its structure to consumers as 
well. How good is your company at getting close to your cus-
tomer,  really close?  Do you study their behavior? Do you bring 
consumers into your process? And do you go at consumer learn-
ing with an eye for the entire brand experience? Are you including 
product development, retail, sales, and other partners into your 
discovery process? 
 From our perspective, the common failure to articulate and 
apply insights is related to the widespread tendency to forget that 
 the consumer owns the brand. We can ’ t ignore consumers ’  real needs 
and wants. We can ’ t hear only what we want to hear. We need to 
embrace the shifts in consumer opinion, rather than develop 
whatever suits us best. If we fail to enter into honest dialogue with 
our customers, we will be slow to react and, worse, unable to antic-
ipate their future needs. 
 The Second Law of Energy 
 To surmount the usual corporate shareholder - centric view of the 
world, to resolve the conﬂ ict of agendas within the enterprise, and 
to ensure that everyone is focused on creating a strong, energized 
brand, companies should adhere to the Second Law of Energy, 
the Law of Openness: Brands don ’ t control, they enhance and 
extend. 

168  The Brand Bubble
 We can no longer doubt that we can control our brands no 
better than we can control our stock prices. Marketers can no lon-
ger rely on the  “ interruption ”  business model. They must pursue 
the consumer ’ s agenda rather than their own, by marketing 
brands  with  consumers rather than to them. When a company 
shares its brand, the consumer actually starts to come inside the 
organization. Through co - creation, real insights can be garnered 
and swift adjustments can be made. 
 The Law of Openness redirects the enterprise toward behav-
iors that support energized brands. As soon as the organization 
abandons attempts to control the brand, it begins to give itself 
over to consumer input and co - creation. A.G. Lafley, CEO of 
Procter  &  Gamble, owner of some of the bluest blue chip brands 
in the world, clearly expressed this when he said,  “ Consumers are 
beginning in a very real sense to own brands and participate in 
their creation. We need to learn to let go. ” 2 
 Today, co - creation is accomplished through many types of 
brand conversations. And brands should not let consumers talk 
back just to them; ideally, they should facilitate consumers ’  talking 
with each other. For brands to stimulate such conversations, they 
must be experiential and experimental. The former provides con-
sumers with experiences to share, while the latter jump - starts con-
versations by bringing in elements of surprise and shock that make 
consumers eager to share the brand and its content with others. 
 Co - creation and conversation are now paramount for brand 
success, because getting into the consumer vernacular requires 
appealing to the language of the people. Being talked about is 
absolutely critical for a brand because, in ConsumerLand, people 
trust other people more than they trust the brands. 
The Laws of Energy
1. The Law of Averages: Creativity spreads out risk.
2. The Law of Openness: Brands don’t control, they enhance 
and extend.
3. The Law of Direction: A brand is not a place, it’s a direction.
4. The Law of Immunity: Brands with remarkable marketing 
access remarkable privileges.
5. The Law of Reﬂ ex: Tactics are strategy, strategy is tactics.

Stage Two—Distillation  169
 One of the tactics brands increasingly employ to demonstrate 
their willingness to give up control is inviting consumers to per-
sonalize and customize their experiences. Think back to Consum-
erLand, where brands give away portable content or widgets that 
consumers can drag to their own Web pages or mash up into their 
own YouTube videos, or take over their home page on MySpace. 
 One great example of co - creation comes from Mattel, which 
built a special secure Web site for its young Barbie fans, six to eleven 
years old. Mattel ’ s research showed that 50 percent of these girls 
were spending large amounts of time online. The site, BarbieGirls.
com, became the ﬁ rst global online community designed exclu-
sively for girls, where they could choose from countless features 
and accessories to customize their own virtual Barbie character, 
design their own  “ room, ”  shop at the mall, play games, hang out, 
and chat safely with other girls. The online community had 
200,000 registered users in the first week, a million within six 
weeks, and six million within a hundred days. 
 Some brands boldly entice consumers to enter into dialogue. 
Converse, for example, put out a call to its audience to create a 
 “ political, positive, original, and inspiring ”  twenty - four - second 
video to  “ celebrate the spirit of Converse and the Chuck Taylor All 
Star shoe. ”  Consumers were given total creative license to ﬁ lm 
what they wanted; the movies did not have to feature Converse 
products, but only be inspired by Converse. The company mar-
keted the initiative through street art and grafﬁ ti - style posters in 
cities — reinforcing and preserving the authenticity, history, and 
street credentials of the brand. The program, along with alliances 
with designers like John Varvatos, helped Converse resurrect itself 
after a near collapse in late 1990s. 
 Pontiac, too, opted for a direct approach to inviting conversa-
tion. First, it built its own social networking site, Pontiac Under-
ground, a forum aimed at Pontiac junkies who can post their 
pictures and videos and discuss anything related to their cars. The 
site uses Yahoo ’ s social media tool as the foundation and has 
the slogan  “ Where passion for Pontiac is driven by you. ”  Tapping 
into MySpace, it next invited MySpacers to make money from Pon-
tiac by promoting their products to friends. Promotees are sent a 
free  “ Friends with beneﬁ ts ”  credit card that allows them to receive 
payments up to $1,000 from Pontiac whenever a  “ friend ” buys one 
of the cars. Named  “ Friendonomics, ”  the program added a big 

170  The Brand Bubble
incentive to the concept of tapping into social networking. Finally, 
Pontiac has staked out a presence in the colossal alternative reality 
world of Second Life, opening  “ Motorati Island. ” To draw players 
to the virtual island, Pontiac offered the prospect of free virtual 
land for car enthusiasts. 
 Yet another example of a music artist asserting an experiential 
and experimental nature was Duncan Sheik ’ s album  White Limou-
sine.  Rather than releasing a standard plain vanilla CD, the album 
came out in a two - disc set, with Disc 1 titled  “ Mine ”  and Disc 2 
 “ Yours. ” The former was Sheik ’ s new CD, while the latter included 
software allowing listeners to remix tracks any way they liked. This 
cool idea effectively erased the distance between the artist and his 
listeners by inviting them into his artistic development process. 
 Whatever form they take, co - creation and involvement must be 
part and parcel of every energized brand ’ s relationship with its audi-
ence. This is new territory for most brands, and giving over control 
is never easy. But if you reﬂ ect on it, there is truly no greater expres-
sion of affection and loyalty than when your customers care enough 
to want to help create or advocate on behalf of your brand. We ’ ve 
cited an aphorism that bears repeating now:  Personalization gains 
greater engagement and acceptance for your message. After all, if someone 
takes the time to create a personal radio station, viewing experience, 
or mashup — what better compliment can a brand ask for? 
 Control Freaks Lose Energy 
 While a few brands are starting to get it right, most still don ’ t trust 
the idea of losing control by welcoming customer input with open 
arms. Here are three recent failures from some major companies 
that should have known better, but instead lost tremendous oppor-
tunities to exploit their brand ’ s energy among eager consumers: 
• 
  Mentos and Diet Coke:  A remarkable video showed that dropping 
a Mentos candy into a Diet Coke bottle results in an explosively 
fun twenty - foot geyser. Almost immediately, people began posting 
videos of their own experiments. Mentos responded with a Web 
site encouraging the craze. But Coca - Cola issued a statement saying, 
 “ We would hope people want to drink [Diet Coke] more than 
try experiments with it . . .  . The craziness with Mentos doesn ’ t ﬁ t 
with the brand personality. ”  Beset by ridicule, Coke soon changed 

Stage Two—Distillation  171
its tune, launching its own pro - geyser Web site, but by then, the 
ﬁ zz was ﬂ at. One blogger on The Viral Garden titled his posting, 
 “ Coke boldly goes where every other clueless control - hungry com-
pany has gone before. ” 
• 
  Polaroid:  Upon hearing the Outkast lyrics  “ shake it like a Pola-
roid picture ”  from the group ’ s chart - busting song  “ Hey Ya! ”  Polaroid 
quickly issued a ﬁ nger - wagging response cautioning people that 
taking the song literally (shaking the ﬁ lm) does not help its devel-
opment and could ruin pictures. The silliness of Polaroid ’ s state-
ment was mocked in hundreds of magazine articles, newspapers, 
and blogs. Aside from the negative press, Polaroid completely 
wasted a golden opportunity. Influx Insights marveled at Pola-
roid ’ s ability to just  “ sit back and let the phenomenon blow by, as 
the brand ’ s dying breath mutters,  ‘ Don ’ t shake the pictures. ’ ” 
• 
  Cristal:  The  Economist  asked Fr é d é ric Rouzaud, managing direc-
tor of Louis Roederer Champagne, whether the hip - hop world ’ s 
love of its ﬂ agship, Cristal,  “ could hurt the brand. ”    “ What can we 
do? ” Rouzaud responded.  “ We can ’ t forbid people from buying it. 
I ’ m sure Dom P é rignon or Krug would be delighted to have their 
business. ”  Hip - hop artists like Sean  “ Puffy ”  Combs, Lauren Hill, 
Snoop Dog, and Jay - Z had written Cristal into a slew of hit songs, 
including free product placement in videos. Hip - hop helped make 
Cristal the eighth - most - mentioned brand on the Billboard charts 
in 2005. But when Rouzaud called the rappers ’  attention  “ unwel-
come, ” the hip - hop community boycotted the brand.  
 The New Rule of Brand Management 
 For companies to adhere to the Law of Openness, they must real-
ize their brands are public servants as much as agents of com-
merce. Rather than working to force consumers to keep the brand 
top of mind, they must instead work to keep consumers on top of 
their minds. This thinking is embodied in the Second New Rule 
of Brand Management, which reads as follows: 
 Stage 2 New Rule of Brand Management: Treat customers like 
investors. 
 Today, brands must think of themselves as being in the busi-
ness of attracting consumers in the same way their enterprises 
attract investors. As noted earlier in the book, consumers today 

172  The Brand Bubble
make decisions using the same rational behavior as investors. The 
qualities they seek in a brand are increasingly similar to what inves-
tors look for in a company. They have become shareholders with 
equal clout and inﬂ uence. They are savvy and inquisitive, actively 
assessing a brand ’ s current and future returns. They look for 
momentum and tomorrow ’ s expectations. Those who don ’ t ﬁ nd 
what they want will readily abandon the brand, just like investors 
divesting from a poorly performing stock. 
 By showing your organization how consumers think like inves-
tors, you can get managers to look at brand management through 
a familiar lens — creating shareholder value. Since basic principles 
of investor management now apply to brand management, cus-
tomer relations have become remarkably similar to investor rela-
tions. That makes it possible to unify various ideologies about how 
brands and companies should be managed. Once others in the 
company understand the  “ two investors ” idea, you can begin alle-
viating the usual spate of concerns that form barriers to building 
a total consumer - facing organization. 
 One of the world ’ s most admired brands has put the consumer 
squarely in its boardroom. And its leaders go from industry to indus-
try remaking lethargic categories in the image of the consumer. 
This is the story of the true consumer champion, Virgin Atlantic.  

Stage Two—Distillation  173
 Energized Brand Case Study for Distillation:
Virgin Atlantic — Brilliant Basics, Magic Touches 
 LONDON, ENGLAND: A brilliant Energy Core is a beacon to 
guide your brand ’ s evolution while instilling an inclusive sense 
of understanding and application across the enterprise. This is 
perhaps best explained through the cheeky, iconic British airline —
 and ultimate challenger brand — Virgin Atlantic. 
 
 The entire family of Virgin brands is known for relentless 
determination to redeﬁ ne the categories where they compete, 
while challenging consumer expectations in an entertaining, 
engaging, and often humorous way. Its businesses, target 
audiences, and communications are quite diverse, but what binds 
them together is distinctly Virgin: Virgin enters every new business 
with the same mission: 
•  Identify markets where consumers are getting a bad deal. 
•  Provide an alternative, tangible Virgin solution. 
•  Inspire consumers by having the conviction to ﬁ ght in their 
 corner. 
 
 Virgin Atlantic is at the heart of this belief and the driving force 
behind this perception. In some respects it is the archetypal Virgin 
brand, embodying all that the other members of the family have to 
live up to. 
 
 At a time when airlines had ceased to be distinguishable 
brands — when most airline business models were focused on 
subtraction, Virgin believed that passion and evangelism had to 
be earned through  innovation. This word gives the airline industry 
hives. And in 1984, the ﬂ edging airline took ﬂ ight — literally — with 
one of its founding principles being founded on one mind - bogglingly 
simple but utterly genius maxim:  “ Brilliant Basics, Magic Touches. ” 
 
 Virgin Atlantic ’ s Energy Core was predicated on re - injecting a 
sense of adventure and excitement into air travel and recapturing 
the imagination of the ﬂ ying public. Most airlines seemed to care 
very little if every customer was engaged with the  “ brand. ”  Their 
most lucrative passengers were in the front of the plane, and the 
masses were stuffed in the back and offered consistently sub - par 
service. International long - haul travelers of all kinds, whom Virgin 
was courting, had increasingly less preference or expectations 
(Continued )

174  The Brand Bubble
of service, comfort, or any expectation for an experience. Today, 
air travel is taken as standard, and not viewed as something 
miraculous or even something particularly special. 
 
 This is where  “ Brilliant Basics, Magic Touches, ” becomes 
the rallying cry for the company ’ s contract with the consumer. 
Virgin Atlantic ’ s Upper Class is the perfect demonstration of this 
principle: Door - to - door limo service, drive - thru check - in, onboard 
massages and manicures, a sleek bar lined with leather stools  . . . 
a revolutionary ﬂ ying experience unlike any other in the sky. Upper 
Class was introduced as a fantasy world of Magic Touches where 
the entire experience was mapped out for the consumer, starting 
on the ground. Research shows that passengers arrive sometimes 
as much as three hours early, just to hang out in Virgin ’ s swanky 
 “ clubhouses. ” At Heathrow in London, for example, Virgin ’ s lounge 
offers haircuts in a Bumble  & Bumble salon, spa treatments from 
Cowshed, a serene rooftop garden, a business center with Wi-Fi 
access, a library, gourmet cuisine served from breakfast through 
dinner, a quick - stop deli to satisfy the munchies, and a dedicated 
mixologist at its sleek cocktail bar. These were Magic Touches 
taken to the highest level of sophisticated luxury; this was what 
made a brand a consumer - champion, an iconoclast — giving 
consumers not only what they expected, but also astonishing 
them with the things they never imagined. 
 
 
 
 Add to this smart, unexpected communications that reinforced 
the basics with simple, visual messages. With bananas and Cuban 
cigars made to look like airplanes and sassy, saucy punch lines 

Stage Two—Distillation  175
like  “ BA don ’ t give a shiatsu, ” referring to the massages available 
onboard in the Upper Class cabin and in the clubhouses on the 
ground, Virgin Atlantic made ﬂ ying look  . . . entertaining. At the 
same time, Virgin never passes on an opportunity to, as the British 
would say,  “ take the piss out of ” Britain ’ s giant ﬂ ag - carrier, British 
Airways. When BA had trouble erecting its Millennium Wheel, Virgin 
pounced on its massive rival by ﬂ ying a blimp over the grounded 
wheel, crying the message.  “ BA can ’ t get it up. ” 
 The result, a brilliant brand experience that is quintessentially  “ Virgin ”  
 
 Virgin ’ s irreverence gained immeasurable appeal because it had 
incredible attention to detail. To Virgin, ﬂ ying was no longer about 
being stuffed into a seat for an eight - hour haul across the ocean. It 
was an experience, something to be enjoyed, savored, like a mini -
 vacation. Virgin brought cheek, sass, and a killer sense of humor 
to its consumers through every aspect of the brand experience —
 from the ﬂ ight attendants to the crew members to every piece of 
communications within the consumers ’ line of sight. Everything 
related to Virgin communicated style, naughty impertinence, and 
a sense of undeniable hip. This ﬂ air extended to the trademark 
shade of instantly recognizable and iconic Virgin - red, which 
permeates all communications, crewmember uniforms, and 
even the aircraft itself. Red is a color of energy, motion, constant 
(Continued )

176  The Brand Bubble
restlessness and change — a bold color that perfectly captures the 
unbridled momentum of the Virgin brand. 
 
 Challenger brands take their category ’ s standard protocol and 
turn it in its head. They spot a consistent weakness in a brand 
experience and annihilate it, giving the consumers something they 
never before dared to dream about. Virgin has succeeded in doing 
this across multiple categories. Beginning with Virgin Megastores 
and Virgin Atlantic Airlines, Richard Branson has taken his vision 
of fun, spontaneous, and always - evolving style from the skies to 
communication to trains to music, and soon into space. Virgin 
reenergizes the consumer - brand relationship, making it something 
exciting, something palpable, which very few established brands 
have the ability to do. But Virgin has managed to persevere, 
changing with the times, keeping up with and moving ahead of 
category trends — in many cases, starting the trends. For example, 
Virgin boasts the longest ﬂ atbed in the sky, as well as (in its Upper 
Class section) the only double bed for couples. A ﬂ ight attendant 
is always on hand to help turn down the bed (which ﬂ attens at the 
press of a button) and settle the incredibly soft, thick duvet to a 
passenger ’ s comfort. 
 
 Unlike many airlines, which offer First Class, Business Class, 
and Economy, Virgin has an entirely different spin on the level 
between Economy and Upper Class — the latter described as  “ First 
Class at Business Class prices. ” Virgin found a way to make even 
Economy, which so often seems ordinary, cramped, and more a 
hassle than an adventure, not only tolerable but even desirable. 
Though the Premium Economy passengers might not receive the 
same incredible perks as Upper Class, they are offered privileges 
such as dedicated check - in, priority baggage claim, a selection 
of preﬂ ight drinks, and after - dinner liqueurs — Magic Touches that 
make the ﬂ ying experience just a little bit sweeter. 
 
 Global BAV data reveals that ﬂ ag carriers — a nation ’ s ofﬁ cial 
airline — have the highest energy in that country ’ s airline category. 
For example, Lufthansa and Alitalia soar above the rest of the 
category in Germany and Italy. But the highest - energy airline in the 
United Kingdom is not British Airways but Virgin Atlantic. In fact, 
in 2005, British Airways outspent Virgin at an 8:1 ratio in media 
and communications, but Virgin still leads the way in consideration 
and brand popularity. One could arguably say it has become a 
sort of icon of British pride — just as the world associates Britain 

Stage Two—Distillation  177
Virgin Atlantic Energy = 96.8%
Virgin Portfolio Energy = 92.2%
Airline
Average
100
Percent
0
Richard
Branson
Money
Trains
Mobile
VAA
Virgin
80
60
40
20
Across its Portfolio – 2007
100
Percent
0
Vision
Dynamism
Innovative
80
60
40
20
Across the Brand Experience – 2007
FIGURE 7.6. VIRGIN ATLANTIC’S ENERGY LEVELS.
with Aston Martin, James Bond, and the Royal Family, Virgin has 
taken its place proudly among the world ’ s best - known popular 
culture British icons. Figure 7.6 tracks Virgin ’ s energy in terms of 
its VID proﬁ le and its varied portfolio. 
 
 Because of this determined push through categories, Branson 
himself has become the highest - energy  “ brand ” in the United 
Kingdom. His strategy of rescuing the consumer from mundane 
and poor - value service and products has made every single 
brand in the Virgin portfolio immensely strong. Ranking only 
slightly below Branson in brand energy are Virgin Atlantic, Virgin 
(Continued )

178  The Brand Bubble
Mobile, and Virgin Trains — in all cases, Virgin has perpetuated 
its signature brand psychology of performing the cost - of - entry 
basics to the business phenomenally well and then surpassing the 
consumer ’ s expectations in mind - blowing, creative, and — what ’ s 
most important — playful and surprising ways. Brilliant basics, 
magic touches: the keys to sweeping miserable, neglected 
consumers off their feet and making them fall in love with what 
should be, what used to be, mundane. 

179
 Chapter Eight  
 Stage Three — Ignition 
 Creating an Energized Value Chain  
 Somebody has to do something, and it ’ s just 
incredibly pathetic that it has to be us. 
 — Jerry Garcia  
 The distillation phase identiﬁ ed the most discriminating and cre-
ative forms of energy for your brand, and helped your company 
coalesce an Energy Core. In this stage,  ignition,  we launch the 
implementation stage where you harness that energy for practical 
use. In ignition, the enterprise takes the fuel from its Energy Core 
and uses it to drive the brand forward, continuously activating and 
renewing the sources of Vision, Invention, and Dynamism. This 
then transfers energy out to consumers and back through the 
organization. 
 In chemistry, ignition occurs when the heat produced by a 
reaction becomes sufﬁ cient to sustain it. Similarly, in business, 
ignition occurs when the excitement produced by the Energy 
Core becomes sufﬁ cient to sustain creativity, customer attraction, 
and business growth. 
 The question is, where does that spark come from? It can only 
come from connecting management with employees, employees 
with each other, and the company with the outside world. The 
organization ’ s goals for the brand must become real for everyone. 
All participants must understand how their own actions boost the 
energy levels in the brand and fuel the Core. 

180  The Brand Bubble
 Companies that operate in multiple channels, in particular, 
face numerous hurdles in their efforts to build a strong brand. 
Incompatible inventory management systems, disjointed incentive 
practices, and different cost and margin structures all dilute the 
company ’ s efforts to present a clear and uniﬁ ed brand to custom-
ers. Brands that overcome these hurdles often ﬁ nd themselves in 
a powerful competitive position. 
 Some of the best companies take a command - and - control 
approach to the brand. They often have a benevolent dictator who 
takes brand management into the boardroom and forces inte-
gration among departments around the brand. But the spark of 
ignition needn ’ t be restricted to the Shultz, Branson, Dyson, and 
Jobs dynasties. With commitment to its brands, any C - suite can 
assume a proprietor mentality and preside over a brand -  and 
consumer - driven culture. 
 Rob White also told us,  “ CEOs should care about the signals 
they send through all the various ways they touch people, inside 
and outside the company. Not just with words and pictures, but 
with their actions. Take inventory of these signals. See where they 
are strong and mutually reinforcing. See where they clash and con-
tradict. The most common transgressions are when the company ’ s 
actions don ’ t match its words. ” 
 How does this C - suite effort begin? One consideration is to 
create a very closely held team that controls and manages the 
ignition process. Its members should represent stakeholders from 
each business unit or division as well as key external partners in 
the supply chain. The key is to ﬁ nd people who can make imple-
mentation happen in the organization, offering a model of ego-
less teamwork and credibility across the company. Grant them 
access to encourage collaboration and shape innovation. Link 
them with vital resources and enable them to synthesize new con-
nections between consumer insights, disparate ideas, and hidden 
innovation. Hold them accountable for inspiring and connecting 
actions that elevate levels of energy in the organization and in the 
brand. 
 This is not a new cost center. The talented team brings each 
of the operating units together to build business excitement and 
implementation around the needs of the brand. In ignition, 
brand building is not a separate exercise from marketing. The 

Stage Three—Ignition  181
brand is instead incorporated in marketing actions across the 
company. 
 To protect them from getting tangled in the thickets of report-
ing lines and P & L ’ s, they must take direction from the C - suite. 
They must begin proselytizing the brand into the culture. To build 
the brand to meet business goals and stimulate growth requires a 
highly integrated brand platform idea that aligns each business 
unit to express the Energy Core by systematically identifying how 
each can best internalize and apply it to their function. For exam-
ple, if you ’ re working in human resources at GE, how does  “ Bring-
ing Imagination to Life ”  impact your job? For everyone in the 
enterprise, the transformation team examines the question, What 
Vision, Invention, and Dynamism can I contribute to the brand, 
or connect to another idea in the company? The team organizes 
and curates, as each division is constantly supplying new potential 
sources of Energy in the form of ideas and connections. 
 When ideas begin ﬂ ying all over the place and when every-
one begins to be accountable for generating energy in the brand -
 consumer relationship, the ﬁ rm will begin to own an  Energized 
Value Chain  like the one depicted in Figure 8.1. This chain relies 
on everyone contributing ideas and sharing insights across the 
organization. Through these actions, the brand ’ s Energy Core 
begins to reach vertically down through the organization to cre-
ate consistent brand experiences for consumers, and horizontally 
across divisions to instill brand advocates among each respective 
stakeholder.   
 Building an Energized Value Chain is not corporate restruc-
turing. It is more like reawakening and repositioning the current 
organizational and operational practices to think uniquely from 
the perspective of the brand. As Figure 8.1 suggests, the model 
resembles a rechargeable battery, as each part of the organization 
becomes responsible for replenishing new forms of energy to keep 
the brand vital and moving in the eyes of the consumer. Every 
function within the business must contribute juice to the recharge 
in some form. Any inconsistencies in leadership and direction will 
compromise the experience and drain energy in the brand and 
the value chain partners. 
 When the enterprise gathers around its Energy Core, it cre-
ates the environment necessary for big ideas. An Energized Value 

182  The Brand Bubble
Chain creates cultural loyalty, as all elements of the enterprise 
combine to elevate the brand above its peers. This loyalty is actu-
ally the most salient characteristic of high - energy brands — the 
ones that end up redeﬁ ning their categories and completely trans-
forming their customers ’ expectations. 
 Ignition in Practice 
 Triggering ignition requires the transformation team to examine 
the entire array of business activities, seeking out new energy from 
all areas in the organization. Through the ignition process, they 
must systematically interrogate how each functional area might 
impact the Energy Core to inspire new forms of Vision, Invention, 
E
n
e
r
gi
ze
d 
Di
ff
er
e
nt
ia
ti
o
n
Energy Core
Vi
si
o
n
D
y
n
a
m
i
s
m
I
n
v
e
n
ti
o
n
Corporate Leadership
Finance
R&D
Marketing
Shareholders, 
Institutional Observers
Financial Community
Innovation Partners
Communications 
Agencies
Sales
Distribution
Manufacturing
Operations
HR
Sales Force, Retailers, 
Intermediaries
Channel Relationship
Operations Management
Procurement Partners
Recruiter, 
Benefits Providers
IT
Risk Management
Technology Partners
Finance and Legal
Internal
Stakeholders
External
Stakeholders
 FIGURE 8.1. CREATING AN ENERGIZED VALUE CHAIN VERTICALLY 
AND HORIZONTALLY THROUGH THE ENTERPRISE. 

Stage Three—Ignition  183
or Dynamism. They ask and get answers indicating how each func-
tion will institutionalize and implement energy in support of the 
brand. 
 Here are a few brief examples to illustrate how different func-
tions or initiatives have contributed to igniting energy for their 
brand: 
 Energized Corporate Leadership 
 After Hurricane Katrina, Wal - Mart ’ s CEO Lee Scott asked his com-
pany how it could reduce the cost of living for its customers. The 
resulting innovation inspired by his leadership: low - energy com-
pact ﬂ uorescent light bulbs (CFLs). The spiral bulbs were proven 
to generate great energy savings because they lasted as much as 
twelve thousand hours versus one thousand hours for the average 
incandescent bulb. But the price hurdle was too high for its cus-
tomers, so Wal - Mart leveraged its vast negotiating power to per-
suade GE to lower its price by 21 percent, reducing CFLs ’  cost to 
about ten times the price of a regular light bulb, according to  Fast 
Company. 1 Manufacturing economies of scale helped lower prices 
further as CFL demand was generated through Wal - Mart ’ s adver-
tising and publicity from Oprah Winfrey. Wal - Mart ’ s stated goal 
was to sell 100 million CFLs in 2007, earning it praise as an envi-
ronmental and consumer advocate. 
 Energized Finance 
 Starting with its name and its heritage as the Sex Pistols ’  record 
label, Virgin had always been in the business of taking risks. 
Then it went public, which turned out to be unproductive for a 
risk - hungry company that needed to fund growth (and avoid 
complacency), given Wall Street ’ s short - term attitudes and 
focus on quarterly returns. Virgin founder Richard Branson 
wanted to expand the brand into increasingly diverse busi-
nesses, so he took the business private again, reinventing its 
capital structure, and in so doing reinforcing its sense of a com-
pany that couldn ’ t sit still waiting for conservative fund managers 
to catch up.  

184  The Brand Bubble
 Energized R & D 
 Procter  &  Gamble started to rethink the entire household - cleaning 
category and eventually the  “ not invented here ”  mentality of new 
innovation. Even though the bulk of its business and the bulk of 
the market was in liquid cleaning products, the company knew 
from research that consumers were dissatisﬁ ed with these prod-
ucts ’  messiness and inconvenience. Through a new  “ connect and 
develop ”  model, its developers brought in collaborative technol-
ogy and design partners to foster lateral ideas. When they found a 
technology from Japan that used electrostatic energy to collect 
dirt and dust, they reinvented the category with a brand called 
Swiffer. It generated the strongest test market results in P & G ’ s his-
tory of marketing cleaning products. Customers do most of the 
marketing — through fan Web sites, blogs, and WOM. P & G  now 
has a burgeoning reputation as a  “ doors open ”  creativity company. 
Outside partners now account for over a third of all of P & G ’ s 
innovation. 
 Energized Business Model 
 Geico, the iconoclast direct marketer of automotive insurance, 
had a simple and yet profound idea: eliminate the middleman 
to give customers a better deal. Then to counter low consumer 
interest in the category (which resulted in a lot of car insur-
ance business going to the default brands), Geico stimulated 
engagement with a free online auto quote questionnaire and 
what it called the  “ ﬁ fteen minute challenge. ” Using a new insur-
ance business model as its Energy Core, Geico layered its mes-
saging to keep the brand fresh and topical: going from geckos 
to celebrities to cavemen (and a TV show on ABC). Landor 
brand consultancy named Geico one of the  “ Breakaway Brands ”  
of 2007.  
 Energized Sales 
 Apple, with only its tiny share of the computer category, strug-
gled for years to get traction with major IT retailers and resell-
ers. The problem looked particularly acute when the company 

Stage Three—Ignition  185
planned its expansion into consumer electronics with the iPod. 
Extending vertically by creating branded retail environments 
had proved a failure for Gateway. But Apple ’ s drive to be a life-
style, not just a technology brand, created the idea for highly 
interactive brand showcases. These showcases took the exciting 
environment found previously only at Macworld and integrated 
it with selling product. Apple went directly to consumers via its 
bright, futuristic concept stores, which are equal parts retail 
environment, educational forum, and brand experience. And 
by stimulating high levels of store traffic, Apple was able to 
prove the stores ’ value as a research destination for consumers 
who end up buying at Apple ’ s other consumer electronics retail 
partners.  
 Energized Manufacturing 
 General Electric knew that people depended for their life on its 
jet engines, so it embraced a commitment that failure could be 
avoided with development of a more rigorous manufacturing pro-
cess. In response, it adopted and refined a new management 
approach called Six Sigma, designed to minimize error. Six Sigma 
contributed greatly to the aura that surrounded GE during the 
Welch era, and many other companies adopted its practices across 
the world. 
 Energized Operations 
 To implement Unilever ’ s  “ consumer nation, ”  a Booz  &  Company 
analysis recommended that the company task all employees (from 
the ﬁ nance director to the supply chain assistant) with  “ experienc-
ing what the consumer experiences. ”  As a result, all employees try 
new organic deodorants, read teen magazines, and blog with con-
sumers. Their vox pops are tracked and monitored, and learning 
is shared across the organization. These efforts foster a culture of 
continuous learning, plus they are fun and add to the work envi-
ronment.  “ The company has instilled a consistent, shared under-
standing of their consumer across the business, ”  according to 
Kevin George at Unilever. 2 

186  The Brand Bubble
 Energized Distribution 
 Zara pioneered  “ Fast Fashion, ”  a method to compress trend - spotting, 
design, manufacturing, and distribution into a thirty - day cycle. 
Zara manages 300,000 new SKUs annually and creates 11,000 new 
items every season. Roving  “ style detectives ”  scour the world for 
the latest fashion trends, then brief designers who interpret and 
deliver new designs to factories across Europe and Asia. From two 
main hubs, new merchandise is delivered to two thousand stores 
worldwide twice a week. Zara allocates small batch allotments per 
store, limiting deliveries to create a scarcity effect. This has caused 
behavior change: customers visit stores more often, and they 
tend to buy new merchandise when it arrives rather than waiting 
for markdowns — which are no longer a near certainty. To keep 
its product as fresh as possible, only 40 percent of its goods are 
produced before the start of the season. Zara books time at its pro-
duction facilities without even knowing what it will make. Indi-
vidual store managers direct designers on how to augment 
merchandise based on local trends, customer feedback, and sell-
ing patterns. With a record of same - store sales growth of roughly 
9 percent annually since 2000, Zara is now the third - largest clothing 
retailer in the world.  
 Energized IT and CRM 
 Harrah ’ s Entertainment started out running the same race as its 
competitors, but visionary IT and a continuous customer tracking 
system put the company in the big money. By tracking customers 
by name, age, preferred gaming method, spending, income, fre-
quency of visits, and other factors — its meticulous databases gave 
Harrah ’ s a significant edge in customized service. It launched 
 “ Total Rewards, ” a preferred - visitor card program, divided into 
Gold, Platinum, and Diamond tiers, providing customers with 
shorter lines and more individualized offerings. Harrah ’ s puts 
every discovery about a customer into the database, from which 
slot machine a visitor prefers and which casino location is most 
frequented to how the customer responds to a telemarketer ’ s offer 
of free rooms or dinners. Because Harrah ’ s collects its informa-
tion about customers for years, it can base marketing strategy on 

Stage Three—Ignition  187
longer - term predictions about how much customers will spend at 
Harrah ’ s over an extended period of time. This data is then used 
to develop marketing programs targeted at certain types of users, 
from casual weekend and evening gamblers to those who stay at 
the hotels and gamble for longer periods. The close partnership 
between IT systems and CRM has made Harrah ’ s one of the most 
successful gaming institutions in the nation, going from $4 billion 
in revenue in 2002 to more than double — $9.6 billion — in 2006. 
 Energized HR 
 From its start, Google has had a clear idea of the kind of people it 
needs to fulﬁ ll its broader corporate mission. It looks for people 
who approach problem solving in unconventional and unexpected 
ways, as well as having a detailed grasp of technology. To satisfy its 
hunger for the right people, the company created a new approach 
to recruiting, including puzzles that people had to solve simply to 
get an application form. By making the process public, Google 
created WOM that added to the company ’ s image as a trend - setting 
company and a cool place to work. 
 The Obstacle to Beat Back 
 Only continuous business innovation will create sustainable com-
petitive advantage. But when management is focused primarily on 
short - term performance, an Energized Value Chain is never opti-
mized. The distractions that cause managers to fail to take a long -
 term view form the third obstacle to true brand - centered enterprise 
integration, which we synthesize as follows: 
 Stage 3 Obstacle: Management ’ s focus is primarily on today ’ s 
proﬁ tability. 
 Despite long - range business plans and innovation strategies, 
ﬁ rms tend to manage brands in the here and now. The erosion in 
aggregate brand health is in part the by - product of a world where, 
all too often, short beats long. Given the pressure to drive quar-
terly earnings and the relative absence of forward - looking brand 
metrics, marketing ’ s perceived worth inevitably ends up being 
judged largely on current sales. This turns marketing into a leaf 

188  The Brand Bubble
blower — primarily pushing out current inventory to maximize cur-
rent quarterly earnings for shareholders. 
 When Selling More Is Earning Less 
 Brands are the last levee holding back commoditization, but brand 
managers are often deluged with a very demanding here and now. 
Don ’ t get us wrong — we love robust quarterly earnings as much as 
anyone. But brand building takes serious collateral damage when 
only the short term is emphasized. This view detracts from the real 
purpose of marketing. In effect, marketing is put in charge of a 
brand with a business objective that is essentially anti - brand. Mar-
keting must maximize consumer value, not just sales. Too often, 
though, CMOs are being drawn away from the future and into the 
present. The steady ongoing process of branding is fast becoming 
a discretionary expense that can be dialed up or down through 
ninety - day strategic planning cycles.  Today, most of marketing is no 
longer marketing; most of marketing is just selling. 
 Part of the challenge can be traced to a lack of marketing 
accountability. While real - time data offers marketers lots of tools 
and gadgets, little hard evidence reveals marketing ’ s contribution 
to the objectives of business strategy. How do marketing activi-
ties correlate with top - line growth?  “ Hard numbers drive out soft, 
leading managers to manage brands by the data they have, not the 
data they need, ”  Leonard Lodish and Carl Mela point out in their 
 Harvard Business Review paper,  “ If Brands Are Built Over Years, 
Why Are They Managed Over Quarters  ?” 3 This is, in part, because 
promotions and events that drive sales can also be considered as 
brand building. These tend to supplant long - term brand building, 
which is more soft and squishy. 
 Focusing only on near - term brand managing turns the eye 
away from the world constructed by today ’ s consumers, where 
brands play a key role in the emotional landscape. We can discern 
this shift in the distinct turn over the past few decades toward 
emphasizing tactical price promotions over strategic brand build-
ing. Between 1978 and 2001, trade promotion spending — or 
discounts — increased from 33 percent to more than 60 percent 
of marketing budgets, while spending for advertising was down 
from 40 percent of marketing budgets to 24 percent. 

Stage Three—Ignition  189
 But with an increased reliance on price promotions to move 
product and bolster near - term earnings, consumers will begin to 
abandon brands and commoditize the categories. Why wouldn ’ t 
they? If that ’ s all marketers have to say about their brands, why 
wouldn ’ t consumers follow suit? 
 Which brings us back to the paradox: We woo investors to 
see our company ’ s vast horizons, shiniest forecasts, and glossiest 
annual reports, but we don ’ t often position our brands in that 
same context. How do you create a sea change if you can ’ t see 
above the waves? 
 The Third Law of Energy 
 The way to break through a static, short - term cycle of brand man-
agement is to embrace the third Law of Energy, the Law of Direc-
tion: A brand is not a place, it ’ s a direction. 
 The Laws of Energy 
 1.  The Law of Averages: Creativity spreads out risk. 
 2.  The Law of Openness: Brands don ’ t control, they enhance and 
extend. 
 3.  The Law of Direction: A brand is not a place, it ’ s a direction. 
 4.  The Law of Immunity: Brands with remarkable marketing 
access remarkable privileges. 
 5.  The Law of Reﬂ ex: Tactics are strategy, strategy is tactics. 
 ConsumerLand runs on a Darwinian principle. Like animals 
in the wild, consumers handle a vast, diversiﬁ ed brandscape by 
staying alert to movement. Consumers now cope with life by mak-
ing decisions based on pieces of the picture that are changing, 
rather than by what stays the same. Sameness recedes into the 
background. With change occurring at such an accelerated rate, 
and confronted with such an astonishing number of products and 
choices, consumers worry about falling behind the learning curve, 
betting on the wrong technology, or investing in a product that 
rapidly becomes obsolete. 

190  The Brand Bubble
 To compete in today ’ s world, brands must be verbs.  Rather than 
being a ﬁ xed, stationary promise, the brands consumers notice 
and attach themselves to are the ones that are heading some-
where. If a brand isn ’ t moving, it ’ s invisible. 
 Irresistible brands move their culture by leading, changing, 
adapting, and evolving. We see this in the entertainment world, 
where the most highly acclaimed artists today take on new and 
diverse roles. Madonna ’ s enduring fame is due, in part, to her 
effort and ability to constantly reinvent her brand. Johnny Depp 
has played diverse roles in  Edward Scissorhands, Pirates of the Carib-
bean,  and  Sweeny Todd.  Music artists from REM to U2 to Beck have 
taken new paths as ways to stay surprising. These artists implicitly 
understand that celebrities who remain overly consistent fall prey 
to being typecast. Even a brand like Woot (woot.com) has created 
a huge following on the premise of selling a new item (and only 
one item) each day, for one day only. 
 The same is true for consumers, who want, and even respect, 
brands that  “ change things up. ”  The Law of Direction dictates 
that a brand must constantly prompt people to consider and 
reconsider. Consumers want brand relationships that are as dif-
ferentiated and evolved as they are so they can navigate through 
constantly new and unfamiliar territory. They need brands that 
will help them, not pull them back, even in the most mundane 
of categories. Wanting innovation from their brands becomes at 
least a habit, if not a necessity, even if there is no rational need 
for it. 
 The Law of Direction means positioning can no longer be 
static. We can no longer rely on positioning a brand with the 
hope that it will stay in place. We used to think of positioning 
as a hole in the ground in which to plant a brand. Water it with 
repetitive messages and Gross Rating Points until it bears the 
fruits of brand equity. But the marketplace is in constant motion. 
Competitors, consumers, and culture are constantly reordering 
brand meaning. 
 It ’ s no longer effective to stake a claim to a perpetual territory 
and defend it through repetition. Instead,  the best way for a brand to 
own a position is to be constantly dynamic within it.  The only position-
ing that works is to continuously redeﬁ ne and refresh what the 
brand means to consumers. This also helps the brand respond 

Stage Three—Ignition  191
to threats better and faster, and recognize when consumers are 
giving it opportunities to evolve and change. When brands allow 
themselves to be episodic and surprising, they are more apt to 
be believed. In the consumer mind, ﬂ exibility makes the brands 
theirs (and not the object of some brand manager ’ s control fan-
tasy). Position a brand and you create users; energize a brand and 
you create followers. 
 Today ’ s leading brands often come from companies that are 
eschewing short - term performance metrics as the only metrics 
that matter. Many instead are thinking about the long - term direc-
tion in their companies and brands. They are reversing the stream 
of inﬂ uence and focusing instead on pleasing all stakeholders —
 customers, employees, and partners in their value chain. Some are 
dispensing with quarterly earnings forecasts, staking out longer 
success criteria, and allowing more time for brand initiatives to 
take hold. 
 A firm that embraces the Law of Direction knows that  “ the 
brand ”  is the only real business, and without that, it ’ s out of busi-
ness. Its people see past the immediate challenges to fold long - term 
brand health into their decision making. They know consumers 
are a temporary blessing and will only stay with those brands that are 
moving, engaging, and acting different, continuously. 
 Putting a Value on Future Vision 
 The value of brands ’  being direction seeking and forward think-
ing seemed so critical that we put the concept to a test. We per-
formed an analysis to ﬁ nd out if companies that looked beyond 
today were perceived to have more energy by consumers. We con-
structed the premise that  “ stakeholder - centered ”  firms — those 
that set out to optimize value for  all  constituents involved, includ-
ing investors, customers, employees, and partners with more or 
less equal regard — have a broader purpose in creating value in 
their brands and company than what we might call traditional 
 “ shareholder - centered ” ﬁ rms. 
 We borrowed a list of stakeholder - centered ﬁ rms from David 
Wolfe, Rajendra Sisodia, and Jagdish Sheth ’ s book  Firms of Endear-
ment: The Pursuit of Purpose and Proﬁ t,  which identiﬁ ed thirty such 
stakeholder companies, including Amazon, Best Buy, Caterpillar, 

192  The Brand Bubble
Commerce Bank, Costco, eBay, Google, Harley - Davidson, Honda, 
JetBlue, Johnson  &  Johnson, Progressive Insurance, Southwest, 
Starbucks, Timberland, Toyota, UPS, and Whole Foods. Using 
their list as an informed starting point, we compared those com-
panies to their non - stakeholder - centered competitors within their 
respective categories to contrast the levels of Brand Stature (Ener-
gized Differentiation and Relevance) among consumers. 
 Sure enough, stakeholder - centered companies achieved signi-
ﬁ cantly stronger results than their shareholder - centered competi-
tors. Moreover, the results showed their competitors consistently 
lost energy over the years, while stakeholder - centered ﬁ rms main-
tained healthy levels (Figure 8.2). 
 Stakeholder - centered ﬁ rms also achieved 115 percent more 
 “ emotional consideration ” on average than other companies in 
our study (deﬁ ned as  “ is this brand the only one you prefer? ” ). We 
also uncovered the point that companies that stake out a longer - term 
vision and are oriented toward future value actually have greater 
margin power: Stakeholder - centered companies were worth 
51 percent more in pricing power than the norm in the comparison 
time frame. 
100
Brand Strength
(Energized Differentiation and Relevance)
0
1997
Year
2001
49%
2005
Stakeholder-
Centered 
Companies
Competitors
45%
25%
80
60
40
20
 FIGURE 8.2. MORE ENERGY IN STAKEHOLDER - CENTERED COMPANIES. 

Stage Three—Ignition  193
 This test demonstrates the widening gap forming between 
stakeholder -  and shareholder - centered firms from a consumer 
view. Stakeholder - centered companies are more energized, indi-
cating a longer - term focus on energy and creating future value in 
the marketplace. What this means for marketers is that consumers 
are more attuned than previously thought to a company ’ s motiva-
tions. They are acutely aware of the emphasis, or lack thereof, that 
companies place on them as constituents. Consumers, being inves-
tors, want a vision for where the brand is heading. They reward 
brands from companies that see further. 
 The New Rule of Brand Management 
 Through a brand, consumers expect future utility on the part 
of the entire company. Managing the brand and its momentum 
and direction is now everyone ’ s responsibility. Every link in the 
value chain needs to be devoted to the brand  and consumer to 
align strategic decisions with product and service innovation, 
brand management, customer experience, and marketing. 
To achieve this, the brand and its Energy Core must be used 
as a basis for guiding the business forward, rather than simply as 
a brand - building communications function detached from busi-
ness strategy. The New Rule of Brand Management for this 
stage is 
 Stage 3 New Rule of Brand Management: Drive the brand back 
through the organization. 
 Instead of simply sending a brand into the marketplace, a 
company with an Energized Value Chain constantly thinks, plans, 
and acts from the viewpoint of the brand. This company is able to 
balance the short with the long and maintain the energy supply 
necessary to propel the brand forward. Together these moves cre-
ate a culture that consistently champions creativity and embraces 
change. 
 And once in a while, a chain is put to a great test to see if each 
link can hold in the face of seemingly inevitable collapse. This is 
when a company is at its best, or at its worst. Xerox was pushed to 
the brink and an unlikely leader was about to emerge.  

194  The Brand Bubble
 Energized Brand Case Study for Ignition: 
Xerox — The Energy Inside 
 At the beginning of this chapter, we said that ignition occurs when 
the heat produced by the Energy Core becomes sufﬁ cient to 
sustain continuous creativity, customer attraction, and business 
growth. Ignition requires the entire team to come together, remove 
their own personal agendas, and break down silos and self - interest 
in favor of the larger brand goals. For most organizations, this 
challenge is enormous, but it can be done. The story of Xerox ’ s 
reinvention of itself to become one of the leading brands of the 
world exempliﬁ es both the effort required and the rewards. 
 
 For half a century, Xerox symbolized a golden icon of 
breakthrough ideas and innovation. As the inventor of the world ’ s 
ﬁ rst photocopier, launched in 1959, the company had a product that 
was critical enough in business to become its own verb. By 1975, 
Xerox possessed an astonishing 70 percent share of the photocopy 

Stage Three—Ignition  195
market. Its monopolistic lead was so far ahead of competitors that 
the Federal Trade Commission directed it to license its technology to 
other ﬁ rms as a way to boost consumer choice. 
 
 Over the next two decades, Xerox became locked in ﬁ erce 
competition with its rivals, who challenged the ﬁ rm for innovation, 
especially over color copiers. But then in the 1990s, as digital 
technology came to the forefront, Xerox found its Achilles ’ heel. 
For a company rooted in analog programming, making the switch 
to digital was an especially slow and painful process. 
 
 Xerox ’ s board brought in Richard Thoman to do for Xerox 
what he had helped to accomplish for IBM. But attempts to 
recreate Xerox as a total document solutions ﬁ rm and prove to 
consumers it was not merely a  “ one - trick pony ” did not work 
as well as the ﬁ rm had expected. The company ’ s efforts to 
make the sales and billing divisions more efﬁ cient backﬁ red and 
Xerox lost many key contracts due to relationship disputes and 
administration problems. Around this same troubled time came 
SEC investigations into Xerox ’ s accounting practices in its Mexico 
ofﬁ ces. Competition pounced while Xerox was struggling to get 
back on its feet. As a result, investors lost conﬁ dence in Xerox ’ s 
ability to recover from the blows. Things looked very bad indeed. 
 
 When returning CEO Paul Allaire approached Anne Mulcahy 
in 2000 and chose her as his successor, the ﬁ rm was staggering 
beneath $18 billion in debt and the stock price had taken a nosedive 
from $65 to $27 in less than a year, only to fall even further — to a 
scant $6.88 — before the year was out. From the very beginning, 
Anne Mulcahy did not see her task as merely  “ saving a corporation. ” 
It was about saving something precious — something that had 
changed her life and that of thousands of other families. While Xerox 
had given them jobs, it had also inspired passion and devotion 
in them all. It was not the sort of company that people joined 
just for a few years. Employees worked at Xerox for, on average, 
fourteen years, and they threw retirement bashes for their departing 
colleagues. And unlike many other corporations, which had become 
uncaring in the high - ﬂ ying nineties, the ﬁ rm had retained its people -
 centric culture. Xerox offered not just a job, but meaning — and 
family, literally. Employees met and married each other. In fact, 
Anne ’ s own family had taken root at Xerox when she met her 
husband during her years in sales, and when she was appointed 
CEO, he had just recently retired after thirty - ﬁ ve years with the ﬁ rm. 
(Continued )

196  The Brand Bubble
 
 But dark skies put even great families to the test, invoking in 
employees a natural instinct to ﬂ ee to safety, especially in a robust 
economy with plentiful job opportunities. It is during such times 
that leaders are most desperately needed, and indeed, that great 
leaders are made. Anne Mulcahy was one of these. 
 
 Because of her long experience in sales, she had a natural 
empathy with people; she could read them easily and see what 
made them tick. She also knew that Xerox was mired in crises 
too massive to solve without the stubborn determination of every 
member of its family. Changing just one thing — sales, operations, 
or whatever — was not enough. Xerox needed help from every 
angle; it needed a change from its very roots to its outer limits. As 
Anne says,  “ The critical component [of progress] is the alignment 
of your people around a common set of objectives. ” 4 For her, the 
only way to save Xerox was for its people to rally behind it. 
 
 In a series of meetings with a hundred senior executives, 
Mulcahy asked each point - blank if they would agree to stick with 
company for the long haul. Only three walked away, and those 
who remained were as passionate as Mulcahy, vowing to work 
together toward the new goals. Mulcahy ’ s challenge also extended 
to Xerox partners, including our company, Y & R. We had been 
Xerox ’ s longtime agency. Along with others who signed on, we 
were asked to make sacriﬁ ces, such as forgoing our fees while 
working with the team to drive the turnaround effort. Some left, 
fearing Xerox would never recover. But those who remained began 
to see more clearly who the Xerox community really was. This 
group simply loved the company and was not going down without 
swinging. The hard work began, but energy built among those 
who stayed to ﬁ ght another day. 
 
 Mulcahy communicated with employees through videos and 
constant messages, but most often in person.  “ In a world of 
voicemail, e - mail, teleconferencing, and Web conferencing, face 
to face cannot be substituted for. ” 5 Great leaders let their people 
know they have support and encouragement, that they are never 
alone in their ﬁ ght for the company ’ s survival. Mulcahy made 
absolutely certain her Xerox family knew that. 
 
 In late 2000, when Xerox had close to no cash in its coffers, 
and the S & P downgraded the ﬁ rm ’ s debt rating to BBB, Mulcahy ’ s 
advisers began pushing her to ﬁ le for Chapter 11 bankruptcy. At 
the rate Xerox was going, all they had to rely on was a revolving 

Stage Three—Ignition  197
credit line of $7 billion, but with no security or improvement in 
sight, the ﬁ fty - eight banks that held the reins were beginning to 
get nervous. Ever the warrior, Mulcahy stood her ground against 
all advice, and refused to give up hope. In her mind, Xerox could 
never again be Xerox once it was branded as a ﬁ rm that had had 
to ﬁ le for bankruptcy. 
 
 While Ignition can perpetuate an already strong brand and 
make it a mega - icon in the eyes of consumers, it also can harness 
incredible power to resuscitate and revive a dying brand. But 
Ignition must begin from within — in the passion of people. Mulcahy ’ s 
assumption of leadership was a powerful spark that renewed 
Xerox ’ s Ignition. Already known for innovation, she set in motion a 
chain of events that led to an explosion of passion and ideas. For 
Mulcahy, the key to driving employees toward a catalytic change 
was responsibility. As she said in a 2006 speech at McGraw - Hill, 
 “ My instincts told me that complex organizational matrices create 
complexity and lack of accountability. So we made clear choices, 
eliminated the matrix organization, and created clear accountability. ”  
 
 Mulcahy bonded especially with Ursula Burns, senior vice 
president of corporate strategic services, who herself had pledged 
her loyalty to Xerox at a young age and remained committed to 
the ailing giant. She and Mulcahy oversaw the difﬁ cult task of 
restructuring internal operations, especially the manufacturing 
divisions, weeding out the unproﬁ table ones and either selling them 
off or closing them altogether. 6 It was a process that took a very 
gentle human touch. Both Burns and Mulcahy were forced to lay 
off employees, many longtime friends. But they forged forward with 
grim determination, relying on the collective energy and the energy 
of each other to guide and sustain them. 
 
 One night, when all still seemed bleak and dreary, Mulcahy 
received a phone call from Jim Firestone, her chief strategist. 7 He 
had some encouraging thoughts for her, telling her he believed in 
her and that  “ this company will have a great future. ” Those weren ’ t 
mere words — everyone at Xerox passionately believed they were 
true and lived by the hope that one day, Xerox would once again 
be whole, healthy, and thriving. 
 
 Mulcahy involved everyone from senior management to the 
sales force to customers in the turnaround, moving her energy 
throughout the company and out into the marketplace. She ﬂ ew all 
over the country to reassure clients that despite investor concerns 
(Continued )

198  The Brand Bubble
and negative press, the ﬁ rm was there for the long haul. Though 
some customers defected out of fear that Xerox would ﬁ le for 
bankruptcy, leaving them high and dry, she received enough loyalty 
from customers to help Xerox come through the dark tunnel and 
emerge into the light. As Mulcahy says,  “ I made it personal. They 
had my personal commitment that we wouldn ’ t let them down . . . . 
The great thing is that the customers really wanted the brand to 
survive and the company to be successful. ” 8 In the end, when 
long - standing clients refused to abandon ship, it became clear 
Xerox ’ s people were doing something right by ﬁ ghting for survival. 
 
 To build more of the heat needed for ignition, Mulcahy also 
insisted on investing in R & D, even during the bleakest of ﬁ nancial 
moments for Xerox. If repositioning the brand as a  “ document 
solutions ” service, rather than a one - trick pony, was to be 
successful, she knew Xerox would have to prove that it was still an 
innovation leader, worthy of its storied heritage. As she says,  “ Even 
as we dramatically reduced our cost base, we maintained research 
and development spending. In fact, we didn ’ t take a single 
dollar out of R & D in our core business — not one  . . . our ﬁ nancial 
advisers thought that slashing R & D was a no - brainer  . . . but we 
knew it would have been a hollow victory if we avoided ﬁ nancial 
bankruptcy today only to face a technology drought tomorrow. ” 9 
 
 Mulcahy ’ s leadership began to pay off. In 2007, Xerox ’ s new 
offering of services brought in $3.4 billion in annuity revenue, up an 
impressive 8 percent from 2006. 10 According to Mulcahy,  “ Two - thirds 
of our revenues are coming from products that were introduced in 
the past few years. ” Meanwhile, the Xerox brand has been entirely 
reinvented, from the inside out, pushed beyond the limits of what 
anyone in its early years ever imagined Xerox could be. Even the 
company ’ s logo was modernized, which one article in  Ad Age 
referred to as  “ future - prooﬁ ng, ” because  “ the red X sphere  . . . will 
be important in mobile and Internet applications. ” 11 
 
 Today, what ’ s key is that Xerox is thinking way ahead into the 
future, past copiers and document services into new, fresh arenas. 
The ﬁ rm has launched over a hundred products in three years, and 
not a single one is a plain paper copier, proving that Xerox has, in 
effect, come to understand the Third Law of Energy:  “ A brand is 
not a place, it ’ s a direction. ” As Xerox recovers its past respect and 
reputation, it is constantly moving, reinventing itself, and surprising 
consumers with its ability to keep the marketplace on its toes. 

199
 Chapter Nine  
 Stage Four — Fusion 
 Becoming an Energy - Driven 
Enterprise  
 The world is changing very fast. Big will not beat 
small anymore. It will be the fast beating the slow. 
 — Rupert Murdoch 
 Having established a working Energized Value Chain, manage-
ment must now focus on formalizing this way of working through-
out the organization. Stakeholders need to transfer their energy 
and passion to their business units and functions. At this stage, 
management is asking,  “ How do we know this is working? Are our 
plans taking hold? ”  When management ’ s aspirations for the brand 
and business are becoming part of the culture, that ’ s the start of 
the ﬁ nal stage of transformation we call  fusion,  a deﬁ ning charac-
teristic of companies that launch out of their categories and exceed 
customer expectations. 
 The added challenge of this stage is that a constant ﬂ ow of 
energy and ideas is needed to propel the brand forward. Manage-
ment must sustain the positive energy that ’ s been building in the 
organization. As everyone knows, ideas lose energy and people 
lose energy. A new issue can distract focus and waste the energy in 
the team. Whatever the factors, the key to making progress stick 
is when people in the organization begin to own the brand, the 
business challenges, and the culture as well. 

200  The Brand Bubble
 Xerox ’ s fusion began when Anne Mulcahy forced commit-
ments from each manager. Like stripping off varnish to see the 
wood grain again, forcing these commitments made detractors and 
fence sitters fall away at various levels and functions, leaving an 
organization that everyone could see with clarity. Self - interest 
and ego gave way to believing in each other and tackling the chal-
lenges with a common love for the brand and the company they 
had been such an instrumental part of building. 
 In fusion, there ’ s a transfer of power. The burden of leadership 
shifts to the enterprise. The brand and the customer become the 
window into how people perceive their jobs and their contributions 
to the overall direction of the company. At this point, people can 
recognize the Core Values of the company. Xerox returned to its 
values of innovation, customer - centricity, and family to get back on 
its feet. Core Values have always guided proprietor - driven cultures 
like Starbucks, Virgin, Innocent, and many other cherished brands. 
They attract employees and customers alike because they convey 
brand integrity. They also suggest that working for the company is 
worth something much more than a paycheck. People are building 
something more. Core Values guide the company through change 
and adversity and act as a reference point for unity. By making the 
brand part of people ’ s working lives, fusion provides the reason to 
get up out of bed and come to work. 
 We ’ ve consistently identified stronger levels of energy and 
overall ﬁ nancial performance when a  “ brand as culture ” mentality 
is present in the organization. The brand is perceived as some-
thing as sacred and valuable as anything the company owns. 
When the purpose of the company is the happiness and satisfac-
tion of each stakeholder, the firm becomes an Energy - Driven 
Enterprise — another illustration of the advantage of stakeholder -
 centered companies. 
 An Energy - Driven Enterprise reaps many beneﬁ ts. Aside from 
garnering customers and fame more readily than its duller fel-
lows, it more competitively attracts and retains talent. In a recent 
Deloitte  &  Touche survey of CEOs, one - third said they believe 
that company vision is the primary reason employees stay with their 
companies. An Energy - Driven Enterprise can also garner greater 
investment and source materials at preferential rates. It secures the 
most desirable strategic alliance partners and encourages consum-
ers to join in, reducing the expense of marketing. 

Stage Four—Fusion  201
 Even as it asks the organization to live the brand and core 
values, only the C - suite can create the environment for prog-
ress to stick. Top executives can shape policy to bring brand and 
consumer principles into management decision making. They 
can encourage streamlined approval processes, while allocating 
reserve budgets for tactics and short - term responses. The C - suite 
can alter systems and structures that inhibit collaboration, can 
realign the organization to be idea - led, and can hold divisions 
accountable for embedding a marketing ethos into their opera-
tions by expanding the purview of the CMO or by introducing 
marketing skill sets in each part of the company. 
 In most instances, great ideas only emerge and take hold with 
support from the top. The C - suite must think of itself as a creative 
director, because a big brand idea can do more for a culture than 
almost any other type of management activity. Just ask Nike or 
Apple. Big ideas are simply irresistible. They grab hold of people 
and make them proud. People then work harder at keeping them 
alive and making them better. They start to believe. Consumers 
begin to believe that people at Nike or Apple must be cooler, 
more creative, and more in love with their work. 
 Big ideas offer a more immersive consumer experience. Think 
of newer high - energy brands like American Apparel, Innocent, 
Method, Simplehuman, Pinkberry, and MUJI. In each case, the 
brand experience is seamless. This is  “ brand as theater. ”  Everyone 
in the organization is consumer facing. Each has a responsibility 
to create ideas that set the brand alight. 
 Examples of Energy - Driven Enterprises 
 An Energy - Driven Enterprise feeds off human energy — the energy 
of its people. Ideas come and go, but individuals sustain the activi-
ties and beliefs that keep the brand energized. We examined some 
of the more laudable cultures around today and found many 
examples of this kind of energy in action: 
 Google 
 Fortune  ranked Google no. 1 in its 2007 survey of  “ 100 Best Com-
panies to Work For. ”  Without a doubt, Google ’ s wild success over 
the past few years is intricately tied to its unique company culture. 

202  The Brand Bubble
The  “ Googleplex, ”  as its campus is known, recreates the feel of a 
college campus where the hard - core geek rules. The company keeps 
its employees keenly focused on its mission by providing them with 
innumerable perks that help keep them optimally engaged in their 
work and spending as much time as possible on campus. 
 Some of the many offerings at Google: free meals at any of 
the eleven company - sponsored gourmet cafeterias, a gym, a swim-
ming pool, a climbing wall, pool and foosball tables, videogames, 
roller hockey games, beach volleyball courts, massage chairs, 
weekly TGIF parties, a hairdressing salon, free doctors onsite, 
shuttle buses for commuters, and even a laundry! All Google ’ s 
workspaces are open and shared, to the point that employees are 
joyously cramped in order to recreate the fun teamwork environ-
ment typical of university campuses. This also reinforces the ﬂ at 
organizational hierarchy, which rewards creativity and abilities 
over experience and position. And, probably most important, 
Google allows employees to spend up to 20 percent of their time 
on independent projects — a relevant beneﬁ t for the type of inno-
vative, overachieving employee that Google seeks to hire. 
 In 2006, Google had sales of $10.6 billion versus $16.6 billion, 
with proﬁ ts of $4.2 billion. It had 76 percent more Energized Dif-
ferentiation than the BAV average for brands in 2007. 
 Whole Foods 
 Widely known for its energized culture, Whole Foods is no. 5 on 
 Fortune ’ s  “ Best Companies to Work For ”  survey. The motto  “ Whole 
Foods, Whole People, Whole Planet ”  characterizes the company 
as not just a grocery chain but a lifestyle choice. The company has 
stringent self - imposed quality standards on its products and sells 
only those that meet them. It does not sell any products contain-
ing trans fats or meat from cloned animals, despite FDA approval 
that the latter is safe to eat. It has banned the sale of live lobsters 
and foie gras, due to animal cruelty concerns. 
 Whole Foods pays its employees above - industry - average wages 
and imposes a salary cap for top executives at nineteen times 
average full - time pay. CEO John Mackey cut his salary to $1 a year 
in 2007, donating his stock options to the company ’ s two chari-
table foundations and setting up a $100,000 a year Team Member 

Stage Four—Fusion  203
emergency fund for employees in need. The company has a policy 
of donating at least 5 percent of its net proﬁ ts to charitable organi-
zations and, four times a year, generously offers 5 percent of that 
day ’ s net sales to local nonproﬁ ts. 
 In 2006, Whole Foods sales from its 187 stores were $5.6 bil-
lion, with a same - store sales increase of 8.4 percent. The company 
had 55 percent more Energized Differentiation than the BAV aver-
age for brands in 2007. 
 Nordstrom 
 Nordstrom is no. 24 on the  Fortune  list and is another legendary 
example of an energized culture, focused on its mission of provid-
ing outstanding customer service. Rather than following a strict set 
of rules, salespeople and managers are given a wide range of respon-
sibilities that allow them to operate the store as though they were the 
owner of their own shop. At the center of Nordstrom ’ s customer -
 service orientation is its unconditional money - back guarantee 
return policy, which leaves the decision on whether an item can be 
returned up to the salesperson. While this type of policy might 
invite abuse, Nordstrom ’ s perspective is that it caters to the 98 per-
cent of customers who are honest and who will generate positive 
word - of - mouth for the company. Nordstrom also frees salespeople to 
sell merchandise to their customers from any department in the 
store, emphasizing a total customer - centric shopping experience. 
 Managers in the company start off as sales associates, which 
signals to employees that ground - ﬂ oor experience is valued in 
the company. Buyers in each region are given the freedom to 
acquire products that reﬂ ect local styles and tastes, and salespeople 
are encouraged to report customer feedback on merchandise to 
the buyers. All employees must strive for excellence, tracking sales 
on a daily basis, and top performers are compensated accordingly. 
Nordstrom pays its employees ’  commission plus proﬁ t - sharing into 
a retirement plan, producing the highest levels of employee com-
pensation in the industry. 
 In 2006, its sales were $8.6 billion, with a same - store sales 
increase of 7.5 percent from 2005. Nordstrom had 40 percent 
more Energized Differentiation than the BAV average for brands 
in 2007. 

204  The Brand Bubble
 The Obstacle to Beat Back 
 We ’ ve addressed three obstacles already. We ’ ve started connecting 
creativity across the ﬁ rm, becoming more consumer - centric, and 
thinking longer - term about brand building and satisfying consum-
ers as investors. Inherent in these steps is a more inclusive practice 
of marketing. Now we need to connect marketing more closely 
with the C - suite. 
 Top management and marketing have plenty of reasons 
for not winding up on the same page: Corporate managers 
may delegate the marketing function. They might see market-
ing as having soft metrics and therefore diminished strategic 
value. They might limit marketing ’ s access to the larger organiza-
tion. They may not embrace the wider skill sets needed of today ’ s 
marketing function. 
 Whatever the causes, this disconnect limits the sustainability of 
the Energy - Driven Enterprise. When marketing is not linked into 
top management, brand strategies don ’ t align with business strate-
gies. Consumer insights fail to fertilize new forms of innovation. 
In the end, marketing ’ s lack of support and inability to inﬂ uence 
and interact with other parts of the organization results in lost 
opportunities for growth and eventually, lost market share. This is 
the Stage 4 obstacle: 
 Stage 4 Obstacle: Marketing is disintermediated from the C - suite.  
 Some organizations are R & D - led; others are led by technology 
or ﬁ nance; still others by operational excellence. But all must give 
way to becoming brand - led.  “ Brand as organizing principle ”  in 
the company creates a new imperative for business. The brand 
is the central focus of all decision making. Consumer insights are a 
catalyst to internal collaboration and marketplace conversations. 
The brand and the consumer are at the heart of business strategy. 
 In too many companies, however, marketing has suffered a 
long and steady decline in scope and inﬂ uence, right at the time 
when it has never been more important. In fact, the Chief Mar-
keting Ofﬁ cer position is steadily under ﬁ re. Greg Welch from 
Spencer Stuart talked with us about his research showing that the 
average tenure of today ’ s CMO is less than twenty - ﬁ ve months. 
Greg says,  “ I can ’ t tell you how many CMOs ring me each month 
to say,  ‘ Hey, I made it to month twenty - six! ’  ” Even  CMO Magazine 

Stage Four—Fusion  205
itself went out of business after only nineteen months, not even 
lasting the average life span of its beleaguered readers. 
 Although marketing was once a traditional path to the C - suite, 
today only about 18 percent of Fortune 500 CEOs have a market-
ing background. Greg said,  “ I ’ m worried about the next genera-
tion of leaders who are making career choices and seeing the 
current environment such as it is. They see CMOs expected to 
perform at superhuman levels. I worry about the talent pool of 
the future. ”  In reality, the marketing function keeps moving 
 further away from the boardroom, even though it acts as the 
guardian of one - third of all shareholder value. The brand should 
be worthy of investment and focus made in similar value - creation 
engines, such as R & D, innovation, and other intellectual prop-
erty. Remember Joanna Seddon ’ s research? She pointed out,  “ If 
30 percent of companies ’  value is generated by brands, that 
means that 30 percent of companies ’  resources should go toward 
managing brands and optimizing their impact on customer 
behavior. ”  
 Resources mean money, people, and capabilities so that mar-
keting can be a way of thinking across the company. You don ’ t 
need a bigger marketing department; you need a marketing mind -
 set that permeates the entire organization. In the everything - is -
 media world, everything about the organization is now marketing. 
As Joel Steckel, professor of marketing at NYU Stern School of 
Business, has notably said,  “ Marketing is too important to leave to 
the marketers. ” 
 The Fourth Law of Energy 
 Remarkable brands often have remarkable marketing. And when 
brands are remarkable marketers, they do great work, which 
attracts greater resources both inside and outside the company. 
Consumers give them permission to be ever more daring, to 
experiment and explore new frontiers. If something fails, they 
absolve the brand and forgive the error, appreciating the effort. 
They even build communities to insulate the brand from competi-
tors and criticism. This thinking is embedded in the Fourth Law 
of Energy: the Law of Immunity: Brands with remarkable market-
ing access remarkable privileges. 

206  The Brand Bubble
 As category disruption happens more frequently, brands 
must increasingly extend their reach, reinvent their business 
models, and head into new frontiers of growth and proﬁ tability. 
Brands with immersive and highly integrated marketing can com-
mand greater levels of support and more leeway to experiment 
and explore. Consumers, in acting like investors, will champion 
brands that take calculated risks while penalizing those that play 
it too safe. 
 As a result, many brands build themselves up to a broad 
scale without cost, courtesy of their advocates, social networks, 
and brand fan clubs. They become reference points in popu-
lar culture, earning them the ancillary respect of noncustomer 
audiences. Supply chain partners give them special treatment. 
And they ’ re allowed ample latitude to innovate in more forms and 
to transfer brand meaning into new products and categories. 
No one ever questioned whether a coffee chain had the creden-
tials to sell books and music. No one admonished iPod for the 
highest cost per gigabyte in its category. JetBlue ’ s customers, 
according to BAV, forgave it for its logistical failings by restor-
ing established levels of trust. Google ’ s aura was enough to get it 
landing rights at a NASA - managed airstrip seven minutes from its 
ofﬁ ces. 
 Well - marketed brands are also given the occasional permis-
sion to fail. In wanting the brand to bring more benefits in the 
future, consumers will accept some degree of  “ brilliant failure ” 
as a necessary by - product of the brand ’ s search for progress. 
The Laws of Energy
1. The Law of Averages: Creativity spreads out risk.
2. The Law of Openness: Brands don’t control, they enhance and 
extend.
3. The Law of Direction: A brand is not a place, it’s a direction.
4. The Law of Immunity: Brands with remarkable marketing 
access remarkable privileges.
5. The Law of Reﬂ ex: Tactics are strategy, strategy is tactics.

Stage Four—Fusion  207
Remember, Apple had the Newton, the Lisa, and Macintosh 
TV, but Apple ’ s inventiveness constantly supplies the evolu-
tionary learning for the company ’ s new products, including 
today ’ s Nano video and iPhone. Apple knows that consumers 
perceive its products as so attractive that it was able to disrupt 
the cell phone industry by designing its iPhone to its own 
specifications, dictating all terms of compliance in exchange 
for exclusivity from AT & T. Starbucks flopped with Caf é  Star-
bucks (a full sit - down restaurant), Mazagran (a coffee and 
soda drink), and  Joe  (a lifestyle magazine), but the company ’ s 
willingness to experiment with marketing built the foundation 
for its expansion into premium drinks, as well as into music, 
movies, and books, all brand meaning transfers that didn ’ t 
faze consumers one latte. Doubleshot and Frappucinos were 
successful evolutions of Mazagran, and, with music sales only 
a year old, Starbucks managed to account for 25 percent of all 
sales for Ray Charles ’ s Grammy - winning recording   Genius Loves 
Company.  
 Harley perfume and ESPN mobile phones were both product 
failures that never hurt their brands. American Express Optima 
set the stage for American Express Blue. All these are essentially 
great marketers. Despite their ﬂ ops, they managed to create com-
petitive advantage from the fact that marketing in other ﬁ rms is 
about as central to their business strategy today as Pluto is to a 
contemporary understanding of our solar system. 
 The New Rule of Brand Management 
 Rather than being insular, marketing needs to pervade the mind -
 set of the entire enterprise. Our new rule here is as follows: 
 Stage 4 New Rule of Brand Management: Return marketing back 
upstream into business strategy. 
 Why is it that some of the best CMOs are CEOs? People like 
Jobs, Murdoch, Schultz, Branson, Nordstrom, and Whitman. The 
approach they take to their brands is evidence for a more broadly 
deﬁ ned role for marketing. These leaders coalesce marketing into 
a generalist capability in the organization, rather than segment-
ing it into specialties and silos. Greg Welch says,  “ I hope the CMO 

208  The Brand Bubble
function evolves to be more of a general manager job that just 
happens to look over marketing. This person needs to be spend-
ing the most time understanding the call center, embedded in the 
supply - chain issues, and learning the business units, not scouring 
over advertising copy. ” 
 The lesson to the C - suite is don ’ t outsource marketing.  The 
brand is your baby.  Marketing is not a department or a cost center; 
it ’ s a catalyst for creative collaboration. When marketing becomes 
a common cultural language, it can create highly integrated and 
immersive brand experiences. Like the brand and consumer, place 
marketing at the center of the organization. Align the  “ O ” s (CEO, 
CMO, CFO, CIO). Ensure each division is working with marketing 
and thinking from a marketing perspective. And hold marketing 
accountable for addressing business challenges and not just com-
munications challenges. 
 Marketing must also adopt a wider set of skills to exploit new 
ways in which consumers now connect with brands. Just as with 
the blurring of behaviors in ConsumerLand, everyone is in mar-
keting, whether or not it ’ s on their business card. Everyone must 
think in terms of the consumer and act like a guardian of the 
brand. 
 For marketing to have a seat in the boardroom, marketers 
need to develop greater business acumen. A Spencer Stuart Sur-
vey of three hundred senior - level marketing professionals found 
that among the top skills a CMO should possess is strategic vision; 
other requirements include an ability to build relationships 
throughout the organization and a capacity to act as strategic 
adviser to the CEO, supporting work as a change agent. Coinci-
dentally, these were precisely the same skills respondents thought 
CMOs were most lacking. 1 
 In an increasingly intangible world driven by ideas, business 
is now in the Age of Marketing. In a world left with few  “ unfair 
advantages ”  of the sort businesses cherish, marketing is still one 
of the most potent forms of driving intangible value in brands 
and businesses. And sometimes marketing shows itself in won-
drous new ways, as is the case of a brand you ’ ve probably never 
heard of that rules the hearts of one the world ’ s fastest - growing 
economies. 

Stage Four—Fusion  209
 Energized Brand Case Study for Fusion:
Mumbai Tifﬁ n Box Suppliers — Human Energy  
 Let ’ s assume you have a well - known brand. You have working 
capital and maybe even state - of - the art infrastructure. But do you 
have human energy? Can you truly harness the people power in 
your organization? The true test of management ’ s leadership is 
when there ’ s desire inside your organization to take your vision 
and mission and live it each day. Mumbai Tifﬁ n Box Suppliers 
exempliﬁ es to the extreme the effort that can be attained and the 
astonishing results that are achieved when an enterprise fuses 
energy into every individual. 
 
 This remarkable company ’ s business model is quite simple: 
Deliver home - cooked meals to over 200,000 workers among 
millions scattered throughout vast city ofﬁ ce buildings every 
workday in Mumbai. Its product has a ﬁ ve - hour shelf life and 
requires a logistics system of 2.4 million hand movements each 
day. And yet the company ’ s workforce is nearly 100 percent 
illiterate, equipped only with pushcarts and bicycles. Other than 
a train ticket, they employ zero technology. Yet they achieve 
nearly a 100 percent accuracy rate, making only one mistake 
in 16 million transactions. The results are so impressive that 
management and logistics experts have come from every part of 
the world to study these workers. Business schools have taught 
their practices. Management strategy expert C.K. Prahalad said 
of the company,  “ It ’ s a model of managerial and organizational 
simplicity. ”  
 
 We spent a week in Delhi with Raghunath Medge, who 
oversees the Nutan Mumbai Tifﬁ n Box Suppliers Association. He 
explained that the name for his delivery workers,  Dabbawalla, 
means  “ lunch - pail man, ” and  Tifﬁ n  is the old - fashioned English 
word for a light lunch in a box, usually in a cylindrical aluminum 
container. His assets are his people — and not much more. Says 
Mr. Medge,  “ Their computer is their head and their cap is a cover 
to protect it from the sun and rain. ” 
  
 Home - cooked food has a place of reverence in Indian society. 
Mumbai Tifﬁ n Box Suppliers fulﬁ lls a passionate connection in 
this food tradition by ensuring Mumbai ’ s workforce receives 
home - cooked lunches, usually prepared by stay - at - home women 
relatives. Even in households where both partners work, or where 
(Continued )


Stage Four—Fusion  211
(Continued )
Tifﬁ n Box
hired help does the cooking, running the kitchen is still the 
woman ’ s responsibility. Cooking fresh food from scratch each 
day is a virtue, while bulk cooking and freezing are signs of 
laziness and self - indulgence. This is the reason why ready - to -
 eat frozen foods have not yet carved out a respectable market 

212  The Brand Bubble
share in India, and why Kellogg ’ s is still trying to knock over 
the freshly made  Parantha  or  Idli that Indian households eat for 
breakfast. 
 
 The craving for home - cooked food (or  ghar ka khaana ) at work 
in India traces its roots back to the Empire, where many Indian 
people who worked in British companies disliked the food and 
wanted their lunches brought to their workplace from home. In 
addition, a very extensive and prevalent religious notion of purity 
and pollution exists about food, and it is deﬁ ned differently among 
the region ’ s multiple religions. A Hindu will not risk accidental 
consumption of beef, while a Muslim will not risk pork. A Jain 
(a sect of Hinduism) won ’ t eat onions and garlic, and strict 
vegetarians won ’ t eat dinner from a plate that might have served 
chicken during lunch. Each group has a strong preference for 
speciﬁ c tastes. Indian food is time - consuming to cook and needs 
multiple ingredients, and therefore tastes best when made in 
small quantities at home. And much of India lacks affordable and 
hygienic out - of - home dining options. 
 
 The company ’ s operation is a marvel. 2 Every workday an army 
of Dabbawallas pick up more than 200,000 hot lunches from 
homes and deliver them directly to desks all over Mumbai at 
12.30 P.M. when ofﬁ ce workers break to eat. Then they collect and 
return the Tifﬁ ns, amounting to 400,000 transactions in all. 
 
 Honor and respect of the different traditions around food are 
taken seriously by each and every Dabbawalla, who takes great 
pride in delivering the right Tifﬁ n to its respective owner every 
time. They believe they are  Annadaatas (providers of food), and 
this profession has given thousands of impoverished men self -
 esteem and worth. The Dabbawallas are the personiﬁ cation of the 
company ’ s values. 
 
 Besides pledging his commitment upon joining, each 
Dabbawalla has to make a small ﬁ nancial investment in the 
enterprise, which gives him a tangible stake and a sense of 
ownership. The minimum investment is two bicycles, a wooden 
crate, at least one white cotton kurta - pyjama (loose shirt and 
pants), and one trademark Gandhi hat. From his earnings of 
between Rs 5,000 and Rs 6,000 (around US$140) per month, 
every Dabbawalla also contributes a few cents back to the 
association. The amount is used for community programs, loans, 
and booking marriage halls for their children. 

Stage Four—Fusion  213
 
 The company ’ s operational logistics perform daily delivery 
miracles. To compose the pickup teams, the Dabbawallas 
are divided into groups of ﬁ fteen to twenty - ﬁ ve members. 
Each group is ﬁ nancially independent but coordinates with 
other groups on deliveries. The process is competitive at 
the customers ’ end but united at the delivery end. Their 
rationale is to push internal competitiveness among the 
groups, though individual group members do not compete 
against each other.  
 Coding System 
 
 To overcome illiteracy, an ingenious system of codes was 
developed to identify the thousands of Tifﬁ ns delivered every 
day. Because a Tifﬁ n can change hands as many as six 
times in ﬁ ve hours, each is marked for sorting by originating 
neighborhood as well as ﬁ nal delivery destination, right down to 
the ofﬁ ce and ﬂ oor. 
 
 It ’ s hard to imagine a workforce with greater motivation. Critical 
to success is the sheer physical energy each member puts 
into the brand every day, six days a week, traveling an average 
(Continued )

214  The Brand Bubble
of twenty - ﬁ ve kilometers per day on public transport and ten 
kilometers on foot, all involving multiple transfer points using 
Mumbai ’ s local train network, bicycles, and pushcarts. The entire 
system depends on teamwork and meticulous timing. 
 
 On the pickup leg of the journey, the Tifﬁ ns are collected 
from people ’ s homes between 7:00 and 9:00 A.M., strung on the 
backs of bicycles, and taken to the nearest local train station. At 
various intermediary stations, they are hauled onto platforms 
and sorted further for subsequent distribution. We watched the 
process at one train station, with four groups of Dabbawallas, 
each with twenty members, each member serving forty 
customers. That totaled 3,200 Tifﬁ ns collected at this station 
alone by 9:00 A.M., where they were then sorted according to 
their destinations by 10:00 A.M., in time for the  “ Dabbawalla 
Special ” train ’ s arrival. The railways provide sorting areas on 
the platforms and special compartments on trains traveling 
south between 10:00 and 11:30 A.M. During the sorting process, 
each Dabbawalla concentrates on locating those Tifﬁ ns under 
his charge.  
 Collection 

Stage Four—Fusion  215
 Sorting 
 
 Then along Mumbai ’ s several downtown train stations, the 
last links in the chain, eighty Dabbawallas regroup according to 
the number of Tifﬁ ns to be delivered in each particular area, not 
according to the groups they belong to. If 150 Tifﬁ ns are to be 
delivered in the Grant Road Station area, four people are assigned 
to that station because one person can carry no more than 
(Continued )

216  The Brand Bubble
thirty - ﬁ ve or forty Tifﬁ ns. The lunches are delivered to the rightful 
awaiting bellies by 12:30 P.M. without fail. When lunch hour ends, 
the whole process moves into reverse and the Tifﬁ ns are returned 
to their suburban homes by 6:00 P.M.   
  
 As Mr. Medge puts it,  “ The reason we don ’ t have any errors 
is because we don ’ t have any technology. ” Recent BAV data
 Delivering to Ofﬁ ces 

Stage Four—Fusion  217
showed that the Mumbai Tifﬁ n Box Suppliers had a 90 percent 
energy rating, ranking it among many of the most innovative and 
dynamic Indian brands such as Titan, Kingﬁ sher, and Tata Motors. 
Lacking any modern infrastructure or fancy marketing, the Mumbai 
Tifﬁ n Box Suppliers share Mumbai ’ s unique culture of resilience, 
hard work, family, and multi - ethnic identity. And this beloved 
brand mirrors India ’ s  “ anything is possible ” culture, where hope, 
optimism, and human energy lead to Six Sigma excellence. As 
Mr. Medge concludes,  “ People study business books and then 
practice. We practiced and are now studied in business books. 
The world ’ s a funny place. ” 

218
 Chapter Ten  
 Stage Five — Renewal 
 Active Listening and Constant 
Refreshing of Brand Meaning  
 Consistency is the last refuge of the unimaginative. 
 — Oscar Wilde 
 In business as in nature, those who fail to adapt become extinct —
 while those who continue to evolve survive. Giraffes grew long 
necks to reach branches of acacia trees, the only source of vegeta-
tion to dot the open landscape of the African savannah. Then the 
acacias adapted by secreting poison into their leaves and releasing 
a chemical into the air warning neighboring trees to do likewise. 
Giraffes adapted again, learning to graze into the wind, thus get-
ting to leaves before they became too sour. Acacias responded by 
growing nasty spikes, to which, in turn, the giraffe evolved its 
tongue to reach in between the prickly branches. Both species 
have adapted over and over, and now both continue to coexist and 
thrive. 
 Science commentator James Burke has suggested that adjust-
ing to a rapidly changing environment is highly uncomfortable. In 
 The Pinball Effect,  he says  “ The rate of change will be so high that 
for humans to be qualiﬁ ed in a single discipline — deﬁ ning what 
they are and what they do throughout their life — will be as out-
dated as quill and parchment. Knowledge will be changing too 
fast for that. We will need to re - skill ourselves constantly every 
decade just to keep up. ” 

Stage Five—Renewal  219
 Consumers have, in fact, already taken the ﬁ rst steps, adjusting 
to this new world of constant surprise and endless motion. From 
hi - ﬁ  to Wi-Fi, break dancing to breaking news banners, the blur-
ring of work and home to the blurring of professional and ama-
teur media, consumers have adapted. Have brands? 
 Today, brands must be in a state of constant  renewal.  They must 
subject themselves to never - ending feedback. They must be ready to 
reshape themselves over and over again, in whatever form that 
takes. Brands, like business, are in permanent ﬂ ux. While brands 
are decaying in ever more compressed cycles of time, energized 
brands are leading, adapting, surprising, innovating, involving, and 
responding — behaving differently at different times with different 
customers, and collaborating, not just persuading. With expanding 
consumer power and limitless choice, brands cannot possibly stay the 
same for long. All focus is on what ’ s moving and what comes next. 
 In today ’ s world, market position has never been more tempo-
rary. Success is often a momentary high, followed by a tumbling 
fall. We must listen carefully to the market and learn from its mis-
takes in a forward - looking way. We must continuously modify, per-
sonalize, share, and improve upon ourselves. Our brands must be 
an agent of constant surprise. 
 Part of reinvention requires discarding all the linear and 
restrictive models of consumer behavior. These might serve brand 
managers ’  fantasies of control, but consumers now deﬁ ne brands 
in their own personal, random, and unexpected ways. That some-
how consumers could be corralled into brand choices through a 
mechanistic A - I - D - A (Awareness, Interest, Desire, Action) model is 
obsolete. Purchase funnels are really purchase pretzels. Any picture 
of an orderly, patient, and controllable consumer marketplace is 
presenting something that just doesn ’ t exist anymore. Let it go. 
 Striving for steadiness and consistency is futile. Brands need to 
create their perceptual difference by moving faster and never stay-
ing the same. To uncover new insights and connect new technol-
ogy and innovation with untapped needs, we need relentless 
curiosity and attention to nuance (and contradiction). 
 Even when it achieves a success, a brand can ’ t rest on its laurels. 
As much as we ’ d like to think otherwise, brand management is a 
never - ending process. An energized brand is never really ﬁ nished. 
It is always a work - in - progress. There is no ﬁ nish line. Like Mayor 

220  The Brand Bubble
Koch (who famously asked,  “ How am I doing? ” ), a brand must be 
constantly in the market, surveying, learning (and unlearning), 
assessing, and evolving. This helps keep passion and ideas ﬂ owing 
in the company as well. By establishing a consumer - centric listening 
post — and by constantly feeding and sharing insights across the 
organization—management can create renewable energy. 
 We have no choice but to move to the beat of a capricious 
marketplace. Only then can we understand the new twist on the 
French saying,  plus  ç a change, plus  ç a change!  The more things 
change, the more things change. To have consumers fall in love 
with our brands — and stay in love with our brands — we need to 
keep things fresh, new, and just a tad off - kilter. This takes listen-
ing, anticipating, reacting . . . and sometimes pulling off a sur-
prise. But these qualities are, after all, the foundation of a steamy 
enduring romance with pizzazz, exactly the kind of relationship 
we want consumers to have with our brands. 
 The Obstacle to Beat Back 
 This brings us to the ﬁ nal and perhaps most challenging obstacle 
blocking the way for rebuilding brand value. To constantly refresh 
our brands, we need to maintain a much greater regard for the value 
of change. The realities of daily business demands and short - term 
results tend to lull us into a dazed, automaton - like sleepwalk, and we 
miss the forest through the trees. The obstacle to beat is simply this: 
 Stage 5 Obstacle: Reliance on brand strategy slows response 
time. 
 The fact is, everything is moving faster today, creating unparal-
leled pressure on brands to be quicker, smarter, leaner, more 
responsive, and able to innovate more quickly. A critical factor 
slowing momentum is often the need to protect and vet the sacred 
strategy. Strategic accuracy often trumps the needs for the brand 
to respond to meet consumers ’  changing needs. This inability to 
change lies at the heart of consumer discontent we found with so 
many stagnant and predictable brands. 
 The Fifth Law of Energy 
 The Fifth Law of Energy points the way to break out of this 
dilemma — the Law of Reﬂ ex: Tactics are strategy, strategy is tactics.  

Stage Five—Renewal  221
 Conventional wisdom states that strategy is what matters and 
tactics are just short - term initiatives that don ’ t build brands. Mar-
keters devote an excessive amount of time to thinking about, 
developing, researching, and selling strategy. Meanwhile, they 
ignore a real - world truth today: strategy doesn ’ t always come 
ﬁ rst, nor does it necessarily have to. Approaching a strategy vor-
tex, you can easily get sucked in and lose focus on your customer, 
or you can strategize too far out into the future, preventing your-
self from maximizing opportunities in the here and now. 
 Strategic development can be a huge time drain. By the time a 
strategy is developed, pretested, executed, and posttested, the mar-
ket may have moved elsewhere. While networks debated the viability 
of television downloading models, 45 million programs were sold on 
iTunes in 2006. Now, nearly 80 million Americans (43 percent of 
the online population) watch television shows on the Internet. 1 
Veronis Suhler Stevenson estimates that by 2010, spending on 
downloads for TV programs will total $625 million, up from just 
$12 million in 2005. When revenue from pay - for - download via 
cable is added in, the total is put at $938 million for 2010, up from 
$82 million in 2006. 2  
 The Fifth Law of Energy settles the dispute in a King Solomon 
kind of way between strategy and tactics: neither counts more than 
the other. In fact, they are really one and the same. A sailboat 
tacks (that is, changes direction) to maximize the beneﬁ t of the 
wind, but it keeps its destination point ﬁ xed. Similarly, a deﬁ ned 
brand strategy may be the end point, but it needs tactics to 
respond to the winds and reach its destination. 
 The Laws of Energy 
 1.  The Law of Averages: Creativity spreads out risk. 
 2.  The Law of Openness: Brands don ’ t control, they enhance and 
extend. 
 3.  The Law of Direction: A brand is not a place, it ’ s a direction. 
 4.  The Law of Immunity: Brands with remarkable marketing 
access remarkable privileges. 
 5.  The Law of Reﬂ ex: Tactics are strategy, strategy is tactics. 

222  The Brand Bubble
 Thinking simultaneously about strategy and tactics also pro-
vides tangible evidence of progress to people in the organization. 
It makes change visible and real. It can be especially encouraging 
when it comes to keeping the organization moving the brand for-
ward with more ideas. Tactics make strategies real. 
 The ability to think tactically and respond quickly to develop-
ing opportunities is also ever more critical to defending a market 
position. When strategy and tactics are intertwined, a brand can 
exploit competitive missteps, address crises proactively, and capi-
talize on ideas that emerge from cultural shifts. Juggling the two 
at once helps brands learn from experience and respond to the 
marketplace with less lost time. 
 JetBlue ’ s infamous February 2007 ice - storm debacle caused 
operational and logistical failures at its JFK hub, canceling over 
1,000 ﬂ ights, trapping people on planes for up to nine hours, and 
stranding more than 2,500 passengers across the country. Over-
night, the brand went from Harvard Case Study darling to late - night 
talk show fodder: Conan O ’ Brien quipped,  “ JetBlue airlines is 
experiencing more flight delays and cancellations because of 
another winter storm. In their defense, JetBlue says we ’ re really 
more of a May through August airline. ” Ouch. 
 Then - CEO David Neeleman drafted a  “ Customer Bill of 
Rights, ”  offering cash refunds to travelers who did not reach their 
gate within allotted times. At its peak in 2003, JetBlue was generat-
ing $100 million in proﬁ ts. But as expansion and fuel costs cut 
into profitability, it would have been far easier to ride out the 
storm. JetBlue realized that it had to act differently. By the end of 
2007, JetBlue had recovered in BAV. And according to Compete 
Inc., a consumer intelligence ﬁ rm, even after the incident, JetBlue 
enjoyed 43 percent preference among travelers, the highest of any 
U.S. airline. 3 
 Yet now there ’ s the case of the passenger who had to ﬂ y cross -
 country in the bathroom. Think fast again JetBlue! 
 Jones Soda was born out of an initial small tactical idea. Peter 
van Stolk, a former Canadian ski instructor who never went to col-
lege or studied marketing, founded the company in 1996. He 
began selling drinks out of ice chests in snowboarding shops and 
tattoo parlors. A photographer friend, Victor John Penner, sug-
gested that Stolk use his own image as bottle labels. Stolk loved 

Stage Five—Renewal  223
the idea but thought it would be cooler to open the idea to every-
one. Rather than one singular identity, Jones Soda now relies on 
constantly refreshing its image by continually changing the photo-
graphs on its labels using images submitted by its customers. The 
customized labels generated the brand ’ s under - the - radar appeal 
and set the stage for its unique identity. 
 Personalization is now the heart of Jones Soda. Customers 
can submit creatively written fortunes and winners are printed 
under the bottle cap. Since the birth of the company, 187 mil-
lion bottles have been sold. Sales moved from $2.4 million in 
1997 to $54 million in 2007. The small start - up company has 
 produced 30 percent yearly revenue growth in a ﬂ at beverage 
market, attracted major distribution partners such as Starbucks 
and Target, and in a major marketing coup in 2007, unseated 
Coca - Cola for the exclusive nonalcoholic beverage distribution 
rights at Seattle ’ s Seahawks Qwest stadium. 
 In contrast to these successes, many companies do not give 
even the slightest credence to the value of tactics. In 1998, Block-
buster rejected a deal from Warner Brothers to bring DVDs into 
its business model. It then turned down the opportunity to buy 
Netﬂ ix for $50 million, as an online component was not a part of 
its brick - and - mortar video rental model. By 2005, Netflix had 
signed more than 3 million subscribers, while Blockbuster 
acquired a lesser - known competitor (Movielink) in 2007. In 2006 
Blockbuster, the company that had been bought by Redstone in 
1994 for $8.4 billion, had a market value of under $700 million. 
In the first quarter of 2007, Blockbuster announced a loss of 
$49.2 million compared with $4.7 million a year earlier. By not 
being consumer - centric and actively evolving its business model to 
meet the changing market, it had to sit and watch revenue decline 
as video - on - demand eroded its core business of movie rentals. 
 The New Rule of Brand Management  
 Strategy and tactics are more powerful when they lean on each 
other. Tactics propel strategy forward into action, and action helps 
a brand be more strategic. Both contribute value, because learn-
ing is a by - product of action, not inaction. The new consumer 
media and digital environment offer brands endless opportunities 

224  The Brand Bubble
to be constantly surprising and refreshing. Tactics can keep a 
brand fresh and proliﬁ c, and its creativity becomes more disci-
plined in the process. When all those wonderfully creative tactical 
ideas start flying in the same direction, an energized brand 
becomes energy efﬁ cient and begins to gain speed and momen-
tum. Thus, we arrive at the new rule for this stage: 
 Stage 5 New Rule of Brand Management: Act accurately, but by 
all means, act. 
 Taking action any time it ’ s called for is why irresistible brands 
prove themselves to be endless fonts of creativity and reinvention. 
An energized brand places itself in a state of constant change –
 fueled by its ever - renewing Vision, Invention, and Dynamism. 
While inefﬁ cient brands stall and restart, an energy - efﬁ cient brand 
applies continuous force, renewing more energy with each action. 
With enough action, a brand ’ s energy becomes greater than its 
mass, and it actually needs less force to keep it going. Less adver-
tising and promotion. It rarely if ever offers a discount. Instead, 
consumers create the energy around the brand, advocating and 
propelling it forward. 
 You may be asking how you can act accurately if you don ’ t 
know if the action is strategically sound? Science demonstrates 
that thinking tactically is representative of the most highly intui-
tive and successful managers. Weston Agor, former management 
professor at the University of Texas at El Paso and president of El 
Paso ’ s consulting group ENFP Enterprises, conducted intuition 
tests on more than ten thousand executives. After his analysis, 
Agor concluded,  “ The ﬁ ndings are unequivocal. The higher the 
level of management, the higher the raw ability to intuit solutions, 
and the more reliance placed on intuition. ”  Similarly, in a Har-
vard study, 80 percent of surveyed executives credited their suc-
cess to intuition. 4 
 Other researchers also conﬁ rm that experts often rely on their 
instincts during stressful situations. Gary Klein (chief scientist of 
Klein Associates, Inc.) and his research team studied men and 
women working in intensive care units, Black Hawk helicopters, 
ﬁ re stations, multimillion - dollar corporations, and M1 tanks. They 
found that these expert decision makers, from veteran ﬁ reﬁ ghters 
to battle - tested software programmers, are unable to explain how 
they make decisions. As Klein concluded,  “ Their minds move so 

Stage Five—Renewal  225
rapidly when they make a high - pressure decision, they can ’ t articu-
late how they did it. ”  But what ’ s clear, according to Klein, is that 
these individuals react immediately, using instinct as a guide to 
good decision making — and it works for them. In the same way, 
experienced marketers should realize they ’ ve actually encoded the 
skills needed for on - the - spot brand management and can trust 
them. 
 So when faced with a decision about your brand, consider it 
your opportunity to act, to be unlike so many brands looking to 
repeat past glories through an endless recycling of the same tired 
formula. Today, the biggest asset a brand can possess is its capacity 
to change. Brands that break free from monotony and lead con-
sumers to hope and dream, to socialize or simply amaze — these 
brands are proven to derive superior economic performance. 
They prove to be the best defense against the vicissitudes of time, 
of which there will always be plenty. Given that we can no longer 
count on anything to stay the same, a constant devotion to ﬂ exibil-
ity must dominate our culture. 
 The spirit of constant renewal typiﬁ es Japan ’ s largest and most 
proﬁ table chain of retail clothing. And now it ’ s a brand making 
substantial inroads into Europe and America. 
 

226  The Brand Bubble
 Energized Brand Case Study for Renewal: 
UNIQLO — Seeing Farther  
 Today, change can strike at the heart of any brand in the world. 
The story of Japanese fashion retailer UNIQLO exempliﬁ es how 
a company prospered from huge social change, yet maintained 
a state of perpetual metamorphosis in its business model to stay 
ahead. 
 
 Founded in 1984, UNIQLO began as a relatively staid brand in 
a highly static Japanese fashion world. For much of Japan, fashion 
has always symbolized expressiveness cloaked in order and 
uniformity in the culture, even among teens. During most of the 
postwar twentieth century, the majority of urban Tokyo kids have 
dressed to show their belonging to one of the cliques. The largest 
of these is the  Ko - gal ( “ young girl ” ), with roughly 30 – 40 percent of 
all high school girls dressing in their school uniforms with a small 
degree of customization, most typically baggy socks and perhaps 
dyed hair. The hard core of this group are known as  Yamamba, 
girls whose eye makeup gave them a sort of panda - bear look. 
The Ko - gal were thought to be a bit vacuous, like the  “ Valley Girl ” 
stereotype. Other groups included the  Goths (similar to those 
in the United States), the  Lolitas (with the Little Bo Peep look), 
and the  Fruits (the crazy - looking rainbow of color kids that made 
Harajuku street fashion famous). 
 
 

Stage Five—Renewal  227
 
 In older circles, Japanese adults too dress in predictable 
fashion. There was the  “ OL ” look, that is, Ofﬁ ce Lady, the female 
equivalent of the Japanese salaryman. That look was clean and 
tidy, with skirt and jacket — feminine but not ﬂ ashy. Those who 
aspired higher become  Shirokanese, named after the wealthy 
Tokyo area of Shirokane. This was an older head - to - toe look of the 
wealthy businesswoman or housewife, with conspicuous use of 
expensive French and Italian designer brands. 
 
 However, an economic and cultural shift happened in the early 
1990s that altered Japan in signiﬁ cant ways. Fathers were laid off. 
Some families lost their homes. Institutional corruption disrupted 
the social faith in honor and integrity. Slowly, Tokyo ’ s youth 
began to realize there was no safety net, no real order, no use for 
conformity. By the late 1990s, youth culture became withdrawn, 
more introspective and less concerned with outward appearance. 
Their statement was an anti - statement. 
 
 Throughout these turbulent times in Japan, UNIQLO was going 
through its own revolution. The company was suffering from being 
thought of as  dasai — “ uncool. ” Throughout the hip neighborhoods 
of Harajuku and Shibuya, teens described the UNIQLO brand 
this way. UNIQLO entered a deep funk that mirrored the mood 
of Japanese society. Japan was in the midst of a decade - long 
recession, with no end in sight. 
 
 Being open to change, the company recognized an opportunity 
to create a new brand identity that reﬂ ected the social trend. 
Concentrating on urban areas, UNIQLO ’ s cheap and cheery clothing 
set out to outﬁ t the new youth movement. With the launch of a line 
of brightly colored ﬂ eece garments in 1999, its products quickly 
became the uniform against hype and ego.  “ Clothing says a lot, but 
you can say it better, ”  became UNIQLO ’ s mantra:  “ It ’ s what ’ s inside 
that matters most. ” Suddenly the brand was  
 — “ cool. ” 
 
 UNIQLO became the ultra - hip, ultra - practical, anti - fashion 
fashion brand. Whereas fashion usually dictates the look, UNIQLO 
gave people the license to create their own style. The company 
made the red UNIQLO logo nearly invisible, tucked away inside 
each garment. One blog posting from a Japanese fashion writer 
said,  “ UNIQLO has an attitude:  ‘ I don ’ t need that sort of fashion ’ is 
the fashion that UNIQLO offers. ” 
(Continued )

228  The Brand Bubble
 
 Today, the company is becoming an international clothing 
empire, with operations extending beyond Japan to South Korea, 
the United Kingdom, China and the United States. Touting its 
clothing as affordable quality, simple yet chic, UNIQLO has quickly 
become a fashion and pop culture phenomenon. It aims to sell 
fashion at a reasonable price so that people will purchase it 
steadily as long as a trend lasts. 
 
 As a specialty - store retailer of private - label apparel (SPA) 
company, UNIQLO integrates the value chain from design to 
production, quality control, distribution, sales, and promotion. 
It embeds itself deeply in its manufacturing process, down to 
procurement of raw materials and inventory management. So 
UNIQLO is able to source the latest materials more quickly and 
stay in line with the latest fashions, while developing higher 
proﬁ tability and high performance. 
 
 Shinichiro Shuda, chief marketing ofﬁ cer of U.S. operations, 
summed up the company ’ s strategy when he told us,  “ Our 
corporate mission is to provide high - quality, classic, yet on - trend 
casual garments at prices that are way too low for the awesome 
value it brings. We don ’ t represent a lifestyle, as we ’ re more 
utilitarian and industrial. Yet we have design studios in Tokyo, New 
York, Paris, and Milan, and this includes an incredible team of 
designers. I guess we always strive to create the perfect balance 
between price, quality, and style. A very hard task, but we like 
challenges. ” 
 
 One tactic UNIQLO employed was finding ways to be 
present wherever customers frequent the most. Using 
diverse store formats and locations, including urban roadside 
shops, UNIQLO ’ s incongruousness helped generate a large 
proportion of the company ’ s income in Japan. And to further 
enhance its business infrastructure, especially for its growing 
overseas operations, the global design studios collect 
information on product and market needs and design and 
commercialize new products by coordinating the international 
supply chain. 
 
 UNIQLO has remained open to continuous evolution. While it 
achieved substantial growth in the 1990s, by the end of 2003, 
sales and proﬁ ts had again plummeted. Saturation of the fast -
 retailing industry from competition like Zara, Gap, H & M, and 

Stage Five—Renewal  229
others put downward pressure on sales and proﬁ tability. The 
business again needed to embrace Yanai - san ’ s words:  “ We 
never hesitate to create something new from scratch by ruining 
our success stories in the past. ” Rather than continue down 
the same path, it took aggressive steps to reinvent its business 
model once more. 
 
 The company developed a three - pronged approach to 
promoting growth. The ﬁ rst was to review personnel, evaluation, 
and compensation systems. It modiﬁ ed employees ’ approach to 
working within the company, while converting its business format 
to a structure focused on expansion to drive better results. By 
August 2004, it made a second turnaround, increasing sales and 
income through its  “ scrap and build ” strategy, aimed at extending 
its store network. 5 
 
 The company now focuses on international growth and use of 
its large - format stores as a driver to accelerate new store openings 
worldwide, including its ﬁ rst ﬂ agship store in Soho. UNIQLO 
USA, Inc. will focus on brand rather than simply store expansion. 
Management plans to shift from a store chain to a third stage of 
evolution, that of a global brand. 
 
 In branding, UNIQLO has employed various forms of media, 
from print and television ads to innovative online marketing tactics 
to innovative retail environments and packaging. The company 
commissioned an eclectic range of artists, designers, musicians, 
and actors, ranging from Sonic Youth ’ s Kim Gordon to hip - hop 
celebrity Juelz Santana. On the Web, it released UNIQLO Mixplay, 
videos featuring break dancers sporting UNIQLO gear, and 
UNIQLOCK, a twenty - four - hour, color - changing clock, interspersed 
with Japanese models performing a variety of dances. 
 
 UNIQLO has also blossomed as an interactive information 
center, delivering and exchanging ideas with consumers. Shuda -
 san explained that its Soho store was envisioned as a center 
of Japanese culture. The company released a compilation CD 
featuring  “ cutting - edge Japanese music, ” and it employs various 
tactics to bring Japanese culture to New York such as having forty 
designers  “ design today ’ s Tokyo ” with a hundred or so limited-
edition T - shirts and setting up listening booths in the store ﬁ lled 
with CDs of little - known Japanese music selected by Japan - based 
DJ Tanaka. 
(Continued )

230  The Brand Bubble
 
 With a wide array of ambitious and constantly evolving 
marketing and promotion activities, the company listens carefully 
to customers. As part of its mission to develop a global brand, 
the R & D centers act as active listening posts that directly acquire 
information on the most up - to - date fashion trends, including 
fabrics, clothing functions, and customer needs and lifestyles, and 
then translate them into fashion. Each of these centers consists 
of ﬁ ve divisions: men ’ s wear, women ’ s wear, children ’ s wear, bags 
and accessories, and undergarments. It works closely with its 
subcontractors as partners and provides them with cutting - edge 
technology through its  “ Tukami team, ” a group of twenty - two 
textile industry experts. 
 
 Most recently, responding to the relentless pressure and speed 
of  “ fast retailing, ” UNIQLO now plans to restructure once again. 
It aspires to become a third - generation SPA by combining the 
methodology of ﬁ rst - generation SPAs (high - volume sales of low -
 cost single items by uniting manufacturing and sales) with the 
business model of the second - generation SPAs (business strategy 
on fashions and trends). 
 
 UNIQLO ’ s parent, Fast Retailing, has also become Asia ’ s 
biggest clothing retailer, with its sights set on becoming a $1 
billion selling brand with three hundred stores in the United States 

Stage Five—Renewal  231
by 2011. Its online store accounts for approximately $8.8 million 
annually (in ﬁ scal 2006), one of the largest volumes of any online 
shopping site in Japan. Rates of growth in the United States and 
the Asia - Paciﬁ c region have continued on an upward trend. 
 
 UNIQLO today is a top - 10 energy brand in Japan and is 
building its energy abroad. It is the brand of choice for many 
consumers because it sells more than clothes. It continues to 
prosper by pushing its entire value chain to see farther. Whether 
it is research, design, product, manufacturing, marketing, or 
merchandising — everyone is empowered to watch, listen, react, 
and lead. The company pioneered the concept of  “ discount 
clothing turned popular with youth ” against great odds. In doing 
so, it transformed the way consumers perceive fashion, culture, 
and in turn the brand. 


233
   Epilogue 
 A Brand May Be Famous, But Is It 
Creating Return for Shareholders?  
 Snap back to reality, oh there goes gravity 
 — Eminem 
 We ’ re the ﬁ rst to say there ’ s much more to learn, so we hope you ’ ll 
join the conversation at www.thebrandbubble.com. What we know 
thus far is enough to warn managers it ’ s time to take stock of their 
brand. The consumer is sending worrying signals about the state 
of brands today. If we take action now, we can bring brand value 
and brand price back into alignment — and this can be done not 
by lowering the share price of brands but by raising the true worth 
of brands as experienced by the consumer. 
 Irresistible brands create sustainable brand differentiation. 
They permeate all aspects of the organization. They are full of 
measurable energy. They offer consistent and immersive brand 
experiences. And they create a platform of growth for brand value, 
or  “ brand immortality ” as we learned from Booz  & Company. 
 This is vital, as the consumer ’ s (investor - driven) perceptions are 
now a determining factor in whether a brand is merely known or actu-
ally valuable. We now have a more unifying brand metric and a power-
ful predictor of a brand ’ s future success. We can track its impact on 
future as well as immediate sales. We can organize around the brand 
to manage forward and be consumer - centric in all decision making. 
 We urge you and your organization to think about brands in a 
new way. In ConsumerLand, if you ’ re not moving, you fall behind 

234  The Brand Bubble
and die. Yet too often we manage brands through the rearview mir-
ror.  We think of brand equity in terms of size, rather than velocity.  We put 
a tape measure around a brand, when what ’ s required is a speed-
ometer. While the ground beneath brands has irrevocably shifted, 
the methods for managing brands haven ’ t changed for decades. 
This mind - set of resting on brand reputation has inﬂ uenced the 
way we deﬁ ne success metrics and manage toward them. Brand 
management is more like  “ brand maintenance. ”  It tries to con-
trol brands, creating consistency and predictability in a world that 
demands that businesses surprise, innovate, adapt, and respond. 
 Which brings us full circle back to our love of brands. While 
there is no shortage of advice about driving change and fostering 
product, service, and management innovation, we hope to have 
imparted the importance of  brand innovation  as both a ﬁ duciary 
responsibility and also an ever - vital competitive weapon for busi-
ness. Consumers are judging brands on their ability to deliver 
value tomorrow as well as today, so  redefining the future of brand 
management to both grow and protect shareholder value  is now a key 
imperative for business. 
 Today business must maximize consumer perceptions of value 
by continuously managing forward brand expectations with creativ-
ity, innovation, and new brand experiences. We must strip away the 
hype and deliver real value for our brands to be seen as worthy of 
consumer investment. Just as Warren Buffett exempliﬁ es the wisdom 
of investing in value stocks, consumers are now recognizing the same 
intrinsic value in brands. Companies that organize around their con-
sumer and bring their brand into their business will enhance future 
shareholder value by restoring and enhancing consumer value. 
 Y & R ’ s BAV data revealed the patterns that led to identifying 
Energized Differentiation as the new force driving this shift. BAV 
also helps us see the reasons behind consumers ’  intolerance of com-
placent and uncreative brands. In a fractured, chaotic, and uncer-
tain world, consumers are drawn to creativity because a brand with 
a creative attitude helps them hedge against the future. In effect, 
we ’ ve identiﬁ ed that consumers invest in highly creative brands. We 
have come to believe that most brands have customers, but brands 
with energy have followers. The idea isn ’ t so outlandish. After all, a 
brand, regardless of its balance sheet value, is only ever worth some-
thing if consumers want to buy it . . . and buy it again.    

235
   Notes  
 Chapter One 
  1.   Calculation is from the 2007 IMF list based on GDP under purchas-
ing power parity. 
  2.   Based on a modeled BAV Index fund of the top ﬁ fty energy - gaining 
brands compared against the S & P 500. (Also see Figure 2.10.) 
  3.   “ Consumer Confidence Plunges, ” Thomson Reuters (Reuters.
com), February 18, 2008. 
  4.   Statistics from Harper ’ s Index,  Harper ’ s Magazine,  March 2008 and 
April 2008. 
  5.   Datamonitor,  “ New Developments in Global Consumer Trends, ”  
April 2007. This report sources the 2006 Schneider Associates/
Stagnito Communications/IRI report,  “ Most Memorable New 
Product Launch Survey, ” which was released in February 2007 and 
conducted by comScore Networks during December 2006. 
  6.   “ The Decline of Brands, ”  James Surowiecki,  Wired Magazine,  Novem-
ber 2004. 
  7.   “ What ’ s the Difference? Not Much If You Ask Consumers, ”  Mark 
Dolliver,  Adweek, January 22, 2001. 
  8.   “ Brand Confusion, ”  Jack Trout and Kevin J. Clancy,  Harvard Busi-
ness Review, March 2002, Vol. 80, Issue 3. 
  9.   “ Save America ’ s Dying Brands, ”  Kevin J. Clancy,  Marketing Manage-
ment, Sept./Oct. 2001, Vol. 10, Issue 3. 
  10.   “ If Brands Are Built Over Years, Why Are They Managed Over 
Quarters? ”  Leonard M. Lodish and Carl F. Mella,  Harvard Business 
Review, July - Aug. 2007. 
  11.   Datamonitor, April 2007. 
  12.   “ Follow Your Nose to Marketing Evolution, ”  Martin Lindstrom, 
 Advertising Age, May 23, 2005, Vol. 76, Issue 21, p. 136. 
  13.   “ Consumers Love to Hate Advertising: Clutter, Interruption and 
Irrelevance Spur Ad Avoidance, ”  Peter Kim, Forrester report, 
November 27, 2006. Cited in a graph (which includes these 
statistics) in this report are the original Forrester ’ s Consumer 

236  Notes
Technographics October 2002 North American Retail  &  Media 
Study and Forrester ’ s NACTAS Q2 2006 Survey.   
  14.   “ The Evolving Role of the CMO, ”  David Court,  McKinsey Quarterly, 
August 2007. 
 Chapter Two 
  1.   “ How Brand Attributes Drive Financial Performance, ”  Robert 
Jacobson and Natalie Mizik, Marketing Science Institute, Working 
Paper Series, 2005. 
  2.   Under the  efﬁ cient markets  hypothesis, stock price reﬂ ects both the cur-
rent proﬁ tability of a ﬁ rm and expectations of future earnings. The 
model is built on the hypothesis that brand affects stock return in two 
ways: First, the indirect effect, where changes in brand equity impact 
current proﬁ tability, that is to say, a stronger brand leads to more 
sales and, all other things being equal, higher earnings in the current 
period, which in turn generates changes in stock price. Second, the 
direct effect, where changes in brand equity inﬂ uence expectations 
of future earnings, that is to say, a stronger brand today will prob-
ably be a stronger brand in the future and will drive more sales — this 
measurement of the strength of the brand had never before been as 
accurately reﬂ ected in current proﬁ tability measures.  
  3.   For a complete list of brands included in each of the periods that 
comprise the Energy Fund analysis, see www.thebrandbubble.com. 
 Chapter Three 
  1.   Advertising Age,  “ CMO Strategy, ” Spring 2007. 
  2.   “ In Baby Boomlet, Preschool Derby Is the Fiercest Yet, ”  Susan 
Saulny,  New York Times, March 3, 2006. 
  3.   The Average American: The Extraordinary Search for the Nation ’ s Most 
Ordinary Citizen, Kevin O ’ Keefe (New York: Public Affairs, 2005). 
  4.   BIGresearch,  “ Simultaneous Media, ”  Executive Briefing, 2007. 
Available online: www.bigresearch.com/news/big081006.htm. 
  5.   Everything Bad Is Good for You: How Today ’ s Popular Culture Is Actu-
ally Making Us Smarter, Steven Johnson (New York: Penguin Group, 
2006). 
  6.   “ Trend - Watcher Sees Moral Transformation of Capitalism, ”  Jane 
Lampman,  Christian Science Monitor,  October 3, 2005. Available 
online: www.csmonitor.com/2005/1003/p13s01 - wmgn.html. Access 
date: May 31, 2008. 
  7.   This current - term behavior is captured in BAV ’ s Brand Stature met-
ric, which comprises Esteem (favorability) and Knowledge (deep, 
lasting awareness and brand associations). 

Notes  237
 Chapter Five 
  1.   “ Wave.3, ”  Universal McCann, March 2008. Available online: www.
universalmccann.com/Assets/; click  “ 26903747 2413  -  Wave 3 com-
plete document AW 3_20080418124523.pdf, ”  dated Friday, April 
18, 2008. Access date: June 2, 2008. 
  2.   “ Web 2.0: The Global Impact, ”  Universal McCann, December 2006. 
Available online: www.universalmccann.com/Assets/; click  “ Web 
2.0 The Global Impact 2006_20080108085312.pdf, ”  dated Tuesday, 
January 8, 2008. Access date: June 2, 2008. 
  3.   “ Social Commerce Report 2007, ”  E - consultancy and Baazarvoice, 
August 2007. Available online by special order: www.e - consultancy.
com/publications/social - commerce - report - 2007/. Access date: 
June 2, 2008. 
  4.   ChoiceStream, January 9, 2007. Available online: www.choicestream.com/
pdf/cs_press_surveyresults010807.pdf. Access date: June 2, 2008.  
  5.   comScore, SEMPO data, 2007. Figures available online: 80 percent: 
www.fundraisingsuccessmag.com/story/story.bsp?var=story & sid=
80837; 85 percent and 91 percent: www.zeroonezero.com/services/
search - engine - marketing.html. Access date: June 2, 2008. 
 Chapter Six 
  1.   Outlaw consulting, 2007. Available online for subscribers only: www.
outlawconsulting.com/. 
  2.   “ Driving Radical Change, ”  Josep Isern and Caroline Pung,  McKinsey 
Quarterly, 2007, Number 4. 
  3.   “ Champions of the World, ” Forbes, April 16, 2007. 
  4.   “ World ’ s Most Innovative Companies by Region, ”  Business Week /
Boston Consulting Group,  Business Week,  April 17, 2008. Available 
online: www.businessweek.com/table/08/0415_in_geographic.htm?
popupWidth=770 & popupHeight=660. Access date: June 2, 2008. 
  5.   “ Why Can ’ t LEGO Click? ”  Charles Fishman,  Fast Company,  no. 50, 
August 2001. 
 Chapter Seven 
  1.   While a factor analysis provides statistical correlations between 
imagery variables and factor dimensions, it is important to note 
that interpretation is not absolute; different solutions can be 
derived from the same data. 
  2.   “ Business Media ” section, Stuart Elliott,  New York Times,  October 9, 
2006. 

238  Notes
 Chapter Eight 
  1.   “ How Many Lightbulbs Does It Take to Change the World? One. 
And You ’ re Looking at It, ”  Charles Fishman,  Fast Company,  no. 108, 
September 2006. 
  2.   “ HD Marketing 2010: Sharpening the Conversation: The Team 
and Tools You Need to Market in an Increasingly  ‘ Digitally Savvy ’ 
World, ”  Adrea Rasumussen, Carolyn Ude, and Deward Landry, 
Booz  & Company, 2007. 
  3.   “ If Brands Are Built Over Years, Why Are They Managed Over 
Quarters? ”  Leonard Lodish and Carl Mela,  Harvard Business Review, 
July - August 2007, 
  4.   Speech to the McGraw - Hill Companies, Anne Mulcahy, 2006. 
  5.   Mulcahy, 2006. 
  6.   “ The Accidental CEO, ” Betsy Morris,  Fortune, June 23, 2006. 
  7.   “ Leading Xerox Through the Perfect Storm, ”  Anne Mulcahy,  Har-
vard Business Review, January 26, 2005. 
  8.   “ Back from the Brink, ”  William Bulkeley,  Wall Street Journal, April 
24, 2006. 
  9.   Mulcahy, 2006. 
  10.   “ Xerox Overhauls Brand Image, ” Beth Snyder Bulik,  B to B,  January 
7, 2008. 
  11.   Bulik, 2008. 
 Chapter Nine 
  1.   “ Driving the Marketing Agenda: CEOs and CMOs Share the Same 
Vision — but How Do They Make It a Reality? ”  Rick Routhier, 
SpencerStuart, 2006. Available online: www.spencerstuart.co.uk/
practices/consumer/publications/1072/. Access date: June 2, 
2008.  
  2.   For a variety of views of Mumbai Tifﬁ n Box Suppliers operations, 
see www.mydabbawala.com/general/presentation.htm. Access date: 
April 11, 2008. 
 Chapter Ten 
  1.   “ More Consumers Are Watching TV Broadcasts Online, ”   Wireless 
News, Coventry, October 21, 2007. 
  2.   “ Anytime Is Primetime Online for TV Shows, ”  Solutions Research 
Group, February 5, 2008. 
  3.   “ Lessons from the Tarmac, ”  Chuck Salter,  Fast Company,  no. 115, 
May 2007. 

Notes  239
  4.   Executive ESP,  Douglas Dean, John Mihalasky, L. Schroeder, and 
S. Ostander (Englewood N.J.: Prentice - Hall, 1974). Concept cited 
in  “ Deploying Your Intuition to Find Your Ideal Career, ”  Katherine 
Hansen, n.d. Available online: www.quintcareers.com/using_
intuition_ideal_career.html. Access date: June 2, 2008. 
  5.   “ The UNIQLO Business, ”  Annual Report, Fast Retailing, 2006. 
Available online: www.fastretailing.com/eng/ir/library/pdf/
annual2006_05.pdf. Access date: June 2, 2008. 


241
 Acknowledgments  
 We want to cite many dedicated Young  & Rubicam and WPP 
Group partners for their ideas and insights. In London: Rich 
Brown, Richard Exon, Emily James, Ben Kay, Matt Steward, and 
Simon Sylvester. In Madrid: Rafael Esteve. In Mumbai: Mash 
 Chauhan, Surya Prabhala, Sugata Rao, Kalpana Singh, and Nisha 
Singhania. In New York: Rachel Arnett, Julie Bazinet, Jessica 
Brown, Mitch Caplan, Rhonda Chahine, Jeff Cheal, Amanda 
Chin, Zoe Church, Jeremy Diamond, Aviva Ebstein, Stephen 
Fleming, Belle Frank, Jason Gaikowski, Leah Gritton, JaeHee 
Jung, Adam Kellogg, Sean King, Peter Law - Gisiko, Christy Liu, 
Michael Lundgren, Scott Lux, Hugh McGilligan, Maria McHugh, 
Daniel Morel, Cezary Pietrzak, Maureen Pine, Anne Rivers, Hayes 
Roth, Jim Scheele, Ric Scott, Ernie Simon, and Brian Truss. In 
Singapore: Ambar Brahmachary, and Tanuj Philip. In Tokyo: Sean 
Corcoran and Hironaga Yai. 
 
 We especially want to thank Emma Hrustic and Michael 
 Sussman, our principal researchers and constant collaborators at 
every turn. Their input has been invaluable in shaping our ﬁ nd-
ings. We thank Graham Hall for his ideas and optimism. And we 
greatly appreciate the case writing research and help of Niketa 
Gupte, Amber Mason, and Anuja Palkar. 
 
 We are also in great debt to the consultation of Peter Georgescu, 
chairman emeritus of Young  & Rubicam, Robert Jacobson, profes-
sor of marketing, University of Washington Business School, Kevin 
Keller, EB Osborn Professor of Marketing, Tuck School of Business, 
Dartmouth College, and Natalie Mizik, associate professor of mar-
keting, Columbia Business School. 
 
 We also want to thank our editor, Rick Benzel, and the edito-
rial staff at Jossey - Bass, Rebecca Browning and Byron Schneider, 
and our production editor, Mary Garrett. And we are enormously 

242  Acknowledgments
grateful for the marketing leadership of Lee Aldridge, Mark 
 Fortier, and Mindy Romero. We also want to thank James Levine 
and Elizabeth Fisher at Levine/Greenberg for their generous 
advice and support. 
 
 Finally, we want to express our gratitude to CEOs Peter 
Stringham and Hamish McLennan, who lead our group compa-
nies and share our love of brands and creativity.  

243
   The Authors  
 John Gerzema is Chief Insights Officer for Young  &  Rubicam 
Group. One of the earliest founders of account planning in 
American advertising agencies, John has designed brand strate-
gies for clients for almost twenty - ﬁ ve years, guiding campaigns to 
international strategic and creative recognition that resulted in 
The One Show Best of Show award, numerous EFFIE ’ s and sev-
eral gold lions from The Cannes Advertising Festival. Prior to join-
ing Y & R, Gerzema oversaw the international network for Fallon, 
and founded ofﬁ ces in Tokyo, Singapore, Hong Kong, and S â o 
Paulo. He holds a master ’ s degree in integrated marketing from 
the Medill School of Journalism at Northwestern University and a 
B.S. in marketing from The Ohio State University. 
 Ed Lebar  is CEO of BrandAsset ® Consulting Group. Ed manages 
BrandAsset ® Consulting around the world. He has helped grow 
BrandAsset ® Valuator into the largest brand model and database 
in the world, which now includes input from over 500,000 custom-
ers on 38,000 brands across 48 countries through 250 studies. 
 Before his career in marketing and advertising, Lebar was a 
professor of economics at CCNY and Finch College. He holds 
advanced degrees in economics from NYU and the University of 
Denver, and a B.A. from Syracuse University. 
 About Young  & Rubicam Group 
 Young  & Rubicam Group is a global network of preeminent com-
panies specializing in advertising, public relations, public affairs, 
brand identity and design, consulting, direct and database mar-
keting, digital and interactive marketing, multicultural marketing, 
and health care communications. YRG provides marketing com-
munications solutions to more than 750 clients worldwide. 

244  The Authors
 Each of its companies is a leader in its ﬁ eld. They include Y & R, 
Wunderman, Landor, Burson - Marsteller, Penn Schoen  & Berland 
Associates, VML, Sudler  & Hennessey, The Bravo Group, Cohn  & 
Wolfe, Robinson, Lerer  &  Montgomery, RTC Relationship Market-
ing, Sicola Martin, Kang  & Lee, The Banner Corporation, Brand-
Asset Consulting, Blast Radius, BrandBuzz, and ZAAZ. 
 Young  & Rubicam Group has more than 16,000 employees in 
over 550 ofﬁ ces in 90 countries around the world. Young  &  Rubicam 
Group is part of WPP. 
 

245
Index
A
Aaker, David, 33, 83
Accenture, 125
Accountability: for brand perfor-
mance, 113; demand for, 65–66; of 
employees, 197; for marketing, 188
Action: knowledge as prerequisite 
for, 61–64; necessary for brand 
renewal, 223–225
Adidas, 130
Advertising: attitudes against, 26–27; 
consumer desire for truth in, 
83–85; decline of trust in, 27–28, 
84, 235n13; increasing amount 
of, 20–21, 25
Agor, Weston, 224
Airline industry, brand loyalty in, 43.
See also Southwest Airlines; Virgin
Allaire, Paul, 195
Allen, Woody, 40
American Apparel, 125, 145
American Express, 129
ANA Marketing Accountability 
Study, 29
Anderson, Wes, 129
Apple: energized sales by, 184–185; 
iPhone, 66, 75–76; iPod, 49, 82, 
127, 130–131, 206; and Macworld, 
57, 76; product failures of, 207
AT&T, 27
Averages, Law of, 116, 140–144
Awareness, as classic metric of 
brand, 15, 39
Axe, 49
B
Baby Boomers, future as predicted 
by, 90–91
Bazaarvoice, 94
Best Buy, 66
Biases, cognitive, 61
BioEden, 59–60
Bisociation, 82
BitTorrent, 125
“Black Balloons,” 129
Blockbuster, 223
Blogging, 92–93, 95–96, 106
BMW, 159
Boeing, 146
Bolt Media, 92
Bonﬁ re of the Brands (Boorman), 26
Boorman, Neil, 26
Booz & Company, 12, 71, 185, 233
Brand bubble: data as evidence of, 
7, 52–54; described, 6–8, 29; 
origin of, 2; recognized by 
consumers, 69; and traditional 
marketing, 29–31, 41
Brand choice. See Purchasing 
choices
Brand Finance, 10–11
Brand health: Brand Stature as indi-
cator of, 44, 45; Brand Strength 
as indicator of, 44, 45; classic 
metrics of, 15–16, 39–40; interac-
tion between metrics of, 45, 46; 
plotting, to indicate perfor-
mance, 45, 47–49. See also 
 BrandAsset® Valuator (BAV)
Brand immortality, 71, 72, 233
Brand management: command-and-
control approach to, 180–181; 
conscious process of transforming, 
119; framework for transforming, 
114–117; new approach to, 
113–114, 234; new rules for, 116, 
145–146, 171–172, 193, 207–208, 
223–225. See also Distillation stage; 

246  Index
Brand management (Continued)
 
Exploration stage; Fusion stage; 
Ignition stage; Renewal stage
Brand Stature: components of, 44, 
45, 121; in PowerGrid charts, 45, 
47–49
Brand Strength: anatomy of, 120–130; 
components of, 44, 45, 121; and 
Energy Index score, 133–137; of 
most innovative companies, 144; 
in PowerGrid charts, 45, 47–49; 
stagnant, and brand bubble, 52–53
Brand value: as perceived by 
 consumers, 6–7, 8, 15–17; as per-
ceived by investors, 6–7, 9, 15, 
17–18, 233–234; as portion of 
intangible value, 9, 11–13. See also 
BrandAsset® Valuator (BAV)
BrandAsset® Valuator (BAV): analy-
sis of brand value by, 15–16; and 
brand bubble, 7; data collection 
by, 14–15; Energy Index scores 
in, 133–137; how to access, 133; 
“pillars” of, 44–46, 121; Power-
Grid charting, 45, 47–49; as 
respected brand model, 1; VID 
proﬁ le in, 137–138. See also 
 PowerGrids
Brands: attributes of, and stock 
returns, 32–34, 236n2; declining 
value of, 1–2, 8; decrease in num-
ber of stellar, 2, 7–8, 17; as direc-
tion, 189–193; excessive number 
of, 20–23; lack of barriers for 
new, 63–64; lack of permanence 
of, 27; measurement of success 
of, 14–18; sources of diminished 
consumer desire for, 19–29; total 
worth of top, 11–12. See also High-
energy brands; Irresistible brands
Branson, Richard, 176, 177, 183
Bubbles: ﬁ nancial, constant predi-
cating collapse in, 6; real estate, 
18. See also Brand bubble
Buffett, Warren, 234
Burger King, 130
Burke, James, 218
Burns, Ursula, 197
Byrne, David, 82
C
C-suite: ignition stage involvement 
by, 180–181; marketing’s connec-
tion to, 201, 204–205, 207–208
Carlson Marketing Group, 17
Change: change in speed and 
nature of, 89–90; as constant, 
109–110, 219, 220; marketing in 
world of, 40–41; rate of, 218
China Mobile, 124
Choice-supportive bias, 61
Choices. See Purchasing choices
ChoiceStream, 98
Christiansen, Ole Kirk, 148
Cingular, 27
Clancy, Kevin, 21, 22
Coca-Cola, 170–171
Colgate, 126
Commerce Bank, 127
Commoditization, 21–22, 23, 28
Companies: brand value as perceived 
by, 6–7, 9, 15, 17–18; demand for 
responsibility by, 65–66; innova-
tive, 141–144;  purpose-driven, 
Energy Core of, 161–165; 
 stakeholder-centered, 191–193. 
See also Energy-Driven Enterprises
Conference Board, 100
Conﬁ rmation bias, 61
Consumer choice. See Purchasing 
choices
Consumer-generated media (CGM), 
93–97
ConsumerLand, 87–112; consumer-
generated media (CGM) in, 93–97; 
customization of media in, 98–101; 
deﬁ ned, 3–4; as ecosystem, 
108–109; information-seeking by 
consumers in, 106–108; marketing 
principles in, 109–112; technology-
enabled behavior in, 87–88; 
 technology-enabled communities 
in, 101–105; word of mouth 
(WOM) in, 105–106

Index  247
Consumers: behaving like investors, 
58–66; brand bubble recognized 
by, 69; brand value as perceived 
by, 6–7, 8, 15–17; causes of dimin-
ished brand desire of, 19–29; 
co-creation and conversation 
with, 168–171; and creating 
Energy Core, 166–167; high-
energy brands as perceived by, 
35; irresistible brands as attract-
ing, 51–52; losing trust in 
brands, 25–29; nontraditional 
sources of information for, 
28–29, 106–107; treating, as 
investors, 171–178. See also 
Purchasing choices
Converse, 169
Copernicus and Market Facts, 21
Corporate responsibility, demand 
for, 65–66
Cranium, 125
Creativity, 77–86; bisociation as ori-
gin of, 82; economic importance 
of, 77–78; function of, in post-
modern world, 79; and happi-
ness, 81–82; importance to 
brands, 85–86; lacking among 
brands, 23–25; in large vs. small 
companies, 141–144; managing 
brand for, 145–152; obstacles to, 
138–139; playfulness inspired by, 
80; and risk, 140–141; as tran-
scending skepticism, 85; and 
Wow factor, 82–83. See also 
 Innovation
Cristal, 171
Csikszentmihalyi, Mihaly, 81
Culture: corporate, of energized 
brands, 155, 199, 200, 
201–203; popular, 63, 
102–103, 128
Customers. See Consumers
D
Deloitte & Touche, 200
Design Barcode, 129
Diesel, 130
Differentiation: as boosted by 
energy, 38–39, 41; dimensions of, 
123; and excessive number of 
brands, 21; interaction between 
energy and, 130–132. See also 
Energized Differentiation
Direction, Law of, 116, 189–193
Distillation stage, 116, 153–178; law 
of energy for, 167–171; obstacle 
to, 166–167; rule of brand man-
agement for, 171–172. See also 
Energy Core
Distinction, as dimension of differ-
entiation, 123
Donne, John, 101
Doritos, 97
Dove, 49, 52
Drucker, Peter, 166
Dynamism: brands with, 128–130, 
132; as dimension of energy, 123, 
128.See also VID proﬁ le
E
E-consultancy, 94
EarthLink, 27
eBay, 49
Ecko, 129
Edoc laundry, 129, 145
Education, level of attainment of, 62
Einstein, Albert, 29
Eminem, 233
Employees: in creative ﬁ elds, 78; 
Energy-Driven Enterprises’ attrac-
tion for, 200, 202, 203
Energized Differentiation: anatomy 
of, 122–123; as component of 
Brand Strength, 44, 45, 121; 
deﬁ ned, 3, 38; impact of, 42–43, 
69–71, 74–75; as lasting differen-
tiation, 56; multiples increased 
by, 73. See also Differentiation; 
Energy
Energized Value Chains: brand man-
agement with, 193–198; examples 
of companies with, 182–187; 
obstacle to, 187–189; overview of, 
181–182

248  Index
Energy: as creating future value, 
75–76; deﬁ ned, 35; differentia-
tion boosted by, 38–39, 41; 
dimensions of, 123–130; impact 
on brands, 40–41; interaction 
between differentiation and, 
130–132; lost with efforts to con-
trol, 170–171. See also High-
energy brands; Irresistible brands
Energy audit: beneﬁ ts of, 119–120; 
how to perform, 132–138
Energy Core: characteristics of, 
155–156; deﬁ ned, 154; examples 
of, of successful brands, 157–158, 
159, 173–178; how to create, 
159–161; obstacle to creating, 
166–167; of purpose-driven com-
panies, 161–165; testing, 165–166
Energy Index, 133–137
Energy-Driven Enterprises: beneﬁ ts 
of becoming, 200–201; examples 
of, 201–203, 209–217; obstacle to, 
204–205
Enron, 84–85
Ernst & Young, 21
Esteem: as classic metric of brand, 
15, 39; as component of Brand 
Stature, 44, 45, 121
Exploration stage, 116, 119–152; 
and Brand Strength, 120–130; 
example of, 147–152; and inter-
action between Energy and 
 Differentiation, 130–132; law of 
energy for, 140–145; obstacle to, 
138–139; performing Energy audit 
in, 119–120, 132–138; rule of 
brand management for, 145–146
F
Facebook, 27, 120
Fast Retailing, 230–231
Firestone, Jim, 197
Fisher-Price, 126
Florida, Richard, 78
Ford, 93
Forrester Research, 27–28, 235n13
Four Seasons hotels, 127
Fuller, Buckminster, 82
Fusion stage, 116, 199–217; Energy-
Driven Enterprises created in, 
201–203, 209–217; law of energy 
for, 205–207; obstacle to, 204–205; 
overview of, 199–201; rule of 
brand management for, 207–208
Future: consumers and investors 
seeking beneﬁ ts in, 59–60; con-
sumers’ need to manage, 68–69; 
creating value in, 71–72, 75–76; 
impact of Energized Differentia-
tion on sales in, 69–71; and 
option value, 67, 68; uncertainty 
of, 84–85
G
Garcia, Jerry, 179
Geico, 49, 184
General Electric (GE), 125, 183, 185
George, Kevin, 185
Glacéau vitaminwater, 146
Global economy, intangible value in, 
10–11
Google: brand value as percent of 
market capitalization of, 13; ener-
gized human relations at, 187; 
Energy Core of, 159; as Energy-
Driven Enterprise, 201–202, 
206; information searches 
enabled by, 107; as irresistible 
brand, 49
Grameen Bank, 125, 145
Graves, Michael, 157
H
Haigh, David, 11, 12
Hamel, Gary, 82
Happiness: and creativity, 81–82; 
and material wealth, 81
Harley-Davidson, 129, 159
Harrah’s Entertainment, 186–187
Henley Centre, 17
High-energy brands: consumer 
 loyalty to, 43, 182; consumers’ 

Index  249
perception of, 35; examples of, 
36; PowerGrid for, 49–50. See also 
Irresistible brands
Hughes, Steve, 57
I
Ignition stage, 116, 179–198; 
C-suite’s involvement in, 180–181; 
example of, 194–198; law of 
energy for, 189–193; obstacle to, 
187–189; overview of, 179; rule of 
brand management for, 193. See 
also Energized Value Chain
IKEA, 125, 145
Immunity, Law of, 205–207
Information: consumers seeking, 
106–108; nontraditional sources 
of, 28–29; “perfect,” 84; sought 
before action, 61–64. See also 
Knowledge
Innovation: as key to competitive 
advantage, 55–56; technological, 
and human nature, 91–92; 
unpredictable effects of, 90–91; 
at Virgin, 173. See also Creativity
Intangible value: brand value as por-
tion of, 9, 11–13; as portion of 
market value, 9–11
Integrity, demanded of companies, 
65–66
Invention: brands with, 126–128, 
132; as dimension of energy, 123, 
126.See also VID proﬁ le
Investors: basis of purchasing decisions 
by, 67; brand value as perceived 
by, 6–7, 9, 15, 17–18, 233–234; 
 consumers behaving like, 58–66; 
treating consumers as, 171–178
Irresistible brands: characteristics of, 
37–38; creativity’s importance to, 
85–86; deﬁ ned, 3, 37; magnetism 
created by, 51–52; performance of, 
vs. S&P index fund, 54–55; Power-
Grid representation of, 49–50. See 
also High-energy brands
Isern, Josep, 139
J
Jacobson, Robert, 33, 34, 41, 60
JCDecaux, 127, 145
JetBlue, 43, 66, 206, 222
Johnson, Steven, 63
Jones Soda, 222–223
Joose, 125
K
Kennedy, Caroline, 103
Kidfresh, 127
Klein, Gary, 224–225
Klein, Naomi, 26
Knowledge: as component of Brand 
Stature, 44, 45, 121; consumers’, 
about brands, 22–23; sought 
before action, 61–64.See also 
Information
Knudstorp, Jurgen Vig, 152
Koestler, Arthur, 82
Kotler, Philip, 1
Kryptonite bike locks, 95–96
L
Laﬂ ey, A. G., 168
Laing, R. D., 153
Laws of Energy: Law of Averages, 
116, 140–144; Law of Direction, 
116, 189–193; Law of Immunity, 
205–207; Law of Openness, 116, 
167–171; Law of Reﬂ ex, 116, 
220–223
“Lazarus brands,” 51–52
LEGO Group, 146–152
Lodish, Leonard, 22, 188
Louis Vuitton, 127, 145
Loyalty: decline in, to brands, 22, 23; 
to high-energy brands, 43, 182
Lundgren, Mike, 98
M
Mackay, Charles, 5
MacKenzie, Jack, 102–103
Mackey, John, 162, 163, 202
Macworld, 57
Management. See Brand management

250  Index
Marbury, Stephan, 84
Market research, spending on, 32
Market value: brand value as portion 
of, 11–13; intangible value as por-
tion of, 9–11
Marketing: beneﬁ ts of remarkable, 
205–207; C-suite’s connection to, 
201, 204–205, 207–208; desire for 
truth in, 83–85; need for new 
paradigms for, 29–31; principles 
for, in ConsumerLand, 109–112; 
as selling, 31, 188–189; tradi-
tional, and brand bubble, 29–31, 
41; word of mouth (WOM), 
105–106; in world of constant 
change, 40–41
Masstige, 157
Mattel, 145, 169
McDonald’s, 66
McKinsey & Company, 29, 139
Medge, Raghunath, 209, 216, 217
Media: consumer-generated (CGM), 
93–97; everything as, 145–146; 
and multitasking, 62–63; nontra-
ditional, 29, 92; “shifting” tech-
nologies for, 99–101
Media Edge/CIA, 94
Mella, Carl, 22, 188
Method, 159
Micro-addressability, 98
Microsoft, 93
Mill, John Stuart, 63
Millennials: anti-brand attitudes of, 27; 
as inﬂ uence on popular culture, 
102–103; multitasking by, 62–63
“Million Dollar Homepage,” 87–88
Millward Brown, 100
MindSpring, 27
MINI Cooper, 129
Mizik, Natalie, 33, 34
Mizrahi, Isaac, 157
Mobile phone, 104–105
Moore, Gordon E., 89
Moore’s Law, 87, 89
Morel, Daniel, 98
Movement: BAV as revealing, 44, 49, 
52, 53; consumers and investors 
watching for, 64–65; link between 
ﬁ nancial success and, 71
Mozilla Firefox, 129
MTV.com/overdrive, 127
Mulcahy, Anne, 196–198, 200
Multiples, impact of Energized 
 Differentiation on, 73
Multitasking, 62–63
Mumbai Tifﬁ n Box Suppliers, 
209–217
Murakami, Takashi, 127
Murdoch, Rupert, 199
MySpace, 13, 102, 103
N
Neeleman, David, 222
Neiman Marcus, 128, 145
Net present value, 67
Netﬂ ix, 223
News Corporation, acquisition of 
MySpace by, 13
Newspaper Advertising Bureau, 27
Nike, 13, 98, 127, 129, 145, 159
Nintendo, Wii, 127
No Logo (Klein), 26
Nordstrom, 203
Norman, Rob, 100
O
Obama, Barack, 103, 126
O’Brien, Conan, 222
Offering, as dimension of differenti-
ation, 123
O’Keefe, Kevin, 62
Old Spice Red Zone, 130
One Laptop per Child, 125
Openness, Law of, 116, 167–171
Option value, 67, 68
Orange, 49
P
Pandora, 98–99
Patagonia, 159
Penner, Victor John, 222
PepsiCo, 13
Personalization, 98–99, 101, 111, 
170, 223

Index  251
Pettit, Justin, 71–72
Picasso, Pablo, 83
Pinkberry, 127, 145
Planck, Max, 90, 100
Planning, by consumers, 59–60
Podcasting, 93
Polaroid, 171
Pontiac, 169–170
Porter, Michael, 56, 82
Postmodernism, 79, 84, 85, 101
PowerGrids: brand bubble revealed 
by data from, 52–54; described, 
45, 47; for irresistible brands, 
49–50; for largest, fastest-growing 
companies, 143; levels of perfor-
mance indicated by, 48; sample, 
47; value of, 49. See also Brand-
Asset® Valuator (BAV)
Prada, 13
Price: consumer choice increasingly 
based on, 21–22, 23, 28; 
Energized Differentiation’s 
impact on, 74–75
Procter & Gamble, 184
Product Red, 159
Products, simplicity of producing, 
23–24
Pung, Caroline, 139
Purchasing choices: basis of, 67–69; 
change in model of, 66–67; 
increasingly based on price, 
21–22, 23, 28; simpliﬁ ed by 
watching for movement, 64–65
R
Real estate bubble, 18
Reﬂ ex, Law of, 116, 220–223
Regard, as classic metric of brand, 
15, 39
Relevance, as component of Brand 
Strength, 44, 45, 121
Renewal stage, 116, 218–231; and 
constant change, 218–220; exam-
ple of, 226–231; law of energy 
for, 220–223; obstacle to, 220; 
rule of brand management for, 
223–225
Risk: avoiding vs. managing, 139; 
and creativity, 140–141
Risk adjustment, 67–68
Robinson, Ken, 119
Roosevelt, Franklin D., 77
Rouzaud, Frédéric, 171
S
S&P 500: brands as portion of mar-
ket capitalization of, 12–13; per-
formance of irresistible brands 
vs., 54–55
Sales: impact of Energized Differen-
tiation on, 69–71; marketing as, 
31, 188–189
Schwartz, Barry, 20
Scott, Lee, 183
Second Life, 103–104
Seddon, Joanna, 12, 205
Self-serving bias, 61
Shakespeare, William, 32
Sheik, Duncan, 170
Sheth, Jagdish, 191
Shuda, Shinichiro, 228
Shultz, Howard, 161
Silly String, 82
Simon, Ernest, 99–100
Simplehuman, 128
Sisodia, Rajendra, 191
Smirnoff Raw Tea, 129
Social networking, 102–103
Sony, 73–74
Southwest Airlines, 43, 125
Stakeholder-centered companies, 
191–193
Starbucks, 49, 98, 159, 161, 207
Starck, Philippe, 157
Steckel, Joel, 205
Stock returns: and brand attributes, 
32–34, 236n2; impact of future 
value creation on, 71–72; for S&P 
500 vs. irresistible brands, 54–55
Stolk, Peter van, 222–223
Strategies: as obstacle to brand 
renewal, 220; tactics vs., 220–223
Stuart, John, 13
SUBWAY, 49, 125

252  Index
Surowiecki, James, 20, 23
Swiffer, 146, 184
T
Tactics, strategies vs., 220–223
Target, 49, 157–158
Tata Nano, 126
Technologies: ConsumerLand 
behavior enabled by, 87–88; Con-
sumerLand communities enabled 
by, 101–105; innovation in, and 
human nature, 91–92; “shifting,” 
for media, 99–101
Television, “shifting” technologies 
for, 99–101
Tesco, 127
Tew, Alex, 87–88
Thinking: long-term, 191; short-
term, 187–189
Thoman, Richard, 195
TNS Media Intelligence, 100
Tobaccowala, Rishad, 110
Tocqueville, Alexis de, 81
Toyota, 125
Trademarks, new, 20
Trader Joe’s (TJ’s), 160–161
Transparency, demand for, 65–66
Trout, Jack, 21
Trust: in brands vs. other consum-
ers, 94; as classic metric of brand, 
15, 39; decline of, in advertising, 
27–28, 84, 235n13; decline of, in 
brands, 25–29
Tulipmania, 5–6
Twitter, 129
Tyson Foods, 71–72
U
Underhill, Paco, 60–61
Unilever, 161–162, 185
UNIQLO, 225–231
Uniqueness, as dimension of differ-
entiation, 123
V
Value: intangible, 9–13; market, 
9–13; net present, 67; option, 67, 
68. See also Brand value
Vanguard, 93
Varvatos, John, 169
Veronis Suhler Stevenson, 221
VID proﬁ le, 137–138
Videogaming, 63, 104
Virgin: energized ﬁ nance at, 183; 
Energy Core of, 159; as high-
energy brand, 43; management 
of Virgin Atlantic brand, 172–178
Visa Green, 125
Vision: brands with, 124–126, 132; as 
dimension of energy, 123, 124.See 
also VID proﬁ le
Vlogging, 93
Volume, Energized Differentiation’s 
impact on, 74–75
“Von Dutch” effect, 53
W
W Hotels, 50, 127
Wal-Mart, 125, 183
Wall Street, brand value as perceived 
by, 6–7, 9, 15, 17–18, 233–234. See 
also Investors
Wallace, David Foster, 20–21
Wealth, material, and happiness, 81
Web sites: antiadvertising, 26–27; for 
brand information, 4, 233; Brand-
Asset® Valuator (BAV), 133; to help 
consumers track brands, 64–65
Webkinz, 128
Welch, Greg, 204–205, 207–208
Westergen, Tim, 99
White, Rob, 155, 180
Whole Foods, 50, 128, 162, 202–203
Wikipedia, 159
Wilde, Oscar, 218
Wolfe, David, 191
Word of mouth (WOM), 105–106
Wow factor, 82–83
X
Xerox, 194–198, 200
Z
Zara, 186
Zillow, 126, 145

