
 The Unloved Dollar Standard  

This page intentionally left blank 

 Th e Unloved Dollar 
Standard  
 From Bretton Woods 
to the Rise of China 
   
 R onald  I .  M cKinnon 
 1 

  1 
  Oxford University Press is a department of the 
 University of Oxford. It furthers the University’s objective 
 of excellence in research, scholarship, and education
by publishing worldwide  
 Oxford New York 
 Auckland Cape Town Dar es Salaam Hong Kong Karachi 
 Kuala Lumpur Madrid Melbourne Mexico City Nairobi  
 New Delhi Shanghai Taipei Toronto  
 With offi  ces in 
 Argentina Austria Brazil Chile Czech Republic France Greece 
 Guatemala Hungary Italy Japan Poland Portugal Singapore 
 South Korea Switzerland Th ailand Turkey Ukraine Vietnam  
  Oxford is a registered trade mark of Oxford University Press 
in the UK and certain other countries 
 Published in the United States of America by 
Oxford University Press 
 198 Madison Avenue, New York, New York 10016 
 © Oxford University Press 2013 
 All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced,
stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by any means, 
without the prior permission in writing of Oxford University Press, 
or as expressly permitted by law, by license, or under terms agreed with 
the appropriate reproduction rights organization. Inquiries concerning 
reproduction outside the scope of the above should be sent to the 
Rights Department, Oxford University Press, at the address above. 
 You must not circulate this work in any other form
and you must impose this same condition on any acquirer. 
 Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data 
 McKinnon, Ronald I. 
 Th e unloved dollar standard : from Bretton Woods to the rise of 
China / Ronald I. McKinnon. 
 p. cm. 
 Includes bibliographical references and index. 
 ISBN 978-0-19-993700-4 (cloth : alk. paper)
1. Foreign exchange. 2. Dollar, American. 3. Money—United States. 
4. Money—China. 5. Currency question. 6. Currency convertibility. I. Title. 
 HG3851.M44 2013 
 332.4'560973—dc23  2012018037 
  1 3 5 7 9 8 6 4 2 
 Printed in the United States of America 
 on acid-free paper 

  To George P. Shultz, the most distinguished American statesman 
of this age, for his ongoing interest and support despite 
my contrarian views on the foreign exchanges.   

This page intentionally left blank 

 ACKNOWLEDGMENTS  
  From my 50 years of teaching at Stanford, there are simply too 
many students to name individually and to disentangle what 
each has contributed. But collectively they have been invaluable 
in keeping me moving forward as an international economist. 
Robert Mundell with his exotic conferences in Santa Columba, 
and Dominick Salvatore with his annual sessions at the American 
Economic Association have added to the momentum. Martin 
Wolf and Charles Goodhart provided keen fi nancial insights. 
Helen Qiao and Gunther Schnabl have been major contributors 
to this book, and Zhao Liu helped put the book together. I wish 
to thank Martin Wolf of the  Financial Times  for constructive criti-
cism and for provoking me to defi ne more clearly the basic model 
presented in  chapter  9    . Tim Reichardt and Axel Löffl  er provided 
excellent research assistance in support of  chapter  12    . Margaret 
McKinnon provided editorial assistance. 

This page intentionally left blank 

 CONTENTS   
 Preface 
 
 xi 
  1.  Introduction: Th e Unloved Dollar Standard   3 
 PART I.  Th e International Money Machine 
  2.  Th e U.S. Dollar’s Facilitating Role as International Money Today   17 
  3.  Th e Dollar as a Worldwide Nominal Anchor: Insular 
U.S. Monetary Policy from 1945 to the Late 1960s    30 
  4.  Th e Slipping Anchor, 1971–2008: Th e Nixon, 
Carter, and Greenspan Shocks   48 
  5.  Th e Bernanke Shock, 2008–12: Interest Diff erentials, 
Carry Trades, and Hot Money Flows   61 
 PART II.  Trade Imbalances 
  6.  Th e U.S. Saving Defi ciency, Current-Account Defi cits, and 
Deindustrialization: Hard versus Soft Landings   85 
  7.  Exchange Rates and Trade Balances under the Dollar Standard 
   Hong (Helen) Qiao    100 
    8.    Why Exchange Rate Changes Will Not Correct Global 
Trade Imbalances   130 
  9.  Th e Transfer Problem in Reducing the U.S. Current-Account 
Defi cit   135 
  PART III.  China: Adjusting to the Dollar Standard 
 10.  High Wage Growth under Stable Dollar Exchange Rates: Japan, 
1950–71 and China, 1994–2011   149 
 11.  Currency Mismatches on the Dollar’s Periphery: Why China as an 
Immature Creditor Cannot Float Its Exchange Rate   162 

( x ) 
Contents
 12.  China and Its Dollar Exchange Rate: A Worldwide Stabilizing 
Infl uence?   170 
   With Gunther Schnabl 
 PART IV.  International Monetary Reform 
 13.  Rehabilitating the Dollar Standard and the Role of China: 
Th e G-2   187 
 References 
 
 207 
 Index  
 213 

 PREFACE  
 When I started teaching international economics in the early 
1960s—the period sometimes called “American high”—the 
United States bestrode the noncommunist world both politically 
and economically. Other countries, outside the communist bloc, 
were anxious to emulate America’s wealth-creating institutions. 
Although the dollar was already the key currency, the legal cover 
for the postwar international monetary order was the Articles of 
Agreement of the International Monetary Fund ratifi ed by the 
principal industrial economies at Bretton Woods, New Hampshire, 
in 1945. Each member country other than the United States 
declared a dollar exchange rate parity, while the United States 
would redeem its Treasury bonds held by foreign  governments for 
gold at $35 per ounce. 
 Because the United States had accumulated almost all the 
world’s gold by the end of World War II, for the next two decades 
foreign governments were more than happy to hold just U.S. 
Treasuries in their offi  cial reserves. Treasury bonds were interest 
bearing and more conveniently liquid than gold. In 1945, the 
United States was the only major country to have broad and deep 
fi nancial markets without restrictions on currency trading. 
Without offi  cial prompting, the dollar had become the eff ective 
key currency used by governments, banks, and private corpora-
tions, even before many of the IMF articles were observed in 
practice. So, very early in the postwar, the dollar became “inter-

( xii ) 
Preface
national money,” and the limited gold convertibility constraint 
on American fi nancial behavior seemed redundant. 
 Indeed, some infl uential authors argued early on that the 
dollar was better than gold, and gold was only attractive because 
the U.S. Treasury was willing to  buy  as well as sell gold at $35 per 
ounce. So Emile Despres (1963) argued that gold could be safely 
demonetized if the United States gradually withdrew from sup-
porting its price. Despres was joined by Charles Kindleberger and 
Walter Salant to write “Th e Dollar and World Liquidity: A Minority 
View” (1966). To best serve the needs of international trade and 
to provide the rest of the world with international (dollar) 
liquidity, they essentially argued for a pure dollar standard 
without any external constraint. In this vein and in a fi t of youth-
ful enthusiasm, I wrote “Private and Offi  cial International Money: 
Th e Case for the Dollar, 1969” for the Princeton  Essays in 
International Finance . All these papers presumed that the 
American monetary and fi scal authorities would better stabilize 
the American economy and its price level if not hampered by any 
external constraint—particularly by that barbarous relic, gold. 
 Amazingly enough, since 1971, when President Nixon offi  -
cially closed the gold window and so cut what had become just a 
vestigial tie to gold, the world has remained on an unalloyed 
dollar standard. Th e dollar remains the main international unit 
of account, means of settlement, and offi  cial reserve currency. 
However, it is now clear that the presumption that unfettered 
U.S. monetary and fi scal policies would lead to macroeconomic 
stability in the American economy—and by extension to the 
world economy—was wildly optimistic. Th is book documents 
how the many and various monetary and exchange rate shocks 
emanating from the United States, from the Nixon shock of 
forced dollar devaluation in 1971 to the zero-interest-rate 
Bernanke shock of 2008−12, have upset both the American and 
world economies. 
 To help overcome the insularity of American policies, I argue 
that U.S. policymakers should give more weight to stabilizing the 

Preface ( xiii )
dollar’s eff ective (multilateral) exchange rate. Beyond simply 
reacting to the immediate pressure of infl ation or defl ation within 
the domestic American economy, they could lessen the negative 
impact of U.S. monetary and fi scal policies on other countries by 
adjusting U.S. interest rates to curb hot money fl ows to, or from, 
the United States. America would then be rewarded by positive 
feedback eff ects from the world economy that would make 
the United States itself less infl ationary and more stable in the 
medium and longer terms. 
 In eff ect, the center country should pay more (benign) attention 
to economic events on its “periphery.” But the relevant periphery 
has changed dramatically with the enormous growth of the world 
economy. When Nixon shuttered the gold window in 1971 and 
(incorrectly) demanded that other countries appreciate their 
dollar exchange rates, the relevant “others” were just the 
individual Western European countries, Japan, and Canada. All 
had convertible currencies and, beginning in 1970, were deluged 
with hot money fl ows anticipating the 1971 dollar devaluation. 
 After 40 years of more globalized economic growth, however, 
today’s relevant periphery comprises what we now call emerging 
markets (EMs). Th ese are newly industrializing or diversifi ed pri-
mary products producers—such as China or Brazil and many 
other smaller countries in Asia and Latin America—with mainly 
convertible currencies. For more than a decade, they have shown 
high productivity growth that would normally lead to naturally 
higher domestic interest rates. But if the United States follows a 
policy of near-zero interest rates, inducing similar ultralow 
interest rates in the “old” relatively stagnant industrial economies 
of Europe and Japan, this is a volatile mix. Unless interrupted by 
banking crises, the stage is set for continual outfl ows of hot money 
from the center to the periphery—with losses of monetary con-
trol in the emerging markets as their central banks intervene to 
prevent their currencies from appreciating precipitately. With 
lags, the resulting worldwide infl ation then fi lters back to the cen-
ter—as was true of the great infl ations of the 1970s. 

( xiv ) 
Preface
 CHINA  
 Among today’s emerging markets, China is not only the largest 
but also quite special. I fi rst visited China in 1992 when its 
currency was largely inconvertible. Hot money infl ows or out-
fl ows were not a problem, and its trade surplus was insignifi cant. 
But the speed of development in light manufacturing, from tex-
tiles to consumer electronics, was astonishing—largely the result 
of intense market competition among enterprises owned by 
towns, counties, and provinces, as well as by the central 
government. Local governments were building, or planning to 
build, large-scale infrastructure in the form of roads, bridges, air-
ports, and so on, even ahead of actual demand for them. Th e 
streets were crowded with would-be entrepreneurs, many if not 
most on bicycles, all seemingly busy with even modest pursuits. 
 China became the model economy for my 1993 book  Th e Order 
of Economic Liberalization: Financial Control in the Transition to a 
Market Economy.  Instead of a “big bang” approach to escape from 
the detailed state intervention characteristic of socialist econ-
omies, China’s approach was one of well-ordered, step-by-step 
gradualism with the last stage being the elimination of capital 
controls in the balance of payments. For reasons discussed in this 
book—as well as in the earlier one—China has yet to fi nish this 
last stage. 
 Although intrigued by China’s development, I did not initially 
connect it with my main line of thought on the world dollar stan-
dard. To be sure, China like all emerging markets made good 
monetary use of the dollar standard in organizing its rapidly 
growing foreign trade and payments. And when China went from 
a system of multiple exchange rates to a unifi ed yuan/dollar rate 
in 1994, followed in 1996 by current-account convertibility, this 
became the much-needed anchor for its price level and fi nancial 
system more generally. But I did not think then that China today 
would become, albeit inadvertently, a  pillar  of the world dollar 
standard. 

Preface ( xv )
 China’s supporting role arises in large part from its own 
strength—very high domestic saving leading to huge domestic 
and, more recently, foreign investments so that the ambit of its 
dollar-based foreign trade is now the world’s largest. But over the 
past decade, China’s saving has exceeded domestic investment, 
while saving in the United States has dipped below its domestic 
investment. Th e result is China’s decade-long trade surplus, 
which is largely bilateral with the saving-defi cient United States. 
Th e resulting trade (saving) imbalance fl oods the United States 
with Chinese manufactures that lead to political friction in the 
form of “China bashing,” which is made worse by so-called 
informed U.S. opinion misdiagnosing the problem as one of 
China undervaluing it dollar exchange rate. 
 However, in becoming the world’s largest creditor country (by 
some measures) and creditor of the United States, China is also 
an  immature creditor. Th e renminbi is still a long distance from 
being an international currency like the dollar in part because 
China’s domestic fi nancial markets are still subject to exchange 
controls and interest rate restrictions (see Prasad and Ye 2012). 
Th is fi nancial immaturity means that China cannot fi nance its 
huge saving surplus by building up RMB claims on foreigners, 
but must resort to illiquid direct investments abroad or to 
acquiring liquid  dollar claims on foreigners. But Chinese banks 
and insurance companies are inhibited from holding liquid dollar 
claims as assets when their domestic fi nancial liabilities are in 
RMB. Because of this currency mismatch, China cannot free its 
foreign exchange market or fl oat its exchange rate—and the 
government is trapped into being the principal fi nancial 
intermediary for fi nancing the trade surplus. 
 Th is trap is bearable as long as China keeps the yuan/dollar rate 
fairly stable, and successfully resists pushes by American China 
bashing to let it continually appreciate. But the need for a modus 
vivendi between the two giants in the world economy is clear. 
 As China has gained in size and strength over the last thirty 
years, so has America been diminished by very low saving from 

( xvi ) 
Preface
large and growing fi scal defi cits. In addition, inward-looking 
monetary policy by the U.S. Federal Reserve Bank, with its current 
policy of keeping short-term interest rates close to zero being a 
prime example, hurts the world economy as well as the American 
one. Financial repression in China is now a problem because the 
Fed forces it to keep its internal interest rates too low. 
 But there is a parallel threat to the American economy. If 
emerging markets, of which China is the largest and natural 
leader, tire or become exasperated with continually buying dollar 
assets at next to no interest in order to prevent their currencies 
from appreciating, collectively they might stop. True, their cur-
rencies would then all appreciate against the dollar. But as long 
as they did so together, no one EM’s exports need be relatively 
disadvantaged. However, the collective eff ect of withdrawing 
support for the U.S. balance of payments would be to uncover the 
large U.S. fi scal defi cit. Th e result would be a traumatic credit 
crunch within the American economy as U.S. banks bought 
Treasuries rather than lending normally to business fi rms—as 
happened in a more minor way in the so-called U.S. credit crunch 
of 1991–92. 
 To prevent a sharp downturn in China’s biggest export market 
and possible collapse in the dollar standard itself, the two coun-
tries should work together for better mutual understanding of 
what needs to change. If both American and Chinese policy-
makers would read this book, it would be a step in the right 
direction.
Stanford, 2012  

 The Unloved Dollar Standard   

This page intentionally left blank 


Introduction 
 The Unloved Dollar Standard  
 T
he world dollar standard is an accident of history that greatly 
facilitates international trade and exchange—even trade not 
directly involving the United States. Since 1945, the dollar has 
been the key currency for clearing international payments among 
banks, including interventions by governments to set exchange 
rates; the dominant currency for invoicing trade in primary com-
modities; and the principal currency in offi  cial exchange reserves. 
 Although the strong network eff ects of the dollar standard 
greatly increase the fi nancial effi  ciency of multilateral trade 
( ch.  2    ), nobody loves it. Erratic U.S. monetary and exchange 
rate policies since the late 1960s have made, and still make, for-
eigners unhappy. A weak and falling dollar led to the worldwide 
price infl ations of the 1970s and contributed to the disastrous 
asset bubbles and global credit crisis after 2000—including the 
global credit crunch of 2008–9. Dollar weakness aggravated the 
postwar world’s three great oil shocks in 1973, 1979, and 
2007–8 ( ch.  4    ). 
 Th e U.S. Federal Reserve Bank’s current policy of keeping 
short-term interest rates near zero and out of alignment with 
 CHAPTER 1 

( 4 ) 
The Unloved Dollar Standard
higher interest rates in emerging markets on the dollar stan-
dard’s periphery makes the international monetary system vul-
nerable to “carry” trades. For more than two years after 2008, a 
fl ood of hot money into the periphery caused a loss of monetary 
control, commodity bubbles, and worldwide infl ation ( ch.  5 ). 
Th en, in August 2011, these infl ows into emerging markets sud-
denly reversed. A new worldwide banking crisis, associated with 
the possible breakdown of the euro, cut off  the fl ow of credit to 
businesses everywhere—but particularly to highly leveraged 
carry traders. When these carry-trade bubbles suddenly unwind, 
they can result in huge swings in exchange rates as well as credit 
crunches. No wonder that foreigners—from the French in the 
late 1960s to the Chinese since 2008—have called for a new 
international monetary regime that is not so dependent on the 
vicissitudes of any one national currency, that is, the U.S. dollar. 
 Th e asymmetrical nature of the dollar standard also makes 
many Americans unhappy because they cannot control their own 
exchange rate. Under the rules of the dollar standard game as 
explained in  chapters  2 and  3 , foreign governments may opt to 
set their exchange rates against the dollar—while, to prevent 
confl ict, the U.S. government typically does not intervene. 
Nevertheless, Americans often complain that foreigners set their 
dollar exchange rates unfairly. American Japan bashing from 
the late 1970s to the mid-1990s over the alleged undervaluation 
of the yen, and China bashing in the new millennium over the 
alleged undervaluation of the renminbi, are two cases in point. 
 So we have the great paradox. Although nobody loves the dollar 
standard, the revealed preference of both governments and 
private participants in the foreign exchange markets since 1945 
has been to continue to use it. As the principal monetary mecha-
nism ensuring that international trade remains robustly multi-
lateral rather than narrowly bilateral, it is a remarkable survivor 
that is too valuable to lose and too diffi  cult to replace. 
 With the advent of the euro on January 1, 1999, and with the 
GNP of the euro area being (slightly) greater than that of the 

INTRODUCTION 
( 5 )
United States, it was once thought that the more stable-valued 
euro would gradually supplant the central role of the dollar in 
international fi nance. And the euro has served as international 
money in Europe’s own backyard in smaller countries to its east 
and in a few former colonies in Africa and elsewhere. However, 
the Greek debt crisis of 2010 heralded a new era of grave doubts 
regarding the euro’s survival in its present form. In late 2011, 
virtually all the sovereign bonds of countries in the euro zone 
became suspect. Beyond this, the international competitiveness 
of the weaker “Club Med” countries continued to deteriorate, 
making debt repayment problematic. Th us the prospect of the 
euro becoming a truly international reserve currency beyond 
Europe is greatly diminished. 
 Since 1980, China’s astonishing GDP growth based on its 
transition to a market-based system has propelled it to become 
the world’s biggest trading economy, as measured (in dollars of 
course!) by the sum of its exports and imports. With its huge 
population, China’s domestic GNP is already comparable to that 
of the larger European countries—and has overtaken slow- 
growing Japan. Within a decade or so, China’s GNP could well 
become larger than that of the United States itself. 
 Chinese offi  cials, such as Governor Zhou Xiaochuan of the 
People’s Bank of China (PBC), bemoan the use of one national 
currency as “international money,” a practice they regard as 
increasingly anomalous. 
 The People’s Bank of China released a statement by Zhou 
Xiaochuan, on March 23, 2009. It calls for replacing the dollar 
as the dominant world currency and creating “an international 
reserve currency that is disconnected from individual nations 
and is able to remain stable in the long run.” The domestic 
monetary needs of the center country, Zhou contends plau-
sibly, are increasingly likely to diverge from those of the rest 
of the world as globalization proceeds. China nervously sits 
on more than $3 trillion in official dollar exchange reserves 
and is effectively trapped into acquiring more because of 

( 6 ) 
The Unloved Dollar Standard
its exchange rate objectives in the face of America’s zero- interest-
rate policy ( ch.  5 ). 
 Like Japan’s earlier attempts in the 1980s and 1990s to “inter-
nationalize” the yen, in the new millennium China has taken 
steps to subsidize the partial internationalization of the ren-
minbi (RMB). Its government encourages trade on its immediate 
borders to be invoiced in RMB, and has loosened capital controls—
at least on outfl ows. In principle, Shanghai could become an inter-
national center for fi nancing China’s large trade (saving) surplus 
in RMB—as Germany now fi nances its large trade (saving) 
surplus in euros. Th ese steps are all well and good in potentially 
reducing currency mismatches within China’s economy ( ch.  11 ). 
 However, the dollar has two great advantages for retaining its 
central role as international money, advantages that will persist 
even when China’s economy becomes bigger than that of the 
United States. 
 First, having just one dominant international money is a 
natural monopoly. Introducing a second or third reserve currency 
would raise the transactions costs of making and clearing inter-
national payments among diverse countries the world over 
( ch.  2    ). True, for subsets of countries that trade intensively with 
one another and are perhaps contiguous (such as those in, or 
potentially in) the euro zone, the effi  ciency gains from having 
stable intrazone exchange rates from using a common European 
currency are suffi  ciently high to off set any network losses in 
 dollar-based trade with the rest of the world. But not so otherwise. 
 Second, there is a tremendous fi rst-mover advantage to the 
national currency already ensconced as international money. 
Once the private conventions of exchange (networks) are set so 
that most banks use the dollar as the intermediary currency in 
money changing between second and third currencies, transac-
tions costs fall in these dollar-based markets as their liquidity 
increases. With this fall in costs, the remaining banks are attracted 
in to use the dollar—and costs fall even further from economies 
of an ever larger network as globalization proceeds. 

INTRODUCTION 
( 7 )
 Moreover, once established as international money, the dollar 
has become a “safe haven” in times of great international crises—
even ones emanating from the United States itself. In the credit 
crunch and global downturn of 2008 from the U.S. subprime 
mortgage crisis, the resulting fl ight to safety sharply lifted the 
foreign exchange value of the dollar against most other currencies 
that were not tied to it. In the great euro banking crisis that began 
in 2011, there was another surge in the demand for dollars that 
was felt mainly as a sudden reversal of hot money fl ows into 
emerging markets—such as China and Brazil. But it is too early 
to tell how this latest crisis will play itself out. 
 Although “black swans” are not entirely out of the question, 
only a cataclysmic fi nancial event could now displace the dollar as 
fi rst mover. Th e fi nancial earthquakes of the 1970s and 80s, and 
then after 2000—with the dollar at their epicenters—have, 
amazingly enough, left the facilitating role of today’s world dollar 
standard intact ( ch.  2    ). Notwithstanding the dollar’s robustness 
as a facilitator in surviving the calamities of the last few decades, 
its performance as the world’s monetary anchor has become 
abysmal ( chs.  4   and  5 ). Why should this be the case?  
 THE INSULAR TRADITION IN U.S. 
MONETARY POLICY   
 Since 1945, American monetary policy has remained inward 
looking even as the process of globalization has made such insu-
larity obsolete ( ch.  3    )—the central theme in this book. By 
continuing to pursue insular domestic monetary and fi nancial 
policies while neglecting feedback eff ects from the rest of the 
world, the United States itself has often been the biggest loser. 
And the negative consequences of this insularity have been com-
pounded by U.S. policymakers being in thrall to successive mac-
roeconomic and foreign exchange fallacies—listed at the end of 
this chapter—leading to policy mistakes. 

( 8 ) 
The Unloved Dollar Standard
 What is the historical origin of today’s insularity in conducting 
U.S. monetary policy? For more than two decades after 1945, the 
American Gulliver dominated the noncommunist fi nancial world. 
Moreover, globalization in the form of freely fl owing interna-
tional fi nance—as we now know it—was only nascent. Outside 
of the United States, controls on international capital fl ows in 
both the industrial and developing economies proliferated—the 
legacy of war and depression. Th e United States—with its 
relatively open fi nancial system that made, and still makes, the 
dollar attractive as international money—was then insulated 
from fi nancial shocks elsewhere. 
 Under this early dollar standard, insularity in the conduct 
of American monetary policy, where the Fed looked only at 
U.S. domestic economic indicators—such as the rate of infla-
tion, unemployment, or the financial positions of American 
banks—was roughly correct ( ch.  3 ). Useful monetary feedback 
through the foreign exchanges to the U.S. monetary authority 
was small or nonexistent. Foreign currencies were not rival 
stores of international liquidity, and international hot money 
flows were minimal. As long as the U.S. price level and finan-
cial system could be stabilized independently, other countries 
could take that as a datum and anchor their own macro pol-
icies by pegging to it. The Fed’s “benign neglect” of macroeco-
nomic conditions in the rest of the noncommunist world was 
the best policy. 
 However, times change. By the mid-1960s, Western Europe 
and Japan had returned to currency convertibility on current 
account, a necessary ingredient for their strong economic growth 
led by the rapid expansion of world trade. In addition, controls 
on fl ows of fi nancial capital had pretty well eroded by the end of 
the 1970s. West Germany was the leader. It eff ectively eliminated 
capital controls in the late 1960s with a single-minded determi-
nation to keep German infl ation lower than that of the United 
States. Th rough international currency substitution, the poten-
tial for short-term hot money fl ows was now in place. 

INTRODUCTION 
( 9 )
 However, if the U.S. had followed a policy of domestic price-
level and exchange rate stability, even after abrogating its com-
mitment to gold convertibility in the late 1960s ( ch.  3 ), the 
credibility of traditional dollar exchange parities from the 1960s 
could well have been sustained. Th en capital-account liberaliza-
tion by countries on the dollar’s periphery would not have been a 
problem. Instead of the hot money fl ows we see today, interna-
tional money fl ows would make exchange rates more stable—in 
the mode of Milton Friedman’s (1953) hypothetical stabilizing 
speculators. 
 But it was the American government itself—concerned with 
declining competitiveness of U.S. industry in world markets—
that upset the credibility apple cart. In the well-known “Nixon 
shock” of August 1971 ( ch.  4    ), the U.S. president ended America’s 
gold convertibility commitment and imposed a temporary tariff  
on imports of manufactures until governments in the other 
industrial counties agreed to appreciate substantially against the 
dollar. (“Emerging markets” as we know them today were not yet 
economically signifi cant on the world scene.) Less well remem-
bered is the follow-up “Carter shock” of 1977, where Treasury 
secretary Michael Blumenthal was co-opted into talking the 
dollar down further, particularly against the yen. Th e expectation 
of the Treasury’s actions set off  another hot money run out of 
the United States, with a sharply falling dollar in 1977–78. Th is 
only ended when an international consortium of central banks 
intervened to prop up the dollar in October 1978, with a sharp 
increase in U.S. interest rates lasting into the early 1980s. 
 In both the Nixon and Carter cases, it was the  ex ante expectation 
that the dollar would depreciate (a one-way bet), more than the 
 ex post  fact of depreciation, that set off  hot money outfl ows from 
the United States. Acting individually, foreign central banks in 
Western Europe, Japan, and Canada tried to resist excessive 
exchange appreciation against the world’s central money by 
intervening to buy dollars with domestic base money. Th e result-
ing explosions in “world” money in 1970–72 and in 1977–78 led 

( 10 ) 
The Unloved Dollar Standard
to the two great infl ationary episodes of the 1970s, which even-
tually engulfed the United States itself ( ch.  4    ). 
 In retrospect, the monetary-cum–foreign exchange origins of 
the infl ations of the 1970s from runs on the dollar have been 
obscured by the popular tendency to explain them away as caused 
by two exogenous oil shocks—interruptions in the supply of 
crude oil from the Middle East. However,  chapter  4     also shows 
that the sharp increases in the price of oil in 1974 and again in 
1979  followed  the prior losses of monetary control, and were 
much larger than could be explained by sudden oil supply con-
straints from the Yom Kippur War in September 1973 or the 
Iranian revolution in 1979. 
 Th is contrarian view is bolstered by the more recent experi-
ence from 2002 to July 2008 of a falling dollar. With relatively 
low U.S. interest rates, a dollar carry trade (short-term capital 
outfl ows) induced bubbles in many commodity and real estate 
markets worldwide, culminating in a sharp spike in the price of 
oil in the fi rst half of 2008, which was proportionately as large as 
the two spikes in the 1970s ( ch.  4    ). But this more recent episode 
was not associated with any sudden “exogenous” shock or 
politically motivated disruption in the supply of oil in world mar-
kets. Th us the monetary expansion–cum–falling dollar explana-
tion of the earlier oil price spikes seems vindicated by the recent 
spike in the fi rst half of 2008. 
 In retrospect, it seems obvious (at least to the author!) that 
past runs on the dollar, in anticipation of ongoing depreciations, 
gave ample advance warning to the Fed that something was 
amiss. Infl ation in goods or asset prices was likely to follow unless 
the Fed tightened up to stop the rot. Conversely, the few cases 
where the dollar appreciated sharply—as in 1984 into 1985 so as 
to create the industrial “rust bowl” in the American Midwest—
the strong dollar signaled that U.S. monetary policy was too 
tight. 
 If the Federal Reserve’s monetary policy had been less insular, 
say by giving more weight to smoothing fl uctuations in the 

INTRODUCTION 
( 11 )
 dollar’s eff ective exchange rate, both the rest of the world and the 
United States itself would have been the benefi ciaries. But the 
technical specifi cs of having the Fed behave more appropriately 
as the de facto central banker for the world are tricky, and are not 
spelled out until  chapter  13 . 
 THE LENDER OF LAST RESORT 
IN A DOLLAR-BASED SYSTEM  
 To be sure, in crisis circumstances, the U.S. Fed or Treasury has 
willingly lent dollars to foreign governments in distress—as with 
the subprime mortgage crisis of 2007–08 and the euro crisis of 
2011–12. Th e principal fi nancial vehicle for doing this is for 
the Fed to swap dollars with a foreign central bank for its 
 currency—in eff ect a collateralized loan. Th en the foreign central 
bank can lend the dollars to its domestic commercial banks so 
they can make good on their dollar obligations in times of stress—
when the demand for dollars as a safe haven has suddenly 
escalated. 
 For smaller developing countries in the postwar, the United 
States has delegated crisis lending (mainly in dollars) to the 
International Monetary Fund. Th e IMF has become the world’s 
crisis lender of “fi rst resort.” But when a crisis is suffi  ciently acute 
to outrun the immediate dollar resources of the IMF, then the 
U.S. government supplements it in one way or another—as with 
the great Asian crisis of 1997–98 or the Mexican crisis of 1994–95, 
or the euro crisis currently, where central bank swaps with the 
Fed supplement direct IMF lending. 
 Despite being the lender of last resort in international crisis 
situations, however, the Fed still does not bend the mainline 
stance of U.S. domestic monetary policy—by easing or tightening—
to what is going on in the international economy. In succeeding 
chapters, I will contend that this is, and has been, the most 
serious lacuna in the world’s monetary system. 

( 12 ) 
The Unloved Dollar Standard
 MACROECONOMIC FALLACIES  
  If this prima facie case for a more outward-looking U.S. domestic 
monetary policy is granted, what has inhibited, and still inhibits, 
the Fed from overcoming its traditional insularity? 
 Th ree macroeconomic fallacies, some but not all of which have 
been exposed as such, have undermined monetary stability in 
the U.S. and world economies: 
 1.  Th e Phillips Curve Fallacy . In the late 1960s, mild infl ation 
broke out in the United States from the government failing 
to fi nance properly the Vietnam War and domestic social 
expenditures. With fi xed dollar exchange parities, American 
industries became less competitive from the moderate 
increase in the U.S. price level. But disinfl ation was inhibited 
for fear of increasing unemployment—the then prevalent 
belief in the Phillips Curve. Instead of disinfl ating, the U.S. 
government insisted that the countries of Western Europe 
and Japan all appreciate their exchange rates against the 
dollar: the infamous Nixon shock of 1971, as discussed 
further in  chapter  4 .  
 2.  Th e Effi  cient Markets Fallacy . Th e bursting of price bubbles in 
asset markets—common stocks, residential real estate, pri-
mary commodities—over the last decade has punctured the 
once common belief, fi rmly held by Alan Greenspan when he 
was chairman of the U.S. Fed from 1987 to 2008, that asset 
markets are self-correcting and can be safely ignored by the 
monetary authority—at least until a bubble bursts. Although 
the possibility of bubbles and herdlike behavior is now well 
recognized in attempts to regulate domestic fi nance, this 
disillusion has yet to encompass the foreign exchange mar-
kets per se—where wild swings in fl oating exchange rates 
often arise out of carry trades that have bubblelike charac-
teristics. Most economists still believe that freely fl oating 
exchange rates are the preferred “market” solution.  

INTRODUCTION 
( 13 )
 3.  Th e Exchange Rate and Trade Balance Fallacy . Th e most 
enduring fallacy inhibiting many governments, but particu-
larly that of the United States, from orienting monetary 
policy toward exchange stability is the presumption that the 
exchange rate should be assigned to correcting trade (net 
saving) imbalances across counties. In particular, if creditor 
countries such as China are persuaded or coerced to appre-
ciate against the dollar, conventional wisdom has it that 
their trade surpluses will be reduced. But this is not true in 
a world where fi nance and investment have become 
“globalized”—see the  chapters  6 through  9 on trade imbal-
ances in general, and  chapters  10   through  12     on China in 
particular. 
 Although fallacies 1 and 2 are in abeyance, this exchange rate–
cum–trade balance fallacy is alive and well—witness the several 
attempts by the U.S. government since 1970 to talk the dollar 
down. Despite protestations that the government really wants a 
“strong” dollar, today’s weak dollar is tolerated because infl uen-
tial economists still believe that dollar devaluation will reduce 
America’s trade defi cit—the belief that motivates the bashing of 
China to appreciate the renminbi against the dollar. Th is third 
fallacy is particularly pernicious for global monetary stability 
when the center country in the world’s monetary system tries to 
depreciate its own currency. It remains the greatest conceptual 
barrier to having a more internationalist, outward-looking, and 
thus more stable U.S. monetary policy. 
 Even so, the dollar standard remains remarkably resilient. Th e 
succeeding chapters provide historical and analytical perspec-
tives on the diff erent phases of the postwar dollar standard in 
order to better understand this resilience despite the great 
 volatility—past and present—in the global monetary system.      

This page intentionally left blank 

Th e International Money Machine 
 PART I 


This page intentionally left blank 

 CHAPTER 2 
Th e U.S. Dollar’s Facilitating Role 
as International Money Today   
 W
hy does the dollar’s asymmetrical role in facilitating inter-
national exchange continue today even when the other 
industrial countries—such as Japan and those in Europe—have 
recovered from World War II, and no longer have exchange con-
trols or closed capital markets? A little algebra helps explain 
continued dollar predominance. Suppose there are 150 national 
currencies in the world economy. To facilitate international 
exchange, the markets themselves would always pick just one as 
the central money. Th e reason is a big economy in the number of 
foreign exchange markets. 
 Consider a world of  N  countries with independent national 
monies. From basic probability theory, the total number of 
country pairs in the system is the combination of  N  things taken 
two at a time (  N  C 2 ). If foreign exchange dealers tried to trade 
within each pair, say, Swedish crowns against Australian dollars, 
or Korean won against Japanese yen, the number of bilateral 
markets would be huge, that is,  N ( N  − 1) / 2. With 150 national 
currencies in the world ( N  = 150), and dealers tried to trade each 
pair, there would be 11,175 foreign exchange markets! 


( 18 ) 
The Unloved Dollar Standard
 It is expensive for any bank to set up a foreign exchange trading 
desk. Th us, rather than trading all pairs of currencies bilaterally, 
in practice just one currency, the  N th, is chosen as the central 
vehicle currency. Th en all trading and exchange takes place fi rst 
against the vehicle currency before going to the others. By having 
all currency trading against that one currency, the number of 
markets in the system can be reduced to  N  − 1. Th us, with 150 
countries, there need be just 149 independent foreign exchange 
markets—instead of 11,175! Unlike the Bretton Woods system, 
where member countries set offi  cial dollar parities, this theorem 
does not depend on any formal agreement among governments. 
In private markets today, choosing one currency like the dollar to 
be the intermediary is the most natural way of economizing on 
foreign exchange transacting. 
 Once the  N  − 1 foreign exchange rates are established against 
the  N th (central) currency, triangular arbitrage with this 
central money becomes suffi  cient to establish all the relevant 
cross rates between any pair of nondollar currencies ( McKinnon 
 1979    ). Once the 149 primary dollar exchange rates are 
established, triangular arbitrage (among banks) becomes 
suffi  cient to establish all the remaining 11,175 cross rates. In 
thinly traded exchange markets involving small countries, 
many of these cross rates will be only notional—although still 
eff ective as guides for importers and exporters. But history is 
important. If one country starts off  providing the central 
money, as the United States in the late 1940s did, then it 
becomes a natural monopoly because of the economies of scale. 
Th e more countries that deal in dollars, the cheaper it is for 
them all to deal in dollars. If you’re a Japanese importer of 
Swedish Volvos and you want to pay for the Volvos, you fi rst 
get your bank to convert your yen into dollars on the open 
interbank market, then use the dollars to buy Swedish kronor. 
Th e Volvo Corporation is paid in Swedish kronor, and the 
Japanese importer gets the Volvos. However, the dollar is the 
intermediary interbank currency. 

THE INTERNATIONAL MONEY MACHINE 
( 19 )
 Using the standard textbook classifi cation of the roles of 
money, box 2.1 summarizes our paradigm of the dollar’s central 
role in facilitating international exchange. For both the private 
and government sectors, the dollar performs as medium of 
exchange, store of value, unit of account, and standard of deferred 
payment for international transacting on current and capital 
account—as it has done since 1945. 
 First, the dollar is a  medium of exchange.  Because the foreign 
exchange markets are mainly interbank, the dollar is the vehicle 
currency in interbank transactions serving customers in the 
private sector. Th us, when any government—usually represented 
by its central bank—intervenes to infl uence its exchange rate, it 
also fi nds it cheaper and more convenient to use the dollar as the 
offi  cial intervention currency. (Th e major exception to this 
convention is a fringe of small European countries east of the 
euro zone that mainly use the euro as their central money.) 
 Following  Peter Kenen ( 2002 ),  tables  2.1 through  2.6 analyze 
the dollar’s asymmetrical role in international fi nance.  Table  2.1 
shows that the dollar is on one side or the other of 85 to 90 per-
cent of interbank foreign exchange transactions worldwide. 
 Remember that the dollar’s dominance in international trade 
is limited to the interbank market, that is, money changing 
among banks. For the most part, the dollar does not encroach on 
purely domestic monetary transactions among households and 
 Box 2.1 
THE U.S. DOLLAR’S FACILITATING ROLE AS 
INTERNATIONAL MONEY SINCE 1945   
 
  Private 
 Offi  cial 
 Medium of exchange 
 Vehicle 
 Intervention 
 Store of value 
 Banking 
 Reserves 
 Unit of account 
 Invoice 
 Peg 
  Standard of deferred payment 
 Private bonds 
 Sovereign bonds 

( 20 ) 
The Unloved Dollar Standard
 Table 2.1. CURRENCIES INVOLVED IN FOREIGN EXCHANGE TRADING 
(PERCENTAGE OF GLOBAL TRADING, COUNTING EACH TRADE TWICE)  
 Currency 
 1998 
 2001 
 2004 
 2007 
 2010 
 Dollar 
 86.8 
 89.9 
 88.0 
 85.6 
 84.9 
 EMS currencies 
and euro a 
 52.5 
 37.9 
 37.4 
 37.0 
 39.1 
 Yen 
 21.7 
 23.5 
 20.8 
 17.2 
 19.0 
 Pound 
 11.0 
 13.0 
 16.5 
 14.9 
 12.9 
 Swiss franc 
 7.1 
 6.0 
 6.0 
 6.8 
 6.4 
 Canadian and 
Australian dollar 
 6.5 
 8.8 
 10.2 
 10.9 
 12.9 
 All other 
currencies 
 14.4 
 20.9 
 21.1 
 27.6 
 24.8 
 Memorandum 
Total turnover 
in $billion 
 1,705 
 1,505 
 2,040 
 3,370 
 3,981 
 Source : Bank for International Settlements, Central Bank Survey of Foreign Exchange and Derivative 
Market Activity in April 2010: Preliminary Results (September 2010). 
 Note : As each trade involves two currencies, each trade is counted twice, so percentages should add up to 
200, but detail may not sum to total because of rounding. 
 a European Monetary System (EMS) currencies include the ecu and Danish krone. 
fi rms. Th ese are almost always in the domestic currency.   1 And if 
the interbank market is not limited by foreign exchange controls, 
most fi rms and households need to hold liquid balances in just 
their domestic currency—from which their banks make foreign 
payments intermediated through the dollar. 
 Beyond spot transacting, however, the interbank market is 
multidimensional in forward foreign exchange. To serve exporters 
who want to sell future foreign exchange earnings, or importers 
who anticipate having to pay foreign exchange, dealers in the 
major banks remain open to transact with each other and their 
nonbank customers at virtually every term to maturity. Th us, 
with a liquid “wholesale” interbank market where banks whose 
names are taken without question by counterparties, any bank 
can easily cover an open forward exchange position thrust upon 
it by its “retail” nonbank customers. 

THE INTERNATIONAL MONEY MACHINE 
( 21 )
 By having most interbank transactions funneled through the 
dollar as the intermediary currency, this high trading density with 
its high liquidity is precisely what the dollar standard provides. 
Purely bilateral forward exchange markets would be thinly traded 
and hopelessly illiquid. In contrast, banks in more liquid dollar-
based markets have much less trouble matching buy and sell 
orders at diff erent maturities, and so see less risk. Th us they off er 
much lower bid-asked spreads, or lower brokerage fees, in forward 
transacting with other banks and with their nonbank customers. 
 Notice that, apart from the absence of foreign exchange 
controls, country size matters. Because in 1945, the United 
States had by far the largest GDP and foreign trade sector, 
interbank trading in dollars against other currencies was nat-
urally more dense and so more liquid. True, the global economy 
has grown enormously since then, and the American econ-
omy—while still the largest—has shrunk relative to its major 
trading partners. 2  
 Yet, paradoxically, this global growth—particularly in Asia—
seems to have strengthened dollar dominance. Because rapidly 
growing Asian and Latin American economies clear interbank 
payments in dollars, say in trade between China and Brazil, the 
liquidity of dollar-based foreign exchange markets is enhanced—
leading to further declines in bank transaction fees. Even though 
the relative size of the American economy itself is declining, the 
ambit of dollar-based interbank exchanges is increasing—thus 
preserving the dollar standard into the indefi nite future. 
 Perhaps counterintuitively,  table  2.2 shows that dollar-based 
foreign exchange transacting is not centered geographically in 
the United States. Although the dollar is the predominant 
money in foreign currency trading, London has the biggest 
foreign exchange markets using the dollar as the clearing 
currency. Th e United Kingdom actually has the bigger proportion 
of foreign exchange trading. Off shore markets exist in Singapore 
and Hong Kong.  

( 22 ) 
The Unloved Dollar Standard
 Table 2.2. GEOGRAPHIC DISTRIBUTION OF FOREIGN EXCHANGE TRADING 
(PERCENTAGE OF GLOBAL TRADING)  
 Country  
  1998  
 2001 
 2004 
 2007 
 2010 
 United 
Kingdom 
 32.6 
 32.0 
 32.0 
 34.6 
 36.7 
 United States 
 18.3 
 16.1 
 19.1 
 17.4 
 17.9 
 Euro zone 
countries  
 17.0 
 14.6 
 13.1 
 10.5 
 9.4 
 Germany 
 4.7 
 5.4 
 4.6 
 2.4 
 2.1 
 France 
 3.7 
 2.9 
 2.6 
 3.0 
 3.0 
 Others 
 8.6 
 6.2 
 5.9 
 5.2 
 4.3 
 Japan 
 7.0 
 9.0 
 8.0 
 5.8 
 6.2 
 Singapore 
 6.9 
 6.1 
 5.1 
 5.6 
 5.3 
 Switzerland 
 4.4 
 4.5 
 3.3 
 5.9 
 5.2 
 Hong Kong 
 3.8 
 4.0 
 4.1 
 4.2 
 4.7 
 All others 
 10.1 
 13.6 
 15.3 
 15.8 
 14.7 
 Source : Bank for International Settlements, Central Bank Survey of Foreign Exchange and Derivative 
Market Activity in April 2010: Preliminary Results (September 2010). 
 Note : Details may not sum to total because of rounding. 
 In attempting to “internationalize” the renminbi (RMB), the 
People’s Bank of China has tried to encourage off shore trading in 
RMB in Hong Kong since 2010. But this attempt is handicapped 
by China’s controls on capital infl ows designed to prevent or slow 
hot money fl ows from dollars into RMB. So RMB purchased by 
U.S. dollars in Hong Kong don’t appear to be convertible into 
mainland RMB—but the jury is still out on whether this new 
policy succeeds. 
 Referring back to  box  2.1    , we note that the dollar is also an 
international  store of value.  Corporations and some individuals 
hold dollar bank accounts in London, Singapore, and other off -
shore banking centers—as well as in the United States itself. But 
it is virtually impossible to obtain data on the distribution of 
foreign exchange holdings by currency of denomination for the 
private sector the world over. It is estimated that more than half 

THE INTERNATIONAL MONEY MACHINE 
( 23 )
the stock of coin and currency issued by the U.S. government 
 circulates abroad in Latin America, Russia, and in Africa and 
other fi nancially distressed areas. So too does the euro circulate 
as hand-to-hand currency outside of the euro zone, but more in 
the smaller countries of Eastern Europe. However, the Bank for 
International Settlements does compile information on the 
cross-border liabilities of reporting banks identifi able by currency, 
and this is shown in  table  2.3 . 
 As the store of value of governments, international exchange 
reserves are mainly in dollars—as shown in  table  2.4    . After the 
advent of the euro, in 1999, many economists suggested that 
foreign central banks were going to start diversifying their offi  cial 
reserve exchange reserves into euros. Th us the dollar standard 
would not be as strong.  Table  2.4 shows that the degree of this 
diversifi cation has been minor. In developing countries, about two-
thirds of their exchange reserves are in dollars if you allocate their 
unspecifi ed exchange reserves in  table  2.4     in the same way that the 
specifi ed reserves are distributed. Th e developing countries used to 
hold some deutsche marks, francs, and pounds sterling. Now, the 
euro is held more or less in the same balance as were the old 
European national currencies. So even before the global crisis of 
2008, the euro did not encroach much on the dollar-based system. 
After the great euro crisis that began in 2011, however, the euro’s 
worldwide role seems destined to shrink rather than to expand.   
 Th ird, the dollar serves as a  unit of account  for much of interna-
tional trade. Trade in primary commodities shows a strong pattern 
of using the dollar as the main currency of  invoice ( McKinnon  1979 ). 
Exports of homogeneous primary products such as oil, wheat, soy-
beans, iron ore, and copper all tend to be invoiced in dollars, with 
worldwide price formation (quotations) in a centralized exchange. 
Futures markets for hedging price risk in each commodity are located 
at these centralized exchanges—which are usually in American cit-
ies such as Chicago and New York, although dollar-denominated 
commodity exchanges do exist in London and elsewhere. 

 Table 2.3. CROSS-BORDER LIABILITIES OF BANKS (PERCENTAGE OF GLOBAL TOTAL IDENTIFIABLE BY CURRENCY)  
 Currency 
 1998 
 1999 
 2000 
 2001 
 2002 
 2003 
 2004 
 2005 
 2006 
 2007 
 2008 
 2009 
 2010 
 Dollar 
 47.6 
 50.9 
 52.5 
 53.5 
 48.7 
 46.5 
 45.2 
 47.7 
 47.6 
 44.7 
 45.3 
 45.5 
 46.9 
 Euro zone 
currencies and 
euro 
 26.3 
 26.3 
 25.1 
 26.2 
 30.5 
 33.8 
 35.4 
 33.4 
 33.0 
 34.2 
 34.8 
 35.0 
 33.3 
 Yen 
 8.4 
 7.6 
 7.1 
 5.0 
 5.1 
 4.1 
 3.9 
 3.7 
 3.0 
 3.6 
 4.4 
 3.4 
 3.7 
 Pound 
 6.5 
 6.6 
 6.4 
 7.2 
 7.3 
 7.8 
 7.8 
 7.5 
 8.2 
 9.3 
 7.3 
 7.1 
 6.4 
 Swiss franc 
 3.2 
 2.8 
 2.5 
 2.7 
 2.5 
 2.2 
 2.0 
 1.8 
 1.7 
 1.6 
 1.8 
 1.7 
 1.7 
 Other 
 8.1 
 5.7 
 6.3 
 5.4 
 6.0 
 5.7 
 5.7 
 5.9 
 6.5 
 6.7 
 6.5 
 7.3 
 8.0 
 Total allocated 
liabilities in 
$billion 
 8,399 
 8,652 
 9,521 
 10,244 
 12,112 
 14,552 
 17,203 
 18,945 
 23,396 
 30,177 
 27,904 
 26,929 
 27,060 
 Source : Bank for International Settlements, BIS Quarterly Review. 
 Note : Details may not sum to total because of rounding. 

THE INTERNATIONAL MONEY MACHINE 
( 25 )
 Invoicing patterns for exports of manufactured goods are more 
complex ( McKinnon  1979 ). Major industrial countries with 
strong currencies tend to invoice their exports in their home cur-
rencies. Before the European Monetary Union (EMU), more than 
75 percent of German exports had been invoiced in marks, more 
than 50 percent of French exports invoiced in francs, and so on. 
But these illustrative ratios were dominated by intra-European 
trade. With the advent of the EMU, how much continental 
European countries will invoice their exports outside of Europe 
in euros remains unknown. But for manufactured goods, the 
 Table 2.4. CURRENCY COMPOSITION OF OFFICIAL FOREIGN EXCHANGE 
RESERVES (PERCENTAGE OF GLOBAL TOTAL)  
 Country 
Group and 
Currency 
 2000 
 2002 
 2004 
 2006 
 2008 
 2010 
 Industrial 
Countries 
 
 Dollar 
 69.8 
 66.5 
 67.3 
 68.2 
 67.2 
 64.4 
 Euro zone 
currencies 
and euro 
 18.4 
 23.2 
 22.8 
 22.1 
 23.1 
 24.3 
 Yen 
 7.3 
 5.4 
 5.0 
 4.3 
 4.3 
 4.7 
 Pound 
 2.8 
 2.8 
 2.7 
 3.3 
 2.7 
 2.6 
 Other and 
unspecifi ed 
 1.8 
 2.1 
 2.3 
 2.1 
 2.7 
 4.0 
 Developing 
Countries: 
 
 Dollar 
 74.8 
 68.6 
 63.0 
 61.5 
 60.7 
 58.4 
 Euro zone 
currencies 
and euro 
 18.1 
 25.3 
 29.2 
 29.5 
 30.0 
 28.3 
 Yen 
 2.7 
 1.7 
 1.3 
 1.3 
 1.9 
 2.4 
 Pound 
 2.6 
 2.8 
 4.9 
 6.0 
 5.4 
 6.3 
 Other and 
unspecifi ed 
 1.7 
 1.7 
 1.5 
 1.7 
 2.0 
 4.6 
 Source : International Monetary Fund, Annual Report 2004. 
 Note:  Details may not sum to total because of rounding. Euro zone currencies include the deutsche mark, 
French franc, and Dutch guilder, as well as ecu held by industrial countries. 

( 26 ) 
The Unloved Dollar Standard
 Table 2.5.  INVOICE CURRENCIES IN KOREAN TRADE, 1980–2006 (PERCENT) 
 
 Exports (receipts) 
 Imports (payments) 
 
 $ 
 ¥ 
 DM a 
 £ 
 Other 
 $ 
 ¥ 
 DM a 
 £ 
 Other 
 1980 
 96.1 
 1.2 
 2.0 
 0.4 
 0.3 
 93.2 
 3.7 
 1.7 
 0.5 
 0.9 
 1985 
 94.7 
 3.7 
 0.6 
 0.3 
 0.7 
 82.4 
 12.3 
 2.0 
 0.5 
 2.8 
 1990 
 88.0 
 7.8 
 2.1 
 0.5 
 1.7 
 79.1 
 12.7 
 4.1 
 0.9 
 3.4 
 1995 
 88.1 
 6.5 
 2.4 
 0.8 
 2.2 
 79.4 
 12.7 
 3.8 
 0.7 
 3.4 
 2000 
 84.8 
 5.4 
 1.8 
 0.7 
 7.3 
 80.4 
 12.4 
 1.9 
 0.8 
 4.4 
 2002 
 86.8 
 5.2 
 5.8 
 0.8 
 1.4 
 80.6 
 12.1 
 5.4 
 0.6 
 1.3 
 2005 
 83.2 
 5.3 
 9.1 
 1.1 
 1.4 
 81.6 
 11.7 
 5.5 
 0.4 
 0.8 
 2006 
 84.5 
 4.7 
 8.5 
 1.0 
 1.4 
 82.9 
 10.5 
 5.4 
 0.4 
 0.8 
 Source : Bank of Korea: Monthly Statistical Bulletin. 
 Note : Trade in services is not included. 
 a DM represents the euro starting from 2000. 
proportion of euro invoicing probably corresponds to the 
proportion of deutsche mark invoicing that Germany used before 
the euro. 
 Within Asia, however, foreign trade is invoiced mainly in 
dollars. Since we lack general information on the invoicing prac-
tices of most Asian countries,  table  2.5     displays invoicing prac-
tices for just Korea—itself now a fairly industrialized economy. 
In 2006, about 82.9 percent of Korean imports and 84.5 percent 
of exports were invoiced in U.S. dollars.   
 In striking contrast, yen invoicing in Korean trade is surpris-
ingly small. In 2006,  table  2.5     shows, only 4.7 percent of Korean 
exports and 10.5 percent of Korean imports were invoiced in yen. 
Korea has traditionally be a big importer of capital goods from 
Japan.  Table  2.5     also shows that the use of European currencies 
is negligible. 
 Because the smaller Asian economies are less industrialized 
than Korea, their currencies are even less likely to be used in 
foreign trade. China is the big unknown. But the lack of openness 
in its domestic fi nancial markets and use of exchange controls on 
capital account suggest that the proportion of dollar invoicing in 
China’s trade is even greater than in Korea’s. For smaller East 

THE INTERNATIONAL MONEY MACHINE 
( 27 )
Asian countries not trading with Japan but with each other—as 
when Th ailand trades with Malaysia—everything is typically 
invoiced in dollars. Even Japanese trade with other East Asian 
countries is invoiced more in dollars than in yen. Outside of 
Europe, the prevalence of dollar invoicing is also true in other 
parts of the world. For example, in Latin America, exports are 
largely dollar invoiced, and intraregional trade is entirely dollar 
invoiced. 
 For manufactures, more than pure invoicing is involved. 
Exporters everywhere outside of Europe typically opt to quote 
selling prices for their products in dollars, and then keep these 
dollar prices fairly constant in industrial catalogs and other pub-
lished price lists. In eff ect, they price to the world market—and 
not just to the American one—in dollar terms. Th us national 
central banks aiming to stabilize the international purchasing 
power of their currencies, often opt—either formally or infor-
mally—to peg against the dollar, and thus against the huge 
sticky-priced mass of internationally traded goods that it 
represents. 
 Fourth, if we think of a  standard of deferred payment —which is 
also a traditional role of money—private and sovereign bonds in 
international markets are heavily denominated in U.S. dollars, 
though the euro did seem to be as important.  Table  2.6     is diffi  cult 
to interpret because “international” also refers to intra-European 
issues of euro-denominated bonds. But this ambiguity aside, the 
growth of a broadly based euro-denominated bond market within 
Europe made it much more attractive for foreigners to borrow by 
issuing euro bonds or “deposit” by buying euro-denominated 
bonds. So the euro area with its previously strong currency was 
unusual in being a gross creditor in the world economy, that is, 
being able to lend in its own currency. 
 However, because of the recent crisis of the euro,  table  2.6     
shows a precipitate drop in international bond issues in euros—
from 42.4 percent in 2009 to just 19.6 percent in 2010—a down-
ward trend probably accentuated in 2011. By contrast,  table  2.6     

( 28 ) 
The Unloved Dollar Standard
  Table 2.6.  NET INTERNATIONAL ISSUES OF DEBT INSTRUMENTS 
(PERCENTAGE OF TOTAL ISSUE)  
 By currency of issue 
 
 Dollar 
 Euro zone 
currencies and 
euro* 
 Pound 
 All other 
currencies 
 Memorandum: 
Net issues in 
$billion 
 1998 
 60.3 
 33.0 
 8.4 
 −1.8 
 681 
 1999 
 44.4 
 47.7 
 7.1 
 0.8 
 1,230 
 2000 
 50.1 
 37.8 
 8.4 
 3.7 
 1,234 
 2001 
 48.4 
 44.3 
 5.2 
 2.1 
 1,348 
 2002 
 41.5 
 51.7 
 6.2 
 0.6 
 1,429 
 2003 
 31.5 
 56.9 
 6.8 
 4.8 
 1,463.9 
 2004 
 25.1 
 58.3 
 9.3 
 7.3 
 1,614.2 
 2005 
 25.9 
 54.3 
 12.4 
 7.4 
 1,860.9 
 2006 
 40.5 
 44.9 
 8.6 
 6.0 
 2,773.1 
 2007 
 42.5 
 41.6 
 7.9 
 8.0 
 3,002.6 
 2008 
 28.4 
 42.6 
 25.1 
 3.9 
 2,430.7 
 2009 
 49.8 
 42.4 
 7.5 
 0.3 
 2,335.7 
 2010 
 74.4 
 19.6 
 3.3 
 2.7 
 1,506.7 
 By nationality of issuer 
 
 United 
States 
 Euro zone 
countries 
 United 
Kingdom 
 Other 
industrial 
countries 
 Developing 
countries 
and 
off shore 
centers 
 International 
institutions 
 1998 
 41.1 
 31.4 
 7.7 
 4.0 
 7.6 
 8.2 
 1999 
 39.2 
 41.3 
 9.4 
 3.9 
 4.2 
 2.2 
 2000 
 37.7 
 45.0 
 9.7 
 0.9 
 4.9 
 108 
 2001 
 44.3 
 40.9 
 5.7 
 2.7 
 5.2 
 1.2 
 2002 
 32.6 
 47.4 
 9.9 
 3.6 
 4.4 
 2.1 
 2003 
 18.4 
 52.5 
 14.5 
 7.3 
 5.7 
 1.6 
 2004 
 14.6 
 49.3 
 14.7 
 13.9 
 6.1 
 1.4 
 2005 
 14.8 
 51.0 
 1 5.8 
 9.8 
 6.9 
 1.8 
 2006 
 28.1 
 42.8 
 14.1 
 8.6 
 6.0 
 0.4 
 2007 
 34.2 
 37.6 
 10.8 
 10.2 
 6.0 
 1.3 
 2008 
 23.6 
 38.1 
 26.4 
 8.2 
 1.3 
 2.3 
 2009 
 25.9 
 39.5 
 11.2 
 12.4 
 6.6 
 4.4 
 2010 
 35.3 
 25.8 
 6.0 
 11.7 
 15.0 
 6.2 
 Source : Bank for International Settlements. 

THE INTERNATIONAL MONEY MACHINE 
( 29 )
shows that dollar-denominated bond issues rose sharply from 
49.8 percent in 2009 to 74.4 percent in 2010. Th is “fl ight to 
safety” in dollars is one indication of the remarkable resilience of 
the dollar standard in crisis times. 
 Emerging markets, such as China with trade surpluses, are 
more or less confi ned to lending in dollars, that is, accumulating 
liquid dollar bonds or illiquid other assets arising out of direct 
investment abroad. If developing countries have cumulative 
trade defi cits, they cover them by borrowing in dollars. U.S. 
Treasuries are still taken as the benchmark or “risk-free” asset in 
international bond markets. Th at is, dollar-denominated sover-
eign bonds issued by emerging markets the world over have their 
credit ratings (by Moody’s, Standard and Poor’s, or Fitch) mea-
sured relative to U.S. Treasuries. Th us, risk premia in interest 
rates on these bonds are typically quoted as so many percentage 
points over U.S. Treasuries. 
 In summary, the use of the dollar in facilitating international 
commerce in goods or in fi nancial assets is still surprisingly ubiq-
uitous despite the great fi nancial traumas emanating from the 
United States—to which the world has been subject over the last 
four decades—which we will describe further in  chapter  4 . 
 NOTES  
 1. 
True, transacting in dollars can encroach on the natural domains of domestic 
currencies. Such “dollarization” occurs when the domestic currency has become 
very unattractive because of a history of high infl ation, such as in Zimbabwe or 
Ecuador, where households use dollars to buy their groceries. But, for the most 
part, dollarization in domestic trade is rare if only because governments 
mandate that the domestic money be legal tender. But no such legal tender 
constraint exists for international money changing. 
 2. 
Making predictions based on current trends,  Arvind Subramanian ( 2011 ) in his 
book  Eclipse projects that by 2030 China will account for more than 23 percent 
of world GDP and America less than 12 percent at purchasing power parity 
exchange rates. Th ese projections may or may not turn out to be accurate, but 
they don’t undermine the argument presented here that dollar-based exchange 
will continue to increase as world trade grows with GDPs.   


Th e Dollar as a Worldwide 
Nominal Anchor
Insular U.S. Monetary Policy from 1945 
to the Late 1960s  
 F
rom 1945 through most of the 1960s, reconciliation of 
America’s international and domestic monetary objectives was 
not a problem. Th e lack of confi dence in the currencies of Europe 
and Japan, whose industrial and fi nancial sectors had been fl at-
tened by the war, leading to open and repressed infl ation, meant 
that they had to ring-fence their economies with exchange con-
trols to prevent capital fl ight. Early in this era was the “great dollar 
shortage”: people and corporations wanted to hold mainly dollar 
assets with their unique international liquidity. Th is natural role of 
the dollar as the key currency in the postwar monetary order was 
simply “legalized” by the 1945 Bretton Woods Agreement. 
 Th e implosion of the international gold standard in the 1920s 
and 1930s had generated “hot” money fl ows that led to “beggar-
thy-neighbor” exchange rate policies and the Great Depression. 
Th e victorious allies—led by the United States and Britain—
resolved never again to allow large exchange rate fl uctuations or 
uncontrolled fi nancial fl ows across currency boundaries. In this 
 CHAPTER 3 

THE INTERNATIONAL MONEY MACHINE 
( 31 )
brave new international monetary order, gold was dethroned as 
the common monetary anchor and the dollar was enthroned. 
Outside the United States, countries declared fi xed dollar 
exchange parities that could be changed only moderately and 
with the permission of the newly created International Monetary 
Fund. Outside the foreign exchange markets, other  governments 
could sell U.S. Treasury bonds for gold to the U.S. government at 
$35 per ounce. 
 By 1945, the United States had accumulated almost all the 
world’s gold. People at the time did not project that the U.S. gold 
obligation would be anything more than pro forma, and would 
not constrain American policy. Th us the United States alone as 
the Nth country at the center of the Bretton Woods monetary 
order was free to determine its own monetary policy and price-
level objective. In contrast, other countries had to subordinate, 
at least in part, their domestic monetary policies to maintain 
their dollar exchange parities. Th is asymmetrical system worked 
well as long as the U.S. federal government (1) successfully stabi-
lized its own (and hence the world’s) price level in dollars, and 
(2) did not object to how other countries set their exchange rates 
against the dollar. 
 When Western European countries began to recover under 
the Marshall Plan, they did so by fi xing their exchange rates 
fi rmly against the dollar. Th e capstone of the Marshall Plan 
was the formation of the European Payments Union (EPU) in 
July 1950. Sixteen Western European countries declared exact 
dollar parities (without even small margins around these 
central rates) at which only their  central banks  cleared intra-
European payments multilaterally while incidentally anchoring 
their price levels. (Open private foreign exchange trading was 
not yet permitted.) In parallel, with the help of an American 
line of dollar credit known as the Dodge Line, Japan eventually 
managed to stabilize its macroeconomy by choosing 360 yen to 
the dollar in 1949 as the anchor for phasing out infl ation and 
restoring a modicum of confi dence in the yen ( McKinnon and 
Ohno  1997 ). 

( 32 ) 
The Unloved Dollar Standard
 With the important exception of West Germany, industrial 
countries other than the United States maintained capital con-
trols well into the 1970s. With the fully convertible dollar as 
the clearing currency, the Western European countries and 
Japan had adopted more limited current-account convertibility 
by the early 1960s. Together, these monetary structures were 
suffi  cient to promote explosive growth in multilateral trade: 
the engine of extraordinary economic growth from 1950 into 
the early 1970s.  
 COMECON: AN ASIDE ON CURRENCY 
INCONVERTIBILITY   
 From 1945 through the 1980s, the large communist bloc—
including China, the Soviet Union, and Eastern Europe—had 
currencies that were not even convertible on current account. In 
organizing voluntary trade between nations within the bloc, their 
own currencies—which had diff ering (disequilibrium) national 
prices—were totally unusable. In the event, the dollar was used 
as a unit of account to price out the “value” of each communist 
country’s putative export basket to a designated bloc neighbor. 
 How did this work in practice? In the late 1940s, the Soviets 
set up a bureaucracy, the Council for Mutual Economic Assistance 
(COMECON) that hosted member countries once a year to nego-
tiate the exchange of baskets of tradable goods within each pair 
of communist countries. COMECON’S job was to prepare  dollar 
price lists of all relevant goods—primary commodities from, say, 
the Chicago Board of Trade or manufactures from, say, German 
industrial catalogs. Th en a negotiating team from each commu-
nist country could value its desired export basket at international 
relative prices. Even so, when, say, Poland traded with Bulgaria, 
the particular items to be traded were subject to heated bilateral 
bargaining—although their aggregate values traded bilaterally 
would turn out to be about equal in dollar terms. 

THE INTERNATIONAL MONEY MACHINE 
( 33 )
 However, for ideological reasons, the dollar was not used as a 
means of settlement within COMECON. Th us multilateral trade 
within the bloc was next to impossible. Trade between any pair of 
communist countries was narrowly balanced bilaterally through 
barter-type negotiations with no net capital fl ows. Within the 
bloc, the last thing any negotiator wanted was to run a trade 
surplus and be forced to acquire the defi cit-country’s inconvert-
ible currency in exchange ( McKinnon  1979 ,  ch.  3 ). 
 THE WORLD’S PRICE LEVEL  
 Th e American wholesale price index (WPI) approximates a world-
wide index of tradable goods’ prices reinforced by the practice of 
dollar invoicing of so much of world trade.  Figure  3.1     shows the 
U.S. WPI to be remarkably stable from the 1950s into the late 
1960s during the Bretton Woods period of fi xed dollar parities. 
However,  fi gure  3.1     also shows how, after 1970, this anchoring 
stability was lost with the breakdown of the Bretton Woods fi xed 
dollar parities;  fi gure  3.2     shows the yen and the deutsche mark 
beginning to appreciate against the dollar.     
 But more than just the stability in the American price level was 
lost. Before 1970, with fi xed dollar exchange rate parities, the 
WPIs of major trading partners such as Germany and Japan, with 
convertible currencies on current account, closely tracked the 
stable American WPI as shown in  fi gure  3.3 —as did those of a 
host of smaller economies (not shown). In eff ect, the industrial 
countries had a common price level for tradable goods.   
 Th en with the breakdown of the fi xed parity regime after 1970 
and advent of infl ation in the United States, the WPIs of Germany 
and Japan infl ated less quickly—and diverged from the American 
level as well as from each other. Th e benign eff ect on investment 
effi  ciency of having a common “world” price level in the 1950s 
and 1960s was lost. And indeed productivity growth in the 
industrial countries slumped sharply in the 1970s into the 1980s 

( 34 ) 
The Unloved Dollar Standard
Bretton Woods
Log Scale
1950
1955
1960
1965
1970
1975
1980
1985
1990
1995
2000
2005
2010
25
50
100
Stable price levels
Transition blurb:
breakdown of
parity regime
High inflation: 
rising nominal 
interest rates
Disinflation
blurb:
high and 
variable 
More stable 
price levels: 
move toward 
low nominal 
interest rates
Loss of
monetary
control?
(2003–11)
nominal 
interest
rates
 Figure 3.1. 
 Th e World’s Nominal Anchor: U.S. Wholesale Prices (1951–2011)      
 Source :  www.bls.gov 
1951
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
1956 1961 1966 1971 1976 1981 1986 1991 1996 2001 2006 2011
DM
Yen
 Figure 3.2. 
 U.S. Nominal Exchange Rates (1951–2011) 
 Source: Bundesbank ,  www.globalfi nancialdata.com 

THE INTERNATIONAL MONEY MACHINE 
( 35 )
with large exchange rate fl uctuations and highly variable infl a-
tion rates. 
 Th is early dominance of the dollar in determining national 
price levels until 1970 was unintended. Under the Bretton Woods 
Agreement of 1945, national monetary autonomy was supposed 
to be paramount. Because of the disastrous collapse of the inter-
national gold standard in the interwar period, J. M. Keynes in 
particular was adamant that never again should national 
monetary and fi scal policies be subordinated to an international 
standard. But the intentions of the authors of international 
monetary treaties are not necessarily borne out in practice. After 
the war, more by necessity than design, the stable dollar became 
the monetary anchor for most national price levels outside the 
communist bloc ( McKinnon  1979 ). 
 During the early postwar period of highly successful nonin-
flationary growth, there were many controversies—particu-
larly between monetarists and Keynesians—on how U.S. 
1951
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
1956 1961 1966 1971 1976 1981 1986 1991 1996 2001 2006 2011
US
Germany
Japan
 Figure 3.3. 
 Wholesale Price Indices 
 Source: Statistisches Bundesamt Deutschland ,  www.globalfi nancialdata.com 

( 36 ) 
The Unloved Dollar Standard
monetary policy should be conducted. But the foreign 
exchanges were left out of both sides of the debate. The pro-
tagonists treated the American economy as if it was closed. 
But luckily the lack of substitutability between dollars and the 
currencies of the other industrial economies with exchange 
controls before 1970 meant that the Fed could conduct an 
inward-looking monetary policy relatively successfully. It 
could ignore the ebb and flow of the demand for dollars in the 
foreign exchanges and focus just on conditions in the huge 
American economy, such as employment and inflation—while 
benignly neglecting the rest of the world. 
 Th ese rather special historical circumstances of the early dollar 
standard conditioned the American monetary authorities to 
become  insular . Th ey concluded that the demand for money 
(dollars), and various operating rules governing Federal Reserve 
behavior, could be based on purely domestic fi nancial indicat-
ors such as U.S. infl ation and unemployment, or the reserve 
 positions of American commercial banks with the Fed. And this 
inward-looking U.S. monetary policy turned out to be correct for 
the time. 
 Unfortunately, this insular view became enshrined in U.S. text-
books on money and banking, and on monetary policy more gen-
erally, long after fi nancial globalization and the shrinkage in the 
relative size of the American economy had made it obsolete. In 
particular, this insularity has carried over to today’s era when 
runs from dollars into foreign currencies—and vice versa—have 
become commonplace ( ch.  5    ). By ignoring the information 
contained in these runs, the Fed has become much less eff ective 
in stabilizing the domestic American fi nancial system and price 
level, while undermining the anchoring function that the dollar 
had provided to the rest of the world—as shown in  fi gure  3.3 . 
 How this (international) instability was generated after 
1970 and its consequences is the theme of  chapters  4   and  5     to 
follow. But fi rst let us consider the eff ect of the unique American 
obligation under the IMF’s Article IV to buy or sell at $35 per 

THE INTERNATIONAL MONEY MACHINE 
( 37 )
ounce. Did this constrain American policy in the 1950s and 
1960s?  
 THE DOLLAR-GOLD EXCHANGE 
STANDARD (1959–68)  
 Despite all the EPU’s great advantages in reestablishing a 
monetary basis based on the dollar for intra-European trade in 
the 1950s, it had certain economic limitations:
 1. Intra-European payments were placed on substantially dif-
ferent basis than trade with non-European countries. Th e 
latter had to be fi nanced by open market purchases and sales 
of foreign exchange. Th e clearing machinery of the EPU per-
mitted discrimination against purchases of goods from 
outside the union—particularly the United States itself!
2. Th e EPU relied heavily on national central banks for clearing 
all settlements. Indeed this funneling of transactions 
through central banks facilitated the maintenance of 
exchange controls and payments restrictions to outsiders.  
 Hence, on December 24, 1958, the European Payments Union 
was offi  cially disbanded, and exchange restrictions against dollar 
area imports were removed. Fourteen Western European coun-
tries—including all the industrial ones—made their currencies 
fully externally convertible for current transactions under Article 
VIII of the 1945 Bretton Woods Agreement, and also made fully 
operational the par-value obligation under Article IV as then 
stated:
 1. Th e par value of the currency of each member shall be 
expressed in terms of gold as a common denominator or in 
terms of the United States dollar of the weight and fi neness 
in eff ect on July 1, 1944.  

( 38 ) 
The Unloved Dollar Standard
 2. Th e maximum and minimum rates . . . shall not diff er from 
parity . . . in the case of spot exchange transactions by more 
than one percent. ( Horsefi eld  1969 , 189)   
 As a practical matter, it was awkward to buy and sell gold directly 
for fi at currencies in the open market in order to maintain exchange 
margins. Gold is costly to store and transport, and the world gold 
supply was still in the late 1950s asymmetrically concentrated in 
the United States. Moreover, European countries had already been 
maintaining exact dollar parities as part of the EPU agreement. 
Th us, in 1959, Article IV was interpreted such that member coun-
tries of the IMF all pegged their currencies to the U.S. dollar within 
a 1 percent margin on either side of parity. Each national central 
bank kept reserves to buy or sell dollars for the domestic currency 
in the open market for foreign exchanges in order to maintain the 
2 percent band width for all who wished to trade with the country 
in question. Th us the dollar became the  offi  cial intervention currency 
used by European and other central banks the world over. 1  
 Most importantly, in this brave new world of the dollar-gold 
exchange standard, responsibility for clearing international 
payments when exchange rates were within the 2 percent band 
(which was most of the time) devolved away from central banks 
to commercial banks authorized to deal in the interbank market 
for foreign exchange. (Investment banks, such as Goldman Sachs 
and Morgan Stanley, had not yet made an appearance in this 
role—although they have huge foreign exchange trading desks 
today.) To acquire foreign exchange for, say, 90 days hence, a non-
bank importer could contract with its local commercial bank to 
buy the foreign exchange forward. If necessary, the local bank 
could then cover itself by purchasing the forward foreign exchange 
in the interbank market. Unlike the old EPU, central banks need 
not be directly involved in clearing international payments or 
making a forward market. 
 What were the reciprocal American obligations in the brave 
new monetary order? Th e formal obligation under Article IV was 

THE INTERNATIONAL MONEY MACHINE 
( 39 )
to fi x the dollar’s parity in terms of gold. While all other countries 
pegged dollar, the American authorities agreed to sell (or buy) 
gold to foreign central banks upon demand in exchange for U.S. 
Treasury bonds at a fi xed parity of US $35 per ounce with no band 
of variation. Such government-to-government transfers took 
place outside the open market for foreign exchange. Th us, the 
world was put on a full-fl edged dollar-gold exchange standard. 
 Th e second important American obligation under the dollar-
gold exchange standard was implicit. Because all foreign central 
banks were intervening with their own currencies to maintain 
their 1 percent bands against the dollar, the U.S. Federal Reserve 
Bank essentially stayed out of the open foreign exchange mar-
kets in order to avoid confl ict. 2 Th e Bank of England, for example, 
would buy or sell dollars for sterling to maintain the exchange 
rate between US$2.78 and US$2.82, but the Federal Reserve 
Bank would stay out of the dollar-sterling market—and also stay 
out of a hundred or so other markets in foreign currencies. 
Indeed, the United States didn’t, and still doesn’t, hold signifi cant 
reserves of other currencies with which to intervene. And this 
American passivity in allowing other countries to choose their 
exchange rates against the dollar was, and still is, an essential 
element in the harmonious working of the global monetary 
system. (Th e analytical details of this asymmetrical system were 
developed in  chapter  2 .) 
 An important consequence, however, was that the American 
government did not have direct control over the state of its 
balance of payments in the 1960s—nor should it have then or 
now. As long as other countries set their exchange parities and 
interest rates at desired levels vis-à-vis the dollar so they had 
overall payments surpluses, they could accumulate as many U.S. 
dollar bank accounts and Treasury bonds as they wanted. Th e net 
American balance of payments was simply a residual. 
 But American authorities responded with alarm to the result-
ing accounting “defi cits” in American foreign payments, even 
when America was running large trade surpluses in the early 

( 40 ) 
The Unloved Dollar Standard
1960s. In fact, the capital outfl ow from the United States—
including direct investment and purchases of longer-term foreign 
bonds—was greater than the U.S. trade surplus. Th e diff erence 
was a short-term capital infl ow. 
 Instead of welcoming the voluntary buildup of dollar reserves 
by foreigners in a period of worldwide price stability, in the 1960s 
the American authorities saw such foreign accumulation as an 
indirect threat to the American gold reserves—and tried (without 
success) to restrict some kinds of capital outfl ows from the United 
States. 
 As partial  quid pro quo , however, the United States could use its 
own dollars to cover payments “defi cits” as they developed, 
whereas other countries had to use scarce foreign exchange. 
Infl uential French economists have called this asymmetry an 
“exorbitant privilege of the United States” indicating that offi  cial 
misinterpretations of international monetary phenomena were 
not confi ned to the American side of the Atlantic. 
 Before discussing the reasons for the inevitable collapse of the 
pure dollar-gold exchange standard, let us describe its rather 
remarkable accomplishments. For the industrial economies, it 
allowed free multilateral exchange of their convertible currencies 
among private commercial banks and trading fi rms without having 
to channel foreign payments through central banks. Within the 
1 percent margins on either side of the parity, exchange rates were 
very stable and payments restrictions on current account transact-
ing were absent so that domestic monies in the industrial econ-
omies were virtually as good as international money. Meanwhile, 
under GATT, tariff s—and particularly quota restrictions—on com-
modity trade among the industrial countries were more easily 
reduced when exchange rates were stable. Foreign trade grew even 
more rapidly than national incomes in the 1960s, so that all the 
industrial economies became more open to foreign trade, as output 
per capita rose impressively by any historical standard. 
 (It should be noted that most less developed countries main-
tained inconvertible currencies in the 1950s and 1960s, and also 

THE INTERNATIONAL MONEY MACHINE 
( 41 )
maintained payments restrictions as well as tariff  and quota bar-
riers on imports. Th is import-substitution strategy of economic 
development meant, eff ectively, that most did not participate in 
the postwar world trade boom and their economies became more 
closed. Indeed, we have a paradox. U.S. aid in the late 1950s and 
1960s to less developed countries was often associated with more 
centralized planning [India, Latin America] and the imposition 
of restraints on foreign trade, whereas the earlier, more success-
ful Marshall Plan aid to Europe was associated with the removal 
of trade restrictions! Quite possibly, the Agency for International 
Development administrators in the 1950s and 1960s failed to 
recognize the monetary reasons for the Marshall plan’s success.) 
 Stability in a macroeconomic sense was also achieved. Th ose 
countries that eff ectively fi xed their exchange parities to the U.S. 
dollar, and kept convertible currencies on current account, had 
their price levels (in terms of tradable goods) pegged to those in 
the United States—the latter being quite stable from 1951 to the 
mid-1960s, as indicated in  fi gure  3.3 . 3 Th eir domestic monetary 
policies had to be adjusted to maintain this fi xed exchange rate, 
while accommodating quite high rates of growth in real output. 
Indeed, a convincing peg to the U.S. dollar allowed Germany and 
Japan, which had experienced traumatic monetary upheavals in 
the late 1940s, to restore confi dence in the deutsche mark and 
yen faster than would otherwise have been the case. Infl ationary 
expectations were also dampened elsewhere in Europe if citizens 
came to believe that their government was committed to a fi xed 
dollar parity. (Th is earlier favorable experience induced many 
countries to continue their dollar parities into the early 1970s, 
well past the point that it was desirable to do so.) 
    THE UNITED STATES AS BANKER TO THE WORLD  
 A truly international capital market was an outgrowth of the 
 dollar-gold exchange standard, and essential to its smooth 

( 42 ) 
The Unloved Dollar Standard
 functioning. Countries and individuals who were net savers 
(surplus units in a fi nancial sense) could deposit in New York 
banks or buy bonds in New York, whereas countries that had a 
need for investment resources (defi cit units in a fi nancial 
sense) could borrow in New York, with both creditors and 
debtors using the dollar as a vehicle currency. And in the late 
1950s and 1960s, New York with its off shoot “euro” dollar 
market in London was the dominant entrepôt for international 
capital, although not on the grand scale that London had been 
prior to 1914 under the gold standard with sterling being the 
vehicle currency. Still America came close to being the world’s 
banker. 
 Besides bringing net savers and investors together, fi nancial 
intermediation through the dollar had another important 
aspect. Governments abroad had a continuous need to tailor 
their own reserves of freely usable dollars for intervention or 
precautionary purposes, and commercial banks also had a 
demand for dollar checking accounts and term deposits because 
of the dollar’s role as a vehicle currency. Either group was then 
free to borrow at long term—say, by issuing bonds—in New 
York, and use the proceeds to build up its short-term liquidity: 
freely usable dollar deposits in New York or London.   4 Th is free-
dom to borrow long and lend back (deposit) short in dollars did 
not result in any  net  international transfer of capital. Yet for-
eigners could acquire international liquidity when they needed 
it, and hence more easily preserve currency convertibility with 
fi xed rate exchange rates. 
 Notice that it was not necessary for the United States to actu-
ally run a current-account defi cit (as it does now) to supply the 
rest of the world with international liquidity. As long as U.S. 
capital outfl ows, much of which were illiquid direct investment 
in overseas factories or mines, exceeded its current-account 
surplus, the return fl ow in the balance of payments was the 
buildup of dollar bank accounts and Treasury bonds owned by 
foreigners providing international liquidity. 

THE INTERNATIONAL MONEY MACHINE 
( 43 )
 THE TRIFFIN DILEMMA  
 In discussing the collapse of the dollar-gold exchange stand-
ard and fi xed exchange rates, I shall fi rst look at the proximate 
reasons for virtually ending, in 1968, American gold sales to 
 foreigners—and then discuss the deeper reasons rooted in 
the increasing instability of the American economy in the 
late 1960s. 
 After the European recovery, the world’s stock of monetary 
gold changed little: the offi  cial price was fi xed at $35 per ounce 
until 1971, and the net fl ow of newly mined gold for industrial 
use was small relative to existing monetary stocks (see  table  3.1 ). 
In 1951, the total offi  cial gold reserves of IMF members amounted 
to $33.5 billion and were $38.7 billion in 1968. Of this, offi  cial 
American holdings amounted to $22.9 billion in 1951, but fell to 
$10.9 billion by 1968. Rapidly growing European economies 
allowed their dollar reserve positions to grow commensurately 
mainly by purchasing dollars in the open markets for foreign 
 Table 3.1. OFFICIAL GOLD HOLDINGS AND EXTERNAL DOLLAR LIABILITIES 
OF THE UNITED STATES (BILLIONS OF DOLLARS)  
 Year 
 Offi  cial world 
gold holdings 
 Offi  cial U.S. 
gold stocks* 
 Outstanding 
dollar claims on 
U.S. held by 
foreign banks  
 1951 
 33.5 
 22.9 
 8.9 
 1956 
 35.7 
 22.1 
 15.3 
 1960 
 37.7 
 17.8 
 21.0 
 1964 
 40.5 
 15.4 
 29.4 
 1968 
 38.7 
 10.9 
 38.5 
 Closing of the American gold window 
 1972 
 38.5 
 10.5 
 82.9 
 1974 
 43.3 
 11.8 
 119.1 
 1976 
 41.3 
 11.2 
 144.7 
 Source :  International Financial Statistics (various issues). 
 Note : Gold is evaluated at offi  cial dollar prices through time. After 1968, the open-market price for gold 
was two or three times this offi  cial price. Nevertheless, no major country could sell all of its offi  cial gold in 
the open market without driving the price down quite drastically. Th erefore, choosing a correct price for 
evaluation is diffi  cult.   

( 44 ) 
The Unloved Dollar Standard
exchange to maintain their dollar parities. However, some—par-
ticularly the French—chose to convert their dollars into gold, 
which the U.S. Treasury was obligated to supply at $35 per ounce.   
 More frightening to American authorities was the rapidly 
rising stock of dollar claims on the United States held by foreign 
banks (commercial and central) that had not yet been converted. 
Th ese rose from about $8.9 billion in 1951 to $38.5 billion in 
1968, as shown in  table  3.1 . Th us claims potentially convertible 
into gold in 1968 amounted to more than three and a half times 
the remaining American gold, thus posing the Triffi  n Dilemma 
( Triffi  n  1960 ):
  How did this aff ect American decision making? Concern with pro-
tecting the last American gold reserves and avoiding the inevita-
ble run on the bank prompted the American authorities in the 
mid-1960s and afterwards to pressure friendly governments not 
to convert existing dollar holdings, as was their right under 
Article IV. Finally, on March 15, 1968, offi  cial sales of gold by a 
consortium of central banks (including the United States Federal 
Reserve System) on the open private gold market in London were 
terminated, thus segmenting the offi  cial price of gold from the 
free market price. And subsequently the free-market price has 
fl uctuated well above the offi  cial price of $35 per ounce, which 
was raised to $42 in 1971. Although the American gold window 
was not closed offi  cially by President Nixon until August 1971, 
negligible American sales of gold to foreign central banks took 
place after 1968. 
 Worse than simply leaning on foreign central banks not to con-
vert dollars into gold was the spate of balance-of-payments 
restrictions on capital outfl ows imposed by Presidents Kennedy 
and Johnson: (1) the interest-equalization tax on foreign secu-
rities sold in the United States in 1963, (2) the restrictions on 
bank lending to foreigners in 1965, and (3) attempts to force 
multinational corporations in 1968 to fi nance their foreign 

THE INTERNATIONAL MONEY MACHINE 
( 45 )
operations overseas. Th ese were concrete responses to accounting 
balance-of-payments “defi cits”—the overseas buildup of dollar 
claims on the United States (see  table  3.1    )—that in turn 
augmented offi  cial fears of losing gold. If eff ective, such restraints 
would have seriously impeded the key role of the New York capital 
market in providing dollar liquidity to the rest of the world. 
Fortunately, these regulatory eff orts were undercut by the 
development of the Eurodollar market centered in London, 
outside the web of American capital controls.   5 Hence, an interna-
tional capital market continued to provide dollar liquidity as well 
as bringing net savers and investors together. And the American 
balance-of-payments restrictions themselves were eventually 
terminated in 1974. 
 From  table  3.1 , the buildup of offi  cial dollar reserves by foreign 
central banks as the world economy grew were potential dollar 
claims on the American gold stock—and sooner or later would 
force termination of the U.S. Treasury’s unlimited obligation to 
convert extant dollars into gold. Balance-of-payments restric-
tions seeking to limit lending to foreigners contributed to the 
market’s nervousness and were ultimately self-defeating.   6 But 
America’s principal international monetary obligation under the 
de facto international dollar standard was not the pro forma link 
to gold but rather to maintain stable dollar prices of internation-
ally tradable goods as well as an open capital market. Th is it did 
successfully throughout the 1950s and into the mid-1960s (see 
 fi gure  3.1 ). 
 However, infl ationary pressure developed in the United States 
in the late 1960s from failing to fi nance properly the Vietnam 
War and President Johnson’s parallel expansion of the American 
welfare state. Wholesale prices began to increase moderately at 3 
to 4 percent per year. Having to accept even this modest infl ation 
upset major infl ation-phobic trading partners, such as West 
Germany. In addition, with fi xed dollar exchange parities, it also 
upset American industrialists who felt that they were losing 
international competitiveness. But faced with the choice  between 

( 46 ) 
The Unloved Dollar Standard
disinfl ating or devaluing the dollar, the American government 
chose dollar devaluation: the “Nixon shock” to be discussed in 
 chapter  4     that ultimately cracked the system of fi xed exchange 
rates. Th e harmonization of stable monetary policies across 
the world’s major industrial economies came to an end—
although the dollar’s role as a facilitator of international trade 
remained. 
 WAS THE GOLD TIE A CONSTRAINT 
ON AMERICAN MONETARY POLICY?   
 Robert Triffi  n taught us that the American obligation to convert 
dollars into gold at $35 per ounce under the IMF’s Article IV 
would eventually have to be abrogated as the world economy 
grew and offi  cial dollar exchange reserves grew relative to 
monetary gold stocks. But a deeper and more diffi  cult question 
to answer still is whether the “good” American monetary behavior, 
that is, stable wholesale prices in the 1950s on into the late 
1960s, was conditioned by this gold tie. 
 Put diff erently, if gold had been entirely phased out of the 
 dollar-based system, that is, demonetized with the U.S. Treasury 
being neither a buyer or seller, as eminent authors such as Emile 
Despres (1965) wanted, would the now unconstrained American 
monetary policy have been so stable? 
 In my early incarnation as a young man ( McKinnon  1969    , “Th e 
Case for the Dollar as International Money”) I believed that the 
demonetization of gold was the right way to go. “In a world of 
recurrent crises in the gold and foreign exchange markets, it is all 
too easy to forget the great progress that has been made under 
the dollar-based system. Rapid growth in world trade in goods 
and securities has been enormous by any historical standard. 
Th ese crises should not obscure the fact that a little adroit tin-
kering with the system can permit growth to continue even faster 
without the crises. Completing the demonetization of gold, 

THE INTERNATIONAL MONEY MACHINE 
( 47 )
 correcting one or two exchange rates that are badly out of line, 
and removing American restrictions on outfl ows of capital while 
keeping stable domestic prices would be suffi  cient. It would be 
tragic if recurrent crises were to inculcate the psychology of an 
inevitable collapse in the dollar standard. Th ere are no handy 
alternatives” ( McKinnon  1969 , 34). 
 Clearly I badly misjudged the ongoing infl ationary pressure in 
the United States from government policy infl uenced by the 
Phillips Curve Fallacy on the one hand, and the Exchange Rate 
and Trade Balance Fallacy on the other—as described in  chapter 
 1 . But this will become clearer as  chapters  4 and  5 unfold. 
 NOTES  
 1. 
An ever-decreasing number of former British colonies continued to fi x their 
exchange rates in terms of sterling, and a similar overseas franc area was 
maintained in Africa among former French colonies. Canada fl oated without an 
offi  cial par value from 1950 to 1962. Otherwise, virtually all other members of 
the IMF did defi ne their exchange parities in dollars. 
 2. 
Among LDCs parities were frequently changed. Notice that it is suffi  cient to 
establish  all  the cross rates of exchange in the system if each country intervenes 
against a common intervention currency, e.g., the U.S. dollar.  
 3. 
Of course, countries suff ering from often massive internal infl ations—such as 
Argentina, Brazil, Chile—could maintain neither fi xed parities nor convertible 
currencies. 
 4. 
Th is process is described in more analytical depth in  Kindleberger  1965    .  
 5. 
A more complete description of the fascinating fi nancial phenomena of 
Eurocurrency trading can be found in  McKinnon  1979 ,  ch.  9 . 
 6. 
Britain managed the pre-1914 gold standard with even more slender gold 
reserves behind extant sterling claims. But everyone realized that the Bank of 
England would undertake a contractionary monetary policy to defend itself 
against gold losses—unlike the Federal Reserve System in the 1960s. 


Th e Slipping Anchor, 1971–2008 
  The Nixon, Carter, and Greenspan Shocks  
 T
he dollar has become increasingly unsatisfactory as an anchor 
for price levels and fi nancial stability in the American and 
world economies. How can this be measured? 
 First consider the long-term purchasing power of the dollar in a 
comparative international context.  Figure  4.1     plots the path of the 
U.S. and German CPIs since 1957, when comparable data fi rst 
became available, and then splices the CPI for the euro area in 2010 
onto the German series through 2010. When the euro area is spliced 
in, its infl ation rate is very similar to that of Germany’s—past and 
present. Since 1957 infl ation in the United States has averaged 
4 percent, while Germany’s (and the euro area’s) is close to 2.7 per-
cent. Because many central banks around the world ostensibly 
target annual CPI infl ation to be about 2 percent, the German-led 
continental Western Europeans clearly have provided better 
long-term price-level stability despite the euro’s recent travails.  
 What about the short and medium terms? Much of the erratic 
behavior of American monetary policy in the medium term can be 
captured by plotting the exchange rate of the dollar against the 
more stable mark-euro (again spliced together as of 1999) as shown 
 CHAPTER 4 

THE INTERNATIONAL MONEY MACHINE 
( 49 )
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
1957
1967
1977
1987
1997
2007
United States
Euro Area
Germany
 Figure 4.1. 
 Consumer Price Indexes for the United States, Germany, and the Euro Area 
 Source: IFS and globalfi nancialdata.com 
1970
1975
1980
1985
1990
1995
2000
2005
2010
Housing 
downturn
Nixon shock
Run on Carter
dollar
Plaza Accord
Advent of
the euro
Volcker tight
money
U.S. high-tech
bubble
Credit
crunch
.72
.63
1
1.5
2
Run on 
Bernanke-
Greenspan 
dollar
 Figure 4.2. 
 Mark-Euro/USD Exchange rate, 1950–2010 
 Note: Exchange rates before 1999 are calculated with DM rates. 
 Source:  www.globalfi nancialdata.com  and Federal Reserve Economic Data 

( 50 ) 
The Unloved Dollar Standard
in  fi gure  4.2    . When the dollar was weak and falling (sometimes 
because the U.S. government “talked” it down), this triggered a 
fl ight of hot money from the United States, and a fall in the demand 
for money in the United States itself. In each episode, the falling 
dollar fomented worldwide infl ation in commodity and/or asset 
prices that eventually rebounded on the United States. As sug-
gested by  fi gure  4.2    , the outstanding examples of this syndrome of 
a falling dollar were the Nixon shock in 1971–73, carrying over to 
the Carter shock in 1977–78, and the Bernanke-Greenspan shock 
in 2003–04. (Th e more purely Bernanke shock of 2008–12 is ana-
lyzed in  chapter  5 .) Consider each in turn.  
 THE NIXON SHOCK LEADING TO WORLD 
INFLATION IN THE 1970S  
 In the late 1960s, under pressure from fi nancing the Vietnam 
War and pressure from domestic social expenditures, mild infl a-
tion began in the United States (fi gure 3.1). Because of the fi xed 
dollar exchange parities from the Bretton Woods Agreement, 
U.S. industry became less competitive against that of most other 
industrial economies. However, instead of disinfl ating by raising 
interest rates to restore U.S. international competitiveness, the 
American government chose to maintain monetary ease while 
insisting that the other industrial countries all appreciate their 
currencies against the dollar. Th is was the famous Nixon shock of 
August 1971. Indeed, Nixon imposed a tariff  on manufactured 
imports entering the United States and threatened to keep it on 
until the Western industrial economies appreciated substantially, 
which they all did between 10 and 20 percent—as ratifi ed by the 
so-called Smithsonian Agreement in December 1971. (Japan 
appreciated by 17 percent.) 
 Because heated public discussion of possible dollar devalua-
tion had already begun by 1970, hot money began fl ooding out of 
U.S. dollars into all the European currencies and the yen  before 

THE INTERNATIONAL MONEY MACHINE 
( 51 )
actual dollar depreciation in 1971. Th is fl ight from the dollar 
resulted in a fall in the demand for money in the United States 
with no off setting reduction in supply. Combined with a lower 
dollar in the foreign exchanges, the stage was set for the great 
U.S. infl ation of the 1970s. 
 Surprisingly, this loss of monetary control was fi rst evident in 
the industrial economies on the dollar standard’s periphery and 
not in the United States itself.  Figure  4.3 shows the smooth 
growth in U.S. M1 from 1970 to 1981 of about 2 percent per year 
despite wide fl uctuations in the dollar’s eff ective exchange rate 
and wild bouts of infl ation in U.S. price indexes—the CPI in  fi gure  4.4  
and WPI in  fi gure  4.6    . Having the U.S. M1 growing smoothly at 
about 2 percent per year seems inconsistent with a monetary 
explanation of the great infl ationary swings of the 1970s. 
 Th en as now, the key to understanding the impact of unstable 
monetary-cum–exchange rate policies in the United States is to 
look fi rst at their monetary consequences in relevant countries on 
the dollar standard’s periphery. By 1970, the relevant periphery 
was the industrial countries of Western Europe, Canada, and 
Japan—whose economic recoveries and currency convertibility put 
them into the “hard” money category. (In 2012, the most relevant 
4
2
0
–2
–4
–6
1971
1975
1980
1985
U.S. effective
exchange rate
M1
 Figure 4.3. 
 Rate of Change in U.S. Money Supply (M1) and in Eff ective Dollar Exchange Rate, 
1970–86 
 Source: McKinnon 1996 

( 52 ) 
The Unloved Dollar Standard
periphery has become major emerging markets with high growth 
and high “natural” rates of interest—as discussed in  chapter  5 .) 
 What was the infl ation transition mechanism from center to 
periphery and then back again? Because of doubts about future 
U.S. monetary policy and commitment to future exchange rate 
stability, hot money continued to fl ow out of the United States 
even after the supposed one-time Nixon dollar depreciation rati-
fi ed in the Smithsonian Agreement of December 1971. Other 
countries, industrial and some developing, tried to resist further 
appreciations against the dollar beyond what had been agreed to 
with President Nixon. Each central bank intervened to buy dollars 
to prevent its national currency from appreciating precipitately 
against its neighbors. But collectively this triggered a general 
explosion in their dollar foreign exchange reserves.  Table  4.1     
shows the foreign exchange reserves of Japan, Western Europe, 
and Canada, surging about 60 percent per year in 1970–72. 
Because they could not fully sterilize the monetary consequences 
1970
1975
1980
1985
0
5
10
15
20
UnitedStates
Europe
Japan
 Figure 4.4. 
 Consumer Price Index of the Principal Western European Countries, United States, and 
Japan 
 Source: globalfi nancialdata.com 

THE INTERNATIONAL MONEY MACHINE 
( 53 )
of buying dollars with domestic base money, their national money 
supplies also surged in 1970–73.  Figure  4.5     shows the sharp 
increase in “ROW” (rest of the world) money in the form of M1 in 
1970–72 ( McKinnon  1982 ). 
 Infl ation became high in both Europe and Japan despite the 
appreciations of their currencies against the world’s central 
money.  Figure  4.4     shows the surge in infl ation in the CPIs of the 
Western European counties, Japan, and the United States from 
1973 to 1975, and  fi gure  4.6     shows the even higher surge in their 
PPIs (producer price indexes). Primary commodity prices including 
oil also rose sharply from the worldwide infl ationary pressure.   
 But notice that monetary control in these periphery countries 
was lost ( fi gure  4.5 ) well before the fi rst oil shock. Th e Yom Kippur 
War, followed by an Arab embargo on world oil supplies, started 
in September 1973. Undoubtedly, the sudden supply constraint 
on Middle East crude coming onto the market would have caused 
the price of oil to jump. But the infl ationary genie had already 
 Table 4.1. DIRECT DOLLAR LIABILITIES OF THE U.S. TO FOREIGN CENTRAL 
BANKS AND GOVERNMENTS (BILLION DOLLARS, YEAR-END STOCKS)  
 Year 
 Canada 
 Japan 
 Western Europe 
 Total 
 Annual percentage 
change 
 1970 
 2.95 
 3.19 
 13.61 
 19.75 
 74.8 
 1971 
 3.98 
 13.78 
 30.13 
 47.89 
 142.5 
 1972 
 4.25 
 16.48 
 34.20 
 54.93 
 14.7 
 1973 
 3.85 
 10.20 
 45.76 
 59.81 
 8.9 
 1974 
 3.66 
 11.35 
 44.33 
 59.34 
 –0.8 
 1975 
 3.13 
 10.63 
 45.70 
 59.46 
 0.2 
 1976 
 3.41 
 13.88 
 45.88 
 63.17 
 6.2 
 1977 
 2.33 
 20.13 
 70.75 
 93.21 
 47.6 
 1978 
 2.49 
 28.90 
 93.09 
 124.48 
 33.5 
 1979 
 1.90 
 16.36 
 85.60 
 103.86 
 -16.6 
 1980 
 1.56 
 21.56 
 81.59 
 104.71 
 0.8 
 1981 
 2.40 
 24.72 
 65.22 
 92.34 
 -11.8 
 1982 
 2.08 
 19.17 
 60.72 
 81.97 
 -11.2 
 1983, Q3 
 2.76 
 20.45 
 63.25 
 86.46 
 5.5 
 Source : McKinnon 1996. 

( 54 ) 
The Unloved Dollar Standard
30
20
10
0
–10
–20
20
16
12
8
–4
0
1970
1975
1980
1985
ROW money
(right scale)
U.S. effective
exchange rate
 Figure 4.5. 
 Rate of Change in Eff ective Dollar Exchange Rate and in Rest of the World (ROW) Money, 
1970–86 
 Source: McKinnon 1996  
1970
1975
1980
1985
–5
0
5
10
15
20
25
United States
Europe
Japan
 Figure 4.6. 
 Producer Price Indexes of the Principal Western European Countries, United States, and 
Japan 
 Source: globalfi nancialdata.com 

THE INTERNATIONAL MONEY MACHINE 
( 55 )
been let out of the bottle because of the fl ight from the dollar 
starting in 1970 and the huge increase ROW money in 1971–72. 
So the size of the jump in the price of oil in 1973–74, if attributed 
only to the supply constraint, surprised even the most militant 
Arab sheiks.  
 THE CARTER SHOCK OF THE LATE 1970S  
 Th e sharp global recession of 1975–76 damped the ongoing 
worldwide infl ation temporarily ( fi gures  4.4 and  4.6 ). But the 
incoming administration of U.S. President Jimmy Carter was 
also fi xated on “unfair” foreign mercantile competition, and his 
advisers were heavily in thrall to the Exchange Rate Cum Trade 
Balance Fallacy. (By then, high infl ation combined with high 
unemployment had weaned many people off  the Phillips Curve 
Fallacy.) At the end of 1976, the Carter government embarked on 
another campaign to depreciate the dollar—particularly against 
the yen. Despite his doubts, Secretary of the Treasury Michael 
Blumenthal was dragooned into giving speeches suggesting that 
the dollar should be lower and the yen higher. In 1977–78, the 
result again was another run of hot money out of the United 
States, another surge in dollar foreign exchange reserves ( table  4.1    ), 
excessive money growth abroad in 1977–78 ( fi gure  4.5 ), and a 
second burst of worldwide infl ation ( fi gures  4.4 and  4.6 ). 
 Finally, in October 1978, an international consortium of the 
major industrial countries rescued the dollar from further 
declines with actual and threatened intervention to support it. 
Part of the agreement was a sharp increase in U.S. interest rates 
to halt further outfl ows of hot money—and the package did suc-
ceed in putting a fl oor under the dollar. 
 Note that the Iranian revolution, and second big disruption in 
world oil supplies, did not occur until 1979—well  after  the run 
on the Carter dollar. So the surge in dollar exchange reserves 
( table  4.1    ) and loss of monetary control in peripheral industrial 

( 56 ) 
The Unloved Dollar Standard
countries ( fi gure  4.5    ) had already occurred in 1977–78. Th e infl a-
tion genie of excessive money issue had been let out of the bottle 
before the advent of hostilities in Iran and sharp increases in oil 
prices in 1979–80. 
 In retrospect, these disruptions in the marketing of oil 
provided, and still provide, a deceptive cover for the two great 
infl ationary episodes of the 1970s. Most people just remember 
them as “oil shocks” that caused the great infl ations. But the 
worldwide loss of monetary control, following the Nixon shock 
of 1971 and then the Carter shock of 1976, both leading to a 
depreciating dollar, was the primary engine of infl ation in both 
cases. In large part, the surprisingly sharp increases in the price 
of oil ( fi gure  4.7    ) were largely endogenous to the preceding surges 
in money growth in Western Europe and Japan. 
 True, there is an identifi cation problem. How much of the two 
great surges in the price of oil in 1973–74 and again in 1979–80 
( fi gure  4.7 ) can be attributed to a prior loss of monetary control 
from a malfunctioning dollar standard, and how much from the 
Aftermath of
Nixon
shock
Jan–70
1
5
25
125
Jan–75
Jan–80
Jan–85
Jan–90
Jan–95
Jan–00
Jan–05
Jan–10
Aftermath
of Carter
shock
Aftermath of
Bernanke-
Greenspan
Quantitative
easing
Credit
crunch
 Figure 4.7. 
 West Texas Intermediate Oil Price, 1970–2010 
 Source: globalfi nancialdata.com 

THE INTERNATIONAL MONEY MACHINE 
( 57 )
sudden supply constraints in the form of embargoes by major 
exporters? Fortunately, a “natural” experiment suggests itself to 
help sort things out. 
 Th e world suff ered another big shock when the price of oil more 
than tripled between 2002 and July 2008 ( fi gure  4.7 ). But this 
time, there were no obvious politically based disruptions in the 
supply of oil. As will be discussed more comprehensively in  chapter 
 5    , this last oil shock can again be attributed to hot money out-
fl ows from the United States because of unduly low interest rates 
in 2003–06, leading to a weak and falling dollar. But this time the 
relevant periphery was (is) large emerging markets—China, India, 
Brazil, Russia, and Indonesia—whose central banks intervened 
heavily to buy dollars But in most people’s minds, the great infl a-
tions of the 1970s are dimly remembered as “supply side” oil 
shocks rather than as worldwide monetary shocks arising out of a 
malfunctioning world dollar standard—as hypothesized here. 
 High and variable infl ations with wild exchange fl uctuations 
continued into the 1980s until the new Fed chairman, Paul 
Volcker, ended the infl ation with an extremely tight money policy 
in  1981–83. Short-term interest rates rose to more than 20 per-
cent in 1981 so that the dollar shot up in the foreign exchanges 
( fi gure  4.2    ), resulting in a sharp decline in U.S. manufacturing in 
1982–84, the advent of the so-called rust bowl, largely in the 
American Midwest. Th is international monetary turmoil knocked 
the industrial economies off  their paths of high, noninfl ationary 
productivity growth—which had prevailed under stable exchange 
rates and monetary stability of the 1950s and 1960s. Th e general 
slowdown in productivity growth in the 1970s and early 1980s 
was much greater than could be explained by “exogenous” oil 
shocks. 
 In light of these disasters, one might ask why the U.S. 
government failed to disinfl ate in the late 1960s when infl ation 
was still quite mild (3 to 4 percent per year) compared to what 
was to come in the 1970s (fi gures 3.1 and 3.3)—and thus pre-
serve the dollar’s anchoring eff ect for the rest of the world. Th e 

( 58 ) 
The Unloved Dollar Standard
short answer is that the U.S. government—like most others in 
the 1960s—was in thrall to the Phillips Curve Fallacy: the 
trade-off  between infl ation and unemployment. It imagined that 
by tolerating (slightly) higher infl ation the economy would settle 
down to a permanently lower rate of unemployment. Th anks to 
Milton  Friedman ( 1968    ), and to actual experience with high 
infl ation coupled with high unemployment in the in the 1970s, 
this fallacy has been discredited. Doctrinally, we are now in some-
what better shape to reestablish an international monetary regime 
with stable exchange rates. But the exchange rate–cum–trade 
balance fallacy is still alive and well, and undermines reestablish-
ing a strong dollar as an anchor for the world price level.  
 THE BERNANKE-GREENSPAN SHOCK AND THE 
BUBBLE ECONOMY, 2003–08  
 Fast-forward 20 years to consider a more recent episode of a per-
sistent fall in the foreign exchange value of the dollar, again using 
the euro for comparison.  Figure  4.2     shows the dollar falling per-
sistently from about 1.2 euros in 2002 (the top of the U.S. 
high-tech bubble) to about 0.63 euro in July 2008—when U.S. 
interest rates averaged much less than European ones. Th is 
unduly easy U.S. monetary policy did not show up as high infl a-
tion in the U.S. core CPI ( fi gure  4.8 ), which excludes more volatile 
items such as food and energy. By focusing on infl ation in the 
U.S. core CPI, which showed a modest 2 percent or so annual 
infl ation in this purely domestic (and backward-looking) price-
level indicator, the Fed missed the bubbles in asset prices in both 
the American and world economies.  Figure  4.8    , courtesy of Steve 
Hanke (2010), shows that the Commodity Reserve Bureau (CRB) 
index, a very of broad index of dollar commodity prices, rose 
more than 90 percent from the fi rst quarter of 2003 to peak out 
in the second quarter of 2008. Th e price of oil ( fi gure  4.7 ) rose 
even more sharply than the general commodity price indexes. 

THE INTERNATIONAL MONEY MACHINE 
( 59 )
Housing prices, measured by the Case-Schiller index, surged 44.7 
percent from the fi rst quarter of 2003 to their peak in the fi rst 
quarter of 2006. 
 Why did the Fed actively stoke these bubbles? Fearing defl a-
tion after the collapse of the high-tech bubble in 2001–02, the 
U.S. Federal Reserve Bank lowered the Fed funds interest rate to 
just 1 percent in 2003–04. At the time, this interest rate was far 
too low for balancing actual infl ation in the “headline” CPI with 
the economy’s excess capacity. Th e well-known Taylor Rule sug-
gested that the Fed funds rate should have been closer to 4 per-
cent in 2003–4 ( Taylor  2009 ). 
 Beyond the Taylor Rule violation, however, the persistent 
weakness of the dollar from 2002 to mid-2008 should have also 
signaled to the insular Fed that American monetary policy was 
far too loose. Th e asset bubbles themselves were not the only 
indicator. Large emerging markets (EMs) with naturally higher 
interest rates and fl oating exchange rates, such as Brazil, were 
particularly discomfi ted by the sharp appreciations of their 
Jan-03
Jun-03
Nov-03
Apr-04
Sep-04
Feb-05
Jul-05
Dec-05
Jan-08
Jun-08
Nov-08
Apr-09
Sep-09
Feb-10
Jul-10
Dec0-10
May-06
Oct-06
Mar-07
Aug-07
80
100
120
140
160
180
200
Case-Shiller
CRB Spot
CPI (less Food and Energy)
S&P500
 Figure 4.8. 
 Th e Greenspan-Bernanke Bubble Economy, 2003–10 
 Source : Bloomberg and Federal Reserve Economic Data 

( 60 ) 
The Unloved Dollar Standard
 currencies and loss of internal monetary control. China, which 
was trying to maintain a more stable dollar peg, also experienced 
hot money infl ows that made control of its monetary base 
increasingly diffi  cult. Th e People’s Bank of China had to under-
take massive sterilization eff orts to mop up excess monetary 
liquidity that was contributing to the bubble in commodity prices, 
and then to reimpose controls on capital infl ows. But the Fed, 
with its orientation toward only domestic monetary indicators, 
ignored all this. 
 Th is insular view of how  American monetary policy  should be 
conducted interacted with another major economic fallacy: the 
so-called effi  cient markets theory. Although observers in the 
Federal Reserve and elsewhere could see the extraordinary 
increases in asset prices from 2002 into 2008 shown in  fi gures  4.7   
and  4.8    , they chose to ignore them. Th e prevailing doctrine of effi  -
cient markets convinced the Fed that such bubbles would be 
effi  ciently self-correcting without any countervailing action by 
the central bank. 
 In summary, the Fed’s insularity regarding events in the inter-
national economy, particularly the falling dollar and associated 
bubbles in asset prices, combined with the Effi  cient Markets 
Fallacy on the one hand and the Exchange Rate and Trade Balance 
Fallacy on the other (a lower dollar will reduce the trade defi cit) 
culminated in the bubble economy—whose bursting led to the 
subprime mortgage crisis and great credit crunch of 2008–09. In 
eff ect, the Fed overreacted to the bursting of the dot-com bubble 
in 2001 by reducing interest rates too much, and seems to have 
overreacted again to the subprime mortgage bust by setting 
short-term interest rate near zero after December 2008—as we 
shall see in  chapter  5 . 


Th e Bernanke Shock, 2008–12 
 Interest Differentials, Carry Trades, 
and Hot Money Flows  
 WHAT DOES  CURRENCY CARRY TRADE MEAN?  
   It is a strategy in which an investor sells a certain currency with 
a relatively low interest rate (the funding currency) and uses the 
funds to  purchase  a diff erent currency yielding a higher interest 
rate (the investment currency). A trader using this strategy 
attempts to capture the diff erence between the rates, which can 
often be substantial, depending on the amount of leverage used. 
Th e big risk in a carry trade is the uncertainty of exchange rates. 
Th e carry trader would run the risk of losing money if the 
investment currency suddenly depreciates but would gain 
further if it appreciates. Also, these transactions are generally 
done with a lot of leverage, so a small movement in exchange 
rates can result in huge losses unless the position is hedged 
appropriately.  
 CHAPTER 5 

( 62 ) 
The Unloved Dollar Standard
 Th is Wikipedia description is useful but not complete. A key 
feature of a carry trade is that the trader does not (cannot) hedge 
his position against foreign exchange risk. From covered interest 
arbitrage, we have the well-known result that the interest 
diff erential  i (funding) minus  i * (investment) approximately 
equals the forward premium  f  = ( F  –  S ) /  S , where  F  is the forward, 
and  S  the spot exchange rate: investment currency / funding 
currency. So if the trader sells the investment currency forward 
to cover himself, the preexistence of covered interest arbitrage 
exactly wipes out his profi t because  f  =  i  –  i *. To get back into the 
funding currency, the cost of forward cover, that is, the forward 
premium  f , is equal to the interest diff erential. Carry trading is a 
risky business where hedging is virtually useless! 
 CARRY TRADING FROM THE FED’S 
ZERO-INTEREST-RATE POLICY  
 From 2009 into mid-2011, almost all emerging markets (EMs) 
complained about ultralow interest rates at the “center” inducing 
hot money fl ows to the “periphery.” With the two-speed world 
recovery, the slowly growing mature industrial countries—the 
United States, Europe, and Japan—have cut short-term interest 
rates very low.  Figure  5.1     shows short-term interbank inter est 
rates in the United States to be near zero since the end of 2008: 
the Bernanke shock. Th is is then followed by declines in short 
rates on euros (Germany) and the pound sterling to less than 
1 percent by mid-2009 and continuing into 2012. Japan had been 
stuck in a zero-interest liquidity trap since the mid-1990s. 
 In addition, the U.S. Federal Reserve’s Quantitative Easing 
(QE) for reducing long rates (ending in June 2011) exacerbated 
the problem.  Figure  5.2     shows the 10-year bond rate in the United 
States, U.K., and the euro area (Germany) approaching 2 percent 
in 2011, with the 10-year bond rate of Japan down to just 1 per-
cent. No wonder carry traders get excited with the prospect of 

THE INTERNATIONAL MONEY MACHINE 
( 63 )
much higher interest rates in emerging markets on the dollar 
standard’s periphery. 
 Th e long swing in the American portion of the current carry 
trade began in 2002. After the dot com bubble burst in 2001, the 
Fed (over)reacted by cutting the U.S. interbank interest rate to 
just 1 percent from 2002 into 2004—and then raised it very 
slowly despite economic recovery and the advent of bubbles in 
housing prices and in worldwide commodity markets. Th e result-
ing carry trade induced a fl ood of hot money into emerging 
 markets—which have higher growth and naturally higher interest 
rates. Th e result was a steadily depreciating dollar on a trade-
weighted basis until 2008, as shown in  fi gure  5.3 . Th is more or 
less steady dollar depreciation (appreciation in emerging mar-
kets) magnifi ed the short-term profi ts of carry traders in the 
2002–08 period. 
 7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
Jan-07 Jul-07
Jul-08
Jul-09
Jul-10
Jul-11
Jan-08
Jan-09
Jan-10
Jan-11
Jan-12
Germany
Japan
United States
United Kingdom
 Figure 5.1. 
Post-crisis Money Market Interest Rate of the Developed World 
 Source : Global Financial Data 

( 64 ) 
The Unloved Dollar Standard
 However, this seemingly lucrative carry trade was interrupted 
by the worldwide bank credit crunch from the last half of 2008 
into 2009. Th e crisis demand for dollars shot upward, and  fi gure  5.3  
shows the dollar rising sharply in the foreign exchanges. Highly 
leveraged dollar carry traders were caught by banks suddenly 
refusing to roll over their short-term loans in dollars. Th e traders 
were forced to sell off  their foreign exchange assets to repay their 
dollar loans, whence the sharp rise in the dollar in the foreign 
exchanges in 2008 ( fi gure  5.3 ). 
 Because the United States has had near-zero short-term 
interest rates from late 2008 onward, the stage was set for the 
revival of the carry trade once the credit crunch was over. Indeed, 
once banks resumed their “normal” lending to carry traders, 
the dollar began to weaken again from early 2009 to mid-2011 
( fi gure  5.3    ), and the relaxation of bank credit also induced another 
4.5
4
3.5
3
2.5
2
1.5
1
0.5
0
Nov-08
Nov-09
Nov-10
Nov-11
May-09
May-10
May-11
US
Germany
Japan
UK
 Figure 5.2. 
10-Year Government Bond Rate of Selected Countries (November 2008 to March 2012) 
 Source : IMF 

THE INTERNATIONAL MONEY MACHINE 
( 65 )
“mini” surge in commodity prices from 2009 to mid-2011, as 
shown in  fi gure  5.4 . 
 But then another surprise came. Th e “exogenous” crisis in 
Europe over the fate of Greece and the euro became a full-fl edged 
worldwide banking crisis by the summer of 2011. Bank credit 
seized up from counterparty risk over European sovereign debt 
uncertainty among the banks themselves. Again carry traders 
were caught on the hop as normal bank credit was cut off . Th ey 
had to sell off  their foreign exchange assets and long positions in 
commodities. In the fall of 2011, the dollar rose somewhat in 
foreign exchanges ( fi gure  5.3    ), while commodity prices began to 
fall ( fi gure  5.4    ). Th e upshot is that a weakening dollar from carry 
trading goes hand in hand with surging commodity prices, as 
refl ected in a longer-term perspective in fi gure 4.8 on the 
Greenspan-Bernanke bubble economy. Clearly, allowing wide 
interest diff erentials to persist between the center and periphery 
is a recipe for chronic macroeconomic instability. 
125
Credit Crunch
New Dollar Carry Trade
Dollar Carry Trade
Euro Crisis
120
115
110
105
100
95
90
85
80
2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012
 Figure 5.3. 
Th e Nominal Broad Dollar Index Movements (January 2002 = 100)     
 Source:  Federal Reserve Economic Data  

( 66 ) 
The Unloved Dollar Standard
 THE PLIGHT OF EMERGING MARKETS  
 For emerging markets only,  fi gure  5.5     is the mirror image of  fi gure 
 5.3    , and shows their ongoing nominal appreciation since 2002, as 
the counterpart of the dollar’s slow depreciation.  Figure  5.6     shows that 
China’s modest appreciation from 2002 to early 2011 cumulated to 
be about the same as other emerging markets—but the upward 
course of the RMB has been smoother and more predictable.  
 So the combination of very low American interest rates and a 
declining dollar has provoked large outfl ows of fi nancial capital 
(“hot” money) into EMs for almost a decade. When EM exchange 
rates are not tied down by offi  cial parities, their endogenous 
ongoing appreciation induces even more hot money infl ows. 
Trend-following (chartist) carry traders see a double benefi t: the 
higher EM interest rates combined with their currencies appreci-
ating against the dollar or yen. For 2000–07 before the global 
credit crunch in 2008,  table  5.1 provides illustrative returns to 
Selected Commodity Prices After QE
(Nov-08=100)
300
250
200
150
100
50
Nov-08
QE 1
QE 2
Euro
Brent Crude
Gold
Corn
Wheat
Soybeans
Copper
Banking
Crisis
0
May-09 Nov-09 May-10 Nov-10 May-11 Nov-11
 Figure 5.4. 
Selected Commodity Prices after QE (November 2008 = 100) 
 Source : Global Financial Data 

THE INTERNATIONAL MONEY MACHINE 
( 67 )
EM Real and Nominal Exchange Rate Appreciation, Jan’05=100
125
decrease=appreciation
Jan-01
100
75
Jan-03
Jan-05
Jan-07
Jan-09
Jan-11
Real
Nominal
 Figure 5.5. 
EM Percentage Nominal Exchange Rate Appreciation (January 2005 = 100)     
 Source : Haver Analytics, Morgan Stanley Research  
 Emerging markets (EMs) include the following countries: Russia, Poland, Czech Republic, Hungary, Romania, 
Ukraine, Turkey, Israel, UAE, Saudi Arabia, South Africa, China, India, Hong Kong, Korea, Taiwan, Singapore, 
Indonesia, Malaysia, Th ailand, Brazil, Mexico, Chile, Peru, Colombia, Argentina, Venezuela 
 Table 5.1. RETURNS ON CARRY TRADE (2000–07)  
 Funding currency 
 Interest rates 
 Returns from 
appreciation 
 Returns of 
carry trades 
 Investment 
currencies 
 Funding 
 Investment 
 U.S. dollar 
 3.4 
 10.2 
 1.1 
 7.9 
 Brazil, 
Mexico, and 
Canada 
 Euro 
 3.2 
 7.4 
 1.0 
 5.2 
 Iceland, 
Poland, and 
Czech 
Republic 
 Japanese yen 
 0.1 
 5.3 
 5.2 
 10.7 
 Australia, 
Korea, and 
New Zealand 
 Source : IMF 

( 68 ) 
The Unloved Dollar Standard
borrowing in dollars, euros, or yen to invest in surrounding EMs. 
Th e annual returns to dollar-based carry traders investing in 
Brazil, Mexico, and Canada were about 7.9 percent. 
 For emerging markets, therefore, exchange rate fl exibility is 
no protection from foreign interest rate disturbances—as when 
the Fed reduces its short rates to zero. In the short run, exchange 
rate fl exibility may actually enhance the returns that carry traders 
see as the target EM investment currency appreciates against the 
dollar. To slow the appreciations of EM currencies, EM central 
banks typically intervene to buy dollars with domestic base 
money. And these interventions have been truly massive.  Figure 
 5.7 shows that from the fi rst quarter of 2001 to the fi rst quarter 
of 2011, the dollar value of EM foreign exchange reserves rose 
sixfold—from $1 trillion to $7 trillion!  Figure  5.7 also shows that 
China accounted for about half of this huge buildup—but the col-
lectivity of other EMs was equally important.  
EM and CHN Nominal Exchange Rate Appreciation, Jan’05=100
120
Jan-01
decrease = appreciation
110
100
90
80
Jan-03
Jan-05
Jan-07
Jan-09
Jan-11
120
110
100
90
80
70
Nominal EM
Nominal China, rhs
 Figure 5.6. 
EM and China Nominal Exchange Rate Appreciation (January 2005 = 100) 
 Source : Haver Analytics, Morgan Stanley Research  

THE INTERNATIONAL MONEY MACHINE 
( 69 )
  Figure  5.8     shows that this EM buildup of foreign exchange 
reserves increased much faster than the growth of their nominal 
GDPs. For the EM group, reserves rose from about 15 percent of 
GDP at the beginning of 2001 to 34 percent of GDP at the 
beginning of 2011.  Figure  5.8     shows that for China alone over 
this same 10-year period, the ratio of foreign exchange reserves 
to GDP increased particularly strongly, from 13 to 50 percent. 
Some EMs, notably China and Brazil, have reimposed exchange 
controls on capital  infl ows —but with limited success. 
 Th is sharp buildup of EM foreign exchange reserves has been too 
big to be fully off set by domestic monetary sterilization operations. 
Th e resulting loss of monetary control in the EMs led (and leads) to 
infl ation generally higher than that in the developed market econ-
omies (DMs)—as shown in  fi gure  5.9 . Th is greater infl ation in EMs 
Emerging Markets and China, Foreign Exchange Reserves ($Billon)
8000
7000
6000
5000
4000
3000
2000
1000
2001
0
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
China
Total Emerging Markets
 Figure 5.7. 
Emerging Markets and China, Foreign Exchange Reserves ($Billion) 
 Source : IFS 
 Emerging markets (EMs) include the following countries: Russia, Poland, Czech Republic, Hungary, Romania, 
Ukraine, Turkey, Israel, UAE, Saudi Arabia, South Africa, China, India, Hong Kong, Korea, Singapore, 
Indonesia, Malaysia, Th ailand, Brazil, Mexico, Chile, Peru, Colombia, Argentina, Venezuela. Data missing for 
UAE from October 2011 and for Venezuela at December 2011, approximated by previous periods 

( 70 ) 
The Unloved Dollar Standard
occurred  despite  the fact that, since 2002, EM currencies on average 
appreciated against the DM currencies, as shown in  fi gure  5.5    .   
 More recently, after the interruption of the 2008 global credit 
crunch, a renewed carry trade began and was led by the now zero 
short-term interest rates in the United States.  Table  5.2 shows 
from May 2009 into mid-2011 the continued rapid buildup of 
foreign exchange reserves in the largest EMs—China, Russia, 
Indonesia, India, and Brazil—all of which have nominal CPIs 
growing more than 5 percent per year. Th is is substantially higher 
than CPI or PPI infl ation in Europe or Japan, or in the United 
States itself. China’s ongoing trade surplus (without any normal 
off setting capital outfl ow) also contributes to its buildup of 
foreign exchange reserves—but is no longer dominant. 
Emerging Markets and China, FX Reserve-GDP Ratio
60%
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
50%
40%
30%
20%
10%
0%
China
All Emerging Markets
 Figure 5.8. 
Emerging Markets and China, FS Reserve-GDP Ratio     
 Source : IFS 
 Notes : Calculated from annual GDP. Assume constant intrayear growth rate. Months in 2011 use 2010 GDP 
growth rate  
 Emerging markets (EMs) include the following countries: Russia, Poland, Czech Republic, Hungary, Romania, 
Ukraine, Turkey, Israel, UAE, Saudi Arabia, South Africa, China, India, Hong Kong, Korea, Singapore, 
Indonesia, Malaysia, Th ailand, Brazil, Mexico, Chile, Peru, Colombia, Argentina, Venezuela. Data missing for 
UAE from October 2011 and for Venezuela at December 2011, approximated by previous periods 

THE INTERNATIONAL MONEY MACHINE 
( 71 )
 Stephen Green of Standard Chartered Bank shows ( fi gure  5.10 ) 
that net fi nancial infl ows into China in the last quarter of 2010 and 
fi rst quarter of 2011were much bigger than its trade surplus. And 
Green estimates that in the fi rst quarter of 2011 China’s foreign 
exchange reserves rose by $152 billion even though its trade surplus 
was negligible. Hot money infl ows, then, seemed to be the main 
source of China’s increased foreign exchange reserves before the 
euro banking crisis—as they were in the fi rst half of 2008 ( fi gure 
 5.8    ) before the global credit crunch took hold in the second half.   
 On a world scale, the most striking infl ationary impulse is seen 
in primary commodity prices. Year-over-year to June 21, 2011, 
 Th e Economist ’s dollar commodity price index for all items shows 
an average increase of 38.6 percent, with food prices alone rising 
39 percent. For the past decade, fi gure 4.8 gives a longer perspec-
tive on various asset price bubbles—including two extraordinary 
surges in commodity prices before and after the global credit 
crunch of 2008. 
 16%
12%
8%
4%
1999
0%
–4%
2001
2003
2005
2007
2009
2011
DM Inflation
EM Inflation
 Figure 5.9. 
Emerging Market (EM) and Developed Markets (DM) Infl ations 
 Source : Haver Analytics, Morgan Stanley Research  
 Developed markets (DMs) include the following countries: United States, Germany, France, Italy, Spain, 
Japan, United Kingdom, Canada, Sweden, Australia  

( 72 ) 
The Unloved Dollar Standard
 Table 5.2. FOREIGN EXCHANGE RESERVES (BILLION DOLLARS)  
 
 Brazil 
 China, 
mainland 
 India 
 Indonesia 
 Russian 
Federation 
 May-09 
 194 
 2,093 
 253 
 56 
 387 
 June-09 
 200 
 2,135 
 255 
 55 
 396 
 July-09 
 206 
 2,178 
 262 
 55 
 385 
 August-09 
 215 
 2,224 
 267 
 58 
 392 
 September-09 
 221 
 2,288 
 271 
 60 
 395 
 October-09 
 230 
 2,344 
 273 
 62 
 414 
 November-09 
 235 
 2,405 
 270 
 63 
 425 
 December-09 
 237 
 2,416 
 265 
 64 
 417 
 January-10 
 239 
 2,432 
 263 
 67 
 414 
 February-10 
 240 
 2,441 
 260 
 67 
 413 
 March-10 
 243 
 2,464 
 261 
 69 
 423 
 April-10 
 246 
 2,507 
 261 
 76 
 436 
 May-10 
 249 
 2,456 
 255 
 72 
 429 
 June-10 
 252 
 2,471 
 256 
 73 
 433 
 July-10 
 256 
 2,556 
 266 
 76 
 448 
 August-10 
 260 
 2,565 
 263 
 78 
 447 
 September-10 
 274 
 2,667 
 272 
 83 
 458 
 October-10 
 283 
 2,780 
 276 
 89 
 464 
 November-10 
 284 
 2,786 
 270 
 90 
 449 
 December-10 
 287 
 2,866 
 275 
 93 
 444 
 January-11 
 296 
 2,952 
 278 
 92 
 451 
 February-11 
 306 
 3,012 
 280 
 96 
 458 
 March-11 
 316 
 3,067 
 283 
 102 
 465 
 April-11 
 326 
 3,168 
 290 
 110 
 483 
 May-11 
 331 
 3,188 
 288 
 113 
 480 
 Percentage 
increase from 
May 2009 
 71% 
 52% 
 14% 
 102% 
 24% 
 Source : IFS 
 Near-zero interest rates in the mature industrial countries 
contribute to commodity price infl ation in two ways. First, they 
generate hot money infl ows into the emerging market  periphery—
as analyzed here—and EM demand for primary commodities 
rises. Second, once commodity prices begin to rise, commodity 
carry traders fi nd they can borrow ultra cheaply in New York or 
Tokyo to fund long positions in commodity futures. Of course, 

THE INTERNATIONAL MONEY MACHINE 
( 73 )
this adds to the upward price  momentum  making commodity 
prices, and asset prices in general, more prone to bubbles—as a 
glance at fi gure 4.8, Th e Greenspan-Bernanke Bubble Economy, 
would suggest. 
 But also notice from fi gure 4.8 that the U.S. core CPI index, 
which excludes food and energy prices, has yet to register any of 
this infl ationary pressure. Th is backward-looking index, which 
includes the post-bubble downward fall in house prices and rents, 
is the Fed’s favorite infl ation target! With the Fed looking the 
other way, this international infl ation will eventually—albeit 
with a lag of somewhat uncertain duration—come back to the 
United States and other mature industrial countries, perhaps in 
the form of the “stagfl ation” reminiscent of the 1970s. 
 (Th is analysis was written before the second big international 
banking crisis, beginning about August 2011, from the implo-
sion of confi dence in the euro. Th is second banking crisis then 
cut off  bank credits to carry traders, interrupted hot money fl ows, 
and suddenly relieved the infl ationary pressure on peripheral 
countries. Whether this interruption is temporary or not remains 
to be seen—but I will return to it  chapter  13 ). 
250
200
150
100
50
0
–50
–100
–150
–200
–250
Q1 2008
Q2 2008
Q3 2008
Q4 2008
Q1 2009
Q2 2009
Q3 2008
Q4 2009
Q1 2010
Q2 2010
Q3 2010
Q4 2010
Trade (BoP)
Net FDI
Returns
Everything Else
 Figure 5.10. 
Components of China’s Foreign Exchange Reserve Growth 
 Source : Standard Chartered 

( 74 ) 
The Unloved Dollar Standard
 CARRY TRADES AND INTERNATIONAL 
MONETARY REFORM  
 What are the implications for international monetary reform? In 
the new millennium, I have argued, world monetary instability 
has been (and is) provoked by large and persistent interest diff er-
entials that induce carry trades: the willingness of speculators to 
borrow in low-interest-rate currencies (source currencies) to 
invest in higher-yield currencies (investment currencies). But 
what can governments do about this? 
 One of the principal designers of Bretton Woods, J. M. Keynes, 
was adamant that capital controls be retained to minimize cross-
currency fi nancial fl ows. Keynes wanted the new system to be 
insulated from the hot money fl ows characteristic of the 1920s 
and 1930s, which had undermined, and then caused, the implo-
sion of the interwar gold standard leading to worldwide depres-
sion. Instead, Keynes wanted  national macroeconomic autonomy 
( McKinnon  1993    ), where each nation remained free to set its 
own interest rates and conduct its own fi scal policy to secure full 
employment without being bound by an international standard. 
So, to this day, under the IMF Articles of Agreement, any signa-
tory is free to impose exchange restrictions on capital account. 
Although doing so is legal for all countries, the United States 
itself could not possibly impose capital controls. Because the 
dollar is the key currency, the whole system of clearing interna-
tional payments multilaterally would collapse. 
 From 1945 to the late 1960s, most industrial countries and 
virtually all developing ones kept capital controls in place. But 
unlike what Keynes wanted or projected, a common international 
monetary standard was reestablished. Th e stable-valued dollar 
became the common anchor for keeping national price levels 
roughly aligned, as discussed in  chapter  3    , and the need for dra-
matically diff erent interest rates was minimal. Although 
imperfect, the old system of fi xed dollar parities eliminated the 

THE INTERNATIONAL MONEY MACHINE 
( 75 )
possibility of prolonged exchange rate movements in one 
direction, on which carry traders now thrive. 
 Compared to the 1950s and 1960s, today’s worldwide carry-
trade problem has become more acute because exchange rates are 
more fl exible and because of the relaxation of controls on inter-
national movements of fi nancial capital—at least in part at the 
misguided behest of the IMF as a necessary step toward economic 
“liberalization.” (However, illiquid longer-term direct foreign 
investments are not a problem.) Fortunately, over the last two 
years, the IMF now seems to have reversed itself and is more tol-
erant of controls on liquid international capital fl ows—but only 
after a lot damage had been done. 
 Th e Asian crisis of 1997–98 was worsened by an earlier carry 
trade with Japan. By 1995, Japan had fallen into a near-zero 
interest rate liquidity trap with a weakening yen. Hot money 
poured out of Japan and into the Asian Crisis Five: Indonesia, 
Korea, Malaysia, Philippines, and Th ailand. Although Japan was 
not the only source for overborrowing by the Crisis Five, they 
became badly overextended in their foreign-currency indebted-
ness. Th us when speculators attacked Th ailand in June 1997, the 
contagion spread to the other four by the end of the year—with 
capital fl ight, widespread fi nancial bankruptcies, sharp exchange 
rate depreciations, and sharp downturns in output and 
employment. Japan was hurt as its exports to other East Asian 
countries slumped. Fortunately, China ignored foreign advice to 
depreciate the renminbi in tandem. Instead, the yuan/dollar rate 
was kept stable—which made it easier for its fi ve smaller East 
Asian trading partners (and competitors) and Japan to recover. 
 Today, the carry-trade story is no better. Th e prolonged dollar 
depreciation after 2002 ( fi gure  5.3 ) with ultralow U.S. interest 
rates led to the huge buildup of foreign exchange reserves 
( fi gure  5.7    ) in the EMs. Similarly over the last decade, misdirected 
pressure on China to continually appreciate the RMB has given 
carry traders a one-way bet on foreign exchange movements that 

( 76 ) 
The Unloved Dollar Standard
they really love. Notice that this explanation diff ers from the 
common view ( Rajan  2010    , 82) that Asian countries were so 
badly burned by the 1997–98 crisis that they turned conserva-
tive and resolved to run large trade surpluses to build up their 
foreign reserve positions. But today’s large Asian offi  cial exchange 
reserves are far in excess of any such prudential motivation and 
much larger than their cumulative trade surpluses. 
 How best can carry trades be limited? Central bankers from 
the G-20 major economies could meet continually to monitor 
each other in order to prevent wide interest diff erentials from 
developing. True to its newly professed virtue, the IMF should 
refrain from criticizing countries that attempt to impose capital 
controls to stem hot money fl ows. It could also provide technical 
advice on how to do so most effi  ciently. 
 But if interest spreads are too wide, capital controls will always 
fail. Th e fi rst item on the G-20 agenda should be to abandon 
monetary policies by the mature economies that set interest rates 
near zero, which encourages emerging markets to keep their 
interest rates low despite the infl ationary pressure they now face. 
Th e Fed must be the leader in raising interest rates because, under 
the asymmetrical world dollar standard, it has the greatest 
autonomy in monetary policy. 
 But American offi  cials point to the stagnant U.S. economy as 
the reason they want to keep domestic interest rates as low as 
possible—even zero. Th us, they have to be convinced that this 
common view is mistaken, and that raising short-term interest 
rates on dollar assets from zero to modest levels is in America’s 
own best interests—as well as those of the rest of the world. 
    THE SUPPLY CONSTRAINT ON BANK CREDIT   
 How do near-zero interest rates in U.S. interbank markets con-
strict the American economy? Since July 2008, the stock of base 
money in the U.S. banking system has virtually tripled. As part of 

THE INTERNATIONAL MONEY MACHINE 
( 77 )
its rescue mission in the crisis and to drive interest rates down 
and fl ood markets with liquidity, the Fed has bought many 
 nontraditional assets (mortgage-backed securities) as well as 
Treasuries. However, these drastic actions have not stimulated 
new bank lending. As shown in  fi gure  5.11 , much of this huge 
increase in base money is now lodged as excess reserves (cash 
assets) in large American commercial banks: a  liquidity trap. In 
addition,  fi gure  5.11     shows that banks have invested heavily in 
Treasury and Agency securities.   
 Despite the Fed’s strenuous eff orts, the supply of ordinary 
bank credit to fi rms and households remains weak.  Figure  5.11     
shows outstanding Commercial and Industrial Loans falling 
from $1.62 trillion in October 2008 to just $1.30 trillion in 
October 2011. Although large corporate enterprises have recov-
ered from the credit crunch of 2008 through their renewed 
access to bond and equity fi nancing, bank credit is the principal 
source of fi nance for working capital for small and medium-sized 
enterprises (SMEs), enabling them to purchase labor and other 
Treasury and Agency Securities
1.69
1.64
1.39
1.21
1.68
1.13
1.21
0.60
1.31
1.21
1.33
1.62
3.49
3.63
3.74
3.83
0.12
0.19
0.28
0.45
Commercial and Industrial Loans
Real Estate Loans
Interbank Loans
Cash Assets
Oct-11
Oct-10
Oct-09
Oct-08
 Figure 5.11. 
Holdings of Bank Assets at Commercial Banks in the United States ($trillion) 
 Source : Federal Reserve Economic Data  

( 78 ) 
The Unloved Dollar Standard
supplies. In cyclical upswings, SMEs have traditionally been the 
main engines for increasing employment. But in the very weak 
upswing of 2009–11, employment gains have been meager or 
nonexistent. 
 Why should zero-interest rates be causing a credit constraint? 
After all, conventional thinking has it that the lower the interest 
rate the better credit can expand. But this is only true when 
interest rates—particularly interbank interest rates—are com-
fortably above zero. Banks with good retail lending opportunities 
typically lend by opening credit lines to nonbank customers. But 
these credit lines are open-ended in the sense that the commercial 
borrower can choose when—and by how much—he will actually 
draw on his credit line (subject to some maximum limit of course). 
Th is creates uncertainty for the bank in not knowing what 
its future cash positions will be. An illiquid bank could be in 
trouble if its customers simultaneously decided to draw down 
their credit lines. 
 However, if the “retail” bank has easy access to the “wholesale” 
interbank market, its liquidity is much improved. To cover unex-
pected liquidity shortfalls, it can borrow from banks with excess 
reserves with few or no credit checks. But if the prevailing inter-
bank lending rate is close to zero (as it is now), then large banks 
with surplus reserves become loath to part with them for a deri-
sory yield. Th en smaller banks, which collectively are the biggest 
lenders to SMEs, cannot easily bid for funds at an interest rate 
signifi cantly above the prevailing interbank rate without inad-
vertently signaling that they might be in trouble, that is, distress 
borrowers. And indeed counterparty risk in smaller banks 
remains substantial, as almost 100 failed in 2011. (Remember 
that the huge Fed and TARP bailouts of 2008–09 were limited to 
large banks deemed too big to fail.) 
 Th at the American system of bank intermediation is essentially 
broken is refl ected in the sharp fall in interbank lending:  Figure 
 5.11     shows that interbank loans outstanding in October 2011 
were only slightly more than one-quarter of their level in October 

THE INTERNATIONAL MONEY MACHINE 
( 79 )
2008, just after the crisis hit. How to fi x bank  intermediation and 
escape from the liquidity trap is a long story ( McKinnon  2009 and 
 2010a  ). However, raising short-term interest rates above zero is 
an important part of the story. 
 But the damage that near-zero interest rates have done to 
fi nancial intermediation in the United States is more general 
than that seen just in banking statistics. Money market mutual 
funds attract depositors who believe they can withdraw their 
deposits to get virtually instant liquidity. But as the yields on the 
short-term liquid assets of these funds approach zero, a small 
negative shock could cause any of them to “break the buck” if 
marked to market. Th at is, a customer trying to withdraw from 
his account might get only 99 cents on the dollar. Banks and 
other sponsors of money market mutual funds are paranoid 
about the reputational risks of breaking the buck. So they have 
closed, or are closing, money market mutual funds both in Europe 
(in euros) and in the United States (in dollars). 
 Although expanding bank and mutual fund credit to nonfi nan-
cial fi rms is important enough, the United States should also 
raise interest rates moderately to prevent pension funds from 
going bust in the medium term. With short-term interest rates 
so close to zero and Fed chairman Ben Bernanke pledging to keep 
them there until the economy improves (perhaps as late as 2014), 
this must drive down long rates. Remember that long rates today 
refl ect the path of expected short rates into the future plus a 
liquidity premium. And  fi gure  5.2     shows that the American 10- 
year bond rate on Treasuries is already down to just 2 percent. 
 In California, public pension plans have typically assumed 
yields of about 7.5 percent on their assets to meet their fi xed 
pension obligations. Clearly, in today’s interest rate environment, 
they can’t do it even if they were “fully” funded by the 7.5 percent 
criterion. Private life insurance companies are also very stressed 
in meeting their annuity obligations to policyholders. And these 
fi nancial intermediaries have been important sources of 
long-term fi nance for American industry. So, in its own domestic 

( 80 ) 
The Unloved Dollar Standard
interest, the United States itself desperately needs to get interest 
rates up from rock-bottom levels—and needs to curb the carry 
trades that are so upsetting internationally.  
 A CONCLUDING NOTE ON STAGFLATION 
IN THE UNITED STATES  
 Th e Fed’s zero-interest-rate policy has worsened the situation 
and made escape to a more normal fl ow of bank intermediation 
more diffi  cult. Without more lending to SMEs, domestic economic 
stagnation will continue even though infl ation will take off . 
 Th e stagfl ation of the 1970s was brought on by unduly easy 
U.S. monetary policy in conjunction with attempts to “talk” the 
dollar down (the Nixon shock of August 1971), leading to mas-
sive outfl ows of hot money that destabilized the monetary sys-
tems of America’s trading partners ( McKinnon  1982    ) and 
generated worldwide infl ation (ch. 4). Although today’s stagfl a-
tion is not identical, the similarities would seem to be more 
important than the diff erences. 
 Today’s “shock” is the Fed’s overreaction to the global down-
turn of 2008 by setting the short-term federal funds rate close to 
zero. So the solution is more straightforward. Th e Fed should 
announce a program for gradually increasing the Fed funds rate 
to some modest target, say 2 percent. Th is should be accompa-
nied by a defi nite program for reducing the counterparty risk in 
interbank lending to all banks but particularly small ones, pos-
sibly by allowing them to pledge loans to SMEs as collateral. 
 To better preserve fi nancial and exchange rate stability in the 
transition, the big four central banks—Fed, European Central 
Bank, Bank of England, and Bank of Japan—should move jointly 
and smoothly to phase in a common minimum target—say 
2 percent—for their basic short-term interbank rates while relax-
ing any commitment they may have made to keep long rates 

THE INTERNATIONAL MONEY MACHINE 
( 81 )
down indefi nitely. By escaping from liquidity traps that so impair 
the effi  ciency of domestic bank intermediation and aggravate the 
international bubbles problem, the mature center itself would 
benefi t along with its periphery. 
 Reducing the spread in interest rates between the center and 
periphery would dampen carry trades and hot money fl ows in an 
important way. But it may not be suffi  cient to end them alto-
gether. So acknowledging the legitimacy of emerging markets 
using capital controls and other devices to dampen hot money 
infl ows should be an important part of the new G-20 discussion. 
Indeed central banks in the mature center could monitor their 
own commercial banks to help central banks on the periphery 
enforce their controls. 
 (But there is an important asymmetry here. Capital controls 
are not for everybody. In particular, the United States at the center 
of the world dollar standard cannot itself impose capital controls 
without destroying the world’s system for clearing international 
payments multilaterally. Th us everybody has a vested interest in 
rehabilitating the unloved dollar standard with open U.S. fi nan-
cial markets. Th e fi rst of many necessary steps in the rehabilita-
tion process is for the Fed to abandon any thought of a QE3 while 
phasing out its policy of keeping short rates near zero.) 
 Th ese cyclical carry trades illustrate the main point of the 
chapter: wide interest rate diff erentials across currencies make 
the world monetary system much more fragile whatever the 
exchange rate regime. “Reform” eff orts should focus much more 
on international monetary harmonization that limits interest 
diff erentials while accepting the need for exchange rate buff ers, 
such as capital controls, to limit hot money fl ows. Once the 
European banking crisis recedes (if ever), the large interest dif-
ferential—near-zero interest rates in the United States and much 
higher natural interest rates in the high-growth EMs—will set 
off  another cycle of hot money fl ows from the center to the 
periphery.   

This page intentionally left blank 


Trade Imbalances 
 PART TWO 

This page intentionally left blank 


 CHAPTER 6 
Th e U.S. Saving Defi ciency, 
Current-Account Defi cits, 
and Deindustrialization 
Hard versus Soft Landings  
 S
ince the early 1980s, economists have failed rather dismally to 
construct convincing theoretical models of why the seemingly 
endless U.S. current-account defi cits ( fi gure  6.1 ) are sustained by a 
seemingly endless willingness of the rest of the world to acquire 
dollar assets. Refl ecting this conceptual inadequacy, many see the 
continuation of such global “imbalances” to be unsustainable. 
Worriers claim that foreigners—both governments and their 
private sectors—will eventually cease buying dollar assets, which 
will trigger a collapse in the dollar’s value in the foreign exchanges 
and in America’s ability to borrow from foreigners. Beginning with 
the infamous twin defi cits—fi scal and trade—of the Reagan 
presidency in the 1980s, such failed predictions have been 
commonplace for almost 30 years.  
 Alone among nations, the United States has a virtually unlim-
ited line of credit with the rest of the world to sustain its current-
account defi cits because, in extremis, it could create the necessary 
international means of payment to repay debts to foreigners. 

( 86 ) 
The Unloved Dollar Standard
Consequently the U.S. can borrow heavily in its own currency 
because creditors of the United States voluntarily build up dollar 
claims—or are trapped into building up dollar claims, as we saw 
in  chapter  5 . Consequently, the net international wealth position 
of the United States (measured in dollars of course!) has become 
increasingly negative. 
 As of 2009,  fi gure  6.2     shows that value of foreign claims on the 
United States (a large proportion of which are Treasury bonds) 
exceeds America’s claims on foreigners (mainly equities and 
direct investments) by $2.5 to $3 trillion—mainly the cumulative 
eff ect of past current-account defi cits. Th is large and growing 
net indebtedness of the United States continually confounds 
the prognosticators of the dollar’s imminent collapse because 
they have seen less highly indebted countries in Asia and Latin 
America—and now Europe—ultimately being forced to repay in 
crisis circumstances associated with devaluations or default. 
 Th is resilience of the unloved dollar standard is even more 
astonishing in the aftermath of the Nixon, Carter, Greenspan, 
and Bernanke shocks to world monetary stability ( chs.  4 and  5 ). 
True, the sharp decline in confi dence in the euro since 2010 
1960
–7.0%
–6.0%
–5.0%
–4.0%
–3.0%
–2.0%
–1.0%
0.0%
1.0%
2.0%
1965
1970
1975
1980
1985
1990
1995
2000
2005
2010
 Figure 6.1. 
Th e U.S. Current Account (% of GDP) 
 Source: Bureau of Economic Analysis 

TRADE IMBAL ANCES 
( 87 )
undoubtedly buoyed the position of the dollar as international 
money—but this hardly explains the dollar’s robustness for the 
previous 30 years. Apparently, having just one currency to facili-
tate international exchange has such great technical advantages 
in economizing on markets ( ch.  2    ) that it overcomes the risks 
seen by the rest of the world of depending so heavily on that one 
national currency. And once it is ensconced as the central facili-
tator of international exchange, very powerful network eff ects 
take hold to keep the dollar as the prime vehicle currency in inter-
bank markets. Although hardly satisfying, this nontechnical 
explanation of the persistence of the unloved dollar standard is 
the best I can do.  
 IS THE UNITED STATES ALSO TRAPPED?  
 Th at said, what have been the consequences for the United States 
itself of its unique ability to borrow from the rest of the world? 
 Foreign central banks now hold almost half the outstanding 
stock of U.S. Treasury bonds beyond the Fed’s own holdings and 
that of other U.S. government agencies. Th e incidental eff ect has 
1976
–3500
–3000
–2500
–2000
–1500
–1000
–500
500
1000
$BN
0
1978 1980 1982 1984 1986 1988 1990 1992 1994 1996 1998 2000 2002 2004 2006 2008 2010
Current Account
Net Foreign Wealth
 Figure 6.2.  
U.S. Current Account and Net Foreign Wealth 
 Source: Bureau of Economic Analysis 

( 88 ) 
The Unloved Dollar Standard
been to provide a cheap and very long line of dollar credit to the 
U.S. Treasury and U.S. economy more generally. Because the 
United States is the only country that can go deeply into debt in 
its  own  currency, it is invulnerable to the usual risk faced by other 
debtor countries whose debts are denominated in foreign cur-
rencies. Because the Federal Reserve Bank could potentially 
“print” enough dollars to repay the U.S. Treasury’s foreign dollar 
debts, outright default is not a possibility. 
 Indeed, in international portfolios, U.S. Treasury bonds are 
generally treated as the world’s “risk-free” fi nancial assets against 
which risk premia in bonds denominated in other currencies are 
measured. And, with the big proviso that the U.S. price level 
remains fairly stable, foreign central banks are loath to see their 
currencies appreciate against the dollar. Today’s very low nominal 
interest rates on dollar assets, from near 0 percent on short-term 
securities rising to just 2 percent on 10-year Treasury bonds (fi g-
ures 5.1 and 5.2), suggest that the markets don’t take U.S. default 
or depreciation risk very seriously—perhaps because so much of 
U.S. Treasury debt now resides in central banks—both domestic 
and foreign ( ch.  5    ). Is this then nirvana for the saving-defi cient, 
some might say profl igate, United States? 
 Despite being at the center of the international dollar stan-
dard, the United States itself is also trapped by it—although not 
so obviously as its creditor countries on the dollar’s periphery. 
Th is entrapment of the United States has longer- and shorter-
run dimensions. 
 Consider the long-run problem fi rst. To a considerable extent, 
low U.S. saving is a natural consequence of the ease with which it 
can borrow from foreigners. Th is ultrasoft borrowing constraint 
tilts the behavior of the federal government toward defi cit 
spending because of the ease with which it can sell low-yield 
Treasury bonds to foreign fi nancial institutions. But private bor-
rowing can also be excessive. 
 In 2012, the American economy is now more fragile because of 
low U.S. domestic saving: meager personal saving has fallen to 

TRADE IMBAL ANCES 
( 89 )
about 4 percent of GNP—less than half of what it was in the non-
infl ationary 1960s, and large government fi scal defi cits are now 
nearly 9 percent of GNP—although the economy has partially 
recovered from its cyclical trough in 2008–09.  Figure  6.3     shows 
the decline of America’s long-term saving rate relative to China’s 
rising rate. In the 1960s, U.S. gross saving was over 20 percent of 
GDP, whereas today it is less than 10 percent. America’s current-
account defi cit of 4 to 5 percent of GDP simply refl ects this 
long-term saving defi ciency. America needs to borrow heavily in 
world markets in general, and from East Asia in particular, to 
prevent a domestic credit crunch that would sharply reduce U.S. 
investment—normally about 16 percent of U.S. GNP. So the 
United States is trapped in the sense that it needs the foreign 
fi nance to prevent a credit crunch. 
 U.S. domestic politics have taken a strange turn that refl ects 
this soft borrowing constraint. Th e reckless political pressure 
–8%
1965
1968
1971
1974
1977
1980
1983
1986
1989
1992
1995
1998
2001
2004
2007
2010
–6%
–4%
–2%
U.S. Saving
U.S. CA
China
CA
China Saving
Gross Domestic Savings % GDP
Current Account % GDP
0%
2%
0%
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
4%
6%
8%
10%
12%
U.S. Current Account
U.S. Gross Saving
China Current Account
China Gross Saving
 Figure 6.3.  
U.S. and China Current Account and Gross Domestic Savings as Percentage of GDP     
 Source:  World Bank, OECD, Stat 

( 90 ) 
The Unloved Dollar Standard
from so-called supply-siders to cut taxes, no matter what the 
budgetary consequences, could only be sustained for so long 
because the United States alone has virtually unlimited access to 
international credit denominated in its own currency to cover 
the resulting fi scal defi cits. Other debtor economies face the 
specter of having debts build up in foreign currencies (largely 
dollars) that, if continued indefi nitely, would provoke an attack 
on their currencies—as with the forced depreciations of the 
Indonesian, Korean, Malaysian, Philippine, and Th ai currencies 
in 1997–98 or the Argentinian peso in 2002. Such an attack, 
or the threat thereof, then forces a retrenchment in the debtor 
country’s government fi nances or private bank lending or both. 
But not so in the United States, where low national saving is 
endogenously determined because of its ultrasoft borrowing 
constraint. 
 In the shorter run, the real or imagined insuffi  ciency of 
aggregate demand in the American economy induces the U.S. 
government to be ultra-Keynesian. Democrats or Republicans 
cut taxes or raise expenditures with alacrity at any sign of 
economic slack in the American economy. On February 14, 2012, 
President Obama submitted his 2012 budget to the U.S. 
Congress; it makes little or no progress in reducing America’s 
saving defi ciency, and it projects a fi scal defi cit of over half a tril-
lion dollars by 2015 and increasing thereafter. 
 In the world system, this soft borrowing constraint has induced 
the United States to be “the consumer of last resort.” In 2012, 
Japan, Korea, and the euro area face a growth slowdown with 
defl ation unless exports to the United States can be sustained—
whence the willingness of emerging markets, especially China, to 
accumulate huge volumes of dollar exchange reserves to prevent 
their currencies from appreciating and slowing export growth 
( ch.  5    ). In 2011–12, the Bank of Japan intervened several times 
to buy dollars to dampen the unduly strong yen. Th is uncomfort-
able dependence of the United States on its foreign creditors is 
mutually symbiotic. 

TRADE IMBAL ANCES 
( 91 )
 Th e U.S. government’s “Keynesian”   1 proclivity to defi cit-spend 
with every real or imagined cyclical downturn can only be accom-
modated because of America’s unique position in the global 
monetary system. Th e international dollar standard relaxes the 
borrowing constraints on agents in the American economy, par-
ticularly households and the federal government, and lures them 
into feeling that they can safely get by without saving much.  
 THE DEINDUSTRIALIZATION OF 
THE UNITED STATES  
 But suppose that a crash in the unloved dollar standard, where a 
cessation of foreign lending to the United States precipitates a 
credit crunch, is avoided indefi nitely. Th ere remains an additional 
cost to the “trapped” center country: an untoward contraction in 
employment in its manufacturing sector. Heavy reliance on 
foreign borrowing speeds the pace of deindustrialization in the 
United States. 
 Employment in American manufacturing has been shrinking 
for a long time. In the mid-1960s, manufacturing output was 
27 percent of GNP and its share of employment was 24 percent. 
By 2004, these numbers had fallen to about 13.8 percent 
and 10.1 percent, respectively—and in 2011, manufacturing 
employment had fallen to less than 9 percent of the U.S. labor 
force. Although not so dramatic as in the United States, the other 
advanced industrial countries also show marked shrinkage in the 
size of their manufacturing sectors. Th e consensus explanation is 
 twofold: since the 1960s rapid technical progress has been greater 
in manufacturing than in services, and, as households become 
richer, demand naturally shifts away from goods toward services. 
Even with far fewer resources being allocated to manufacturing, 
modern economies are still in consumption equilibrium. 
 But how does foreign trade enter this consensus view? Stalwart 
free traders—such as Gregory Mankiw, then chairman of the 

( 92 ) 
The Unloved Dollar Standard
Council of Economic Advisors in the  Economic Report of the 
President  (February 2004)—argued that America’s remarkable 
productivity growth, particularly in manufacturing, is the prox-
imate reason for the shrinkage in the size of the manufacturing 
sector. Mankiw also argued that foreign competitive pressure, 
including outsourcing, increases technical progress in manufac-
turing. Weaker American manufacturing industries are being 
continually displaced, and manufacturing output becomes 
 concentrated in more profi table and technically dynamic 
activities. 
 So, in the United States and other industrial economies, foreign 
trade shrinks the size of manufacturing sectors indirectly by 
benignly increasing the pace of technical progress—rather than 
(malignly) by direct displacement of workers without increasing 
the economy’s overall ability to reabsorb them. According to 
Mankiw, the outsourcing of jobs in manufacturing and services—
however ominous it might seem—is simply the modern manifes-
tation of healthy ongoing international competition. 
 Th is standard defense of free trade is well and good as far as it 
goes. However, it fails to link the unusual shrinkage in manufac-
turing employment to America’s saving defi ciency. Heavy foreign 
borrowing aggravates the natural decline in the size of the U.S. 
manufacturing sector well beyond that experienced by other 
mature industrial countries, which generally are not net bor-
rowers internationally. 
 Th e transfer of foreign saving to the United States is embodied 
more in goods than in services. India aside, most services are 
not so easily traded internationally. Th us when American 
spending rises above output (income), the net absorption of 
foreign goods—largely raw materials and manufactures—
increases. True, episodic sharp increases in the price of oil signif-
icantly increase the U.S. current-account defi cit for awhile. 
However,  fi gure  6.4     shows that, since the early 1980s, the trade 
defi cit in manufactures alone has been about as big as the cur-
rent-account defi cit, that is, as big as America’s saving shortfall. 

TRADE IMBAL ANCES 
( 93 )
 Highly industrialized economies in East Asia, such as Japan 
and China, have had big saving (trade) surpluses—and are the 
natural creditors of the saving-defi cient United States. Because 
their exports are largely manufactures, the real counterpart of 
their buildup of nominal dollar claims is for them to run export 
surpluses in manufactures with the United States—as shown in 
 fi gure  6.4 . Th is “transfer problem” is discussed in more depth in 
 chapter  9 . 
 THE SHRINKAGE IN AMERICAN MANUFACTURING  
 We can estimate very roughly the shrinkage in American manu-
facturing from its saving defi ciency by making simplifying 
assumptions. Assume that spending by American households 
and fi rms for manufactures is more or less independent of 
whether the goods are produced at home or abroad. Th en domestic 
production of manufactures shrinks by the amount of the trade 
1965
1968
1971
1974
1977
1980
1983
1986
1989
1992
1995
1998
2001
2004
2007
2010
–7
–6
–5
–4
–3
–2
–1
0
1
2
CA Balance
Manufacturing Trade Balance
 Figure 6.4.  
U.S. Current-Account Balance and Trade Balance in Manufacturing, 1965–2010 
(% of GDP) 
 Source: Bureau of Economic Analysis 

( 94 ) 
The Unloved Dollar Standard
defi cit in manufactures. Th e consequent loss in jobs depends 
inversely on labor productivity in manufacturing, which rises 
strongly through time. Th e actual path of manufacturing 
employment from 1965 to 2009 is the unbroken dark line in 
 fi gure  6.5 . 
 If we take the trade defi cit in manufactures and add it back to 
get “adjusted manufactured output,” and assume that labor pro-
ductivity (output per person) is the same in adjusted output as in 
actual output, we get projected employment in manufacturing—
the dashed line in  fi gure  6.5    . For example, in 2004, actual 
employment in manufacturing was just 10.1 percent of the 
American labor force, but it would have been 14 percent without 
a trade defi cit in manufactures. Th e diff erence is 4 to 5 million 
lost jobs in manufacturing. In 2009, actual employment in man-
ufacturing was about 8.5 percent of the labor force and the 
simulated employment assuming no saving defi ciency, that is, 
balanced trade, was about 10.3 percent. 
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
%
1965
1968
1971
1974
1977
1980
1983
1986
1989
1992
1995
1998
2001
2004
2007
2010
Projected Share of Manufacturing Employment under Balanced Manufacturing Trade
Share of Manufacturing Employment
 Figure 6.5.  
Projection of Labor Growth in U.S. Manufacturing under Balanced Manufacturing Trade, 
1965–2010 
 Source: Bureau of Economic Analysis, author’s projection 

TRADE IMBAL ANCES 
( 95 )
 As early as the 1980s, employment in manufacturing began to 
shrink substantially because of the then large current-account 
defi cit ( fi gure  6.1    ) attributed to the then large fi scal defi cit: the 
famous twin defi cits of Ronald Reagan’s presidency. With fi scal 
consolidation in the 1990s under President Clinton, the saving 
gap narrowed but wasn’t closed because American personal 
saving weakened. Now under Presidents George W. Bush and 
Barack Obama, the fi scal defi cit has exploded while private saving 
still remains weak. Th e result is heavy borrowing from foreigners, 
leading to all-time highs in the U.S. current-account defi cit in 
2005 ( fi gure  6.1 ). Th e main component remains the trade defi cit 
in manufactures, leading to intensifi ed shrinkage in American 
manufacturing employment. 
 Should we be concerned? Note that I am not suggesting that 
the trend in overall U.S. unemployment has increased (although 
it may have), but only that its composition has been tilted away 
from manufactures. In the past, the U.S. economy remained a 
very effi  cient job-creating machine, with growth in service-sector 
employment largely off setting the decline in manufacturing. 
However, the rate of technical change in manufacturing is much 
higher than in other sectors. And it is hard to imagine the U.S. 
sustaining its technical leadership with no manufacturing sec-
tor at all. 
 More uncomfortably, more congressmen, pundits, and voters 
feel justifi ed in claiming that foreigners use unfair trade practices 
to steal American jobs, particularly in manufacturing. In lobby-
ing against free trade, protectionists use the supposed underval-
uing of their exchange rates by East Asian countries (particularly 
China), the poor working conditions in countries that are natu-
rally poor, and so on, as pretexts for imposing tariff s or other 
restraints on manufactured imports into the United States. But 
this critique of foreigners is misplaced when net American 
imports of manufactures is primarily a consequence of America’s 
saving defi ciency. Better to lobby the U.S. government to reduce 
its fi scal defi cit. 

( 96 ) 
The Unloved Dollar Standard
 THE LONG WAY OUT: THE 
SOFT-LANDING SCENARIO  
 Th ere is no easy way out of the worldwide dollar standard trap. A 
deep devaluation of the dollar from its historical norms will only 
worsen macroeconomic conditions, defl ation on the periphery or 
infl ation in the United States, within the trap  without  springing it. 
 Chapters  7   and  8     show the futility of trying to “correct” a trade 
imbalance, which only refl ects international saving imbalances, 
by changing the exchange rate. So what can be done? 
 Th e most promising, although still diffi  cult, way out is to change 
the saving behavior of the United States over the next decade 
or two. Immediate large increases in taxes or cuts in government 
expenditure are not desirable from today’s countercyclical point 
of view. Instead a slow and deliberate improvement in the U.S. 
public fi nances from defi cit to surplus with a strong improvement 
in the propensity to save of American households—perhaps 
through tax incentives and higher required down payments for 
automobile and home purchases—is devoutly to be wished. 
 However, a necessary complement to gradually increasing 
American net saving is to have “surplus” saving abroad gradually 
decline. And here the behavior of China is all important.  Chapters  12   
and  13 show that, in recent years, the share of enterprise profi ts 
in Chinese GDP has grown sharply relative to the disposable 
income of Chinese households. Th us a parallel gradual shift from 
enterprise profi ts (which are largely saved) to household dispos-
able income would reduce surplus saving in China, and make the 
soft landing even softer. 
    A HARD-LANDING SCENARIO WITH A CREDIT 
CRUNCH: A NATURAL EXPERIMENT IN 1991–92   
  Ironically, if American protectionists succeed and imports from 
foreigners were suddenly greatly reduced so as to prevent the 
transfer of foreign saving to the United States, the U.S. fi scal  defi cit 

TRADE IMBAL ANCES 
( 97 )
would be uncovered and a credit crunch would ensue—with greater 
losses of American jobs. To illustrate this important point, a sharp 
fall in the infl ow of foreign fi nance to the saving-defi cient United 
States did occur in 1991–92—and did lead to a cessation of bank 
lending to fi rms and households. Th e resulting sharp economic 
downturn prevented George H. Bush, who was otherwise a very 
successful president, from being reelected in the fall of 1992. 
 Th is natural experiment of what happens when long-term 
capital infl ows suddenly cease, and imports fall sharply relative to 
exports, shows up in  fi gure  6.1 : the U.S. current-account defi cit 
temporarily vanished in late 1991 before deepening again to its 
“norm” after 1992. At that time, Japan and Germany were by far 
America’s largest creditors with current-account surpluses—and 
both were buff eted coincidentally by exogenous negative shocks to 
their lending capabilities, which had nothing to do with each other 
or with economic events in the United States. Th is little recognized 
explanation of the otherwise mysterious U.S. credit crunch of 
1991–92 was written up with supporting fi gures and analysis in a 
book I wrote with Kenichi Ohno ( McKinnon and Ohno  1997    )—
and I can do no better than reproduce some of its essentials.  
 Germany in 1991 after the Fall of the Berlin Wall in 1990 
 “Th e fi scal costs of reunifi cation changed Germany almost 
overnight from being a big international lender up to 1990 to 
being a net borrower in 1991. . . . Germany’s current-account 
surplus fell from about $50 billion per year before 1991 to a  defi cit 
of about $20 billion in 1991” ( McKinnon and Ohno  1997 , 120).  
 Japan in 1991 and the Collapse in Its Bubble Economy 
 “Th e crash in the Japanese stock and property markets so impaired 
the capital positions of important Japanese fi nancial institu-
tions—banks, insurance companies, trust funds, and so on—that 

( 98 ) 
The Unloved Dollar Standard
they shifted out of long-term international lending. . . . [L]ong-
term capital was actually repatriated to Japan in 1991 before a 
very modest recovery began 1992. . . . Not only was the amount 
of foreign capital available to the American economy suddenly 
reduced because of the Japanese fi nancial crash, but the form 
of fi nance shifted dramatically from long term to short term” 
( McKinnon and Ohno  1997 , 120). 
 McKinnon and Ohno go much further in analyzing the interest 
rate eff ects within the American fi nancial system from this  double 
shock of German reunifi cation and the bursting of the Japanese 
stock and property market bubbles. In eff ect, the sudden drying 
up of foreign purchases of long-term U.S. Treasuries in the face 
of a large ongoing U.S. fi scal defi cit meant that long-term interest 
rates rose sharply and induced American banks to buy Treasury 
bonds instead of lending normally to businesses for working 
capital, whence the intense “credit crunch” and sharp U.S. economic 
downturn in 1991–92. 
 Of course, after 1992, foreign capital from many sources began 
to return to the United States—and the U.S. fi scal defi cit moder-
ated for some years. For the remainder of the 1990s, the American 
capital market was restored as banks returned to normal lending 
to fi rms and households and the economy recovered and the 
trade defi cit widened. 
 Nevertheless, the credit crunch of 1991–92 usefully illustrates 
what could happen if foreign creditors—now mainly emerging 
markets (EMs) such a Brazil and China—were induced  collectively 
to stop lending to the United States. Instead of intervening in 
the foreign exchange markets to buy dollars (as described in 
 chapter  5    ), suppose EM central banks just stepped back and let 
their currencies appreciate in the face of the Fed’s zero-interest-
rate policy. If somehow they did it by common agreement, no one 
EM would be particularly disadvantaged from having its currency 
appreciate against the others. However, because they would no 
longer be signifi cant buyers of U.S. Treasuries, the now much 
larger U.S. fi scal defi cit would again be uncovered. 

TRADE IMBAL ANCES 
( 99 )
 So I leave it to the reader to imagine how a new credit crunch 
from this hypothetical withdrawal of foreign fi nancial support 
from the United States would work itself out. Of course, the 
probability of such collective action among diverse nations is 
small. However, now in 2012, China bulks very large. As I specu-
late in  chapter  13    , China with its stable dollar exchange rate is 
key in holding the world’s dollar-based monetary system together. 
If the People’s Bank of China wearies of seemingly unending pur-
chases of low-yield dollar assets in order to stabilize its exchange 
rate, other emerging markets would surely follow. 
 NOTES  
 1. 
With apologies to the memory of Keynes himself, who, if alive today, might not 
be a Keynesian.  


Exchange Rates and Trade Balances 
under the Dollar Standard 
 H ONG (HELEN)  Q IAO  
 I
n this chapter, we consider the impacts of discrete exchange 
rate changes in open economies with net foreign exchange lia-
bilities and assets under the dollar standard. To anticipate the 
results of the investigation, the combination of wealth, price, 
investment, and indirect investment eff ects (when present) 
increases the complexity of predicting current-account move-
ments following exchange rate changes, which in many cases 
leads to ambiguous results. For instance, currency devaluation 
may well improve the trade balance of a debtor economy by 
depressing domestic absorption, whereas an appreciation has an 
ambiguous eff ect on the trade balance of a creditor economy. 
Because exchange rate changes can no longer be separated from 
domestic price-level and absorption eff ects, except in special 
cases, they cannot be used predictably to adjust the trade 
balance. 
 Let us now put a foundation under these conclusions. 
 Some commentators in the Western fi nancial press have 
 suggested that East Asian economies, especially China, have 
 CHAPTER 7 

TRADE IMBAL ANCES 
( 101 )
undervalued currencies and should seek to appreciate them 
( Lardy  2003  ,  2005    ;  Goldstein  2004    ;  Roubini  2005    ). To reduce 
trade surpluses, especially in bilateral trade with the United 
States, these economies are advised to appreciate or freely fl oat 
their currencies in the near future ( Lardy  2005 ). Instead of 
addressing the external imbalances by increasing national 
savings (public and private), the U.S. government willingly and 
conveniently adopted this simplistic view, and has exerted pres-
sures on China and other East Asian trading partners to adjust 
their exchange rate policies. Th is chapter shows that the U.S. 
trade defi cit would not necessarily be alleviated by forcing cred-
itor countries to appreciate. 
 Most economists who propose to use exchange rate changes to 
adjust trade balances have elasticities models in mind, which are 
based on insular economies from the past rather than the open 
economies of today. However, unlike the industrial economies 
after World War II, now countries are much more open, with a 
greater trade component and impressive infl ows and outfl ows of 
capital. Notably, open economies react diff erently to exchange 
rate changes than insular ones do.  McKinnon ( 1990    ) and 
 McKinnon and Ohno ( 1997    ) have shown that in open economies, 
exchange rate changes may have unpredictable eff ects on trade 
balances. In other words, with the correct setup of open-economy 
models, depreciation may not improve the trade balance, and 
appreciation may not worsen it. 
 Th is chapter traces out the eff ects of exogenous exchange 
changes on open creditor/debtor economies when income and 
absorption are endogenously determined. It reveals that the 
combination of wealth eff ect and investment eff ect, together 
with the indirect investment eff ect (in the East Asian region), 
increases the complexity of forecasting current-account move-
ments accompanying any exchange rate change. Except for the 
case when a debtor economy depreciates its currency against 
the dollar and suff ers a foreign exchange crisis that depresses the 
economy, it is impossible to predict the net trade balance eff ect 

( 102 ) 
The Unloved Dollar Standard
of a depreciation or appreciation because absorption may move 
“perversely” and off set the relative price eff ects. 
 Chapter 9 in this book tackles the problem the other way 
around. To correct a trade imbalance, suppose government(s) act 
exogenously and in concert to change domestic absorption. Th e 
defi cit country raises taxes and cuts spending, while the surplus 
country cuts taxes or otherwise increases spending. However, 
the exchange rate is left to be determined endogenously. As 
 chapter  9     shows, the resulting improvement in the trade balance 
need not—and it is better if it does not—induce the defi cit coun-
try’s currency to depreciate, contrary to the expectations of con-
ventional theory. 
 LITERATURE REVIEW  
 As with many other subjects in economics, economists have yet 
to reach an agreement over whether equilibrium in the balance of 
payments can be reached by exchange rate changes. But unlike 
other projects that require economists and politicians to work 
together, in this case the misconception of adjusting trade bal-
ances through exchange rate movements can be largely attrib-
uted to economists, not politicians. Most economists who believe 
that exchange rate changes systematically aff ect trade balances 
acquired such thinking from the conventional elasticities model 
of the balance of trade, which is still being taught in undergrad-
uate economic courses today. 
 Created in the 1930s and still widely accepted, the elasticities 
approach is central to many Keynesian ( Meade  1951    ) and mone-
tarist models ( Friedman  1953 ;  Johnson  1958 ). According to 
these models, the exchange rate is assigned to address external 
balance, while government expenditures are assigned to internal 
balance and full employment. However, this type of model is 
based on the assumption that exchange rate policies can be sepa-
rated from monetary policies and investment decisions. In other 

TRADE IMBAL ANCES 
( 103 )
words, it is assumed that when a discrete exchange rate change 
takes place, the domestic price level can remain undisturbed 
because the money supply is unaff ected. In some circumstances, 
this may be true. For example, among the industrial countries 
after World War II, when capital movement was strictly limited 
and trade was less prevalent, this separability in policy was pos-
sible. In that case, a currency depreciation may lead to a reduction 
in a trade defi cit, and an appreciation lead to a reduction in a 
trade surplus. 
 However, no one will deny that today industrial economies 
and emerging market economies are much more open than they 
were 50 years ago. Without the insularity assumption, the elas-
ticity type of model is no longer valid in predicting the conse-
quences of exchange rate changes ( McKinnon  1990    , 1997). 
Nonetheless, economic scholars have yet to update their frame-
work of assumptions when they naturally associate currency 
depreciations with current-account defi cit reduction. For 
example, in a recent publication of the Institute for International 
Economics,  Goldstein ( 2004    ) concluded that “To reduce the U.S. 
current-account defi cit to, say, 2 to 2½ percent of GDP at reason-
able cost, it would be helpful to have a real depreciation of the 
dollar of about 25 percent from its peak (in February 2002),” 
which is based on “the rule of thumb that each 1 percent fall in 
the real trade-weighted dollar improves the U.S. current-account 
position by roughly $10 billion.” Clearly, he remains a strong sup-
porter of the elasticities model: “As James  Meade ( 1951    ) empha-
sized more than 50 years ago, the classical remedy for an economy 
experiencing both domestic overheating and external surpluses 
is exchange rate appreciation, and neither reserve nor debt 
consideration appear to constrain such exchange rate action.” 
 It perhaps will take years—and, one hopes, not too many more 
mistakes—for the elasticity school to realize that a discrete 
change in exchange rate does not necessarily lead to trade balance 
adjustment in a certain direction. In open economies today, 
capital markets are no longer tightly restricted, and interest rates 

( 104 ) 
The Unloved Dollar Standard
are infl uenced by expected exchange rate changes. As a result, 
exchange rate determination can no longer be isolated from 
monetary policies nor from the level of domestic investment. 
 According to  Frenkel and Mussa ( 1980    ), in an open economy, the 
exchange rate is a forward-looking variable. Th ey adopt an asset-
market approach that implies that investors will base their port-
folio decisions between claims denominated in local and foreign 
currencies on their expectations of future exchange rates. Th us, 
their portfolio decisions determine today’s spot exchange rates. 
 How do people form their expectations on future exchange 
rates in the fi rst place? Th ey are ultimately derived from expecta-
tions on the relative tightness of monetary policies in one country 
compared to others. If they feel that future monetary policy will 
be tighter in a certain country than elsewhere, the price level in 
this country will decrease, while the demand for its currency 
grows, which forces an appreciation in the spot market, and 
investment falls. In other words, in an open economy, exchange 
rates are endogenous to present and future monetary polices and 
so is the domestic investment decision. Unless the monetary 
authority accommodates the private sector’s expectation on 
future monetary policy, exchange rate changes will not be sus-
tainable. Th erefore, it seems rather simplistic to ignore the 
monetary and domestic investment consequences from an 
exchange rate change (as is done in an elasticities model). 
 McKinnon ( 1990 ) and  McKinnon and Ohno ( 1997 ) have dem-
onstrated that exchange rate changes may be followed by unpre-
dictable movements of the balance of payments in open 
economies. Under the dollar standard in the twenty-fi rst century, 
how should exchange rate economics be updated for open econ-
omies with large dollar assets or debts? What are the distinctive 
features of economies in East Asia and how are they related to 
the East Asian fi nancial crisis? In discussing the impact of dis-
crete exchange rate changes, this chapter addresses these ques-
tions by introducing a wealth eff ect, an investment eff ect, and an 
indirect investment eff ect into relevant macroeconomic models. 

TRADE IMBAL ANCES 
( 105 )
 INSULAR VERSUS OPEN ECONOMIES  
 Let’s fi rst review the diff erences between insular and open econ-
omies by analyzing the short-term and long-term eff ect of an 
exchange rate change within each. 
 Insular Economies 
 Defi ned in the same fashion as in  McKinnon ( 1990    ) and 
 McKinnon and Ohno ( 1997    ), an insular economy in the follow-
ing model refl ects industrial countries from the 1930s to 1950s, 
and some developing countries at a later time. Such an economy 
features a tightly regulated capital market and domestically 
determined interest rates. Th e trade component in the economy 
is also limited so that exchange rate changes aff ect trade volume 
but not the domestic price level. 
 Th e setup of the insular-economy model is borrowed from 
McKinnon (1997) with reference to  Marston ( 1985    ). Lowercase 
letters are logarithms
 Y
A
B
=
+
 
Domestic output 
(1) 
 

( )
(
)
A
C Y
I i
p
G
=
+
−
+
 
Domestic absorption 
(2)
– 
 
( ,
)
B
B A e
p
=
−
 
Trade balance 
(3)
 
– 
+  
 

( , , )
m
p
L Y i p
−
=
 
Money market 
(4)
+ – – 
 
(
)

,(
0)
p
Y
Y
α
α
=
−
>
 
Price equation 
(5) 
 p
p
=
 
Alternative price equation 
(6) 

( 106 ) 
The Unloved Dollar Standard
 where endogenous variables include  Y ,  A ,  B ,  p  ( p  ), and  i  and exog-
enous variables include  G ,  e ,  Y  , and  m . In this standard macro-
economic model and its modifi cations in the following section, 
variables are defi ned as shown in  box  7.1 . 
 Assume that the nominal exchange rate is exogenously deter-
mined in an arrangement resembling dollar pegs. Th e real 
exchange rate is equal to   −
e
p , as the foreign price  p*  is assumed 
to be fi xed. 
 Th ere are two alternative equations for domestic price deter-
mination: (5) and (6). Equation (5) allows the price to respond to 
a deviation of the full-employment output level. And equation 
(6) fi xes the price at the level of   p . In this insular economy, 
exchange rate changes cannot be passed on to domestic prices 
through either of the two price equations. In addition, the 
exchange rate does not aff ect domestic absorption directly 
because domestic investment is not infl uenced by the real 
exchange rate and the domestic interest rate is isolated from 
foreign ones. Th ere are neither foreign-currency assets nor debts, 
that is,  F  = 0. In the following part, we will adopt equation (5) for 
price determination in our model. However, if this price equation 
is replaced by equation (6), it should not aff ect our results in any 
signifi cant way. 
 Box 7.1 
NOTATION FOR MODEL OF THE INSULAR ECONOMY   
 
 Y 
 = real GDP 
 Y  
 = full-employment 
output 
 A 
 = domestic absorption 
 B 
 = trade balance (net) 
 i 
 = domestic interest rate 
  i* 
 = foreign interest rate 
 p 
 = domestic price level 
 p   
 = price level change  
 G 
 = government expenditure 
 e 
 = nominal exchange rate 
(domestic currency/
foreign currency) 
 m 
 = domestic money supply 
  F  
 = foreign currency assets  

TRADE IMBAL ANCES 
( 107 )
 To determine the sign of the derivative of the trade balance 
with respect to changes in the real exchange rate, we have to con-
sider both the direct impact and the indirect eff ect from domestic 
absorption. Let us fi rst examine the direct impact from an 
exchange rate change. Suppose the partial derivative of the trade 
balance with respect to the real exchange rate is positive: that the 
well-known Marshall-Lerner condition is satisfi ed, that is,
 (
)
∂
>
∂
−
0
B
e
p
 . 
 Th at means, ceteris paribus, the exchange rate will aff ect the 
trade balance in the same way as predicted by conventional 
wisdom. A real depreciation of the local currency makes imports 
more expensive and exports cheaper, thus boosting exports and 
reducing imports, improving the current-account balance. Vice 
versa, an appreciation encourages imports and reduces exports, 
thus lowering the current-account surplus. 
 In this model of an insular economy, we now have to consider 
the domestic absorption eff ect from the impact of currency 
depreciation on domestic expenditure. In the insular economy, 
the domestic money supply can be fi xed, while the unliberalized 
capital account permits exchange rate changes. In this economy, 
a devaluation stimulates exports and income, while domestic 
absorption is constrained by the fi xed money supply. As output 
increases, the interest rate rises ( 
> 0
di
de
 ), which restrains 
domestic absorption. In the end, the increase in output is more 
pronounced than the increase in absorption, and thus trade 
balance still improves after considering domestic absorption 
eff ects.
 
>
→
> 0
dY
dA
dB
de
de
de
 
 In the long run, however, the price change induced by deprecia-
tion diminishes as prices remain at the higher level,   →

0
p
 and  p ↑. 

( 108 ) 
The Unloved Dollar Standard
Such a price increase reduces the real money supply, inducing an 
increase in the interest rate because of the money market 
equilibrium. Th is is easily seen from equation (4). As output falls 
back to the original level in the long run, the domestic interest 
rate is the only adjustable variable to accommodate the fall in the 
real money supply from the higher price levels. In other words, 
the interest rate has to rise, which reduces domestic investment 
(and domestic absorption) according to equation (2), improving 
the trade balance also in the long run. 
 Table  7.1 summarizes the impact eff ects of an exchange rate 
change in an insular economy systematically.    
    Open Economies   
 As readers must have noticed, the insular features of the 
economy described in the previous section bear very few similar-
ities to the ones prevailing today. Now there is a much higher 
proportion of international trade, and current rules against 
capital movements internationally are much less restrictive than 
50 years ago. Now exchange rates can fl oat more freely if govern-
ments choose to let them. Almost all industrial countries after 
the 1960s and many emerging market economies today are better 
described by the following model for open economies.
 Table 7.1. INSULAR ECONOMY: DEPRECIATION/APPRECIATION AGAINST 
DOLLAR (NO NET FOREIGN EXCHANGE INDEBTEDNESS)   
 
 Wealth 
Eff ect 
 Investment 
Eff ect 
 Domestic 
Absorption 
 Import 
 Export 
 Trade 
Balance 
 Depreciation  - 
 - 
 ↑ (small and 
limited) 
 ↓ 
 ↑ 
 ↑ 
 Appreciation  - 
 - 
 ↓ (small and 
limited) 
 ↑ 
 ↓ 
 ↓ 

TRADE IMBAL ANCES 
( 109 )
 
*
i
i
=
 
Interest rate parity 
(7) 
 
(
)
b
b

, where(
0)
p
e
p
=
−
>
 
Price expectation 
(8) 
 Y
A
B
=
+
 
Domestic output 
(9) 
 

( )
(
,
)
A
p
C Y
I i
e
p
G
=
+
−
−
+
 Domestic absorption 
(10)
 
+ – + 
 
( ,
)
B
B A e
p
=
−
 
Trade balance 
(11)
 
– +  
 

( , , )
m
p
L Y i p
−
=
 
Money market 
(12)
 
+ – – 
 Endogenous variables are  Y ,  A ,  B ,  p ( p ),  m , and  i ; exogenous 
 variables are  e ,  i* , and  G. 
 An open economy diff ers from an insular one, and this is 
refl ected in the setup of the model. In the fi rst place, equation (7) 
states that the domestic interest rate has to follow the interna-
tional one. In this model of stationary exchange rate expecta-
tions, risk adjustments are omitted. Financial openness requires 
the rate of return or domestic bond yield to converge to the inter-
national level. 
 Second, price equation (8) pinpoints that the real exchange 
rate should lead domestic prices. According to the asset-market 
approach of exchange rate determination ( Frenkel and Mussa 
 1980    , 1985), today’s exchange rate changes can aff ect future 
domestic price levels through the expectation of future changes 
in monetary policies. Th e reason is that any substantial exchange 
rate change can only be sustained by future monetary adjust-
ments permitting price level changes at home (or the opposite 
changes abroad). 
 On the output side, both domestic absorption and the trade 
balance are infl uenced by real exchange rate changes. In particular, 

( 110 ) 
The Unloved Dollar Standard
currency depreciation raises infl ation expectations and lowers 
the real interest rate, which gives a boost to domestic investment. 
In addition, the drop in currency value also makes the economy a 
less expensive place in which to invest. At the same time, if a 
currency appreciates, investment in that country will likely slow 
as a result of higher real interest rates and the relatively higher 
price of on-site investments compared to those in other econ-
omies. Th e relationship between real exchange rate changes and 
investment/domestic absorption can be summarized as the 
follows:
 (
)
∂
>
∂
−
0
I
e
p
 . 
 Suppose there is an unexpected appreciation, which is discrete 
and isolated from other major policy changes in government 
expenditure, and money supply changes exogenously. In the 
short run,  p becomes negative according to equation (8), but  p 
initially remains at its original level. Th e appreciation in the 
exchange rate does not aff ect the domestic interest rate, which is 
aligned with the foreign rates. Th erefore we have
 −
−
<
↑
↓

and
0.
e
p
i
p
p
 
 Such real appreciation together with an increase in the real 
interest rate slows down domestic investment, as described in 
equation (10). Domestic absorption A and imports both 
decrease along with exports, leaving the sign of trade balance 
 =
−
B
Y
A  indeterminate. In the short term, before the domestic 
price level falls, the responses to an exogenous exchange rate 
appreciation in an open economy with anticipated future 
accommodation of domestic monetary policy can be summa-
rized as follows:
 
0,
0,
0,
0
dp
dY
dA
dB
de
de
de
de
<
<
<
 . 

TRADE IMBAL ANCES 
( 111 )
 If it still seems less than obvious why currency appreciation does 
not necessarily lead to a reduction in trade surplus, let us try to 
explain it without the help of equations. Suppose the Marshall-
Lerner condition is still satisfi ed, that is, the price eff ect from 
real appreciation will cause an increase in imports and a slump in 
exports, reducing the overall trade surplus. On the other hand, 
this appreciation also makes the economy a more expensive place 
in which to invest, and at the same time exerts a tightening eff ect 
on the domestic economy due to the defl ationary pressure. As a 
result, growth of investment and output moderates, triggering a 
deceleration in domestic demand and imports. Although exports 
slow down as a result of the currency appreciation, imports also 
decline, making the net impact on trade balance ambiguous. 
Conversely, currency depreciation in an open economy does not 
necessarily improve the trade balance either. 
 We list the short-term eff ects of discrete exchange rate changes 
in an open economy above in  table  7.2    . In contrast to the eff ects 
on an insular economy in  table  7.1    , the net eff ect on trade balance 
is ambiguous. 
 Since we assume the central bank accommodates the private 
sector’s expectation on future monetary policy, which is embedded 
in the exchange rate, the future path for the money supply should 
be endogenously determined by the exchange rate change and 
the rate of price change. In the special but simplest case of a dis-
crete appreciation with no change in the interest rate and no dis-
crete change in today’s money supply, the vector of changes in 
future money supplies can be described as follows:
 Table 7.2. OPEN ECONOMIES: INITIAL IMPACT OF A DISCRETE EXCHANGE 
RATE CHANGE  
 
 Wealth 
Eff ect 
 Investment 
Eff ect 
 Domestic 
Absorption 
 Import 
 Export 
 Trade 
Balance 
 Depreciation 
 - 
 ↑ 
 ↑ 
 ↑ 
 ↑ 
 ? 
 Appreciation 
 - 
 ↓ 
 ↓ 
 ↓ 
 ↓ 
 ? 

( 112 ) 
The Unloved Dollar Standard
 
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
=
=
+
=
+
=
+
+
=
+
=
+
+
+
…
=
+
=
Π
+
+










1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
2
2
2
2
2
1
2
2
2
0
(
, ,
)
(
,
,
)
(1
)
(
,
,
)
(
,
,
)
(1
)(1
)
(
,
,
)
(
,
,
)
(1
)
(
,
,
t
t
t
t
t
t
t
t
t
t
t
t
t
t
t
t
t
t
t
t
t
t
n
i
t
t
t
t
t n
t n
t n
t n
t n
t
t i
t n
t n
m
p
L Y i p
m
p
L Y
i
p
p
p
L Y
i
p
m
p
L Y
i
p
p
p
p
L Y
i
p
m
p
L Y
i
p
p
p
L Y
i
+

)
t n
p
 
 As the economy approaches a new steady state, the money supply 
would have to decrease in strict proportion to  e  (and to  p ). 
Otherwise,  e  will have to depreciate back to its original level as 
the monetary policy becomes inconsistent with people’s expecta-
tions. Th e eff ect on expected future money supplies is illustrated 
in  fi gure  7.1 . 
 In the long run, however, any discrete change in the nominal 
exchange rate eventually washes out as the domestic price level 
increases so as to restore the initial value of the real exchange 
e
·p
p
Y
A
B (= Y − A)
m
t0 (news arrives)
Time
?
 Figure 7.1. 
An Open Economy’s Response to an Exogenous Exchange Rate Appreciation with 
Anticipation of Monetary Tightening in the Future 

TRADE IMBAL ANCES 
( 113 )
rate. After PPP is restored, output, domestic absorption, and 
trade balance will be left unchanged, while prices and money 
supply remain at a lower level.
 
0,
1
dY
dA
dB
dp
dm
de
de
de
de
de
=
=
=
=
=
 . 
 DEBTORS VERSUS CREDITORS UNDER 
THE DOLLAR STANDARD   
 Th e model in the previous section is a better depiction of the 
major economies in the 1970s and 1980s into the new millen-
nium than is our fi rst model. During those times, the global 
capital market was more or less symmetrical because neither the 
United States nor Japan (and certainly not China) had accumu-
lated large dollar debts or assets. Nonetheless, the world has 
changed tremendously under the dollar standard over the past 
many years. As mentioned earlier, many economies have acquired 
signifi cantly diff erent positions in foreign-currency- denominated 
wealth. In the case of East Asia, a few countries have run chronic 
current-account surpluses, whereas others changed from net 
dollar debtors to creditors only recently. How does this diff erence 
in net wealth denominated in a foreign currency alter the impact 
of an exchange rate change on the trade balance? 
 To incorporate the asymmetry created by the dollar standard 
into the model, we expand the model into a two-country setup 
to include the economy with net foreign exchange assets—as 
denoted by  F —and the United States. When  F <  0, the economy 
is a net debtor. Th e rest of the world is treated as a sink so that 
the sum of world trade balances is zero.
 
*
i
i
γ
=
+  
Interest rate parity 
(13) 
 
(
)
b
b

,(
0)
p
e
p
=
−
>
 Price expectation 
(14) 

( 114 ) 
The Unloved Dollar Standard
 Y
A
B
=
+
 
Domestic output 
(15) 
 

( , · )
(
,
)
A
C Y e F
I i
p
p e
G
=
+
−
−
+
 Domestic absorption 
(16)
 
+ + + – + 
 
( ,
, *)
B
B A e
p A
=
−
 
Trade balance 
(17)
 
– + + 
 

( , , )
m
p
L Y i p
−
=
 
Money market 
(18)
 
+ – – 
 Endogenous variables are  Y ,  A ,  B ,  p ( p  ),  m , and  i ; exogenous var-
iables are  e ,  i* ,  G ,  γ , and  F 
 It is notable that the major diff erences between this economy of 
interest and the open economy introduced in the previous section 
are, fi rst, that a wealth eff ect is included in domestic absorption 
(equation 16), and, second, U.S. absorption  A* will also aff ect the 
domestic economy’s trade surplus (equation 17). Th e wealth eff ect 
has a positive impact on consumption, which implies that an 
appreciation decreases net wealth in domestic-currency terms for 
a creditor economy where  F > 0. But for a debtor economy where  F 
< 0, a depreciation increases net debt in domestic-currency terms. 
In both cases, people are conscious of such a change in their net 
wealth and reduce their consumption accordingly. Th us, for a cred-
itor economy where F > 0, this negative wealth eff ect from an 
appreciation reinforces the investment eff ect (the investment 
slump) so that imports decline further. Th e net trade surplus of an 
appreciating creditor economy could actually increase!  
 Th e U.S. Economy  
 *
*
*
Y
A
B
=
+
 Domestic output 
(19) 
 

*
( *)
( *
*, *
*)
*
p
A
C Y
I i
e
p
G
=
+
−
−
+
 
Domestic absorption (20)
 
– + 

TRADE IMBAL ANCES 
( 115 )
 *
( *, *
*, )
B
B A e
p
A
=
−
 
Trade balance 
(21)
 
– + + 
 

*
*
( *, *, *)
m
p
L Y
i p
−
=
 
Money market 
(22)
 
+ – – 
 
(
)

*
* ,(
0)
p
Y
Y
α
α
=
−
>
 
Price equation 
(23) 
 Endogenous variables are  Y *,  A *,  B *,  p * ( p  *), and  i *; exogenous 
variables are  G* ,  e* ,  *
Y
 ,  m* , and  γ . 
 Th e asymmetry of the dollar standard is largely refl ected in 
the fact that the U.S. economy bears more similarity to an 
insular economy than to an open economy. First, the U.S. 
interest rate  i * is determined domestically, and there is no direct 
impact on domestic price level from an exchange rate change 
(equation 23). Second, domestic absorption is not infl uenced 
by the net foreign indebtedness of the United States (equation 
20) because all liquid foreign assets and debts are denominated 
in dollars. 1    We believe this setting describes the United States 
more accurately because of its central role in the world monetary 
system today. 
 Unlike interest rates in peripheral countries, the interest 
rate on dollar assets is determined in the U.S. market. Th e price 
level in the center country is also less aff ected by exchange rate 
changes because the dollar has served as the major invoice 
currency in international trade. Th erefore the price equation 
adopted (equation 23) is diff erent from that of the peripheral 
economy (equation 14) or the zero-debt open economy 
(equation 11). 
 Th e United States has a colossal amount of foreign debt, but 
primarily denominated in dollars. We acknowledge that some 
of the U.S. foreign claims are in other currencies, such as the 
euro, but the size of the claims is much smaller than dollar 
debts. Exchange rate changes may infl uence investment 
decisions in the United States because of the price eff ect, but 

( 116 ) 
The Unloved Dollar Standard
due to the absence of the wealth eff ect, not the consumption 
decision.  
 Th e Rest of the World  
 
*
0.
rB
B
B
+
+
=
 
World trade balance 
(24) 
 DEBTOR COUNTRY’S DEPRECIATION 
AGAINST THE DOLLAR  
 Consider an economy with net foreign debts, largely denomi-
nated in dollars. Such debts have been accumulated from past 
current-account defi cits. Suppose an unexpected event (such as 
a new administration committed to more extensive monetary 
expansion) takes place, leading to currency depreciation. 
Such depreciation will be sustained in the future if the 
monetary authority increases the money supply as per initial 
expectations. 
 In the short run, noticeably, a discrete depreciation sets off  
infl ationary expectations and price increases in the debtor 
economy (equation 14). In response, domestic investment rises 
because of the drop in real interest rates and currency underval-
uation (equation 16). Even though this leads to a rise in output, 
the economy’s net worth decreases sharply because the domestic 
cost of dollar debts increases as a result of currency depreciation. 
Ultimately domestic consumption declines (equation 16), caus-
ing a slump in domestic absorption: the net trade balance of a 
debtor economy improves with devaluation. 
 Th e trade balance improvement can also be seen from the fact 
that after currency depreciation, exports grow and imports decline 
due to the price eff ect. Th e negative wealth eff ect then dominates 
the positive investment eff ect, setting a brake on domestic 
absorption. Domestic demand for imports slows down because 

TRADE IMBAL ANCES 
( 117 )
people restrain their consumption after fi nding out their net 
worth (in foreign exchange) decreases (through an increase in 
debt or a decrease in the value of assets). Th erefore, both the price 
eff ect and the wealth eff ect dominate the investment eff ect and 
imports decrease, improving the trade balance. Th ese short- to 
middle-term dynamics can be summarized as shown in  table  7.3    .   
 In the long run when the real exchange rate and PPP are 
restored, however, currency depreciation will leave output, 
domestic absorption, and the trade balance unchanged, while 
prices remain at a higher level (as price changes diminish). Th e 
money supply also increases as a result of the accommodating 
monetary policies.
 
0,
0,
0, and
1
dY
dA
dB
dp
dm
de
de
de
de
de
=
=
=
=
=
 . 
 Empirical results also support these theoretical predictions. 
 Milesi-Ferretti and Razin ( 1998    ) recorded episodes of trade 
balance improvement following depreciations in Latin America 
and East Asia in the 1980s and 1990s. Notably, Colombia in 
1982, Korea in 1984–86, Malaysia in 1986, and Th ailand in 
1984–86 were featured with policy shifts that drove down 
exchange rates. Without exception, these debtor economies 
improved their trade balances with stronger saving and a fall in 
absorption. 
 Reduction in trade defi cits is more evident for debtor econ-
omies during crisis periods. Chile in 1983 and Mexico in 1982 
and 1995 were known for sharp output contractions and  substantial 
 Table 7.3. DEBTOR’S DEPRECIATION AGAINST DOLLAR  
 
 Wealth 
Eff ect 
 Investment 
Eff ect 
 Domestic 
Absorption 
 Import 
 Export 
 Trade 
Balance 
 Debtor 
 ↓↓ 
 ↑ 
 ↓ 
 ↓ 
 ↑ 
 ↑ 
 U.S. 
 - 
 ↓ 
 ↓ 
 ↓ 
 ↓ 
 ? 
 Rest of world 
 ↓ 

( 118 ) 
The Unloved Dollar Standard
exchange rate depreciations. At the same time, investment fell 
because of the failing fi nancial sector. Furthermore, domestic 
absorption declined in these debtor economies, making room for 
trade balance improvements following currency depreciations. 
 Th ese economies are not alone. During the 1997–98 East Asian 
fi nancial crisis, the fi ve crisis economies (Korea, Malaysia, 
Indonesia, Th ailand, and Philippines) all experienced remarkable 
improvement in their trade balances after their sharp deprecia-
tions reduced domestic absorption, as the cost of servicing their 
foreign debts greatly increased.  Figures  7.2 – 7.7 illustrate their 
trade balances and exchange rate changes of between 1978 and 
2005. Very much as  Noland et al. ( 1998    ) argued, “net exports 
increase primarily through a compression of imports and only 
secondarily through an expansion of exports.” Th ese fi ve crisis 
countries therefore had substantial improvements in their trade 
balances. 
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
1400
1600
1978
1980
1982
1984
1986
1988
1990
1992
1994
1996
1998
2000
2002
2004
Won/Dollar
–20
–10
0
10
20
30
40
50
Trade Balance: bn.
Market Rate
Trade Balance 
(RHS)
 Figure 7.2. 
 Korea: Trade Balance and Exchange Rate 

TRADE IMBAL ANCES 
( 119 )
0
1
2
3
4
5
1978
1980
1982
1984
1986
1988
1990
1992
1994
1996
1998
2000
2002
2004
Ringget/Dollar
–5
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
Trade Balace: bn.
Official Rate
Trade Balance 
(RHS)
 Figure 7.3. 
Malaysia: Trade Balance and Exchange Rate 
0
2000
4000
6000
8000
10000
12000
1978
1980
1982
1984
1986
1988
1990
1992
1994
1996
1998
2000
2002
2004
Rupiah/Dollar
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
Trade Balance: bn.
Market Rate
Trade Balance
(RHS)
 Figure 7.4. 
Indonesia: Trade Balance and Exchange Rate 

( 120 ) 
The Unloved Dollar Standard
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
1978
1980
1982
1984
1986
1988
1990
1992
1994
1996
1998
2000
2002
2004
Thai Baht/Dollar
–15
–10
–5
0
5
10
15
20
Trade Balance: bn.
Official Rate
Trade Balance 
(RHS)
 Figure 7.5. 
Th ailand: Trade Balance and Exchange Rate 
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
1978
1980
1982
1984
1986
1988
1990
1992
1994
1996
1998
2000
2002
2004
Peso/Dollar
–12
–10
–8
–6
–4
–2
0
Trade Balance: bn.
Market 
Rate 
Trade 
Balance 
(RHS)
 Figure 7.6. 
Philippines: Trade Balance and Exchange Rate 

TRADE IMBAL ANCES 
( 121 )
 For the most part, the existing literature that studies the 
impact of the exchange rate on trade balances has largely concen-
trated on debtor economies depreciating against the U.S. dollar. 
Many more examples can be found where a debtor country 
reduces its trade defi cit by depreciating its currency either volun-
tarily or involuntarily in a crisis. Due to apparently signifi cant 
improvements in trade balances in these countries, researchers 
tend to conclude that a shift in exchange rate certainly should be 
followed by a trade balance correction. Hence they deduce that if 
depreciation improves the trade balance, the converse should be 
true too. Enhanced by predictions of elasticity models for debtor 
economies, currency appreciations are widely (but incorrectly as 
we shall show) believed to reduce trade surpluses. 
 However, we will attest below that this is not necessarily the 
case. Even though currency depreciation followed by trade 
balance improvement has been commonplace, an appreciation 
will not necessarily induce a reduction in a creditor country’s 
trade surplus.  
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
1978
1980
1982
1984
1986
1988
1990
1992
1994
1996
1998
2000
2002
2004
Singapore Dollar/USD
–10
–5
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
Trade Balance: bn.
Market Rate
Trade
Balance
(RHS)
 Figure 7.7. 
Singapore: Trade Balance and Exchange Rate 

( 122 ) 
The Unloved Dollar Standard
 THE UNITED STATES IS DIFFERENT  
 Due to the asymmetry of the dollar standard, we cannot simply 
fl ip the signs and call them the impact eff ects on the United 
States. First, exchange rate depreciation of a debtor country 
often does not have any major impacts on U.S. price level or 
even price changes, because the latter is determined by the U.S. 
output level (equation 23). Second, there is no wealth eff ect 
from currency revaluation that will change overall consumption 
(equation 20). 
 Consequently, what we observe in the United States, dollar 
appreciation is mainly refl ected in falling domestic investment 
and not in changes in its price level or consumption. Since the 
dollar is more expensive now relative to the debtor economy’s 
currency, it is more economic to invest in the debtor economy 
than in the United States. Furthermore, domestic investment in 
the United States drops and domestic absorption also decreases 
(equation 20). At the same time, the overall output growth slows 
down as a result of dollar appreciation, leaving the trade balance 
with an indeterminate sign. Th is is equivalent to saying even 
though U.S. exports may slow down, its imports can be set back 
as well. Obversely, a depreciation of the dollar has an ambiguous 
eff ect on the U.S. trade balance in the short run. In the long run, 
exchange rate changes just wash out. 
 CREDITOR COUNTRY’S APPRECIATION 
AGAINST THE DOLLAR  
 After the end of the Asian Financial Crisis in 1998, most East 
Asian economies switched from trade defi cits to trade surpluses. 
As they paid off  the foreign debts incurred previously, some of 
them also emerged as net creditor economies. Because of their 
trade surpluses, these economies are often under pressure to 
appreciate their currencies no matter whether they maintain a 

TRADE IMBAL ANCES 
( 123 )
free-fl oat or dollar peg (soft or hard) as their exchange rate policy. 
However, does currency appreciation necessarily help them 
reduce trade surpluses and U.S. trade defi cits? Th e following anal-
ysis gives a negative answer. 
 Suppose in a creditor economy a discrete appreciation of its 
exchange rate takes place. In the short run, domestic prices begin 
to fall (equation 14). Output also slows down because of currency 
appreciation ( e ↓) and the monetary tightening eff ect following 
such appreciation. Consumption is cut back because of the output 
slowdown and the negative wealth eff ect: the domestic currency 
price of foreign dollar wealth also falls (equation 16). Appreciation 
also increases the real interest rate ( i  −   p )↑ and makes investment 
goods more expensive. Hence domestic investment is also set 
back (equation 16), reinforcing a decrease of overall domestic 
absorption ( C + I + G ). In the end, since both output and domestic 
absorption decrease, the net impact on the trade balance is 
ambiguous. 
 Th is result can be easily verifi ed by the Japanese experience 
since the 1980s. As Japan was arm-twisted to appreciate yen from 
360 in 1971 to below 100 in 1995, the Japanese trade surplus 
with the United States did not narrow at all. Even in the short 
run, Japanese imports did not respond to yen appreciation as pre-
dicted by the elasticities models. (See  table  7.4 and  fi gure  7.8    .)   
 Empirically, there are fewer examples of creditor countries 
being forced to appreciate. First, let’s take a look of Japan.  Figure  7.8     
illustrates the trade balance, imports, exports, and yen-dollar 
 Table 7.4. CREDITOR’S APPRECIATION AGAINST DOLLAR   
 
 Wealth 
Eff ect 
 Investment 
Eff ect 
 Domestic 
Absorption 
 Import 
 Export 
 Trade 
Balance 
 Creditor 
 ↓ 
 ↓ 
 ↓ 
 ↓ 
 ↓ 
 ? 
 U.S. 
 - 
 ↑ 
 ↑ 
 ↑ 
 ↑ 
 ? 
 Rest of world 
 ? 

( 124 ) 
The Unloved Dollar Standard
exchange rate on a bi-axis chart. During the period succeeding 
the Plaza Accord, Japanese yen appreciated from 250 yen to a 
dollar in 1985 to 130 yen to a dollar in 1989. However, the 
Japanese trade surplus continued to grow. Ever since the 1970s, 
yen appreciations have been unable to “correct” the Japan-U.S. 
trade imbalance, and Japan has kept posting a large trade surplus 
versus the United States—as shown by  fi gure  7.8 . 
 Second, consider China.  Figure  7.9     shows that the RMB appre-
ciated against the dollar from 8.62 yuan per dollar to 8.31 yuan 
per dollar between 1994 and 1996, while the Sino-U.S. trade 
surplus more than doubled. From July 2005 to January 2007, 
the renminbi appreciated moderately from 8.28 yuan per dollar to 
7.7 yuan per dollar, and the trade surplus doubled again ( fi gure  7.9    ). 
Clearly something else is going on in China’s economy that cannot 
be explained by the exchange rate.   
 Due to the asymmetry, we should also examine the impact 
eff ects on the United States. Th e dollar depreciates against the 
creditor economy’s currency, but any price change in the United 
–400
–300
–200
–100
0
100
200
300
400
500
1978
1980
1982
1984
1986
1988
1990
1992
1994
1996
1998
2000
2002
2004
Yen/Dollar Rate
–400
–300
–200
–100
0
100
200
300
400
500
Trade Balance: bn.
Market Rate
(LHS)
Trade
Balance
Goods
Exports
Goods Imports
 Figure 7.8. 
Japanese Trade Balance, Imports, Exports, and Exchange Rate 

TRADE IMBAL ANCES 
( 125 )
States is minimal. Output increases as a result of undervaluation. 
Domestic absorption also grows because the United States 
becomes a relatively cheaper place in which to invest. 
Consequently, the U.S. current-account defi cit may increase or 
decrease in the short run. In the long run, this dollar deprecia-
tion will not change the level of output, domestic absorption, 
trade surplus, or prices. 
 SPECIAL ANALYSIS OF EAST ASIA  
  With the asymmetry brought by the dollar standard taken into 
consideration, our analysis of open economies implies that the 
eff ects on the trade balance brought about by exchange rate 
changes are complex. In most cases, we still cannot predict how 
the balance of trade will move, except for the case of debtor 
country after depreciation. However, that this is the only pre-
dictable case creates little excitement because of the harmful 
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
1978
1980
1982
1984
1986
1988
1990
1992
1994
1996
1998
2000
2002
2004
Yuan/Dollar
–40
–20
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
Trade Balance: bn
Principal
Rate
Trade Balance
(RHS)
 Figure 7.9. 
China: Trade Balance and Exchange Rate 

( 126 ) 
The Unloved Dollar Standard
 consequences for economic growth and the fi nancial sector in 
the debtor economy whose currency depreciates. Yet we would 
like to further analyze the consequences of fl uctuations in the 
yen/dollar rate for other East Asian economies that are more or 
less pegged to the dollar. 
 Impact of Fluctuations in the Yen-Dollar Rate on a 
Smaller Asian Country Pegged to the Dollar 
 In East Asia in particular, a third country may also be aff ected 
when the yen-dollar rate fl uctuates. According to  McKinnon 
( 2005    , ch. 2), East Asian economies have synchronized business 
cycles that are related to fl uctuations of the yen against the dollar. 
When the yen is high, East Asian economies other than Japan 
enjoy high investment and consumption growth; when the yen is 
low, these other economies have a slower pace of business. 
 Because most East Asian economies are soft dollar peggers, 
when the yen appreciates against the dollar, it also appreciates 
against other major East Asian currencies. A higher yen implies it 
is more expensive to invest in Japan domestically and therefore 
Japanese outward FDI (foreign direct investment) increases, 
with much of it going to other East Asian countries. Th erefore 
economies such as Hong Kong, Indonesia, Korea, Malaysia, 
Philippines, Singapore, and Th ailand all enjoy a stimulus during 
yen appreciations but suff er from a slowdown during yen depre-
ciations ( table  7.5    ). During good times, both imports and exports 
grow rapidly, whereas the net trade eff ect is ambiguous. 
 Crisis: An Asian Debtor Economy Depreciates against the 
Dollar Reinforced by a Depreciation of the Yen 
 During the East Asian fi nancial crisis, the fi ve crisis economies 
were dollar debtors. Th ey suff ered from the direct impacts of 

TRADE IMBAL ANCES 
( 127 )
currency depreciations against the dollar as well as indirectly 
from yen depreciation against the dollar. Th e yen fell from 80 to 
the dollar in April 1995 to reach 147 to the dollar in March 1998, 
thus increasing the destructive impact of the great crisis ( table  7.6    ). 
Even though export goods appeared to be cheaper and exports 
may have grown faster than before, the signifi cant reduction 
in domestic absorption and output was catastrophic. First, 
domestic direct investment from Japan in the fi ve crisis econ-
omies slumped because of the weakening yen. Th is magnifi ed the 
depressing eff ect of their defaults on dollar debts. Th is largely 
tempered the direct and indirect investment eff ect of the depre-
ciation. Due to fears of collapse of the fi ve crisis economies, inves-
tors chose not to further invest, even though devaluation made 
investment relatively cheaper. As the yen dropped against the 
dollar, Japanese investors also had more incentives to stay within 
Japan. Because foreign exchange indebtedness became more 
onerous in East Asian debtor countries, consumption also 
slumped from this negative wealth eff ect. Th erefore, domestic 
absorption decreased faster than output slowed, and each of the 
fi ve countries’ trade balances rapidly improved.   
 Like other crisis economies suff ering from foreign debts and 
forced to depreciate their currencies, East Asian crisis economies 
all had trade balance improvements, as shown in  fi gures  7.2 – 7.7 . 
Because of the collapse of their fi nancial sectors during the crisis, 
and the indirect investment eff ect, investment and consumption 
in the crisis countries slumped. 
 Table 7.5. THE IMPACT OF FLUCTUATIONS IN THE YEN-DOLLAR RATE ON A 
SMALLER ASIAN COUNTRY PEGGED TO DOLLAR   
 
 Wealth 
Eff ect 
 Investment 
Eff ect 
 Indirect 
Investment 
 Domestic 
Absorption 
 Import  Export  Trade 
Balance 
 Yen 
appreciates 
 - 
 - 
 ↑ 
 ↑ 
 ↑ 
 ↑ 
 ? 
 Yen 
depreciates 
 - 
 - 
 ↓ 
 ↓ 
 ↓ 
 ↓ 
 ? 

( 128 ) 
The Unloved Dollar Standard
  Barro ( 2001    ) charted investment ratios for these countries be-
tween 1960 and 2000.   2    According to his records, Indonesia, 
Malaysia, South Korea, and Th ailand all had dramatic declines in 
investment in 1998, and it took a long time for them to recover. 
Th e investment lapse in Philippines was relatively smaller but it 
was probably related to the fact that the investment ratio in 
Philippines had been low historically. Th is substantiates our 
argument that the trade balance improvement during the East 
Asian crisis was mainly caused by the fall in domestic absorption. 
 CONCLUSIONS  
 Th is chapter discusses the ex post impact of a discrete exchange 
rate change and its implications for the net trade balance. We 
emphasized the diff erence between dollar debtor and dollar cred-
itor countries and concluded that even though currency devalua-
tion may improve the trade balance of a debtor country, 
appreciation may or may not reduce the surplus of a creditor 
country. It is therefore inappropriate to follow the elasticity 
model for using the exchange rate to adjust trade balance predict-
ably when the wealth eff ect, investment eff ect, and indirect 
investment eff ect (in East Asia) are all considered. 
 On July 21, 2005, China shifted its decade-long currency peg 
to the dollar by 2.1 percent. Although it was a baby step, we deem 
 Table 7.6. CRISIS FOR AN ASIAN DEBTOR ECONOMY DEPRECIATING AGAINST 
THE DOLLAR REINFORCED BY A DEPRECIATION OF THE YEN  
 
 Wealth 
Eff ect 
 Investment 
Eff ect 
 Indirect 
Investment 
 Domestic 
Absorption 
 Import  Export  Trade 
Balance 
 Debtor 
 ↓↓ 
 ? 
 ? 
 ↓↓ 
 ↓↓ 
 ↑ 
 ↑↑ 
 U.S. 
 - 
 ↓ 
 - 
 ↓ 
 ↓ 
 ↓ 
 ? 
 Rest of 
world 
 ↓ 

TRADE IMBAL ANCES 
( 129 )
it as a symbolic move in China’s exchange rate regime—and 
indeed was followed by other small appreciations. Our model 
attests that such moves may not induce a reduction in China’s 
trade surplus. Indeed, empirical evidence shows that China’s 
trade surplus remained large for several years after that. Even in 
2012, China is still subject to foreign political pressure to appre-
ciate its currency on the mistaken belief that this will reduce its 
trade surplus. 
 Unfortunately, the expectation of renminbi appreciation 
invites massive hot money infl ows to speculate on further appre-
ciations, making the problem of domestic monetary control 
much more diffi  cult. As suggested in  McKinnon and Ohno 
( 1997    ), China could follow Japan’s steps into defl ation and even 
a zero-interest liquidity trap if it continues to appreciate. Only 
time will tell.  
 NOTES  
 1. 
Th is is a very strong assumption. However, relaxing it will not signifi cantly 
change the implications from our model. U.S. claims on foreigners are generally 
less liquid, and wealth eff ects from exchange rate changes are less pronounced. 
 Studies have shown that a large proportion of U.S. foreign assets is stored in 
dollars. According to Gourinchas and Rey (2005), almost all U.S. foreign 
liabilities are in dollars, but only about 70 percent of U.S. foreign assets are in 
foreign currencies, such as euro and sterling, instead of the currencies from 
major trading partners. Consequently, this asymmetry causes a valuation eff ect 
on the U.S. trade balance—dollar depreciation should generate positive wealth 
transfers into the United States and therefore allow trade defi cits to persist for 
longer without a crisis. Using data from 1952 to 2004, Gourinchas and Rey 
estimate that a 10 percent fall in the dollar transfers about 5 percent of U.S. 
national income from the rest of the world to the United States. Th is stabilizing 
valuation eff ect, which is independent of the exchange rate impact, is claimed to 
have contributed as much as 31 percent of the external adjustment. 
 2. 
Investment ratio is defi ned as the ratio of real investment (sum of private and 
public) to real GDP. 


Why Exchange Rate Changes Will Not 
Correct Global Trade Imbalances 
 N
obody disputes that almost three decades of U.S. trade (net 
saving) deﬁ cits have made the global system of ﬁ nance and 
trade more accident-prone. Outstanding dollar debts have 
become huge, and threaten America’s own ﬁ nancial future. 
Insofar as the principal creditor countries in Asia (Japan in the 
1980s and 1990s, China since 2000) are industrial countries 
relying heavily on exports of manufactures, the transfer of their 
surplus savings to the saving-deﬁ cient United States requires 
that they collectively run large trade surpluses in manufactures. 
Th e resulting large American trade deﬁ cits have worsened the 
“natural” decline in the relative size of the American manufac-
turing sector, and eroded the U.S. industrial base—as shown in 
 chapter  6. 
 One unfortunate consequence of this industrial decline has been 
an outbreak of protectionism in the United States, which is exacer-
bated by the conviction that foreigners have somehow been cheat-
ing with their exchange rate and other commercial policies. Th e 
most prominent of these have been associated with New York’s 
Senator Charles Schumer. In March 2005, he cosponsored a bill to 
impose a 27.5 percent tariﬀ  on all U.S. imports from China until 
the renminbi was appreciated. His bill was withdrawn in October 
 CHAPTER 8 

TRADE IMBAL ANCES 
( 131 )
2006, when shown to be obviously incompatible with America’s 
obligations under the World Trade Organization. But Schumer has 
threatened to craft a new China bill that is WTO compatible. 
 Furthermore, congressional legislation requires the Secretary 
of the Treasury to investigate any country that runs a trade surplus 
with the United States and to pronounce on whether or not the 
surplus country is manipulating its exchange rate. Th e current 
secretary—Timothy Geithner—has narrowly avoiding having to 
label China a “currency manipulator,” which would involve as yet 
unspeciﬁ ed sanctions that could lead to a trade war. 
 However, the common idea that a country’s exchange rate 
could, and indeed should, be used to bring its external trade into 
better balance is often wrong. As shown in  chapter  7 , this prevail-
ing wisdom is based on faulty economic theorizing. It need not 
apply in a globalized ﬁ nancial system where capital ﬂ ows freely 
internationally. Under ﬁ nancial globalization, forcing a creditor 
country such as China to appreciate its currency is neither 
necessary nor suﬃ  cient—and need not be even helpful—for 
reducing its trade surplus. 
 In  chapter  7    , Helen Qiao developed a complete macroeconomic 
model that showed the trade surplus of a creditor country need 
not fall when its currency appreciated and the investment 
decision is “globalized,” that is, is sensitive to the exchange rate. 
Here I present the same result more succinctly but in the context 
of a much less complete macroeconomic model. What are the 
issues involved? 
 THE EXCHANGE RATE AND THE TRADE 
BALANCE: THE DEBATE  
 For a “home” country, consider the identity from the national income 
accounts:
 
=  =Trade (Saving) Surplus,
X
M
S
I
 

( 132 ) 
The Unloved Dollar Standard
 where  X  is exports and  M  is imports (both broadly deﬁ ned), and 
 S is gross national saving and  I is gross domestic investment. 
 Most economists and commentators focus just on the left-hand 
side of this accounting identity. It suggests that a depreciation of 
the home currency will make exports cheaper in world markets, 
and they will expand. Similarly, the home country’s imports will 
become more expensive in domestic currency, so they should 
contract. Th us conventional wisdom has it that the overall trade 
balance should improve if the underlying price elasticities for 
exporting and importing are even moderately high. Th is seem-
ingly plausible result is very intuitive, so even journalists can 
understand and perpetuate it. 
 But this elasticities approach is basically microeconomic and 
quite deceptive. Th e export function  X  is looked at on its own—
and the demand for imports  M  is looked at on its own—even by 
supposedly sophisticated econometricians who purport to mea-
sure separately the price elasticities of exports, and of imports, 
to exchange rate changes. Th us it is called the elasticities approach 
to the trade balance. 
 However, if you analyze the right-hand side ( S  −  I ) of the iden-
tity, the emphasis is macroeconomic. For the trade balance to 
improve with exchange depreciation, overall domestic expendi-
tures must fall relative to aggregate output. Th is is the same as 
saying that domestic saving must rise relative to domestic 
investment. Looking at it this way, one cannot presume that U.S. 
net saving will rise when the dollar is devalued. 
 Indeed, the presumption may go the other way when domestic 
investment (fueled in part by multinational ﬁ rms) is sensitive 
to the exchange rate. Suppose the RMB were to appreciate 
sharply against the dollar. Potential investors—either foreign 
or domestic, would now see China as a more expensive place in 
which to invest and the United States less expensive. Th is might 
set oﬀ  a minor investment boom in the United States, where 
investment expenditures rise from a relatively small base, and 
a major slump in China’s huge investment sector—which is 

TRADE IMBAL ANCES 
( 133 )
 currently about 45 percent of GNP. Overall, investment-led 
expenditures in China would fall, the economy would contract, 
and Chinese imports could fall. 
 Th is is what happened to Japan from the 1980s into the mid-
1990s when the yen went ever higher. Japan became a higher-
cost place in which to invest, so that large Japanese ﬁ rms 
decamped to invest in lower-cost Asian countries, and in the 
United States itself. Even though yen appreciation slowed 
Japan’s export growth, the trade surplus of the slumping 
economy increased ( ch.  7 ). 
 No wonder China is reluctant to appreciate! Like Japan in 
the 1980s and 1990s, its trade (saving) surplus would likely 
not diminish because domestic saving is relatively insensitive 
to the exchange rate even though investment in a globalized 
financial-industrial world is sensitive. However, foreign 
critics in the United States and Europe with the misleading 
elasticities model (which doesn’t take international 
investment choices into account) in their heads, would come 
back and say, “You just didn’t appreciate enough.” With this 
adverse expectation of continual RMB appreciation, the 
upshot would be further hot money inflows. The People’s 
Bank of China would be, as has been described in  chapter  5    , 
forced to intervene to buy dollars on a grand scale to prevent 
an indefinite upward spiral in the RMB. But the accumulation 
of dollar foreign exchange reserves threatens a loss of 
internal monetary control and inflation as base money in 
China’s banking system expands from the foreign exchange 
intervention—and cannot be completely sterilized. China’s 
monetary control problem is exacerbated by American China 
bashing on the exchange rate. 
 So “exogenous” exchange rate changes without planned 
absorption adjustment are quite ambiguous in their eﬀ ect on 
the net trade (saving) balance of an open economy. But suppose 
we get the necessary changes in absorption adjustment that is 
properly two-sided: the deﬁ cit country raises taxes or otherwise 

( 134 ) 
The Unloved Dollar Standard
cuts expenditures, and vice versa for the surplus country. In 
 chapter  9    , I show that such changes would be suﬃ  cient to correct 
the trade imbalance without invoking any need to change the 
exchange rate. Th at is, the dollar need not (best not) be depreci-
ated for the U.S. trade deﬁ cit to be reduced.   


Th e Transfer Problem in Reducing the 
U.S. Current-Account Defi cit 
 I
n this chapter I argue that correcting global trade imbalances is 
a form of the transfer problem: spending must be transferred 
from trade-defi cit countries (mainly the United States) to trade-
surplus countries. Reducing the U.S. current-account defi cit 
requires that net saving, that is, saving minus investment, be 
increased in the United States and reduced abroad—particularly 
in Asia. But contrary to most literature on the subject, exchange 
rates need not, and probably best not, be changed as part of the 
transfer process for improving the U.S. trade balance. To show 
why this is so, I draw on the older literature on the transfer 
problem associated with paying war reparations. Adjustment in 
absorption, that is, aggregate spending, is two-sided because the 
loser (the transferor) must raise taxes to pay an indemnity to the 
winner (the transferee), which then spends it. But there is no 
presumption that the terms of trade must turn against the trans-
feror. Th at is, the losing country, which is forced into running a 
trade surplus (or smaller defi cit), need not depreciate its real 
exchange rate to eff ect the transfer. 
 Like it or not, the dollar is at the center of the world’s monetary 
system, while simultaneously the United States runs large current 
 CHAPTER 9 

( 136 ) 
The Unloved Dollar Standard
account and trade defi cits. As shown in  chapter  6    , the United 
States couldn’t have run such defi cits for more than three decades 
if the dollar were not the defi nitive international money. Because 
much of the world is on a dollar standard, only the United States 
can borrow abroad indefi nitely in terms of its  own  currency to 
cover its relatively low level of saving. Th is is possible as long as 
the U.S. Federal Reserve Bank keeps the purchasing power of 
the dollar fairly stable so that countries with trade surpluses 
are loath to appreciate against the currency in which most of 
world trade is invoiced. Th us, there is no immediate crisis and 
no need for precipitate action by governments—particularly on 
the exchange rate front—to “correct” the U.S. current-account 
defi cit. 
 Nevertheless this continual U.S. borrowing is  unsatisfactory 
even if  sustainable . Th e world is treated to the spectacle of its 
richest economy grabbing the lion’s share of international fi nance 
that would be potentially available for economic development in 
much poorer countries. In addition, the process of transferring 
resources from the rest of the world creates tensions within the 
American economy itself. 
 What is the transfer mechanism? In order to transfer real 
resources from the rest of the world (apart from surplus-saving 
oil-producing emirates), the United States runs very large trade 
defi cits in manufactures from surplus-saving industrial econ-
omies such as China, Japan, a host of smaller ones in East Asia, 
and Germany. Th is real transfer of manufactures needed to 
cover the shortfall in American saving speeds the contrac-
tion in employment in U.S. manufacturing ( ch.  6    ) beyond the 
natural rate of decline experienced by other mature industrial 
economies. 
 Th e upshot is a protectionist backlash in the United States, 
particularly by members of Congress with manufacturing con-
stituencies. Instead of blaming America’s own defi cient saving, 
which makes foreign borrowing necessary, American politicians 
incorrectly blame “unfair” foreign trading practices— undervalued 

TRADE IMBAL ANCES 
( 137 )
currencies, substandard labor practices, dumping of subsidized 
exports in American markets, and so on. Rather than any immi-
nent collapse in America’s credit line with the rest of the world, 
this protectionist backlash is the serious threat to the world 
economy. 
 However, contrary to a widely held belief within the eco-
nomics profession, devaluing the dollar is itself no panacea for 
correcting the savings (trade) imbalances across countries. In 
 chapter  7    , Hong (Helen) Qiao shows formally that having cred-
itor countries like Japan earlier or China today appreciate the 
yen or renminbi against the dollar would have no predictable 
eff ect on their trade surpluses—unlike what the old and familiar 
elasticities model of the balance of trade would suggest. In eff ect, 
their savings surpluses (or the American saving defi ciency) need 
not be corrected if the dollar is devalued. Nevertheless, any such 
major change in the dollar’s nominal exchange rate could create 
serious monetary imbalances in the world economy: defl ation 
in the appreciating countries or infl ation in the United States, 
with the trade-off   between the two being somewhat arbitrary 
( McKinnon  2005    ), but where any long-run impact on the “real” 
exchange rate washes out. 
 Instead, correcting international trade imbalances must start 
with countries’ changing domestic absorption, that is, aggregate 
spending, relative to income. International adjustment requires 
that net saving be increased in the United States or reduced 
abroad—particularly in East Asia. To be eff ective in reducing the 
trade imbalance, absorption adjustment must be two-sided—
and if it were so, would itself be suffi  cient to right the trade imbal-
ance between, say, China and the United States. No additional or 
“supporting” exchange rate changes would be necessary or even 
helpful. 
 So in building a more formal model to show this, let us sup-
pose that absorption adjustment is balanced and two-sided. Th at 
is, taxes fall abroad as they increase in the United States. Unfortu-
nately, modeling possible monetary-cum-price-level repercussions 

( 138 ) 
The Unloved Dollar Standard
together with the transfer itself presents problems. Instead, I will 
follow the time-honored but treacherous tradition in international 
economics of separating out monetary issues from “real” ones.  
 THE TRANSFER PROBLEM  
 Th e transfer problem is fi rst modeled in real terms. To emphasize 
the importance of two-sided adjustment, I utilize the older liter-
ature on the economics of war reparations. Th e loser must raise 
taxes to pay a fi xed sum to the winner, who then spends it and 
increases his absorption by that amount. What then happens 
endogenously to the real exchange rate? 
 To reduce the U.S. current-account defi cit from, say, 6.5 to 
3.5 percent of GDP, adjustment must start with a permanent fall 
in total U.S. absorption relative to income of at least 3 percent—
and with complementary inverse changes abroad. Because the 
United States bulks so large in the world economy, complemen-
tary foreign reactions to any change in American spending 
behavior must be explicitly modeled. 
 Consider the accounting identity
 
,
Y
A
CA
CA
A
Y
∗
∗
∗
−
=
= −
=
−
 
 where  A  is U.S. domestic absorption (total spending),  Y  is output 
(GDP),  CA  is the current-account surplus (negative in the 
American case), and the starred variables are the counterparts in 
rest of the world (ROW). 
 Given full employment output at home and abroad, then 
clearly CA can only improve if Δ A  < 0, Δ A * > 0, and Δ A  = −Δ A *. To 
correct a trade imbalance for a large country like the United 
States,  absorption adjustment must be symmetric with ROW . 
 Let us assume that the 3 percent U.S. decline in absorption is 
not abrupt, but nevertheless is fairly defi nite as part of corrective 
government program. Th at is, fi scal improvement is highly visible 

TRADE IMBAL ANCES 
( 139 )
and the Federal Reserve Bank avoids future episodes of exces-
sively easy money that unduly stimulate U.S. private spending—
as with the ultralow interest rate policy of 2003–04, which created 
the U.S. housing bubble of 2005–08. 
 If well signaled and spread out over some years, the fall in 
absorption itself would gradually bid down the price of U.S. non-
tradables relative to tradables—which remain buoyed by robust 
external demand. Th is natural fall in the relative price of non-
tradables—largely services of all kinds—with slower wage growth 
in that sector gradually releases capital and labor for greater U.S. 
production of both importables and exportables. Of course 
nobody (least of all economists!) would know exactly how much 
the relative prices of nontradables would eventually fall in the 
United States or increase abroad. But the American economy is 
fl exible, with workers and fi rms continually adjusting to various 
shocks, and a 3 percent fall in absorption over some years isn’t all 
that large. In the modern world, where the distinction between 
tradables and nontradables is eroding, the necessary relative 
price changes would be quite modest in the long run. 
 However, absorption adjustment must be two-sided, if only 
because of the accounting identity: the gradual fall in U.S. 
absorption relative to income must be matched by a gradual rise 
in foreign absorption relative to income. Otherwise, unilateral 
absorption adjustment by either side to right the trade imbal-
ance will always be frustrated. Putting pressure on China and 
Japan to increase consumption is all well and good, but only if 
matched by a reduction in consumption in the United States. 
 Suppose both sides begin the necessary adjustment—reducing 
absorption in the United States and raising it abroad. In long-run 
equilibrium, we know that relative prices of nontradables will fall 
in the United States and increase abroad. But should one pre-
sume that the U.S. terms of trade, the price of American exports 
relative to American imports, need fall as the U.S. trade defi cit 
declines? Essentially, and perhaps surprisingly to most economists, 
the answer is no. In the long run, any change in America’s real 

( 140 ) 
The Unloved Dollar Standard
exchange rate as measured by its terms of trade would likely be 
small with an unpredictable sign. 
 When one speaks of the  real  exchange rate, economists use at 
least two defi nitions. 
 Th e fi rst and most common defi nition is simply the terms of 
trade, and it arises naturally out of the old elasticities model. In 
its most stripped-down, short-run version, the elasticities model 
presumes that the domestic-currency price of each country’s 
export good is fi xed. Th us a devaluation of the home currency 
reduces its terms of trade one-for-one—and this relative price 
eff ect is the mechanism by which it is presumed that exports 
expand and imports contract to improve the trade balance. Th is 
assumption is often incorporated into large-scale macroecono-
metric models (such as the Sigma model used by the U.S. Federal 
Reserve) by assuming all trading partners eff ectively produce just 
one aggregate good, some of which is exported and the rest con-
sumed at home. Th en, again, real exchange rate changes are asso-
ciated with changes in the terms of trade. 
 An alternative defi nition of the “real” exchange rate is the price 
of tradable goods collectively relative to nontradables collectively. 
A real devaluation would then be defi ned as an increase in the 
relative price of tradables. And as we have just seen, it is vari-
ation in this relative price that is most relevant for the transfer 
problem—with the relative price of tradables rising in the trans-
feror and falling in the transferee. But to facilitate the transfer, 
does this leave any room for changes in the terms of trade? 
    THE JONES MODEL AND THE TERMS OF TRADE  
 From the 1950s into the 1970s, there was a spirited “real” (non-
monetary) literature on the transfer problem associated with war 
reparations. Given a fall in spending in the home country (the 
loser and the transferor) and a rise in spending in the foreign 
country (the winner and the transferee), what would happen to 

TRADE IMBAL ANCES 
( 141 )
the terms of trade? Th e orthodox presumption then as now was 
that there would be a secondary burden on the home country as 
its terms of trade deteriorated: the price of its exportables would 
fall relative to its importables in order for its trade balance to 
improve. However, several eminent authors—Paul Samuelson, 
Harry Johnson, John Chipman, and Ronald Jones—with some 
heavy mathematical artillery, in the context of a long-run real 
model where resources remained fully employed, successfully 
questioned the validity of the orthodox presumption that a real 
devaluation was necessary. 
 In particular, Ronald Jones in his article “Presumption and 
the Transfer Problem” (1975) built a model with a nontradable 
and two tradables sectors (importables and exportables) in each 
country. He showed that the relative price of nontradables 
declines in the transferor, and rises in the transferee, but what 
happened to the terms of trade is quite ambiguous. Only by mak-
ing extremely strong assumptions about specialization in pro-
duction or consumption could Jones get either the orthodox or 
the antiorthodox presumption of the change in the terms of 
trade to hold. However, for any large economy such as the United 
States with well-diversifi ed production and consumption, the 
eff ect of a transfer on its terms of trade is ambiguous—and pre-
sumably a second-order eff ect compared to the primary changes 
in the prices of nontradables relative to tradables at home and 
abroad. 
 We can extract Jones’s main result thus. In a stable market, 
the terms of trade of the transferor (the home country) worsen if 
and only if:
 
2
3
2
3.
m
m
m
m
ω
ω
∗
∗
∗
+
>
+
 
 Commodity 2 is the home country’s importable and foreign coun-
try’s exportable. Commodity 3 is the nontraded good in each 
country;  m j  is the marginal propensity to consume commodity  j 
at home, and  m j  * the marginal propensity to consume  j abroad. 

( 142 ) 
The Unloved Dollar Standard
(Th e subscripts  i  or  j  can assume the values 1, 2, or 3, in Jones’s 
model.) Th e  ω * and  ω  terms are positive parameters, embodying 
the substitution eff ects in consumption and production trig-
gered by the transfer’s alteration of the relative price of non-
tradables to tradables in each country. If ω ≈ ω*, then terms of 
trade turn against the transferor only if  m 2 *  >  m 2 . Th at is, the 
foreign country (transferee) has a higher propensity to consume 
its own export good than the home country’s (transferor) pro-
pensity to consume imports. In countries with large nontrad-
ables sectors, there is no reason to believe a priori that such a 
condition holds. 
 One can get an intuitive sense of Jones’s result by noting that 
as absorption falls in the transferor, and the relative price of its 
nontradables begin to decline, then its exports will increase and 
imports decline as resources move into its tradables sector. If, 
myopically, one stopped at this point with adjustment only in the 
transferor, it then seems as if the orthodox presumption holds: 
the price of its exports would be bid down relative to the price of 
imports. 
 However, absorption adjustment must be two-sided. As the 
transferee’s absorption of both tradables and nontradables 
increases, its nontradable prices are bid up relatively so that 
resources are drawn out of its tradable sectors. Th e transferee’s 
exports will tend to fall and imports from the transferor rise. 
Th is foreign pressure by itself would tend to raise the prices of 
the transferor’s exports relative to its imports. So putting the 
two off setting sides together, Jones showed that there is  no pre-
sumption  as to which way the transferor’s terms of trade will 
move. If we use the terms-of-trade (most common) defi nition of 
the “real” exchange rate, there is no presumption as to which 
direction, if any, the real exchange rate need move to facilitate 
the transfer in the long run. And in the short run, when export 
prices are “sticky” in each country’s home currency, there is no 
presumption as to which way the nominal exchange rate should 
change either. 

TRADE IMBAL ANCES 
( 143 )
 What are the lessons from this “real” long-run model of the 
transfer problem?
 1. Balanced international adjustment in both transferor and 
transferee is important for preventing a secondary burden 
on the transferor of having the terms of trade turn against 
it as its trade balance improves, and for maintaining macro-
economic equilibrium in the (two-country) system as a 
whole.  
   2.  Precipitate action to foment a discrete major “real” depreci-
ation of the dollar—which would initially turn the terms of 
trade against the transferor, that is, the United States, at 
the start of the adjustment process—is unwarranted. This 
would be painful but also quite unnecessary. In the long 
run, when the U.S. trade deficit was substantially reduced 
through mutual absorption adjustment, little or no change 
in the initial real exchange rate need characterize the final 
equilibrium.  
 Martin Wolf of the  Financial Times  constructively criticized the 
preceding analysis and suggested that “the price changes needed 
to bring that shift [a reduction in the U.S. trade defi cit] around 
may not happen easily under a fi xed nominal exchange rate, par-
ticularly if it requires a sizeable fall in nominal wages.” Th is is a 
common Keynesian worry for maintaining aggregate demand 
should domestic absorption be reduced. 
 Wolf is right to focus on the nature of wage adjustment. If 
taxes were gradually raised in the United States and decreased 
abroad by 3 percent of U.S. GNP, American  after-tax  wages and 
returns to the other factors of production must fall by 3 percent 
on average—as would foreign after-tax wages rise by the same 
amount in dollar terms. Th is is the necessary primary burden on 
Americans for reducing the U.S. current defi cit. 
 However, it is not at all clear that average  before-tax (nominal) 
wages need fall in the United States. Th ere would be downward 

( 144 ) 
The Unloved Dollar Standard
pressure on wages in the U.S. nontradables sector but upward 
pressure in the tradables sector from the increased foreign 
demand for American exports. Th e expansion of absorption 
abroad—most important for maintaining aggregate demand and 
limiting any necessary fall in American pretax wages—should 
parallel the contraction in the United States. In particular, there 
would be no need for a nominal depreciation of the dollar as an 
infl ationary backdoor device for reducing American real (before 
tax) wages as an adjunct to eff ecting the transfer. 
 Dollar depreciation would impose an unnecessary secondary 
burden on the United States as the terms of trade turned against 
it in the short run, although any real depreciation would even-
tually unwind in the long run. Because domestic export prices 
are sticky in the short run, a stable nominal exchange rate 
would have the great advantage of keeping the terms of trade 
fairly  constant—rather than fl uctuating unpredictably as mutual 
absorption adjustment proceeded. Without devaluing the dollar, 
U.S. net exports would gradually increase anyway. 
 A CONCLUDING NOTE  
 Th is chapter has approached the problem of correcting global 
imbalances from a somewhat unusual angle. Th e usual approach 
is to start off  by estimating what the necessary “real” devaluation 
of the dollar must be to reduce the U.S. trade defi cit by a prede-
termined amount—as in  Cline ( 2005 ), or  Obstfeld and Rogoff  
( 2005 ). However,  Qiao ( 2007 and  chapter  7 ) has shown that 
appreciations by America’s creditor countries, with large over-
hangs of dollar assets such as those in East Asia, are most unlikely 
to reduce their trade (saving) surpluses. Moreover,  McKinnon 
( 2007b  ) emphasizes the adverse defl ationary consequences of 
any one of them being forced to appreciate—particularly in the 
face of continued expectations of further appreciation, as with 

TRADE IMBAL ANCES 
( 145 )
the ever-higher yen for Japan in the 1970s to the mid-1990s, and 
the ever-higher renminbi for China today. 
 Any new international “Plaza” agreement should focus on 
directly adjusting international savings imbalances and not on 
exchange rates. Because naked exchange rate changes aimed at 
correcting international savings imbalances do no good and pos-
sibly much harm, the approach taken here has focused more 
directly on the underlying international transfer problem. Clearly, 
expenditures (absorption) must fall relative to income in the 
United States and rise relative to income in countries in East Asia 
and elsewhere. If governments want to reduce America’s trade 
defi cit and Asia’s trade surplus, then they must act jointly to 
coordinate their fi scal and complementary other policies to 
achieve this result.   

This page intentionally left blank 

China 
 Adjusting to the Dollar Standard  
 PART III 


This page intentionally left blank 

 CHAPTER 10 
High Wage Growth under Stable Dollar 
Exchange Rates 
 Japan, 1950–71 and China, 1994–2011  
 I
nternational saving and current-account imbalances aside, 
suppose a country such as China, with low wages but very high 
productivity growth, trades with a country such as the United 
States, with much lower productivity growth but higher real 
wages. When wages are “sticky,” as traditional theory would have 
it, isn’t exchange rate fl exibility with ongoing appreciation of the 
renminbi more or less necessary to balance international 
competitiveness? 
 In the high-growth economy, however, wages  are fl exible. 
When wages grow about 10 to 15 percent per year, fi rst diff er-
ences are high relative to wage levels. International competitive-
ness can be roughly balanced in the medium term when high 
quarterly wage increases match high productivity growth. In the 
very long run, the level of money wages in the high-growth 
peripheral country converges to their level in the slower-growing 
center. But the key is to ensure that monetary and exchange rate 


( 150 ) 
The Unloved Dollar Standard
conditions are right so that high wage growth accurately refl ects 
productivity gains in the medium term. 
 In the 1950s and 1960s under the Bretton Woods system of 
fixed dollar exchange rates, how differential wage growth 
became the mode of international adjustment was first artic-
ulated for high-growth Scandinavia when the Swedish, 
Norwegian, and Danish currencies were all pegged to the 
dollar. But very high productivity growth in postwar Japan 
relative to the United States, when the yen/dollar rate was 
also convincingly fixed from 1949 to 1971, provided an equally 
striking example of what is now known as the Scandinavian 
model (SM) of wage adjustment ( Lindbeck  1979    ). When the 
high-growth country’s dollar exchange rate is credibly fixed, 
the SM has four key features:
  1. Purchasing power parity holds: infl ation in tradable goods 
prices converges to that in the center country, in whose 
currency most world trade is invoiced.  
 2. Productivity growth in tradable (exportable) manufac-
tures is higher than in the rest of the high-growth 
economy.  
   3.  Employers in manufacturing, subject to the fi xed exchange 
rate constraint, naturally bid up wages to fully refl ect the 
higher productivity growth in manufacturing.  
 4. Th e high wage growth in manufactures then spreads out into 
the nontradables sector, especially services, where produc-
tivity growth is less, causing prices there to increase: the 
now classic Balassa-Samuelson eff ect.   
 THE JAPANESE CASE  
 When the yen was fi xed at 360 to the dollar from 1950 to 1971 
under Bretton Woods, the importance of relative wage adjust-
ment between Japan and the United States was pronounced 
( table  10.1    ). In that period, Japan’s annual growth in real 

CHINA: ADJUSTING TO THE DOLL AR STANDARD 
( 151 )
output was 9.45 percent, while industrial production grew an 
astonishing 14.6 percent—much like China’s more recently. 
Unsurprisingly, the annual growth in Japan’s labor productivity 
of 8.9 percent was far in excess of America’s 2.6 percent. However, 
the balancing item was that average money wages grew at a robust 
rate of 10 percent per year in Japan and only 4.5 percent in the 
United States. In Japan’s manufacturing export sector with its 
extremely high growth in labor productivity, employers bid vigor-
ously for both skilled and unskilled workers—subject to remain-
ing internationally competitive at the fi xed exchange rate.  
 Keeping the yen at 360 per dollar eff ectively anchored Japan’s 
price level for tradable goods. In the 1950s and 1960s, the 
Japanese wholesale price index (WPI) rose less than 1 percent 
per year, whereas the American WPI rose a bit more than 1 per-
cent ( table  10.1    ). Because the bulk of world trade was invoiced 
in dollars, fi xing an exchange rate to the dollar was (is) a stronger 
anchor for Japan’s price level than the size of Japanese bilateral 
trade with the United States would have suggested. 
  Figure  10.1     shows the dramatic rise of Japanese money wages 
relative to American money wages in the 1950s and 1960s with 
the fi xed dollar exchange rate. 
 Table 10.1. JAPAN AND THE UNITED STATES, 1950–1971, WITH THE YEN 
FIXED AT 360 PER DOLLAR (AVERAGE ANNUAL PERCENTAGE CHANGE 
IN KEY INDICATORS)  
 Wholesale prices 
 Money wages 
 Consumer prices 
 Industrial 
production 
 U.S. 
 Japan 
 U.S. 
 Japan 
 U.S. 
 Japan 
 U.S. 
 Japan 
 1.63 
 0.69 a 
 4.52 
 10.00 
 2.53 
 5.01 
 4.40 
 14.56 
 Real GDP 
 Nominal GDP 
 Narrow money 
 Labor productivity 
 U.S. 
 Japan 
 U.S. 
 Japan 
 U.S. 
 Japan 
 U.S. 
 Japan 
 3.84 
 9.45 a 
 6.79 
 14.52 a 
 3.94 
 16.10 b 
 2.55 
 8.92 c 
 a 1952–71. 
 b 1953–71. 
 c 1951–71. 

( 152 ) 
The Unloved Dollar Standard
 But what happens to wage growth when the national currency 
is expected to appreciate against that of the center country? 
After the Nixon shock of 1971, and then continual American 
pressure to have the yen appreciate further, employers began to 
expect that yen appreciation would continue so that the high 
wage growth in Japan tailed off  sharply about 1975–77. Japanese 
wage growth became even  less  than that in the United States, 
despite Japan’s productivity growth remaining much higher 
( fi gure  10.2    ).   
 From the Nixon shock, the yen had appreciated 17 percent by 
the end of 1971. Initially, markets treated this discrete apprecia-
tion as just a one-time adjustment. But when Japan’s trade 
surplus failed to decline ( chs.  7   and  8    ), the Americans continued 
to pressure Japan to appreciate the yen—so-called Japan 
 bashing—expectations changed. Reinforced by the Carter shock 
beginning in 1976 and further yen appreciation, the expectation 
of an ever-higher yen took hold ( McKinnon and Ohno  1997    ). 
2010
2008
2006
2004
2002
2000
1998
1996
1994
1992
1990
1988
1986
1984
1982
1980
1978
1976
1974
1972
1970
1968
1966
1964
1962
1960
1958
1956
1954
1952
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
3000
3500
Japan (in Yen)
US
 Figure 10.1. 
Percentage diff erences in Manufacturing Wage Growth for the United States and Japan, 
1952–2010 (1952 = 100) 
 Source:  Japan Statistics Bureau and Bureau of Labor Statistics 

CHINA: ADJUSTING TO THE DOLL AR STANDARD 
( 153 )
Indeed, the yen rose all the way from 360 to the dollar in early 
1971 to touch 80 to the dollar in April 1995. 
 By the mid-1970s, the expectation of chronic yen appreciation 
aff ected wage setting in Japanese labor markets. Employers, par-
ticularly exporters in Japan’s large manufacturing sector, became 
more loath to grant generous wage settlements refl ecting Japan’s 
higher productivity growth because they could go bankrupt if the 
yen suddenly ratcheted up in the next period. So employers 
became much more conservative in wage setting as the yen rose 
in the foreign exchange markets. Th is slower growth in wages 
(relative to productivity growth) added to the defl ationary 
pressure in Japan—particularly after the Plaza Hotel accord of 
1985, where a large further appreciation of the yen was negoti-
ated ( fi gure  10.2 ) and Japanese wholesale prices fell sharply. 
 Th is general defl ation in Japan continues to the present day, 
when wage settlements in Japanese industry are still less than 
those negotiated by their American counterparts. From the prin-
ciple of open interest parity, this syndrome of the ever-higher yen 
25%
400
350
300
250
200
150
100
50
0
20%
15%
10%
5%
0%
–5%
–10%
1953
1956
1959
1962
1965
1968
1971
1974
1977
1980
1983
1986
1989
1992
1995
1998
2001
2004
2007
2010
Manufacturing Wage Growth Difference
JPY/USD (RHS)
 Figure 10.2. 
CPI Infl ation and Wage Diff erential between Japan and the United States, and Yen/Dollar 
Rate, 1953–2010 
 Source: Japan Statistics Bureau and Bureau of Labor Statistics 

( 154 ) 
The Unloved Dollar Standard
was also responsible for driving Japanese interest rates close to 
zero by the mid-1990s. One could then argue that ultralow interest 
rates in Japan, combined with a sense of triumphalism from the 
yen going ever higher (we can now buy up the rest of the world!) 
created huge asset bubbles in both real estate and the stock market 
in the 1980s. After the bursting of the bubble economy in 1991, 
the yen continued to rise until April 1995. So the double whammy 
of imploding asset prices and an overvalued yen knocked Japan 
off  its high growth path. Since then, the economy has suff ered 
two lost decades of little or no real growth with ongoing defl a-
tionary pressure ( McKinnon  2007b ). China beware!  
 THE CHINESE CASE  
 After unifying its currency (eliminating multiple exchange rates) 
and moving to de facto current-account convertibility in 1994, 
China kept its exchange rate stable at 8.28 yuan per dollar until 
July 2005.  Figure  10.3 shows China’s infl ation (measured by its 
CPI) to be high in 1994–96, and, after 1998, to converge close to 
that in the United States:  equilibrium  in the sense of relative pur-
chasing power parity. But how well did this fi xed exchange rate 
policy anchor China’s macroeconomy more generally? Coupled 
with greater economic openness since the mid-1990s, it helped 
end the “roller coaster” ride in China’s domestic infl ation and GDP 
growth characteristic of the 1980s and early 1990s ( fi gure  10.4 ), 
and as explained in more depth in  chapter  12    .     
 But more was involved than just stabilizing infl ation at a low 
level.  Figure  10.4     shows that China’s very high growth in real 
GDP also became more stable after 1996 to 2010. No doubt other 
explanations of the end of China’s roller-coaster ride in both 
infl ation and real growth rates before 1995 are possible. However, 
the data are consistent with my hypothesis that fi xing the 
nominal exchange rate provided a much-needed nominal anchor 
when very rapid fi nancial transformation made purely domestic 

CHINA: ADJUSTING TO THE DOLL AR STANDARD 
( 155 )
30
10
9
8
7
6
5
4
25
20
15
10
5
0
–5
1993
1995
1997
1999
2001
2003
2005
2007
2009
2011
China-US CPI difference (LHS)
CNY/USD
 Figure 10.3. 
China-U.S. Infl ation Diff erential and Exchange Rate, 1993–2011 
 Source: IMF 
1980
–5%
5%
10%
15%
20%
25%
30%
0%
GDP growth
CPI
1981
1982
1983
1984
1985
1986
1987
1988
1989
1990
1991
1992
1993
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011Q3
 Figure 10.4. 
Infl ation Rate and Real Growth Rate of China, 1980–2011 
 Source: IMF 

( 156 ) 
The Unloved Dollar Standard
monetary control mechanisms diffi  cult to implement—as was 
also true of Japan in the 1950s and 1960s. 
 But to preserve the exchange rate anchor, China’s money wages 
had to grow in line with its rapid productivity growth. From 1995 
through 2010 money wages in manufacturing in China increased 
by 10.4 percent per year and by just 2.5 percent in the United 
States (see  table  10.2    ). Subsequent evidence for 2011 and 2012 
shows Chinese wages growing closer to 15 or 20 percent per year. 
Th is wage growth diff erential approximately refl ected the 
diff erential growth of labor productivity: about 15 percent in 
China versus 5 percent in the United States over the decade. 
 Much of this extraordinary growth in Chinese wages refl ects 
the upgrading of skills and greater work experience of the manu-
facturing labor force. True, at the margin, the wages of unskilled 
migrant workers have lagged in past years. Many of these seem 
to be absorbed into construction activities, where average wages 
show (slightly) slower growth. But with the yuan/dollar rate fi xed 
or just slowly appreciating ( fi gure  10.5 ), high wage growth in 
China seems to balance international competitiveness—at least 
approximately given the highly imperfect data available—as the 
Scandinavian model would have it. 
 To be sure, wage growth and is not always perfectly aligned with 
high, and somewhat variable, productivity growth.  Figure  10.6     
shows that China’s productivity growth exceeded wage growth in 
 Table 10.2. CHINA AND THE UNITED STATES, 1995–2010, WITH A FAIRLY 
STABLE YUAN/DOLLAR (AVERAGE ANNUAL PERCENTAGE CHANGE 
IN KEY INDICATORS)  
 Producer prices 
 Money wages 
 Consumer prices 
 Industrial 
production 
 U.S. 
 China 
 U.S. 
 China 
 U.S. 
 China 
 U.S. 
 China 
 2.81 
 1.95 
 2.50 
 10.41 
 2.45 
 2.97 
 2.03 
 13.42 
 Real GDP 
 Nominal GDP 
 Narrow money 
 Labor productivity 
 U.S. 
 China 
 U.S. 
 China 
 U.S. 
 China 
 U.S. 
 China 
 2.48 
 9.93 
 4.61 
 13.88 
 3.06 
 17.49 
 5.25 
 15.75 

CHINA: ADJUSTING TO THE DOLL AR STANDARD 
( 157 )
the early 2000s up to about 2005, so that unit labor costs were 
actually falling. Subsequently, however, wages grew faster than 
productivity growth—the more so if restated in dollar terms. From 
July 2005 to July 2008, the RMB appreciated against the dollar 
about 6 percent per year before it was restabilized for a brief two-
year period. Since June 2010 (too recent to be included in the fi g-
ures), the RMB has again been appreciating gently.  
  Figure  10.7     tells a similar story in terms of unit labor costs 
measured wholly in domestic currency, that is, the RMB. From 
2001 through 2005, unit labor costs in China fell as domestic 
productivity growth exceeded wage growth. Since then, manu-
facturing wages have grown faster than productivity so that man-
ufacturing unit labor costs in China have been rising.   
  Figure  10.8     shows China’s wage growth catching up to produc-
tivity growth since 2002 (the base year), and of course growing 
much faster than in the United States. With the passage of time, 
it seems as if Chinese wages are on track to converge eventually 
with those in the United States unless there is some violent 
1994
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
500
1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009
China
US
 Figure 10.5. 
Nominal Manufacturing Wage for the United States and China, 1994–2009 (1994 = 100)     

( 158 ) 
The Unloved Dollar Standard
%Chg yoy
30
25
20
15
10
5
0
–5
1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010
China US average wage growth differential (local currency)
China–US average wage growth differential (USD)
China–US CPI differential
China–US labor productivity growth differential
 Figure 10.6. 
China-U.S. Wage Growth, CPI, and Labor Productivity Growth Diff erential 
% Chg yoy
40
30
20
10
0
–10
–20
1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010
Unit labor cost
Labor productivity
Average manufacturing wage(estimated)
 Figure 10.7. 
Manufacturing Sector Wage, Labor Productivity, and ULC: Percentage Changes     

CHINA: ADJUSTING TO THE DOLL AR STANDARD 
( 159 )
interruption—such as happened to Japan with the sharp ratch-
eting up of the yen from the late 1970s into the mid-1990s. 
 Although this fast rise in Chinese wages better balances 
international competitiveness, it does not by itself correct the 
trade imbalance. Th ere remains the need for China to reduce 
its surplus saving in conjunction with the United States elimi-
nating its saving defi ciency—as shown by the analysis in 
 chapters  6 and  9 .  
    THE NEGATIVE RISK PREMIUM IN WAGE GROWTH  
 Suppose we modify our Scandinavian model of wage determi-
nation to introduce the expectation of renminbi appreciation, 
but the precise amount is uncertain. Because risk-averse 
employers in export activities don’t know how much the ren-
minbi will actually appreciate, they hesitate to bid money 
wages up by the full amount of expected productivity growth 
350
300
250
200
150
100
50
0
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
China productivity
China wage (effective in US$ )
 Figure 10.8. 
China’s Productivity and Wage Growth (2002 = 100)     

( 160 ) 
The Unloved Dollar Standard
in tradables. A Chinese exporter could go bankrupt if he bid 
up incremental wages too strongly only to find that the ren-
minbi appreciated more than his mean expectation. Let us call 
this shortfall in wage growth from employer risk aversion the 
 negative risk premium  in wage bargaining,  WRP  < 0. Starting 
from a position where the domestic price level in China is 
stable (as was approximately true until the worldwide infla-
tion of 2010–11, as explained in  chapter  5    ), wages increase 
according to
 
(
)
(
)
=
+
+
,
W
E
PROD
E
S
WRP
D
D
D
 
 where  W  is money wages in China,  PROD  is (real) labor produc-
tivity,  S  is yuan/dollar;  Δ  is the operator for percentage change, 
and  E  is the expectations operator . E ( ΔS ) < 0 refl ects expected 
appreciation, and  E ( ΔPROD ) > 0 refl ects high productivity 
growth. 
 If the rate of appreciation was certain, say the renminbi was 
sure to appreciate by 2.9 percent per year, then  WRP  = 0. 
Money wages would increase less than productivity growth by 
2.9 percentage points. On a balanced deflation path, prices 
would fall 2.9 per year while real wages grew as much as labor 
productivity. 
 But the rate of renminbi appreciation in China is uncertain, 
so that  WRP  < 0. It is still too soon in 2011 to get any fi rm 
estimate of the shortfall in wage increases in China from the 
uncertainty in exchange appreciation. However, the earlier 
Japanese experience of massive actual appreciations after 1970, 
which only later became more or less fully realized, seemed to 
have fi rst-order impact on Japanese wage growth. Fortunately, 
the Chinese authorities have been much more resistant to China 
bashing and, unlike the Japanese experience, there have been 
no sharp appreciations of the RMB against the dollar—and 
cumulative appreciation has also been low. In 2012, China has 
slowed to a halt even gradual appreciation. So China seems to 

CHINA: ADJUSTING TO THE DOLL AR STANDARD 
( 161 )
be much less in danger of a sudden, disruptive slowdown in 
wage growth such as that which affl  icted Japan from the 1970s 
through the mid-1990s ( fi gure  10.2 ).  
 A CONCLUDING NOTE  
 For creditor countries on the periphery of the dollar standard 
such as China that have current-account (saving) surpluses, mer-
cantile pressure to appreciate their currencies and become more 
“fl exible” is misplaced (as per  chapters  7   and  8    ). Just the 
expectation of (ongoing) exchange appreciation with high vari-
ance seriously disrupts the natural tendency for wage growth to 
balance productivity growth. It could create a zero-interest 
liquidity trap in fi nancial markets that leaves the central bank 
helpless to combat future defl ation arising out of actual currency 
appreciation—as with the earlier experience of Japan ( McKinnon 
and Ohno  1997    ). Exchange rate appreciation, or the threat of it, 
causes macroeconomic distress through hot money fl ows ( ch.  5 ) 
without having any predictable eff ect on the trade surpluses of 
creditor economies ( ch.  7 ). Th e solution is to credibly fi x the 
central yuan/dollar rate into the indefi nite future. 


Currency Mismatches on the 
Dollar’s Periphery
Why China as an Immature Creditor Cannot 
Float Its Exchange Rate  
 C
hina is again coming under heavy political pressure by the U.S. 
government, with some foreign offi  cials in Europe and emerg-
ing markets chiming in, to appreciate the renminbi. Behind this 
political clamor is the academic view of many economists that 
exchange rate “fl exibility” 1    is itself desirable—particularly as a way 
of correcting imbalances in foreign trade. Bowing to this foreign 
pressure, the People’s Bank of China (PBC) announced on June 19, 
2010, that it was unhooking its two-year old peg of 6.83 yuan per 
dollar and would henceforth be more fl exible. But since then, the 
yuan/dollar rate has moved very little. In August 2012 the rate was 
just 6.36 yuan per dollar, whence the sense of outrage among 
American and European politicians that they were deceived. 
 But China’s government is trapped in two important respects. 
 First, government offi  cials and many economists on both sides 
are in thrall to a false theory: that a discrete appreciation of the 
RMB against the dollar would have the predictable eff ect of reducing 
China’s trade surplus and U.S. trade defi cit. Once one realizes that 
China’s trade surplus just refl ects its net surplus of saving over 
investment,  S  −  I , and vice versa for the saving-defi cient United 
 CHAPTER 11 

CHINA: ADJUSTING TO THE DOLL AR STANDARD 
( 163 )
States, then there is no presumption as to which way  S  −  I would 
move in either country if the RMB was appreciated. True, an appre-
ciation would reduce China’s corporate profi tability and some cor-
porate saving. However, in our globalized fi nancial system, 
investment would fall sharply when China was suddenly seen to be 
a more expensive country in which to install productive capacity 
and produce from it. And China’s currently extremely high ratio of 
investment to GDP, about 40 to 45 percent, has a long way to fall. 
With the greater sensitivity of investment to the exchange rate, any 
presumption should be that China’s trade (net saving surplus) 
would increase with RMB appreciation (see  chapters  7   and  8    ). 
 Second, and the major focus of this chapter, is the issue of 
exchange rate flexibility per se. I will argue that it is impos-
sible for the PBC to withdraw from foreign exchange interven-
tions and let the “market” decide what the rate should be 
when, at the same time, China has a huge net saving (trade) 
surplus. That is, floating the yuan/dollar rate is out of the 
question. Many well-meaning foreign commentators, who are 
not overtly bashing China to appreciate its currency, still 
believe that greater market-determined exchange flexibility is 
warranted. U.S. Treasury secretary Timothy Geithner seems 
to think so:
  “It is China’s decision about what to do with the exchange rate—
they’re a sovereign country,” Geithner said. “But I think it is enor-
mously in their interest to move, over time, to let the exchange 
rate refl ect market forces, and I am confi dent that they will do 
what is in their interest,” he said while visiting Boeing and other 
exporters in Washington State. (Associated Press, May 23, 2010) 
 Secretary Geithner’s tone here is much more measured and 
careful than in previous episodes of American China bashing 
where various congressmen, journalists, industrialists, union 
offi  cials, and economists have called for a large appreciation of 
the RMB against the dollar. Nevertheless, Secretary Geithner’s 
more moderate and seemingly reasonable approach to let the 

( 164 ) 
The Unloved Dollar Standard
yuan/dollar rate refl ect “market forces,” that is, by fl oating or 
otherwise becoming more fl exible, is still not feasible. Why?  
 CHINA AS AN IMMATURE INTERNATIONAL 
CREDITOR  
 China is in the historically unusual position of being an  imma-
ture  creditor: its own currency, the renminbi, is hardly used at all 
in fi nancing its huge trade (saving) surplus. Instead the world—
particularly the Asian part of it—is still on a dollar standard. 
Th e dollar is the invoice currency of choice for most of Chinese 
exports and imports and for open-market, that is, nongovernment- 
 controlled, fi nancial fl ows. So we have the anomaly that the 
world’s largest creditor country cannot use its own currency in 
lending to foreigners. 
 Th e lag in the international use of the RMB is partly because 
China’s domestic fi nancial markets are not fully developed: 
interest rate restrictions as well as residual capital controls on 
foreign exchange infl ows remain. But a more fundamental con-
straint is that the U.S. dollar has the fi rst-mover advantage of 
being ensconced as “international money.” World fi nancial mar-
kets shun the use of more than one or two national currencies for 
clearing international payments—with the euro now in second 
place. But the euro’s use in payments clearing is still pretty well 
confi ned to Europe’s own backyard (Eastern Europe and former 
European colonies). Th us dollar dominance makes the interna-
tionalization of the RMB very diffi  cult—although the People’s 
Bank of China is trying hard to encourage the RMB’s use in inter-
national transacting on China’s immediate borders. 
 Th e upshot is that China’s own currency is still not used much 
in lending to foreigners. Foreigners won’t borrow from Chinese 
banks in RMB or issue RMB-denominated bonds in Shanghai. (A 
very small market in RMB-denominated bonds, now called “dim 
sum” bonds, operates in an off shore market out of Hong Kong.) 

CHINA: ADJUSTING TO THE DOLL AR STANDARD 
( 165 )
But, apart from direct investments abroad by Chinese corpora-
tions, private fi nance for China’s trade surplus would have to take 
the form of Chinese banks, insurance companies, pension funds, 
and so on, acquiring liquid foreign exchange assets—largely in 
dollars. But their domestic liabilities—bank deposits and annuity 
or pension liabilities—are all denominated in RMB. Because of 
this  currency mismatch , the exchange rate risks for China’s private 
banks and other fi nancial institutions are simply too great for 
them to be international fi nancial intermediaries, that is, to lend 
to foreigners on a large-enough scale. 
 China’s current large trade (saving) surpluses, which run at 
about $200 to $300 billion per year, would quickly cumulate to 
become much greater than the combined net worth of all of 
China’s private fi nancial institutions. Because these private 
(nonstate) institutions would refuse to accept the exchange risk 
(possible dollar depreciation) of holding dollar assets on a 
signifi cant scale, the international intermediation of China’s 
saving surplus is left to the central government. Th e problem is 
worsened by American “China bashing” to appreciate the RMB, 
the expectation of which makes foreigners even more loath to 
borrow in RMB—while stimulating perverse fl ows of hot money 
 into  China. Th e upshot is that China’s central government steps 
in to intermediate and control the country’s saving surplus in 
several diff erent ways.
 1. Th e accumulation of huge liquid offi  cial reserves of foreign 
exchange, currently about $3.2 trillion, in the State 
Administration of Foreign Exchange (SAFE).  
 2. Th e creation of sovereign wealth funds, like the China 
Investment Corporation (CIC), which invests overseas in 
bonds, equities, or real estate.  
  3. Encouraging China’s large state-owned enterprises such as 
SINOPEC to invest in, or partner with, foreign oil companies 
in exploration and production.  

( 166 ) 
The Unloved Dollar Standard
   4.  Quasi-barter aid and investment programs in developing 
countries that generate a return fl ow of industrial 
materials. 2  
 Under 4, China does not give “aid” to African or Latin American 
countries in the conventional form of liquid dollar deposits. 
Instead, China’s overseas investments are combined with aid 
under the fairly strict government control of China’s Export-
Import Bank or the Department of Commerce. In return for using 
Chinese state-owned construction companies to build large-scale 
infrastructure for ports, railways, power plants, and so on, the 
recipient country agrees to repay China by giving it a claim on a 
future stream of copper or iron ore or oil or whatever mineral 
that the infrastructure investments make possible, whence the 
“quasi barter” nature of the deal. Because these foreign-aid/
investment projects are under the control of state-owned fi nan-
cial intermediaries, they become eff ectively  illiquid : they will not 
be suddenly sold off  and become part of hot money fl ows back 
into China. 
 Each of these four techniques for intermediating China’s saving 
surplus internationally generates claims on foreigners that are in 
“safe” government hands. Th at is, they won’t be suddenly liqui-
dated if, say, there is suddenly a new scare that the RMB will be 
appreciated. Th is minimizes, but does not eliminate, the possi-
bility of hot money infl ows back into China that could destabilize 
the exchange rate and make monetary control more diffi  cult. 
 Tiny Singapore is also an immature creditor whose own 
currency is not used for international lending and whose 
government, like China’s, tightly controls overseas fi nancial 
intermediation. For decades, Singapore’s net saving (current 
account) surpluses have been persistently the world’s largest at 
about 15 to 20 percent of its GNP. To prevent hot money fl ows, it 
essentially nationalizes the internal fl ow of saving by requiring 
all Singaporeans to deposit what had been as much as 30 percent 
of their personal incomes in the Singapore Provident Fund—a 

CHINA: ADJUSTING TO THE DOLL AR STANDARD 
( 167 )
state-run defi ned-contribution pension scheme. Th en, beyond 
fi nancing internal investments within Singapore, the proceeds 
from the Provident Fund are lent to two giant sovereign wealth 
funds: the Government Overseas Investment Corporation (GIC), 
which invests in fairly liquid overseas assets, and Temasek, which 
is more of a risk taker in foreign equities and real estate. 
 Both the GIC and Temasek are Singapore’s answer to mini-
mizing currency risk from international investing. Although the 
domestic liabilities of the Provident Fund are all in Singapore 
dollars, their large foreign assets are in various foreign 
 currencies—mainly U.S. dollars. But both agencies are government 
owned with (implicitly) large capital reserves, so that they can 
disregard the currency risk. Because the country’s large overseas 
assets are in safe government hands, hot money fl ows are 
minimal. Th e Monetary Authority of Singapore (MAS) controls a 
gentle “fl oat” of the Singapore dollar against U.S. dollar while 
holding little in the way of overt offi  cial exchange reserves. (Th e 
country’s unoffi  cial international reserves are the huge assets 
held by the GIC and Temasek.) Th e stable exchange rate then 
anchors Singapore’s national price level. 
 Th is “Singapore Solution” to international fi nancial intermedi-
ation by an immature creditor country, while preserving monetary 
control, was described in  McKinnon ( 2005 ,  ch.  8 ). Singapore is 
too small for Americans and Europeans to complain about its dis-
proportionately large trade (saving) surplus, and demand that 
the Singapore dollar be appreciated. China (and Japan before it) 
are not so lucky. Although China’s trade surpluses are propor-
tionately much smaller than Singapore’s, their large absolute size 
draws the ire of American mercantilists in the form of “China 
bashing” for the RMB to be appreciated. Although the common 
theory that exchange rate appreciation will reduce a saving 
surplus of a creditor country is wrong ( Qiao  2007 ,  McKinnon 
 2010b ), fear of appreciation still induces large hot money 
infl ows into China despite the immunization of its overseas 
investments—as described by points 1 to 4 above. 

( 168 ) 
The Unloved Dollar Standard
 Surplus-saving Japan is still an immature international cred-
itor because the yen is not much used to denominate claims on 
foreigners. But, unlike China’s or Singapore’s, Japan’s government 
does not dominate the international intermediation of its saving 
surplus as much. How then is Japan’s saving (current account) 
surplus fi nanced internationally? 
 Large Japanese corporations make heavy overseas direct 
investments in autos, steel, electronics, and so on. But, in 
addition, Japanese banks, insurance companies, and pension 
funds have become big holders of liquid assets, at diff erent terms 
to maturity, denominated in many foreign currencies such as 
Australian, New Zealand, and U.S. dollars—which until fairly 
recently had much higher yields than yen assets. 
 Th is part of the Japanese system for overseas investment is vul-
nerable to hot money fl ows. Over the last 20 years, carry trades out 
of low-yield yen assets have been commonplace with a weakening 
yen. But they can suddenly reverse, as in 2008 and again in 2012. 
Th e Japanese economy is then vulnerable to sudden runs from 
dollars (largely owned by private Japanese fi nancial institutions) 
into yen that create damaging sharp appreciations in the “fl oating” 
yen/dollar exchange rate. Investment within Japan is inhibited, 
while it becomes more diffi  cult for the stagnant economy to escape 
from its zero-interest liquidity trap ( McKinnon  2007a  ). 
 Th rough the four measures described above, China has 
 mitigated—although not escaped from—the immature creditor 
dilemma. If it tried to fl oat the RMB, so that the PBC was neither 
a buyer nor a seller of foreign exchange, then nonstate Chinese 
banks would not accept the risk of fi nancing the huge trade 
(saving) surplus by accumulating dollar claims. Th ere would be 
no net buyers of the dollars thrown off  by China’s large export 
surplus. Th e RMB would spiral upward indefi nitely against the 
dollar with no well-defi ned upper bound until the PBC was 
dragged back in to reset the rate. Despite what Secretary Geithner 
suggests, there is no market solution for the exchange rate of a 
large immature creditor country. 

CHINA: ADJUSTING TO THE DOLL AR STANDARD 
( 169 )
 NOTES   
 1. 
“Flexibility” is a very pleasant word in the English language if only because its 
opposite connotes pejorative terms such as “rigid,” “unbending,” “uncaring,” and 
so on. But we should not be deceived by these semantics.  
 2 . 
With apologies to the memory of Keynes himself, who, if alive today, might not 
be a Keynesian. 


China and Its Dollar Exchange Rate 
 A Worldwide Stabilizing Influence?  
 WITH  G UNTHER  S CHNABL  
 C
hina is criticized for keeping its dollar exchange rate fairly 
stable when it has a large trade (saving) surplus. Th is criti-
cism is misplaced in two ways. First, no predictable link exists 
between the exchange rate and the trade balance of an interna-
tional creditor economy. Second, since 1995, the stable yuan/
dollar rate has anchored China’s price level and facilitated coun-
tercyclical fi scal policies that have smoothed its high real GDP 
growth. With its now greater GDP, China displaces Japan as the 
largest economy in East Asia—but with a much stronger stabi-
lizing infl uence on East Asian neighbors because of its higher 
economic growth and more stable dollar exchange rate. Now, an 
ever larger China is an essential stabilizer for the world 
 economy—as exemplifi ed by its prompt and eff ective fi scal 
response to the global credit crunch of 2008–09. However, cumu-
lating fi nancial distortions—in China and the United States—
threaten to undermine China’s growth and its stabilizing infl uence 
on the rest of the world. 
 CHAPTER 12 

CHINA: ADJUSTING TO THE DOLL AR STANDARD 
( 171 )
 Since 1994, when China unifi ed its currency, achieving full 
current-account convertibility by 1996, a stable yuan/dollar rate 
has anchored China’s price level. It has also smoothed real 
economic growth at an amazingly high annual rate of 9 to 
11 percent—almost without precedent in the annals of economic 
development. Although growth was led by a surge in exports of 
manufactures in the 1990s, imports also surged, so that China’s 
overall trade remained roughly balanced ( table  12.1    )—and trade 
frictions were minimal. 
 Beginning in 2002, however, China’s domestic saving began 
increasing relative to domestic investment—while national 
saving in the United States slumped. Th e result of this interna-
tional saving imbalance over the next decade was large, growing 
Chinese bilateral trade surpluses in manufactures with the United 
States and multilateral surpluses more generally ( table  12.1    ). Th e 
corresponding U.S. trade defi cits accelerated American industrial 
decline with politically painful losses of jobs in manufacturing 
( ch.  6    ). Fortunately, China had become a full-fl edged member of 
the World Trade Organization (WTO) in 2001. Th us the WTO’s 
rules of the game inhibited outright protectionism by the 
United States, European Union, Japan, and smaller industrial 
economies—although antidumping suits against Chinese goods 
(within the WTO’s rubric) remain signifi cant. 
 Stymied by the WTO but needing an easy political response to 
the decline in their manufacturing sectors, politicians in the 
industrial economies led by the United States began to claim that 
China’s heretofore stable exchange rate of 8.28 yuan per dollar 
was unfairly undervalued and a prime “cause” of China’s emerging 
trade surpluses. Instead, the correct American economic response 
should have been to increase U.S. tax revenues while curbing both 
personal and government consumption so as to improve the 
national investment-saving balance and reduce America’s trade 
defi cit. But this proved, and still proves, to be politically too diffi  -
cult. Far easier to look for a foreign villain—and the yuan/dollar 
rate was (and is) a politically convenient scapegoat. 

( 172 ) 
The Unloved Dollar Standard
 Table 12.1.  CHINA’S MULTILATERAL TRADE BALANCE AND BILATERAL 
TRADE BALANCE VERSUS THE UNITED STATES   
 Year 
 Trade 
balance 
(billion 
US$) 
 Trade 
balance 
(% of GDP) 
 Bilateral 
trade 
balance 
(billion 
US$) 
 Bilateral 
trade 
balance 
(% of GDP) 
 1980 
 −1.0 
 −0.33 
 −2.8 
 −0.93 
 1981 
 1.0 
 0.34 
 −3.2 
 −1.08 
 1982 
 4.8 
 1.63 
 −2.5 
 −0.86 
 1983 
 2.6 
 0.82 
 −1.0 
 −0.33 
 1984 
 0.1 
 0.01 
 −1.5 
 −0.48 
 1985 
 −12.5 
 −4.04 
 −2.8 
 −0.93 
 1986 
 −7.4 
 −2.43 
 −2.1 
 −0.69 
 1987 
 0.3 
 0.09 
 −1.8 
 −0.55 
 1988 
 −4.1 
 −.98 
 −3.2 
 −0.78 
 1989 
 −4.9 
 −1.07 
 −3.5 
 −0.75 
 1990 
 10.7 
 2.64 
 −1.3 
 −0.32 
 1991 
 11.6 
 2.74 
 −1.8 
 −0.43 
 1992 
 5.1 
 1.00 
 −0.3 
 −0.06 
 1993 
 −11.8 
 −1.84 
 6.4 
 0.99 
 1994 
 7.4 
 1.26 
 7.4 
 1.28 
 1995 
 12.0 
 1.58 
 8.6 
 1.14 
 1996 
 17.6 
 1.97 
 10.5 
 1.18 
 1997 
 42.8 
 4.35 
 16.5 
 1.67 
 1998 
 43.8 
 4.19 
 21.0 
 2.01 
 1999 
 30.6 
 2.78 
 22.5 
 2.05 
 2000 
 28.8 
 2.42 
 29.8 
 2.50 
 2001 
 28.1 
 2.13 
 28.2 
 2.14 
 2002 
 37.4 
 2.57 
 42.8 
 2.94 
 2003 
 36.1 
 2.19 
 58.7 
 3.56 
 2004 
 49.3 
 2.54 
 80.4 
 4.14 
 2005 
 124.7 
 5.46 
 114.3 
 5.01 
 2006 
 208.9 
 7.49 
 144.6 
 5.19 
 2007 
 307.3 
 8.80 
 163.2 
 4.67 
 2008 
 348.7 
 7.69 
 171.1 
 3.77 
 2009 
 220.1 
 4.36 
 143.6 
 2.84 
 2010 
 183.1 
 3.11 
 181.2 
 3.08 
 2011 
 155.1 
 2.07 
 202.3 
 2.70 
 Source:  Datastream. 

CHINA: ADJUSTING TO THE DOLL AR STANDARD 
( 173 )
 However, in today’s world of globalized fi nance for trade and 
investment, the claim that China could reduce its trade (net 
saving) by appreciating the RMB surplus is specious ( chs.  7   and  8    ; 
and McKinnon and Schnabl 2009). If the RMB was sharply appre-
ciated, turning China into a higher-cost country in which to invest, 
globally oriented fi rms would decamp and invest elsewhere, so 
that investment in China itself would slump. China’s saving-
investment balance ( S  −  I ) and trade surplus could well increase 
( chs.  7 and  8 )! 
 Th e now false idea that the exchange rate can be used to control 
the trade balance has deep historical roots. In the immediate 
post–World War II era, when capital controls proliferated outside 
of the United States and foreign trade was more of a fringe activity, 
the Western industrial economies were more insular. For that era, 
using the exchange rate to control a country’s trade balance was 
more plausible—and was central in the infl uential work of Nobel 
laureate James Meade,  Th e Balance of Payments (1951). 
 However, by the new millennium, with much greater globaliza-
tion of trade and fi nance, Meade’s view of the exchange rate had 
become obsolete—except in economics textbooks. But it is still 
the intellectual infl uence behind today’s continuing American 
and European political pressure on China to appreciate the RMB 
as if that would reduce China’s trade surplus. As J. M. Keynes 
(1935, 383) so aptly put it, “the ideas of economists and political 
philosophers, both when they are right and when they are wrong, 
are more powerful than is commonly understood. Indeed, the 
world is ruled by little else. Practical men, who believe themselves 
to be exempt from any intellectual infl uence, are usually the 
slaves of some defunct economist.” 
 Showing how and why the conventional view linking exchange 
rate changes to the trade balance breaks down as an economy 
becomes more open in trade and fi nance is all well and good. 
However, we also need an alternative, more positive theory of 
why a stable dollar exchange rate is the best policy for a rapidly 
growing emerging market such as China—particularly one with a 

( 174 ) 
The Unloved Dollar Standard
large saving surplus but whose own private capital market is still 
too immature to fi nance it internationally ( ch.  11 ). 
 THREE STAGES OF THE CHINESE DOLLAR 
PEG AS A STABILIZER  
  Why focus just on China’s  dollar  exchange rate? Despite 
monetary turmoil—past and present—emanating from the 
United States, the world is still mainly on a dollar standard. In 
East Asia, virtually all imports and exports—including the 
burgeoning intra-industry trade within the region—are invoiced 
in dollars. Th e dollar remains the dominant means of settling 
international payments among banks, and is the principal 
intervention currency used by governments, such as China’s, 
for smoothing exchange rate fl uctuations. When China stabi-
lizes the yuan/dollar rate, it is really stabilizing the rate against 
a much broader basket of currencies underlying interregional 
trade in Asia—and against dollar-based fi nancial markets 
beyond Asia.  
 Stage 1. Th e Dollar Exchange Rate as the Nominal 
Anchor for the Chinese Economy 
 Th us in 1994 when China’s system of multiple exchange rates 
was unifi ed and currency restrictions on importing and export-
ing were eliminated, the yuan/dollar peg became the centerpiece 
for reducing China previously high and volatile infl ation. 
 In the 1980s, under Deng Xiaoping, China began to move strongly, 
but gradually, away from a Soviet-style planned economy. Wage and 
price controls were slowly relaxed. But out of necessity the currency 
remained inconvertible, with no free arbitrage between domestic 
prices and the very diff erent relative dollar prices prevailing in inter-
national markets. During this 1980–93 period of currency inconvert-

CHINA: ADJUSTING TO THE DOLL AR STANDARD 
( 175 )
ibility, the “offi  cial” yuan/dollar rate was frequently and arbitrarily 
changed ( fi gure  12.1    ), and could not have been an anchor for the 
domestic price level. No open domestic capital market existed for the 
People’s Bank of China (PBC) to execute conventional monetary 
policy. Monetary control depended on very imperfect credit ceilings 
on individual banks. Th e result was high and variable infl ation, which 
peaked out in 1994 at over 20 percent per year (fi gure 10.4).   
 But to maintain the new dollar exchange anchor for tradable goods 
as of 1995, the PBC was “forced” to disinfl ate suffi  ciently to maintain 
8.28 yuan per dollar over the next decade. By 1997, infl ation in China’s 
CPI had fallen to the American level—about 2 percent per year. 
 From time to time, other countries have used a fi xed exchange 
rate as a “nominal anchor” to kill infl ation. What seems virtually 
unique about the Chinese experience, however, is that infl ation 
remained in abeyance (at least until the worldwide infl ation of 
2010–11)  and  real GDP growth stabilized at a high level. Figure 10.4 
also shows the roller-coaster ride in real growth rates before 1996 
during the period of currency inconvertibility, and the subsequent 
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
Jan 80
Jan 83
Jan 86
Jan 89
Jan 92
Jan 95
Jan 98
Jan 01
Jan 04
Jan 07
Jan 10
CNY/USD
Currency 
Inconvertibility
(multiple 
exchange rates)
Fixed 
Exchange 
Rate
Controlled
Upward
Crawling
Peg
New Period of 
Controlled 
Appreciation?
Fixed
Rate
Relaunched
 Figure 12.1. 
Th e Yuan-Dollar Exchange Rate, 1980–2011 
 Source:  IMF 

( 176 ) 
The Unloved Dollar Standard
much smoother growth in real GNP of around 10 percent per year 
when the current account had been liberalized under a fi xed dollar 
exchange rate. True, GDP growth slowed to just 8 percent or so in 
the global crisis of 2008–09, when Chinese exports fell sharply. But 
in 2010, growth bounced back to its “norm” of about 10 percent.  
 Stage 2. China as Anchor for the Greater 
East Asian Economy 
 China’s own monetary and fi nancial stability helped by a stable 
yuan/dollar rate is important of itself, but it is not the only issue. 
China has now displaced Japan as the dominant economy in East 
Asia, both in trade and in size ( fi gure  12.2 ). Much more rapid 
growth in GDP for almost a decade and a half, and growing intra-
industry trade links, make it not only the engine of high East 
Asian economic growth but also an anchor for stabilizing that 
growth. 
 Japan was dominant in economic size and in East Asian trade 
fl ows before 2002 ( fi gure  12.2 ). Japanese economists linked East 
Asian development to the so-called fl ying geese pattern—with 
Japan as the leading goose. But the Japanese economy never 
recovered from the collapsed bubbles in its stock and real estate 
markets in 1990, and remains mired with slow growth and near-
zero interest rates today. 
 More disturbingly for East Asia, the yen/dollar rate fl uctuated 
from 360 per dollar in 1971 to 80 to the dollar in April 1995, and 
continues to fl uctuate widely—albeit closer to 80 than to 360—as 
shown in  fi gure  12.3    . Because the other East Asian economies were 
“normally” pegged to the dollar, these large fl uctuations in the 
yen/dollar rate created cyclical instability in the smaller East Asian 
economies ( Kwan  2001 ,  McKinnon and Schnabl  2003 ). When the 
yen rose against the dollar, direct investment (largely by Japanese 
fi rms) fl owed out of Japan to Th ailand, Korea, and so on, and their 
exports to Japan boomed. When the yen was weak and Japan 

CHINA: ADJUSTING TO THE DOLL AR STANDARD 
( 177 )
became more competitive as in the East Asian crisis of 1997–98 
( ch.  7    ), Japanese investment at home boomed, while FDI in other 
countries in Asia, as well their as exports to Japan, slumped.  
 So cyclical instability (which China largely avoided) in the 
smaller East Asian economies was aggravated by fl uctuations 
0%
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
70%
80%
1980 1982 1984 1986 1988 1990 1992 1994 1996 1998 2000 2002 2004 2006 2008 2010 2012
percent
as percent of East Asian GDP
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
1980 1982 1984 1986 1988 1990 1992 1994 1996 1998 2000 2002 2004 2006 2008
percent of total intra-regional trade
as percent of intra-East Asian exports
Japan
China
East Asia 8
China
Japan
East Asia 8
 Figure 12.2. 
Economic Weights in East Asia     
 Source:  IMF 

( 178 ) 
The Unloved Dollar Standard
in the yen/dollar rate. Before the turn of the millennium, the 
fl uctuations of the yen against the dollar were an important 
determinant of the business cycle of the smaller East Asian 
economies. Yen appreciation boosted growth in the smaller 
East Asian economies, while yen depreciation put a drag on 
growth. After the turn of the millennium China gained a larger 
economic weight in East Asia, and the role of the yen/dollar 
exchange rate for East Asian business cycle fl uctuations seems 
to have faded. 
 Now in the new millennium and beyond, China has displaced 
Japan as the dominant East Asian economy—but with the 
yuan/dollar rate kept much more stable since 1994 than was 
(and is) the yen/dollar rate ( fi gure  12.2    ). Th us China is not only 
the engine of high economic growth for its smaller Asian 
 suppliers and customers, but is also a better anchor for reducing 
cyclical instability in East Asia. Th e relatively stable yuan/dollar 
rate means that an “inadvertent” business cycle is not imparted 
to the smaller Asian countries (also dollar peggers) in the mode 
140
120
100
80
60
40
Index 1994:Q1=100
20
0
–20
–40
Q1 1980
Q1 1982
Q1 1984
Q1 1986
Q1 1988
Q1 1990
Q1 1992
Q1 1994
Q1 1996
Q1 1998
Q1 2000
Q1 2002
Q1 2004
Q1 2006
Q1 2008
Q1 2010
Yuan/Dollar
Yen/Dollar
 Figure 12.3. 
Yen and Yuan against the Dollar 
 Source:  Datastream  

CHINA: ADJUSTING TO THE DOLL AR STANDARD 
( 179 )
of their earlier experience with Japan and fl uctuations in the 
yen/dollar rate. 
 Although the yuan/dollar rate has remained relatively stable, on 
occasion political pressure from the United States has induced 
periods of gradual RMB appreciation, as from July 2005 to July 
2008 (about 6 percent per year), and after June 2010 ( fi gure  12.4 ). 
In these intervals, a few other East Asian counties have followed 
with (small) gradual appreciations. But insofar as these govern-
ments intervene, it is still a dollar-based system. (Th e RMB is not 
used as an intervention currency because China’s fi nancial mar-
kets are underdeveloped, with controls on capital infl ows.) Th e 
dollar remains predominant in interbank markets and as an invoice 
currency in goods markets. However, the RMB now supplements 
the dollar’s role as an exchange rate anchor in East Asia.  
 Th ere is a second sense in which China provides stability to East 
Asia. Major macroeconomic shocks to the East Asian region not 
originating in China are smoothed by China’s stabilizing presence. 
0
50
100
150
200
250
Jan 94
Jan 96
Jan 98
Jan 00
Jan 02
Jan 04
Jan 06
Jan 08
Jan 10
Index Jan 1994 = 100
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
Index Jan 1994 = 100
China
Hong Kong
Malaysia
South Korea
Thailand 
Japan
Philippines
Singapore
Taiwan
Indonesia
 Figure 12.4. 
East Asian Exchange Rates against the Dollar 
 Source:  IMF 

( 180 ) 
The Unloved Dollar Standard
Th e upper panel of  fi gure  12.5     shows the real growth patterns in 
the 10 most important East Asian economies. In the great Asian 
crisis of 1997–98, one can see the sharp fall to negative growth in 
most of them—particularly the fi ve in crisis: Indonesia, Korea, 
Malaysia, Philippines, and Th ailand. Meanwhile, during the Asian 
crisis, China’s high growth barely dipped at all—just to 8 percent. 
Most importantly, despite misplaced foreign advice to depreciate 
the RMB in the face depreciations by the other nine Asian counties, 
China opted to keep the yuan/dollar stable at 8.28 during the 
crisis ( fi gure  12.4 ). Th is stable Chinese anchor permitted the other 
nine East Asian counties to export their way out of the Asian 
crisis, and thus recover much sooner.  
 Stage 3. China as a Fiscal Stabilizer on the World Stage 
 Th e same pattern of a stabilizing Chinese anchor for the East 
Asian economies prevails in response to “worldwide” macro 
shocks, that is, those originating in the center country of the 
world dollar standard—the United States. Th e upper panel of 
 fi gure  12.5 shows the eff ect of the collapse in 2001–02 in the 
American stock-market dot-com bubble, when growth slowed 
sharply in the other nine East Asian economies, but not in China, 
with its stable yuan/dollar exchange rate. Similarly, in the global 
credit crunch of 2008–09, growth became negative or slowed 
sharply in the other East Asian countries but only dipped moder-
ately by one or two percentage points from its very high level in 
China. 
 In each of the two major macroeconomic crises, the stable 
yuan/dollar exchange rate facilitated countercyclical fi scal policy 
by China. In March 1998, the middle of the Asian crisis, Premier 
Zhu Rongji announced a major “fi scal” expansion of over one-
half trillion U.S. dollars over the next three years. Similarly, in 
last half of 2008, in the midst of the global credit crunch from 
failing U.S. and European banks, an ever-larger China began an 

CHINA: ADJUSTING TO THE DOLL AR STANDARD 
( 181 )
–15%
–10%
–5%
0%
5%
10%
15%
1989
1991
1993
1995
1997
1999
2001
2003
2005
2007
2009
percent
East Asia
–5%
–3%
–1%
1%
3%
5%
7%
9%
11%
13%
15%
1980
1983
1986
1989
1992
1995
1998
2001
2004
2007
2010
2013
percent
World
China
Hong Kong
Malaysia
Singapore
Thailand
Japan
Philippines
South Korea
Taiwan
Indonesia
European Union
China
Japan
US
 Figure 12.5. 
Regional and Global Growth Performance 
 Source:  IMF 

( 182 ) 
The Unloved Dollar Standard
even bigger multi-trillion-dollar fi scal expansion lasting through 
2010. In both cases, increased central and local government 
spending was fi nanced mainly by enormously increased credits 
from China’s huge state-owned banks. However, by 2011, the 
Chinese central government began trying to rein in spending by 
local governments. China had reset its exchange rate at 6.83 yuan 
per dollar from July 2008 to June 2010 ( fi gure  12.1 ). So in both 
cases, the fi xed yuan/dollar rate increased the eff ectiveness of 
China’s countercyclical fi scal expansion—as the old Mundell-
Fleming model would have it ( Mundell  1963    ). East Asia and the 
world economy more generally were indirect benefi ciaries. 
 Can China now be considered a major stabilizing infl uence 
worldwide? A glance at the lower panel of  fi gure  12.5 suggests 
that this is plausible and has already happened. Growth in the 
European Union, Japan, and the United States plunged well into 
negative territory in the credit crunch of 2008–09, whereas 
China’s growth only dipped to a comfortable 8 percent per year, 
and has subsequently recovered to its norm of 10 percent or so. 
But China itself was sharply impacted by the global credit crunch. 
To off set the sharp 50 percent fall in its exports in 2008–09, 
China’s massive “fi scal” stimulus, based on the expansion of bank 
credit in 2008–10, increased demand for both domestic and 
foreign goods. Imports were sucked in so that China’s trade 
surplus vanished—albeit very briefl y—and the other East Asian 
countries quickly exported their way out of the downturn, helped 
by a stable yuan/dollar rate. Beyond East Asia, the rest of the 
world’s exports to China also increased in 2009–11. 
 Although not yet portrayed in any of the fi gures, it seems that 
the sovereign debt–cum-banking crisis in Europe beginning in 
mid-2011 slowed European GDP growth signifi cantly—but not 
China’s. True, this banking crisis interrupted—probably just 
temporarily—the fl ow of hot money from the old low-interest 
industrial economies to the higher-interest emerging markets, as 
discussed in  chapter  5    . But high real growth in the Chinese 
economy was sustained in the face of the American economy’s 

CHINA: ADJUSTING TO THE DOLL AR STANDARD 
( 183 )
very sluggish recovery from the 2008–09 credit crunch and 
Europe’s travails in 2011. 
 In 2012, the euro crisis may be weakening Europe’s demand 
for Chinese exports with some slowing of Chinese growth. Th e 
big, as yet unresolved, question is “Can China do it again?” Th at 
is, can China in 2012–13 again embark on another big countercy-
clical expansion based on domestic bank credit to preserve 
aggregate demand in the face of weakening exports? As before, 
the central government seems to be leaning on state and local 
governments to invest more in infrastructure projects. But these 
lower-level governments have larger debt overhangs from their 
expansiveness in 2008–09. So only time will tell. 
 Unlike diamonds, sustained high GDP growth in China as a 
worldwide stabilizer under the dollar standard need not be forever. 
Some of these sustainability issues are taken up in  chapter  13 .  

This page intentionally left blank 

International Monetary Reform 
 PART IV 


This page intentionally left blank 

 CHAPTER 13 
Rehabilitating the Dollar Standard 
and the Role of China
The G-2  
 A
s international money since 1945, the dollar has shown 
  remarkable resilience in the face of huge upheavals, from 
the Nixon shock in 1971 to the subprime mortgage crisis of 
2008–09 ( ch.  4    ), and to the Bernanke zero-interest rate shock 
from December 2008 to the present. Its facilitating role in inter-
national fi nancial markets is still entrenched as the world’s 
principal invoice, clearing, and reserve currency ( ch.  2    ). It remains 
invaluable in international commerce. 
 Yet after the dollar standard’s early success from 1945 to the 
late 1960s in providing a stable nominal anchor for the rest of the 
world ( ch.  3    ) when China was not yet a major player, its subsequent 
performance in that role has been lamentable. Because nations 
have been unable to agree on an alternative international money, I 
claim that the only feasible international monetary reform is one 
of rehabilitating the dollar standard. 1 In this concluding chapter, 
idealized rules of the game—only some of which are new—are 
proposed to restore a well-functioning world dollar standard. 
 In the new millennium, China has emerged as the world’s larg-
est trading nation and the biggest creditor of the United States. 


( 188 ) 
The Unloved Dollar Standard
So it is important to spell out how a modus viviendi between the 
United States and China—a veritable Group of Two or simply 
G-2—can operate to rehabilitate the dollar standard. Indeed, 
without China’s (implicit) support, a worldwide monetary crisis 
from American fi scal profl igacy coupled with a credit crunch in 
the United States will be diffi  cult to avoid. 
    IDEAL RULES OF THE GAME FOR 
THE DOLLAR STANDARD   
 Suppose hypothetically that the U.S. government finally rec-
ognizes the central position of the dollar in the world’s 
monetary system and resolves to behave more appropriately 
as the keeper of the world’s money. It embarks on a more 
 outward-looking monetary policy to reduce exchange rate 
volatility and keep short-term interest rates set comfortably 
above zero to limit carry trades ( chs.  4   and  5    ). It officially rec-
ognizes that America’s international borrowing constraint 
has been unnaturally softened by the special role of the dollar 
in international finance. Rather than turning protectionist, 
the U.S. government recognizes that the unduly large trade 
deficits it has been able finance for decades with impunity by 
selling Treasury bonds in exchange for foreign manufactured 
goods has resulted in  deindustrialization in the United States 
( ch.  6 ). 
 Even more hopefully, suppose further that the U.S. government 
comes to understand that these trade defi cits cannot be ended, 
or even alleviated, by devaluing the dollar ( chs.  7   and  8    ), so it 
stops “bashing” neighboring countries on exchange rate issues. 
Instead, the United States develops the political will to raise 
America’s net saving rate by ending fi scal defi cits and encour-
aging more saving in the private sector. As the trade defi cit with 
its transfer of foreign manufactures to the United States natu-
rally declines, the dollar’s eff ective exchange rate need not, and 

INTERNATIONAL MONETARY REFORM 
( 189 )
best not, change ( ch.  9    ). But the American manufacturing sector 
would begin to recover. 
 With a rehabilitated dollar standard, foreign governments would 
become resigned to the inevitable asymmetry between center and 
periphery in current fi nancial arrangements based on the dollar. 
As debtors or creditors, they would move to minimize volatility 
arising out of currency mismatches ( ch.  11    ). In crisis situations, 
the IMF would remain the lender of fi rst resort and stay as crisis 
manager. But the United States itself would still be the lender of 
last resort. With the possible exception of an implosion in the euro 
zone, the combined IMF–United States entity would have suffi  cient 
dollar resources to limit fi nancial crises around the world. 
 To show how our present international monetary order should 
be modifi ed, 10 idealized rules for the dollar standard of the 
future are set out in  box  13.1    . Refl ecting the inherent asymmetry 
in the world’s money machine, the fi rst six rules apply to the 
United States, and the second four rules apply to emerging mar-
kets on the periphery with immature capital markets—including 
large rapidly growing countries such as China and Brazil. 
 Th ese 10 idealized rules are hardly all-encompassing.   2 Th e 
European bloc, with the euro as the central currency, really does 
not fi t comfortably into this analytical framework. Moreover, as 
of the current writing, the European Monetary Union is in 
 turmoil—for which a meaningful set of rules would be beyond 
the scope of this book. Small countries independent of any bloc 
would be free to choose what monetary-cum-exchange-rate 
system they wanted. Yet for larger countries, these rules show 
how a better-functioning dollar standard could greatly reduce 
recurring currency crises in the world at large and fi nancial vola-
tility in the United States itself. 
 In light of the analysis contained in earlier chapters of this book, 
each of the 10 rules in  box  13.1     is virtually self-explanatory. If the 
dollar standard is truly rehabilitated, U.S. short-term monetary 
policy would be more oriented toward multilateral exchange sta-
bility, and fi scal policy oriented toward eliminating the country’s 

( 190 ) 
The Unloved Dollar Standard
 Box 13.1 
NEW RULES OF THE GAME FOR AN 
IDEALIZED DOLLAR STANDARD   
 U N I T E D  S TAT E S  
 Rule 1.  In the long run, limit infl ation and stabilize the domestic and 
foreign purchasing power of the dollar so as to provide a nominal anchor 
for the price levels of other countries. 
 Rule 2.  In the short run, raise interest rates to prevent outfl ows of 
“hot” money to other countries collectively when the dollar is weak, and 
vice versa. Keep interest rates comfortably above zero. 
 Rule 3  . In noncrisis periods, remain passive in the foreign exchanges: 
allow foreigners to transact freely in dollars and set their dollar exchange 
rates without being “bashed.” No capital controls for the center country. 
 Rule 4 . Th e IMF acts as lender of fi rst resort to individual countries in 
crisis. Th e United States acts as lender of last resort through dollar swaps 
and similar devices to overcome dollar liquidity crises more generally. 
 Rule 5  . Do not force developing countries to open their fi nancial mar-
kets internationally or to abandon capital controls. Cease pushing entry 
of American banks and other fi nancial institutions into their domestic 
economies. 
 Rule 6  . Limit or reverse current account defi cits by increasing domestic 
saving, government and private. 
 E M E R G I N G  M A R K E T S  
 Rule 7  . Retain current-account currency convertibility under the IMF’s 
Article VIII, but recognize the problem of currency mismatches. Restrain 
foreign exchange exposure by banks and other fi nancial institutions, if 
necessary by capital controls. 
 7 A : Debtor economies: Limit buildup of short-term liquid dollar 
liabilities. 
 7B: Creditor economies: Limit “overhangs” of liquid dollar assets. 
 Rule 8  . Recognize that pegging to the dollar may be necessary to reduce 
risk in countries with immature domestic fi nancial markets—particularly 
if they are either large dollar debtors or large dollar creditors. 
 Rule 9 . Aim for mutual exchange rate stability within natural economic 
regions such as East Asia. Set long-term dollar exchange rate objectives 
for the group. 
 Rule 10 . Hold offi  cial exchange reserves mainly in dollar assets. If 
necessary, supplement with regional swap agreements—as in East Asia. 

INTERNATIONAL MONETARY REFORM 
( 191 )
huge saving defi ciency and accompanying trade defi cit. Th en U.S. 
long-term monetary policy could focus on stabilizing America’s 
 domestic  price level—perhaps by adopting a 2 percent annual infl a-
tion target for its CPI. With a more stable domestic price level and 
exchange rates, and with moderately variable interest rates com-
fortably above zero, the United States would then return to being a 
stable nominal anchor for the price levels and monetary policies of 
most other counties—as was largely true of the Bretton Woods 
system of fi xed exchange rates in the 1950s and 1960s ( ch.  3    ). 
 But this time around, a collective agreement to fi x dollar 
exchange parities (as per the IMF’s original Article IV) would be 
unnecessary, provided that China retains its dollar peg (see 
below) and countries continue to adhere to Article VIII—
the commitment to current-account convertibility. With a stable 
nominal anchor, most countries would voluntarily return to 
dollar pegging 3   —or at least to tracking the dollar so as to avoid 
large changes in their dollar-cum-yuan exchange rates. And the 
United States would benignly neglect such machinations without 
“bashing” any country on its exchange rate policies. 
 In this brave new world, the dollar would retain its current role 
as the facilitator of multilateral exchange among nations ( ch.  2    ). 
But now this facilitating role would be enhanced as exchange rate 
fl uctuations moderated—as per rules 2, 8, and 9—so as to reduce 
banking, that is, money-changing, risks. For emerging markets 
and developing countries more generally, dollar dominance would 
still lead to currency mismatches in those that were either debtors 
or creditors (rule 7) as it now does. But again, greater exchange 
stability would mitigate the risks involved. 
 EMERGING CHINA AS A PILLAR OF 
THE DOLLAR STANDARD   
 Beyond  box  13.1    , China is not just another “emerging market.” 
Measured by the sum of its exports and imports, it is now the 

( 192 ) 
The Unloved Dollar Standard
world’s largest trading economy—and has eclipsed Japan as the 
center of the trading system in Asia ( ch.  12    ). Nobody can predict 
the future. But by extrapolating possible trends,  fi gure  13.1 pro-
jects that, around 2021, China’s  nominal  GDP will approach that 
of the United States even without further renminbi apprecia-
tion. 4    If there is substantial appreciation of the RMB (a decidedly 
bad idea; see  chapters  5   and  12    ), then the approach would be 
quicker. Of course, with its immense population, China’s “real” 
per capita GDP will still remain much less than America’s for sev-
eral decades. 
 China has also become very large fi nancially.  Figure  13.2 shows 
that, in 2011, its offi  cial exchange reserves of over $3.2 trillion 
now dwarf Japan’s second-highest holding of $1.2 trillion. 
Countries don’t reveal the currency composition of their reserves, 
but before the euro crisis of 2011−12, the IMF estimated that 
about 65 percent of offi  cial reserves were in dollar-denominated 
China Nominal
US Nominal
35000
$Billions
30000
Projections
25000
20000
15000
10000
5000
0
1978 1982 1986 1990 1994 1998 2002 2006 2010 2014 2018 2022
 Figure 13.1. 
US and China Nominal GDP History and Projection 
 Source:  International Financial Statistics, IMF, author’s projection  

INTERNATIONAL MONETARY REFORM 
( 193 )
instruments. China’s huge buildup of offi  cial exchange reserves 
refl ects both the cumulative eff ect of its large trade surpluses 
over many years, not off set by capital outfl ows, and, increasingly, 
“hot” money infl ows. Th e U.S. Fed’s unfortunate policy of near-
zero interest rates and threats of RMB appreciation from 
American China “bashing” are the main source of China’s hot 
money infl ow ( ch.  5 ). 
 Surprisingly, despite some political and economic frictions 
with the United States, China has—more or less inadvertently—
become a pillar of the dollar standard. Consider just three aspects 
of this supporting role:
 1.  Th e “snowball” eff ect ( Krugman  1984 ): Th e great expansion of 
Chinese trade with other emerging markets and countries 
producing primary products throughout the world, where 
the dollar is both the invoice currency for goods and the 
clearing currency for making international payments ( ch.  2    ), 
3500
3000
2500
2000
1500
1000
500
168
355
1161
3223
472
379
107
348
32
310
96
284
38
108
277 232 257 80234
24
0
China
Japan
Russia
Taiwan
Brazil
Korea
India
Hong Kong
Euro 17
Singapore
2000
2011 Q3
 Figure 13.2. 
Major Foreign Reserve Holders, Oil Exporters Excluded (2000 vs. 2011 Q3, in Billions of 
USD) 
 Source:  International Financial Statistics, IMF  

( 194 ) 
The Unloved Dollar Standard
reduces transaction costs and increases the liquidity of 
 dollar-based markets.  Figure  13.3     shows the relative increase 
in China’s imports (mainly of primary products) from Asia, 
Africa, and Latin America—coupled with a relative decline 
in imports from the more mature industrial economies of 
the United States, the European Union, and Japan. But these 
shifts are only relative: China’s trade everywhere is growing 
fast in absolute terms.   
 2.  Th e macro stabilization eff ect : Since 1994, China has succeeded 
in following a countercyclical fi scal (credit) policy so as to stabi-
lize its own GDP growth at a high level, which somewhat buff ers 
cyclical instability emanating from the United States ( ch.  12 ).  
 3.  The finance effect : China provides finance for large American 
fiscal deficits. If, following China, foreigners collectively 
35%
30%
25%
20%
15%
15%
12%
8%
12%
15%
18%
16%
11%
13%
28%
30%
3% 3%
5%
5%
8%
6%
13%
26%
4%
16%
10%
5%
0%
US &
Canada
EU
Japan
ASEAN
Korea,
Taiwan
Australia &
New
Zealand
BRICS
Others
(Excluding
HK)
1991
2001
2011
 Figure 13.3. 
China’s Trade Partners: Imports from China (percentage based on total imports) 
 Source:  China Customs Statistics  
 BRICS: Brazil, Russia, India, South Africa. EU in 1991 refer to EEC, EFTA (less Switzerland), Bulgaria, 
Hungary, Malta, Poland, Romania, Czechoslovakia 

INTERNATIONAL MONETARY REFORM 
( 195 )
ceased buying Treasury bonds and other dollar assets, a 
credit crunch in the United States would ensue ( figure  13.4     
and  chapter  6 ).  
 These three effects are hardly recognized in the economic lit-
erature, let alone in political discussion between governments. 
Yet they go well beyond the conventional wisdom on compar-
ative advantage, where the U.S. consumer greatly benefits 
from a plethora of Chinese-made consumption goods—while 
China has greatly benefited from access to U.S. technology 
and capital goods. Although this conventional view is all well 
and good the three effects cited above show that the mutual 
gains to the Sino-American economic interaction are much 
greater than this received wisdom would suggest.  
1200
Grand Total: 4750.9
Of which, Official Holdings: 3271.2
1000
800
600
400
200
0
China
Japan
United Kingdom
Oil Exporters
Brazil
Caribbean Banking Centers
Taiwan
Switzerland
Hong Kong
Russia
Korea
India
 Figure 13.4. 
U.S. Treasury Securities Holdings by Selected Foreign Countries (November 2011, in 
billions of dollars) 
 Source:  U.S. Department of the Treasury 

( 196 ) 
The Unloved Dollar Standard
 THE SAVING (TRADE) IMBALANCE  
 However, the current economic sticking point in the political 
relationship between the Chinese and American governments is 
the trade imbalance. Table 12.1 in  chapter  12 shows that this 
imbalance between the two countries became substantial after 
2000, continuing to the present day. Indeed, China’s bilateral 
trade surplus with the United States is now greater than its 
overall trade surplus; see  fi gure  13.5 and table 12.1. Th is suggests 
that, in determining the U.S. trade defi cit in 2012, the pull from 
the American saving defi ciency is now stronger than the push 
from surplus saving in China—although both are important. 
Otherwise, China’s trade surplus would be larger on a multilat-
eral basis, as it was back in 2006−09 ( fi gure  13.5 ). 
400
Billion $
350
300
250
200
150
100
50
0
–50
1980
1982
1984
1986
1987
1988
1990
1992
1996
1994
1998
2000
2002
2004
2006
2008
2009
2010
2011
Bilateral Trade Balance with US
Multilateral Trade Balance
 Figure 13.5. 
China’s Multilateral (Overall) Trade Surplus and Bilateral Trade Surplus versus the United 
States 

INTERNATIONAL MONETARY REFORM 
( 197 )
 Because of myopia on the causes of the U.S. trade defi cit, there 
has been an American political backlash against China. Th e 
political representatives of fi rms and trade unions involved in 
U.S. manufacturing misdiagnose the problem: they accuse China 
of deliberately undervaluing the RMB against the dollar, or 
engaging in covert protectionism by Chinese state-owned enter-
prises. Instead, to reduce the trade defi cit, they should be lobby-
ing the Congress to end the U.S. fi scal defi cit (the saving defi ciency) 
by cutting expenditures or raising taxes. 
 Th is current story is even more depressing (at least to the 
author!) because it has happened before. In the 1970s and 1980s, 
Japan was the up-and-coming manufacturing nation with very 
high growth in both exports and GDP. But in the 1980s American 
net saving fell because President Ronald Reagan’s huge defense 
buildup resulted in a large fi scal defi cit—whence the famous U.S. 
twin defi cits: fi scal and trade. In the 1980s, Japan began to run 
large trade (saving) surpluses in manufactures with the United 
States. Th e result was “Japan bashing,” with the threat of severe 
American protectionist measures unless Japan allowed the yen 
to appreciate. Unfortunately, Japan acquiesced to this political 
pressure, and the yen rose from 360 to the dollar in 1971 to touch 
80 to the dollar by April 1995. Th is huge appreciation then 
knocked Japan off  its high growth path into semistagnation and 
defl ation  without  reducing Japan’s trade surplus as a proportion 
of its GDP ( McKinnon and Ohno  1997 ,  Qiao  2007 ). 
  Figure  13.6     shows “Japan bashing” back in the 1980s and early 
1990s that was provoked by Japan’s having a high bilateral trade 
surplus with the United States. Th is is then succeeded by “China 
bashing” after 2000 as China’s bilateral surplus with the United 
States grows bigger than the declining Japanese bilateral surplus. 
U.S. policymaking in both periods was (is) under the sway of the 
Exchange Rate and Trade Balance Fallacy ( ch.  1    ). American poli-
ticians and many economists still believe (mistakenly) that if 
China accelerated the appreciation of the RMB against the dollar, 
the trade imbalance between the two countries would diminish. 

( 198 ) 
The Unloved Dollar Standard
 However, in today’s world, this saving imbalance between 
China and the United States is not one-sided. True, the American 
fi scal defi cits of the G. W. Bush and Obama administrations 
greatly reduce(d) government saving; and the huge U.S. housing 
bubble from 2003 to 2008 created a false wealth eff ect that 
reduced private saving as well. But China has had the inverse 
problem of “surplus” saving. It has resulted both in excess low-
quality investment by local governments and state-owned enter-
prises ( ch.  12    ) and in an unnaturally high bilateral trade surplus 
with the United States. Th ey are not unrelated. Th e very low 
interest policy of Fed chairman Bernanke has aggravated both 
problems. 
 THE LOW INTEREST RATE CONUNDRUM  
 On the American side, in early 2012 the Fed offi  cially forecast 
that it would keep short-term interest rates close to zero through 
China Bashing
Japan Bashing
3.0%
2.5%
2.0%
1.5%
1.0%
0.5%
0.0%
1985 1987 1989 1991 1993 1995 1997 1999 2001 2003 2005 2007 2009 2011
China
China + Japan
Japan
 Figure 13.6. 
Bilateral Trade Balances of Japan and China versus the United States (percentage of U.S. 
GDP, 1985–2011) 
 Source: U.S. Census Bureau 

INTERNATIONAL MONETARY REFORM 
( 199 )
2014. Since longer-term interest rates simply refl ect short rates 
expected in the future plus a liquidity premium, 10-year rates on 
U.S. Treasuries have been driven down to just 1.65 percent in 
2012—and seem set to stay there. Because long rates no longer 
rise from fear of future fi scal defi cits generating a credit crunch, 
Congress and the president no longer face market discipline when 
they overspend or undertax. What used to be called the 
“Bond Market Vigilantes” are missing ( McKinnon  2011b  ).   5 Th e 
unchecked U.S. fi scal defi cit does not lead to higher interest rates 
and a credit crunch because the U.S. trade defi cit widens and 
induces the People’s Bank of China, and central banks from other 
emerging markets facing upward pressure on their exchange 
rates, to buy dollars—many of which are then switched into U.S. 
Treasury bonds. 
 Chapter 5 also showed that the Fed’s policy of near-zero 
short-term interest rates, in force since December 2008, dis-
rupts internal fi nancial intermediation. Lending within the 
U.S. wholesale interbank market is constricted, which increases 
the risks seen by “retail” bank lenders to fi rms and households. 
Th e disappointingly slow recovery of the U.S. GDP after the 
2008–09 downturn ( fi gures  13.7a  and  13.7b  ) is often ascribed 
to the slow, or nonexistent, growth in normal short-term bank 
credit—unlike most recoveries from cyclical downturns. 
Moreover, near zero interest rates is forcing the closure of 
money market mutual funds (MMMF) for fear of “breaking the 
buck,” as described in  chapter  5    . And as short-term fi nancial 
intermediaries, these MMMF had become almost as large as 
banks themselves.  
 In the medium term, defi ned-benefi t pension funds, either 
public such as those run by state and local governments or private 
such as those run by insurance companies, cannot now earn 
enough on their assets to cover their contracted future pension 
payouts. And these insurance-type fi nancial intermediaries have 
been the main source of long-term fi nance within the American 
economy. So the Fed’s protracted policy of near-zero interest 

( 200 ) 
The Unloved Dollar Standard
 Figure 13.7a. 
World’s Real GDP in Recoveries (2007 = 100) 
180
170
160
150
140
130
120
110
100
90
80
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
World
US
China
Emerging and Developing Economies
Advanced Economies
Projections
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
16
%
Projections
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0
–2
–4
–6
World
US
China
Emerging and Developing Economies
Advanced Economies
 Figure 13.7b. 
Real GDP Growth Rate in Recoveries 
 Source:  Martin Wolf,  Financial Times , February 8, 2012 

INTERNATIONAL MONETARY REFORM 
( 201 )
rates has the making of a fi nancial disaster within the United 
States itself. 
 On the Chinese side, the U.S. Federal Reserve’s ultralow 
interest rates at the center of the world dollar standard result in 
a form of  fi nancial repression ( Lardy  2008 ;  ch.  12 ). Th e PBC is 
forced to keep Chinese bank deposit and loan interest rates far 
below the natural rate of interest associated with a high-growth 
economy ( table  13.1    ). Even so, hot money fl ows in through some-
what porous capital controls, and the PBC is forced to buy U.S. 
dollars to keep the exchange rate stable. (Th e infl ow of hot money 
is accentuated by expected appreciation of the RMB.) Some of 
this excess money creation is sterilized, but potential infl ationary 
pressure in China’s CPI remains. How does the resulting fi nancial 
repression distort China’s economy? 
      1.  Households see a deposit interest rate below the rate of 
infl ation—a form of taxation that reduces household income 
and consumption ( fi gure  13.8  ).  
 Table 13.1. INTEREST RATES AND GDP GROWTH FOR U.S. AND CHINA  
 
  China 
 United States 
 
 Deposit 
rate 
 Lending 
rate 
 Interbank 
overnight 
rate 
 GDP 
growth 
 Deposit 
rate 
 Lending 
rate 
 Federal 
funds 
rate 
 GDP 
growth 
 2000 
 2.25 
 5.85 
 8.37 
 6.65 
 9.23 
 6.24 
 6.39 
 2001 
 2.25 
 5.58 
 10.41 
 3.73 
 6.92 
 3.89 
 3.36 
 2002 
 1.98 
 5.31 
 2.4 
 10.50 
 1.88 
 4.67 
 1.67 
 3.46 
 2003 
 1.98 
 5.31 
 2.18 
 13.41 
 1.23 
 4.12 
 1.13 
 4.70 
 2004 
 2.25 
 5.58 
 2.01 
 17.69 
 1.79 
 4.34 
 1.35 
 6.51 
 2005 
 2.25 
 5.58 
 2.01 
 16.38 
 3.76 
 6.19 
 3.21 
 6.49 
 2006 
 2.52 
 6.12 
 1.31 
 18.76 
 5.27 
 7.96 
 4.96 
 6.02 
 2007 
 4.14 
 7.47 
 1.97 
 19.62 
 5.25 
 8.05 
 5.02 
 4.95 
 2008 
 2.25 
 5.31 
 2.21 
 18.46 
 3.05 
 5.09 
 1.93 
 2.19 
 2009 
 2.25 
 5.31 
 .83 
 9.57 
 1.12 
 3.25 
 0.16 
 -1.74 
 2010 
 2.5 
 5.56 
 2.24 
 12.88 
 0.518 
 3.25 
 0.17 
 3.57 
 Source : Datastream; GDP for 2010 are IMF staff  estimates; values for Chinese deposit and lending rates are 
from November 2010. 

( 202 ) 
The Unloved Dollar Standard
   2.  Some enterprises receive a substantial subsidy in the form 
of cheap credit (the standard bank loan rate in 2010 was 
5.56 percent), creating great excess demand. At this cen-
trally mandated low interest rate, the state-owned banks 
pick just the safest borrowers—which are large state-owned 
enterprises.  
   3.  With the credit subsidy, the profi tability of large state-owned 
enterprises (SOEs) has surged in recent years—and there is 
no policy of remitting these profi ts to households, whence 
the proclivity of SOEs to invest in fi xed assets. Investment 
has grown to a remarkable 45 percent of GDP ( fi gure  13.8 ). 
At near-zero real rates of interest, the quality of many of 
120
100
80
60
40
20
0
1980
1982
1984
1986
1988
1990
1992
1994
1996
1998
2000
2002
2004
2006
2008
2010
Private Consumption
Government Consumption
Gross Fixed Capital Formation
Stockbuilding
Net Export
 Figure 13.8. 
China GDP Composition, 1980–2011 
 Source:  Economist Intelligence Unit (EIU). Estimation value for 2011 

INTERNATIONAL MONETARY REFORM 
( 203 )
these investments cannot be high. Moreover, the shares of 
personal income and private consumption are falling ( fi gure 
 13.8    ). In 2012, China’s private consumption of 35 percent of 
GDP was only half of the U.S. level.  
  4. Because formal bank rates of interest have to be kept low, 
the banks cannot really lend to small and medium-size fi rms 
or households—where interest rates would have to be in the 
range of 10 to 20 percent. So a number of “shadow” banks 
have come into existence to lend to small fi rms outside the 
control of China’s regulatory authorities.  
 5. Th e real exchange rate, that is, the relative price of nontrad-
ables to tradables, has not appreciated enough because of 
the need to sterilize the hot money infl ows ( ch.  12 ). So China 
remains overly competitive in international trade.      
  A MODUS VIVENDI BETWEEN CHINA 
AND THE UNITED STATES?  
 In the short run, the two countries can live comfortably with 
each other if the U.S. Federal Reserve Bank gradually raises its 
federal funds interest rate toward some modest level, say 2 
 percent—and abandons its policy of talking down long rates by 
threatening to keep short rates near zero indefi nitely. Th is win-
win policy change would benefi t both countries: relaxing con-
straints on bank-based or MMMF fi nancial intermediation in the 
United States, while curbing infl ationary infl ows of hot money 
into China, which keep Chinese interest rates too low. 
 To correct the trade imbalance in the longer run, the need for 
substantial, but complementary, structural adjustments in 
both countries’ saving rates cannot be ignored. To comfortably 
fi nance its “normal” level of domestic investment of about 17 
percent of GDP without relying on net borrowing from foreigners, 
the United States must restore its domestic saving to about the 

( 204 ) 
The Unloved Dollar Standard
same level. While U.S. households may be induced to save more, 
the bulk of the adjustment must be to curb public sector dissav-
ing, that is, to eliminate the large fi scal defi cits of the federal 
government by some combination of cutting expenditures and 
increasing tax revenues. 
 To right its distribution of income between households and 
enterprises, China must arrange for regular dividend payouts 
from enterprises to households. Th e household share of dispos-
able income in GDP has fallen too much as enterprise profi ts have 
ballooned since the middle of the last decade. Th us the problem 
is not that the household propensity to save is too high, but 
rather that enterprises save too much—mostly in the form of 
excess investment in fi xed assets. Rapid wage increases are also 
part of the answer, and Chinese wages can be expected to grow 
faster when the yuan/dollar rate is stable ( ch.  10 ). 
 If both countries proceed in parallel, with American saving 
increasing as Chinese saving falls, then the trade imbalance can 
be reduced smoothly without wrenching changes in relative 
prices or the need for the yuan/dollar rate to change—as shown 
in  chapter  9     (no more China bashing on the exchange rate). 
Gradually correcting the saving imbalance between the two coun-
tries with a stable exchange rate is the key to promoting a “soft” 
landing ( ch.  6    ) without a credit crunch in the United States, or a 
wave of protectionism against Chinese exports. Th en the modus 
vivendi between the two countries will be sustainable. 
 What about other emerging markets and industrial countries 
like Japan? Under a rehabilitated dollar standard, a stable yuan/
dollar rate is also a vital cog in inducing other countries to stabi-
lize their dollar exchange rates—as per rules 7 and 8 in  box  13.1     
and  chapter  9    . If the world’s largest trading economy stabilized 
its dollar exchange rate, this would provide an even stronger 
nominal anchor and incentive for others, such as Japan, to do the 
same. With the G-2 seen to be cooperating, a new system of stable 
dollar exchange rates for both industrial countries and emerging 
markets would emerge without a new formal treaty like that 
associated with Bretton Woods in 1945. 

INTERNATIONAL MONETARY REFORM 
( 205 )
 Alternatively, however, suppose there is no modus vivendi. 
Th at is, U.S. interest rates stay close to zero and there is no mutual 
saving adjustment between the China and the United States as 
the American fi scal system continues to hemorrhage. Th is opens 
up the possibility of a new credit crunch in the United States. 
 Chapter  6     described how the 1991–92 U.S. credit crunch resulted 
from the sudden interruption of capital infl ows from Germany 
and Japan, which at that time had been covering the U.S. fi scal 
defi cit. Although temporary, the 1991–92 U.S. downturn was 
suffi  ciently sharp to block the re-election of George H. Bush in 
the fall of 1992—a re-election that seemed almost certain after 
the U.S. victory in the Gulf War of 1991. But banks stopped 
normal commercial lending and bought Treasury bonds instead. 
 Today, the size of the U.S. fi scal defi cit—and the defi ciency in 
American saving more generally—is now larger. In addition, the 
stock overhang refl ecting net American indebtedness to for-
eigners is much larger. So the potential for a much sharper and 
prolonged credit crunch in the United States is there. 
 Foreigners, particularly central banks, will stop lending to the 
United States only if a precipitate general loss of confi dence in 
the dollar standard leads them to forgo stabilizing their dollar 
exchange rates—and instead allow appreciation(s) to occur. If 
emerging markets all appreciate together, the loss of interna-
tional competitiveness by any one of them would be minimized. 
Nobody knows when or what might trigger such a loss in 
confi dence. But leading candidates are (1) the Federal Reserve’s 
near-zero interest rate policy, (2) “China bashing” to force China 
give up on stabilizing its dollar exchange rate that signals other 
EMs to do the same, and (3) the U.S. political paralysis over the 
never-ending fi scal defi cit. 
 Despite the dollar standard’s remarkably long hegemony since 
1945, the world’s one and only money machine is in a fragile 
state. And any sudden breakdown would be extremely disruptive 
for all nations, including China and, most of all, the United States 
itself. But euro related problems aside, constructive cooperation 
between the G-2 can avoid such a breakdown outside of Europe. 

( 206 ) 
The Unloved Dollar Standard
 NOTES  
 1. 
Increases in Special Drawing Rights (SDRs) by the IMF for its member countries 
have been touted as a partial substitute for the dollar. But since its fi rst issue in 
1972, and greatly expanded issue in 2010, SDRs have had a negligible eff ect on 
dollar holdings in offi  cial exchange reserves. As international money, SDRs are 
essentially fl awed because they have no basis in private international commerce 
( McKinnon  1979 ). 
 2. 
Indeed they arise naturally out of the author’s previous eff orts to describe the 
continually evolving postwar dollar standard by a series of rule boxes ( McKinnon 
 1993    ).  
 3. 
As they largely did from the mid-1980s to the global credit crisis of 2008–09. 
Th is informal pegging to the dollar has been christened as “Bretton Woods II” by 
 Dooley, Folkerts-Landau, and Garber ( 2003 ). 
 4. 
Assumption: U.S. real GDP annual growth at 2.5 percent, infl ation 1.5 percent; 
China real GDP annual growth at 8 percent, infl ation 4 percent, USD/RMB rate 
stays at 2012 level.  
 5. 
See my “Where are the Bond Vigilantes?” in the  Wall Street Journal  Sept 30, 2011.                      

 Barro, Robert J. 2001. “Economic Growth in East Asia before and after the Financial 
Crisis.” NBER Working Paper No. 8330. 
 Bergsten, Fred. 2010. “Correcting the Chinese Exchange Rate: An Action Plan.” 
Testimony before the Committee on Ways and Means, US House of 
Representatives.  Congressional Record , March 24. 
 Calvo, Guillermo, and Carmen Reinhart. 2000. “Fixing for Your Life.” NBER Working 
Paper No. 8006. 
 Chinoy, Sajjid Z. 2001. “Currency Risk Premia and Unhedged, Foreign-Currency 
Borrowing in Emerging Markets.” Ph.D. dissertation, Department of Economics, 
Stanford University. 
 Cline, William. 2005.  Th e United States as a Debtor Nation . Washington, D.C.: Institute 
for International Economics, Center for Global Development. 
 Cline, William, and John Williamson. 2009. “Estimates of Fundamental Equilibrium 
Exchange Rates.” Peterson Institute for International Economics, Policy Brief 
No. 09-10. 
 De Grauwe, Paul, and Gunther Schnabl. 2005. “Nominal versus Real Convergence with 
Respect to EMU Accession—EMU Entry Scenarios for the New Member States.” 
 Kyklos  58:481–99. 
 Despres, Emile. 1965. “A Proposal for Strengthening the Dollar.” Research Center in 
Economic Growth, Stanford University, Memo No. 38, May. 
 Despres, Emile, Charles Kindleberger, and Walter Salant. 1966. “Th e Dollar and World 
Liquidity: A Minority View.”  Th e Economist  (London), February 5, 526–29. 
 Dooley, Michael P., David Folkerts-Landau, and Peter Garber. 2003. “An Essay on the 
Revived Bretton Woods System.” NBER Working Paper No. 9971. 
 Eichengreen, Barry, and Ricardo Hausmann. 1999. “Exchange Rate Regimes and 
Financial Fragility.” NBER Working Paper No. 7418. 
 ———. 2003. “Currency Mismatches, Debt Intolerance and Original Sin: Why Th ey 
Are Not the Same and Why It Matters.” NBER Working Paper No. 10036. 
 Frenkel, Jacob A., and Michael L. Mussa. 1980. “Th e Effi  ciency of the Foreign Exchange 
Market and Measures of Turbulence.”  American Economic Association Papers and 
Proceedings  70:374–81. 
 ———. 1985. “Asset Markets, Exchange Rates and the Balance of Payments.” In Ronald 
W. Jones and Peter B. Kenen, eds.,  Handbook of International Economics , vol. 2, 
679–747. Amsterdam: North-Holland. 
 REFERENCES  

( 208 ) 
References
 Freitag, Stephan, and Gunther Schnabl. 2010. “Reverse Causality in Global Current 
Accounts.” ECB Working Paper No. 1208. 
 Friedman, Milton. 1953. “Th e Case for Flexible Exchange Rates.” In  Essays in Positive 
Economics.  Chicago: University of Chicago Press. 
 ———. 1968. “Th e Role of Monetary Policy.”  American Economic Review 58:1–17. 
 Goldstein, Morris. 2004. “China and the Renminbi Exchange Rate.” In C. Fred Bergsten 
and John Williamson, eds.,  Dollar Adjustment: How Far? Against What? , 197–230. 
Washington, D.C.: Institute for International Economics. 
 Gourinchas, Pierre-Olivier, and Helene Rey. 2005. “International Financial Adjustment.” 
NBER Working Paper No. 11155, February. 
 Goyal, Rishi, and Ronald McKinnon. 2001. “Japan’s Negative Risk Premium in Interest 
Rates: Th e Liquidity Trap and Fall in Bank Lending.”  World Economy 
24:279–315. 
 Green, Stephen. 2011. “China, In, Out, Shake It About.”  Global Research , Standard 
Chartered, May 5. 
 Hale, Galina, and Cheryl Long. 2010. “If You Try, You’ll Get By: Chinese Private Firms’ 
Effi  ciency Gains from Overcoming Financial Constraints.” Photocopy. 
 Hamada, Koichi, and Akiyoshi Horiuchi. 1987. “Th e Political Economy of the Financial 
Market.” In Kozo Yamamura and Yasukichi Yasuba, eds.,  Th e Political Economy of 
Japan , vol. 1,  Th e Domestic Transformation , 23–262. Stanford, Calif.: Stanford 
University Press. 
 Hanke, Steve. 2010. “Th e Great 18-Year  Real Estate Cycle.”  Globe Asia , 22–24. 
 Hanke, Steve. 2011. “Malfeasant Central Bankers, Again.”  GlobeAsia , November, 
20–22. 
 Hayek, Friedrich von. 1929.  Geldtheorie und Konjunkturtheorie . Vienna: Hölder-Pichler-
Tempsky. 
 Hoff mann, Andreas, and Gunther Schnabl. 2011. “A Vicious Cycle of Financial Market 
Exuberance, Panics and Asymmetric Policy Response—an Overinvestment 
View.”  World Economy 34:382–403. 
 Horsefi eld, J. Keith, ed. 1969.  Th e International Monetary Fund, 1945–1965: Twenty 
Years of International Monetary Cooperation . Vol. 3,  Documents . Washington, D.C.: 
International Monetary Fund. 
 Johnson, Harry. 1958. “Towards a General Th eory of the Balance of Payments.” In 
 International Trade and Economic Growth: Studies in Pure Th eory . London: Allen 
and Unwin. 
 Kenen, Peter. 2002. “Th e Euro versus the Dollar: Will Th ere Be Struggle for Dominance?” 
 Journal of Policy Modeling 24:347–54. 
 Keynes, John Maynard. 1936.  Th e General Th eory of Employment, Interest, and Money . 
London: Macmillan. 
 Kindleberger, Charles. 1965. “Balance of Payments Defi cits and the International 
Market for Liquidity.”  Princeton Essays in International Finance  No. 46, May. 
 Kraay, Art, and Jaume Ventura. 2000. “Current Accounts in Debtor and Creditor 
Countries.”  Quarterly Journal of Economics 115:1137–66. 
 Krugman, Paul. 1984. “Th e International Role of the Dollar: Th eory and Prospect.” In 
John F. O. Bilson and Richard C. Marston, eds.,  Exchange Rate Th eory and Practice , 
261–78. Chicago: University of Chicago Press. 
 ———. 2010. “Chinese New Year.”  New York Times , January 1. 
 Kwan, C. H. 2001.  Yen Bloc: Toward Economic Integration in Asia . Washington, D.C.: 
Brookings Institution Press. 

References 
( 209 )
 Jones, Ronald W. 1975. “Presumption and the Transfer Problem.”  Journal of International 
Economics  5:263–74. 
 Lardy, Nicholas. 2003. “United States–China Ties: Reassessing the Economic 
Relationship.” Testimony before the House Committee on International 
Relations.  Congressional Record , October 21. 
 ———. 2005. “China: Th e Great New Economic Challenge?” In C. Fred Bergsten, ed., 
 Th e United States and the World Economy: Foreign Economic Policy for the Next 
Decade , 121–41. Washington, D.C.: Institute for International Economics. 
 ———. 2008. “Financial Repression in China.” Peterson Institute for International 
Economics, Policy Brief No. 08-8, September. 
 Lindbeck, Assar. 1979.  Infl ation and Unemployment in Open Economies. Amsterdam: 
North-Holland. 
 Marston, Richard C. 1985. “Stabilization Policies in Open Economies.” In R. W. Jones 
and Peter Kenen, eds.,  Handbook of International Economics , vol. 2, 859–916. 
Amsterdam: North-Holland. 
 McKinnon, Ronald. 1969. “Private and Offi  cial International Money: Th e Case for the 
Dollar.”  Princeton   Essays in International Finance No. 74, April. 
 ———. 1979.  Money in International Exchange: Th e Convertible Currency System . New 
York: Oxford University Press. 
 ———. 1982. “Currency Substitution and Instability in the World Dollar Standard.” 
 American Economic Review 72:320–33. 
 ———. 1990. “Th e Exchange Rate and the Trade Balance: Insular versus Open 
Economies.”  Open Economies Review 1:17–37. 
 ———. 1993. “Th e Rules of the Game: International Money in Historical Perspective.” 
 Journal of Economic Literature 21:1–44. 
 ———. 2005.  Exchange Rates under the East Asian Dollar Standard: Living with Confl icted 
Virtue . Cambridge: MIT Press. Chinese translation 2005, Japanese 2007. 
 ———. 2005. “Trapped by the Dollar Standard.”  Journal of Policy Modeling 27:477–85. 
 ———. 2007a. “Japan’s Defl ationary Hangover and the Syndrome of the Ever-Weaker 
Yen.”  Singapore Economic Review 52:309–34. 
 ———. 2007b. “Th e Transfer Problem in Reducing the U.S. Current Account Defi cit.” 
 Journal of Policy Modeling 29:669–75. 
 ———. 2007c. “Th e Worth of the Dollar.” SIEPR Policy Brief, Stanford University, 
February. Reprinted from  Wall Street Journal , December 16, 2006. 
 ———. 2007d. “Why China Should Keep Its Dollar Peg: A Historical Perspective from 
Japan.”  International Finance 10:43–70. 
 ———. 2009. “U.S. Exit Strategies and Zero Interest Rates.”  Journal of Economic 
Asymmetries  6, no. 3: 7–13. 
 ———. 2010a. “Why Exchange Rate Changes Will Not Correct Global Imbalances.” 
SIEPR Policy Brief, Stanford University, August. 
 ———. 2010b. “Why China Shouldn’t Float: Th ere Is No Market Exchange Rate 
Solution for an Immature Creditor Country.”  International Economy , Fall, 34–35. 
 ———. 2011a. “Th e Return of Stagfl ation.”  Wall Street Journal , May 24. 
 ———. 2011b. “Where Are the Bond Vigilantes?”  Wall Street Journal , September 30. 
 McKinnon, Ronald, and Kenichi Ohno. 1997.  Dollar and Yen: Resolving Economic Confl ict 
between the United States and Japan . Cambridge: MIT Press. Japanese translation 
1998, Chinese 1999. 
 McKinnon, Ronald, and Huw Pill. 1996. “Credible Liberalizations and International 
Capital Flows: Th e Overborrowing Syndrome.” In Takatoshi Ito and Anne O. 

( 210 ) 
References
Krueger, eds.,  Financial Deregulation and Integration in East Asia , 7–42. Chicago: 
University of Chicago Press. 
 ———. 1999. “Exchange Rate Regimes for Emerging Markets: Moral Hazard and 
International Overborrowing.”  Oxford Review of Economic Policy 15:19–38. 
 McKinnon, Ronald, and Gunther Schnabl. 2003. “Synchronized Business Cycles in East 
Asia and Fluctuations in the Yen/Dollar Exchange Rate.”  World Economy 
26:1067–88. 
 ———. 2004a. “Th e East Asian Dollar Standard, Fear of Floating, and Original Sin.” 
 Review of Development Economics , August 8, 331–60. 
 ———. 2004b. “A Return to Soft Dollar Pegging in East Asia? Mitigating Confl icted 
Virtue.”  International Finance 7, no. 2: 169–201. 
 ———. 2006. “China’s Exchange Rate and International Adjustment in Wages, Prices, 
and Interest Rates: Japan Déjà Vu?”  CESifo Studies 52, no. 2: 276–303. 
 ———. 2009. “Th e Case for Stabilizing China’s Exchange Rate: Setting the Stage for 
Fiscal Expansion.”  China and the World Economy 17 (January–February): 1–32. 
 ———. 2010a. “A Reply to Krugman.”  International Economy , Winter, 37–39. 
 ———. 2010b. “Why Exchange Rate Changes Will Not Correct Global Imbalances.” 
Policy Brief, Stanford Institute for Policy Research, June. 
 ———. 2011. “China and Its Dollar Exchange Rate: A Worldwide Stabilizing Infl uence?” 
CESifo Working Paper No. 3449, May. 
 Meade, James. 1951.  Th e Balance of Payments . New York: Oxford University Press. 
 Milesi-Ferretti, Gian Maria, and Assaf Razin. 1998. “Current Account Reversals and 
Currency Crises: Empirical Regularities.” IMF Working Paper No. 98/89, June. 
 Mundell, Robert, 1963. “Capital Mobility and Stabilization Policy under Fixed and 
Flexible Exchange Rates.”  Canadian Journal of Economics and Political Science 
29:479–85. 
 Noland, Marcus, Li-Gang Liu, Sherman Robinson, and Zhi Wang. 1998. “Global 
Economic Eff ects of the Asian Currency Devaluations.” Institute for international 
Economics, Washington, D.C. 
 Obstfeld, Maurice, and Kenneth Rogoff . 2005. “Th e Unsustainable U.S. Current 
Account Revisited.”  Proceedings of the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco , 
February. 
 Prasad, Eswar. 2009. “Eff ects of the Financial Crisis on the U.S.-China Economic 
Relationship.”  Cato Journal 29, no. 2: 223–35. 
 Prasad, Eswar and Lei Ye. 2012. “Will the Renminbi Rule?”  Finance and Development , 
March. 
 http://www.brookings.edu/research/articles/2012/03/renminbi-rule-
prasad . 
 Qiao, Hong. 2007. “Exchange Rate Changes and Trade Balances under the Dollar 
Standard.”  Journal of Policy Modeling 29:765–82. 
 Rajan, Raghuram G. 2010.  Fault Lines: How Hidden Fractures Still Th reaten the World 
Economy.  Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press. 
 Roubini, Nouriel. 2005. “Global Imbalances: A Contemporary Rashomon Tale with Five 
Interpretations.” Nouriel Roubini’s Global Economics blog,  http://roubiniglobal.
com . 
 Schnabl, Gunther. 2010. “Th e Role of the Chinese Dollar Peg for Macroeconomic 
Stability in China and the World Economy.” Working Papers on Global Financial 
Markets No. 13. 

References 
( 211 )
 Schumpeter, Joseph. 1934.  Th e Th eory of Economic Development: An Inquiry into Profi ts, 
Capital, Credit, Interest, and the Business Cycle . Trans. Redvers Opie. Cambridge: 
Harvard University Press. 
 Subramanian, Arvind. 2011.  Eclipse: Living in the Shadow of China’s Economic Dominance . 
Washington, D.C.: Peterson Institute for International Economics. 
 Taylor, John B. 2009.  Getting Off  Track . Stanford, Calif.: Hoover Institution Press. 
 Triffi  n, Robert. 1960.  Gold and the Dollar Crisis: Th e Future of Convertibility . New Haven: 
Yale University Press. 
 Wicksell, Knut. 1898.  Geldzins und Güterpreise: Eine Studie über die den Tauschwert des 
Geldes bestimmenden ursachen . Jena: G. Fischer. 
 Zhou, Xiaochuan. 2009. “On Reforming the International Monetary System.” People’s 
Bank of China, March 23. News release. 
 

This page intentionally left blank 

 Africa,  23 ,  47 n 1 ,  166 ,  194 
 Argentina,   47 n 3 ,  90 
 Asian ﬁ nancial crisis (1997–98),  11 , 
 75–76 ,  90 ,  118–22 ,  126–28 , 
 180–81 
 Balance of Payments (Meade),  173 
 Balassa-Samuelson eﬀ ect,  150 
 Bank of England,  39 ,  47 n 6 ,  80–81 
 Bank of Japan,   80–81 ,  90 
 Barro, Robert,   128 
 Bernanke, Ben,   79 ,  198 
 Bernanke-Greenspan bubble economy 
(2003–12),   58–59 ,  65 ,  73 ,  198 
 Bernanke-Greenspan shock
(2003–2004),   49–50 ,  56 ,  58 ,  86 
 Bernanke shock (2008−12),  xii ,  62 ,  86 ,  187  
 Blumenthal, Michael,   9 ,  55 
 bond markets,   27–29 ,  62 ,  64 .  See also 
 United States Treasury bonds 
 Brazil,  xiii ,  7 ,  47 n 3 ,  57 ,  59 ,  68–70 ,  72 , 
 98 ,  189 ,  193–95 
 Bretton Woods Agreement (1945). 
 See also   International Monetary 
Fund 
 currency convertibility (Article VIII) 
and,  37 ,  190–91 
 dollar parity agreement (Article IV) 
and,   xi ,  18 ,  30–31 ,  33–34 ,  36–39 , 
 44 ,  46 ,  50 ,  150 ,  191 
 national monetary autonomy and, 
 35 ,  74 
  British pound sterling,   20  ,  23–25  ,  28  ,  62    
 Bush, George H.W.,   97 ,  205 
 Bush, George W.,   95 ,  198 
 Canada,  xiii ,  9 ,  47 n 1 ,  51–53 ,  68 ,  194 
 capital controls 
 Bretton Woods agreement and,  74 
 China and,  xiv–xv ,  6 ,  22 ,  26 ,  69 ,  164 , 
 174 ,  201 
 emerging markets and,  69 ,  81 ,  190 
 International Monetary Fund and, 
 75–76 
 Japan and,  8 ,  30 
 post-World War II era and,  8 ,  30–32 , 
 74 ,  103 ,  173 
 United States and,  40 ,  44–45 ,  81 
 Western Europe (pre-European 
Union) and,  30 ,  32 
 West Germany and,  8 
 Carter shock (1977),  9 ,  49–50 ,  55–56 , 
 86 ,  152 
 Case-Schiller index,  59 
 central banks.  See also  European Central 
Bank ;  United States Federal 
Reserve Bank 
 dollar trade and,  9 ,  11 ,  52 
 foreign exchange and,  37–39 ,  44 , 
 68–69 ,  81 
 Chile,  47 n 3 ,  117–18 
 China 
 Asian Financial Crisis and,  75 
 capital controls and,  xiv–xv ,  6 ,  22 ,  26 , 
 69 ,  164 ,  174 ,  201 
 currency mismatch in,  xv ,  6 ,  165 
 current account surplus of,  89 ,  161 
 dollar standard and,  xiv–xv ,  5 ,  21 ,  26 , 
 29 ,  99 ,  191–95 
 domestic absorption rates 
in,  137 ,  139 
 IND EX  

( 214 ) 
Index
China (continued )
 East Asian economy and,  170 ,  174 , 
 176–80 ,  192 
 European Union and,  183 ,  194 
 exchange rates and,   xiv–xv ,  124–25 , 
 128–29 ,  133  ,  154–56 ,  161–63 , 
 168 ,  170–71 ,  174–75 ,  178–79 , 
 182 ,  191 ,  203–204 
 foreign currency reserves in,  5–6 , 
 68–73  ,  133  ,  165 ,  192–93 
 foreign direct investment in,  73 ,  163 
 foreign investment of,  xv ,  165–66 
 GDP growth in,   5 ,  29 n 2 ,  154–56 , 
 170–71 ,  175–76 ,  180–83 ,  192 , 
 194 ,  200–01 
 global dollar standard and,  xiv ,  174 
 hot money ﬂ ows and,  7 ,  60 ,  71 ,  129 , 
 165–67 ,  193  ,  201 ,  203 
 household income levels in,  202–04 
 “immature creditor” status of,  xv , 
 164 ,  168 
 inﬂ ation in,   154–55 ,  158 ,  174–75 
 interest rates in,   201–203 
 manufacturing in,   156–58 
 productivity in,   149 ,  156–60 
 savings rates in,   xv ,  89 ,  93 ,  96 ,  159 , 
 161–63  ,  165–67 ,  171 ,  173–74 , 
 196 ,  198 ,  204 
 “snowball eﬀ ect” of,   193–94 
 sovereign wealth funds in,  165 
 stabilizing role of,   xiv–xv ,  99 ,  170 , 
 174 ,  176 ,  178–80 ,  182–83 
 state-owned enterprises in,  165 ,  202 
 trade balances and,   xiv–xv ,  70–71 , 
 101 ,  124–25 ,  129 ,  133 ,  137 , 
 162–63  ,  165 ,  168 ,  171–72 ,  182 , 
 194 ,  196–98 ,  204 
 United States and,   xv–xvi ,  13 , 
 130–31 ,  149 ,  188 ,  194–96 ,  203–05 
 U.S. Treasury bond holdings of,  195 
 wages in,   149 ,  156–60 ,  204 
 China Investment Corporation (CIC), 
 165 
 Chipman, John,   141 
 Clinton, Bill,   95 
 Colombia,   117 
 commercial banks 
 commercial lending and,  77–78 , 
 199 ,  205 
 dollar standard and,  19–21 ,  42 
 foreign exchange and,  38 
 Commodity Reserve Bureau (CRB) index, 
 58–59 
 Council for Mutual Economic Assistance 
(COMECON),  32–33 
 currency carry trade 
 deﬁ nition of,  61–62 
 Euro and,  67 
 international monetary reform and, 
 4 ,  74–76 ,  81 
 U.S. dollar and,  10 ,  63–65 ,  67–68 ,  70 , 
 188 
 yen and,  67 ,  75 ,  168 
 Deng Xiaoping,  174 
 Denmark,  150 
 Despres, Emile,  xii ,  46 
 deutsche mark,  34 ,  41 ,  49 
 developed markets (DMs), inﬂ ation in, 
 69–71 .  See also  individual countries 
 Dodge Line,  31 
 dollar devaluation,  9 ,  13 ,  50 ,  137 .
 See also  Nixon shock 
 dollar standard.  See also  United States 
dollar 
 China and,  xiv–xv ,  5 ,  21 ,  26 ,  29 ,  99 , 
 191–95 
 exchange rate policies and,  113 ,  115 , 
 122 
 ideal rules of the game for,  187–91 
 East Asia.  See also individual countries 
 China's role in,  170 ,  174 ,  176–80 , 
 192 
 dollar standard in,  27 
 exchange rate policies in,  100–101 , 
 113 ,  122–23 ,  126–28 
 Japan's role in,  126 ,  133 ,  176–77 
 yen's role in,  126–27 ,  176–79 
 East Asian ﬁ nancial crisis.  See  Asian 
ﬁ nancial crisis 
 Eastern Europe,  19 ,  23 ,  32 ,  164 
 Ecuador,  29 n 1 
 eﬃ  cient markets fallacy,  12 ,  60 
 emerging markets (EMs).  See also 
 individual countries 
 bond markets in,  28 
 current-account convertibility in,  190 

Index 
( 215 )
 dollar standard and,   xvi ,  25 ,  29 
 exchange rates in,   59–60 ,  67–68 ,  98 , 
 190 ,  205 
 foreign exchange reserves in,  25 ,  57 , 
 68–70 ,  75–76 ,  190 
 hot money ﬂ ows and,  xiii ,  4 ,  7 , 
 62–63  ,  66 ,  72 ,  81 
 inﬂ ation in,   69–73 ,  76 
 Euro currency 
 bond markets and,   27–28 
 crisis of 2011–12,   4–5 ,  7 ,  11 ,  23 , 
 65–66 ,  73  ,  81 ,  182–83 
 Eastern Europe and,   19 ,  164 
 exchange rates and,   49 
 international exchange and,  4–6 , 
 19–20 ,  23–25 ,  27 
 European Central Bank,   80–81 
 European Monetary Union (EMU),  23 , 
 25 ,  189 
 European Payments Union (EPU),  31 , 
 37–38 
 European Union.  See also  Euro currency ; 
 Western Europe (pre-European 
Union) 
 bond market in,   27–28 
 China and,   183  ,  194 
 foreign exchange reserves in,  193 
 foreign exchange trading in,  22 ,  25 
 GDP growth in,   90 ,  181–82 
 inﬂ ation in,   48–49 
 exchange rate and trade balance fallacy, 
 13  ,  47 ,  55 ,  58 ,  60 ,  131 ,  162 ,  170 , 
 173  ,  197 
 exchange rate policies 
 asset-market approach and,  109 
 China and,   xiv–xv ,  124–25 ,  128–29 , 
 133  ,  154–56 ,  161–63 ,  168 , 
 170–71 ,  174–75 ,  178–79 ,  182 , 
 191 ,  203–04 
 currency appreciation and,  110–11 , 
 114 ,  122–23  ,  128 
 currency depreciation and,  110 ,  114 , 
 116 ,  118–21 ,  128 
 dollar standard and,   113 , 
 115 ,  122 
 domestic absorption and,  106–11 , 
 113  ,  115–18 ,  123  ,  125 ,  127 
 East Asia and,   100–01 ,  113 ,  122–23 , 
 126–28 
 elasticities approach and,  101–04 , 
 128 ,  132–33 ,  137 ,  140 
 emerging markets (EMs) and,  59–60 , 
 67–68 ,  98 ,  190 ,  205 
 insular economies and,  105–08 ,  115 
 interest rates and,  108–10 ,  115–16 ,  123  
 investment eﬀ ect and,  111 ,  114 , 
 116–17 ,  123 ,  127–28 
 Japan and,  31 ,  41 ,  123–24 ,  126 
 monetary policy and,  104 ,  109 , 
 111–13 ,  117 
 open economies and,  101 ,  103–104 , 
 108–13 ,  125 
 trade balances and,  100–03 ,  107–11 , 
 113 ,  116–23 ,  125 ,  127–28 , 
 131–34 ,  162 
 United States and,  114–15 ,  122 ,  125 
 wealth eﬀ ect and,  114 ,  116–17 , 
 122–23 ,  127–28 
 Western Europe and,  31 
 France,  4 ,  22 ,  25 ,  44 
 Frenkel, Jacob,  104 ,  109 
 Friedman, Milton,  9 ,  58 
 futures markets,  23 ,  72 
 Geithner, Timothy,  131 ,  163 ,  168 
 Germany.  See also  West Germany 
 bond market in,  64 
 Euro currency and,  6 
 exports and,  25–26 
 foreign exchange trading in,  22 
 inﬂ ation in,  48–49 
 interest rates in,  62–63 
 reuniﬁ cation of,  97–98 
 wholesale price index in,  33 ,  35 
 Global Agreement on Trade and Tariﬀ s 
(GATT),  40 
 global credit crunch (2008–09),  3 ,  7 ,  49 , 
 56 ,  60 ,  64–65 ,  70–71 ,  170 ,  180 , 
 182–83 
 gold standard 
 Bretton Woods agreement and,  xi , 
 30–31 ,  37 
 demonetization of,  xii–xiii ,  46–47 
 dollar convertibility and,  xi–xii ,  9 ,  31 , 
 37–40 ,  43–45 
 interwar period and,  30 ,  35 ,  74 
 U.S. reserves and,  31 ,  43–44 

( 216 ) 
Index
 Goldstein, Morris,   103 
 Gourinchas, Pierre-Olivier,  129 n 1 
 Government Overseas Investment 
Corporation (GIC, Singapore),  167 
 Great Depression,  30 
 Greece,   5 ,  65 
 Green, Stephen,   71 
 Greenspan, Alan,   12 .  See also  Bernanke-
Greenspan bubble economy ; 
 Bernanke-Greenspan Shock 
 Group of 20 (G-20),   76 ,  81 
 Hanke, Steve,   58 
 Hong Kong 
 exchange rates and,   179 
 foreign currency reserves in,  193 
 foreign exchange trading in,  21–22 
 GDP growth in,   181 
 Japanese yen and,   126 
  renminbi-denominated bonds in,   164    
 U.S. Treasury bond holdings of,  195 
 hot money ﬂ ows 
  Brazil and,   7    
 China and,   7 ,  60 ,  71 ,  129 ,  165–67 , 
 193  ,  201 ,  203    
 emerging markets (EMs) and,  xiii ,  4 , 
 7 ,  62–63  ,  66 ,  72 ,  81 
 Great Depression and,  30 ,  74 
 Japan and,   xiii ,  75 ,  168 
 Singapore and,   166–67 
 United States and,   xiii ,  9 ,  50 ,  52 ,  55 , 
 57 ,  80 
 India,  41 ,  57 ,  72 ,  92 ,  193–95 
 Indonesia 
 Asian Financial Crisis and,  75 ,  90 , 
 118–19 ,  126–28 ,  180–81 
 currency depreciation and,  119 
 exchange rates and,   179 
 foreign exchange reserves in,  57 ,  70 ,  72  
 GDP growth in,   181 
 Japanese yen and,   126 
 trade balance and,   119 
 interest rates 
 China and,   201–03 
 exchange rate policies and,  108–10 , 
 115–16 ,  123    
 Germany and,   62–63  
 Japan and,   62–63 ,  154 
 United Kingdom and,  63 
 United States and,  xii–xiii ,  xvi ,  3–6 , 
 9–10 ,  55 ,  57 ,  59–60 ,  62–64 ,  70 , 
 75–76 ,  78–81 ,  98 ,  139 ,  190 ,  193 , 
 198–99 ,  201 ,  203 ,  205 
 International Monetary Fund,  xi ,  11 ,  31 , 
 75–76 ,  189–90 ,  206 n 1 .  See also 
 Bretton Woods Agreement 
 international trade.  See  trade balances 
 Iranian Revolution (1979),  10 ,  55–56 
 Japan 
 Asian Financial Crisis and,  75 , 
 126–27 ,  176–77 
 bond market in,  64 
 capital controls and,  8 ,  30 
 deﬂ ation in,  153 
 dollar standard and,  27 ,  31 ,  41 
 domestic absorption rates in,  139 
 East Asian economy and,  126 ,  133 , 
 176–77 
 exchange rate policies in,  31 ,  41 , 
 123–24 ,  126 
 ﬁ nancial collapse (1990s) in,  97–98 , 
 154 ,  176 
 foreign currency exchange in,  22 ,  52–53  
 foreign currency reserves in,  168 , 
 192–93 
 foreign investment of,  126–27 ,  133 , 
 168 ,  176–77 
 GDP growth in,  5 ,  90 ,  150–51 , 
 181–82 
 hot money ﬂ ows and,  xiii ,  75 ,  168 
 inﬂ ation in,  51–54 
 interest rates in,  62–63 ,  154 
 liquidity traps and,  62 ,  75 ,  129 ,  161 , 
 168 ,  204 
 manufacturing sector in,  151–53 
 productivity in,  150–53 
 savings rate in,  93 ,  168 ,  197 
 trade balances and,  123–24 ,  133 ,  137 , 
 152 ,  194 ,  197–98 
 United States and,  130 ,  150–52 
 U.S. Treasury bonds holdings of,  195 
 wages in,  150–53 ,  160–61 
 wholesale price index in,  33 ,  35 ,  151 
 Johnson, Harry,  141 
 Johnson, Lyndon B.,  44–45 
 Jones, Ronald,  141–42 

Index 
( 217 )
 Kenen, Peter,   19 
 Kennedy, John F.,   44 
 Keynes, John Maynard,  35 ,  74 ,  99 n 1 , 
 173    
 Keynesianism,   90–91 ,  102 ,  143 
 Kindleberger, Charles,  xii  
 Korea, Republic of 
 Asian Financial Crisis and,  75 ,  90 , 
 118 ,  126–28 ,  180–81 
 currency depreciation in,  117–18 
 dollar standard and,   26 
 exchange rates and,   179 
 GDP growth in,   181 
 Japanese yen and,   126 
 trade balance in,   118 ,  194 
 Krugman, Paul,   193 
 Latin America.   See also   individual 
countries 
 China and,   21 ,  166 ,  194 
 currency depreciation in,  117 
 dollar standard and,   21 ,  23 ,  27 
 U.S. aid to,   41 
 liquidity traps 
 Japan and,   62 ,  75 ,  129 ,  161 ,
  168 ,  204 
 United States and,   77–79 
 Malaysia 
 Asian Financial Crisis and,  75 ,  90 , 
 118–19 ,  126–28 ,  180–81 
 currency depreciation in,  117 ,  119 
 exchange rates and,   179 
 GDP growth in,   181 
 Japanese yen and,   126 
 trade balance and,   119 
 Mankiw, Gregory,   91–92 
 Marshall-Lerner condition,  107 ,  111 
 Marshall Plan,  31 ,  41 
 Marston, Richard,   105 
 McKinnon, Ronald,   xii ,  46–47 ,  97–98 , 
 101 ,  104–105 ,  126 ,  129 ,  144–45 
 Meade, James,   103 ,  173 
 Mexico,   11 ,  68 ,  117–18 
 Milesi-Ferretti, Gian Maria,  117 
 money market mutual funds (MMMFs), 
 79 ,  199 
 Mundell-Fleming model,  182 
 Mussa, Michael,   104 ,  109 
 national macroeconomic autonomy,  35 ,  74  
 Nixon shock (1971),  xii–xiii ,  9 ,  12 ,  46 , 
 49–50 ,  52 ,  56 ,  80 ,  86 ,  152 ,  187 
 Norway,  150 
 Obama, Barack,  90 ,  95 ,  198 
 Ohno, Kenichi,  97–98 ,  101 ,  104–05 ,  129 
 oil shock (1973),  3 ,  10 ,  53 ,  55–57 
 oil shock (1979),  3 ,  10 ,  55–57 
 oil shock (2007–2008),  3 ,  10 ,  56–58 
 Order of Economic Liberalization, Th e 
(McKinnon),  xiv  
 People’s Bank of China (PBC) 
 dollar standard and,  5 ,  99 
 exchange rates and,  22 ,  133 ,  162–63 , 
 168 ,  175 ,  199 ,  201 
 hot money ﬂ ows and,  60 ,  201 
 Philippines 
 Asian Financial Crisis and,  75 ,  90 , 
 118 ,  120 ,  126–28 ,  180–81 
 currency depreciation in,  120 
 exchange rates and,  179 
 GDP growth and,  181 
 Japanese yen and,  126 
 trade balance in,  120 
 Phillips Curve fallacy,  12 ,  47 ,  55 ,  58 
 Plaza Accord,  49 ,  153 
 “Presumption and the Transfer Problem” 
(Jones),  141 
 Qiao, Helen,  131 ,  137 ,  144 ,  167 
 quantitative easing (QE),  56 ,  62 ,  66 ,  81 
 Razin, Assaf,  117 
 Reagan, Ronald,  85 ,  95 ,  197 
 renminbi (RMB) 
 appreciation of,  66 ,  124 ,  128–29 , 
 149 ,  156–57 ,  159–60 ,  162–63 , 
 175 ,  179 ,  201 
 appreciation debates regarding,  4 ,  13 , 
 75 ,  100–01 ,  129–33 ,  137 ,  145 , 
 162–63 ,  165 ,  167 ,  171 ,  173 ,  180 , 
 192 ,  197 
 partial international convertibility of, 
 6 ,  22 ,  164 
 Rey, Hélène,  129 n 1 
 Rueﬀ , Jacques,  40 
 Russia,  23 ,  57 ,  70 ,  72 ,  193–95 

( 218 ) 
Index
 Salant, Walter,  xii  
 Samuelson, Paul,   141 ,  150 
 Scandinavian model (SM) of wage 
adjustment,   150 ,  156 ,  159 
 Schumer, Charles,   130–31 
 Singapore 
 Asian Financial Crisis in,  121 ,
  126–27 
 currency depreciation in,  121 
 exchange rates and,   179 
 foreign currency reserves in,  193 
 foreign exchange trading in,  21–22 
 GDP growth in,   181 
 hot money ﬂ ows,   166–67 
 Japanese yen and,   126 
 Monetary Authority of Singapore 
(MAS) and,   167 
 Provident Fund,   166–67 
 savings rates in,   166–67 
 trade balance in,   121 
 “Singapore Solution,”   167 
 Smithsonian Agreement (1971),  50 ,  52 
 Soviet Union,  32 
 Subramanian, Arvind,   29 n 2 
 Sweden,   150 
 Swiss franc,   20 ,  24 
 Switzerland,   22 ,  195 
 Taiwan,   179 ,  181 ,  193–95 
 Taylor Rule,   59 
 Temasek (Singapore),   167 
 Th ailand 
 Asian Financial Crisis and,  75 ,  90 , 
 118 ,  120 ,  126–28 ,  180–81 
 currency depreciation in,  117 ,  120 
 GDP growth in,   181 
 Japanese yen and,   126 
 trade balance in,   120 
 trade balances 
 ASEAN countries and,  118–21 
 China and,   xiv–xv ,  70–71 ,  101 , 
 124–25 ,  129 ,  133  ,  137 ,  162–63 , 
 165 ,  168 ,  171–72 ,  182 ,  194 , 
 196–98 ,  204 
 domestic absorption and,  102 ,  118 
 East Asian region and,  101–102 
 exchange rate policies and,  100–103 , 
 107–11 ,  113  ,  116–23 ,  125 , 
 127–28 ,  131–34 ,  162 
 Japan and,  123–24 ,  133 ,  137 ,  152 , 
 194 ,  197–98 
 United States and,  xv ,  39–40 ,
  92–94 ,  101 ,  122 ,  124 ,  130–31 , 
 136 ,  144 ,  171–72 ,  188 ,  194 , 
 196–98 ,  204 
 transfer problem 
 dollar system and,  135–36 
 domestic absorption rates and,  135 , 
 137–39 ,  142–45 
 exchange rates and,  135 ,  144–45 
 international savings imbalances and, 
 137 ,  143–45 ,  171 
 nontradeables and,  139–42 
 “real” dollar depreciation 
and,  143–44 
 real exchange rates and, 
 139–40 ,  142 
 trade balances and,  135 ,  137 ,  143 
 wages and,  139 ,  143–44 
 war reparations and,  138 ,  140–41 
 Triﬃ  n, Robert,  43–44 ,  46 
 Troubled Asset Relief Program (TARP),  78  
 United Kingdom.  See also  British pound 
sterling 
 bond market in,  28 ,  64 
 foreign exchange trading in, 
 21–22 
 interest rates in,  63 
 pre-1914 gold standard and,  47 n 6 
 U.S. Treasury bond holdings of,  195 
 United States.  See also  United States 
dollar ;  United States Federal 
Reserve Bank 
 Agency for International 
Development (USAID),  41 
 balance of payments restrictions in, 
 44–45 
 bank intermediation in,  78–81 
 bond market in,  28 ,  62 ,  64 
 capital controls and,  40 , 
 44–45 ,  81 
 China and,  xv–xvi ,  13 ,  130–31 ,  149 , 
 188 ,  194–96 ,  203–05 
 “China bashing” in,  xv ,  4 ,  13 ,  133 , 
 163 ,  165 ,  167 ,  193 ,  197–98 ,  205 
 credit crunch of 1991–92 in,  xvi , 
 97–98 ,  205 

Index 
( 219 )
 current account of,   42 ,  44 ,  85–87 ,  89 , 
 92–93  ,  95 ,  97 ,  103 ,  125 ,  135–36 , 
 138 
 domestic absorption in,  137–39 
 exchange rates and policies of,  4 ,  9 , 
 12–13    
 ﬁ scal deﬁ cits in,   xvi ,  88–90 ,  95–98 , 
 136 ,  197–98 ,  204–05 
 foreign borrowing of,  89–92 ,  95 ,  115 , 
 130 ,  136 
 GDP growth in,   29 n 2 ,  156 ,  181–82 , 
 192 ,  199–201 
 gold reserves of,   xi ,  43–44 
 hot money ﬂ ows and,  xiii ,  9 ,  50 ,  52 , 
 55 ,  57 ,  80 
 inﬂ ation in,   9–12 ,  33–34 ,  45 ,  47–49 , 
 51–59 ,  73  ,  80 ,  153 ,  155–56 ,  158 , 
 190–91 
 interest rates in,   xvi ,  3–6 ,  9–10 ,  55 , 
 57 ,  59–60 ,  62–64 ,  70 ,  75–76 , 
 78–81 ,  98 ,  139 ,  190 ,  193 ,  198–99 , 
 201 ,  203  ,  205 
 Japan and,   130 ,  150–52 
 “Japan bashing” in,   4 ,  152 ,  197–98 
 liquidity traps and,   77–79 
 manufacturing in,  50 ,  57 ,  91–95 ,  130 , 
 136 ,  151–52 ,  156–58 
 productivity levels in,  92 ,  94 ,  149–51 , 
 156 ,  158 
 savings rates in,   xv–xvi ,  88–93 , 
 95–96 ,  135 ,  137 ,  159 ,  162–63 , 
 171 ,  190 ,  196 ,  198 ,  203–204 
 small and medium-sized enterprises 
(SMEs) in,   77–78 ,  80 
 stagﬂ ation in,   80 
 subprime mortgage crisis (2007–08) 
in,   7 ,  11 ,  60 ,  187 
 tech bubble (2001–2002) in,  58–60 , 
 63    
 trade balances and,   xv ,  39–40 ,  92–94 , 
 101 ,  122 ,  124 ,  130–31 ,  136 ,  144 , 
 171–72 ,  188 ,  194 ,  196–98 ,  204 
 trade protectionism in,  130–31 , 
 136–37 ,  197 
 unemployment in,   58 ,  95 
 wages in,   143–44 ,  149–53 ,  156–58 
 wholesale price index (WPI) in, 
 33–35 ,  54 ,  151 
 United States dollar 
 appreciation of,  10 ,  64–65 ,  122 
 bond markets and,  27–29 
 carry trade in,  10 ,  63–65 ,  67–68 , 
 70 ,  188 
 COMECON and,  32–33 
 depreciation of,  50–52 ,  55–56 ,  58 , 
 63–66 ,  122 ,  143–44 
 devaluation of,  9 ,  13 ,  50 ,  137 
 exchange rates and,  xii–xiii ,  49 , 
 54–55 ,  58 
 international central banks and, 
 9 ,  11 
 international exchange and,  xi–xii, 
xvi ,  3–8 ,  17–29 ,  38 ,  40 ,  42 ,  46 ,  87 , 
 164 ,  174 ,  179 ,  187 
 Japanese yen and,  31 ,  34 ,  41 , 
 123–24 ,  126–28 ,  150–53 , 
 176–79 ,  204 
 medium of exchange function of, 
 19–21 
 standard of deferred payment 
function of,  19 ,  27 
 store of value function of,  19 ,  22–23 
 unit of account function of,  19 ,  23 
 United States Federal Reserve Bank 
 broader monetary policy of,  xiii ,  xvi , 
 10–11 ,  36 ,  188 ,  203 
 foreign exchange and,  39 
 international economy and,  11 , 
 36 ,  88 
 macroeconomic fallacies and,  12–13 
 near-zero interest rates of,  xii–xiii , 
 xvi ,  3–6 ,  59–60 ,  62–64 ,  70 ,  75–76 , 
 78–81 ,  139 ,  193 ,  198–99 ,  201 ,  205 
 United States monetary policy, insular 
tradition in,  7–8 ,  10–12 ,  36 ,  60 
 United States monetary supply (M1),  51 , 
 53 
 United States Treasury bonds 
 bond markets and,  29 
 Bretton Woods agreement and, 
 31 ,  39 
 foreign exchange and,  39 
 foreign holdings of,  xi ,  42 ,  86–88 ,  98 , 
 188 ,  194–95 ,  199 
 interest rates on,  79 ,  88 ,  199 
 Vietnam War,  12 ,  45 ,  50 
 Volcker, Paul,  49 ,  57 

( 220 ) 
Index
 wages 
 China and,   149 ,  156–60 ,  204 
 Japan and,   150–53 ,  160–61 
 negative risk premiums and,  159–60 
 productivity and,   149–53 
 transfer problem and,  139 ,  143–44 
 United States,   143–44 ,  149–53 , 
 156–58 
 Western Europe (pre-European Union) 
 capital controls and,  30 ,  32 
 currency convertibility in,  8 ,  37 
 European Payments Union (EPU),  31 , 
 37–38 
 exchange rate policies and,  31 
 foreign currency exchange in,  43–44 , 
 52–53    
 inﬂ ation in,   52–54 
 Marshall Plan,  31 ,  41 
 West Germany,   8 ,  32–33 ,  35 ,  41 ,  45 , 
 48–49 .  See also   Germany 
 Wolf, Martin,  143 
 World Trade Organization (WTO), 
 131 ,  171 
 yen 
 appreciation of,  90 ,  123–24 ,  126 , 
 127 ,  133  ,  137 ,  145 ,  152–54 , 
 159–60 ,  176 ,  197 
 convertibility of,  6 ,  8 
 currency carry trade and,  67 ,  75 ,  168 
 depreciation of,  127–28 
 East Asia and,  126–27 ,  176–79 
 international exchange and,  20 , 
 24–27 ,  168 
 U.S. dollar and,  31 ,  34 ,  41 ,  123–24 , 
 126–28 ,  150–53 ,  176–79 ,  204 
 Yom Kippur War (1973),  10 ,  53 
 yuan.  See  renminbi (RNB) 
 Zimbabwe,  29 n 1 

