
THE ESSAYS OF WARREN BUFFETT:
LESSONS FOR CORPORATE AMERICA

THE ESSAYS OF WARREN BUFFETT:
LESSONS FOR CORPORATE AMERICA
ESSAYS BY
WARREN E. BUFFETT
SELECTED, ARRANGED, AND INTRODUCED BY
LAWRENCE A. CUNNINGHAM
THIRD EDITION

Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data eISBN: 978-1-61163-
447-1
Cunningham, Lawrence A., 1962-
Buffett, Warren E., 1930-The Essays of Warren Buffett: Lessons for Corporate
America / selected, arranged, and introduced by Lawrence A. Cunningham—3d
ed.
308 p. 26 cm.
Includes previously copyrighted material. Reprinted with permission.
Includes bibliographical references and index.
1. Corporations—United States—Finance. 2. Corporate governance—
United States. 3. Investments—United States. 4. Stocks—United States. 5.
Consolidation and merger of corporations—United States. 6. Accounting—
United States. I. Buffett, Warren E. II. Cunningham, Lawrence A. III. Title.
HG4061.B8372 2001
(OCoLC) 38497313
Originally published as part of the Cardozo Law Review’s special issue on The
Essays of Warren Buffett Symposium. Copyright © Lawrence A. Cunningham,
1997, 2001, 2008, and 2013. Includes previously copyrighted materials, ©
Warren E. Buffett, reprinted with permission. All rights reserved. Printed in the
United States of America.
ISBN: 978-1-61163-409-9
Copies of this collection are available in larger quantities at special discounts to
use for teaching, training, promotions, premiums or other purposes. For more
information, please contact Carolina Academic Press, 700 Kent Street, Durham,
NC 27701, http://www.cap-press.com.

 
“The speech I love is a simple, natural speech, the same on paper as in the
mouth; a speech succulent and sinewy, brief and compressed, not so much dainty
and well-combed as vehement and brusque.”
Michel de Montaigne
The Essays of Montaigne
(1580)
“The sincerity and marrow of the man reaches to his sentences.
I know not anywhere a book that seems less written.
Cut these words and they would bleed; they are vascular and alive.”
Ralph Waldo Emerson
Representative Man
(1850)
(Referring to Montaigne
and his Essays)

TABLE OF CONTENTS
PREFACE
INTRODUCTION
PROLOGUE: OWNER-RELATED BUSINESS PRINCIPLES
I. CORPORATE GOVERNANCE
A. Full and Fair Disclosure
B. Boards and Managers
C. The Anxieties of Business Change
D. Social Compacts
E. An Owner-Based Approach to Corporate Charity
F. A Principled Approach to Executive Pay
G. Risk, Reputation and Oversight
II. FINANCE AND INVESTING
A. Mr. Market
B. Arbitrage
C. Debunking Standard Dogma
D. “Value” Investing: A Redundancy
E. Intelligent Investing
F. Cigar Butts and the Institutional Imperative
G. Life and Debt
III. INVESTMENT ALTERNATIVES
A. Surveying the Field
B. Junk Bonds
C. Zero-Coupon Bonds
D. Preferred Stock
E. Derivatives
F. Foreign Currencies and Equities
G. Home Ownership: Practice and Policy
IV. COMMON STOCK
A. The Bane of Trading: Transaction Costs
B. Attracting the Right Sort of Investor

C. Dividend Policy and Share Repurchases
D. Stock Splits and Trading Activity
E. Shareholder Strategies
F. Berkshire’s Recapitalization
V. MERGERS AND ACQUISITIONS
A. Bad Motives and High Prices
B. Sensible Share Repurchases Versus Greenmail
C. Leveraged Buyouts
D. Sound Acquisition Policies
E. On Selling One’s Business
F. The Buyer of Choice
VI. VALUATION AND ACCOUNTING
A. Aesop and Inefficient Bush Theory
B. Intrinsic Value, Book Value, and Market Price
C. Look-Through Earnings
D. Economic versus Accounting Goodwill
E. Owner Earnings and the Cash Flow Fallacy
F. Option Valuation
VII. ACCOUNTING SHENANIGANS
A. A Satire on Accounting Shenanigans
B. Standard Setting
C. Stock Options
D. “Restructuring” Charges
E. Pension Estimates
F. Realization Events
VIII. ACCOUNTING POLICY
A. Mergers
B. Segment Data and Consolidation
C. Deferred Taxes
D. Retiree Benefits
IX. TAX MATTERS
A. Distribution of the Corporate Tax Burden
B. Taxation and Investment Philosophy
EPILOGUE

INDEX
CONCEPT GLOSSARY
DISPOSITION SUMMARY

PREFACE
The original edition of The Essays of Warren Buffett: Lessons for Corporate
America was the centerpiece of a symposium held two decades ago at the
Benjamin N. Cardozo School of Law under the auspices of its Samuel and
Ronnie Heyman Center on Corporate Governance. This gathering brought
hundreds of Cardozo students together for a two-day dissection of all the ideas in
the collection, featuring a series of vibrant debates among some 30 distinguished
professors, investors, managers, and other students, with Warren E. Buffett and
Charles T. Munger participating throughout from their seats in the front row.
The Essays was the standard textbook for a specialized course I taught at
Cardozo in proper business practices and is adopted by scores of professors at
other law and business schools for classes such as investment, finance and
accounting. Some investment firms have distributed copies to their professional
employees and clients as part of training programs. I am grateful for the positive
feedback from these students, teachers, and other users and delighted to know
that the lessons are being taught and learned. Special thanks to Professor Tom
Johansen (Ft. Hays State University, Kansas) and Professor Leo Chan (Delaware
State College).
Continuing thanks also to Mr. Buffett’s good friend and advisor, Robert
Denham, whom I have had the pleasure of getting to know in the years following
the symposium. Mr. Denham, a partner in the law firm Munger, Tolles & Olsen,
introduced Mr. Buffett to Cardozo and me through another mutual friend, former
Munger, Tolles colleague and now Cardozo professor Monroe Price, and I thank
both of them for opening that door. Thanks also to Carol Loomis, a close friend
of Mr. Buffett’s and the person who annually edits each shareholder letter. For
institutional support in countless ways, thanks as always to Sam and Ronnie
Heyman.
As in previous editions of The Essays, this one retains the architecture and
philosophy of the original edition but adds selections from Mr. Buffett’s most
recent annual shareholder letters. All the letters are woven together into a fabric
that reads as a complete and coherent narrative of a sound business and
investment philosophy. As an aid to all readers, and to enable readers of the
previous editions to see what is new in this one, a disposition table at the end of
the book shows the various places in this collection where selections from each
year’s letter appear. Footnotes throughout indicate the year of the annual report

from which essays are taken. To avoid interrupting the narrative flow in this
collection, omissions of text within excerpts are not indicated by ellipses or other
punctuation.
The new edition is called for not because anything has changed about the
fundamentals of sound business and investment philosophy but because Mr.
Buffett’s articulation of that philosophy is always done in the context of
contemporary events and business conditions. So periodic updating is warranted
to maintain its currency.
In preparing the previous editions, I was aided by numerous people, to
whom I expressed gratitude in those editions, and I want to thank them again.
Among those, I especially thank Mr. Buffett. His generosity not only made the
symposium possible but his participation enriched it manifold; his willingness to
entrust the rearrangement and republication of his letters to me is a great honor.
His partner, Charlie Munger, deserves repeated thanks too, for not only did he
participate in the symposium from the front row he also graciously chaired, on a
moment’s notice, one of the panels.
Lawrence A. Cunningham

New York City
February 2, 2013

INTRODUCTION
Lawrence A. Cunningham
Experienced readers of Warren Buffett’s letters to the shareholders of
Berkshire Hathaway Inc. have gained an enormously valuable informal
education. The letters distill in plain words all the basic principles of sound
business practices. On selecting managers and investments, valuing businesses,
and using financial information profitably, the writings are broad in scope, and
long on wisdom. By arranging these writings as thematic essays, this collection
presents a synthesis of the overall business and investment philosophy intended
for dissemination to a wide general audience.
The central theme uniting Buffett’s lucid essays is that the principles of
fundamental business analysis, first formulated by his teachers Ben Graham and
David Dodd, should guide investment practice. Linked to that theme are
management principles that define the proper role of corporate managers as the
stewards of invested capital, and the proper role of shareholders as the suppliers
and owners of capital. Radiating from these main themes are practical and
sensible lessons on the entire range of important business issues, from
accounting to mergers to valuation.
Buffett has applied these traditional principles as chief executive officer of
Berkshire Hathaway, a company with roots in a group of textile operations begun
in the early 1800s. Buffett took the helm of Berkshire in 1964, when its book
value per share was $19.46 and its intrinsic value per share far lower. Today, its
book value per share is around $100,000 and its intrinsic value far higher. The
growth rate in book value per share during that period is about 20% compounded
annually.
Berkshire is now a holding company engaged in 80 distinct business lines.
Berkshire’s most important business is insurance, carried on through various
companies including its 100% owned subsidiary, GEICO Corporation, among
the largest auto insurers in the United States, and General Re Corporation, one of
the largest reinsurers in the world. In 2010, Berkshire acquired Burlington
Northern Santa Fe Corporation, among the largest railroads in North America,
and has long owned and operated large energy companies. Some Berkshire
subsidiaries are massive: eight would be included in the Fortune 500 if they were

stand-alone companies. Its other interests are so vast that, as Buffett writes:
“when you are looking at Berkshire, you are looking across corporate America.”
Examples: food, clothing, building materials, tools, equipment, newspapers,
books, transportation services and financial products. Berkshire also owns large
equity interests in major corporations, including American Express, Coca-Cola,
International Business Machines (IBM), Procter & Gamble (through merger with
longtime holdings in Gillette), The Washington Post, and Wells Fargo.
Buffett and Berkshire Vice Chairman Charlie Munger have built this
sprawling enterprise by investing in businesses with excellent economic
characteristics and run by outstanding managers. While they prefer negotiated
acquisitions of 100% of such a business at a fair price, they take a “double-
barreled approach” of buying on the open market less than 100% of some
businesses when they can do so at a pro-rata price well below what it would take
to buy 100%.
The double-barreled approach pays off handsomely. The value of
marketable securities in Berkshire’s portfolio, on a per share basis, increased
from $4 in 1965 to $95,000 in 2010, a 20% compound annual increase. Per share
operating earnings increased in the same period from just over $4 to nearly
$6,000, a compound annual increase of about 21%. According to Buffett, these
results follow not from any master plan but from focused investing—allocating
capital by concentrating on businesses with outstanding economic characteristics
and run by firstrate managers.
Buffett views Berkshire as a partnership among him, Munger and other
shareholders, and virtually all his net worth is in Berkshire stock. His economic
goal is long-term—to maximize Berkshire’s per share intrinsic value by owning
all or part of a diversified group of businesses that generate cash and above-
average returns. In achieving this goal, Buffett foregoes expansion for the sake
of expansion and foregoes divestment of businesses so long as they generate
some cash and have good management.
Berkshire retains and reinvests earnings when doing so delivers at least
proportional increases in per share market value over time. It uses debt sparingly
and sells equity only when it receives as much in value as it gives. Buffett
penetrates accounting conventions, especially those that obscure real economic
earnings.
These owner-related business principles, as Buffett calls them, are the
organizing themes of the accompanying essays. As organized, the essays
constitute an elegant and instructive manual on management, investment,

finance, and accounting. Buffett’s basic principles form the framework for a rich
range of positions on the wide variety of issues that exist in all aspects of
business. They go far beyond mere abstract platitudes. It is true that investors
should focus on fundamentals, be patient, and exercise good judgment based on
common sense. In Buffett’s essays, these advisory tidbits are anchored in the
more concrete principles by which Buffett lives and thrives.
CORPORATE GOVERNANCE
For Buffett, managers are stewards of shareholder capital. The best
managers think like owners in making business decisions. They have
shareholder interests at heart. But even firstrate managers will sometimes have
interests that conflict with those of shareholders. How to ease those conflicts and
to nurture managerial stewardship have been constant objectives of Buffett’s
long career and a prominent theme of his essays. The essays address some of the
most important governance problems.
The first is the importance of forthrightness and candor in communications
by managers to shareholders. Buffett tells it like it is, or at least as he sees it, and
laments that he is in the minority. Berkshire’s annual report is not glossy; Buffett
prepares its contents using words and numbers people of average intelligence
can understand; and all investors get the same information at the same time.
Buffett and Berkshire avoid making predictions, a bad managerial habit that too
often leads other managers to make up their financial reports.
Besides the owner-orientation reflected in Buffett’s disclosure practice and
the owner-related business principles summarized above, the next management
lesson is to dispense with formulas of managerial structure. Contrary to textbook
rules on organizational behavior, mapping an abstract chain of command on to a
particular business situation, according to Buffett, does little good. What matters
is selecting people who are able, honest, and hard-working. Having firstrate
people on the team is more important than designing hierarchies and clarifying
who reports to whom about what and at what times.
Special attention must be paid to selecting a chief executive officer (CEO)
because of three major differences Buffett identifies between CEOs and other
employees. First, standards for measuring a CEO’s performance are inadequate
or easy to manipulate, so a CEO’s performance is harder to measure than that of
most workers. Second, no one is senior to the CEO, so no senior person’s
performance can be measured either. Third, a board of directors cannot serve that
senior role since relations between CEOs and boards are conventionally
congenial.

Major reforms are often directed toward aligning management and
shareholder interests or enhancing board oversight of CEO performance. Stock
options for management were touted as one method; greater emphasis on board
processes was another. Separating the identities and functions of the Chairman of
the Board and the CEO or appointment of standing audit, nominating and
compensation committees were also heralded as promising reforms. Perhaps the
most pervasive prescription is to populate boards with independent directors.
None of these innovations has solved governance problems, however, and some
have exacerbated them.
The best solution, Buffett instructs, is to take great care in identifying CEOs
who will perform capably regardless of weak structural restraints. Large
institutional shareholders must exercise their power to oust CEOs that do not
measure up to the demands of corporate stewardship. Outstanding CEOs do not
need a lot of coaching from owners, although they can benefit from having a
similarly outstanding board. Directors therefore must be chosen for their
business savvy, their interest, and their owner-orientation. According to Buffett,
one of the greatest problems among boards in corporate America is that
members are selected for other reasons, such as adding diversity or prominence
to a board—or, famously, independence.
Most reforms are painted with a broad brush, without noting the major
differences among types of board situations that Buffett identifies. For example,
director power is weakest in the case where there is a controlling shareholder
who is also the manager. When disagreements arise between the directors and
management, there is little a director can do other than to object and, in serious
circumstances, resign. Director power is strongest at the other extreme, where
there is a controlling shareholder who does not participate in management. The
directors can take matters directly to the controlling shareholder when
disagreement arises.
The most common situation, however, is a corporation without a controlling
shareholder. This is where management problems are most acute, Buffett says. It
would be helpful if directors could supply necessary discipline, but board
congeniality usually prevents that. To maximize board effectiveness in this
situation, Buffett believes the board should be small in size and composed
mostly of outside directors. The strongest weapon a director can wield in these
situations remains his or her threat to resign.
All these situations do share a common characteristic: the terrible manager
is a lot easier to confront or remove than the mediocre manager. A chief problem
in all governance structures, Buffett emphasizes, is that in corporate America
evaluation of chief executive officers is never conducted in regular meetings in

the absence of that chief executive. Holding regular meetings without the chief
executive to review his or her performance would be a marked improvement in
corporate governance.
The CEOs at Berkshire’s various operating companies enjoy a unique
position in corporate America. They are given a simple set of commands: to run
their business as if (1) they are its sole owner, (2) it is the only asset they hold,
and (3) they can never sell or merge it for a hundred years. This enables
Berkshire CEOs to manage with a long-term horizon ahead of them, something
alien to the CEOs of public companies whose short-term oriented shareholders
obsess with meeting the latest quarterly earnings estimate. Short-term results
matter, of course, but the Berkshire approach avoids any pressure to achieve
them at the expense of strengthening long-term competitive advantages.
If only short-term results mattered, many managerial decisions would be
much easier, particularly those relating to businesses whose economic
characteristics have eroded. Consider the time horizon trade-off Buffett faced in
managing what he considers the worst investment he ever made, buying
Berkshire in the first place. The economic characteristics of Berkshire’s old
textile business had begun to erode by the late 1970s. Buffett had hoped to
devise a reversal of its misfortunes, noting how important Berkshire’s textile
business was to its employees and local communities in New England, and how
able and understanding management and labor had been in addressing the
economic difficulties. Buffett kept the ailing plant alive through 1985, but a
financial reversal could not be achieved and Buffett eventually closed it. This
balancing of short-term results with long-term prospects based on community
trust is not easy, but it is intelligent. Kindred lessons carry over to other sectors
in which Berkshire invests, such as the newspaper business in the internet age,
and highly regulated industries, such as energy and railroads, in which Buffett
sees an implicit social compact between private enterprise and regulatory
overseers.
Sometimes management interests conflict with shareholder interests in
subtle or easily disguised ways. Take corporate philanthropy, for example. At
most major corporations, management allocates a portion of corporate profit to
charitable concerns. The charities are chosen by management, for reasons often
unrelated either to corporate interests or shareholder interests. Most state laws
permit management to make these decisions, so long as aggregate annual
donations are reasonable in amount, usually not greater than 10% of annual net
profits.
Berkshire does things differently. It makes no contributions at the parent
company level and allows its subsidiaries to follow philanthropic policies they

had in effect before Berkshire acquired them. For two decades, moreover,
Berkshire used an imaginative program through which its shareholders
designated the charities to which Berkshire would donate and in what amounts.
Nearly all shareholders participated, donating tens of millions of dollars annually
to thousands of different charities. Political controversy over the abortion issue,
however, interfered with this program. Political activists organized boycotts of
Berkshire’s products to protest particular charitable donations that were made,
destroying this feature of Berkshire’s “partnership” approach.
The plan to align management and shareholder interests by awarding
executives stock options not only was oversold, but also subtly disguised a
deeper division between those interests that the options created. Many
corporations pay their managers stock options whose value increases simply by
retention of earnings, rather than by superior deployment of capital. As Buffett
explains, however, simply by retaining and reinvesting earnings, managers can
report annual earnings increases without so much as lifting a finger to improve
real returns on capital. Stock options thus often rob shareholders of wealth and
allocate the booty to executives. Moreover, once granted, stock options are often
irrevocable, unconditional, and benefit managers without regard to individual
performance.
It is possible to use stock options to instill a managerial culture that
encourages owner-like thinking, Buffett agrees. But the alignment will not be
perfect. Shareholders are exposed to the downside risks of suboptimal capital
deployment in a way that an option holder is not. Buffett therefore cautions
shareholders who are reading proxy statements about approving option plans to
be aware of the asymmetry in this kind of alignment. Many shareholders
rationally ignore proxy statements, but the abuse of stock options should be on
the front-burner of shareholders, particularly institutional investors that
periodically engage in promoting corporate governance improvements.
Buffett emphasizes that performance should be the basis for executive pay
decisions. Executive performance should be measured by profitability, after
profits are reduced by a charge for the capital employed in the relevant business
or earnings retained by it. If stock options are used, they should be related to
individual performance, rather than corporate performance, and priced based on
business value. Better yet, as at Berkshire, stock options should simply not be
part of an executive’s compensation. After all, exceptional managers who earn
cash bonuses based on the performance of their own business can simply buy
stock if they want to; if they do, they “truly walk in the shoes of owners,” Buffett
says. And owners’ interests are paramount on executive pay as with other
corporate governance topics Buffett addresses, such as risk management,

corporate compliance and financial reporting.
FINANCE AND INVESTING
The most revolutionary investing ideas of the past thirty-five years were
those called modern finance theory. This is an elaborate set of ideas that boil
down to one simple and misleading practical implication: it is a waste of time to
study individual investment opportunities in public securities. According to this
view, you will do better by randomly selecting a group of stocks for a portfolio
by throwing darts at the stock tables than by thinking about whether individual
investment opportunities make sense.
One of modern finance theory’s main tenets is modern portfolio theory. It
says that you can eliminate the peculiar risk of any security by holding a
diversified portfolio—that is, it formalizes the folk slogan “don’t put all your
eggs in one basket.” The risk that is left over is the only risk for which investors
will be compensated, the story goes.
This leftover risk can be measured by a simple mathematical term—called
beta—that shows how volatile the security is compared to the market. Beta
measures this volatility risk well for securities that trade on efficient markets,
where information about publicly traded securities is swiftly and accurately
incorporated into prices. In the modern finance story, efficient markets rule.
Reverence for these ideas was not limited to ivory tower academics, in
colleges, universities, business schools, and law schools, but became standard
dogma throughout financial America in the past thirty-five years, from Wall
Street to Main Street. Many professionals still believe that stock market prices
always accurately reflect fundamental values, that the only risk that matters is
the volatility of prices, and that the best way to manage that risk is to invest in a
diversified group of stocks.
Being part of a distinguished line of investors stretching back to Graham
and Dodd which debunks standard dogma by logic and experience, Buffett
thinks most markets are not purely efficient and that equating volatility with risk
is a gross distortion. Accordingly, Buffett worried that a whole generation of
MBAs and JDs, under the influence of modern finance theory, was at risk of
learning the wrong lessons and missing the important ones.
A particularly costly lesson of modern finance theory came from the
proliferation of portfolio insurance—a computerized technique for readjusting a
portfolio in declining markets. The promiscuous use of portfolio insurance
helped precipitate the stock market crash of October 1987, as well as the market
break of October 1989. It nevertheless had a silver lining: it shattered the modern

finance story being told in business and law schools and faithfully being
followed by many on Wall Street.
Ensuing market volatility could not be explained by modern finance theory,
nor could mountainous other phenomena relating to the behavior of small
capitalization stocks, high dividend-yield stocks, and stocks with low price-
earnings ratios. The piece de resistance of market inefficiency was the
technology and Internet stock bubble that blew up in the late 1990s and early
2000s, marked by stock price gyrations that spasmodically bounced between
euphoria and gloom without the remotest nexus to business value. Growing
numbers of skeptics emerged to say that beta does not really measure the
investment risk that matters, and that capital markets are really not efficient
enough to make beta meaningful anyway.
In stirring up the discussion, people started noticing Buffett’s record of
successful investing and calling for a return to the Graham-Dodd approach to
investing and business. After all, for more than forty years Buffett has generated
average annual returns of 20% or better, which double the market average. For
more than twenty years before that, Ben Graham’s Graham-Newman Corp. had
done the same thing. As Buffett emphasizes, the stunning performances at
Graham-Newman and at Berkshire deserve respect: the sample sizes were
significant; they were conducted over an extensive time period, and were not
skewed by a few fortunate experiences; no data-mining was involved; and the
performances were longitudinal, not selected by hindsight.
Threatened by Buffett’s performance, stubborn devotees of modern finance
theory resorted to strange explanations for his success. Maybe he is just lucky—
the monkey who typed out Hamlet—or maybe he has inside access to
information that other investors do not. In dismissing Buffett, modern finance
enthusiasts still insist that an investor’s best strategy is to diversify based on
betas or dart throwing, and constantly reconfigure one’s portfolio of investments.
Buffett responds with a quip and some advice: the quip is that devotees of
his investment philosophy should probably endow chaired professorships at
colleges and universities to ensure the perpetual teaching of efficient market
dogma; the advice is to ignore modern finance theory and other quasi-
sophisticated views of the market and stick to investment knitting. That can best
be done for many people through long-term investment in an index fund. Or it
can be done by conducting hard-headed analyses of businesses within an
investor’s competence to evaluate. In that kind of thinking, the risk that matters
is not beta or volatility, but the possibility of loss or injury from an investment.
Assessing that kind of investment risk requires thinking about a company’s
management, products, competitors, and debt levels. The inquiry is whether

after-tax returns on an investment are at least equal to the purchasing power of
the initial investment plus a fair rate of return. The primary relevant factors are
the long-term economic characteristics of a business, the quality and integrity of
its management, and future levels of taxation and inflation. Maybe these factors
are vague, particularly compared with the seductive precision of beta, but the
point is that judgments about such matters cannot be avoided, except to an
investor’s disadvantage.
Buffett points out the absurdity of beta by observing that “a stock that has
dropped very sharply compared to the market . . . becomes ‘riskier’ at the lower
price than it was at the higher price”—that is how beta measures risk. Equally
unhelpful, beta cannot distinguish the risk inherent in “a single-product toy
company selling pet rocks or hula hoops from another toy company whose sole
product is Monopoly or Barbie.” But ordinary investors can make those
distinctions by thinking about consumer behavior and the way consumer
products companies compete, and can also figure out when a huge stock-price
drop signals a buying opportunity.
Contrary to modern finance theory, Buffett’s investment knitting does not
prescribe diversification. It may even call for concentration, if not of one’s
portfolio, then at least of its owner’s mind. As to concentration of the portfolio,
Buffett reminds us that Keynes, who was not only a brilliant economist but also
an astute investor, believed that an investor should put fairly large sums into two
or three businesses he knows something about and whose management is
trustworthy. On that view, risk rises when investments and investment thinking
are spread too thin. A strategy of financial and mental concentration may reduce
risk by raising both the intensity of an investor’s thinking about a business and
the comfort level he must have with its fundamental characteristics before
buying it.
The fashion of beta, according to Buffett, suffers from inattention to “a
fundamental principle: It is better to be approximately right than precisely
wrong.” Long-term investment success depends not on studying betas and
maintaining a diversified portfolio, but on recognizing that as an investor, one is
the owner of a business. Reconfiguring a portfolio by buying and selling stocks
to accommodate the desired beta-risk profile defeats long-term investment
success. Such “flitting from flower to flower” imposes huge transaction costs in
the forms of spreads, fees and commissions, not to mention taxes. Buffett jokes
that calling someone who trades actively in the market an investor “is like
calling someone who repeatedly engages in one-night stands a romantic.”
Investment knitting turns modern finance theory’s folk wisdom on its head:
instead of “don’t put all your eggs in one basket,” we get Mark Twain’s advice

from Pudd’nhead Wilson: “Put all your eggs in one basket—and watch that
basket.”
Buffett learned the art of investing from Ben Graham as a graduate student
at Columbia Business School in the 1950s and later working at Graham-
Newman. In a number of classic works, including The Intelligent Investor,
Graham introduced some of the most profound investment wisdom in history. It
rejects a prevalent but mistaken mind-set that equates price with value. On the
contrary, Graham held that price is what you pay and value is what you get.
These two things are rarely identical, but most people rarely notice any
difference.
One of Graham’s most profound contributions is a character who lives on
Wall Street, Mr. Market. He is your hypothetical business partner who is daily
willing to buy your interest in a business or sell you his at prevailing market
prices. Mr. Market is moody, prone to manic swings from joy to despair.
Sometimes he offers prices way higher than value; sometimes he offers prices
way lower than value. The more manic-depressive he is, the greater the spread
between price and value, and therefore the greater the investment opportunities
he offers. Buffett reintroduces Mr. Market, emphasizing how valuable Graham’s
allegory of the overall market is for disciplined investment knitting—even
though Mr. Market would be unrecognizable to modern finance theorists.
Another leading prudential legacy from Graham is his margin-of-safety
principle. This principle holds that one should not make an investment in a
security unless there is a sufficient basis for believing that the price being paid is
substantially lower than the value being delivered. Buffett follows the principle
devotedly, noting that Graham had said that if forced to distill the secret of sound
investment into three words, they would be: margin of safety. Over forty years
after first reading that, Buffett still thinks those are the right words. While
modern finance theory enthusiasts cite market efficiency to deny there is a
difference between price (what you pay) and value (what you get), Buffett and
Graham regard it as all the difference in the world.
That difference also shows that the term “value investing” is a redundancy.
All true investing must be based on an assessment of the relationship between
price and value. Strategies that do not employ this comparison of price and value
do not amount to investing at all, but to speculation—the hope that price will
rise, rather than the conviction that the price being paid is lower than the value
being obtained. Many professionals make another common mistake, Buffett
notes, by distinguishing between “growth investing” and “value investing.”

Growth and value, Buffett says, are not distinct. They are integrally linked since
growth must be treated as a component of value.
Nor does the phrase “relational investing” resonate with Buffett. The term
became popular in the mid-1990s, describing a style of investing that is designed
to reduce the costs of the separation of shareholder ownership from managerial
control by emphasizing shareholder involvement and monitoring of
management. Many people incorrectly identified Buffett and Berkshire as
exemplars of this descriptive label. It is true that Buffett buys big blocks in a few
companies and sticks around a long time. He also only invests in businesses run
by people he trusts. But that is about as far as the similarity goes. If Buffett were
pressed to use an adjective to describe his investment style, it would be
something like “focused” or “intelligent” investing. Yet even these words ring
redundant; the unadorned term investor best describes Buffett.
Other misuses of terms include blurring the difference between speculation
and arbitrage as methods of sound cash management; the latter being very
important for companies like Berkshire that generate substantial excess cash.
Both speculation and arbitrage are ways to use excess cash rather than hold it in
short-term cash equivalents such as commercial paper. Speculation describes the
use of cash to bet on lots of corporate events based on rumors of unannounced
coming transactions. Arbitrage, traditionally understood to mean exploiting
different prices for the same thing on two different markets, for Buffett describes
the use of cash to take short-term positions in a few opportunities that have been
publicly announced. It exploits different prices for the same thing at different
times. Deciding whether to employ cash this way requires evaluating four
commonsense questions based on information rather than rumor: the probability
of the event occurring, the time the funds will be tied up, the opportunity cost,
and the downside if the event does not occur.
The circle of competence principle is the third leg of the Graham/Buffett
stool of intelligent investing, along with Mr. Market and the margin of safety.
This commonsense rule instructs investors to consider investments only
concerning businesses they are capable of understanding with a modicum of
effort. It is this commitment to stick with what he knows that enables Buffett to
avoid the mistakes others repeatedly make, particularly those who feast on the
fantasies of fast riches promised by technological fads and new era rhetoric that
have recurrently infested speculative markets over the centuries.
In all investment thinking, one must guard against what Buffett calls the
“institutional imperative.” It is a pervasive force in which institutional dynamics
produce resistance to change, absorption of available corporate funds, and
reflexive approval of suboptimal CEO strategies by subordinates. Contrary to

what is often taught in business and law schools, this powerful force often
interferes with rational business decision-making. The ultimate result of the
institutional imperative is a follow-the-pack mentality producing industry
imitators, rather than industry leaders—what Buffett calls a lemming-like
approach to business.
Every reader of this collection will savor, and want to share with family and
friends, Buffett’s compelling essays on the use of debt. Aptly dubbed “Life and
Debt,” these exquisitely explain both the temptation and perils of leverage in
personal and corporate finance.
INVESTMENT ALTERNATIVES
All these investment principles are animated in Buffett’s lively essays
concerning investment opportunities. After explaining his preference for
investing in productive assets, and defining what this means, a series of essays
addresses a wide range of alternatives, starting with junk and zero-coupon bonds
and preferred stock. Challenging both Wall Street and the academy, Buffett again
draws on Graham’s ideas to reject the “dagger thesis” advanced to defend junk
bonds. The dagger thesis, using the metaphor of the intensified care an
automobile driver would take facing a dagger mounted on the steering wheel,
overemphasizes the disciplining effect that enormous amounts of debt in a
capital structure exerts on management.
Buffett points to the large numbers of corporations that failed in the early
1990s recession under crushing debt burdens to dispute academic research
showing that higher interest rates on junk bonds more than compensated for their
higher default rates. He attributes this error to a flawed assumption recognizable
to any first-year statistics student: that historical conditions prevalent during the
study period would be identical in the future. They would not. Further
illuminating the folly of junk bonds is an essay in this collection by Charlie
Munger that discusses Michael Milken’s approach to finance.
Wall Street tends to embrace ideas based on revenue-generating power,
rather than on financial sense, a tendency that often perverts good ideas to bad
ones. In a history of zero-coupon bonds, for example, Buffett shows that they
can enable a purchaser to lock in a compound rate of return equal to a coupon
rate that a normal bond paying periodic interest would not provide. Using zero-
coupons thus for a time enabled a borrower to borrow more without need of
additional free cash flow to pay the interest expense. Problems arose, however,
when zero-coupon bonds started to be issued by weaker and weaker credits
whose free cash flow could not sustain increasing debt obligations. Buffett

laments, “as happens in Wall Street all too often, what the wise do in the
beginning, fools do in the end.”
Many culprits contributed to the financial crisis of 2008, among them the
proliferation of derivative financial instruments, which Buffett’s essays written
several years earlier had warned about. Contemporary financial engineering has
produced an explosion of complex instruments known as derivatives, because
their fluctuating value is derived from movements in a contractually designated
benchmark. Proponents believe that these devices are useful to manage risk—
and Berkshire from time to time takes modest positions in derivatives contracts
that Buffett judges as mis-priced. But while proponents also believe that
derivatives tend to reduce overall systemic risk, Buffett presciently observed that
they may have the opposite effect. They are hard to value, valuations can change
rapidly and they create linkages and interdependencies among financial
institutions. Buffett cautioned that the combination of these factors could mean
that, should a single event cause challenges in one sector, that could spread
rapidly to others with a domino effect bringing devastating systemic
consequences. Such was the case with the crisis of 2008.
Buffett acknowledges that his view on derivative risks may be influenced
by his aversion to any kind of mega-catastrophe risk that would jeopardize
Berkshire’s status as a fortress of financial strength. But this is no arm-chair
opinion, for Buffett endured several years of direct experience in managing a
derivatives dealership that came along with Berkshire’s acquisition of the Gen
Re reinsurance company. Buffett explains the unpleasant consequences of not
dumping the business immediately but notes how it could not be sold and
contained a maze of long term liabilities that took several painful years to
unwind. Buffett offers extensive meditation on this experience so that others can
learn from the Berkshire trials.
Concluding essays in this Part address other macroeconomic lessons as
well, ranging from the U.S. international trade deficit to national policies
towards home ownership that also contributed to the financial crisis of 2008.
COMMON STOCK
Buffett recalls that on the day Berkshire listed on the New York Stock
Exchange in 1988, he told Jimmy Maguire, the specialist in Berkshire stock, “I
will consider you an enormous success if the next trade in this stock is about two
years from now.” While Buffett jokes that Maguire “didn’t seem to get enthused
about that,” he emphasizes that his mind-set when he buys any stock is “if we
aren’t happy owning a piece of that business with the Exchange closed, we’re

not happy owning it with the Exchange open.” While Berkshire and Buffett are
investors for the long haul, too many others are temporary traders of common
stock—whose actions pose high costs.
A significant portion of corporate earnings are dissipated through frictional
costs associated with trading. Trading is the rearrangement of who owns what
shares. The rearrangement entails paying commissions to brokers, fees to
investment managers and cash to financial planners and business consultants
who sell even more advice during this process. Of late, these frictional costs
have escalated into whole industries that describe themselves variously as hedge
funds and private equity firms. Buffett estimates that total costs may consume
some 20% of the country’s total annual corporate earnings.
Unlike many CEOs, who desire their company’s stock to trade at the
highest possible prices in the market, Buffett prefers Berkshire stock to trade at
or around its intrinsic value—neither materially higher nor lower. Such linkage
means that business results during one period will benefit the people who owned
the company during that period. Maintaining the linkage requires a shareholder
group with a collective long-term, business-oriented investment philosophy,
rather than a short-term, market-oriented strategy.
Buffett notes Phil Fisher’s suggestion that a company is like a restaurant,
offering a menu that attracts people with particular tastes. Berkshire’s long-term
menu emphasizes that the costs of trading activity can impair long-term results.
Indeed, Buffett estimates that the transaction costs of actively traded stocks—
broker commissions and market-maker spreads—often amount to 10% or more
of earnings. Avoiding or minimizing such costs is necessary for long-term
investment success, and Berkshire’s listing on the New York Stock Exchange
helped contain those costs.
Corporate dividend policy is a major capital allocation issue, always of
interest to investors but infrequently explained to them. Buffett’s essays clarify
this subject, emphasizing that “capital allocation is crucial to business and
investment management.” Since 1998, Berkshire’s common stock has been
priced in the market at above $50,000 per share and the company’s book value,
earnings, and intrinsic value have steadily increased well in excess of average
annual rates. Yet the company has never effected a stock split, and has not paid a
cash dividend in over three decades.
Apart from reflecting the long-term menu and minimization of transaction
costs, Berkshire’s dividend policy also reflects Buffett’s conviction that a
company’s earnings payout versus retention decision should be based on a single
test: each dollar of earnings should be retained if retention will increase market
value by at least a like amount; otherwise it should be paid out. Earnings

retention is justified only when “capital retained produces incremental earnings
equal to, or above, those generally available to investors.”
Like many of Buffett’s simple rules, this one is often ignored by corporate
managers, except of course when they make dividend decisions for their
subsidiaries. Earnings are often retained for non-owner reasons, such as
expanding the corporate empire or furnishing operational comfort for
management.
Things are so different at Berkshire, Buffett said at the symposium, that
under his test Berkshire “might distribute more than 100% of the earnings,” to
which Charlie Munger chimed in “You’re damn right.” That has not been
necessary, however, for throughout Buffett’s stewardship at Berkshire,
opportunities for superior returns on capital have been discovered, and exploited.
Share repurchases of underpriced stock can be a value-enhancing way to
allocate capital, though these are not always what they seem. In the 1980s and
early 1990s, share buy-backs were uncommon and Buffett credited managers
who recognized that the purchase of a share priced at $1 but with a value of $2
would rarely be inferior to any other use of corporate funds. Alas, as often
happens, the imitators stepped in and now you frequently see companies paying
$2 to buy back shares worth $1. These value-destroying share repurchases often
are intended to prop up a sagging share price or to offset the simultaneous
issuing of stock under stock options exercised at much lower prices.
Buffett lays out the rationale and terms under which Berkshire occasionally
embarks on share repurchase programs: when the stock trades at a deep discount
to intrinsic value. That makes the investment an easy case, of clear value to
continuing holders, though Buffett has mixed feelings about repurchasing as
Berkshire’s selling shareholders cash in at a discount. The solution: clear
disclosure to enable such selling holders to make an informed decision.
Stock splits are another common action in corporate America that Buffett
points out disserve owner interests. Stock splits have three consequences: they
increase transaction costs by promoting high share turnover; they attract
shareholders with short-term, market-oriented views who unduly focus on stock
market prices; and, as a result of both of those effects, they lead to prices that
depart materially from intrinsic business value. With no offsetting benefits,
splitting Berkshire’s stock would be foolish. Not only that, Buffett adds, it would
threaten to reverse over three decades of hard work that has attracted to
Berkshire a shareholder group comprised of more focused and long-term
investors than probably any other major public corporation.
Two important consequences have followed from Berkshire’s high stock
price and its dividend policy. First, the extraordinarily high share price impaired

the ability of Berkshire shareholders to effect gifts of their equity interest to
family members or friends, though Buffett has offered a few sensible strategies
like bargain sales to donees to deal with that. Second, Wall Street engineers tried
to create securities that would purport to mimic Berkshire’s performance and
that would be sold to people lacking an understanding of Berkshire, its business,
and its investment philosophy.
In response to these consequences, Berkshire effected a recapitalization by
creating a new class of stock, called the Class B shares, and sold it to the public.
The Class B shares have 1/30th the rights of the existing Class A shares, except
with respect to voting rights they have 1/200th of those of the A shares.
Accordingly, the Class B shares should (and do) trade somewhere in the vicinity
of 1/30th of the market price of the Class A shares.
The Class A shares are convertible into Class B shares, giving Berkshire
shareholders a do-it-yourself mechanism to effect a stock-split to facilitate gift
giving and so on. More importantly, the Berkshire recapitalization would halt the
marketing of Berkshire clones that contradict all the basic principles Buffett
believes in. These clones—investment trusts that would buy and sell Berkshire
shares according to demand for units in the trust—would have imposed costs on
shareholders. If held by people who do not understand Berkshire’s business or
philosophy, they would have caused spikes in Berkshire’s stock price, producing
substantial deviations between price and value.
The Class B shares are designed to be attractive only to investors who share
Buffett’s philosophy of focused investing. For example, in connection with the
offering of the Class B shares, Buffett and Munger emphasized that Berkshire
stock was, at that time, not underpriced in the market. They said that neither of
them would buy the Class A shares at the market price nor the Class B shares at
the offering price. The message was simple: do not buy these securities unless
you are prepared to hold them for the long term. The effort to attract only long-
term investors to the Class B shares appears to have worked: trading volume in
the shares after the offering was far below average for Big Board stocks.
Some expressed surprise at Buffett and Munger’s cautionary statement,
since most managers tell the market that newly-issued equity in their companies
is being offered at a very good price. You should not be surprised by Buffett and
Munger’s disclosure, however. A company that sells its stock at a price less than
its value is stealing from its existing shareholders. Quite plausibly, Buffett
considers that a crime.
MERGERS AND ACQUISITIONS

Berkshire’s acquisition policy is the double-barreled approach: buying
portions or all of businesses with excellent economic characteristics and run by
managers Buffett and Munger like, trust, and admire. Contrary to common
practice, Buffett argues that in buying all of a business, there is rarely any reason
to pay a premium.
The rare cases involve businesses with franchise characteristics—those that
can raise prices without impairing sales volume or market share and only require
incremental capital investment to increase both. Even ordinary managers can
operate franchise businesses to generate high returns on capital. The second
category of rare cases is where extraordinary managers exist who can achieve
the difficult feat of identifying underperforming businesses, and apply
extraordinary talent to unlock hidden value.
These two categories are extremely limited, and certainly do not explain the
hundreds of high-premium takeovers that occur annually. Buffett attributes high-
premium takeovers outside those unusual categories to three motives of buying-
managers: the thrill of an acquisition, the thrill of enhanced size, and excessive
optimism about synergies.
In paying for acquisitions, Berkshire issues stock only when it receives as
much in business value as it gives. This has become increasingly difficult for
Berkshire to do. This is the case because Berkshire has assembled the business
equivalent of the art collection at the Louvre. Enhancing the value of the existing
collection by adding a single new Botticelli is difficult enough, and even more so
if you have to give up part of your Rembrandt collection to get it.
It has also been difficult for managers of other companies to follow this
rule, but not so much because of the wonderful collection of businesses they
have. Instead, Buffett notes that sellers in stock acquisitions measure the
purchase price by the market price of the buyer’s stock, not by its intrinsic value.
If a buyer’s stock is trading at a price equal to, say, half its intrinsic value, then a
buyer who goes along with that measure gives twice as much in business value
as it is getting. Its manager, usually rationalizing his or her actions by arguments
about synergies or size, is elevating thrill or excessive optimism above
shareholder interests.
Moreover, acquisitions paid for in stock are too often (almost always)
described as “buyer buys seller” or “buyer acquires seller.” Buffett suggests
clearer thinking would follow from saying “buyer sells part of itself to acquire
seller,” or something of the sort. After all, that is what is happening; and it would
enable one to evaluate what the buyer is giving up to make the acquisition.
Another abuse of shares-as-currency is the practice of green-mail, the
repurchase of shares from an unwanted suitor at a premium price to fend off his

acquisition overtures. While share repurchases available to all shareholders can
be value enhancing, Buffett condemns this practice as simply another form of
corporate robbery.
Nearly as reprehensible, a second Charlie Munger essay in this collection
explains, were the cascades of leveraged buy-outs (LBOs) in the 1980s.
Permissive laws made LBOs hugely profitable, Munger tells us, but the LBOs
weakened corporations, put a heavy premium on cash generation to pay for
enormous debt obligations, and raised the average cost of acquisitions.
Value-enhancing acquisitions are hard enough to find without the added
burden of higher average costs for all of them. Indeed, most acquisitions are
value-decreasing, Buffett says. Finding the best value-enhancing transactions
requires concentrating on opportunity costs, measured principally against the
alternative of buying small pieces of excellent businesses through stock market
purchases. Such concentration is alien to the manager obsessed with synergies
and size, but a vital part of Berkshire’s double-barreled investment approach.
Berkshire has additional advantages in acquisitions: a high quality stock to
pay with and a substantial amount of managerial autonomy to offer once a deal
is done—both rare in an acquiring company, Buffett says. Buffett also puts his
money where his mouth is, reminding prospective sellers that Berkshire has
acquired many of its businesses from family or other closely-held groups, and
inviting them to check with every previous seller about Berkshire’s initial
promises measured against its later actions. In short, Berkshire seeks to be the
buyer of choice for attractive business sellers—a lesson so important that it
explains why Buffett prefers to retain rather than sell even those acquired
businesses that struggle against business headwinds.
VALUATION AND ACCOUNTING
Buffett’s essays provide an entertaining and illuminating tutorial on
understanding and using financial information. In dissecting significant aspects
of generally accepted accounting principles (GAAP), Buffett shows both their
importance and limits in understanding and valuing any business or investment.
Buffett demystifies key topics that highlight the important differences between
accounting earnings and economic earnings, between accounting goodwill and
economic goodwill, and between accounting book value and intrinsic value.
These are essential tools for any investor’s or manager’s valuation toolbox.
Aesop was to fables of the ancient world what Buffett is to business essays
in ours. The essayist invokes the fabulist to show that valuation has been the
same across the millennia—Aesop said “a bird in the hand is worth two in the

bush” and Buffett extends the principle to dollars. Valuation is counting cash, not
hopes or dreams, a lesson many should have learned amid the late 1990s tech
rush bubble that burst when everyone finally realized there were few birds in the
bushes. It is doubtful everyone learned the lesson, however, for it has been
taught repeatedly since Aesop’s time and yet, well, it has been taught repeatedly
since Aesop’s time.
A leading example of Buffett’s specialized toolkit is intrinsic value, “the
discounted value of the cash that can be taken out of a business during its
remaining life.” Though simple to state, calculating intrinsic value is neither
easy nor objective. It depends on estimation of both future cash flows and
interest rate movements. But it is what ultimately matters about a business. Book
value, in contrast, is easy to calculate, but of limited use. So too with market
price, at least for most companies. Differences between intrinsic value and book
value and market price may be hard to pin down. They can go either way, but
there will almost certainly be differences.
Buffett emphasizes that useful financial statements must enable a user to
answer three basic questions about a business: approximately how much a
company is worth, its likely ability to meet its future obligations, and how good
a job its managers are doing in operating the business. Buffett laments that
GAAP conventions make these determinations difficult, and indeed almost any
accounting system will be hard pressed to furnish completely accurate answers
given the complexities of business. Acknowledging the monumental difficulty of
inventing an accounting system superior to GAAP, Buffett articulates a range of
concepts that go a longer way toward making financial information useful to
investors and managers.
Consider a concept Buffett calls “look-through earnings.” GAAP
investment accounting calls for using the consolidation method for majority-
owned equity, which means full reporting of all line items from the investee’s
financial statements on the parent’s. For equity investments from 20% to 50%,
GAAP calls for reporting the investor’s proportionate share of earnings of the
investee on its statements; for investments of less than 20%, GAAP provides that
only dividends actually received by the investor be recorded, rather than any
share of the investee’s earnings. These accounting rules obscure a major factor in
Berkshire’s economic performance: the undistributed earnings of its investee
companies are an enormous part of Berkshire’s value, but would not be reported
on its financial statements prepared using GAAP.
Recognizing that it is not the size of an equity investment that determines
its value, but how the undistributed earnings are deployed, Buffett develops the
concept of look-through earnings to gauge Berkshire’s economic performance.

Look-through earnings add to Berkshire’s own net earnings the undistributed
earnings in investee companies, less an incremental amount for taxes. Look-
through earnings are not different from GAAP earnings for many businesses. But
they are for Berkshire and probably are for many individual investors.
Accordingly, individuals can adopt a similar approach for their own portfolios
and try to design a portfolio that delivers the highest possible look-through
earnings over the long term.
The difference between accounting goodwill and economic goodwill is
well-known, but Buffett’s lucidity makes the subject refreshing. Accounting
goodwill is essentially the amount by which the purchase price of a business
exceeds the fair value of the assets acquired (after deducting liabilities). It is
recorded as an asset on the balance sheet and then amortized as an annual
expense, usually over forty years. So the accounting goodwill assigned to that
business decreases over time by the aggregate amount of that expense.
Economic goodwill is something else. It is the combination of intangible
assets, like brand name recognition, that enable a business to produce earnings
on tangible assets, like plant and equipment, in excess of average rates. The
amount of economic goodwill is the capitalized value of that excess. Economic
goodwill tends to increase over time, at least nominally in proportion to inflation
for mediocre businesses, and more than that for businesses with solid economic
or franchise characteristics. Indeed, businesses with more economic goodwill
relative to tangible assets are hurt far less by inflation than businesses with less
of that.
These differences between accounting goodwill and economic goodwill
entail the following insights. First, the best guide to the value of a business’s
economic goodwill is what it can earn on unleveraged net tangible assets,
excluding charges for amortization of goodwill. Therefore when a business
acquires other businesses, and the acquisitions are reflected in an asset account
called goodwill, analysis of that business should ignore the amortization charges.
Second, since economic goodwill should be measured at its full economic cost,
i.e., before amortization, evaluation of a possible business acquisition should be
conducted without regard to those amortization charges as well.
Buffett emphasizes, however, that the same does not hold for depreciation
charges—these should not be ignored because they are real economic costs. He
makes this point in explaining why Berkshire always shows its shareholders the
results of operations with respect to acquired businesses net of any purchase
price adjustments GAAP requires.
It is common on Wall Street to value businesses using a calculation of cash
flows equal to (a) operating earnings plus (b) depreciation expense and other

non-cash charges. Buffett regards that calculation as incomplete. After taking (a)
operating earnings and adding back (b) non-cash charges, Buffett argues that you
must then subtract something else: (c) required reinvestment in the business.
Buffett defines (c) as “the average amount of capitalized expenditures for plant
and equipment, etc., that the business requires to fully maintain its long-term
competitive position and its unit volume.” Buffett calls the result of (a) + (b) -
(c) “owner earnings.”
When (b) and (c) differ, cash flow analysis and owner earnings analysis
differ too. For most businesses, (c) usually exceeds (b), so cash flow analysis
usually overstates economic reality. In all cases where (c) differs from (b),
calculation of owner earnings enables one to appraise performance more
accurately than would analysis of GAAP earnings, or cash flows affected by
purchase price accounting adjustments. That is why Berkshire supplementally
reports owner earnings for its acquired businesses, rather than rely solely on
GAAP earnings figures, or cash flow figures.
ACCOUNTING SHENANIGANS
The ultimate point to understand about accounting is that it is a form. As a
form, it can be manipulated. Buffett shows just how severe the manipulation can
be with a satire written by Ben Graham in the 1930s. The advanced bookkeeping
methods Graham presents enable his phantom US Steel to report “phenomenally
enhanced” earnings without cash outlays or changes in operating conditions or
sales. Except in its lampooning spirit, Graham’s illustration of accounting
chicanery is not all that different from what is often seen coming out of
corporate America.
GAAP has enough trouble. Yet two groups of people make it worse: those
who try to overcome GAAP requirements by stretching their accounting
imagination, and those who deliberately employ GAAP to facilitate financial
fraud. The former is especially hard to deal with, as Buffett suggests in
illustrating how debate on accounting for stock options reveals the parochialism
of many executives and accountants. For example, criticizing the view against
treating stock options as expenses when granted, Buffett delivers this laconic
argument: “If options aren’t a form of compensation, what are they? If
compensation isn’t an expense, what is? And, if expenses shouldn’t go into the
calculation of earnings, where in the world should they go?” So far, he has
gotten no answers.
The quest for integrity in financial reporting is endless, with new flavors of
accounting machinations developed regularly and periodically sweeping the

chief financial officer (CFO) suites of corporate America. The latest product to
catch on is accounting for “restructurings,” a label given to a whole range of
maneuvers that enable managers to engage in age-old earnings management and
smoothing techniques with greater felicity and deftness than ever before. Other
examples concern estimates required when calculating pension liabilities and the
timing of sales of assets that generate gains or losses to influence reported
earnings. Investors beware.
ACCOUNTING POLICY
Devotees of integrity in financial reporting sometimes must take matters
into their own hands. Buffett does so regularly by furnishing Berkshire
shareholders with information, such as segment data, that GAAP does not
require but which Buffett would want to see if their positions were reversed.
Sometimes the crusaders triumph, however, as Buffett shows was the case when
accounting rules began to require companies to record promises to fund retiree
benefits that had previously not been required.
One clear lesson from Buffett’s discussions of financial information is that
accounting has inherent limits, even though it is absolutely essential. Despite
enormous managerial leeway in reporting earnings and potential abuse, financial
information can be of great use to investors. Buffett uses it every day, and has
allocated billions of dollars doing it. So it is possible to make important
investment decisions on the basis of available financial information if one
exercises knowledgeable judgment. That judgment may include making
adjustments to determine look-through earnings, owner earnings and intrinsic
value.
TAX MATTERS
Bringing this collection full circle, the concluding essays note the obvious
but often overlooked tax advantages of long-term investment. Linking life’s two
certainties, the final essay includes one of Buffett’s many jokes about his
personal longevity: if enjoying life promotes longevity, he is jeopardizing
Methuselah’s record (969 years). At the symposium featuring this collection,
someone asked what effect Buffett’s death would have on Berkshire stock.
Another answered, “a negative effect.” Without missing a beat, Buffett quipped:
“It won’t be as negative for the holders as it will be for me.”

PROLOGUE: OWNER-RELATED BUSINESS PRINCIPLES1
In some ways, our shareholder group is a rather unusual one, and this
affects our manner of reporting to you. For example, at the end of each year
about 98% of the shares outstanding are held by people who also were
shareholders at the beginning of the year. Therefore, in our annual report we
build upon what we have told you in previous years instead of restating a lot of
material. You get more useful information this way, and we don’t get bored.
Furthermore, perhaps 90% of our shares are owned by investors for whom
Berkshire is their largest security holding, very often far and away the largest.
Many of these owners are willing to spend a significant amount of time with the
annual report, and we attempt to provide them with the same information we
would find useful if the roles were reversed.
In contrast, we include no narrative with our quarterly reports. Our owners
and managers both have very long time-horizons in regard to this business, and it
is difficult to say anything new or meaningful each quarter about events of long-
term significance.
But when you do receive a communication from us, it will come from the
fellow you are paying to run the business. Your Chairman has a firm belief that
owners are entitled to hear directly from the CEO as to what is going on and how
he evaluates the business, currently and prospectively. You would demand that in
a private company; you should expect no less in a public company. A once-a-
year report of stewardship should not be turned over to a staff specialist or public
relations consultant who is unlikely to be in a position to talk frankly on a
manager-to-owner basis.
We feel that you, as owners, are entitled to the same sort of reporting by
your managers as we feel is owed to us at Berkshire Hathaway by managers of
our business units. Obviously, the degree of detail must be different, particularly
where information would be useful to a business competitor or the like. But the
general scope, balance, and level of candor should be similar. We don’t expect a
public relations document when our operating managers tell us what is going on,
and we don’t feel you should receive such a document.
In large part, companies obtain the shareholder constituency that they seek
and deserve. If they focus their thinking and communications on short-term
results or short-term stock market consequences they will, in large part, attract
shareholders who focus on the same factors. And if they are cynical in their

treatment of investors, eventually that cynicism is highly likely to be returned by
the investment community.
Phil Fisher, a respected investor and author, once likened the policies of the
corporation in attracting shareholders to those of a restaurant attracting potential
customers. A restaurant could seek a given clientele—patrons of fast foods,
elegant dining, Oriental food, etc.—and eventually obtain an appropriate group
of devotees. If the job were expertly done, that clientele, pleased with the
service, menu, and price level offered, would return consistently. But the
restaurant could not change its character constantly and end up with a happy and
stable clientele. If the business vacillated between French cuisine and take-out
chicken, the result would be a revolving door of confused and dissatisfied
customers.
So it is with corporations and the shareholder constituency they seek. You
can’t be all things to all men, simultaneously seeking different owners whose
primary interests run from high current yield to long-term capital growth to stock
market pyrotechnics, etc.
The reasoning of managements that seek large trading activity in their
shares puzzles us. In effect, such managements are saying that they want a good
many of the existing clientele continually to desert them in favor of new ones—
because you can’t add lots of new owners (with new expectations) without
losing lots of former owners.
We much prefer owners who like our service and menu and who return year
after year. It would be hard to find a better group to sit in the Berkshire
Hathaway shareholder “seats” than those already occupying them. So we hope to
continue to have a very low turnover among our owners, reflecting a
constituency that understands our operation, approves of our policies, and shares
our expectations. And we hope to deliver on those expectations.
1. Although our form is corporate, our attitude is partnership. Charlie
Munger and I think of our shareholders as owner-partners, and of ourselves as
managing partners. (Because of the size of our shareholdings we are also, for
better or worse, controlling partners.) We do not view the company itself as the
ultimate owner of our business assets but instead view the company as a conduit
through which our shareholders own the assets.
Charlie and I hope that you do not think of yourself as merely owning a
piece of paper whose price wiggles around daily and that is a candidate for sale
when some economic or political event makes you nervous. We hope you instead
visualize yourself as a part owner of a business that you expect to stay with
indefinitely, much as you might if you owned a farm or apartment house in
partnership with members of your family. For our part, we do not view Berkshire

shareholders as faceless members of an ever-shifting crowd, but rather as co-
venturers who have entrusted their funds to us for what may well turn out to be
the remainder of their lives.
The evidence suggests that most Berkshire shareholders have indeed
embraced this long-term partnership concept. The annual percentage turnover in
Berkshire’s shares is a small fraction of that occurring in the stocks of other
major American corporations, even when the shares I own are excluded from the
calculation.
In effect, our shareholders behave in respect to their Berkshire stock much
as Berkshire itself behaves in respect to companies in which it has an
investment. As owners of, say, Coca-Cola or Gillette shares, we think of
Berkshire as being a non-managing partner in two extraordinary businesses, in
which we measure our success by the long-term progress of the companies rather
than by the month-to-month movements of their stocks. In fact, we would not
care in the least if several years went by in which there was no trading, or
quotation of prices, in the stocks of those companies. If we have good long-term
expectations, short-term price changes are meaningless for us except to the
extent they offer us an opportunity to increase our ownership at an attractive
price.
2. In line with Berkshire’s owner-orientation, most of our directors have a
major portion of their net worth invested in the company. We eat our own
cooking.
Charlie’s family has [80–90%] of its net worth in Berkshire shares; and I
have about [98–99%]. In addition, many of my relatives—my sisters and
cousins, for example—keep a huge portion of their net worth in Berkshire stock.
Charlie and I feel totally comfortable with this eggs-in-one-basket situation
because Berkshire itself owns a wide variety of truly extraordinary businesses.
Indeed, we believe that Berkshire is close to being unique in the quality and
diversity of the businesses in which it owns either a controlling interest or a
minority interest of significance.
Charlie and I cannot promise you results. But we can guarantee that your
financial fortunes will move in lockstep with ours for whatever period of time
you elect to be our partner. We have no interest in large salaries or options or
other means of gaining an “edge” over you. We want to make money only when
our partners do and in exactly the same proportion. Moreover, when I do
something dumb, I want you to be able to derive some solace from the fact that
my financial suffering is proportional to yours.
3. Our long-term economic goal (subject to some qualifications mentioned
later) is to maximize Berkshire’s average annual rate of gain in intrinsic

business value on a per-share basis. We do not measure the economic
significance or performance of Berkshire by its size; we measure by per-share
progress. We are certain that the rate of per-share progress will diminish in the
future—a greatly enlarged capital base will see to that. But we will be
disappointed if our rate does not exceed that of the average large American
corporation.
4. Our preference would be to reach our goal by directly owning a
diversified group of businesses that generate cash and consistently earn above-
average returns on capital. Our second choice is to own parts of similar
businesses, attained primarily through purchases of marketable common stocks
by our insurance subsidiaries. The price and availability of businesses and the
need for insurance capital determine any given year’s capital allocation.
In recent years, we made a number of acquisitions. Though there will be
dry years also, we expect to make a number of acquisitions in the decades to
come, and our hope is that they will be large. If these purchases approach the
quality of those we have made in the past, Berkshire will be well served.
The challenge for us is to generate ideas as rapidly as we generate cash. In
this respect, a depressed stock market is likely to present us with significant
advantages. For one thing, it tends to reduce the prices at which entire
companies become available for purchase. Second, a depressed market makes it
easier for our insurance companies to buy small pieces of wonderful businesses
—including additional pieces of business we already own—at attractive prices.
And third, some of those same wonderful businesses, such as Coca-Cola, are
consistent buyers of their own shares, which means that they, and we, gain from
the cheaper prices at which they can buy.
Overall, Berkshire and its long-term shareholders benefit from a sinking
stock market much as a regular purchaser of food benefits from declining food
prices. So when the market plummets—as it will from time to time—neither
panic nor mourn. It’s good news for Berkshire.
5. Because of our two-pronged approach to business ownership and
because of the limitations of conventional accounting, consolidated reported
earnings may reveal relatively little about our true economic performance.
Charlie and I, both as owners and managers, virtually ignore such consolidated
numbers. However, we will also report to you the earnings of each major
business we control, numbers we consider of great importance. These figures,
along with other information we will supply about the individual businesses,
should generally aid you in making judgments about them.
To state things simply, we try to give you in the annual report the numbers
and other information that really matter. Charlie and I pay a great deal of

attention to how well our businesses are doing, and we also work to understand
the environment in which each business is operating. For example, is one of our
businesses enjoying an industry tailwind or is it facing a headwind? Charlie and
I need to know exactly which situation prevails and to adjust our expectations
accordingly. We will also pass along our conclusions to you.
Over time, the large majority of our businesses have exceeded our
expectations. But sometimes we have disappointments, and we will try to be as
candid in informing you about those as we are in describing the happier
experiences. When we use unconventional measures to chart our progress, we
will try to explain these concepts and why we regard them as important. In other
words, we believe in telling you how we think so that you can evaluate not only
Berkshire’s businesses but also assess our approach to management and capital
allocation.
6. Accounting consequences do not influence our operating or capital-
allocation decisions. When acquisition costs are similar, we much prefer to
purchase $2 of earnings that is not reportable by us under standard accounting
principles than to purchase $1 of earnings that is reportable. This is precisely
the choice that often faces us since entire businesses (whose earnings will be
fully reportable) frequently sell for double the pro-rata price of small portions
(whose earnings will be largely unreportable). In aggregate and over time, we
expect the unreported earnings to be fully reflected in our intrinsic business
value through capital gains.
We have found over time that the undistributed earnings of our investees, in
aggregate, have been as fully as beneficial to Berkshire as if they had been
distributed to us (and therefore had been included in the earnings we officially
report). This pleasant result has occurred because most of our investees are
engaged in truly outstanding businesses that can often employ incremental
capital to great advantage, either by putting it to work in their businesses or by
repurchasing their shares. Obviously, every capital decision that our investees
have made has not benefitted us as shareholders, but overall we have garnered
far more than a dollar of value for each dollar they have retained. We
consequently regard look-through earnings as realistically portraying our yearly
gain from operations.
7. We use debt sparingly and, when we do borrow, we attempt to structure
our loans on a long-term fixed-rate basis. We will reject interesting opportunities
rather than over-leverage our balance sheet. This conservatism has penalized
our results but it is the only behavior that leaves us comfortable, considering our
fiduciary obligations to policyholders, lenders and the many equity holders who
have committed unusually large portions of their net worth to our care. (As one

of the Indianapolis “500” winners said: “To finish first, you must first finish.”)
The financial calculus that Charlie and I employ would never permit our
trading a good night’s sleep for a shot at a few extra percentage points of return.
I’ve never believed in risking what my family and friends have and need in order
to pursue what they don’t have and don’t need.
Besides, Berkshire has access to two low-cost, non-perilous sources of
leverage that allow us to safely own far more assets than our equity capital alone
would permit: deferred taxes and “float,” the funds of others that our insurance
business holds because it receives premiums before needing to pay out losses.
Both of these funding sources have grown rapidly and now total about $100
billion.
Better yet, this funding to date has been cost-free. Deferred tax liabilities
bear no interest. And as long as we can break even in our insurance
underwriting, the cost of the float developed from that operation is zero. Neither
item, it should be understood, is equity; these are real liabilities. But they are
liabilities without covenants or due dates attached to them. In effect, they give us
the benefit of debt—an ability to have more assets working for us—but saddle us
with none of its drawbacks.
Of course, there is no guarantee that we can obtain our float in the future at
no cost. But we feel our chances of attaining that goal are as good as those of
anyone in the insurance business. Not only have we reached the goal in the past
(despite a number of important mistakes by your Chairman), our 1996
acquisition of GEICO materially improved our prospects for getting there in the
future. [Since 2011], we expect additional borrowings to be concentrated in our
utilities and railroad businesses, loans that are non-recourse to Berkshire. Here,
we will favor long-term, fixed-rate loans. When we make a truly large purchase,
as we did with BNSF, we will borrow money at the parent company level with
the intent of quickly paying it back.
8. A managerial “wish list” will not be filled at shareholder expense. We
will not diversify by purchasing entire businesses at control prices that ignore
long-term economic consequences to our shareholders. We will only do with
your money what we would do with our own, weighing fully the values you can
obtain by diversifying your own portfolios through direct purchases in the stock
market.
Charlie and I are interested only in acquisitions that we believe will raise
the per-share intrinsic value of Berskhire’s stock. The size of our paychecks or
our offices will never be related to the size of Berkshire’s balance sheet.
9. We feel noble intentions should be checked periodically against results.
We test the wisdom of retaining earnings by assessing whether retention, over

time, delivers shareholders at least $1 of market value for each $1 retained. To
date, this test has been met. We will continue to apply it on a five-year rolling
basis. As our net worth grows, it is more difficult to use retained earnings wisely.
I should have written the “five-year rolling basis” sentence differently, an
error I didn’t realize until I received a question about this subject at the 2009
annual meeting.
When the stock market has declined sharply over a five-year stretch, our
market-price premium to book value has sometimes shrunk. And when that
happens, we fail the test as I improperly formulated it. In fact, we fell far short as
early as 1971-75, well before I wrote this principle in 1983.
The five-year test should be: (1) during the period did our book-value gain
exceed the performance of the S&P; and (2) did our stock consistently sell at a
premium to book, meaning that every $1 of retained earnings was always worth
more than $1? If these tests are met, retaining earnings has made sense.
10. We will issue common stock only when we receive as much in business
value as we give. This rule applies to all forms of issuance—not only mergers or
public stock offerings, but stock-for-debt swaps, stock options, and convertible
securities as well. We will not sell small portions of your company—and that is
what the issuance of shares amounts to—on a basis inconsistent with the value of
the entire enterprise.
When we sold the Class B shares in 1996, we stated that Berkshire stock
was not undervalued—and some people found that shocking. That reaction was
not well-founded. Shock should have registered instead had we issued shares
when our stock was undervalued. Managements that say or imply during a
public offering that their stock is undervalued are usually being economical with
the truth or uneconomical with their existing shareholders’ money: Owners
unfairly lose if their managers deliberately sell assets for 80¢ that in fact are
worth $1. We didn’t commit that kind of crime in our offering of Class B shares
and we never will. (We did not, however, say at the time of the sale that our
stock was overvalued, though many media have reported that we did.)
11. You should be fully aware of one attitude Charlie and I share that hurts
our financial performance: Regardless of price, we have no interest at all in
selling any good businesses that Berkshire owns. We are also very reluctant to
sell sub-par businesses as long as we expect them to generate at least some cash
and as long as we feel good about their managers and labor relations. We hope
not to repeat the capital-allocation mistakes that led us into such sub-par
businesses. And we react with great caution to suggestions that our poor
businesses can be restored to satisfactory profitability by major capital
expenditures. (The projections will be dazzling and the advocates sincere, but, in

the end, major additional investment in a terrible industry usually is about as
rewarding as struggling in quicksand.) Nevertheless, gin rummy managerial
behavior (discard your least promising business at each turn) is not our style. We
would rather have our overall results penalized a bit than engage in that kind of
behavior.
We continue to avoid gin rummy behavior. True, we closed our textile
business in the mid-1980s after 20 years of struggling with it, but only because
we felt it was doomed to run never-ending operating losses. We have not,
however, given thought to selling operations that would command very fancy
prices nor have we dumped our laggards, though we focus hard on curing the
problems that cause them to lag.
12. We will be candid in our reporting to you, emphasizing the pluses and
minuses important in appraising business value. Our guideline is to tell you the
business facts that we would want to know if our positions were reversed. We
owe you no less. Moreover, as a company with a major communications
business, it would be inexcusable for us to apply lesser standards of accuracy,
balance and incisiveness when reporting on ourselves than we would expect our
news people to apply when reporting on others. We also believe candor benefits
us as managers: The CEO who misleads others in public may eventually mislead
himself in private.
At Berkshire you will find no “big bath” accounting maneuvers or
restructuring. And we won’t “smooth” quarterly or annual results: We will
always tell you how many strokes we have taken on each hole and never play
around with the scorecard. When the numbers are a very rough “guesstimate,” as
they necessarily must be in insurance reserving, we will try to be both consistent
and conservative in our approach.
We will be communicating with you in several ways. Through the annual
report, I try to give all shareholders as much value-defining information as can
be conveyed in a document kept to reasonable length. We also try to convey a
liberal quantity of condensed but important information in our quarterly reports,
though I don’t write those (one recital a year is enough). Still another important
occasion for communication is our Annual Meeting, at which Charlie and I are
delighted to spend five hours or more answering questions about Berkshire. But
there is one way we can’t communicate: on a one-on-one basis. That isn’t
feasible given Berkshire’s many thousands of owners.
In all of our communications, we try to make sure that no single
shareholder gets an edge: We do not follow the usual practice of giving earnings
“guidance” to analysts or large shareholders. Our goal is to have all of our
owners updated at the same time.

13. Despite our policy of candor we will discuss our activities in
marketable securities only to the extent legally required. Good investment ideas
are rare, valuable and subject to competitive appropriation just as good product
or business acquisition ideas are. Therefore we normally will not talk about our
investment ideas. This ban extends even to securities we have sold (because we
may purchase them again) and to stocks we are incorrectly rumored to be
buying. If we deny those reports but say “no comment” on other occasions, the
no-comments become confirmation.
Though we continue to be unwilling to talk about specific stocks, we freely
discuss our business and investment philosophy. I benefitted enormously from
the intellectual generosity of Ben Graham, the greatest teacher in the history of
finance, and I believe it appropriate to pass along what I learned from him, even
if that creates new and able investment competitors for Berkshire just as Ben’s
teachings did for him.
14. To the extent possible, we would like each Berkshire shareholder to
record a gain or loss in market value during his period of ownership that is
proportional to the gain or loss in per-share intrinsic value recorded by the
company during that holding period. For this to come about, the relationship
between the intrinsic value and the market price of a Berkshire share would need
to remain constant, and by our preferences at 1-to-1. As that implies, we would
rather see Berkshire’s stock price at a fair level than a high level. Obviously,
Charlie and I can’t control Berkshire’s price. But by our policies and
communications, we can encourage informed, rational behavior by owners that,
in turn, will tend to produce a stock price that is also rational. Our it’s-as-bad-
to-be-overvalued-as-to-be-undervalued 
approach 
may 
disappoint 
some
shareholders, particularly those poised to sell. We believe, however, that it
affords Berkshire the best prospect of attracting long-term investors who seek to
profit from the progress of the company rather than from the investment mistakes
of their partners.
15. We regularly compare the gain in Berkshire’s per-share book value to
the performance of the S&P 500. Over time, we hope to outpace this yardstick.
Otherwise, why do our investors need us? The measurement, however, has
certain shortcomings. Moreover, it now is less meaningful on a year-to-year
basis than was formerly the case. That is because our equity holdings, whose
value tends to move with the S&P 500, are a far smaller portion of our net worth
than they were in earlier years. Additionally, gains in the S&P stocks are
counted in full in calculating that index, whereas gains in Berkshire’s equity
holdings are counted at 65% because of the federal tax we incur. We, therefore,
expect to outperform the S&P in lackluster years for the stock market and

underperform when the market has a strong year.
1 [1979; 1996 Owner’s Manual—originally 1983, and annually beginning
in 1988, with occasional modification.]

I. CORPORATE GOVERNANCE
Many annual meetings are a waste of time, both for shareholders and for
management. Sometimes that is true because management is reluctant to open up
on matters of business substance. More often a nonproductive session is the fault
of shareholder participants who are more concerned about their own moment on
stage than they are about the affairs of the corporation. What should be a forum
for business discussion becomes a forum for theatrics, spleen-venting and
advocacy of issues. (The deal is irresistible: for the price of one share you get to
tell a captive audience your ideas as to how the world should be run.) Under
such circumstances, the quality of the meeting often deteriorates from year to
year as the antics of those interested in themselves discourage attendance by
those interested in the business.
Berkshire’s meetings are a different story. The number of shareholders
attending grows a bit each year and we have yet to experience a silly question or
an ego-inspired commentary.2 Instead, we get a wide variety of thoughtful
questions about the business. Because the annual meeting is the time and place
for these, Charlie and I are happy to answer them all, no matter how long it
takes. (We cannot, however, respond to written or phoned questions at other
times of the year; one-person-at-a-time reporting is a poor use of management
time in a company with [thousands of] shareholders.) The only business matters
that are off limits at the annual meeting are those about which candor might cost
our company real money. Our activities in securities would be the main
example.3
A. Full and Fair Disclosure4
At Berkshire, full reporting means giving you the information that we
would wish you to give to us if our positions were reversed. What Charlie and I
would want under that circumstance would be all the important facts about
current operations as well as the CEO’s frank view of the long-term economic
characteristics of the business. We would expect both a lot of financial details
and a discussion of any significant data we would need to interpret what was
presented.
When Charlie and I read reports, we have no interest in pictures of
personnel, plants or products. References to EBITDA make us shudder—does

management think the tooth fairy pays for capital expenditures?5 We’re very
suspicious of accounting methodology that is vague or unclear, since too often
that means management wishes to hide something. And we don’t want to read
messages that a public relations department or consultant has turned out. Instead,
we expect a company’s CEO to explain in his or her own words what’s
happening.
For us, fair reporting means getting information to our 300,000 “partners”
simultaneously, or as close to that mark as possible. We therefore put our annual
and quarterly financials on the Internet between the close of the market on a
Friday and the following morning. By our doing that, shareholders and other
interested investors have timely access to these important releases and also have
a reasonable amount of time to digest the information they include before the
markets open on Monday.
We applaud the work that Arthur Levitt, Jr., until recently Chairman of the
SEC, has done in cracking down on the corporate practice of “selective
disclosure” that had spread like cancer in recent years. Indeed, it had become
virtually standard practice for major corporations to “guide” analysts or large
holders to earnings expectations that were intended either to be on the nose or a
tiny bit below what the company truly expected to earn. Through the selectively
dispersed hints, winks and nods that companies engaged in, speculatively-
minded institutions and advisors were given an information edge over
investment-oriented individuals. This was corrupt behavior, unfortunately
embraced by both Wall Street and corporate America.
Thanks to Chairman Levitt, whose general efforts on behalf of investors
were both tireless and effective, corporations are now required to treat all of their
owners equally. The fact that this reform came about because of coercion rather
than conscience should be a matter of shame for CEOs and their investor
relations departments.
One further thought while I’m on my soapbox: Charlie and I think it is both
deceptive and dangerous for CEOs to predict growth rates for their companies.
They are, of course, frequently egged on to do so by both analysts and their own
investor relations departments. They should resist, however, because too often
these predictions lead to trouble.
It’s fine for a CEO to have his own internal goals and, in our view, it’s even
appropriate for the CEO to publicly express some hopes about the future, if these
expectations are accompanied by sensible caveats. But for a major corporation to
predict that its per-share earnings will grow over the long term at, say, 15%
annually is to court trouble.
That’s true because a growth rate of that magnitude can only be maintained

by a very small percentage of large businesses. Here’s a test: Examine the record
of, say, the 200 highest earning companies from 1970 to 1980 and tabulate how
many have increased per-share earnings by 15% annually since those dates. You
will find that only a handful have. I would wager you a very significant sum that
fewer than 10 of the 200 most profitable companies in 2000 will attain 15%
annual growth in earnings-per-share over the next 20 years.
The problem arising from lofty predictions is not just that they spread
unwarranted optimism. Even more troublesome is the fact that they corrode CEO
behavior. Over the years, Charlie and I have observed many instances in which
CEOs engaged in uneconomic operating maneuvers so that they could meet
earnings targets they had announced. Worse still, after exhausting all that
operating acrobatics would do, they sometimes played a wide variety of
accounting games to “make the numbers.” These accounting shenanigans have a
way of snowballing: Once a company moves earnings from one period to
another, operating shortfalls that occur thereafter require it to engage in further
accounting maneuvers that must be even more “heroic.” These can turn fudging
into fraud. (More money, it has been noted, has been stolen with the point of a
pen than at the point of a gun.)
Charlie and I tend to be leery of companies run by CEOs who woo
investors with fancy predictions. A few of these managers will prove prophetic
—but others will turn out to be congenital optimists, or even charlatans.
Unfortunately, it’s not easy for investors to know in advance which species they
are dealing with.
Three suggestions for investors: First, beware of companies displaying
weak accounting. If a company still does not expense options, or if its pension
assumptions are fanciful, watch out. When managements take the low road in
aspects that are visible, it is likely they are following a similar path behind the
scenes. There is seldom just one cockroach in the kitchen.
Trumpeting EBITDA (earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and
amortization) is a particularly pernicious practice. Doing so implies that
depreciation is not truly an expense, given that it is a “non-cash” charge. That’s
nonsense. In truth, depreciation is a particularly unattractive expense because the
cash outlay it represents is paid up front, before the asset acquired has delivered
any benefits to the business. Imagine, if you will, that at the beginning of this
year a company paid all of its employees for the next ten years of their service
(in the way they would lay out cash for a fixed asset to be useful for ten years).
In the following nine years, compensation would be a “non-cash” expense—a

reduction of a prepaid compensation asset established this year. Would anyone
care to argue that the recording of the expense in years two through ten would be
simply a bookkeeping formality?
Second, 
unintelligible 
footnotes 
usually 
indicate 
untrustworthy
management. If you can’t understand a footnote or other managerial explanation,
it’s usually because the CEO doesn’t want you to. Enron’s descriptions of certain
transactions still baffle me.
Finally, be suspicious of companies that trumpet earnings projections and
growth expectations. Businesses seldom operate in a tranquil, no-surprise
environment, and earnings simply don’t advance smoothly (except, of course, in
the offering books of investment bankers).
Charlie and I not only don’t know today what our businesses will earn next
year—we don’t even know what they will earn next quarter. We are suspicious
of those CEOs who regularly claim they do know the future—and we become
downright incredulous if they consistently reach their declared targets. Managers
that always promise to “make the numbers” will at some point be tempted to
make up the numbers.
B. Boards and Managers6
[The performance of CEOs of investee companies], which we have
observed at close range, contrasts vividly with that of many CEOs, which we
have fortunately observed from a safe distance. Sometimes these CEOs clearly
do not belong in their jobs; their positions, nevertheless, are usually secure. The
supreme irony of business management is that it is far easier for an inadequate
CEO to keep his job than it is for an inadequate subordinate.
If a secretary, say, is hired for a job that requires typing ability of at least 80
words a minute and turns out to be capable of only 50 words a minute, she will
lose her job in no time. There is a logical standard for this job; performance is
easily measured; and if you can’t make the grade, you’re out. Similarly, if new
sales people fail to generate sufficient business quickly enough, they will be let
go. Excuses will not be accepted as a substitute for orders.
However, a CEO who doesn’t perform is frequently carried indefinitely.
One reason is that performance standards for his job seldom exist. When they
do, they are often fuzzy or they may be waived or explained away, even when
the performance shortfalls are major and repeated. At too many companies, the
boss shoots the arrow of managerial performance and then hastily paints the
bull's–eye around the spot where it lands.

Another important, but seldom recognized, distinction between the boss and
the foot soldier is that the CEO has no immediate superior whose performance is
itself getting measured. The sales manager who retains a bunch of lemons in his
sales force will soon be in hot water himself. It is in his immediate self–interest
to promptly weed out his hiring mistakes. Otherwise, he himself may be weeded
out. An office manager who has hired inept secretaries faces the same
imperative.
But the CEO’s boss is a Board of Directors that seldom measures itself and
is infrequently held to account for substandard corporate performance. If the
Board makes a mistake in hiring, and perpetuates that mistake, so what? Even if
the company is taken over because of the mistake, the deal will probably bestow
substantial benefits on the outgoing Board members. (The bigger they are, the
softer they fall.)
Finally, relations between the Board and the CEO are expected to be
congenial. At board meetings, criticism of the CEO’s performance is often
viewed as the social equivalent of belching. No such inhibitions restrain the
office manager from critically evaluating the substandard typist.
These points should not be interpreted as a blanket condemnation of CEOs
or Boards of Directors: Most are able and hardworking, and a number are truly
outstanding. But the management failings that Charlie and I have seen make us
thankful that we are linked with the managers of our three permanent holdings.
They love their businesses, they think like owners, and they exude integrity and
ability.
At our annual meetings, someone usually asks “What happens to this place
if you get hit by a truck?” I’m glad they are still asking the question in this form.
It won’t be too long before the query becomes: “What happens to this place if
you don’t get hit by a truck?”
Such questions, in any event, raise a reason for me to discuss corporate
governance, a hot topic during the past year. In general, I believe that directors
have stiffened their spines recently and that shareholders are now being treated
somewhat more like true owners than was the case not long ago. Commentators
on corporate governance, however, seldom make any distinction among three
fundamentally different manager/owner situations that exist in publicly-held
companies. Though the legal responsibility of directors is identical throughout,
their ability to effect change differs in each of the cases. Attention usually falls
on the first case, because it prevails on the corporate scene. Since Berkshire falls
into the second category, however, and will someday fall into the third, we will

discuss all three variations.
The first, and by far most common, board situation is one in which a
corporation has no controlling shareholder. In that case, I believe directors
should behave as if there is a single absentee owner, whose long-term interest
they should try to further in all proper ways. Unfortunately, “long-term” gives
directors a lot of wiggle room. If they lack either integrity or the ability to think
independently, directors can do great violence to shareholders while still
claiming to be acting in their long-term interest. But assume the board is
functioning well and must deal with a management that is mediocre or worse.
Directors then have the responsibility for changing that management, just as an
intelligent owner would do if he were present. And if able but greedy managers
overreach and try to dip too deeply into the shareholders’ pockets, directors must
slap their hands.
In this plain-vanilla case, a director who sees something he doesn’t like
should attempt to persuade the other directors of his view. If he is successful, the
board will have the muscle to make the appropriate change. Suppose, though,
that the unhappy director can’t get other directors to agree with him. He should
then feel free to make his views known to the absentee owners. Directors seldom
do that, of course. The temperament of many directors would in fact be
incompatible with critical behavior of that sort. But I see nothing improper in
such actions, assuming the issues are serious. Naturally, the complaining director
can expect a vigorous rebuttal from the unpersuaded directors, a prospect that
should discourage the dissenter from pursuing trivial or non-rational causes.
For the boards just discussed, I believe the directors ought to be relatively
few in number—say, ten or less—and ought to come mostly from the outside.
The outside board members should establish standards for the CEO’s
performance and should also periodically meet, without his being present, to
evaluate his performance against those standards.
The requisites for board membership should be business savvy, interest in
the job, and owner-orientation. Too often, directors are selected simply because
they are prominent or add diversity to the board. That practice is a mistake.
Furthermore, mistakes in selecting directors are particularly serious because
appointments are so hard to undo: The pleasant but vacuous director need never
worry about job security.
The second case is that existing at Berkshire, where the controlling owner is
also the manager. At some companies, this arrangement is facilitated by the
existence of two classes of stock endowed with disproportionate voting power.
In these situations, it’s obvious that the board does not act as an agent between
owners and management and that the directors cannot effect change except

through persuasion. Therefore, if the owner/manager is mediocre or worse—or is
overreaching—there is little a director can do about it except object. If the
directors having no connections to the owner/manager make a unified argument,
it may well have some effect. More likely it will not.
If change does not come, and the matter is sufficiently serious, the outside
directors should resign. Their resignation will signal their doubts about
management, and it will emphasize that no outsider is in a position to correct the
owner/manager’s shortcomings.
The third governance case occurs when there is a controlling owner who is
not involved in management. This case, examples of which are Hershey Foods
and Dow Jones, puts the outside directors in a potentially useful position. If they
become unhappy with either the competence or integrity of the manager, they
can go directly to the owner (who may also be on the board) and report their
dissatisfaction. This situation is ideal for an outside director, since he need make
his case only to a single, presumably interested owner, who can forthwith effect
change if the argument is persuasive. Even so, the dissatisfied director has only
that single course of action. If he remains unsatisfied about a critical matter, he
has no choice but to resign.
Logically, the third case should be the most effective in insuring first-class
management. In the second case the owner is not going to fire himself, and in the
first case, directors often find it very difficult to deal with mediocrity or mild
overreaching. Unless the unhappy directors can win over a majority of the board
—an awkward social and logistical task, particularly if management’s behavior
is merely odious, not egregious—their hands are effectively tied. In practice,
directors trapped in situations of this kind usually convince themselves that by
staying around they can do at least some good. Meanwhile, management
proceeds unfettered.
In the third case, the owner is neither judging himself nor burdened with the
problem of garnering a majority. He can also insure that outside directors are
selected who will bring useful qualities to the board. These directors, in turn,
will know that the good advice they give will reach the right ears, rather than
being stifled by a recalcitrant management. If the controlling owner is intelligent
and self-confident, he will make decisions in respect to management that are
meritocratic and pro-shareholder. Moreover—and this is critically important—he
can readily correct any mistake he makes.
At Berkshire we operate in the second mode now and will for as long as I
remain functional. My health, let me add, is excellent. For better or worse, you
are likely to have me as an owner/manager for some time. All in all, we’re
prepared for “the truck.”

Both the ability and fidelity of managers have long needed monitoring.
Indeed, nearly 2,000 years ago, Jesus Christ addressed this subject, speaking
(Luke 16:2) approvingly of “a certain rich man” who told his manager, “Give an
account of thy stewardship; for thou mayest no longer be steward.”
Accountability and stewardship withered in the last decade, becoming
qualities deemed of little importance by those caught up in the Great Bubble. As
stock prices went up, the behavioral norms of managers went down. By the late
‘90s, as a result, CEOs who traveled the high road did not encounter heavy
traffic.
Most CEOs, it should be noted, are men and women you would be happy to
have as trustees for your children’s assets or as next-door neighbors. Too many
of these people, however, have in recent years behaved badly at the office,
fudging numbers and drawing obscene pay for mediocre business achievements.
Why have intelligent and decent directors failed so miserably? The answer
lies not in inadequate laws—it’s always been clear that directors are obligated to
represent the interests of shareholders—but rather in what I’d call “boardroom
atmosphere.”
It’s almost impossible, for example, in a boardroom populated by well-
mannered people, to raise the question of whether the CEO should be replaced.
It’s equally awkward to question a proposed acquisition that has been endorsed
by the CEO, particularly when his inside staff and outside advisors are present
and unanimously support his decision. (They wouldn’t be in the room if they
didn’t.) Finally, when the compensation committee—armed, as always, with
support from a high-paid consultant—reports on a mega-grant of options to the
CEO, it would be like belching at the dinner table for a director to suggest that
the committee reconsider.
These “social” difficulties argue for outside directors regularly meeting
without the CEO—a reform that is being instituted and that I enthusiastically
endorse. I doubt, however, that most of the other new governance rules and
recommendations will provide benefits commensurate with the monetary and
other costs they impose.
The current cry is for “independent” directors. It is certainly true that it is
desirable to have directors who think and speak independently—but they must
also be business-savvy, interested and shareholder oriented [as noted in the
previous essay].
Over a span of 40 years, I have been on 19 public-company boards
(excluding Berkshire’s) and have interacted with perhaps 250 directors. Most of
them were “independent” as defined by today’s rules. But the great majority of

these directors lacked at least one of the three qualities I value. As a result, their
contribution to shareholder well-being was minimal at best and, too often,
negative.
These people, decent and intelligent though they were, simply did not know
enough about business and/or care enough about shareholders to question foolish
acquisitions or egregious compensation. My own behavior, I must ruefully add,
frequently fell short as well: Too often I was silent when management made
proposals that I judged to be counter to the interests of shareholders. In those
cases, collegiality trumped independence.
So that we may further see the failings of “independence,” let’s look at a
62-year case study covering thousands of companies. Since 1940, federal law
has mandated that a large proportion of the directors of investment companies
(most of these mutual funds) be independent. The requirement was originally
40% and now it is 50%. In any case, the typical fund has long operated with a
majority of directors who qualify as independent.
These directors and the entire board have many perfunctory duties, but in
actuality have only two important responsibilities: obtaining the best possible
investment manager and negotiating with that manager for the lowest possible
fee. When you are seeking investment help yourself, those two goals are the only
ones that count, and directors acting for other investors should have exactly the
same priorities. Yet when it comes to independent directors pursuing either goal,
their record has been absolutely pathetic.
Many thousands of investment-company boards meet annually to carry out
the vital job of selecting who will manage the savings of the millions of owners
they represent. Year after year the directors of Fund A select manager A, Fund B
directors select manager B, etc. . . . in a zombie-like process that makes a
mockery of stewardship. Very occasionally, a board will revolt. But for the most
part, a monkey will type out a Shakespeare play before an “independent”
mutual-fund director will suggest that his fund look at other managers, even if
the incumbent manager has persistently delivered substandard performance.
When they are handling their own money, of course, directors will look to
alternative advisors—but it never enters their minds to do so when they are
acting as fiduciaries for others.
The hypocrisy permeating the system is vividly exposed when a fund
management company—call it “A”—is sold for a huge sum to Manager “B”.
Now the “independent” directors experience a “counter-revelation” and decide
that Manager B is the best that can be found—even though B was available (and
ignored) in previous years. Not so incidentally, B also could formerly have been
hired at a far lower rate than is possible now that it has bought Manager A.

That’s because B has laid out a fortune to acquire A, and B must now recoup that
cost through fees paid by the A shareholders who were “delivered” as part of the
deal. (For a terrific discussion of the mutual fund business, read John Bogle’s
Common Sense on Mutual Funds.)
Investment company directors have failed as well in negotiating
management fees. If you or I were empowered, I can assure you that we could
easily negotiate materially lower management fees with the incumbent managers
of most mutual funds. And, believe me, if directors were promised a portion of
any fee savings they realized, the skies would be filled with falling fees. Under
the current system, though, reductions mean nothing to “independent” directors
while meaning everything to managers. So guess who wins?
Having the right money manager, of course, is far more important to a fund
than reducing the manager’s fee. Both tasks are nonetheless the job of directors.
And in stepping up to these all-important responsibilities, tens of thousands of
“independent” directors, over more than six decades, have failed miserably.
(They’ve succeeded, however, in taking care of themselves; their fees from
serving on multiple boards of a single “family” of funds often run well into six
figures.)
When the manager cares deeply and the directors don’t, what’s needed is a
powerful countervailing force—and that’s the missing element in today’s
corporate governance. Getting rid of mediocre CEOs and eliminating
overreaching by the able ones requires action by owners—big owners. The
logistics aren’t that tough: The ownership of stock has grown increasingly
concentrated in recent decades, and today it would be easy for institutional
managers to exert their will on problem situations. Twenty, or even fewer, of the
largest institutions, acting together, could effectively reform corporate
governance at a given company, simply by withholding their votes for directors
who were tolerating odious behavior. In my view, this kind of concerted action is
the only way that corporate stewardship can be meaningfully improved.
Several institutional shareholders and their advisors decided I lacked
“independence” in my role as a director of Coca-Cola. One group wanted me
removed from the board and another simply wanted me booted from the audit
committee.
My first impulse was to secretly fund the group behind the second idea.
Why anyone would wish to be on an audit committee is beyond me. But since
directors must be assigned to one committee or another, and since no CEO wants
me on his compensation committee, it’s often been my lot to get an audit

committee assignment. As it turned out, the institutions that opposed me failed
and I was re-elected to the audit job. (I fought off the urge to ask for a recount.)
Some institutions questioned my “independence” because, among other
things, McLane and Dairy Queen buy lots of Coke products. (Do they want us to
favor Pepsi?) But independence is defined in Webster’s as “not subject to control
by others.” I’m puzzled how anyone could conclude that our Coke purchases
would “control” my decision-making when the counterweight is the well-being
of $8 billion of Coke stock held by Berkshire. Assuming I’m even marginally
rational, elementary arithmetic should make it clear that my heart and mind
belong to the owners of Coke, not to its management.
I can’t resist mentioning that Jesus understood the calibration of
independence far more clearly than do the protesting institutions. In Matthew
6:21 He observed: “For where your treasure is, there will your heart be also.”
Even to an institutional investor, $8 billion should qualify as “treasure” that
dwarfs any profits Berkshire might earn on its routine transactions with Coke.
Measured by the biblical standard, the Berkshire board is a model: (a) every
director is a member of a family owning at least $4 million of stock; (b) none of
these shares were acquired from Berkshire via options or grants; (c) no directors
receive committee, consulting or board fees from the company that are more
than a tiny portion of their annual income; and (d) although we have a standard
corporate indemnity arrangement, we carry no liability insurance for directors.
At Berkshire, board members travel the same road as shareholders.
Charlie and I have seen much behavior confirming the Bible’s “treasure”
point. In our view, based on our considerable boardroom experience, the least
independent directors are likely to be those who receive an important fraction of
their annual income from the fees they receive for board service (and who hope
as well to be recommended for election to other boards and thereby to boost their
income further). Yet these are the very board members most often classed as
“independent.”
Most directors of this type are decent people and do a first-class job. But
they wouldn’t be human if they weren’t tempted to thwart actions that would
threaten their livelihood. Some may go on to succumb to such temptations.
Let’s look at an example based upon circumstantial evidence. I have first-
hand knowledge of a recent acquisition proposal (not from Berkshire) that was
favored by management, blessed by the company’s investment banker and slated
to go forward at a price above the level at which the stock had sold for some
years (or now sells for). In addition, a number of directors favored the
transaction and wanted it proposed to shareholders.
Several of their brethren, however, each of whom received board and

committee fees totaling about $100,000 annually, scuttled the proposal, which
meant that shareholders never learned of this multi-billion offer. Non-
management directors owned little stock except for shares they had received
from the company. Their open-market purchases in recent years had meanwhile
been nominal, even though the stock had sold far below the acquisition price
proposed. In other words, these directors didn’t want the shareholders to be
offered X even though they had consistently declined the opportunity to buy
stock for their own account at a fraction of X.
I don’t know which directors opposed letting shareholders see the offer. But
I do know that $100,000 is an important portion of the annual income of some of
those deemed “independent,” clearly meeting the Matthew 6:21 definition of
“treasure.” If the deal had gone through, these fees would have ended.
Neither the shareholders nor I will ever know what motivated the
dissenters. Indeed they themselves will not likely know, given that self-interest
inevitably blurs introspection. We do know one thing, though: At the same
meeting at which the deal was rejected, the board voted itself a significant
increase in directors’ fees.
We now have eleven directors and each of them, combined with members
of their families, owns more than $4 million of Berkshire stock. Moreover, all
have held major stakes in Berkshire for many years. In the case of six of the
eleven, family ownership amounts to at least hundreds of millions and dates
back at least three decades. All eleven directors purchased their holdings in the
market just as you did; we’ve never passed out options or restricted shares.
Charlie and I love such honest-to-God ownership. After all, who ever washes a
rental car?
In addition, director fees at Berkshire are nominal (as my son, Howard,
periodically reminds me). Thus, the upside from Berkshire for all eleven is
proportionately the same as the upside for any Berkshire shareholder. And it
always will be.
The downside for Berkshire directors is actually worse than yours because
we carry no directors and officers liability insurance. Therefore, if something
really catastrophic happens on our directors’ watch, they are exposed to losses
that will far exceed yours.
The bottom line for our directors: You win, they win big; you lose, they lose
big. Our approach might be called owner-capitalism. We know of no better way
to engender true independence.
In addition to being independent, directors should have business savvy, a

shareholder orientation and a genuine interest in the company. The rarest of these
qualities is business savvy—and if it is lacking, the other two are of little help.
Many people who are smart, articulate and admired have no real understanding
of business. That’s no sin; they may shine elsewhere. But they don’t belong on
corporate boards.
Charlie and I really have only two jobs. One is to attract and keep
outstanding managers to run our various operations.7 This hasn’t been all that
difficult. Usually the managers came with the companies we bought, having
demonstrated their talents throughout careers that spanned a wide variety of
business circumstances. They were managerial stars long before they knew us,
and our main contribution has been to not get in their way. This approach seems
elementary: if my job were to manage a golf team—and if Jack Nicklaus or
Arnold Palmer were willing to play for me—neither would get a lot of directives
from me about how to swing.
Some of our key managers are independently wealthy (we hope they all
become so), but that poses no threat to their continued interest: they work
because they love what they do and relish the thrill of outstanding performance.
They unfailingly think like owners (the highest compliment we can pay a
manager) and find all aspects of their business absorbing.
(Our prototype for occupational fervor is the Catholic tailor who used his
small savings of many years to finance a pilgrimage to the Vatican. When he
returned, his parish held a special meeting to get his first-hand account of the
Pope. “Tell us,” said the eager faithful, “just what sort of fellow is he?” Our hero
wasted no words: “He’s a forty-four medium.”)
Charlie and I know that the right players will make almost any team
manager look good. We subscribe to the philosophy of Ogilvy & Mather’s
founding genius, David Ogilvy: “If each of us hires people who are smaller than
we are, we shall become a company of dwarfs. But, if each of us hires people
who are bigger than we are, we shall become a company of giants.”
A by-product of our managerial style is the ability it gives us to easily
expand Berkshire’s activities. We’ve read management treatises that specify
exactly how many people should report to any one executive, but they make
little sense to us. When you have able managers of high character running
businesses about which they are passionate, you can have a dozen or more
reporting to you and still have time for an afternoon nap. Conversely, if you have
even one person reporting to you who is deceitful, inept or uninterested, you will
find yourself with more than you can handle. Charlie and I could work with

double the number of managers we now have, so long as they had the rare
qualities of the present ones.
We intend to continue our practice of working only with people whom we
like and admire. This policy not only maximizes our chances for good results, it
also ensures us an extraordinarily good time. On the other hand, working with
people who cause your stomach to churn seems much like marrying for money
—probably a bad idea under any circumstances, but absolute madness if you are
already rich.
At Berkshire we feel that telling outstanding CEOs, such as Tony [Nicely of
GEICO], how to run their companies would be the height of foolishness. Most of
our managers wouldn’t work for us if they got a lot of backseat driving.
(Generally, they don’t have to work for anyone, since 75% or so are
independently wealthy.) Besides, they are the Mark McGwires of the business
world and need no advice from us as to how to hold the bat or when to swing.
Nevertheless, Berkshire’s ownership may make even the best of managers
more effective. First, we eliminate all of the ritualistic and nonproductive
activities that normally go with the job of CEO. Our managers are totally in
charge of their personal schedules. Second, we give each a simple mission: Just
run your business as if: (1) you own 100% of it; (2) it is the only asset in the
world that you and your family have or will ever have; and (3) you can’t sell or
merge it for at least a century. As a corollary, we tell them they should not let
any of their decisions be affected even slightly by accounting considerations. We
want our managers to think about what counts, not how it will be counted.
Very few CEOs of public companies operate under a similar mandate,
mainly because they have owners who focus on short-term prospects and
reported earnings. Berkshire, however, has a shareholder base—which it will
have for decades to come—that has the longest investment horizon to be found
in the public-company universe. Indeed, a majority of our shares are held by
investors who expect to die still holding them. We can therefore ask our CEOs to
manage for maximum long-term value, rather than for next quarter’s earnings.
We certainly don’t ignore the current results of our businesses—in most cases,
they are of great importance—but we never want them to be achieved at the
expense of our building ever-greater competitive strengths.
I believe the GEICO story demonstrates the benefits of Berkshire’s
approach. Charlie and I haven’t taught Tony a thing—and never will—but we
have created an environment that allows him to apply all of his talents to what’s
important. He does not have to devote his time or energy to board meetings,

press interviews, presentations by investment bankers or talks with financial
analysts. Furthermore, he need never spend a moment thinking about financing,
credit ratings or “Street” expectations for earnings per share. Because of our
ownership structure, he also knows that this operational framework will endure
for decades to come. In this environment of freedom, both Tony and his
company can convert their almost limitless potential into matching
achievements.
Every day, in countless ways, the competitive position of each of our
businesses grows either weaker or stronger. If we are delighting customers,
eliminating unnecessary costs and improving our products and services, we gain
strength. But if we treat customers with indifference or tolerate bloat, our
businesses will wither. On a daily basis, the effects of our actions are
imperceptible; cumulatively, though, their consequences are enormous.
When our long-term competitive position improves as a result of these
almost unnoticeable actions, we describe the phenomenon as “widening the
moat.” And doing that is essential if we are to have the kind of business we want
a decade or two from now. We always, of course, hope to earn more money in
the short-term. But when short-term and long-term conflict, widening the moat
must take precedence.
If a management makes bad decisions in order to hit short-term earnings
targets, and consequently gets behind the eight-ball in terms of costs, customer
satisfaction or brand strength, no amount of subsequent brilliance will overcome
the damage that has been inflicted. Take a look at the dilemmas of managers in
the auto and airline industries today as they struggle with the huge problems
handed them by their predecessors. Charlie is fond of quoting Ben Franklin’s
“An ounce of prevention is worth a pound of cure.” But sometimes no amount of
cure will overcome the mistakes of the past.
C. The Anxieties of Business Change8
In July we decided to close our textile operation, and by year-end this
unpleasant job was largely completed. The history of this business is instructive.
When Buffett Partnership, Ltd., an investment partnership of which I was
general partner, bought control of Berkshire Hathaway 21 years ago, it had an
accounting net worth of $22 million, all devoted to the textile business. The
company’s intrinsic business value, however, was considerably less because the
textile assets were unable to earn returns commensurate with their accounting

value. Indeed, during the previous nine years (the period in which Berkshire and
Hathaway operated as a merged company) aggregate sales of $530 million had
produced an aggregate loss of $10 million. Profits had been reported from time
to time but the net effect was always one step forward, two steps back.
At the time we made our purchase, southern textile plants—largely non-
union—were believed to have an important competitive advantage. Most
northern textile operations had closed and many people thought we would
liquidate our business as well.
We felt, however, that the business would be run much better by a long-
time employee whom we immediately selected to be president, Ken Chace. In
this respect we were 100% correct: Ken and his recent successor, Garry
Morrison, have been excellent managers, every bit the equal of managers at our
more profitable businesses.
In early 1967 cash generated by the textile operation was used to fund our
entry into insurance via the purchase of National Indemnity Company. Some of
the money came from earnings and some from reduced investment in textile
inventories, receivables, and fixed assets. This pullback proved wise: although
much improved by Ken’s management, the textile business never became a good
earner, not even in cyclical upturns.
Further diversification for Berkshire followed, and gradually the textile
operation’s depressing effect on our overall return diminished as the business
became a progressively smaller portion of the corporation. We remained in the
business for reasons that I stated in the 1978 annual report (and summarized at
other times also): “(1) our textile businesses are very important employers in
their communities, (2) management has been straightforward in reporting on
problems and energetic in attacking them, (3) labor has been cooperative and
understanding in facing our common problems, and (4) the business should
average modest cash returns relative to investment.” I further said, “As long as
these conditions prevail—and we expect that they will—we intend to continue to
support our textile business despite more attractive alternative uses for capital.”
It turned out that I was very wrong about (4). Though 1979 was moderately
profitable, the business thereafter consumed major amounts of cash. By mid-
1985 it became clear, even to me, that this condition was almost sure to continue.
Could we have found a buyer who would continue operations, I would have
certainly preferred to sell the business rather than liquidate it, even if that meant
somewhat lower proceeds for us. But the economics that were finally obvious to
me were also obvious to others, and interest was nil.
I won’t close down businesses of sub-normal profitability merely to add a
fraction of a point to our corporate rate of return. However, I also feel it

inappropriate for even an exceptionally profitable company to fund an operation
once it appears to have unending losses in prospect. Adam Smith would disagree
with my first proposition, and Karl Marx would disagree with my second; the
middle ground is the only position that leaves me comfortable.
I should reemphasize that Ken and Garry have been resourceful, energetic
and imaginative in attempting to make our textile operation a success. Trying to
achieve sustainable profitability, they reworked product lines, machinery
configurations and distribution arrangements. We also made a major acquisition,
Waumbec Mills, with the expectation of important synergy (a term widely used
in business to explain an acquisition that otherwise makes no sense). But in the
end nothing worked and I should be faulted for not quitting sooner. A recent
Business Week article stated that 250 textile mills have closed since 1980. Their
owners were not privy to any information that was unknown to me; they simply
processed it more objectively. I ignored Comte’s advice—“the intellect should be
the servant of the heart, but not its slave”—and believed what I preferred to
believe.
The domestic textile industry operates in a commodity business, competing
in a world market in which substantial excess capacity exists. Much of the
trouble we experienced was attributable, both directly and indirectly, to
competition from foreign countries whose workers are paid a small fraction of
the U.S. minimum wage. But that in no way means that our labor force deserves
any blame for our closing. In fact, in comparison with employees of American
industry generally, our workers were poorly paid, as has been the case
throughout the textile business. In contract negotiations, union leaders and
members were sensitive to our disadvantageous cost position and did not push
for unrealistic wage increases or unproductive work practices. To the contrary,
they tried just as hard as we did to keep us competitive. Even during our
liquidation period they performed superbly. (Ironically, we would have been
better off financially if our union had behaved unreasonably some years ago; we
then would have recognized the impossible future that we faced, promptly closed
down, and avoided significant future losses.)
Over the years, we had the option of making large capital expenditures in
the textile operation that would have allowed us to somewhat reduce variable
costs. Each proposal to do so looked like an immediate winner. Measured by
standard return-on-investment tests, in fact, these proposals usually promised
greater economic benefits than would have resulted from comparable
expenditures in our highly-profitable candy and newspaper businesses.
But the promised benefits from these textile investments were illusory.
Many of our competitors, both domestic and foreign, were stepping up to the

same kind of expenditures and, once enough companies did so, their reduced
costs became the baseline for reduced prices industry-wide. Viewed individually,
each company’s capital investment decision appeared cost-effective and rational;
viewed collectively, the decisions neutralized each other and were irrational (just
as happens when each person watching a parade decides he can see a little better
if he stands on tiptoes). After each round of investment, all the players had more
money in the game and returns remained anemic.
Thus, we faced a miserable choice: huge capital investment would have
helped to keep our textile business alive, but would have left us with terrible
returns on ever-growing amounts of capital. After the investment, moreover, the
foreign competition would still have retained a major, continuing advantage in
labor costs. A refusal to invest, however, would make us increasingly non-
competitive, even measured against domestic textile manufacturers. I always
thought myself in the position described by Woody Allen in one of his movies:
“More than any other time in history, mankind faces a crossroads. One path leads
to despair and utter hopelessness, the other to total extinction. Let us pray we
have the wisdom to choose correctly.”
For an understanding of how the to-invest-or-not-to-invest dilemma plays
out in a commodity business, it is instructive to look at Burlington Industries, by
far the largest U.S. textile company both 21 years ago and now. In 1964
Burlington had sales of $1.2 billion against our $50 million. It had strengths in
both distribution and production that we could never hope to match and also, of
course, had an earnings record far superior to ours. Its stock sold at 60 at the end
of 1964; ours was 13.
Burlington made a decision to stick to the textile business, and in 1985 had
sales of about $2.8 billion. During the 1964–85 period, the company made
capital expenditures of about $3 billion, far more than any other U.S. textile
company and more than $200-per-share on that $60 stock. A very large part of
the expenditures, I am sure, was devoted to cost improvement and expansion.
Given Burlington’s basic commitment to stay in textiles, I would also surmise
that the company’s capital decisions were quite rational.
Nevertheless, Burlington has lost sales volume in real dollars and has far
lower returns on sales and equity now than 20 years ago. Split 2-for-1 in 1965,
the stock now sells at 34—on an adjusted basis, just a little over its $60 price in
1964. Meanwhile, the CPI has more than tripled. Therefore, each share
commands about one-third the purchasing power it did at the end of 1964.
Regular dividends have been paid but they, too, have shrunk significantly in
purchasing power.
This devastating outcome for the shareholders indicates what can happen

when much brain power and energy are applied to a faulty premise. The situation
is suggestive of Samuel Johnson’s horse: “A horse that can count to ten is a
remarkable horse—not a remarkable mathematician.” Likewise, a textile
company that allocates capital brilliantly within its industry is a remarkable
textile company—but not a remarkable business.
My conclusion from my own experiences and from much observation of
other businesses is that a good managerial record (measured by economic
returns) is far more a function of what business boat you get into than it is of
how effectively you row (though intelligence and effort help considerably, of
course, in any business, good or bad). Should you find yourself in a chronically-
leaking boat, energy devoted to changing vessels is likely to be more productive
than energy devoted to patching leaks.
Not all of our businesses are destined to increase profits. When an
industry’s underlying economics are crumbling, talented management may slow
the rate of decline. Eventually, though, eroding fundamentals will overwhelm
managerial brilliance. (As a wise friend told me long ago, “If you want to get a
reputation as a good businessman, be sure to get into a good business.”) And
fundamentals are definitely eroding in the newspaper industry, a trend that has
caused the profits of our Buffalo News to decline. The skid will almost certainly
continue.
When Charlie and I were young, the newspaper business was as easy a way
to make huge returns as existed in America. As one not-too-bright publisher
famously said, “I owe my fortune to two great American institutions: monopoly
and nepotism.” No paper in a one-paper city, however bad the product or
however inept the management, could avoid gushing profits.
The industry’s staggering returns could be simply explained. For most of
the 20th Century, newspapers were the primary source of information for the
American public. Whether the subject was sports, finance, or politics,
newspapers reigned supreme. Just as important, their ads were the easiest way to
find job opportunities or to learn the price of groceries at your town’s
supermarkets.
The great majority of families therefore felt the need for a paper every day,
but understandably most didn’t wish to pay for two. Advertisers preferred the
paper with the most circulation, and readers tended to want the paper with the
most ads and news pages. This circularity led to a law of the newspaper jungle:
Survival of the Fattest.
Thus, when two or more papers existed in a major city (which was almost

universally the case a century ago), the one that pulled ahead usually emerged as
the stand-alone winner. After competition disappeared, the paper’s pricing power
in both advertising and circulation was unleashed. Typically, rates for both
advertisers and readers would be raised annually—and the profits rolled in. For
owners this was economic heaven. (Interestingly, though papers regularly—and
often in a disapproving way—reported on the profitability of, say, the auto or
steel industries, they never enlightened readers about their own Midas-like
situation. Hmmm . . .)
As long ago as my 1991 letter to shareholders, I nonetheless asserted that
this insulated world was changing, writing that “the media businesses . . . will
prove considerably less marvelous than I, the industry, or lenders thought would
be the case only a few years ago.” Some publishers took umbrage at both this
remark and other warnings from me that followed. Newspaper properties,
moreover, continued to sell as if they were indestructible slot machines. In fact,
many intelligent newspaper executives who regularly chronicled and analyzed
important worldwide events were either blind or indifferent to what was going
on under their noses.
Now, however, almost all newspaper owners realize that they are constantly
losing ground in the battle for eyeballs. Simply put, if cable and satellite
broadcasting, as well as the internet, had come along first, newspapers as we
know them probably would never have existed. In Berkshire’s world, Stan
Lipsey does a terrific job running the Buffalo News, and I am enormously proud
of its editor, Margaret Sullivan. The News’ penetration of its market is the
highest among that of this country’s large newspapers. We also do better
financially than most metropolitan newspapers, even though Buffalo’s
population and business trends are not good.
Nevertheless, this operation faces unrelenting pressures that will cause
profit margins to slide. True, we have the leading online news operation in
Buffalo, and it will continue to attract more viewers and ads. However, the
economic potential of a newspaper internet site—given the many alternative
sources of information and entertainment that are free and only a click away—is
at best a small fraction of that existing in the past for a print newspaper facing no
competition.
For a local resident, ownership of a city’s paper, like ownership of a sports
team, still produces instant prominence. With it typically comes power and
influence. These are ruboffs that appeal to many people with money. Beyond
that, civic-minded, wealthy individuals may feel that local ownership will serve
their community well. That’s why Peter Kiewit bought the Omaha paper more
than 40 years ago.

We are likely therefore to see non-economic individual buyers of
newspapers emerge, just as we have seen such buyers acquire major sports
franchises. Aspiring press lords should be careful, however: There’s no rule that
says a newspaper’s revenues can’t fall below its expenses and that losses can’t
mushroom. Fixed costs are high in the newspaper business, and that’s bad news
when unit volume heads south. As the importance of newspapers diminishes,
moreover, the “psychic” value of possessing one will wane, whereas owning a
sports franchise will likely retain its cachet.
Unless we face an irreversible cash drain, we will stick with the News, just
as we’ve said that we would. Charlie and I love newspapers—we each read five
a day—and believe that a free and energetic press is a key ingredient for
maintaining a great democracy. We hope that some combination of print and
online will ward off economic doomsday for newspapers, and we will work hard
in Buffalo to develop a sustainable business model. I think we will be successful.
But the days of lush profits from our newspaper are over.
D. Social Compacts9
We have two very large businesses, BNSF [Burlington Northern Santa Fe
Railroad Corporation] and MidAmerican Energy, with important common
characteristics that distinguish them from our many others. A key characteristic
of both companies is the huge investment they have in very long-lived, regulated
assets, with these funded by large amounts of long-term debt that is not
guaranteed by Berkshire. Our credit is not needed: Both businesses have earning
power that, even under very adverse business conditions, amply covers their
interest requirements.
Both companies are heavily regulated, and both will have a never-ending
need to make major investments in plant and equipment. Both also need to
provide efficient, customer-satisfying service to earn the respect of their
communities and regulators. In return, both need to be assured that they will be
allowed to earn reasonable earnings on future capital investments.
[R]ailroads are [vital] to our country’s future. Rail moves 42% of America’s
inter-city freight, measured by ton-miles, and BNSF moves more than any other
railroad—about 28% of the industry total. A little math will tell you that more
than 11% of all inter-city ton-miles of freight in the U.S. is transported by BNSF.
Given the shift of population to the West, our share may well inch higher.
All of this adds up to a huge responsibility. We are a major and essential
part of the American economy’s circulatory system, obliged to constantly

maintain and improve our 23,000 miles of track along with its ancillary bridges,
tunnels, engines and cars. In carrying out this job, we must anticipate society’s
needs, not merely react to them. Fulfilling our societal obligation, we will
regularly spend far more than our depreciation, with this excess amounting to $2
billion in 2011. I’m confident we will earn appropriate returns on our huge
incremental investments. Wise regulation and wise investment are two sides of
the same coin.
At MidAmerican, we participate in a similar “social compact.” We are
expected to put up ever increasing sums to satisfy the future needs of our
customers. If we meanwhile operate reliably and efficiently, we know that we
will obtain a fair return on these investments.
MidAmerican supplies 2.4 million customers in the U.S. with electricity,
operating as the largest supplier in Iowa, Wyoming and Utah and as an important
provider in other states as well. Our pipelines transport 8% of the country’s
natural gas. Obviously, many millions of Americans depend on us every day.
MidAmerican has delivered outstanding results for both its owners
(Berkshire’s interest is 89.8%) and its customers. Shortly after MidAmerican
purchased Northern Natural Gas pipeline in 2002, that company’s performance
as a pipeline was rated dead last, 43 out of 43, by the leading authority in the
field. In the most recent report published, Northern Natural was ranked second.
The top spot was held by our other pipeline, Kern River.
In its electric business, MidAmerican has a comparable record. Iowa rates
have not increased since we purchased our operation there in 1999. During the
same period, the other major electric utility in the state has raised prices more
than 70% and now has rates far above ours. In certain metropolitan areas in
which the two utilities operate side by side, electric bills of our customers run far
below those of their neighbors. I am told that comparable houses sell at higher
prices in these cities if they are located in our service area.
MidAmerican will have 2,909 megawatts of wind generation in operation
by the end of 2011, more than any other regulated electric utility in the country.
The total amount that MidAmerican has invested or committed to wind is a
staggering $5.4 billion. We can make this sort of investment because
MidAmerican retains all of its earnings, unlike other utilities that generally pay
out most of what they earn.
MidAmerican has consistently kept its end of the bargain with society and,
to society’s credit, it has reciprocated: With few exceptions, our regulators have
promptly allowed us to earn a fair return on the ever increasing sums of capital

we must invest. Going forward, we will do whatever it takes to serve our
territories in the manner they expect. We believe that, in turn, we will be allowed
the return we deserve on the funds we invest.
We see a “social compact” existing between the public and our railroad
business, just as is the case with our utilities. If either side shirks its obligations,
both sides will inevitably suffer. Therefore, both parties to the compact should—
and we believe will—understand the benefit of behaving in a way that
encourages good behavior by the other. It is inconceivable that our country will
realize anything close to its full economic potential without its possessing first-
class electricity and railroad systems. We will do our part to see that they exist.
E. An Owner-Based Approach to Corporate Charity10
A recent survey reported that about 50% of major American companies
match charitable contributions made by directors (sometimes by a factor of three
to one). In effect, these representatives of the owners direct funds to their
favorite charities, and never consult the owners as to their charitable preferences.
(I wonder how they would feel if the process were reversed and shareholders
could invade the directors’ pockets for charities favored by the shareholders.)
When A takes money from B to give to C and A is a legislator, the process is
called taxation. But when A is an officer or director of a corporation, it is called
philanthropy. We continue to believe that contributions, aside from those with
quite clear direct benefits to the company, should reflect the charitable
preferences of owners rather than those of officers and directors.
On September 30, 1981 Berkshire received a tax ruling from the U.S.
Treasury Department that, in most years, should produce a significant benefit for
charities of your choice.
Each Berkshire shareholder—on a basis proportional to the number of
shares of Berkshire that he owns—will be able to designate recipients of
charitable contributions by our company. You’ll name the charity; Berkshire will
write the check. The ruling states that there will be no personal tax consequences
to our shareholders from making such designations.
Thus, our owners now can exercise a perquisite that, although routinely
exercised by the owners in closely-held businesses, is almost exclusively
exercised by the managers in more widely-held businesses.
In a widely-held corporation the executives ordinarily arrange all charitable
donations, with no input at all from shareholders, in two main categories:

(1) Donations considered to benefit the corporation directly in an amount
roughly commensurate with the cost of the donation; and
(2) Donations considered to benefit the corporation indirectly through hard-
to-measure, long-delayed feedback effects of various kinds.
I and other Berkshire executives have arranged in the past, as we will
arrange in the future, all charitable donations in the first category. However, the
aggregate level of giving in such category has been quite low, and very likely
will remain quite low, because not many gifts can be shown to produce roughly
commensurate direct benefits to Berkshire.
In the second category, Berkshire’s charitable gifts have been virtually nil,
because I am not comfortable with ordinary corporate practice and had no better
practice to substitute. What bothers me about ordinary corporate practice is the
way gifts tend to be made based more on who does the asking and how corporate
peers are responding than on an objective evaluation of the donee’s activities.
Conventionality often overpowers rationality.
A common result is the use of the stockholder’s money to implement the
charitable inclinations of the corporate manager, who usually is heavily
influenced by specific social pressures on him. Frequently there is an added
incongruity; many corporate managers deplore governmental allocation of the
taxpayer’s dollar but embrace enthusiastically their own allocation of the
shareholder’s dollar.
For Berkshire, a different model seems appropriate. Just as I wouldn’t want
you to implement your personal judgments by writing checks on my bank
account for charities of your choice, I feel it inappropriate to write checks on
your corporate “bank account” for charities of my choice. Your charitable
preferences are as good as mine and, for both you and me, funds available to
foster charitable interests in a tax-deductible manner reside largely at the
corporate level rather than in our own hands.
Under such circumstances, I believe Berkshire should imitate more closely-
held companies, not larger public companies. If you and I each own 50% of a
corporation, our charitable decision making would be simple. Charities very
directly related to the operations of the business would have first claim on our
available charitable funds. Any balance available after the “operations-related”
contributions would be divided among various charitable interests of the two of
us, on a basis roughly proportional to our ownership interest. If the manager of
our company had some suggestions, we would listen carefully—but the final
decision would be ours. Despite our corporate form, in this aspect of the
business we probably would behave as if we were a partnership.
Wherever feasible, I believe in maintaining such a partnership frame of

mind, even though we operate through a large, fairly widely-held corporation.
Our Treasury ruling will allow such partnership-like behavior in this area.
I am pleased that Berkshire donations can become owner-directed. It is
ironic, but understandable, that a large and growing number of major
corporations have charitable policies pursuant to which they will match gifts
made by their employees (and—brace yourself for this one—many even match
gifts made by directors) but none, to my knowledge, has a plan matching
charitable gifts by owners. I say “understandable” because much of the stock of
many large corporations is owned on a “revolving door” basis by institutions that
have short-term investment horizons, and that lack a long-term owner’s
perspective.
Our own shareholders are a different breed. [A]t the end of each year, more
than 98% of our shares are owned by people who were shareholders at the
beginning of the year. This long-term commitment to the business reflects an
owner mentality which, as your manager, I intend to acknowledge in all feasible
ways. The designated contributions policy is an example of that intent.
Our new program enabling shareholders to designate the recipients of
corporate charitable contributions was greeted with extraordinary enthusiasm. Of
932,206 shares eligible for participation (shares where the name of the actual
owner appeared on our stockholder record), 95.6% responded. Even excluding
Buffett-related shares, the response topped 90%.
In addition, more than 3% of our shareholders voluntarily wrote letters or
notes, all but one approving of the program. Both the level of participation and
of commentary surpass any shareholder response we have witnessed, even when
such response has been intensively solicited by corporate staff and highly-paid
professional proxy organizations. In contrast, your extraordinary level of
response occurred without even the nudge of a company-provided return
envelope. This self-propelled behavior speaks well for the program, and speaks
well for our shareholders.
Apparently the owners of our corporation like both possessing and
exercising the ability to determine where gifts of their funds shall be made. The
“father-knows-best” school of corporate governance will be surprised to find that
none of our shareholders sent in a designation sheet with instructions that the
officers of Berkshire—in their superior wisdom, of course—make the decision
on charitable funds applicable to his shares. Nor did anyone suggest that his
share of our charitable funds be used to match contributions made by our
corporate directors to charities of the directors’ choice (a popular, proliferating

and non-publicized policy at many large corporations).
All told, $1,783,655 of shareholder-designed contributions were distributed
to about 675 charities. In addition, Berkshire and subsidiaries continue to make
certain contributions pursuant to local level decisions made by our operating
managers.
There will be some years, perhaps two or three out of ten, when
contributions by Berkshire will produce substandard tax deductions—or none at
all. In those years we will not effect our shareholder-designated charitable
program. In all other years we expect to inform you about October 10th of the
amount per share that you may designate. A reply form will accompany the
notice, and you will be given about three weeks to respond with your
designation.
The designated-contributions idea, along with many other ideas that have
turned out well for us, was conceived by Charlie Munger, Vice Chairman of
Berkshire. Irrespective of titles, Charlie and I work as partners in managing all
controlled companies. To almost a sinful degree, we enjoy our work as managing
partners. And we enjoy having you as our financial partners.
In addition to the shareholder-designated contributions that Berkshire
distributes, managers of our operating businesses make contributions, including
merchandise, averaging [between $1.5 million and $2.5 million] annually. These
contributions support local charities, such as The United Way, and produce
roughly commensurate benefits for our businesses.
However, neither our operating managers nor officers of the parent
company use Berkshire funds to make contributions to broad national programs
or charitable activities of special personal interest to them, except to the extent
they do so as shareholders. If your employees, including your CEO, wish to give
to their alma maters or other institutions to which they feel a personal
attachment, we believe they should use their own money, not yours.
Let me add that our program is easy to administer. Last fall, for two
months, we borrowed one person from National Indemnity to help us implement
the instructions that came from our 7,500 registered shareholders. I’d guess that
the average corporate program in which employee gifts are matched incurs far
greater administrative costs. Indeed, our entire corporate overhead is less than
half the size of our charitable contributions. (Charlie, however, insists that I tell
you that $1.4 million of our $4.9 million overhead is attributable to our corporate
jet, The Indefensible.)11

Below is a list showing the largest categories to which our shareholders
have steered their contributions.
(a) 347 churches and synagogues received 569 gifts
(b) 238 colleges and universities received 670 gifts
(c) 244 K-12 schools (about two-thirds secular, one-third religious)
received 525 gifts
(d) 288 institutions dedicated to art, culture or the humanities received
447 gifts
(e) 180 religious social-service organizations (split about equally
between Christian and Jewish) received 411 gifts
(f) 445 secular social-service organizations (about 40% youth-related)
received 759 gifts
(g) 153 hospitals received 261 gifts
(h) 186 health-related organizations (American Heart Association,
American Cancer Society, etc.) received 320 gifts
Three things about this list seem particularly interesting to me. First, to
some degree it indicates what people choose to give money to when they are
acting of their own accord, free of pressure from solicitors or emotional appeals
from charities. Second, the contributions programs of publicly-held companies
almost never allow gifts to churches and synagogues, yet clearly these
institutions are what many shareholders would like to support. Third, the gifts
made by our shareholders display conflicting philosophies: 130 gifts were
directed to organizations that believe in making abortions readily available for
women and 30 gifts were directed to organizations (other than churches) that
discourage or are opposed to abortion.
Last year I told you that I was thinking of raising the amount that Berkshire
shareholders can give under our designated-contributions program and asked for
your comments. We received a few well-written letters opposing the entire idea,
on the grounds that it was our job to run the business and not our job to force
shareholders into making charitable gifts. Most of the shareholders responding,
however, noted the tax efficiency of the plan and urged us to increase the
designated amount. Several shareholders who have given stock to their children
or grandchildren told me that they consider the program a particularly good way
to get youngsters thinking at an early age about the subject of giving. These
people, in other words, perceive the program to be an educational, as well as
philanthropic, tool. The bottom line is that we did raise the amount in 1993, from
$8 per share to $10.

We reluctantly terminated the [shareholder-designated contribution]
program in 2003 because of controversy over the abortion issue. Over the years
numerous organizations on both sides of this issue had been designated by our
shareholders to receive contributions. As a result, we regularly received some
objections to the gifts designated for pro-choice operations. A few of these came
from people and organizations that proceeded to boycott products of our
subsidiaries.
In 2003, many independent associates of The Pampered Chef began to feel
the boycotts. This development meant that people who trusted us—but who were
neither employees of ours nor had a voice in Berkshire decision-making—
suffered serious losses of income.
For our shareholders, there was some modest tax efficiency in Berkshire
doing the giving rather than their making their gifts directly. Additionally, the
program was consistent with our “partnership” approach. But these advantages
paled when they were measured against damage done loyal associates who had
with great personal effort built businesses of their own. Indeed, Charlie and I see
nothing charitable in harming decent, hardworking people just so we and other
shareholders can gain some minor tax efficiencies.
Berkshire now makes no contributions at the parent company level. Our
various subsidiaries follow philanthropic policies consistent with their practices
prior to their acquisition by Berkshire, except that any personal contributions
that former owners had earlier made from their corporate pocketbook are now
funded by them personally.12
F. A Principled Approach to Executive Pay13
When returns on capital are ordinary, an earn-more-by-putting-up-more
record is no great managerial achievement. You can get the same result
personally while operating from your rocking chair. Just quadruple the capital
you commit to a savings account and you will quadruple your earnings. You
would hardly expect hosannas for that particular accomplishment. Yet,
retirement announcements regularly sing the praises of CEOs who have, say,
quadrupled earnings of their widget company during their reign—with no one
examining whether this gain was attributable simply to many years of retained
earnings and the workings of compound interest.
If the widget company consistently earned a superior return on capital
throughout the period, or if capital employed only doubled during the CEO’s
reign, the praise for him may be well deserved. But if return on capital was

lackluster and capital employed increased in pace with earnings, applause should
be withheld. A savings account in which interest was reinvested would achieve
the same year-by-year increase in earnings—and, at only 8% interest, would
quadruple its annual earnings in 18 years.
The power of this simple math is often ignored by companies to the
detriment of their shareholders. Many corporate compensation plans reward
managers handsomely for earnings increases produced solely, or in large part, by
retained earnings—i.e., earnings withheld from owners. For example, ten-year,
fixed-price stock options are granted routinely, often by companies whose
dividends are only a small percentage of earnings.
An example will illustrate the inequities possible under such circumstances.
Let’s suppose that you had a $100,000 savings account earning 8% interest and
“managed” by a trustee who could decide each year what portion of the interest
you were to be paid in cash. Interest not paid out would be “retained earnings”
added to the savings account to compound. And let’s suppose that your trustee,
in his superior wisdom, set the “pay-out ratio” at one-quarter of the annual
earnings.
Under these assumptions, your account would be worth $179,084 at the end
of ten years. Additionally, your annual earnings would have increased about 70%
from $8,000 to $13,515 under this inspired management. And, finally, your
“dividends” would have increased commensurately, rising regularly from $2,000
in the first year to $3,378 in the tenth year. Each year, when your manager’s
public relations firm prepared his annual report to you, all of the charts would
have had lines marching skyward.
Now, just for fun, let’s push our scenario one notch further and give your
trustee-manager a ten-year fixed-price option on part of your “business” (i.e.,
your savings account) based on its fair value in the first year. With such an
option, your manager would reap a substantial profit at your expense—just from
having held on to most of your earnings. If he were both Machiavellian and a bit
of a mathematician, your manager might also have cut the pay-out ratio once he
was firmly entrenched.
This scenario is not as far fetched as you might think. Many stock options
in the corporate world have worked in exactly that fashion: they have gained in
value simply because management retained earnings, not because it did well
with the capital in its hands.
Managers actually apply a double standard to options. Leaving aside
warrants (which deliver the issuing corporation immediate and substantial
compensation), I believe it is fair to say that nowhere in the business world are
ten-year, fixed-price options on all or a portion of a business granted to

outsiders. Ten months, in fact, would be regarded as extreme. It would be
particularly unthinkable for managers to grant a long-term option on a business
that was regularly adding to its capital. Any outsider wanting to secure such an
option would be required to pay fully for capital added during the option period.
The unwillingness of managers to do-unto-outsiders, however, is not
matched by an unwillingness to do-unto-themselves. (Negotiating with one’s self
seldom produces a barroom brawl.) Managers regularly engineer ten-year, fixed-
price options for themselves and associates that, first, totally ignore the fact that
retained earnings automatically build value and, second, ignore the carrying cost
of capital. As a result, these managers end up profiting much as they would have
had they had an option on that savings account that was automatically building
up in value.
Of course, stock options often go to talented, value-adding managers and
sometimes deliver them rewards that are perfectly appropriate. (Indeed,
managers who are really exceptional almost always get far less than they
should.) But when the result is equitable, it is accidental. Once granted, the
option is blind to individual performance. Because it is irrevocable and
unconditional (so long as a manager stays in the company), the sluggard receives
rewards from his options precisely as does the star. A managerial Rip Van
Winkle, ready to doze for ten years, could not wish for a better “incentive”
system.
(I can’t resist commenting on one long-term option given an “outsider”: that
granted the U.S. Government on Chrysler shares as partial consideration for the
government’s guarantee of some life-saving loans. When these options worked
out well for the government, Chrysler sought to modify the payoff, arguing that
the rewards to the government were both far greater than intended and outsize[d]
in relation to its contribution to Chrysler’s recovery. The company’s anguish
over what it saw as an imbalance between payoff and performance made
national news. That anguish may well be unique: to my knowledge, no managers
—anywhere—have been similarly offended by unwarranted payoffs arising from
options granted to themselves or their colleagues.)
Ironically, the rhetoric about options frequently describes them as desirable
because they put managers and owners in the same financial boat. In reality, the
boats are far different. No owner has ever escaped the burden of capital costs,
whereas a holder of a fixed-price option bears no capital costs at all. An owner
must weigh upside potential against downside risk; an option holder has no
downside. In fact, the business project in which you would wish to have an
option frequently is a project in which you would reject ownership. (I’ll be
happy to accept a lottery ticket as a gift—but I’ll never buy one.)

In dividend policy also, the option holders’ interests are best served by a
policy that may ill serve the owner. Think back to the savings account example.
The trustee, holding his option, would benefit from a no-dividend policy.
Conversely, the owner of the account should lean to a total payout so that he can
prevent the option-holding manager from sharing in the account’s retained
earnings.14
Despite their shortcomings, options can be appropriate under some
circumstances. My criticism relates to their indiscriminate use and, in that
connection, I would like to emphasize three points:
First, stock options are inevitably tied to the overall performance of a
corporation. Logically, therefore, they should be awarded only to those managers
with overall responsibility. Managers with limited areas of responsibility should
have incentives that pay off in relation to results under their control. The .350
hitter expects, and also deserves, a big payoff for his performance—even if he
plays for a cellar-dwelling team. And the .150 hitter should get no reward—even
if he plays for a pennant winner. Only those with overall responsibility for the
team should have their rewards tied to its results.
Second, options should be structured carefully. Absent special factors, they
should have built into them a retained-earnings or carrying-cost factor. Equally
important, they should be priced realistically. When managers are faced with
offers for their companies, they unfailingly point out how unrealistic market
prices can be as an index of real value. But why, then, should these same
depressed prices be the valuations at which managers sell portions of their
businesses to themselves? (They may go further: officers and directors
sometimes consult the Tax Code to determine the lowest prices at which they
can, in effect, sell part of the business to insiders. While they’re at it, they often
elect plans that produce the worst tax result for the company.) Except in highly
unusual cases, owners are not well served by the sale of part of their business at
a bargain price—whether the sale is to outsiders or to insiders. The obvious
conclusion: options should be priced at true business value.
Third, I want to emphasize that some managers whom I admire enormously
—and whose operating records are far better than mine—disagree with me
regarding fixed-price options. They have built corporate cultures that work, and
fixed-price options have been a tool that helped them. By their leadership and
example, and by the use of options as incentives, these managers have taught
their colleagues to think like owners. Such a culture is rare and when it exists
should perhaps be left intact—despite inefficiencies and inequities that may
infest the option program. “If it ain’t broke, don’t fix it” is preferable to “purity
at any price.”

Take, for instance, ten year, fixed-price options (and who wouldn’t?). If
Fred Futile, CEO of Stagnant, Inc., receives a bundle of these—let’s say enough
to give him an option on 1% of the company—his self-interest is clear: He
should skip dividends entirely and instead use all of the company’s earnings to
repurchase stock.
Let’s assume that under Fred’s leadership Stagnant lives up to its name. In
each of the ten years after the option grant, it earns $1 billion on $10 billion of
net worth, which initially comes to $10 per share on the 100 million shares then
outstanding. Fred eschews dividends and regularly uses all earnings to
repurchase shares. If the stock constantly sells at ten times earnings per share, it
will have appreciated 158% by the end of the option period. That’s because
repurchases would reduce the number of shares to 38.7 million by that time, and
earnings per share would thereby increase to $25.80. Simply by withholding
earnings from owners, Fred gets very rich, making a cool $158 million, despite
the business itself improving not at all. Astonishingly, Fred could have made
more than $100 million if Stagnant’s earnings had declined by 20% during the
ten-year period.
Fred can also get a splendid result for himself by paying no dividends and
deploying the earnings he withholds from shareholders into a variety of
disappointing projects and acquisitions. Even if these initiatives deliver a paltry
5% return, Fred will still make a bundle. Specifically—with Stagnant’s p/e ratio
remaining unchanged at ten—Fred’s option will deliver him $63 million.
Meanwhile, his shareholders will wonder what happened to the “alignment of
interests” that was supposed to occur when Fred was issued options.
A “normal” dividend policy, of course—one-third of earnings paid out, for
example—produces less extreme results but still can provide lush rewards for
managers who achieve nothing.
CEOs understand this math and know that every dime paid out in dividends
reduces the value of all outstanding options. I’ve never, however, seen this
manager-owner conflict referenced in proxy materials that request approval of a
fixed-priced option plan. Though CEOs invariably preach internally that capital
comes at a cost, they somehow forget to tell shareholders that fixed-price options
give them capital that is free.
It doesn’t have to be this way: It’s child’s play for a board to design options
that give effect to the automatic build-up in value that occurs when earnings are
retained. But—surprise, surprise—options of that kind are almost never issued.
Indeed, the very thought of options with strike prices that are adjusted for
retained earnings seems foreign to compensation “experts,” who are nevertheless

encyclopedic about every management-friendly plan that exists. (“Whose bread I
eat, his song I sing.”)
Getting fired can produce a particularly bountiful payday for a CEO.
Indeed, he can “earn” more in that single day, while cleaning out his desk, than
an American worker earns in a lifetime of cleaning toilets. Forget the old maxim
about nothing succeeding like success: Today, in the executive suite, the all too-
prevalent rule is that nothing succeeds like failure.
At Berkshire, however, we use an incentive-compensation system that
rewards key managers for meeting targets in their own bailiwicks. If See’s does
well, that does not produce incentive compensation at the News—nor vice versa.
Neither do we look at the price of Berkshire stock when we write bonus checks.
We believe good unit performance should be rewarded whether Berkshire stock
rises, falls, or stays even. Similarly, we think average performance should earn
no special rewards even if our stock should soar. “Performance”, furthermore, is
defined in different ways depending upon the underlying economics of the
business: in some our managers enjoy tailwinds not of their own making, in
others they fight unavoidable headwinds.
The rewards that go with this system can be large. At our various business
units, top managers sometimes receive incentive bonuses of five times their base
salary, or more, and it would appear possible that one manager’s bonus could top
$2 million in 1986. (I hope so.) We do not put a cap on bonuses, and the
potential for rewards is not hierarchical. The manager of a relatively small unit
can earn far more than the manager of a larger unit if results indicate he should.
We believe, further, that such factors as seniority and age should not affect
incentive compensation (though they sometimes influence basic compensation.)
A 20 year-old who can hit .300 is as valuable to us as a 40 year-old performing
as well.
Obviously, all Berkshire managers can use their bonus money (or other
funds, including borrowed money) to buy our stock in the market. Many have
done just that—and some now have large holdings. By accepting both the risks
and the carrying cost that go with outright purchases, these managers truly walk
in the shoes of owners.
At Berkshire, we try to be as logical about compensation as about capital
allocation. For example, we compensate Ralph Schey based upon the results of
Scott Fetzer rather than those of Berkshire. What could make more sense, since
he’s responsible for one operation but not the other? A cash bonus or a stock

option tied to the fortunes of Berkshire would provide totally capricious rewards
to Ralph. He could, for example, be hitting home runs at Scott Fetzer while
Charlie and I rang up mistakes at Berkshire, thereby negating his efforts many
times over. Conversely, why should option profits or bonuses be heaped upon
Ralph if good things are occurring in other parts of Berkshire but Scott Fetzer is
lagging?
In setting compensation, we like to hold out the promise of large carrots,
but make sure their delivery is tied directly to results in the area that a manager
controls. When capital invested in an operation is significant, we also both
charge managers a high rate for incremental capital they employ and credit them
at an equally high rate for capital they release.
The product of this money’s-not-free approach is definitely visible at Scott
Fetzer. If Ralph can employ incremental funds at good returns, it pays him to do
so: His bonus increases when earnings on additional capital exceed a meaningful
hurdle charge. But our bonus calculation is symmetrical: If incremental
investment yields substandard returns, the shortfall is costly to Ralph as well as
to Berkshire. The consequence of this two-way arrangement is that it pays Ralph
—and pays him well—to send to Omaha any cash he can’t advantageously use
in his business.
It has become fashionable at public companies to describe almost every
compensation plan as aligning the interests of management with those of
shareholders. In our book, alignment means being a partner in both directions,
not just on the upside. Many “alignment” plans flunk this basic test, being artful
forms of “heads I win, tails you lose.”
A common form of misalignment occurs in the typical stock option
arrangement, which does not periodically increase the option price to
compensate for the fact that retained earnings are building up the wealth of the
company. Indeed, the combination of a ten-year option, a low dividend payout,
and compound interest can provide lush gains to a manager who has done no
more than tread water in his job. A cynic might even note that when payments to
owners are held down, the profit to the option-holding manager increases. I have
yet to see this vital point spelled out in a proxy statement asking shareholders to
approve an option plan.
I can’t resist mentioning that our compensation arrangement with Ralph
Schey was worked out in about five minutes, immediately upon our purchase of
Scott Fetzer and without the “help” of lawyers or compensation consultants. This
arrangement embodies a few very simple ideas—not the kind of terms favored
by consultants who cannot easily send a large bill unless they have established
that you have a large problem (and one, of course, that requires an annual

review). Our agreement with Ralph has never been changed. It made sense to
him and to me in 1986, and it makes sense now. Our compensation arrangements
with the managers of all our other units are similarly simple, though the terms of
each agreement vary to fit the economic characteristics of the business at issue,
the existence in some cases of partial ownership of the unit by managers, etc.
In all instances, we pursue rationality. Arrangements that pay off in
capricious ways, unrelated to a manager’s personal accomplishments, may well
be welcomed by certain managers. Who, after all, refuses a free lottery ticket?
But such arrangements are wasteful to the company and cause the manager to
lose focus on what should be his real areas of concern. Additionally, irrational
behavior at the parent may well encourage imitative behavior at subsidiaries.
At Berkshire, only Charlie and I have the managerial responsibility for the
entire business. Therefore, we are the only parties who should logically be
compensated on the basis of what the enterprise does as a whole. Even so, that is
not a compensation arrangement we desire. We have carefully designed both the
company and our jobs so that we do things we enjoy with people we like.
Equally important, we are forced to do very few boring or unpleasant tasks. We
are the beneficiaries as well of the abundant array of material and psychic perks
that flow to the heads of corporations. Under such idyllic conditions, we don’t
expect shareholders to ante up loads of compensation for which we have no
possible need.
Indeed, if we were not paid at all, Charlie and I would be delighted with the
cushy jobs we hold. At bottom, we subscribe to Ronald Reagan’s creed: “It’s
probably true that hard work never killed anyone, but I figure why take the
chance.”
We made a sizable acquisition in 1991—the H.H. Brown Shoe Co., the
leading North American manufacturer of work shoes and boots, and it has a
history of earning unusually fine margins on sales and assets. Shoes are a tough
business—of the billion pairs purchased in the United States each year, about
85% are imported—and most manufacturers in the industry do poorly. The wide
range of styles and sizes that producers offer causes inventories to be heavy;
substantial capital is also tied up in receivables.
A distinguishing characteristic of H.H. Brown is one of the most unusual
compensation systems I’ve encountered—but one that warms my heart: A
number of key managers are paid an annual salary of $7,800, to which is added a
designated percentage of the profits of the company after these are reduced by a
charge for capital employed. These managers therefore truly stand in the shoes

of owners. In contrast, most managers talk the talk but don’t walk the walk,
choosing instead to employ compensation systems that are long on carrots but
short on sticks (and that almost invariably treat equity capital as if it were cost-
free). The arrangement at Brown, in any case, has served both the company and
its managers exceptionally well, which should be no surprise: Managers eager to
bet heavily on their abilities usually have plenty of ability to bet on.
It’s understandable how [CEO] pay got out of hand. When management
hires employees, or when companies bargain with a vendor, the intensity of
interest is equal on both sides of the table. One party’s gain is the other party’s
loss, and the money involved has real meaning to both. The result is an honest-
to-God negotiation.
But when CEOs (or their representatives) have met with compensation
committees, too often one side—the CEO’s—has cared far more than the other
about what bargain is struck. A CEO, for example, will always regard the
difference between receiving options for 100,000 shares or for 500,000 as
monumental. To a comp committee, however, the difference may seem
unimportant—particularly if, as has been the case at most companies, neither
grant will have any effect on reported earnings. Under these conditions, the
negotiation often has a “play-money” quality.
Overreaching by CEOs greatly accelerated in the 1990s as compensation
packages gained by the most avaricious—a title for which there was vigorous
competition—were promptly replicated elsewhere. The couriers for this
epidemic of greed were usually consultants and human relations departments,
which had no trouble perceiving who buttered their bread. As one compensation
consultant commented: “There are two classes of clients you don’t want to
offend—actual and potential.”
In recent years compensation committees too often have been tail-wagging
puppy dogs meekly following recommendations by consultants, a breed not
known for allegiance to the faceless shareholders who pay their fees. (If you
can’t tell whose side someone is on, they are not on yours.) True, each
committee is required by the SEC to state its reasoning about pay in the proxy.
But the words are usually boilerplate written by the company’s lawyers or its
human-relations department.
This costly charade should cease. Directors should not serve on
compensation committees unless they are themselves capable of negotiating on
behalf of owners. They should explain both how they think about pay and how

they measure performance. Dealing with shareholders’ money, moreover, they
should behave as they would were it their own.
In the 1890s, Samuel Gompers described the goal of organized labor as
“More!” In the 1990s, America’s CEOs adopted his battle cry. The upshot is that
CEOs have often amassed riches while their shareholders have experienced
financial disasters.
Directors should stop such piracy. There’s nothing wrong with paying well
for truly exceptional business performance. But, for anything short of that, it’s
time for directors to shout “Less!” It would be a travesty if the bloated pay of
recent years became a baseline for future compensation. Compensation
committees should go back to the drawing boards.
G. Risk, Reputation and Oversight15
Charlie and I believe that a CEO must not delegate risk control. It’s simply
too important. At Berkshire, [for example,] I both initiate and monitor every
derivatives contract on our books, with the exception of operations-related
contracts at a few of our subsidiaries, such as MidAmerican, and the minor
runoff contracts at General Re. If Berkshire ever gets in trouble, it will be my
fault. It will not be because of misjudgments made by a Risk Committee or
Chief Risk Officer.
In my view a board of directors of a huge financial institution is derelict if it
does not insist that its CEO bear full responsibility for risk control. If he’s
incapable of handling that job, he should look for other employment. And if he
fails at it—with the government thereupon required to step in with funds or
guarantees—the financial consequences for him and his board should be severe.
It has not been shareholders who have botched the operations of some of
our country’s largest financial institutions. Yet they have borne the burden, with
90% or more of the value of their holdings wiped out in most cases of failure.
Collectively, they have lost more than $500 billion in just the four largest
financial fiascos of the last two years. To say these owners have been “bailed-
out” is to make a mockery of the term.
The CEOs and directors of the failed companies, however, have largely
gone unscathed. Their fortunes may have been diminished by the disasters they
oversaw, but they still live in grand style. It is the behavior of these CEOs and
directors that needs to be changed: If their institutions and the country are
harmed by their recklessness, they should pay a heavy price—one not
reimbursable by the companies they’ve damaged nor by insurance. CEOs and, in

many cases, directors have long benefitted from oversized financial carrots;
some meaningful sticks now need to be part of their employment picture as well.
[The 2010 annual report included the following dated July 26, 2010 to
Berkshire’s managers.] This is my biennial letter to reemphasize Berkshire’s top
priority [which] is that all of us continue to zealously guard Berkshire’s
reputation. We can’t be perfect but we can try to be. As I’ve said in these memos
for more than 25 years: “We can afford to lose money—even a lot of money. But
we can’t afford to lose reputation—even a shred of reputation.” We must
continue to measure every act against not only what is legal but also what we
would be happy to have written about on the front page of a national newspaper
in an article written by an unfriendly but intelligent reporter.
Sometimes your associates will say “Everybody else is doing it.” This
rationale is almost always a bad one if it is the main justification for a business
action. It is totally unacceptable when evaluating a moral decision. Whenever
somebody offers that phrase as a rationale, in effect they are saying that they
can’t come up with a good reason. If anyone gives this explanation, tell them to
try using it with a reporter or a judge and see how far it gets them.
If you see anything whose propriety or legality causes you to hesitate, be
sure to give me a call. However, it’s very likely that if a given course of action
evokes such hesitation, it’s too close to the line and should be abandoned.
There’s plenty of money to be made in the center of the court. If it’s questionable
whether some action is close to the line, just assume it is outside and forget it.
As a corollary, let me know promptly if there’s any significant bad news. I
can handle bad news but I don’t like to deal with it after it has festered for
awhile. A reluctance to face up immediately to bad news is what turned a
problem at Salomon from one that could have easily been disposed of into one
that almost caused the demise of a firm with 8,000 employees.
Somebody is doing something today at Berkshire that you and I would be
unhappy about if we knew of it. That’s inevitable: We now employ more than
250,000 people and the chances of that number getting through the day without
any bad behavior occurring is nil. But we can have a huge effect in minimizing
such activities by jumping on anything immediately when there is the slightest
odor of impropriety. Your attitude on such matters, expressed by behavior as
well as words, will be the most important factor in how the culture of your
business develops. Culture, more than rule books, determines how an
organization behaves.
In other respects, talk to me about what is going on as little or as much as

you wish. Each of you does a first-class job of running your operation with your
own individual style and you don’t need me to help. The only items you need to
clear with me are any changes in post-retirement benefits and any unusually
large capital expenditures or acquisitions.
Audit committees can’t audit. Only a company’s outside auditor can
determine whether the earnings that a management purports to have made are
suspect. Reforms that ignore this reality and that instead focus on the structure
and charter of the audit committee will accomplish little. The key job of the
audit committee is simply to get the auditors to divulge what they know.
To do this job, the committee must make sure that the auditors worry more
about misleading its members than about offending management. In recent years
auditors have not felt that way. They have instead generally viewed the CEO,
rather than the shareholders or directors, as their client. That has been a natural
result of day-to-day working relationships and also of the auditors’
understanding that, no matter what the book says, the CEO and CFO pay their
fees and determine whether they are retained for both auditing and other work.
The rules that have been recently instituted [requiring committee members
to have financial expertise] won’t materially change this reality. What will break
this cozy relationship is audit committees unequivocally putting auditors on the
spot, making them understand they will become liable for major monetary
penalties if they don’t come forth with what they know or suspect.
In my opinion, audit committees can accomplish this goal by asking four
questions of auditors, the answers to which should be recorded and reported to
shareholders. These questions are:
1. If the auditor were solely responsible for preparation of the company’s
financial statements, would they have in any way been prepared differently from
the manner selected by management? This question should cover both material
and non-material differences. If the auditor would have done something
differently, both management’s argument and the auditor’s response should be
disclosed. The audit committee should then evaluate the facts.
2. If the auditor were an investor, would he have received—in plain English
—the information essential to his understanding the company’s financial
performance during the reporting period?
3. Is the company following the same internal audit procedure that would
be followed if the auditor himself were CEO? If not, what are the differences and
why?
4. Is the auditor aware of any actions—either accounting or operational—

that have had the purpose and effect of moving revenues or expenses from one
reporting period to another?
If the audit committee asks these questions, its composition—the focus of
most reforms—is of minor importance. In addition, the procedure will save time
and expense. When auditors are put on the spot, they will do their duty. If they
are not put on the spot . . . well, we have seen the results of that.
The primary advantage of our four questions is that they will act as a
prophylactic. Once the auditors know that the audit committee will require them
to affirmatively endorse, rather than merely acquiesce to, management’s actions,
they will resist misdoings early in the process, well before specious figures
become embedded in the company’s books. Fear of the plaintiff’s bar will see to
that.
2 [Subsequent letters sometimes report on the turnout at prior annual
meetings. The turnout went from 12 at the 1975 meeting to approximately 7,500
at the 1997 meeting to over 15,000 in the early 2000s and to 35,000 in 2008,
with steady increases since 1984.]
3 [Introductory essay, 1984.]
4 [Divided by hash lines: 2000; 2002.]
5 [See the essay Owner Earnings and the Cash Flow Fallacy in Part VI.E.]
6 [Divided by hash lines: 1988; 1993; 2002; 2004; 2003; 1986; 1998; 2005.]
7 [The other is capital allocation, discussed in Parts II and VI.]
8 [1985; 2006.]
9 [2010 with variations in subsequent years; 2009]
10 [Divided by hash lines: 1987; 1981 (reprinted 1988); 1981; 1990-93;
1993; 2003.]
11 [Typesetting in original] [The 1986 letter contained the following:]
We bought a corporate jet last year. [Typesetting in original] What you have heard
about such planes is true: they are very expensive and a luxury in situations like
ours where little travel to out-of-the-way places is required. And planes not only
cost a lot to operate, they cost a lot just to look at. Pre-tax, cost of capital plus
depreciation on a new $15 million plane probably runs $3 million annually. On
our own plane, bought for $850,000 used, such costs run close to $200,000
annually.
Cognizant of such figures, your Chairman, unfortunately, has in the past
made a number of rather intemperate remarks about corporate jets. Accordingly,
prior to our purchase, I was forced into my Galileo mode. I promptly
experienced the necessary “counter-revelation” and travel is now considerably

easier—and considerably costlier—than in the past. Whether Berkshire will get
its money’s worth from the plane is an open question, but I will work at
achieving some business triumph that I can (no matter how dubiously) attribute
to it. I’m afraid Ben Franklin had my number. Said he: “So convenient a thing it
is to be a reasonable creature, since it enables one to find or make a reason for
everything one has a mind to do.” [The 1989 letter contained the following:]
Last summer we sold the corporate jet that we purchased for $850,000 three
years ago and bought another used jet for $6.7 million. [Noting an amusing
anecdote of Carl Sagan about obstacles that impede exponential growth of
bacteria—referred to in the Epilogue below, some readers] will understandably
panic: If our net worth continues to increase at current rates, and the cost of
replacing planes also continues to rise at the now-established rate of 100%
compounded annually, it will not be long before Berkshire’s entire net worth is
consumed by its jet.
Charlie doesn’t like it when I equate the jet with bacteria; he feels it’s
degrading to the bacteria. His idea of traveling in style is an air-conditioned bus,
a luxury he steps up to only when bargain fares are in effect. My own attitude
toward the jet can be summarized by the prayer attributed, apocryphally I’m
sure, to St. Augustine as he contemplated leaving a life of secular pleasures to
become a priest. Battling the conflict between intellect and glands, he pled:
“Help me, Oh Lord, to become chaste—but not yet.”
Naming the plane has not been easy. I initially suggested “The Charles T.
Munger.” Charlie countered with “The Aberration.” We finally settled on “The
Indefensible.”
[The 1998 letter indicates that Buffett sold the Berkshire plane and now
does all his flying with Berkshire’s flight services businesses.]
12 [Each annual letter through 2002 states the approximate percentage of
eligible shares that participated in the shareholder-designated contributions
program, the dollar amount of the contributions, and the number of recipients.
The percentage of participating shares always exceeded 95% and usually
exceeded 97%; the annual dollar amount rose steadily, from $1–2 million in the
early 1980s to around $17 million in 2002; the number of different charities
grew from fewer than 1,000 to some 3,500 in the same period; and aggregate
giving through the program’s termination in 2002 was $197 million.]
13 [Divided by hash lines: 1985; 2005; 1985; 1994; 1991; 2003; 2002.]
14 [See the essay Dividend Policy and Share Repurchases in Part IV.C.]
15 [2009; appendix to 2010 annual report; 2002.]

II. FINANCE AND INVESTING
We bought all of our [Washington Post Company (“WPC”)] holdings in
mid-1973 at a price of not more than one-fourth of the then per-share business
value of the enterprise. Calculating the price/value ratio required no unusual
insights. Most security analysts, media brokers, and media executives would
have estimated WPC’s intrinsic business value at $400 to $500 million just as we
did. And its $100 million stock market valuation was published daily for all to
see. Our advantage, rather, was attitude: we had learned from Ben Graham that
the key to successful investing was the purchase of shares in good businesses
when market prices were at a large discount from underlying business values.
Most institutional investors in the early 1970s, on the other hand, regarded
business value as of only minor relevance when they were deciding the prices at
which they would buy or sell. This now seems hard to believe. However, these
institutions were then under the spell of academics at prestigious business
schools who were preaching a newly-fashioned theory: the stock market was
totally efficient, and therefore calculations of business value—and even thought,
itself—were of no importance in investment activities. (We are enormously
indebted to those academics: what could be more advantageous in an intellectual
contest—whether it be bridge, chess, or stock selection—than to have opponents
who have been taught that thinking is a waste of energy?)16
A. Mr. Market17
Whenever Charlie and I buy common stocks for Berkshire’s insurance
companies (leaving aside arbitrage purchases, discussed [in the next essay]) we
approach the transaction as if we were buying into a private business. We look at
the economic prospects of the business, the people in charge of running it, and
the price we must pay. We do not have in mind any time or price for sale.
Indeed, we are willing to hold a stock indefinitely so long as we expect the
business to increase in intrinsic value at a satisfactory rate. When investing, we
view ourselves as business analysts—not as market analysts, not as
macroeconomic analysts, and not even as security analysts.
Our approach makes an active trading market useful, since it periodically
presents us with mouth-watering opportunities. But by no means is it essential: a
prolonged suspension of trading in the securities we hold would not bother us

any more than does the lack of daily quotations on World Book or Fechheimer.
Eventually, our economic fate will be determined by the economic fate of the
business we own, whether our ownership is partial or total.
Ben Graham, my friend and teacher, long ago described the mental attitude
toward market fluctuations that I believe to be most conducive to investment
success. He said that you should imagine market quotations as coming from a
remarkably accommodating fellow named Mr. Market who is your partner in a
private business. Without fail, Mr. Market appears daily and names a price at
which he will either buy your interest or sell you his.
Even though the business that the two of you own may have economic
characteristics that are stable, Mr. Market’s quotations will be anything but. For,
sad to say, the poor fellow has incurable emotional problems. At times he feels
euphoric and can see only the favorable factors affecting the business. When in
that mood, he names a very high buy-sell price because he fears that you will
snap up his interest and rob him of imminent gains. At other times he is
depressed and can see nothing but trouble ahead for both the business and the
world. On these occasions he will name a very low price, since he is terrified
that you will unload your interest on him.
Mr. Market has another endearing characteristic: He doesn’t mind being
ignored. If his quotation is uninteresting to you today, he will be back with a new
one tomorrow. Transactions are strictly at your option. Under these conditions,
the more manic-depressive his behavior, the better for you.
But, like Cinderella at the ball, you must heed one warning or everything
will turn into pumpkins and mice: Mr. Market is there to serve you, not to guide
you. It is his pocketbook, not his wisdom, that you will find useful. If he shows
up some day in a particularly foolish mood, you are free to either ignore him or
to take advantage of him, but it will be disastrous if you fall under his influence.
Indeed, if you aren’t certain that you understand and can value your business far
better than Mr. Market you don’t belong in the game. As they say in poker, “If
you’ve been in the game 30 minutes and you don’t know who the patsy is,
you’re the patsy.”
Ben’s Mr. Market allegory may seem out-of-date in today’s investment
world, in which most professionals and academicians talk of efficient markets,
dynamic hedging and betas. Their interest in such matters is understandable,
since techniques shrouded in mystery clearly have value to the purveyor of
investment advice. After all, what witch doctor has ever achieved fame and
fortune by simply advising “Take two aspirins”?
The value of market esoterica to the consumer of investment advice is a
different story. In my opinion, investment success will not be produced by

arcane formulae, computer programs or signals flashed by the price behavior of
stocks and markets. Rather an investor will succeed by coupling good business
judgment with an ability to insulate his thoughts and behavior from the super-
contagious emotions that swirl about the marketplace. In my own efforts to stay
insulated, I have found it highly useful to keep Ben’s Mr. Market concept firmly
in mind.
Following Ben’s teachings, Charlie and I let our marketable equities tell us
by their operating results—not by their daily, or even yearly, price quotations—
whether our investments are successful. The market may ignore business success
for a while, but eventually will confirm it. As Ben said: “In the short run, the
market is a voting machine but in the long run it is a weighing machine.” The
speed at which a business’s success is recognized, furthermore, is not that
important as long as the company’s intrinsic value is increasing at a satisfactory
rate. In fact, delayed recognition can be an advantage: It may give us the chance
to buy more of a good thing at a bargain price.
Sometimes, of course, the market may judge a business to be more valuable
than the underlying facts would indicate it is. In such a case, we will sell our
holdings. Sometimes, also, we will sell a security that is fairly valued or even
undervalued because we require funds for a still more undervalued investment or
one we believe we understand better.
We need to emphasize, however, that we do not sell holdings just because
they have appreciated or because we have held them for a long time. (Of Wall
Street maxims the most foolish may be “You can’t go broke taking a profit.”) We
are quite content to hold any security indefinitely, so long as the prospective
return on equity capital of the underlying business is satisfactory, management is
competent and honest, and the market does not overvalue the business.
However, our insurance companies own three marketable common stocks
that we would not sell even though they became far overpriced in the market. In
effect, we view these investments exactly like our successful controlled
businesses—a permanent part of Berkshire rather than merchandise to be
disposed of once Mr. Market offers us a sufficiently high price. To that, I will
add one qualifier: These stocks are held by our insurance companies and we
would, if absolutely necessary, sell portions of our holdings to pay extraordinary
insurance losses. We intend, however, to manage our affairs so that sales are
never required.
A determination to have and to hold, which Charlie and I share, obviously
involves a mixture of personal and financial considerations. To some, our stand
may seem highly eccentric. (Charlie and I have long followed David Ogilvy’s
advice: “Develop your eccentricities while you are young. That way, when you

get old, people won’t think you’re going ga-ga.”) Certainly, in the transaction-
fixated Wall Street of recent years, our posture must seem odd: To many in that
arena, both companies and stocks are seen only as raw material for trades.
Our attitude, however, fits our personalities and the way we want to live our
lives. Churchill once said, “You shape your houses and then they shape you.” We
know the manner in which we wish to be shaped. For that reason, we would
rather achieve a return of X while associating with people whom we strongly
like and admire than realize 110% of X by exchanging these relationships for
uninteresting or unpleasant ones.
A short quiz: If you plan to eat hamburgers throughout your life and are not
a cattle producer, should you wish for higher or lower prices for beef? Likewise,
if you are going to buy a car from time to time but are not an auto manufacturer,
should you prefer higher or lower car prices? These questions, of course, answer
themselves.
But now for the final exam: If you expect to be a net saver during the next
five years, should you hope for a higher or lower stock market during that
period? Many investors get this one wrong. Even though they are going to be net
buyers of stocks for many years to come, they are elated when stock prices rise
and depressed when they fall. In effect, they rejoice because prices have risen for
the “hamburgers” they will soon be buying. This reaction makes no sense. Only
those who will be sellers of equities in the near future should be happy at seeing
stocks rise. Prospective purchasers should much prefer sinking prices.
For shareholders of Berkshire who do not expect to sell, the choice is even
clearer. To begin with, our owners are automatically saving even if they spend
every dime they personally earn: Berkshire “saves” for them by retaining all
earnings, thereafter using these savings to purchase businesses and securities.
Clearly, the more cheaply we make these buys, the more profitable our owners’
indirect savings program will be.
Furthermore, through Berkshire you own major positions in companies that
consistently repurchase their shares. The benefits that these programs supply us
grow as prices fall: When stock prices are low, the funds that an investee spends
on repurchases increase our ownership of that company by a greater amount than
is the case when prices are higher. For example, the repurchases that Coca-Cola,
The Washington Post and Wells Fargo made in past years at very low prices
benefitted Berkshire far more than do today’s repurchases, made at loftier prices.
[Since at the end of every year, almost all Berkshire shares are held by the
same investors who owned them at the start of the year, Berkshire shareholders

are] savers. They should therefore rejoice when markets decline and allow both
us and our investees to deploy funds more advantageously.
So smile when you read a headline that says “Investors lose as market
falls.” Edit it in your mind to “Disinvestors lose as market falls—but investors
gain.” Though writers often forget this truism, there is a buyer for every seller
and what hurts one necessarily helps the other. (As they say in golf matches:
“Every putt makes someone happy.”)
We gained enormously from the low prices placed on many equities and
businesses in the 1970s and 1980s. Markets that then were hostile to investment
transients were friendly to those taking up permanent residence. In recent years,
the actions we took in those decades have been validated, but we have found few
new opportunities. In its role as a corporate “saver,” Berkshire continually looks
for ways to sensibly deploy capital, but it may be some time before we find
opportunities that get us truly excited.
B. Arbitrage18
[O]ur insurance subsidiaries sometimes engage in arbitrage as an alternative
to holding short-term cash equivalents. We prefer, of course, to make major
long-term commitments, but we often have more cash than good ideas. At such
times, arbitrage sometimes promises much greater returns than Treasury Bills
and, equally important, cools any temptation we may have to relax our standards
for long-term investments. (Charlie’s signoff after we’ve talked about an
arbitrage commitment is usually: “Okay, at least it will keep you out of bars.”)
During 1988 we made unusually large profits from arbitrage, measured both
by absolute dollars and rate of return. Our pre-tax gain was about $78 million on
average invested funds of about $147 million.
This level of activity makes some detailed discussion of arbitrage and our
approach to it appropriate. Once, the word applied only to the simultaneous
purchase and sale of securities or foreign exchange in two different markets. The
goal was to exploit tiny price differentials that might exist between, say, Royal
Dutch stock trading in guilders in Amsterdam, pounds in London, and dollars in
New York. Some people might call this scalping: it won’t surprise you that
practitioners opted for the French term, arbitrage.
Since World War I the definition of arbitrage—or “risk arbitrage,” as it is
now sometimes called—has expanded to include the pursuit of profits from an
announced corporate event such as sale of the company, merger, recapitalization,
reorganization, liquidation, self-tender, etc. In most cases the arbitrageur expects

to profit regardless of the behavior of the stock market. The major risk he
usually faces instead is that the announced event won’t happen.
Some offbeat opportunities occasionally arise in the arbitrage field. I
participated in one of these when I was 24 and working in New York for
Graham-Newman Corp. Rockwood & Co., a Brooklyn-based chocolate products
company of limited profitability, that had adopted LIFO inventory valuation in
1941 when cocoa was selling for 5 cents per pound. In 1954 a temporary
shortage of cocoa caused the price to soar to over 60 cents. Consequently
Rockwood wished to unload its valuable inventory—quickly, before the price
dropped. But if the cocoa had simply been sold off, the company would have
owed close to a 50% tax on the proceeds.
The 1954 Tax Code came to the rescue. It contained an arcane provision
that eliminated the tax otherwise due on LIFO profits if inventory was
distributed to shareholders as part of a plan reducing the scope of a corporation’s
business. Rockwood decided to terminate one of its businesses, the sale of cocoa
butter, and said 13 million pounds of its cocoa bean inventory was attributable to
that activity. Accordingly, the company offered to repurchase its stock in
exchange for the cocoa beans it no longer needed, paying 80 pounds of beans for
each share.
For several weeks I busily bought shares, sold beans, and made periodic
stops at Schroeder Trust to exchange stock certificates for warehouse receipts.
The profits were good and my only expense was subway tokens.
The architect of Rockwood’s restructuring was an unknown, but brilliant
Chicagoan, Jay Pritzker, then 32. If you’re familiar with Jay’s subsequent record,
you won’t be surprised to hear the action worked out rather well for Rockwood’s
continuing shareholders also. From shortly before the tender until shortly after it,
Rockwood stock appreciated from 15 to 100, even though the company was
experiencing large operating losses. Sometimes there is more to stock valuation
than price-earnings ratios.
In recent years, most arbitrage operations have involved takeovers, friendly
and unfriendly. With acquisition fever rampant, with anti-trust challenges almost
non-existent, and with bids often ratcheting upward, arbitrageurs have prospered
mightily. They have not needed special talents to do well; the trick, à la Peter
Sellers in the movie, has simply been “Being There.” In Wall Street the old
proverb has been reworded: “Give a man a fish and you feed him for a day.
Teach him how to arbitrage and you feed him forever.” (If, however, he studied
at the Ivan Boesky School of Arbitrage, it may be a state institution that supplies
his meals.)
To evaluate arbitrage situations you must answer four questions: (1) How

likely is it that the promised event will indeed occur? (2) How long will your
money be tied up? (3) What chance is there that something still better will
transpire—a competing takeover bid, for example? and (4) What will happen if
the event does not take place because of anti-trust action, financing glitches,
etc.?
Arcata Corp., one of our more serendipitous arbitrage experiences,
illustrates the twists and turns of the business. On September 28, 1981 the
directors of Arcata agreed in principle to sell the company to Kohlberg Kravis
Roberts & Co. (KKR), then and now a major leveraged-buyout firm. Arcata was
in the printing and forest products businesses and had one other thing going for
it: In 1978 the U.S. Government had taken title to 10,700 acres of Arcata timber,
primarily old-growth redwood, to expand Redwood National Park. The
government had paid $97.9 million, in several installments, for this acreage, a
sum Arcata was contesting as grossly inadequate. The parties also disputed the
interest rate that should apply to the period between the taking of the property
and final payment for it. The enabling legislation stipulated 6% simple interest;
Arcata argued for a much higher and compounded rate.
Buying a company with a highly-speculative, large-sized claim in litigation
creates a negotiating problem, whether the claim is on behalf of or against the
company. To solve this problem, KKR offered $37.00 per Arcata share plus two-
thirds of any additional amounts paid by the government for the redwood lands.
Appraising this arbitrage opportunity, we had to ask ourselves whether
KKR would consummate the transaction since, among other things, its offer was
contingent upon its obtaining “satisfactory financing.” A clause of this kind is
always dangerous for the seller: It offers an easy exit for a suitor whose ardor
fades between proposal and marriage. However, we were not particularly
worried about this possibility because KKR’s past record for closing had been
good.
We also had to ask ourselves what would happen if the KKR deal did fall
through, and here we also felt reasonably comfortable: Arcata’s management and
directors had been shopping the company for some time and were clearly
determined to sell. If KKR went away, Arcata would likely find another buyer,
though of course, the price might be lower.
Finally, we had to ask ourselves what the redwood claim might be worth.
Your Chairman, who can’t tell an elm from an oak, had no trouble with that one:
He coolly evaluated the claim at somewhere between zero and a whole lot.
We started buying Arcata stock, then around $33.50, on September 30 and
in eight weeks purchased about 400,000 shares, or 5% of the company. The
initial announcement said that the $37.00 would be paid in January, 1982.

Therefore, if everything had gone perfectly, we would have achieved an annual
rate of return of about 40%—not counting the redwood claim, which would have
been frosting.
All did not go perfectly. In December it was announced that the closing
would be delayed a bit. Nevertheless, a definitive agreement was signed on
January 4. Encouraged, we raised our stake, buying at around $38.00 per share
and increasing our holdings to 655,000 shares, or over 7% of the company. Our
willingness to pay up—even though the closing had been postponed—reflected
our leaning toward “a whole lot” rather than “zero” for the redwoods.
Then, on February 25 the lenders said they were taking a “second look” at
financing terms “in view of the severely depressed housing industry and its
impact on Arcata’s outlook.” The stockholders’ meeting was postponed again, to
April. An Arcata spokesman said he “did not think the fate of the acquisition
itself was imperiled.” When arbitrageurs hear such reassurances, their minds
flash to the old saying: “He lied like a finance minister on the eve of
devaluation.”
On March 12 KKR said its earlier deal wouldn’t work, first cutting its offer
to $33.50, then two days later raising it to $35.00. On March 15, however, the
directors turned this bid down and accepted another group’s offer of $37.50 plus
one-half of any redwood recovery. The shareholders okayed the deal, and the
$37.50 was paid on June 4.
We received $24.6 million versus our cost of $22.9 million; our average
holding period was close to six months. Considering the trouble this transaction
encountered, our 15% annual rate of return—excluding any value for the
redwood claim—was more than satisfactory.
But the best was yet to come. The trial judge appointed two commissions,
one to look at the timber’s value, the other to consider the interest rate questions.
In January 1987, the first commission said the redwoods were worth $275.7
million and the second commission recommended a compounded, blended rate
of return working out to about 14%.
In August 1987 the judge upheld these conclusions, which meant a net
amount of about $600 million would be due Arcata. The government then
appealed. In 1988, though, before this appeal was heard, the claim was settled
for $519 million. Consequently, we received an additional $29.48 per share, or
about $19.3 million. We will get another $800,000 or so in 1989.
Berkshire’s arbitrage activities differ from those of many arbitrageurs. First,
we participate in only a few, and usually very large, transactions each year. Most
practitioners buy into a great many deals—perhaps 50 or more per year. With
that many irons in the fire, they must spend most of their time monitoring both

the progress of deals and the market movements of the related stocks. This is not
how Charlie nor I wish to spend our lives. (What’s the sense in getting rich just
to stare at a ticker tape all day?)
Because we diversify so little, one particularly profitable or unprofitable
transaction will affect our yearly result from arbitrage far more than it will the
typical arbitrage operation. So far, Berkshire has not had a really bad experience.
But we will—and when it happens we’ll report the gory details to you.
The other way we differ from some arbitrage operations is that we
participate only in transactions that have been publicly announced. We do not
trade on rumors or try to guess takeover candidates. We just read the
newspapers, think about a few of the big propositions, and go by our own sense
of probabilities.
At year-end, our only major arbitrage position was 3,342,000 shares of RJR
Nabisco with a cost of $281.8 million and a market value of $304.5 million. In
January we increased our holdings to roughly four million shares and in
February we eliminated our position. About three million shares were accepted
when we tendered our holdings to KKR, which acquired RJR, and the returned
shares were promptly sold in the market. Our pre-tax profit was a better-than-
expected $64 million.
Earlier, another familiar face turned up in the RJR bidding contest: Jay
Pritzker, who was part of a First Boston group that made a tax-oriented offer. To
quote Yogi Berra: “It was déjà vu all over again.”
During most of the time when we normally would have been purchasers of
RJR, our activities in the stock were restricted because of Salomon’s
participation in a bidding group. Customarily, Charlie and I, though we are
directors of Salomon, are walled off from information about its merger and
acquisition work. We have asked that it be that way: The information would do
us no good and could, in fact, occasionally inhibit Berkshire’s arbitrage
operations.
However, the unusually large commitment that Salomon proposed to make
in the RJR deal required that all directors be fully informed and involved.
Therefore, Berkshire’s purchases of RJR were made at only two times: first, in
the few days immediately following management’s announcement of buyout
plans, before Salomon became involved; and considerably later, after the RJR
board made its decision in favor of KKR. Because we could not buy at other
times, our directorships cost Berkshire significant money.
Considering Berkshire’s good results in 1988, you might expect us to pile
into arbitrage during 1989. Instead, we expect to be on the sidelines.
One pleasant reason is that our cash holdings are down—because our

position in equities that we expect to hold for a very long time is substantially
up. As regular readers of this report know, our new commitments are not based
on a judgment about short-term prospects for the stock market. Rather, they
reflect an opinion about long-term business prospects for specific companies. We
do not have, never have had, and never will have an opinion about where the
stock market, interest rates, or business activity will be a year from now.
Even if we had a lot of cash we probably would do little in arbitrage in
1989. Some extraordinary excesses have developed in the takeover field. As
Dorothy says: “Toto, I have a feeling we’re not in Kansas any more.”
We have no idea how long the excesses will last, nor do we know what will
change the attitudes of government, lender and buyer that fuel them. But we do
know that the less the prudence with which others conduct their affairs, the
greater the prudence with which we should conduct our own affairs. We have no
desire to arbitrage transactions that reflect the unbridled—and, in our view, often
unwarranted—optimism of both buyers and lenders. In our activities, we will
heed the wisdom of Herb Stein: “If something can’t go on forever, it will end.”
We told you last year that we expected to do little in arbitrage during 1989,
and that’s the way it turned out. Arbitrage positions are a substitute for short-
term cash equivalents, and during part of the year we held relatively low levels
of cash. In the rest of the year we had a fairly good-sized cash position and even
so chose not to engage in arbitrage. The main reason was corporate transactions
that made no economic sense to us; arbitraging such deals comes too close to
playing the greater-fool game. (As Wall Streeter Ray DeVoe says: “Fools rush in
where angels fear to trade.”) We will engage in arbitrage from time to time—
sometimes on a large scale—but only when we like the odds.
C. Debunking Standard Dogma19
The preceding discussion about arbitrage makes a small discussion of
“efficient market theory” (EMT) also seem relevant. This doctrine became
highly fashionable—indeed, almost holy scripture—in academic circles during
the 1970s. Essentially, it said that analyzing stocks was useless because all
public information about them was appropriately reflected in their prices. In
other words, the market always knew everything. As a corollary, the professors
who taught EMT said that someone throwing darts at the stock tables could
select a stock portfolio having prospects just as good as one selected by the
brightest, most hard-working security analyst. Amazingly, EMT was embraced

not only by academics, but by many investment professionals and corporate
managers as well. Observing correctly that the market was frequently efficient,
they went on to conclude incorrectly that it was always efficient. The difference
between these propositions is night and day.
In my opinion, the continuous 63-year arbitrage experience of Graham-
Newman Corp., Buffett Partnership, and Berkshire illustrates just how foolish
EMT is. (There’s plenty of other evidence, also.) While at Graham-Newman, I
made a study of its earnings from arbitrage during the entire 1926-1956 lifespan
of the company. Unleveraged returns averaged 20% per year. Starting in 1956, I
applied Ben Graham’s arbitrage principles, first at Buffett Partnership and then
Berkshire. Though I’ve not made an exact calculation, I have done enough work
to know that the 1956-1988 returns averaged well over 20%. (Of course, I
operated in an environment far more favorable than Ben’s; he had 1929-1932 to
contend with.)
All of the conditions are present that are required for a fair test of portfolio
performance: (1) the three organizations traded hundreds of different securities
while building this 63-year record; (2) the results are not skewed by a few
fortunate experiences; (3) we did not have to dig for obscure facts or develop
keen insights about products or managements—we simply acted on highly-
publicized events; and (4) our arbitrage positions were a clearly identified
universe—they have not been selected by hindsight.
Over the 63 years, the general market delivered just under a 10% annual
return, including dividends. That means $1,000 would have grown to $405,000
if all income had been reinvested. A 20% rate of return, however, would have
produced $97 million. That strikes us a statistically-significant differential that
might, conceivably, arouse one’s curiosity.
Yet proponents of the theory have never seemed interested in discordant
evidence of this type. True, they don’t talk quite as much about their theory
today as they used to. But no one, to my knowledge, has ever said he was wrong,
no matter how many thousands of students he has sent forth misinstructed. EMT,
moreover, continues to be an integral part of the investment curriculum at major
business schools. Apparently, a reluctance to recant, and thereby to demystify
the priesthood, is not limited to theologians.
Naturally the disservice done students and gullible investment professionals
who have swallowed EMT has been an extraordinary service to us and other
followers of Graham. In any sort of a contest—financial, mental, or physical—
it’s an enormous advantage to have opponents who have been taught that it’s
useless to even try. From a selfish point of view, Grahamites should probably
endow chairs to ensure the perpetual teaching of EMT.

All this said, a warning is appropriate. Arbitrage has looked easy recently.
But this is not a form of investing that guarantees profits of 20% a year or, for
that matter, profits of any kind. As noted, the market is reasonably efficient
much of the time: For every arbitrage opportunity we seized in that 63-year
period, many more were foregone because they seemed properly-priced.
An investor cannot obtain superior profits from stocks by simply
committing to a specific investment category or style. He can earn them only by
carefully evaluating facts and continuously exercising discipline. Investing in
arbitrage situations, per se, is no better a strategy than selecting a portfolio by
throwing darts.
[W]hen we own portions of outstanding businesses with outstanding
managements, our favorite holding period is forever. We are just the opposite of
those who hurry to sell and book profits when companies perform well but who
tenaciously hang on to businesses that disappoint. Peter Lynch aptly likens such
behavior to cutting the flowers and watering the weeds.
[W]e continue to think that it is usually foolish to part with an interest in a
business that is both understandable and durably wonderful. Business interests of
that kind are simply too hard to replace.
Interestingly, corporate managers have no trouble understanding that point
when they are focusing on a business they operate: A parent company that owns
a subsidiary with superb long-term economics is not likely to sell that entity
regardless of price. “Why,” the CEO would ask, “should I part with my crown
jewel?” Yet that same CEO, when it comes to running his personal investment
portfolio, will offhandedly—and even impetuously—move from business to
business when presented with no more than superficial arguments by his broker
for doing so. The worst of these is perhaps, “You can’t go broke taking a profit.”
Can you imagine a CEO using this line to urge his board to sell a star subsidiary?
In our view, what makes sense in business also makes sense in stocks: An
investor should ordinarily hold a small piece of an outstanding business with the
same tenacity that an owner would exhibit if he owned all of that business.
Earlier I mentioned the financial results that could have been achieved by
investing $40 in The Coca-Cola Co. in 1919.20 In 1938, more than 50 years after
the introduction of Coke, and long after the drink was firmly established as an
American icon, Fortune did an excellent story on the company. In the second
paragraph the writer reported: “Several times every year a weighty and serious
investor looks long and with profound respect at Coca-Cola’s record, but comes
regretfully to the conclusion that he is looking too late. The specters of saturation

and competition rise before him.”
Yes, competition there was in 1938 and in 1993 as well. But it’s worth
noting that in 1938 The Coca-Cola Co. sold 207 million cases of soft drinks (if
its gallonage then is converted into the 192-ounce cases used for measurement
today) and in 1993 it sold about 10.7 billion cases, a 50-fold increase in physical
volume from a company that in 1938 was already dominant in its very major
industry. Nor was the party over in 1938 for an investor: Though the $40
invested in 1919 in one share had (with dividends reinvested) turned into $3,277
by the end of 1938, a fresh $40 then invested in Coca-Cola stock would have
grown to $25,000 by year-end 1993.
I can’t resist one more quote from that 1938 Fortune story: “It would be
hard to name any company comparable in size to Coca-Cola and selling, as
Coca-Cola does, an unchanged product that can point to a ten-year record
anything like Coca-Cola’s.” In the 55 years that have since passed, Coke’s
product line has broadened somewhat, but it’s remarkable how well that
description still fits.
Charlie and I decided long ago that in an investment lifetime it’s too hard to
make hundreds of smart decisions. That judgment became ever more compelling
as Berkshire’s capital mushroomed and the universe of investments that could
significantly affect our results shrank dramatically. Therefore, we adopted a
strategy that required our being smart—and not too smart at that—only a very
few times. Indeed, we’ll now settle for one good idea a year. (Charlie says it’s
my turn.)
The 
strategy 
we’ve 
adopted 
precludes 
our 
following 
standard
diversification dogma. Many pundits would therefore say the strategy must be
riskier than that employed by more conventional investors. We disagree. We
believe that a policy of portfolio concentration may well decrease risk if it raises,
as it should, both the intensity with which an investor thinks about a business
and the comfort-level he must feel with its economic characteristics before
buying into it. In stating this opinion, we define risk, using dictionary terms, as
“the possibility of loss or injury.”
Academics, however, like to define investment “risk” differently, averring
that it is the relative volatility of a stock or portfolio of stocks—that is, their
volatility as compared to that of a large universe of stocks. Employing data bases
and statistical skills, these academics compute with precision the “beta” of a
stock—its relative volatility in the past—and then build arcane investment and
capital-allocation theories around this calculation. In their hunger for a single
statistic to measure risk, however, they forget a fundamental principle: It is better
to be approximately right than precisely wrong.

For owners of a business—and that’s the way we think of shareholders—
the academics’ definition of risk is far off the mark, so much so that it produces
absurdities. For example, under beta-based theory, a stock that has dropped very
sharply compared to the market—as had Washington Post when we bought it in
1973—becomes “riskier” at the lower price than it was at the higher price.
Would that description have then made any sense to someone who was offered
the entire company at a vastly-reduced price?
In fact, the true investor welcomes volatility. Ben Graham explained why in
Chapter 8 of The Intelligent Investor. There he introduced “Mr. Market,” an
obliging fellow [noted above] who shows up every day to either buy from you or
sell to you, whichever you wish. The more manic-depressive this chap is, the
greater the opportunities available to the investor. That’s true because a wildly
fluctuating market means that irrationally low prices will periodically be
attached to solid businesses. It is impossible to see how the availability of such
prices can be thought of as increasing the hazards for an investor who is totally
free to either ignore the market or exploit its folly.
In assessing risk, a beta purist will disdain examining what a company
produces, what its competitors are doing, or how much borrowed money the
business employs. He may even prefer not to know the company’s name. What
he treasures is the price history of its stock. In contrast, we’ll happily forgo
knowing the price history and instead will seek whatever information will
further our understanding of the company’s business. After we buy a stock,
consequently, we would not be disturbed if markets closed for a year or two. We
don’t need a daily quote on our 100% position in See’s or H.H. Brown to
validate our wellbeing. Why, then, should we need a quote on our 7% interest in
Coke?
In our opinion, the real risk an investor must assess is whether his aggregate
after-tax receipts from an investment (including those he receives on sale) will,
over his prospective holding period, give him at least as much purchasing power
as he had to begin with, plus a modest rate of interest on that initial stake.
Though this risk cannot be calculated with engineering precision, it can in some
cases be judged with a degree of accuracy that is useful. The primary factors
bearing upon this evaluation are:
(1) The certainty with which the long-term economic characteristics of
the business can be evaluated;
(2) The certainty with which management can be evaluated, both as to
its ability to realize the full potential of the business and to wisely
employ its cash flows;
(3) The certainty with which management can be counted on to

channel the reward from the business to the shareholders rather than to
itself;
(4) The purchase price of the business;
(5) The levels of taxation and inflation that will be experienced and
that will determine the degree by which an investor’s purchasing-
power return is reduced from his gross return.
These factors will probably strike many analysts as unbearably fuzzy since
they cannot be extracted from a data base of any kind. But the difficulty of
precisely quantifying these matters does not negate their importance nor is it
insuperable. Just as Justice Stewart found it impossible to formulate a test for
obscenity but nevertheless asserted, “I know it when I see it,” so also can
investors—in an inexact but useful way—“see” the risks inherent in certain
investments without reference to complex equations or price histories.
Is it really so difficult to conclude that Coca-Cola and Gillette possess far
less business risk over the long term than, say, any computer company or
retailer?21 Worldwide, Coke sells about 44% of all soft drinks, and Gillette has
more than a 60% share (in value) of the blade market. Leaving aside chewing
gum, in which Wrigley is dominant, I know of no other significant businesses in
which the leading company has long enjoyed such global power.
Moreover, both Coke and Gillette have actually increased their worldwide
shares of market in recent years. The might of their brand names, the attributes
of their products, and the strength of their distribution systems give them an
enormous competitive advantage, setting up a protective moat around their
economic castles. The average company, in contrast, does battle daily without
any such means of protection. As Peter Lynch says, stocks of companies selling
commodity-like products should come with a warning label: “Competition may
prove hazardous to human wealth.”
The competitive strengths of a Coke or Gillette are obvious to even the
casual observer of business. Yet the beta of their stocks is similar to that of a
great many run-of-the-mill companies who possess little or no competitive
advantage. Should we conclude from this similarity that the competitive strength
of Coke and Gillette gains them nothing when business risk is being measured?
Or should we conclude that the risk in owning a piece of a company—its stock
—is somehow divorced from the long-term risk inherent in its business
operations? We believe neither conclusion makes sense and that equating beta
with investment risk makes no sense.
The theoretician bred on beta has no mechanism for differentiating the risk
inherent in, say, a single-product toy company selling pet rocks or hula hoops
from that of another toy company whose sole product is Monopoly or Barbie.

But it’s quite possible for ordinary investors to make such distinctions if they
have a reasonable understanding of consumer behavior and the factors that
create long-term competitive strength or weakness. Obviously, every investor
will make mistakes. But by confining himself to a relatively few, easy-to-
understand cases, a reasonably intelligent, informed and diligent person can
judge investment risks with a useful degree of accuracy.
In many industries, of course, Charlie and I can’t determine whether we are
dealing with a “pet rock” or a “Barbie.” We couldn’t solve this problem,
moreover, even if we were to spend years intensely studying those industries.
Sometimes our own intellectual shortcomings would stand in the way of
understanding, and in other cases the nature of the industry would be the
roadblock. For example, a business that must deal with fast-moving technology
is not going to lend itself to reliable evaluations of its long-term economics. Did
we foresee thirty years ago what would transpire in the television-manufacturing
or computer industries? Of course not. (Nor did most of the investors and
corporate managers who enthusiastically entered those industries.) Why, then,
should Charlie and I now think we can predict the future of other rapidly-
evolving businesses? We’ll stick instead with the easy cases. Why search for a
needle buried in a haystack when one is sitting in plain sight?
Of course, some investment strategies—for instance, our efforts in arbitrage
over the years—require wide diversification. If significant risk exists in a single
transaction, overall risk should be reduced by making that purchase one of many
mutually-independent commitments. Thus, you may consciously purchase a
risky investment—one that indeed has a significant possibility of causing loss or
injury—if you believe that your gain, weighted for probabilities, considerably
exceeds your loss, comparably weighted, and if you can commit to a number of
similar, but unrelated opportunities. Most venture capitalists employ this
strategy. Should you choose to pursue this course, you should adopt the outlook
of the casino that owns a roulette wheel, which will want to see lots of action
because it is favored by probabilities, but will refuse to accept a single, huge bet.
Another situation requiring wide diversification occurs when an investor
who does not understand the economics of specific businesses nevertheless
believes it in his interest to be a long-term owner of American industry. That
investor should both own a large number of equities and space out his purchases.
By periodically investing in an index fund, for example, the know-nothing
investor can actually out-perform most investment professionals. Paradoxically,
when “dumb” money acknowledges its limitations, it ceases to be dumb.
On the other hand, if you are a know-something investor, able to understand
business economics and to find five to ten sensibly-priced companies that

possess 
important 
long-term 
competitive 
advantages, 
conventional
diversification makes no sense for you. It is apt simply to hurt your results and
increase your risk. I cannot understand why an investor of that sort elects to put
money into a business that is his 20th favorite rather than simply adding that
money to his top choices—the businesses he understands best and that present
the least risk, along with the greatest profit potential. In the words of the prophet
Mae West: “Too much of a good thing can be wonderful.”
We should note that we expect to keep permanently our three primary
holdings, Capital Cities/ABC, Inc., GEICO Corporation, and The Washington
Post.22 Even if these securities were to appear significantly overpriced, we
would not anticipate selling them, just as we would not sell See’s or Buffalo
Evening News if someone were to offer us a price far above what we believe
those businesses are worth.
This attitude may seem old-fashioned in a corporate world in which activity
has become the order of the day. The modern manager refers to his “portfolio” of
businesses—meaning that all of them are candidates for “restructuring”
whenever such a move is dictated by Wall Street preferences, operating
conditions or a new corporate “concept.” (Restructuring is defined narrowly,
however: it extends only to dumping offending businesses, not to dumping the
officers and directors who bought the businesses in the first place. “Hate the sin
but love the sinner” is a theology as popular with the Fortune 500 as it is with
the Salvation Army.)
Investment managers are even more hyperkinetic: their behavior during
trading hours makes whirling dervishes appear sedated by comparison. Indeed,
the term “institutional investor” is becoming one of those self-contradictions
called an oxymoron, comparable to “jumbo shrimp,” “lady mudwrestler” and
“inexpensive lawyer.”
Despite the enthusiasm for activity that has swept business and financial
America, we will stick with our ‘til-death-do-us-part policy. It’s the only one
with which Charlie and I are comfortable, it produces decent results, and it lets
our managers and those of our investees run their businesses free of distractions.
Our stay-put behavior reflects our view that the stock market serves as a
relocation center at which money is moved from the active to the patient. (With
tongue only partly in check, I suggest that recent events indicate that the much-
maligned “idle rich” have received a bad rap: They have maintained or increased
their wealth while many of the “energetic rich”—aggressive real estate

operators, corporate acquirers, oil drillers, etc.—have seen their fortunes
disappear.)
We continually search for large businesses with understandable, enduring
and mouth-watering economics that are run by able and shareholder-oriented
managements. This focus doesn’t guarantee results: We both have to buy at a
sensible price and get business performance from our companies that validates
our assessment. But this investment approach—searching for the superstars—
offers us our only chance for real success. Charlie and I are simply not smart
enough, considering the large sums we work with, to get great results by adroitly
buying and selling portions of far-from-great businesses. Nor do we think many
others can achieve long-term investment success by flitting from flower to
flower. Indeed, we believe that according the name “investors” to institutions
that trade actively is like calling someone who repeatedly engages in one-night
stands a romantic.
If my universe of business possibilities was limited, say, to private
companies in Omaha, I would, first, try to assess the long-term economic
characteristics of each business; second, assess the quality of the people in
charge of running it; and, third, try to buy into a few of the best operations at a
sensible price. I certainly would not wish to own an equal part of every business
in town. Why, then, should Berkshire take a different tack when dealing with the
larger universe of public companies? And since finding great businesses and
outstanding managers is so difficult, why should we discard proven products? (I
was tempted to say “the real thing.”) Our motto is: “If at first you do succeed,
quit trying.”
John Maynard Keynes, whose brilliance as a practicing investor matched
his brilliance in thought, wrote a letter to a business associate, F.C. Scott, on
August 15, 1934 that says it all: “As time goes on, I get more and more
convinced that the right method in investment is to put fairly large sums into
enterprises which one thinks one knows something about and in the management
of which one thoroughly believes. It is a mistake to think that one limits one’s
risk by spreading too much between enterprises about which one knows little
and has no reason for special confidence. One’s knowledge and experience are
definitely limited and there are seldom more than two or three enterprises at any
given time in which I personally feel myself entitled to put full confidence.”
During 1987 the stock market was an area of much excitement but little net
movement: The Dow advanced 2.3% for the year. You are aware, of course, of
the roller coaster ride that produced this minor change. Mr. Market was on a

manic rampage until October and then experienced a sudden, massive seizure.
We have “professional” investors, those who manage many billions, to
thank for most of this turmoil. Instead of focusing on what businesses will do in
the years ahead, many prestigious money managers now focus on what they
expect other money managers to do in the days ahead. For them, stocks are
merely tokens in a game, like the thimble and flatiron in Monopoly.
An extreme example of what their attitude leads to is “portfolio insurance,”
a money-management strategy that many leading investment advisors embraced
in 1986-1987. This strategy—which is simply an exotically-labeled version of
the small speculator’s stop-loss order—dictates that ever-increasing portions of a
stock portfolio, or their index-future equivalents, be sold as prices decline. The
strategy says nothing else matters: A downtick of a given magnitude
automatically produces a huge sell order. According to the Brady Report, $60
billion to $90 billion of equities were poised on this hair trigger in mid-October
of 1987.
If you’ve thought that investment advisors were hired to invest, you may be
bewildered by this technique. After buying a farm, would a rational owner next
order his real estate agent to start selling off pieces of it whenever a neighboring
property was sold at a lower price? Or would you sell your house to whatever
bidder was available at 9:31 on some morning merely because at 9:30 a similar
house sold for less than it would have brought on the previous day?
Moves like that, however, are what portfolio insurance tells a pension fund
or university to make when it owns a portion of enterprises such as Ford or
General Electric. The less these companies are being valued at, says this
approach, the more vigorously they should be sold. As a “logical” corollary, the
approach commands the institutions to repurchase these companies—I’m not
making this up—once their prices have rebounded significantly. Considering that
huge sums are controlled by managers following such Alice-in-Wonderland
practices, is it any surprise that markets sometimes behave in aberrational
fashion?
Many commentators, however, have drawn an incorrect conclusion upon
observing recent events: They are fond of saying that the small investor has no
chance in a market now dominated by the erratic behavior of the big boys. This
conclusion is dead wrong: Such markets are ideal for any investor—small or
large—so long as he sticks to his investment knitting. Volatility caused by
money managers who speculate irrationally with huge sums will offer the true
investor more chances to make intelligent investment moves. He can be hurt by
such volatility only if he is forced, by either financial or psychological pressures,
to sell at untoward times.

D. “Value” Investing: A Redundancy23
We really don’t see many fundamental differences between the purchase of
a controlled business and the purchase of marketable holdings. In each case we
try to buy into businesses with favorable long-term economics. Our goal is to
find an outstanding business at a sensible price, not a mediocre business at a
bargain price. Charlie and I have found that making silk purses out of silk is the
best that we can do; with sow’s ears, we fail.
(It must be noted that your Chairman, always a quick study, required only
20 years to recognize how important it was to buy good businesses. In the
interim, I searched for “bargains”—and had the misfortune to find some. My
punishment was an education in the economics of short-line farm implement
manufacturers, third-place department stores, and New England textile
manufacturers.)
Of course, Charlie and I may misread the fundamental economics of a
business. When that happens, we will encounter problems whether that business
is a wholly-owned subsidiary or a marketable security, although it is usually far
easier to exit from the latter. (Indeed, businesses can be misread: Witness the
European reporter who, after being sent to this country to profile Andrew
Carnegie, cabled his editor, “My God, you’ll never believe the sort of money
there is in running libraries.”)
In making both control purchases and stock purchases, we try to buy not
only good businesses, but ones run by high-grade, talented and likeable
managers. If we make a mistake about the managers we link up with, the
controlled company offers a certain advantage because we have the power to
effect change. In practice, however, this advantage is somewhat illusory:
Management changes, like marital changes, are painful, time-consuming and
chancy. In any event, at our three marketable-but-permanent holdings, this point
is moot: With Tom Murphy and Dan Burke at Cap Cities, Bill Snyder and Lou
Simpson at GEICO, and Kay Graham and Dick Simmons at The Washington
Post, we simply couldn’t be in better hands.
I would say that the controlled company offers two main advantages. First,
when we control a company we get to allocate capital, whereas we are likely to
have little or nothing to say about this process with marketable holdings. This
point can be important because the heads of many companies are not skilled in
capital allocation. Their inadequacy is not surprising. Most bosses rise to the top
because they have excelled in an area such as marketing, production,
engineering, administration—or, sometimes, institutional politics.
Once they become CEOs, they face new responsibilities. They now must

make capital allocation decisions, a critical job that they may have never tackled
and that is not easily mastered. To stretch the point, it’s as if the final step for a
highly-talented musician was not to perform at Carnegie Hall but, instead, to be
named Chairman of the Federal Reserve.
The lack of skill that many CEOs have at capital allocation is no small
matter: After ten years on the job, a CEO whose company annually retains
earnings equal to 10% of net worth will have been responsible for the
deployment of more than 60% of all the capital at work in the business.
CEOs who recognize their lack of capital-allocation skills (which not all
do) will often try to compensate by turning to their staffs, management
consultants, or investment bankers. Charlie and I have frequently observed the
consequences of such “help.” On balance, we feel it is more likely to accentuate
the capital-allocation problem than to solve it.
In the end, plenty of unintelligent capital allocation takes place in corporate
America. (That’s why you hear so much about “restructuring.”) Berkshire,
however, has been fortunate. At the companies that are our major non-controlled
holdings, capital has generally been well-deployed and, in some cases, brilliantly
so.
The second advantage of a controlled company over a marketable security
has to do with taxes. Berkshire, as a corporate holder, absorbs some significant
tax costs through the ownership of partial positions that we do not when our
ownership is 80% or greater. Such tax disadvantages have long been with us, but
changes in the tax code caused them to increase significantly during [1986]. As a
consequence, a given business result can now deliver Berkshire financial results
that are as much as 50% better if they come from an 80%-or-greater holding
rather than from a lesser holding.
The disadvantages of owning marketable securities are sometimes offset by
a huge advantage: Occasionally the stock market offers us the chance to buy
non-controlling pieces of extraordinary businesses at truly ridiculous prices—
dramatically below those commanded in negotiated transactions that transfer
control. For example, we purchased our Washington Post stock in 1973 at $5.63
per share, and per-share operating earnings in 1987 after taxes were $10.30.
Similarly, our GEICO stock was purchased in 1976, 1979 and 1980 at an
average of $6.67 per share, and after-tax operating earnings per share last year
were $9.01. In cases such as these, Mr. Market has proven to be a mighty good
friend.
Our equity-investing strategy remains little changed from what it was when

we said in the 1977 annual report: “We select our marketable equity securities in
much the way we would evaluate a business for acquisition in its entirety. We
want the business to be one (a) that we can understand; (b) with favorable long-
term prospects; (c) operated by honest and competent people; and (d) available
at a very attractive price.” We have seen cause to make only one change in this
creed: Because of both market conditions and our size, we now substitute “an
attractive price” for “a very attractive price.”
But how, you will ask, does one decide what’s “attractive”? In answering
this question, most analysts feel they must choose between two approaches
customarily thought to be in opposition: “value” and “growth.” Indeed, many
investment professionals see any mixing of the two terms as a form of
intellectual cross-dressing.
We view that as fuzzy thinking (in which, it must be confessed, I myself
engaged some years ago). In our opinion, the two approaches are joined at the
hip: Growth is always a component in the calculation of value, constituting a
variable whose importance can range from negligible to enormous and whose
impact can be negative as well as positive.
In addition, we think the very term “value investing” is redundant. What is
“investing” if it is not the act of seeking value at least sufficient to justify the
amount paid? Consciously paying more for a stock than its calculated value—in
the hope that it can soon be sold for a still-higher price—should be labeled
speculation (which is neither illegal, immoral nor—in our view—financially
fattening).
Whether appropriate or not, the term “value investing” is widely used.
Typically, it connotes the purchase of stocks having attributes such as a low ratio
of price to book value, a low price-earnings ratio, or a high dividend yield.
Unfortunately, such characteristics, even if they appear in combination, are far
from determinative as to whether an investor is indeed buying something for
what it is worth and is therefore truly operating on the principle of obtaining
value in his investments. Correspondingly, opposite characteristics—a high ratio
of price to book value, a high price-earnings ratio, and a low dividend yield—are
in no way inconsistent with a “value” purchase.
Similarly, business growth, per se, tells us little about value. It’s true that
growth often has a positive impact on value, sometimes one of spectacular
proportions. But such an effect is far from certain. For example, investors have
regularly poured money into the domestic airline business to finance profitless
(or worse) growth. For these investors, it would have been far better if Orville
had failed to get off the ground at Kitty Hawk: The more the industry has grown,
the worse the disaster for owners.

Growth benefits investors only when the business in point can invest at
incremental returns that are enticing—in other words, only when each dollar
used to finance the growth creates over a dollar of long-term market value. In the
case of a low-return business requiring incremental funds, growth hurts the
investor.
In The Theory of Investment Value, written over 50 years ago, John Burr
Williams set forth the equation for value, which we condense here: The value of
any stock, bond or business today is determined by the cash inflows and outflows
—discounted at an appropriate interest rate—that can be expected to occur
during the remaining life of the asset. Note that the formula is the same for
stocks as for bonds. Even so, there is an important, and difficult to deal with,
difference between the two: A bond has a coupon and maturity date that define
future cash flows; but in the case of equities, the investment analyst must himself
estimate the future “coupons.” Furthermore, the quality of management affects
the bond coupon only rarely—chiefly when management is so inept or dishonest
that payment of interest is suspended. In contrast, the ability of management can
dramatically affect the equity “coupons.”
The investment shown by the discounted-flows-of-cash calculation to be
the cheapest is the one that the investor should purchase—irrespective of
whether the business grows or doesn’t, displays volatility or smoothness in its
earnings, or carries a high price or low [price] in relation to its current earnings
and book value. Moreover, though the value equation has usually shown equities
to be cheaper than bonds, that result is not inevitable: When bonds are calculated
to be the more attractive investment, they should be bought.
Leaving the question of price aside, the best business to own is one that
over an extended period can employ large amounts of incremental capital at very
high rates of return. The worst business to own is one that must, or will, do the
opposite—that is, consistently employ ever-greater amounts of capital at very
low rates of return. Unfortunately, the first type of business is very hard to find:
Most high-return businesses need relatively little capital. Shareholders of such a
business usually will benefit if it pays out most of its earnings in dividends or
makes significant stock repurchases.
Though the mathematical calculations required to evaluate equities are not
difficult, an analyst—even one who is experienced and intelligent—can easily go
wrong in estimating future “coupons.” At Berkshire, we attempt to deal with this
problem in two ways. First, we try to stick to businesses we believe we
understand. That means they must be relatively simple and stable in character. If
a business is complex or subject to constant change, we’re not smart enough to
predict future cash flows. Incidentally, that shortcoming doesn’t bother us. What

counts for most people in investing is not how much they know, but rather how
realistically they define what they don’t know. An investor needs to do very few
things right as long as he or she avoids big mistakes.
Second, and equally important, we insist on a margin of safety in our
purchase price. If we calculate the value of a common stock to be only slightly
higher than its price, we’re not interested in buying. We believe this margin-of-
safety principle, so strongly emphasized by Ben Graham, to be the cornerstone
of investment success.
[A]n intelligent investor in common stocks will do better in the secondary
market than he will do buying new issues. The reason has to do with the way
prices are set in each instance. The secondary market, which is periodically ruled
by mass folly, is constantly setting a “clearing” price. No matter how foolish that
price may be, it’s what counts for the holder of a stock or bond who needs or
wishes to sell, of whom there are always going to be a few at any moment. In
many instances, shares worth x in business value have sold in the market for ½x
or less.
The new-issue market, on the other hand, is ruled by controlling
stockholders and corporations, who can usually select the timing of offerings or,
if the market looks unfavorable, can avoid an offering altogether.
Understandably, these sellers are not going to offer any bargains, either by way
of a public offering or in a negotiated transaction: It’s rare you’ll find x for ½x
here. Indeed, in the case of common-stock offerings, selling shareholders are
often motivated to unload only when they feel the market is overpaying. (These
sellers, of course, would state that proposition somewhat differently, averring
instead that they simply resist selling when the market is underpaying for their
goods.)
Right after year-end, Berkshire purchased 3 million shares of Capital
Cities/ABC, Inc. (“Cap Cities”) at $172.50 per share, the market price of such
shares at the time the commitment was made early in March, 1985. I’ve been on
record for many years about the management of Cap Cities: I think it is the best
of any publicly-owned company in the country. And Tom Murphy and Dan
Burke are not only great managers, they are precisely the sort of fellows that you
would want your daughter to marry. It is a privilege to be associated with them—
and also a lot of fun, as any of you who know them will understand.
Our purchase of stock helped Cap Cities finance the $3.5 billion acquisition
of American Broadcasting Companies. For Cap Cities, ABC is a major
undertaking whose economics are likely to be unexciting over the next few

years. This bothers us not an iota; we can be very patient. (No matter how great
the talent or effort, some things just take time: you can’t produce a baby in one
month by getting nine women pregnant.)
As evidence of our confidence, we have executed an unusual agreement: for
an extended period Tom, as CEO (or Dan, should he be CEO) votes our stock.
This arrangement was initiated by Charlie and me, not by Tom. We also have
restricted ourselves in various ways regarding sale of our shares. The object of
these restrictions is to make sure that our block does not get sold to anyone who
is a large holder (or intends to become a large holder) without the approval of
management, an arrangement similar to ones we initiated some years ago at
GEICO and Washington Post.
Since large blocks frequently command premium prices, some might think
we have injured Berkshire financially by creating such restrictions. Our view is
just the opposite. We feel the long-term economic prospects for these businesses
—and, thus, for ourselves as owners—are enhanced by the arrangements. With
them in place, the first-class managers with whom we have aligned ourselves
can focus their efforts entirely upon running the businesses and maximizing
long-term values for owners. Certainly this is much better than having those
managers distracted by “revolving-door capitalists” hoping to put the company
“in play.” (Of course, some managers place their own interests above those of
the company and its owners and deserve to be shaken up—but, in making
investments, we try to steer clear of this type.)
Today, corporate instability is an inevitable consequence of widely-diffused
ownership of voting stock. At any time a major holder can surface, usually
mouthing reassuring rhetoric but frequently harboring uncivil intentions. By
circumscribing our blocks of stock as we often do, we intend to promote stability
where it otherwise might be lacking. That kind of certainty, combined with a
good manager and a good business, provides excellent soil for a rich financial
harvest. That’s the economic case for our arrangements.
The human side is just as important. We don’t want managers we like and
admire—and who have welcomed a major financial commitment by us—to ever
lose any sleep wondering whether surprises might occur because of our large
ownership. I have told them there will be no surprises, and these agreements put
Berkshire’s signature where my mouth is. That signature also means the
managers have a corporate commitment and therefore need not worry if my
personal participation in Berkshire’s affairs ends prematurely (a term I define as
any age short of three digits).
Our Cap Cities purchase was made at a full price, reflecting the very
considerable enthusiasm for both media stocks and media properties that has

developed in recent years (and that, in the case of some property purchases, has
approached a mania). It’s no field for bargains. However, our Cap Cities
investment allies us with an exceptional combination of properties and people—
and we like the opportunity to participate in size.
Of course, some of you probably wonder why we are now buying Cap
Cities at $172.50 per share given that your Chairman, in a characteristic burst of
brilliance, sold Berkshire’s holdings in the same company at $43 per share in
1978–80. Anticipating your question, I spent much of 1985 working on a snappy
answer that would reconcile these acts.
A little more time, please.
E. Intelligent Investing24
Inactivity strikes us as intelligent behavior. Neither we nor most business
managers would dream of feverishly trading highly-profitable subsidiaries
because a small move in the Federal Reserve’s discount rate was predicted or
because some Wall Street pundit had reversed his views on the market. Why,
then, should we behave differently with our minority positions in wonderful
businesses? The art of investing in public companies successfully is little
different from the art of successfully acquiring subsidiaries. In each case you
simply want to acquire, at a sensible price, a business with excellent economics
and able, honest management. Thereafter, you need only monitor whether these
qualities are being preserved.
When carried out capably, an investment strategy of that type will often
result in its practitioner owning a few securities that will come to represent a
very large portion of his portfolio. This investor would get a similar result if he
followed a policy of purchasing an interest in, say, 20% of the future earnings of
a number of outstanding college basketball stars. A handful of these would go on
to achieve NBA stardom, and the investor’s take from them would soon
dominate his royalty stream. To suggest that this investor should sell off portions
of his most successful investments simply because they have come to dominate
his portfolio is akin to suggesting that the Bulls trade Michael Jordan because he
has become so important to the team.
In studying the investments we have made in both subsidiary companies
and common stocks, you will see that we favor businesses and industries
unlikely to experience major change. The reason for that is simple: Making
either type of purchase, we are searching for operations that we believe are
virtually certain to possess enormous competitive strength ten or twenty years

from now. A fast-changing industry environment may offer the chance for huge
wins, but it precludes the certainty we seek.
I should emphasize that, as citizens, Charlie and I welcome change: Fresh
ideas, new products, innovative processes and the like cause our country’s
standard of living to rise, and that’s clearly good. As investors, however, our
reaction to a fermenting industry is much like our attitude toward space
exploration: We applaud the endeavor but prefer to skip the ride.
Obviously all businesses change to some extent. Today, See’s is different in
many ways from what it was in 1972 when we bought it: It offers a different
assortment of candy, employs different machinery and sells through different
distribution channels. But the reasons why people today buy boxed chocolates,
and why they buy them from us rather than from someone else, are virtually
unchanged from what they were in the 1920s when the See family was building
the business. Moreover, these motivations are not likely to change over the next
20 years, or even 50.
We look for similar predictability in marketable securities. Take Coca-Cola:
The zeal and imagination with which Coke products are sold has burgeoned
under Roberto Goizueta, who has done an absolutely incredible job in creating
value for his shareholders. Aided by Don Keough and Doug Ivester, Roberto has
rethought and improved every aspect of the company. But the fundamentals of
the business—the qualities that underlie Coke’s competitive dominance and
stunning economics—have remained constant through the years.
I was recently studying the 1896 report of Coke (and you think that you are
behind in your reading!). At that time Coke, though it was already the leading
soft drink, had been around for only a decade. But its blueprint for the next 100
years was already drawn. Reporting sales of $148,000 that year, Asa Candler, the
company’s president, said: “We have not lagged in our efforts to go into all the
world teaching that Coca-Cola is the article, par excellence, for the health and
good feeling of all people.” Though “health” may have been a reach, I love the
fact that Coke still relies on Candler’s basic theme today—a century later.
Candler went on to say, just as Roberto could now, “No article of like character
has ever so firmly entrenched itself in public favor.” Sales of syrup that year,
incidentally, were 116,492 gallons versus about 3.2 billion in 1996.
I can’t resist one more Candler quote: “Beginning this year about March 1st
. . . we employed ten traveling salesmen by means of which, with systematic
correspondence from the office, we covered almost the territory of the Union.”
That’s my kind of sales force.
Companies such as Coca-Cola and Gillette might well be labeled “The
Inevitables.” Forecasters may differ a bit in their predictions of exactly how

much soft drink or shaving-equipment business these companies will be doing in
ten or twenty years. Nor is our talk of inevitability meant to play down the vital
work that these companies must continue to carry out, in such areas as
manufacturing, distribution, packaging and product innovation. In the end,
however, no sensible observer—not even these companies’ most vigorous
competitors, assuming they are assessing the matter honestly—questions that
Coke and Gillette will dominate their fields worldwide for an investment
lifetime. Indeed, their dominance will probably strengthen. Both companies have
significantly expanded their already huge shares of market during the past ten
years, and all signs point to their repeating that performance in the next decade.
Obviously many companies in high-tech businesses or embryonic industries
will grow much faster in percentage terms than will The Inevitables. But I would
rather be certain of a good result than hopeful of a great one.
Of course, Charlie and I can identify only a few Inevitables, even after a
lifetime of looking for them. Leadership alone provides no certainties: Witness
the shocks some years back at General Motors, IBM and Sears, all of which had
enjoyed long periods of seeming invincibility. Though some industries or lines
of business exhibit characteristics that endow leaders with virtually
insurmountable advantages, and that tend to establish Survival of the Fattest as
almost a natural law, most do not. Thus, for every Inevitable, there are dozens of
Impostors, companies now riding high but vulnerable to competitive attacks.
Considering what it takes to be an Inevitable, Charlie and I recognize that we
will never be able to come up with a Nifty Fifty or even a Twinkling Twenty. To
the Inevitables in our portfolio, therefore, we add a few “Highly Probables.”
You can, of course, pay too much for even the best of businesses. The
overpayment risk surfaces periodically and, in our opinion, may now be quite
high for the purchasers of virtually all stocks, The Inevitables included. Investors
making purchases in an overheated market need to recognize that it may often
take an extended period for the value of even an outstanding company to catch
up with the price they paid.
A far more serious problem occurs when the management of a great
company gets sidetracked and neglects its wonderful base business while
purchasing other businesses that are so-so or worse. When that happens, the
suffering of investors is often prolonged. Unfortunately, that is precisely what
transpired years ago at both Coke and Gillette. (Would you believe that a few
decades back they were growing shrimp at Coke and exploring for oil at
Gillette?) Loss of focus is what most worries Charlie and me when we
contemplate investing in businesses that in general look outstanding. All too
often, we’ve seen value stagnate in the presence of hubris or of boredom that

caused the attention of managers to wander. That’s not going to happen again at
Coke and Gillette, however—not given their current and prospective
managements.
*
Let me add a few thoughts about your own investments. Most investors,
both institutional and individual, will find that the best way to own common
stocks is through an index fund that charges minimal fees. Those following this
path are sure to beat the net results (after fees and expenses) delivered by the
great majority of investment professionals.
Should you choose, however, to construct your own portfolio, there are a
few thoughts worth remembering. Intelligent investing is not complex, though
that is far from saying that it is easy. What an investor needs is the ability to
correctly evaluate selected businesses. Note that word “selected”: You don’t
have to be an expert on every company, or even many. You only have to be able
to evaluate companies within your circle of competence. The size of that circle is
not very important; knowing its boundaries, however, is vital.
To invest successfully, you need not understand beta, efficient markets,
modern portfolio theory, option pricing, or emerging markets. You may, in fact,
be better off knowing nothing of these. That, of course, is not the prevailing view
at most business schools, whose finance curriculum tends to be dominated by
such subjects. In our view, though, investment students need only two well-
taught courses—How to Value a Business, and How to Think About Market
Prices.
Your goal as an investor should simply be to purchase, at a rational price, a
part interest in an easily-understandable business whose earnings are virtually
certain to be materially higher five, ten and twenty years from now. Over time,
you will find only a few companies that meet these standards—so when you see
one that qualifies, you should buy a meaningful amount of stock. You must also
resist the temptation to stray from your guidelines: If you aren’t willing to own a
stock for ten years, don’t even think about owning it for ten minutes. Put
together a portfolio of companies whose aggregate earnings march upward over
the years, and so also will the portfolio’s market value.
Though it’s seldom recognized, this is the exact approach that has produced
gains for Berkshire shareholders: Our look-through earnings have grown at a
good clip over the years, and our stock price has risen correspondingly. Had
those gains in earnings not materialized, there would have been little increase in
Berkshire’s value.

Over the past 35 years, American business has delivered terrific results. It
should therefore have been easy for investors to earn juicy returns: All they had
to do was piggyback Corporate America in a diversified, low-expense way. An
index fund that they never touched would have done the job. Instead many
investors have had experiences ranging from mediocre to disastrous.
There have been three primary causes: first, high costs, usually because
investors traded excessively or spent far too much on investment management;
second, portfolio decisions based on tips and fads rather than on thoughtful,
quantified evaluation of businesses; and third, a start-and-stop approach to the
market marked by untimely entries (after an advance has been long underway)
and exits (after periods of stagnation or decline). Investors should remember that
excitement and expenses are their enemies. And if they insist on trying to time
their participation in equities, they should try to be fearful when others are
greedy and greedy only when others are fearful.
[S]everal of the companies in which we have large investments had
disappointing business results last year. Nevertheless, we believe these
companies have important competitive advantages that will endure over time.
This attribute, which makes for good long-term investment results, is one
Charlie and I occasionally believe we can identify. More often, however, we
can’t—not at least with a high degree of conviction. This explains, by the way,
why we don’t own stocks of tech companies, even though we share the general
view that our society will be transformed by their products and services. Our
problem—which we can’t solve by studying up—is that we have no insights into
which participants in the tech field possess a truly durable competitive
advantage.
Our lack of tech insights, we should add, does not distress us. After all,
there are a great many business areas in which Charlie and I have no special
capital-allocation expertise. For instance, we bring nothing to the table when it
comes to evaluating patents, manufacturing processes or geological prospects.
So we simply don’t get into judgments in those fields.
If we have a strength, it is in recognizing when we are operating well within
our circle of competence and when we are approaching the perimeter. Predicting
the long-term economics of companies that operate in fast-changing industries is
simply far beyond our perimeter. If others claim predictive skill in those
industries—and seem to have their claims validated by the behavior of the stock
market—we neither envy nor emulate them. Instead, we just stick with what we
understand. If we stray, we will have done so inadvertently, not because we got

restless and substituted hope for rationality. Fortunately, it’s almost certain there
will be opportunities from time to time for Berkshire to do well within the circle
we’ve staked out.
Right now, the prices of the fine businesses we already own are just not that
attractive. In other words, we feel much better about the businesses than their
stocks. That’s why we haven’t added to our present holdings. Nevertheless, we
haven’t yet scaled back our portfolio in a major way: If the choice is between a
questionable business at a comfortable price or a comfortable business at a
questionable price, we much prefer the latter. What really gets our attention,
however, is a comfortable business at a comfortable price.
Our reservations about the prices of securities we own apply also to the
general level of equity prices. We have never attempted to forecast what the
stock market is going to do in the next month or the next year, and we are not
trying to do that now. But [as of late 1999] equity investors currently seem
wildly optimistic in their expectations about future returns.
We see the growth in corporate profits as being largely tied to the business
done in the country (GDP), and we see GDP growing at a real rate of about 3%.
In addition, we have hypothesized 2% inflation. Charlie and I have no particular
conviction about the accuracy of 2%. However, it’s the market’s view: Treasury
Inflation-Protected Securities (TIPS) yield about two percentage points less than
the standard treasury bond, and if you believe inflation rates are going to be
higher than that, you can profit by simply buying TIPS and shorting
Governments.
If profits do indeed grow along with GDP, at about a 5% rate, the valuation
placed on American business is unlikely to climb by much more than that. Add
in something for dividends, and you emerge with returns from equities that are
dramatically less than most investors have either experienced in the past or
expect in the future. If investor expectations become more realistic—and they
almost certainly will—the market adjustment is apt to be severe, particularly in
sectors in which speculation has been concentrated. Berkshire will someday
have opportunities to deploy major amounts of cash in equity markets—we are
confident of that. But, as the song goes, “Who knows where or when?”
Meanwhile, if anyone starts explaining to you what is going on in the truly-
manic portions of this “enchanted” market, you might remember still another
line of song: “Fools give you reasons, wise men never try.”
[At times when prices are high for both businesses and stocks], we try to
exert a Ted Williams kind of discipline. In his book The Science of Hitting, Ted

explains that he carved the strike zone into 77 cells, each the size of a baseball.
Swinging only at balls in his “best” cell, he knew, would allow him to bat .400;
reaching for balls in his “worst” spot, the low outside corner of the strike zone,
would reduce him to .230. In other words, waiting for the fat pitch would mean a
trip to the Hall of Fame; swinging indiscriminately would mean a ticket to the
minors.
If they are in the strike zone at all, the business “pitches” we now see are
just catching the lower outside corner. If we swing, we will be locked into low
returns. But if we let all of today’s balls go by, there can be no assurance that the
next ones we see will be more to our liking. Perhaps the attractive prices of the
past were the aberrations, not the full prices of today. Unlike Ted, we can’t be
called out if we resist three pitches that are barely in the strike zone;
nevertheless, just standing there, day after day, with my bat on my shoulder is
not my idea of fun.
F. Cigar Butts and the Institutional Imperative25
To quote Robert Benchley, “Having a dog teaches a boy fidelity,
perseverance, and to turn around three times before lying down.” Such are the
shortcomings of experience. Nevertheless, it’s a good idea to review past
mistakes before committing new ones. So let’s take a quick look at the last 25
years.
• My first mistake, of course, was in buying control of Berkshire. Though I
knew its business—textile manufacturing—to be unpromising, I was enticed to
buy because the price looked cheap. Stock purchases of that kind had proved
reasonably rewarding in my early years, though by the time Berkshire came
along in 1965 I was becoming aware that the strategy was not ideal.
If you buy a stock at a sufficiently low price, there will usually be some
hiccup in the fortunes of the business that gives you a chance to unload at a
decent profit, even though the long-term performance of the business may be
terrible. I call this the “cigar butt” approach to investing. A cigar butt found on
the street that has only one puff left in it may not offer much of a smoke, but the
“bargain purchase” will make that puff all profit.
Unless you are a liquidator, that kind of approach to buying businesses is
foolish. First, the original “bargain” price probably will not turn out to be such a
steal after all. In a difficult business, no sooner is one problem solved than
another surfaces—never is there just one cockroach in the kitchen. Second, any
initial advantage you secure will be quickly eroded by the low return that the

business earns. For example, if you buy a business for $8 million that can be
sold or liquidated for $10 million and promptly take either course, you can
realize a high return. But the investment will disappoint if the business is sold
for $10 million in ten years and in the interim has annually earned and
distributed only a few percent on cost. Time is the friend of the wonderful
business, the enemy of the mediocre.
You might think this principle is obvious, but I had to learn it the hard way
—in fact, I had to learn it several times over. Shortly after purchasing Berkshire,
I acquired a Baltimore department store, Hochschild, Kohn, buying through a
company called Diversified Retailing that later merged with Berkshire. I bought
at a substantial discount from book value, the people were first-class, and the
deal included some extras—unrecorded real estate values and a significant LIFO
inventory cushion. How could I miss? So-o-o—three years later I was lucky to
sell the business for about what I had paid.
• That leads right into a related lesson: Good jockeys will do well on good
horses, but not on broken-down nags. Both Berkshire’s textile business and
Hochschild, Kohn had able and honest people running them. The same managers
employed in a business with good economic characteristics would have achieved
fine records. But they were never going to make any progress while running in
quicksand.26
I’ve said many times that when a management with a reputation for
brilliance tackles a business with a reputation for bad economics, it is the
reputation of the business that remains intact. I just wish I hadn’t been so
energetic in creating examples. My behavior has matched that admitted by Mae
West: “I was Snow White, but I drifted.”
• A further related lesson: Easy does it. After 25 years of buying and
supervising a great variety of businesses, Charlie and I have not learned how to
solve difficult business problems. What we have learned is to avoid them. To the
extent we have been successful, it is because we concentrated on identifying
one-foot hurdles that we could step over rather than because we acquired any
ability to clear seven-footers.
The finding may seem unfair, but in both business and investments it is
usually far more profitable to simply stick with the easy and obvious than it is to
resolve the difficult. On occasion, tough problems must be tackled as was the
case when we started our Sunday paper in Buffalo. In other instances, a great
investment opportunity occurs when a marvelous business encounters a one-time
huge, but solvable, problem as was the case many years back at both American
Express and GEICO. Overall, however, we’ve done better by avoiding dragons
than by slaying them.

• My most surprising discovery: the overwhelming importance in business
of an unseen force that we might call “the institutional imperative.” In business
school, I was given no hint of the imperative’s existence and I did not intuitively
understand it when I entered the business world. I thought then that decent,
intelligent, and experienced managers would automatically make rational
business decisions. But I learned over time that isn’t so. Instead, rationality
frequently wilts when the institutional imperative comes into play.
For example: (1) As if governed by Newton’s First Law of Motion, an
institution will resist any change in its current direction; (2) Just as work
expands to fill available time, corporate projects or acquisitions will materialize
to soak up available funds; (3) Any business craving of the leader, however
foolish, will be quickly supported by detailed rate-of-return and strategic studies
prepared by his troops; and (4) The behavior of peer companies, whether they
are expanding, acquiring, setting executive compensation or whatever, will be
mindlessly imitated.
Institutional dynamics, not venality or stupidity, set businesses on these
courses, which are too often misguided. After making some expensive mistakes
because I ignored the power of the imperative, I have tried to organize and
manage Berkshire in ways that minimize its influence. Furthermore, Charlie and
I have attempted to concentrate our investments in companies that appear alert to
the problem.
• After some other mistakes, I learned to go into business only with people
whom I like, trust, and admire. As I noted before, this policy of itself will not
ensure success: A second-class textile or department-store company won’t
prosper simply because its managers are men that you would be pleased to see
your daughter marry. However, an owner—or investor—can accomplish
wonders if he manages to associate himself with such people in businesses that
possess decent economic characteristics. Conversely, we do not wish to join with
managers who lack admirable qualities, no matter how attractive the prospects of
their business. We’ve never succeeded in making a good deal with a bad person.
• Some of my worst mistakes were not publicly visible. These were stock
and business purchases whose virtues I understood and yet didn’t make. It’s no
sin to miss a great opportunity outside one’s area of competence. But I have
passed on a couple of really big purchases that were served up to me on a platter
and that I was fully capable of understanding. For Berkshire’s shareholders,
myself included, the cost of this thumb-sucking has been huge.
• Our consistently-conservative financial policies may appear to have been
a mistake, but in my view were not. In retrospect, it is clear that significantly
higher, though still conventional, leverage ratios at Berkshire would have

produced considerably better returns on equity than the 23.8% we have actually
averaged. Even in 1965, perhaps we could have judged there to be a 99%
probability that higher leverage would lead to nothing but good.
Correspondingly, we might have seen only a 1% chance that some shock factor,
external or internal, would cause a conventional debt ratio to produce a result
falling somewhere between temporary anguish and default.
We wouldn’t have liked those 99:1 odds—and never will. A small chance of
distress or disgrace cannot, in our view, be offset by a large chance of extra
returns. If your actions are sensible, you are certain to get good results; in most
such cases, leverage just moves things along faster. Charlie and I have never
been in a big hurry: We enjoy the process far more than the proceeds—though
we have learned to live with those also.
G. Life and Debt27
Except for token amounts, we shun debt, turning to it for only three
purposes: (1) We occasionally use repos as a part of certain short-term investing
strategies that incorporate ownership of U.S. government (or agency) securities.
Purchases of this kind are highly opportunistic and involve only the most liquid
of securities. (2) We borrow money against portfolios of interest-bearing
receivables whose risk characteristics we understand. (3) [Subsidiaries, such as
MidAmerican, may incur debt that appears on Berkshire’s consolidated balance
sheet, but Berkshire does not guarantee the obligation.]
From a risk standpoint, it is far safer to have earnings from ten diverse and
uncorrelated utility operations that cover interest charges by, say, a 2:1 ratio than
it is to have far greater coverage provided by a single utility. A catastrophic event
can render a single utility insolvent—witness what Katrina did to the local
electric utility in New Orleans—no matter how conservative its debt policy. A
geographical disaster—say, an earthquake in a Western state—can’t have the
same effect on MidAmerican. And even a worrier like Charlie can’t think of an
event that would systemically decrease utility earnings in any major way.
Because of MidAmerican’s ever-widening diversity of regulated earnings, it will
always utilize major amounts of debt.
And that’s about it. We are not interested in incurring any significant debt at
Berkshire for acquisitions or operating purposes. Conventional business wisdom,
of course, would argue that we are being too conservative and that there are
added profits that could be safely earned if we injected moderate leverage into
our balance sheet. Maybe so. But many of Berkshire’s hundreds of thousands of

investors have a large portion of their net worth in our stock (among them, it
should be emphasized, a large number of our board and key managers) and a
disaster for the company would be a disaster for them.
Moreover, there are people who have been permanently injured to whom
we owe insurance payments that stretch out for fifty years or more. To these and
other constituencies we have promised total security, whatever comes: financial
panics, stock-exchange closures (an extended one occurred in 1914) or even
domestic nuclear, chemical or biological attacks. We are quite willing to accept
huge risks. Indeed, more than any other insurer, we write high-limit policies that
are tied to single catastrophic events.
We also own a large investment portfolio whose market value could fall
dramatically and quickly under certain conditions (as happened on October 19,
1987). Whatever occurs, though, Berkshire will have the net worth, the earnings
streams and the liquidity to handle the problem with ease. Any other approach is
dangerous. Over the years, a number of very smart people have learned the hard
way that a long string of impressive numbers multiplied by a single zero always
equals zero. That is not an equation whose effects I would like to experience
personally, and I would like even less to be responsible for imposing its penalties
upon others.
Unquestionably, some people have become very rich through the use of
borrowed money. However, that’s also been a way to get very poor. When
leverage works, it magnifies your gains. Your spouse thinks you’re clever, and
your neighbors get envious. But leverage is addictive. Once having profited from
its wonders, very few people retreat to more conservative practices. And as we
all learned in third grade—and some relearned in 2008—any series of positive
numbers, however impressive the numbers may be, evaporates when multiplied
by a single zero. History tells us that leverage all too often produces zeroes, even
when it is employed by very smart people.
Leverage, of course, can be lethal to businesses as well. Companies with
large debts often assume that these obligations can be refinanced as they mature.
That assumption is usually valid. Occasionally, though, either because of
company-specific problems or a worldwide shortage of credit, maturities must
actually be met by payment. For that, only cash will do the job.
Borrowers then learn that credit is like oxygen. When either is abundant, its
presence goes unnoticed. When either is missing, that’s all that is noticed. Even
a short absence of credit can bring a company to its knees. In September 2008, in
fact, its overnight disappearance in many sectors of the economy came

dangerously close to bringing our entire country to its knees.
Charlie and I have no interest in any activity that could pose the slightest
threat to Berkshire’s wellbeing. (With our having a combined age of 167, starting
over is not on our bucket list.) We are forever conscious of the fact that you, our
partners, have entrusted us with what in many cases is a major portion of your
savings. In addition, important philanthropy is dependent on our prudence.
Finally, many disabled victims of accidents caused by our insureds are counting
on us to deliver sums payable decades from now. It would be irresponsible for us
to risk what all these constituencies need just to pursue a few points of extra
return.
At Berkshire, we will hold at least $10 billion of cash, excluding that held
at our regulated utility and railroad businesses. Because of that commitment, we
customarily keep at least $20 billion on hand so that we can both withstand
unprecedented insurance losses (our largest to date having been about $3 billion
from Katrina, the insurance industry’s most expensive catastrophe) and quickly
seize acquisition or investment opportunities, even during times of financial
turmoil.
We keep our cash largely in U.S. Treasury bills and avoid other short-term
securities yielding a few more basis points, a policy we adhered to long before
the frailties of commercial paper and money market funds became apparent in
September 2008. We agree with investment writer Ray DeVoe’s observation,
“More money has been lost reaching for yield than at the point of a gun.” At
Berkshire, we don’t rely on bank lines, and we don’t enter into contracts that
could require postings of collateral except for amounts that are tiny in relation to
our liquid assets.
Furthermore, not a dime of cash has left Berkshire for dividends or share
repurchases during the past 40 years. Instead, we have retained all of our
earnings to strengthen our business, a reinforcement now running about $1
billion per month. Our net worth has thus increased from $48 million to $157
billion during those four decades and our intrinsic value has grown far more. No
other American corporation has come close to building up its financial strength
in this unrelenting way.
By being so cautious in respect to leverage, we penalize our returns by a
minor amount. Having loads of liquidity, though, lets us sleep well. Moreover,
during the episodes of financial chaos that occasionally erupt in our economy,
we will be equipped both financially and emotionally to play offense while
others scramble for survival.
That’s what allowed us to invest $15.6 billion in 25 days of panic following
the Lehman bankruptcy in 2008.

16 [Introductory essay, 1985.]
17 [Divided by hash lines: 1987; 1997.]
18 [Divided by hash lines: 1988; 1989.]
19 [Divided by hash lines: 1988; 1993; 1986; 1991; 1987.]
20 [A separate paragraph from this 1993 letter provided as follows:]
Let me add a lesson from history: Coke went public in 1919 at $40 per
share. By the end of 1920 the market, coldly reevaluating Coke’s future
prospects, had battered the stock down by more than 50%, to $19.50. At year-
end 1993, that single share, with dividends reinvested, was worth more than $2.1
million. As Ben Graham said: “In the short-run, the market is a voting machine
—reflecting a voter-registration test that requires only money, not intelligence or
emotional stability—but in the long-run, the market is a weighing machine.”
21 [Gillette merged with Procter & Gamble (P&G) in late 2005. The 2005
letter states: “We didn’t intend to sell our Gillette shares before the merger; we
don’t intend to sell our P&G shares now.”]
22 [Berkshire’s Capital Cities/ABC holdings left the “primary and
permanent” category following its 1996 acquisition, for stock and cash, by The
Walt Disney Company.]
23 [Divided by hash lines: 1987; 1992; 1985.]
24 [Divided by hash lines: 1996; 2004; 1999; 1997.]
25 [1989.]
26 [See the essay The Anxieties of Business Change in Part I.C.]
27 [2005; 2010.]

III. INVESTMENT ALTERNATIVES
In addition to our permanent common stock holdings, we hold large
quantities of marketable securities in our insurance companies. In selecting
these, we can choose among five major categories: (1) long-term common stock
investments, (2) medium-term fixed-income securities, (3) long-term fixed
income securities, (4) short-term cash equivalents, and (5) short-term arbitrage
commitments [as discussed in the essay Arbitrage in Part II.B].
We have no particular bias when it comes to choosing from these
categories. We just continuously search among them for the highest after-tax
returns as measured by “mathematical expectation,” limiting ourselves always to
investment alternatives we think we understand. Our criteria have nothing to do
with maximizing immediately reportable earnings; our goal, rather, is to
maximize eventual net worth.28
A. Surveying the Field29
Investment possibilities are both many and varied. There are three major
categories, however, and it’s important to understand the characteristics of each.
So let’s survey the field.
Investments that are denominated in a given currency include money-
market funds, bonds, mortgages, bank deposits, and other instruments. Most of
these currency-based investments are thought of as “safe.” In truth they are
among the most dangerous of assets. Their beta may be zero, but their risk is
huge.
Over the past century these instruments have destroyed the purchasing
power of investors in many countries, even as the holders continued to receive
timely payments of interest and principal. This ugly result, moreover, will
forever recur. Governments determine the ultimate value of money, and systemic
forces will sometimes cause them to gravitate to policies that produce inflation.
From time to time such policies spin out of control.
Even in the U.S., where the wish for a stable currency is strong, the dollar
has fallen a staggering 86% in value since 1965, when I took over management
of Berkshire. It takes no less than $7 today to buy what $1 did at that time.
Consequently, a tax-free institution would have needed 4.3% interest annually
from bond investments over that period to simply maintain its purchasing power.

Its managers would have been kidding themselves if they thought of any portion
of that interest as “income.”
For taxpaying investors, the picture has been far worse. During the same
47-year period, continuous rolling of U.S. Treasury bills produced 5.7%
annually. That sounds satisfactory. But if an individual investor paid personal
income taxes at a rate averaging 25%, this 5.7% return would have yielded
nothing in the way of real income. This investor’s visible income tax would have
stripped him of 1.4 points of the stated yield, and the invisible inflation tax
would have devoured the remaining 4.3 points. It’s noteworthy that the implicit
inflation “tax” was more than triple the explicit income tax that our investor
probably thought of as his main burden. “In God We Trust” may be imprinted on
our currency, but the hand that activates our government’s printing press has
been all too human.
High interest rates, of course, can compensate purchasers for the inflation
risk they face with currency-based investments—and indeed, rates in the early
1980s did that job nicely. Current rates, however, do not come close to offsetting
the purchasing-power risk that investors assume. Right now bonds should come
with a warning label.
Under today’s conditions, therefore, I do not like currency-based
investments. Even so, Berkshire holds significant amounts of them, primarily of
the short-term variety. At Berkshire the need for ample liquidity occupies center
stage and will never be slighted, however inadequate rates may be.
Accommodating this need, we primarily hold U.S. Treasury bills, the only
investment that can be counted on for liquidity under the most chaotic of
economic conditions. Our working level for liquidity is $20 billion; $10 billion
is our absolute minimum.
Beyond the requirements that liquidity and regulators impose on us, we will
purchase currency-related securities only if they offer the possibility of unusual
gain—either because a particular credit is mispriced, as can occur in periodic
junk-bond debacles, or because rates rise to a level that offers the possibility of
realizing substantial capital gains on high-grade bonds when rates fall. Though
we’ve exploited both opportunities in the past—and may do so again—we are
now 180 degrees removed from such prospects. Today, a wry comment that Wall
Streeter Shelby Cullom Davis made long ago seems apt: “Bonds promoted as
offering risk-free returns are now priced to deliver return-free risk.”
The second major category of investments involves assets that will never
produce anything, but that are purchased in the buyer’s hope that someone else
—who also knows that the assets will be forever unproductive—will pay more
for them in the future. Tulips, of all things, briefly became a favorite of such

buyers in the 17th century.
This type of investment requires an expanding pool of buyers, who, in turn,
are enticed because they believe the buying pool will expand still further.
Owners are not inspired by what the asset itself can produce—it will remain
lifeless forever—but rather by the belief that others will desire it even more
avidly in the future.
The major asset in this category is gold, currently a huge favorite of
investors who fear almost all other assets, especially paper money (of whose
value, as noted, they are right to be fearful). Gold, however, has two significant
shortcomings, being neither of much use nor procreative. True, gold has some
industrial and decorative utility, but the demand for these purposes is both
limited and incapable of soaking up new production. Meanwhile, if you own one
ounce of gold for an eternity, you will still own one ounce at its end.
What motivates most gold purchasers is their belief that the ranks of the
fearful will grow. During the past decade that belief has proved correct. Beyond
that, the rising price has on its own generated additional buying enthusiasm,
attracting purchasers who see the rise as validating an investment thesis. As
“bandwagon” investors join any party, they create their own truth—for a while.
Over the past 15 years, both Internet stocks and houses have demonstrated
the extraordinary excesses that can be created by combining an initially sensible
thesis with well-publicized rising prices. In these bubbles, an army of originally
skeptical investors succumbed to the “proof” delivered by the market, and the
pool of buyers—for a time—expanded sufficiently to keep the bandwagon
rolling. But bubbles blown large enough inevitably pop.
Today the world’s gold stock is about 170,000 metric tons. If all of this gold
were melded together, it would form a cube of about 68 feet per side. (Picture it
fitting comfortably within a baseball infield.) At $1,750 per ounce—gold’s price
as I write this—its value would be $9.6 trillion. Call this cube pile A.
Let’s now create a pile B costing an equal amount. For that, we could buy
all U.S. cropland (400 million acres with output of about $200 billion annually),
plus 16 Exxon Mobils (the world’s most profitable company, one earning more
than $40 billion annually). After these purchases, we would have about $1
trillion left over for walking-around money (no sense feeling strapped after this
buying binge). Can you imagine an investor with $9.6 trillion selecting pile A
over pile B?
Beyond the staggering valuation given the existing stock of gold, current
prices make today’s annual production of gold command about $160 billion.
Buyers—whether jewelry and industrial users, frightened individuals, or
speculators—must continually absorb this additional supply to merely maintain

an equilibrium at present prices.
A century from now the 400 million acres of farmland will have produced
staggering amounts of corn, wheat, cotton, and other crops—and will continue to
produce that valuable bounty, whatever the currency may be. Exxon Mobil will
probably have delivered trillions of dollars in dividends to its owners and will
also hold assets worth many more trillions (and, remember, you get 16 Exxons).
The 170,000 tons of gold will be unchanged in size and still incapable of
producing anything. You can fondle the cube, but it will not respond.
Admittedly, when people a century from now are fearful, it’s likely many
will still rush to gold. I’m confident, however, that the $9.6 trillion current
valuation of pile A will compound over the century at a rate far inferior to that
achieved by pile B.
Our first two categories enjoy maximum popularity at peaks of fear: Terror
over economic collapse drives individuals to currency-based assets, most
particularly U.S. obligations, and fear of currency collapse fosters movement to
sterile assets such as gold. We heard “cash is king” in late 2008, just when cash
should have been deployed rather than held. Similarly, we heard “cash is trash”
in the early 1980s just when fixed-dollar investments were at their most
attractive level in memory. On those occasions, investors who required a
supportive crowd paid dearly for that comfort.
My own preference—and you knew this was coming—is our third
category: investment in productive assets, whether businesses, farms, or real
estate. Ideally, these assets should have the ability in inflationary times to deliver
output that will retain its purchasing-power value while requiring a minimum of
new capital investment. Farms, real estate, and many businesses such as Coca-
Cola, IBM and our own See’s Candy meet that double-barreled test. Certain
other companies—think of our regulated utilities, for example—fail it because
inflation places heavy capital requirements on them. To earn more, their owners
must invest more. Even so, these investments will remain superior to
nonproductive or currency-based assets.
Whether the currency a century from now is based on gold, seashells, shark
teeth, or a piece of paper (as today), people will be willing to exchange a couple
of minutes of their daily labor for a Coca-Cola or some See’s peanut brittle. In
the future the U.S. population will move more goods, consume more food, and
require more living space than it does now. People will forever exchange what
they produce for what others produce.
Our country’s businesses will continue to efficiently deliver goods and
services wanted by our citizens. Metaphorically, these commercial “cows” will
live for centuries and give ever greater quantities of “milk” to boot. Their value

will be determined not by the medium of exchange but rather by their capacity to
deliver milk. Proceeds from the sale of the milk will compound for the owners of
the cows, just as they did during the 20th century when the Dow increased from
66 to 11,497 (and paid loads of dividends as well). Berkshire’s goal will be to
increase its ownership of first-class businesses. Our first choice will be to own
them in their entirety—but we will also be owners by way of holding sizable
amounts of marketable stocks. I believe that over any extended period of time
this category of investing will prove to be the runaway winner among the three
we’ve examined. More important, it will be by far the safest.
B. Junk Bonds30
Investing in junk bonds and investing in stocks are alike in certain ways:
Both activities require us to make a price-value calculation and also to scan
hundreds of securities to find the very few that have attractive reward/risk ratios.
But there are important differences between the two disciplines as well. In
stocks, we expect every commitment to work out well because we concentrate
on conservatively financed businesses with strong competitive strengths, run by
able and honest people. If we buy into these companies at sensible prices, losses
should be rare. Indeed, during the 38 years we have run the company’s affairs,
gains from the equities we manage at Berkshire (that is, excluding those
managed at General Re and GEICO) have exceeded losses by a ratio of about
100 to one.
Purchasing junk bonds, we are dealing with enterprises that are far more
marginal. These businesses are usually overloaded with debt and often operate in
industries characterized by low returns on capital. Additionally, the quality of
management is sometimes questionable. Management may even have interests
that are directly counter to those of debt-holders. Therefore, we expect that we
will have occasional large losses in junk issues. So far, however, we have done
reasonably well in this field.
Lethargy bordering on sloth remains the cornerstone of our investment
style: This year we neither bought nor sold a share of five of our six major
holdings. The exception was Wells Fargo, a superbly-managed, high-return
banking operation in which we increased our ownership to just under 10%, the
most we can own without the approval of the Federal Reserve Board. About one-
sixth of our position was bought in 1989, the rest in 1990.
The banking business is no favorite of ours. When assets are twenty times

equity—a common ratio in this industry—mistakes that involve only a small
portion of assets can destroy a major portion of equity. And mistakes have been
the rule rather than the exception at many major banks. Most have resulted from
a managerial failing that we described last year when discussing the
“institutional imperative”: the tendency of executives to mindlessly imitate the
behavior of their peers, no matter how foolish it may be to do so. In their
lending, many bankers played follow-the-leader with lemming-like zeal; now
they are experiencing a lemming-like fate.
Because leverage of 20:1 magnifies the effects of managerial strengths and
weaknesses, we have no interest in purchasing shares of a poorly-managed bank
at a “cheap” price. Instead, our only interest is in buying into well-managed
banks at fair prices.
With Wells Fargo, we think we have obtained the best managers in the
business, Carl Reichardt and Paul Hazen. In many ways the combination of Carl
and Paul reminds me of another—Tom Murphy and Dan Burke at Capital
Cities/ABC. First, each pair is stronger than the sum of its parts because each
partner understands, trusts and admires the other. Second, both managerial teams
pay able people well, but abhor having a bigger head count than is needed.
Third, both attack costs as vigorously when profits are at record levels as when
they are under pressure. Finally, both stick with what they understand and let
their abilities, not their egos, determine what they attempt. (Thomas J. Watson
Sr. of IBM followed the same rule: “I’m no genius,” he said. “I’m smart in spots
—but I stay around those spots.”)
Our purchases of Wells Fargo in 1990 were helped by a chaotic market in
bank stocks. The disarray was appropriate: Month by month the foolish loan
decisions of once well-regarded banks were put on public display. As one huge
loss after another was unveiled—often on the heels of managerial assurances
that all was well—investors understandably concluded that no bank’s numbers
were to be trusted. Aided by their flight from bank stocks, we purchased our
10% interest in Wells Fargo for $290 million, less than five times after-tax
earnings, and less than three times pre-tax earnings.
Wells Fargo is big—it has $56 billion in assets—and has been earning more
than 20% on equity and 1.25% on assets. Our purchase of one-tenth of the bank
may be thought of as roughly equivalent to our buying 100% of a $5 billion bank
with identical financial characteristics. But were we to make such a purchase, we
would have to pay about twice the $290 million we paid for Wells Fargo.
Moreover, that $5 billion bank, commanding a premium price, would present us
with another problem: We would not be able to find a Carl Reichardt to run it. In
recent years, Wells Fargo executives have been more avidly recruited than any

others in the banking business; no one however, has been able to hire the dean.
Of course, ownership of a bank—or about any other business—is far from
riskless. California banks face the specific risk of a major earthquake, which
might wreak enough havoc on borrowers to in turn destroy the banks lending to
them. A second risk is systemic—the possibility of a business contraction or
financial panic so severe that it would endanger almost every highly-leveraged
institution, no matter how intelligently run. Finally, the market’s major fear of
the moment is that West Coast real estate values will tumble because of
overbuilding and deliver huge losses to banks that have financed the expansion.
Because it is a leading real estate lender, Wells Fargo is thought to be
particularly vulnerable.
None of these eventualities can be ruled out. The probability of the first two
occurring, however, is low and even a meaningful drop in real estate values is
unlikely to cause major problems for well-managed institutions. Consider some
mathematics: Wells Fargo currently earns well over $1 billion pre-tax annually
after expensing more than $300 million for loan losses. If 10% of all $48 billion
of the bank’s loans—not just its real estate loans—were hit by problems in 1991,
and these produced losses (including foregone interest) averaging 30% of
principal, the company would roughly break even.
A year like that—which we consider only a low-level possibility, not a
likelihood—would not distress us. In fact, at Berkshire we would love to acquire
businesses or invest in capital projects that produced no return for a year, but that
could then be expected to earn 20% on growing equity. Nevertheless, fears of a
California real estate disaster similar to that experienced in New England caused
the price of Wells Fargo stock to fall almost 50% within a few months during
1990. Even though we had bought some shares at the prices prevailing before the
fall, we welcomed the decline because it allowed us to pick up many more
shares at the new, panic prices.
We will be buying businesses—or small parts of businesses, called stocks—
year in, year out as long as I live (and longer, if Berkshire’s directors attend the
seances I have scheduled). Given these intentions, declining prices for
businesses benefit us, and rising prices hurt us.
The most common cause of low prices is pessimism—sometimes pervasive,
sometimes specific to a company or industry. We want to do business in such an
environment, not because we like pessimism but because we like the prices it
produces. It’s optimism that is the enemy of the rational buyer.
None of this means, however, that a business or stock is an intelligent
purchase simply because it is unpopular; a contrarian approach is just as foolish
as a follow-the-crowd strategy. What’s required is thinking rather than polling.

Unfortunately, Bertrand Russell’s observation about life in general applies with
unusual force in the financial world: “Most men would rather die than think.
Many do.”
*
Our other major portfolio change last year was large additions to our
holdings of RJR Nabisco bonds, securities that we first bought in late 1989. At
year-end 1990 we had $440 million invested in these securities, an amount that
approximated market value. (As I write this, however, their market value has
risen by more than $150 million.)
Just as buying into the banking business is unusual for us, so is the purchase
of below-investment-grade bonds. But opportunities that interest us and that are
also large enough to have a worthwhile impact on Berkshire’s results are rare.
Therefore, we will look at any category of investment, so long as we understand
the business we’re buying into and believe that price and value may differ
significantly. (Woody Allen, in another context, pointed out the advantage of
open-mindedness: “I can’t understand why more people aren’t bi-sexual because
it doubles your chances for a date on Saturday night.”)
In the past we have bought a few below-investment-grade bonds with
success, though these were all old-fashioned “fallen angels”—bonds that were
initially of investment grade but that were downgraded when the issuers fell on
bad times.
A kind of bastardized fallen angel burst onto the investment scene in the
1980s—“junk bonds” that were far below investment-grade when issued. As the
decade progressed, new offerings of manufactured junk became ever junkier and
ultimately the predictable outcome occurred: Junk bonds lived up to their name.
In 1990—even before the recession dealt its blows—the financial sky became
dark with the bodies of failing corporations.
The disciples of debt assured us that this collapse wouldn’t happen: Huge
debt, we were told, would cause operating managers to focus their efforts as
never before, much as a dagger mounted on the steering wheel of a car could be
expected to make its driver proceed with intensified care. We’ll acknowledge
that such an attention-getter would produce a very alert driver. But another
certain consequence would be a deadly—and unnecessary—accident if the car
hit even the tiniest pothole or sliver of ice. The roads of business are riddled with
potholes; a plan that requires dodging them all is a plan for disaster.
In the final chapter of The Intelligent Investor Ben Graham forcefully
rejected the dagger thesis: “Confronted with a challenge to distill the secret of
sound investment into three words, we venture the motto, Margin of Safety.”

Forty-two years after reading that, I still think those are the right three words.
The failure of investors to heed this simple message caused them staggering
losses as the 1990s began.
At the height of the debt mania, capital structures were concocted that
guaranteed failure: In some cases, so much debt was issued that even highly
favorable business results could not produce the funds to service it. One
particularly egregious “kill-’em-at-birth” case a few years back involved the
purchase of a mature television station in Tampa, bought with so much debt that
the interest on it exceeded the station’s gross revenues. Even if you assume that
all labor, programs and services were donated rather than purchased, this capital
structure required revenues to explode—or else the station was doomed to go
broke. (Many of the bonds that financed the purchase were sold to now-failed
savings and loan associations; as a taxpayer, you are picking up the tab for this
folly.)
All of this seems impossible now. When these misdeeds were done,
however, dagger-selling investment bankers pointed to the “scholarly” research
of academics, which reported that over the years the higher interest rates
received from low-grade bonds had more than compensated for their higher rate
of default. Thus, said the friendly salesmen, a diversified portfolio of junk bonds
would produce greater net returns than would a portfolio of high-grade bonds.
(Beware of past-performance “proofs” in finance: If history books were the key
to riches, the Forbes 400 would consist of librarians.)
There was a flaw in the salesmen’s logic—one that a first-year student in
statistics is taught to recognize. An assumption was being made that the universe
of newly-minted junk bonds was identical to the universe of low-grade fallen
angels and that, therefore, the default experience of the latter group was
meaningful in predicting the default experience of the new issues. (That was an
error similar to checking the historical death rate from Kool-Aid before drinking
the version served at Jonestown.)
The universes were of course dissimilar in several vital respects. For
openers, the manager of a fallen angel almost invariably yearned to regain
investment-grade status and worked toward that goal. The junk-bond operator
was usually an entirely different breed. Behaving much as a heroin user might,
he devoted his energies not to finding a cure for his debt-ridden condition, but
rather to finding another fix. Additionally, the fiduciary sensitivities of the
executives managing the typical fallen angel were often, though not always,
more finely developed than were those of the junk-bond-issuing financiopath.
Wall Street cared little for such distinctions. As usual, the Street’s
enthusiasm for an idea was proportional not to its merit, but rather to the revenue

it would produce. Mountains of junk bonds were sold by those who didn’t care
to those who didn’t think—and there was no shortage of either.
Junk bonds remain a mine field, even at prices that today are often a small
fraction of issue price. As we said last year, we have never bought a new issue of
a junk bond. (The only time to buy these is on a day with no “y” in it.) We are,
however, willing to look at the field, now that it is in disarray.
In the case of RJR Nabisco, we feel the Company’s credit is considerably
better than was generally perceived for a while and that the yield we receive, as
well as the potential for capital gain, more than compensates for the risk we
incur (though that is far from nil). RJR has made asset sales at favorable prices,
has added major amounts of equity, and in general is being run well.
However, as we survey the field, most low-grade bonds still look
unattractive. The handiwork of the Wall Street of the 1980s is even worse than
we had thought: Many important businesses have been mortally wounded. We
will, though, keep looking for opportunities as the junk market continues to
unravel.
It is interesting to compare Wesco’s approach (deliberate non-
diversification of investments in an attempt to be more skillful per transaction)
with an approach promoted for years by Michael Milken to help sell junk bonds.
The Milken approach, supported by theories of many finance professors, argued
that (1) market prices were efficient in a world where investors get paid extra for
enduring volatility (wide swings in outcomes); (2) therefore, the prices at which
new issues of junk bonds came to market were fair in a probabilistic sense
(meaning that the high promised interest rates covered increased statistical
expectancy of loss) and also provided some premium return to cover volatility
exposure; and (3) therefore, if a savings and loan association (or other
institution) arranged diversification, say, by buying, without much examination,
a large part of each new Milken issue of junk bonds, the association would work
itself into the sure-to-get-better-than-average-results position of a gambling
house proprietor with a “house” edge. This type of theorizing has now wreaked
havoc at institutions, governed by true-believers, which backed their conclusions
by buying Milken’s “bonds.” Contrary to the theorizing, widely diversified
purchases of such “bonds” have in most cases produced dismal results. We can
all understand why Milken behaved as he did and believed what he had to
believe in order to maintain an endurable self-image. But how can we explain
why anyone else believed that Milken was paid 5% commissions to put “bond”
buyers in the position of the house in Las Vegas? We suggest this cause: many of

the foolish buyers, and their advisers, were trained by finance professors who
pushed beloved models (efficient market theory and modern portfolio theory)
way too far, while they ignored other models that would have warned of danger.
This is a common type of “expert” error.
C. Zero-Coupon Bonds31
Berkshire issued $902.6 million principal amount of Zero-Coupon
Convertible Subordinated Debentures, which are now listed on the New York
Stock Exchange. Salomon Brothers handled the underwriting in superb fashion,
providing us helpful advice and a flawless execution.
Most bonds, of course, require regular payments of interest, usually semi-
annually. A zero-coupon bond, conversely, requires no current interest payments;
instead, the investor receives his yield by purchasing the security at a significant
discount from maturity value. The effective interest rate is determined by the
original issue price, the maturity value, and the amount of time between issuance
and maturity.
In our case, the bonds were issued at 44.314% of maturity value and are due
in 15 years. For investors purchasing the bonds, that is the mathematical
equivalent of a 5.5% current payment compounded semi-annually. Because we
received only 44.31 cents on the dollar, our proceeds from this offering were
$400 million (less about $9.5 million of offering expenses).
The bonds were issued in denominations of $10,000 and each bond is
convertible into .4515 shares of Berkshire Hathaway. Because a $10,000 bond
cost $4,431, this means that the conversion price was $9,815 per Berkshire
share, a 15% premium to the market price then existing. Berkshire can call the
bonds at any time after September 28, 1992 at their accreted value (the original
issue price plus 5.5% compounded semi-annually) and on two specified days,
September 28 of 1994 and 1999, the bondholders can require Berkshire to buy
the securities at their accreted value.
For tax purposes, Berkshire is entitled to deduct the 5.5% interest accrual
each year, even though we make no payments to the bondholders. Thus the net
effect to us, resulting from the reduced taxes, is positive cash flow. That is a very
significant benefit. Some unknowable variables prevent us from calculating our
exact effective rate of interest, but under all circumstances it will be well below
5.5%. There is meanwhile a symmetry to the tax law: Any taxable holder of the
bonds must pay tax each year on the 5.5% interest, even though he receives no
cash.

Neither our bonds nor those of certain other companies that issued similar
bonds last year (notably Loews and Motorola) resemble the great bulk of zero-
coupon bonds that have been issued in recent years. Of these, Charlie and I have
been, and will continue to be, outspoken critics. As I will later explain, such
bonds have often been used in the most deceptive of ways and with deadly
consequences to investors. But before we tackle that subject, let’s travel back to
Eden, to a time when the apple had not yet been bitten.
If you’re my age you bought your first zero-coupon bonds during World
War II, by purchasing the famous Series E U.S. Savings Bond, the most widely-
sold bond issue in history. (After the war, these bonds were held by one out of
two U.S. households.) Nobody, of course, called the Series E a zero-coupon
bond, a term in fact that I doubt had been invented. But that’s precisely what the
Series E was.
These bonds came in denominations as small as $18.75. That amount
purchased a $25 obligation of the United States government due in 10 years,
terms that gave the buyer a compounded annual return of 2.9%. At the time, this
was an attractive offer: the 2.9% rate was higher than that generally available on
Government bonds and the holder faced no market-fluctuation risk, since he
could at any time cash in his bonds with only a minor reduction in interest.
A second form of zero-coupon U.S. Treasury issue, also benign and useful,
surfaced in the last decade. One problem with a normal bond is that even though
it pays a given interest rate—say 10%—the holder cannot be assured that a
compounded 10% return will be realized. For that rate to materialize, each semi-
annual coupon must be reinvested at 10% as it is received. If current interest
rates are, say, only 6% or 7% when these coupons come due, the holder will be
unable to compound his money over the life of the bond at the advertised rate.
For pension funds or other investors with long-term liabilities, “reinvestment
risk” of this type can be a serious problem. Savings Bonds might have solved it,
except that they are issued only to individuals and are unavailable in large
denominations. What big buyers needed was huge quantities of “Savings Bond
Equivalents.”
Enter some ingenious and, in this case, highly useful investment bankers
(led, I’m happy to say, by Salomon Brothers). They created the instrument
desired by “stripping” the semi-annual coupons from standard Government
issues. Each coupon, once detached, takes on the essential character of a Savings
Bond since it represents a single sum due sometime in the future. For example, if
you strip the 40 semi-annual coupons from a U.S. Government Bond due in the
year 2010, you will have 40 zero-coupon bonds, with maturities from six months
to 20 years, each of which can then be bundled with other coupons of like

maturity and marketed. If current interest rates are, say, 10% for all maturities,
the six-month issue will sell for 95.24% of maturity value and the 20-year issue
will sell for 14.20%. The purchaser of any given maturity is thus guaranteed a
compounded rate of 10% for his entire holding period. Stripping of government
bonds has occurred on a large scale in recent years, as long-term investors,
ranging from pension funds to individual IRA accounts, recognized these high-
grade, zero-coupon issues to be well suited to their needs.
But as happens in Wall Street all too often, what the wise do in the
beginning, fools do in the end. In the last few years zero-coupon bonds (and their
functional equivalent, pay-in-kind bonds, which distribute additional PIK bonds
semi-annually as interest instead of paying cash) have been issued in enormous
quantities by ever-junkier credits. To these issuers, zero (or PIK) bonds offer one
overwhelming advantage: It is impossible to default on a promise to pay nothing.
Indeed, if LDC governments had issued no debt in the 1970s other than long-
term zero-coupon obligations, they would now have a spotless record as debtors.
This principle at work—that you need not default for a long time if you
solemnly promise to pay nothing for a long time—has not been lost on
promoters and investment bankers seeking to finance ever-shakier deals. But its
acceptance by lenders took a while: When the leveraged buy-out craze began
some years back, purchasers could borrow only on a reasonably sound basis, in
which conservatively-estimated free cash flow—that is, operating earnings plus
depreciation and amortization less normalized capital expenditures—was
adequate to cover both interest and modest reductions in debt.
Later, as the adrenaline of deal-makers surged, businesses began to be
purchased at prices so high that all free cash flow necessarily had to be allocated
to the payment of interest. That left nothing for the paydown of debt. In effect, a
Scarlett O’Hara “I’ll think about it tomorrow” position in respect to principal
payments was taken by borrowers and accepted by a new breed of lender, the
buyer of original-issue junk bonds. Debt now became something to be
refinanced rather than repaid. The change brings to mind a New Yorker cartoon
in which the grateful borrower rises to shake the hand of the bank’s lending
officer and gushes: “I don’t know how I’ll ever repay you.”
Soon borrowers found even the new, lax standards intolerably binding. To
induce lenders to finance even sillier transactions, they introduced an
abomination, EBDIT—Earnings Before Depreciation, Interest and Taxes—as the
test of a company’s ability to pay interest. Using this sawed-off yardstick, the
borrower ignored depreciation as an expense on the theory that it did not require
a current cash outlay.
Such an attitude is clearly delusional. At 95% of American businesses,

capital expenditures that over time roughly approximate depreciation are a
necessity and are every bit as real an expense as labor or utility costs. Even a
high school dropout knows that to finance a car he must have income that covers
not only interest and operating expenses, but also realistically-calculated
depreciation. He would be laughed out of the bank if he started talking about
EBDIT.
Capital outlays at a business can be skipped, of course, in any given month,
just as a human can skip a day or even a week of eating. But if the skipping
becomes routine and is not made up, the body weakens and eventually dies.
Furthermore, a start and-stop feeding policy will over time produce a less
healthy organism, human or corporate, than that produced by a steady diet. As
businessmen, Charlie and I relish having competitors who are unable to fund
capital expenditures.
You might think that waving away a major expense such as depreciation in
an attempt to make a terrible deal look like a good one hits the limits of Wall
Street’s ingenuity. If so, you haven’t been paying attention during the past few
years. Promoters needed to find a way to justify even pricier acquisitions.
Otherwise, they risked—heaven forbid—losing deals to other promoters with
more “imagination.”
So, stepping through the Looking Glass, promoters and their investment
bankers proclaimed that EBDIT should now be measured against cash interest
only, which meant that interest accruing on zero-coupon or PIK bonds could be
ignored when the financial feasibility of a transaction was being assessed. This
approach not only relegated depreciation expense to the let’s-ignore-it corner,
but gave similar treatment to what was usually a significant portion of interest
expense. To their shame, many professional investment managers went along
with this nonsense, though they usually were careful to do so only with clients’
money, not their own. (Calling these managers “professionals” is actually too
kind; they should be designated “promotees.”)
Under this new standard, a business earning, say, $100 million pre-tax and
having debt on which $90 million of interest must be paid currently, might use a
zero-coupon of PIK issue to incur another $60 million of annual interest that
would accrue and compound but not come due for some years. The rate on these
issues would typically be very high, which means that the situation in year 2
might be $90 million cash interest plus $69 million accrued interest, and so on as
the compounding proceeds. Such high-rate reborrowing schemes, which a few
years ago were appropriately confined to the waterfront, soon became models of
finance at virtually all major investment banking houses.
When they make these offerings, investment bankers display their

humorous side: They dispense income and balance sheet projections extending
five or more years into the future for companies they barely had heard of a few
months earlier. If you are shown such schedules, I suggest that you join the fun:
Ask the investment banker for the one-year budgets that his own firm prepared
as the last few years began and then compare these with what actually happened.
Some time ago Ken Galbraith, in his witty and insightful The Great Crash,
coined a new economic term: “the bezzle,” defined as the current amount of
undiscovered embezzlement. This financial creature has a magical quality: The
embezzlers are richer by the amount of the bezzle, while the embezzlees do not
yet feel poorer.
Professor Galbraith astutely pointed out that this sum should be added to
the National Wealth so that we might know the Psychic National Wealth.
Logically, a society that wanted to feel enormously prosperous would both
encourage its citizens to embezzle and try not to detect the crime. By this means,
“wealth” would balloon though not an erg of productive work had been done.
The satirical nonsense of the bezzle is dwarfed by the real-world nonsense
of the zero-coupon bond. With zeros, one party to a contract can experience
“income” without his opposite experiencing the pain of expenditure. In our
illustration, a company capable of earning only $100 million dollars annually—
and therefore capable of paying only that much in interest—magically creates
“earnings” for bondholders of $150 million. As long as major investors willingly
don their Peter Pan wings and repeatedly say “I believe,” there is no limit to how
much “income” can be created by the zero-coupon bond.
Wall Street welcomed this invention with the enthusiasm less-enlightened
folk might reserve for the wheel or the plow. Here, finally, was an instrument
that would let the Street make deals at prices no longer limited by actual earning
power. The result, obviously, would be more transactions: Silly prices will
always attract sellers. And, as Jesse Unruh might have put it, transactions are the
mother’s milk of finance.
The zero-coupon or PIK bond possesses an additional attraction for the
promoter and investment banker, which is that the time elapsing between folly
and failure can be stretched out. This is no small benefit. If the period before all
costs must be faced is long, promoters can create a string of foolish deals—and
take in lots of fees—before any chickens come home to roost from their earlier
ventures.
But in the end, alchemy, whether it is metallurgical or financial, fails. A
base business can not be transformed into a golden business by tricks of
accounting or capital structure. The man claiming to be a financial alchemist
may become rich. But gullible investors rather than business achievements will

usually be the source of his wealth.
Whatever their weaknesses, we should add, many zero-coupon and PIK
bonds will not default. We have in fact owned some and may buy more if their
market becomes sufficiently distressed. (We’ve not, however, even considered
buying a new issue from a weak credit.) No financial instrument is evil per se;
it’s just that some variations have far more potential for mischief than others.
The blue ribbon for mischief-making should go to the zero-coupon issuer
unable to make its interest payments on a current basis. Our advice: Whenever
an investment banker starts talking about EBDIT—or whenever someone creates
a capital structure that does not allow all interest, both payable and accrued, to
be comfortably met out of current cash flow net of ample capital expenditures—
zip up your wallet. Turn the tables by suggesting that the promoter and his high-
priced entourage accept zero-coupon fees, deferring their take until the zero-
coupon bonds have been paid in full. See then how much enthusiasm for the deal
endures.
Our comments about investment bankers may seem harsh. But Charlie and I
—in our hopelessly old-fashioned way—believe that they should perform a
gatekeeping role, guarding investors against the promoter’s propensity to indulge
in excess. Promoters, after all, have throughout time exercised the same
judgment and restraint in accepting money that alcoholics have exercised in
accepting liquor. At a minimum, therefore, the banker’s conduct should rise to
that of a responsible bartender who, when necessary, refuses the profit from the
next drink to avoid sending a drunk out on the highway. In recent years,
unfortunately, many leading investment firms have found bartender morality to
be an intolerably restrictive standard. Lately, those who have traveled the high
road in Wall Street have not encountered heavy traffic.
One distressing footnote: The cost of the zero-coupon folly will not be
borne solely by the direct participants. Certain savings and loan associations
were heavy buyers of such bonds, using cash that came from FSLIC-insured
deposits. Straining to show splendid earnings, these buyers recorded—but did
not receive—ultra-high interest income on these issues. Many of these
associations are now in major trouble. Had their loans to shaky credits worked,
the owners of the associations would have pocketed the profits. In the many
cases in which the loans will fail, the taxpayer will pick up the bill. To
paraphrase Jackie Mason, at these associations it was the managers who should
have been wearing the ski masks.
D. Preferred Stock32

We only want to link up with people whom we like, admire, and trust. John
Gutfreund at Salomon, Colman Mockler, Jr. at Gillette, Ed Colodny at USAir,
and Andy Sigler at Champion meet this test in spades.
They in turn have demonstrated some confidence in us, insisting in each
case that our preferreds have unrestricted voting rights on a fully-converted
basis, an arrangement that is far from standard in corporate finance. In effect
they are trusting us to be intelligent owners, thinking about tomorrow instead of
today, just as we are trusting them to be intelligent managers, thinking about
tomorrow as well as today.
The preferred-stock structures we have negotiated will provide a mediocre
return for us if industry economics hinder the performance of our investees, but
will produce reasonably attractive results for us if they can earn a return
comparable to that of American industry in general. We believe that Gillette,
under Colman’s management, will far exceed that return and believe that John,
Ed, and Andy will reach it unless industry conditions are harsh.
Under almost any conditions, we expect these preferreds to return us our
money plus dividends. If that is all we get, though, the result will be
disappointing, because we will have given up flexibility and consequently will
have missed some significant opportunities that are bound to present themselves
during the decade. Under that scenario, we will have obtained only a preferred-
stock yield during a period when the typical preferred stock will have held no
appeal for us whatsoever. The only way Berkshire can achieve satisfactory
results from its four preferred issues is to have the common stocks of the
investee companies do well.
Good management and at least tolerable industry conditions will be needed
if that is to happen. But we believe Berkshire’s investment will also help and that
the other shareholders of each investee will profit over the years ahead from our
preferred-stock purchase. The help will come from the fact that each company
now has a major, stable, and interested shareholder whose Chairman and Vice
Chairman have, through Berkshire’s investments, indirectly committed a very
large amount of their own money to these undertakings. In dealing with our
investees, Charlie and I will be supportive, analytical, and objective. We
recognize that we are working with experienced CEOs who are very much in
command of their own business but who nevertheless, at certain moments,
appreciate the chance to test their thinking on someone without ties to their
industry or to decisions of the past.
As a group, these convertible preferreds will not produce the returns we can
achieve when we find a business with wonderful economic prospects that is
unappreciated by the market. Nor will the returns be as attractive as those

produced when we make our favorite form of capital deployment, the acquisition
of 80% or more of a fine business with a fine management. But both
opportunities are rare, particularly in a size befitting our present and anticipated
resources.
In summation, Charlie and I feel that our preferred stock investments
should produce returns moderately above those achieved by most fixed-income
portfolios and that we can play a minor but enjoyable and constructive role in the
investee companies.
Mistakes occur at the time of decision. We can only make our mistake-du-
jour award, however, when the foolishness of a decision becomes obvious. By
this measure, 1994 was a vintage year with keen competition for the gold medal.
Here, I would like to tell you that the mistakes I will describe originated with
Charlie. But whenever I try to explain things that way, my nose begins to grow.
And the nominees are . . .
Late in 1993 I sold 10 million shares of Cap Cities at $63; at year-end 1994,
the price was $85¼. (The difference is $222.5 million for those of you who wish
to avoid the pain of calculating the damage yourself.) When we purchased the
stock at $17.25 in 1986, I told you that I had previously sold our Cap Cities
holdings at $4.30 per share during 1978–80, and added that I was at a loss to
explain my earlier behavior.33 Now I’ve become a repeat offender. Maybe it’s
time to get a guardian appointed.
Egregious as it is, the Cap Cities decision earns only a silver medal. Top
honors go to a mistake I made five years ago that fully ripened in 1994: Our
$358 million purchase of USAir preferred stock, on which the dividend was
suspended in September. [T]his deal [w]as an “unforced error,” meaning that I
was neither pushed into the investment nor misled by anyone when making it.
Rather, this was a case of sloppy analysis, a lapse that may have been caused by
the fact that we were buying a senior security or by hubris. Whatever the reason,
the mistake was large.
Before this purchase, I simply failed to focus on the problems that would
inevitably beset a carrier whose costs were both high and extremely difficult to
lower. In earlier years, these life-threatening costs posed few problems. Airlines
were then protected from competition by regulation, and carriers could absorb
high costs because they could pass them along by way of fares that were also
high.
When deregulation came along, it did not immediately change the picture:
The capacity of low-cost carriers was so small that the high-cost lines could, in

large part, maintain their existing fare structures. During this period, with the
longer-term problems largely invisible but slowly metastasizing, the costs that
were non-sustainable became further embedded.
As the seat capacity of the low-cost operators expanded, their fares began to
force the old-line, high-cost airlines to cut their own. The day of reckoning for
these airlines could be delayed by infusions of capital (such as ours into USAir),
but eventually a fundamental rule of economics prevailed: In an unregulated
commodity business, a company must lower its costs to competitive levels or
face extinction. This principle should have been obvious to your Chairman, but I
missed it.
Seth Schofield, [then] CEO of USAir, has worked diligently to correct the
company’s historical cost problems but, to date, has not managed to do so. In
part, this is because he has had to deal with a moving target, the result of certain
major carriers having obtained labor concessions and other carriers having
benefitted from “fresh-start” costs that came out of bankruptcy proceedings. (As
Herb Kelleher, CEO of Southwest Airlines, has said: “Bankruptcy court for
airlines has become a health spa.”) Additionally, it should be no surprise to
anyone that those airline employees who contractually receive above-market
salaries will resist any reduction in these as long as their checks continue to
clear.
Despite this difficult situation, USAir may yet achieve the cost reductions it
needs to maintain its viability long-term. But it is far from sure that will happen.
Accordingly, we wrote our USAir investment down to $89.5 million, or 25¢
on the dollar, at year-end 1994. This valuation reflects both a possibility that our
preferred will have its value fully or largely restored and an opposite possibility
that the stock will eventually become worthless. Whatever the outcome, we will
heed a prime rule of investing: You don’t have to make it back the way that you
lost it.
The accounting effects of our USAir writedown are complicated. On our
balance sheet, we carry all stocks at estimated market value. Therefore, at the
end of last year’s third quarter, we were carrying our USAir preferred at $89.5
million, or 25% of cost. In other words, our net worth was at that time reflecting
a value for USAir that was far below our $358 million cost.
But in the fourth quarter, we concluded that the decline in value was, in
accounting terms, “other than temporary,” and that judgment required us to send
the writedown of $268.5 million through our income statement. The amount had
no other fourth-quarter effect. That is, it did not reduce our net worth, because
the diminution of value had already been reflected there.
Charlie and I will not stand for reelection to USAir’s board at the upcoming

annual meeting. Should Seth wish to consult with us, however, we will be
pleased to be of any help that we can.
When Richard Branson, the wealthy owner of Virgin Atlantic Airways, was
asked how to become a millionaire, he had a quick answer: “There’s really
nothing to it. Start as a billionaire and then buy an airline.” Unwilling to accept
Branson’s proposition on faith, your Chairman decided in 1989 to test it by
investing $358 million in a 9¼% preferred stock of USAir.
I liked and admired Ed Colodny, the company’s then-CEO, and I still do.
But my analysis of USAir’s business was both superficial and wrong. I was so
beguiled by the company’s long history of profitable operations, and by the
protection that ownership of a senior security seemingly offered me, that I
overlooked the crucial point: USAir’s revenues would increasingly feel the
effects of an unregulated, fiercely competitive market whereas its cost structure
was a holdover from the days when regulation protected profits. These costs, if
left unchecked, portended disaster, however reassuring the airline’s past record
might be.
To rationalize its costs, however, USAir needed major improvements in its
labor contracts—and that’s something most airlines have found it extraordinarily
difficult to get, short of credibly threatening, or actually entering, bankruptcy.
USAir was to be no exception. Immediately after we purchased our preferred
stock, the imbalance between the company’s costs and revenues began to grow
explosively. In the 1990–1994 period, USAir lost an aggregate of $2.4 billion, a
performance that totally wiped out the book equity of its common stock.
For much of this period, the company paid us our preferred dividends, but
in 1994 payment was suspended. A bit later, with the situation looking
particularly gloomy, we wrote down our investment by 75%, to $89.5 million.
Thereafter, during much of 1995, I offered to sell our shares at 50% of face
value. Fortunately, I was unsuccessful.
Mixed in with my many mistakes at USAir was one thing I got right:
Making our investment, we wrote into the preferred contract a somewhat
unusual provision stipulating that “penalty dividends”—to run five percentage
points over the prime rate—would be accrued on any arrearages. This meant that
when our 9¼% dividend was omitted for two years, the unpaid amounts
compounded at rates ranging between 13¼% and 14%.
Facing this penalty provision, USAir had every incentive to pay arrearages
just as promptly as it could. And in the second half of 1996, when USAir turned
profitable, it indeed began to pay, giving us $47.9 million. We owe Stephen

Wolf, the company’s CEO, a huge thank-you for extracting a performance from
the airline that permitted this payment. Even so, USAir’s performance has
recently been helped significantly by an industry tailwind that may be cyclical in
nature. The company still has basic cost problems that must be solved.
In any event, the prices of USAir’s publicly-traded securities tell us that our
preferred stock is now probably worth its par value of $358 million, give or take
a little. In addition, we have over the years collected an aggregate of $240.5
million in dividends (including $30 million received in 1997).
Early in 1996, before any accrued dividends had been paid, I tried once
more to unload our holdings—this time for about $335 million. You’re lucky: I
again failed in my attempt to snatch defeat from the jaws of victory.
In another context, a friend once asked me: “If you’re so rich, why aren’t
you smart?” After reviewing my sorry performance with USAir, you may
conclude he had a point.
In making the USAir purchase, your Chairman displayed exquisite timing: I
plunged into the business at almost the exact moment that it ran into severe
problems. (No one pushed me; in tennis parlance, I committed an “unforced
error.”) The company’s troubles were brought on both by industry conditions and
by the post-merger difficulties it encountered in integrating Piedmont, an
affliction I should have expected since almost all airline mergers have been
followed by operational turmoil.
In short order, Ed Colodny and Seth Schofield resolved the second problem:
The airline now gets excellent marks for service. Industry-wide problems have
proved to be far more serious. Since our purchase, the economics of the airline
industry have deteriorated at an alarming pace, accelerated by the kamikaze
pricing tactics of certain carriers. The trouble this pricing has produced for all
carriers illustrates an important truth: In a business selling a commodity-type
product, it’s impossible to be a lot smarter than your dumbest competitor.
However, unless the industry is decimated during the next few years, our
USAir investment should work out all right. Ed and Seth decisively addressed
the current turbulence by making major changes in operations. Even so, our
investment is now less secure than at the time I made it.
Our convertible preferred stocks are relatively simple securities, yet I
should warn you that, if the past is any guide, you may from time to time read
inaccurate or misleading statements about them. Last year, for example, several
members of the press calculated the value of all our preferreds as equal to that of
the common stock into which they are convertible. By their logic, that is, our

Salomon preferred, convertible into common at $38, would be worth 60% of
face value if Salomon common were selling at $22.80. But there is a small
problem with this line of reasoning: Using it, one must conclude that all of the
value of a convertible preferred resides in the conversion privilege and that value
of a non-convertible preferred of Salomon would be zero, no matter what its
coupon or terms for redemption.
The point you should keep in mind is that most of the value of our
convertible preferreds is derived from their fixed-income characteristics. That
means the securities cannot be worth less than the value they would possess as
non-convertible preferreds and may be worth more because of their conversion
options.
Berkshire made five private purchases of convertible preferred stocks
during the 1987–91 period and the time seems right to discuss their status.
In each case we had the option of sticking with these preferreds as fixed-
income securities or converting them into common stock. Initially, their value to
us came primarily from their fixed-income characteristics. The option we had to
convert was a kicker.
Our $300 million private purchase of American Express “Percs” was a
modified form of common stock whose fixed-income characteristics contributed
only a minor portion of its initial value. Three years after we bought them, the
Percs automatically were converted to common stock. In contrast, [our other
convertible preferred stocks] were set to become common stocks only if we
wished them to—a crucial difference.
When we purchased our convertible securities, I told you that we expected
to earn after-tax returns from them that “moderately” exceeded what we could
earn from the medium-term fixed-income securities they replaced. We beat this
expectation—but only because of the performance of a single issue. I also told
you that these securities, as a group, would “not produce the returns we can
achieve when we find a business with wonderful economic prospects.”
Unfortunately, that prediction was fulfilled. Finally, I said that “under almost any
conditions, we expect these preferreds to return us our money plus dividends.”
That’s one I would like to have back. Winston Churchill once said that “eating
my words has never given me indigestion.” My assertion, however, that it was
almost impossible for us to lose money on our preferreds has caused me some
well-deserved heartburn.
Our best holding has been Gillette, which we told you from the start was a
superior business. Ironically, though, this is also the purchase in which I made

my biggest mistake—of a kind, however, never recognized on financial
statements.
We paid $600 million in 1989 for Gillette preferred shares that were
convertible into 48 million (split-adjusted) common shares. Taking an alternative
route with the $600 million, I probably could have purchased 60 million shares
of common from the company. The market on the common was then about
$10.50, and given that this would have been a huge private placement carrying
important restrictions, I probably could have bought the stock at a discount of at
least 5%. I can’t be sure about this, but it’s likely that Gillette’s management
would have been just as happy to have Berkshire opt for common.
But I was far too clever to do that. Instead, for less than two years, we
received some extra dividend income (the difference between the preferred’s
yield and that of the common), at which point the company—quite properly—
called the issue, moving to do that as quickly as was possible. If I had negotiated
for common rather than preferred, we would have been better off at year-end
1995 by $625 million, minus the “excess” dividends of about $70 million.
In the case of Champion, the ability of the company to call our preferred at
115% of cost forced a move out of us last August that we would rather have
delayed. In this instance, we converted our shares just prior to the pending call
and offered them to the company at a modest discount.
Charlie and I have never had a conviction about the paper industry—
actually, I can’t remember ever owning the common stock of a paper producer in
my 54 years of investing—so our choice in August was whether to sell in the
market or to the company. Our Champion capital gain was moderate—about
19% after tax from a six-year investment—but the preferred delivered us a good
after-tax dividend yield throughout our holding period. (That said, many press
accounts have overstated the after-tax yields earned by property-casualty
insurance companies on dividends paid to them.) What the press has failed to
take into account is a change in the tax law that took effect in 1987 and that
significantly reduced the dividends received credit applicable to insurers.
Our First Empire preferred [was to] be called on March 31, 1996, the
earliest date allowable. We are comfortable owning stock in well-run banks, and
we will convert and keep our First Empire common shares. Bob Wilmers, CEO
of the company, is an outstanding banker, and we love being associated with
him.
Our other two preferreds have been disappointing, though the Salomon
preferred has modestly outperformed the fixed-income securities for which it
was a substitute. However, the amount of management time Charlie and I have
devoted to this holding has been vastly greater than its economic significance to

Berkshire. Certainly I never dreamed I would take a new job at age 60—
Salomon interim chairman, that is—because of an earlier purchase of a fixed-
income security.
Soon after our purchase of the Salomon preferred in 1987, I wrote that I had
“no special insights regarding the direction or future profitability of investment
banking.” Even the most charitable commentator would conclude that I have
since proved my point.
To date, our option to convert into Salomon common has not proven of
value. Furthermore, the Dow Industrials have doubled since I committed to buy
the preferred, and the brokerage group has performed equally as well. That
means my decision to go with Salomon because I saw value in the conversion
option must be graded as very poor. Even so, the preferred has continued under
some trying conditions to deliver as a fixed-income security, and the 9%
dividend is currently quite attractive.
Unless the preferred is converted, its terms require redemption of 20% of
the issue on October 31 of each year, 1995–99, and $140 million of our original
$700 million was taken on schedule last year. (Some press reports labeled this a
sale, but a senior security that matures is not “sold.”) Though we did not elect to
convert the preferred that matured last year, we have four more bites at the
conversion apple, and I believe it quite likely that we will yet find value in our
right to convert.
The common stocks of both Gillette and First Empire [into which
Berkshire’s preferreds had been converted] have risen substantially, in line with
the companies’ excellent performance. At year end, the $600 million we put into
Gillette in 1989 had appreciated to $4.8 billion, and the $40 million we
committed to First Empire in 1991 had risen to $236 million.
Our two laggards [USAir and Salomon], meanwhile, have come to life in a
very major way. In a transaction that finally rewarded its long-suffering
shareholders, Salomon recently merged into Travelers Group. All of Berkshire’s
shareholders—including me, very personally—owe a huge debt to Deryck
Maughan and Bob Denham for, first, playing key roles in saving Salomon from
extinction following its 1991 scandal and, second, restoring the vitality of the
company to a level that made it an attractive acquisition for Travelers. I have
often said that I wish to work with executives that I like, trust and admire. No
two fit that description better than Deryck and Bob.
Berkshire’s final results from its Salomon investment won’t be tallied for
some time, but it is safe to say that they will be far better than I anticipated two

years ago. Looking back, I think of my Salomon experience as having been both
fascinating and instructional, though for a time in 1991-92 [when serving as its
chairman] I felt like the drama critic who wrote: “I would have enjoyed the play
except that I had an unfortunate seat. It faced the stage.”
The resuscitation of US Airways borders on the miraculous. Those who
have watched my moves in this investment know that I have compiled a record
that is unblemished by success. I was wrong in originally purchasing the stock,
and I was wrong later, in repeatedly trying to unload our holdings at 50 cents on
the dollar.
Two changes at the company coincided with its remarkable rebound: (1)
Charlie and I left the board of directors and (2) Stephen Wolf became CEO.
Fortunately for our egos, the second event was the key: Stephen Wolf’s
accomplishments at the airline have been phenomenal.
There still is much to do at US Airways, but survival is no longer an issue.
Consequently, the company made up the dividend arrearages on our preferred
during 1997, adding extra payments to compensate us for the delay we suffered.
The company’s common stock, furthermore, has risen from a low of $4 to a
recent high of $73.
Our preferred has been called for redemption on March 15. But the rise in
the company’s stock has given our conversion rights, which we thought
worthless not long ago, great value. It is now almost certain that our US Airways
shares will produce a decent profit—that is, if my cost for Maalox is excluded—
and the gain could even prove indecent.
Next time I make a big, dumb decision, Berkshire shareholders will know
what to do: Phone Mr. Wolf.
*
In addition to the convertible preferreds, we purchased one other private
placement in 1991, $300 million of American Express Percs. This security was
essentially a common stock that featured a tradeoff in its first three years: We
received extra dividend payments during that period, but we were also capped in
the price appreciation we could realize. Despite the cap, this holding has proved
extraordinarily profitable thanks to a move by your Chairman that combined
luck and skill—110% luck, the balance skill.
Our Percs were due to convert into common stock in August 1994, and in
the month before I was mulling whether to sell upon conversion. One reason to
hold was Amex’s outstanding CEO, Harvey Golub, who seemed likely to
maximize whatever potential the company had (a supposition that has since been
proved—in spades). But the size of that potential was in question: Amex faced

relentless competition from a multitude of card-issuers, led by Visa. Weighing
the arguments, I leaned toward sale.
Here’s where I got lucky. During that month of decision, I played golf at
Prouts Neck, Maine with Frank Olson, CEO of Hertz. Frank is a brilliant
manager, with intimate knowledge of the card business. So from the first tee on I
was quizzing him about the industry. By the time we reached the second green,
Frank had convinced me that Amex’s corporate card was a terrific franchise, and
I had decided not to sell. On the back nine I turned buyer, and in a few months
Berkshire owned 10% of the company.
We now have a $3 billion gain in our Amex shares, and I naturally feel very
grateful to Frank. But George Gillespie, our mutual friend, says that I am
confused about where my gratitude should go. After all, he points out, it was he
who arranged the game and assigned me to Frank’s foursome.
E. Derivatives34
Charlie and I are of one mind in how we feel about derivatives and the
trading activities that go with them: We view them as time bombs, both for the
parties that deal in them and the economic system.
Having delivered that thought, which I’ll get back to, let me retreat to
explaining derivatives, though the explanation must be general because the word
covers an extraordinarily wide range of financial contracts. Essentially, these
instruments call for money to change hands at some future date, with the amount
to be determined by one or more reference items, such as interest rates, stock
prices or currency values. If, for example, you are either long or short an S&P
500 futures contract, you are a party to a very simple derivatives transaction—
with your gain or loss derived from movements in the index. Derivatives
contracts are of varying duration (running sometimes to 20 or more years) and
their value is often tied to several variables.
Unless derivatives contracts are collateralized or guaranteed, their ultimate
value also depends on the creditworthiness of the counterparties to them. In the
meantime, though, before a contract is settled, the counterparties record profits
and losses—often huge in amount—in their current earnings statements without
so much as a penny changing hands.
The range of derivatives contracts is limited only by the imagination of man
(or sometimes, so it seems, madmen). At Enron, for example, newsprint and
broadband derivatives, due to be settled many years in the future, were put on
the books. Or say you want to write a contract speculating on the number of

twins to be born in Nebraska in 2020. No problem—at a price, you will easily
find an obliging counterparty.
When we purchased Gen Re, it came with General Re Securities, a
derivatives dealer that Charlie and I didn’t want, judging it to be dangerous. We
failed in our attempts to sell the operation, however, and are now terminating it.
But closing down a derivatives business is easier said than done. In fact, the
reinsurance and derivatives businesses are similar: Like Hell, both are easy to
enter and almost impossible to exit. In either industry, once you write a contract
—which may require a large payment decades later—you are usually stuck with
it. True, there are methods by which the risk can be laid off with others. But
most strategies of that kind leave you with residual liability.
Another commonality of reinsurance and derivatives is that both generate
reported earnings that are often wildly overstated. That’s true because today’s
earnings are in a significant way based on estimates whose inaccuracy may not
be exposed for many years.
Errors will usually be honest, reflecting only the human tendency to take an
optimistic view of one’s commitments. But the parties to derivatives also have
enormous incentives to cheat in accounting for them. Those who trade
derivatives are usually paid (in whole or part) on “earnings” calculated by mark-
to-market accounting. But often there is no real market (think about our contract
involving twins) and “mark-to-model” is utilized.
This substitution can bring on large-scale mischief. As a general rule,
contracts involving multiple reference items and distant settlement dates increase
the opportunities for counterparties to use fanciful assumptions. In the twins
scenario, for example, the two parties to the contract might well use differing
models allowing both to show substantial profits for many years. In extreme
cases, mark-to-model degenerates into what I would call mark-to-myth.
Of course, both internal and outside auditors review the numbers, but that’s
no easy job. For example, General Re Securities at year-end (after ten months of
winding down its operation) had 14,384 contracts outstanding, involving 672
counterparties around the world. Each contract had a plus or minus value derived
from one or more reference items, including some of mindboggling complexity.
Valuing a portfolio like that, expert auditors could easily and honestly have
widely varying opinions.
The valuation problem is far from academic: In recent years, some huge-
scale frauds and near-frauds have been facilitated by derivatives trades. In the
energy and electric utility sectors, for example, companies used derivatives and
trading activities to report great “earnings”—until the roof fell in when they
actually tried to convert the derivatives-related receivables on their balance

sheets into cash. “Mark-to-market” then turned out to be truly “mark-to-myth.”
I can assure you that the marking errors in the derivatives business have not
been symmetrical. Almost invariably, they have favored either the trader who
was eyeing a multi-million dollar bonus or the CEO who wanted to report
impressive “earnings” (or both). The bonuses were paid, and the CEO profited
from his options. Only much later did shareholders learn that the reported
earnings were a sham.
Another problem about derivatives is that they can exacerbate trouble that a
corporation has run into for completely unrelated reasons. This pile-on effect
occurs because many derivatives contracts require that a company suffering a
credit downgrade immediately supply collateral to counterparties. Imagine, then,
that a company is downgraded because of general adversity and that its
derivatives instantly kick in with their requirement, imposing an unexpected and
enormous demand for cash collateral on the company. The need to meet this
demand can then throw the company into a liquidity crisis that may, in some
cases, trigger still more downgrades. It all becomes a spiral that can lead to a
corporate meltdown.
Derivatives also create a daisy-chain risk that is akin to the risk run by
insurers or reinsurers that lay off much of their business with others. In both
cases, huge receivables from many counterparties tend to build up over time. A
participant may see himself as prudent, believing his large credit exposures to be
diversified and therefore not dangerous. Under certain circumstances, though, an
exogenous event that causes the receivable from Company A to go bad will also
affect those from Companies B through Z. History teaches us that a crisis often
causes problems to correlate in a manner undreamed of in more tranquil times.
In banking, the recognition of a “linkage” problem was one of the reasons
for the formation of the Federal Reserve System. Before the Fed was established,
the failure of weak banks would sometimes put sudden and unanticipated
liquidity demands on previously-strong banks, causing them to fail in turn. The
Fed now insulates the strong from the troubles of the weak. But there is no
central bank assigned to the job of preventing the dominoes toppling in
insurance or derivatives. In these industries, firms that are fundamentally solid
can become troubled simply because of the travails of other firms further down
the chain. When a “chain reaction” threat exists within an industry, it pays to
minimize links of any kind. That’s how we conduct our reinsurance business,
and it’s one reason we are exiting derivatives.
Many people argue that derivatives reduce systemic problems, in that
participants who can’t bear certain risks are able to transfer them to stronger
hands. These people believe that derivatives act to stabilize the economy,

facilitate trade, and eliminate bumps for individual participants. And, on a micro
level, what they say is often true. Indeed, at Berkshire, I sometimes engage in
large-scale derivatives transactions in order to facilitate certain investment
strategies.
Charlie and I believe, however, that the macro picture is dangerous and
getting more so. Large amounts of risk, particularly credit risk, have become
concentrated in the hands of relatively few derivatives dealers, who in addition
trade extensively with one other. The troubles of one could quickly infect the
others. On top of that, these dealers are owed huge amounts by non-dealer
counterparties. Some of these counterparties, as I’ve mentioned, are linked in
ways that could cause them to contemporaneously run into a problem because of
a single event (such as the implosion of the telecom industry or the precipitous
decline in the value of merchant power projects). Linkage, when it suddenly
surfaces, can trigger serious systemic problems.
Indeed, in 1998, the leveraged and derivatives-heavy activities of a single
hedge fund, Long-Term Capital Management, caused the Federal Reserve
anxieties so severe that it hastily orchestrated a rescue effort. In later
Congressional testimony, Fed officials acknowledged that, had they not
intervened, the outstanding trades of LTCM—a firm unknown to the general
public and employing only a few hundred people—could well have posed a
serious threat to the stability of American markets. In other words, the Fed acted
because its leaders were fearful of what might have happened to other financial
institutions had the LTCM domino toppled. And this affair, though it paralyzed
many parts of the fixed-income market for weeks, was far from a worst-case
scenario.
One of the derivatives instruments that LTCM used was total-return swaps,
contracts that facilitate 100% leverage in various markets, including stocks. For
example, Party A to a contract, usually a bank, puts up all of the money for the
purchase of a stock while Party B, without putting up any capital, agrees that at a
future date it will receive any gain or pay any loss that the bank realizes.
Total-return swaps of this type make a joke of margin requirements.
Beyond that, other types of derivatives severely curtail the ability of regulators
to curb leverage and generally get their arms around the risk profiles of banks,
insurers and other financial institutions. Similarly, even experienced investors
and analysts encounter major problems in analyzing the financial condition of
firms that are heavily involved with derivatives contracts. When Charlie and I
finish reading the long footnotes detailing the derivatives activities of major
banks, the only thing we understand is that we don’t understand how much risk
the institution is running.

The derivatives genie is now well out of the bottle, and these instruments
will almost certainly multiply in variety and number until some event makes
their toxicity clear. Knowledge of how dangerous they are has already permeated
the electricity and gas businesses, in which the eruption of major troubles caused
the use of derivatives to diminish dramatically. Elsewhere, however, the
derivatives business continues to expand unchecked. Central banks and
governments have so far found no effective way to control, or even monitor, the
risks posed by these contracts.
Charlie and I believe Berkshire should be a fortress of financial strength—
for the sake of our owners, creditors, policyholders and employees. We try to be
alert to any sort of mega-catastrophe risk, and that posture may make us unduly
apprehensive about the burgeoning quantities of long-term derivatives contracts
and the massive amount of uncollateralized receivables that are growing
alongside. In our view, however, derivatives are financial weapons of mass
destruction, carrying dangers that, while now latent, are potentially lethal.
Long ago, Mark Twain said: “A man who tries to carry a cat home by its tail
will learn a lesson that can be learned in no other way.” If Twain were around
now, he might try winding up a derivatives business. After a few days, he would
opt for cats.
We lost $104 million pre-tax last year in our continuing attempt to exit Gen
Re’s derivative operation. Our aggregate losses since we began this endeavor
total $404 million. Originally we had 23,218 contracts outstanding. By the start
of 2005 we were down to 2,890. You might expect that our losses would have
been stemmed by this point, but the blood has kept flowing. Reducing our
inventory to 741 contracts last year cost us the $104 million mentioned above.
[T]he rationale for establishing this unit in 1990 was Gen Re’s wish to meet the
needs of insurance clients.
Yet one of the contracts we liquidated in 2005 had a term of 100 years! It’s
difficult to imagine what “need” such a contract could fulfill except, perhaps, the
need of a compensation-conscious trader to have a long-dated contract on his
books. Long contracts, or alternatively those with multiple variables, are the
most difficult to mark to market (the standard procedure used in accounting for
derivatives) and provide the most opportunity for “imagination” when traders are
estimating their value.
Small wonder that traders promote them. A business in which huge amounts
of compensation flow from assumed numbers is obviously fraught with danger.
When two traders execute a transaction that has several, sometimes esoteric,

variables and a far-off settlement date, their respective firms must subsequently
value these contracts whenever they calculate their earnings. A given contract
may be valued at one price by Firm A and at another by Firm B. You can bet that
the valuation differences—and I’m personally familiar with several that were
huge—tend to be tilted in a direction favoring higher earnings at each firm. It’s a
strange world in which two parties can carry out a paper transaction that each
can promptly report as profitable.
I dwell on our experience in derivatives for two reasons. One is personal
and unpleasant. The hard fact is that I have cost you a lot of money by not
moving immediately to close down Gen Re’s trading operation. Both Charlie and
I knew at the time of the Gen Re purchase that it was a problem and told its
management that we wanted to exit the business. It was my responsibility to
make sure that happened. Rather than address the situation head on, however, I
wasted several years while we attempted to sell the operation. That was a
doomed endeavor because no realistic solution could have extricated us from the
maze of liabilities that was going to exist for decades.
Our obligations were particularly worrisome because their potential to
explode could not be measured. Moreover, if severe trouble occurred, we knew it
was likely to correlate with problems elsewhere in financial markets. So I failed
in my attempt to exit painlessly, and in the meantime more trades were put on
the books. Fault me for dithering. (Charlie calls it thumb-sucking.) When a
problem exists, whether in personnel or in business operations, the time to act is
now.
The second reason I regularly describe our problems in this area lies in the
hope that our experiences may prove instructive for managers, auditors and
regulators. In a sense, we are a canary in this business coal mine and should sing
a song of warning as we expire. The number and value of derivative contracts
outstanding in the world continues to mushroom and is now a multiple of what
existed in 1998, the last time that financial chaos erupted. Our experience should
be particularly sobering because we were a better-than-average candidate to exit
gracefully.
Additionally, we know of no bad behavior by anyone involved. It could be
a different story for others in the future. Imagine, if you will, one or more firms
(troubles often spread) with positions that are many multiples of ours attempting
to liquidate in chaotic markets and under extreme, and well-publicized,
pressures. This is a scenario to which much attention should be given now rather
than after the fact. The time to have considered—and improved—the reliability
of New Orleans’ levees was before Katrina. When we finally wind up Gen Re
Securities, my feelings about its departure will be akin to those expressed in a

country song, “My wife ran away with my best friend, and I sure miss him a
lot.” [The 2006 letter indicates that Gen Re’s derivative operation was finally
closed.]
[W]e have entered into [various] types of derivatives contracts. That may
seem odd [given] the systemic problems that could result from the enormous
growth in the use of derivatives. Why, you may wonder, are we fooling around
with such potentially toxic material?
The answer is that derivatives, just like stocks and bonds, are sometimes
wildly mispriced. For many years, accordingly, we have selectively written
derivative contracts—few in number but sometimes for large dollar amounts. We
currently have 62 contracts outstanding. I manage them personally, and they are
free of counterparty credit risk. So far, these derivative contracts have worked
out well for us, producing pre-tax profits in the hundreds of millions of dollars.
Though we will experience losses from time to time, we are likely to continue to
earn—overall—significant profits from mispriced derivatives.
Derivatives are dangerous. They have dramatically increased the leverage
and risks in our financial system. They have made it almost impossible for
investors to understand and analyze our largest commercial banks and
investment banks. They allowed Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac to engage in
massive misstatements of earnings for years. So indecipherable were Freddie
and Fannie that their federal regulator, OFHEO, whose more than 100
employees had no job except the oversight of these two institutions, totally
missed their cooking of the books.
Indeed, recent events demonstrate that certain big-name CEOs (or former
CEOs) at major financial institutions were simply incapable of managing a
business with a huge, complex book of derivatives. Include Charlie and me in
this hapless group: When Berkshire purchased General Re in 1998, we knew we
could not get our minds around its book of 23,218 derivatives contracts, made
with 884 counterparties (many of which we had never heard of). So we decided
to close up shop. Though we were under no pressure and were operating in
benign markets as we exited, it took us five years and more than $400 million in
losses to largely complete the task. Upon leaving, our feelings about the business
mirrored a line in a country song: “I liked you better before I got to know you so
well.”
Improved “transparency”—a favorite remedy of politicians, commentators
and financial regulators for averting future train wrecks—won’t cure the

problems that derivatives pose. I know of no reporting mechanism that would
come close to describing and measuring the risks in a huge and complex
portfolio of derivatives. Auditors can’t audit these contracts, and regulators can’t
regulate them. When I read the pages of “disclosure” in 10-Ks of companies that
are entangled with these instruments, all I end up knowing is that I don’t know
what is going on in their portfolios (and then I reach for some aspirin).
For a case study on regulatory effectiveness, let’s look harder at the Freddie
and Fannie example. These giant institutions were created by Congress, which
retained control over them, dictating what they could and could not do. To aid its
oversight, Congress created OFHEO in 1992, admonishing it to make sure the
two behemoths were behaving themselves. With that move, Fannie and Freddie
became the most intensely-regulated companies of which I am aware, as
measured by manpower assigned to the task.
On June 15, 2003, OFHEO (whose annual reports are available on the
Internet) sent its 2002 report to Congress—specifically to its four bosses in the
Senate and House, among them none other than Messrs. Sarbanes and Oxley.
The report’s 127 pages included a self-congratulatory cover-line: “Celebrating
10 Years of Excellence.” The transmittal letter and report were delivered nine
days after the CEO and CFO of Freddie had resigned in disgrace and the COO
had been fired. No mention of their departures was made in the letter, even while
the report concluded, as it always did, that “Both Enterprises were financially
sound and well managed.”
In truth, both enterprises had engaged in massive accounting shenanigans
for some time. Finally, in 2006, OFHEO issued a 340-page scathing chronicle of
the sins of Fannie that, more or less, blamed the fiasco on every party but—you
guessed it—Congress and OFHEO.
The Bear Stearns collapse highlights the counterparty problem embedded in
derivatives transactions, a time bomb I first discussed in Berkshire’s 2002 report
[excerpted above]. On April 3, 2008, Tim Geithner, then the able president of the
New York Fed, explained the need for a rescue: “The sudden discovery by
Bear’s derivative counterparties that important financial positions they had put in
place to protect themselves from financial risk were no longer operative would
have triggered substantial further dislocation in markets. This would have
precipitated a rush by Bear’s counterparties to liquidate the collateral they held
against those positions and to attempt to replicate those positions in already very
fragile markets.” This is Fedspeak for “We stepped in to avoid a financial chain
reaction of unpredictable magnitude.” In my opinion, the Fed was right to do so.
A normal stock or bond trade is completed in a few days with one party
getting its cash, the other its securities. Counterparty risk therefore quickly

disappears, which means credit problems can’t accumulate. This rapid settlement
process is key to maintaining the integrity of markets. That, in fact, is a reason
for NYSE and NASDAQ shortening the settlement period from five days to
three days in 1995.
Derivatives contracts, in contrast, often go unsettled for years, or even
decades, with counterparties building up huge claims against each other. “Paper”
assets and liabilities—often hard to quantify—become important parts of
financial statements though these items will not be validated for many years.
Additionally, a frightening web of mutual dependence develops among huge
financial institutions. Receivables and payables by the billions become
concentrated in the hands of a few large dealers who are apt to be highly-
leveraged in other ways as well. Participants seeking to dodge troubles face the
same problem as someone seeking to avoid venereal disease: It’s not just whom
you sleep with, but also whom they are sleeping with.
Sleeping around, to continue our metaphor, can actually be useful for large
derivatives dealers because it assures them government aid if trouble hits. In
other words, only companies having problems that can infect the entire
neighborhood—I won’t mention names—are certain to become a concern of the
state (an outcome, I’m sad to say, that is proper). From this irritating reality
comes The First Law of Corporate Survival for ambitious CEOs who pile on
leverage and run large and unfathomable derivatives books: Modest
incompetence simply won’t do; it’s mindboggling screw-ups that are required.
F. Foreign Currencies and Equities35
During 2002 we entered the foreign currency market for the first time in my
life, and in 2003 we enlarged our position, as I became increasingly bearish on
the dollar. I should note that the cemetery for seers has a huge section set aside
for macro forecasters. We have in fact made few macro forecasts at Berkshire,
and we have seldom seen others make them with sustained success.
We have—and will continue to have—the bulk of Berkshire’s net worth in
U.S. assets. But in recent years our country’s trade deficit has been force-feeding
huge amounts of claims on, and ownership in, America to the rest of the world.
For a time, foreign appetite for these assets readily absorbed the supply. Late in
2002, however, the world started choking on this diet, and the dollar’s value
began to slide against major currencies. Even so, prevailing exchange rates will
not lead to a material letup in our trade deficit. So whether foreign investors like
it or not, they will continue to be flooded with dollars. The consequences of this

are anybody’s guess. They could, however, be troublesome—and reach, in fact,
well beyond currency markets.
As an American, I hope there is a benign ending to this problem. [P]erhaps
the alarms I have raised will prove needless: Our country’s dynamism and
resiliency have repeatedly made fools of nay-sayers. But Berkshire holds many
billions of cash-equivalents denominated in dollars. So I feel more comfortable
owning foreign-exchange contracts that are at least a partial offset to that
position.
Berkshire owned about $21.4 billion of foreign exchange contracts at year-
end, spread among 12 currencies. [As mentioned in the preceding essay],
holdings of this kind are a decided change for us. Before March 2002, neither
Berkshire nor I had ever traded in currencies. But the evidence grows that our
trade policies will put unremitting pressure on the dollar for many years to come
—so since 2002 we’ve heeded that warning in setting our investment course. (As
W.C. Fields once said when asked for a handout: “Sorry, son, all my money’s
tied up in currency.”)
Be clear on one point: In no way does our thinking about currencies rest on
doubts about America. We live in an extraordinarily rich country, the product of
a system that values market economics, the rule of law and equality of
opportunity. Our economy is far and away the strongest in the world and will
continue to be. We are lucky to live here.
But our country’s trade practices are weighing down the dollar. The decline
in its value has already been substantial, but is nevertheless likely to continue.
Without policy changes, currency markets could even become disorderly and
generate spillover effects, both political and financial. No one knows whether
these problems will materialize. But such a scenario is a far-from-remote
possibility that policymakers should be considering now. Their bent, however, is
to lean toward not-so-benign neglect: A 318-page Congressional study of the
consequences of unremitting trade deficits was published in November 2000 and
has been gathering dust ever since. The study was ordered after the deficit hit a
then-alarming $263 billion in 1999; by last year it had risen to $618 billion.
Charlie and I, it should be emphasized, believe that true trade—that is, the
exchange of goods and services with other countries—is enormously beneficial
for both us and them. Last year we had $1.15 trillion of such honest-to-God trade
and the more of this, the better. But, as noted, our country also purchased an
additional $618 billion in goods and services from the rest of the world that was
unreciprocated. That is a staggering figure and one that has important

consequences.
The balancing item to this one-way pseudo-trade—in economics there is
always an offset—is a transfer of wealth from the U.S. to the rest of the world.
The transfer may materialize in the form of IOUs our private or governmental
institutions give to foreigners, or by way of their assuming ownership of our
assets, such as stocks and real estate. In either case, Americans end up owning a
reduced portion of our country while non-Americans own a greater part. This
force-feeding of American wealth to the rest of the world is now proceeding at
the rate of $1.8 billion daily, an increase of 20% since I wrote you last year.
Consequently, other countries and their citizens now own a net of about $3
trillion of the U.S. A decade ago their net ownership was negligible.
The mention of trillions numbs most brains. A further source of confusion
is that the current account deficit (the sum of three items, the most important by
far being the trade deficit) and our national budget deficit are often lumped as
“twins.” They are anything but. They have different causes and different
consequences.
A budget deficit in no way reduces the portion of the national pie that goes
to Americans. As long as other countries and their citizens have no net
ownership of the U.S., 100% of our country’s output belongs to our citizens
under any budget scenario, even one involving a huge deficit.
As a rich “family” awash in goods, Americans will argue through their
legislators as to how government should redistribute the national output—that is
who pays taxes and who receives governmental benefits. If “entitlement”
promises from an earlier day have to be reexamined, “family members” will
angrily debate among themselves as to who feels the pain. Maybe taxes will go
up; maybe promises will be modified; maybe more internal debt will be issued.
But when the fight is finished, all of the family’s huge pie remains available for
its members, however it is divided. No slice must be sent abroad.
Large and persisting current account deficits produce an entirely different
result. As time passes, and as claims against us grow, we own less and less of
what we produce. In effect, the rest of the world enjoys an ever-growing royalty
on American output. Here, we are like a family that consistently overspends its
income. As time passes, the family finds that it is working more and more for the
“finance company” and less for itself.
Should we continue to run current account deficits comparable to those now
prevailing, the net ownership of the U.S. by other countries and their citizens a
decade from now will amount to roughly $11 trillion. And, if foreign investors
were to earn only 5% on that net holding, we would need to send a net of $.55
trillion of goods and services abroad every year merely to service the U.S.

investments then held by foreigners. At that date, a decade out, our GDP would
probably total about $18 trillion (assuming low inflation, which is far from a
sure thing). Therefore, our U.S. “family” would then be delivering 3% of its
annual output to the rest of the world simply as tribute for the overindulgences of
the past. In this case, unlike that involving budget deficits, the sons would truly
pay for the sins of their fathers.
This annual royalty paid the world—which would not disappear unless the
U.S. massively under-consumed and began to run consistent and large trade
surpluses—would undoubtedly produce significant political unrest in the U.S.
Americans would still be living very well, indeed better than now because of the
growth in our economy. But they would chafe at the idea of perpetually paying
tribute to their creditors and owners abroad. A country that is now aspiring to an
“Ownership Society” will not find happiness in—and I’ll use hyperbole here for
emphasis—a “Sharecropper’s Society.” But that’s precisely where our trade
policies, supported by Republicans and Democrats alike, are taking us.
Many prominent U.S. financial figures, both in and out of government,
have stated that our current-account deficits cannot persist. For instance, the
minutes of the Federal Reserve Open Market Committee of June 29-30, 2004
say: “The staff noted that outsized external deficits could not be sustained
indefinitely.” But, despite the constant hand-wringing by luminaries, they offer
no substantive suggestions to tame the burgeoning imbalance.
[Sixteen months earlier, Buffett had] warned that “a gently declining dollar
would not provide the answer.” And so far it hasn’t. Yet policymakers continue
to hope for a “soft landing,” meanwhile counseling other countries to stimulate
(read “inflate”) their economies and Americans to save more. In my view these
admonitions miss the mark: There are deep-rooted structural problems that will
cause America to continue to run a huge current-account deficit unless trade
policies either change materially or the dollar declines by a degree that could
prove unsettling to financial markets.
Proponents of the trade status quo are fond of quoting Adam Smith: “What
is prudence in the conduct of every family can scarce be folly in that of a great
kingdom. If a foreign country can supply us with a commodity cheaper than we
ourselves can make it, better buy it of them with some part of the produce of our
own industry, employed in a way in which we have some advantage.”
I agree. Note, however, that Mr. Smith’s statement refers to trade of product
for product, not of wealth for product as our country is doing to the tune of $.6
trillion annually. Moreover, I am sure that he would never have suggested that
“prudence” consisted of his “family” selling off part of its farm every day in
order to finance its over-consumption. Yet that is just what the “great kingdom”

called the United States is doing.
If the U.S. was running a $.6 trillion current-account surplus, commentators
worldwide would violently condemn our policy, viewing it as an extreme form
of “mercantilism”—a long-discredited economic strategy under which countries
fostered exports, discouraged imports, and piled up treasure. I would condemn
such a policy as well. But, in effect if not in intent, the rest of the world is
practicing mercantilism in respect to the U.S., an act made possible by our vast
store of assets and our pristine credit history. Indeed, the world would never let
any other country use a credit card denominated in its own currency to the
insatiable extent we are employing ours. Presently, most foreign investors are
sanguine: they may view us as spending junkies, but they know we are rich
junkies as well.
Our spendthrift behavior won’t, however, be tolerated indefinitely. And
though it’s impossible to forecast just when and how the trade problem will be
resolved, it’s improbable that the resolution will foster an increase in the value of
our currency relative to that of our trading partners.
We hope the U.S. adopts policies that will quickly and substantially reduce
the current-account deficit. True, a prompt solution would likely cause Berkshire
to record losses on its foreign-exchange contracts. But Berkshire’s resources
remain heavily concentrated in dollar-based assets, and both a strong dollar and a
low-inflation environment are very much in our interest.
John Maynard Keynes said in his masterful The General Theory: “Worldly
wisdom teaches that it is better for reputation to fail conventionally than to
succeed unconventionally.” (Or, to put it in less elegant terms, lemmings as a
class may be derided but never does an individual lemming get criticized.) From
a reputational standpoint, Charlie and I run a clear risk with our foreign-
exchange commitment. But we believe in managing Berkshire as if we owned
100% of it ourselves. And, were that the case, we would not be following a
dollar-only policy.
When we have a long-term position in stocks or bonds, year-to-year
changes in value are reflected in our balance sheet but, as long as the asset is not
sold, are rarely reflected in earnings. For example, our Coca-Cola holdings went
from $1 billion in value early on to $13.4 billion at year end 1998 and have since
declined to $8.1 billion—with none of these moves affecting our earnings
statement. Long-term currency positions, however, are daily marked to market
and therefore have an effect on earnings in every reporting period.
From the date we first entered into currency contracts, we are $2.0 billion in

the black. We reduced our direct position in currencies somewhat during 2005.
We partially offset this change, however, by purchasing equities whose prices are
denominated in a variety of foreign currencies and that earn a large part of their
profits internationally. Charlie and I prefer this method of acquiring non-dollar
exposure. That’s largely because of changes in interest rates: As U.S. rates have
risen relative to those of the rest of the world, holding most foreign currencies
now involves a significant negative “carry.”
In contrast, the ownership of foreign equities is likely, over time, to create a
positive carry—perhaps a substantial one. The underlying factors affecting the
U.S. current account deficit continue to worsen, and no letup is in sight. Not only
did our trade deficit—the largest and most familiar item in the current account—
hit an all-time high in 2005, but we also can expect a second item—the balance
of investment income—to soon turn negative. As foreigners increase their
ownership of U.S. assets (or of claims against us) relative to U.S. investments
abroad, these investors will begin earning more on their holdings than we do on
ours.
Finally, the third component of the current account, unilateral transfers, is
always negative. The U.S., it should be emphasized, is extraordinarily rich and
will get richer. As a result, the huge imbalances in its current account may
continue for a long time without their having noticeable deleterious effects on
the U.S. economy or on markets. I doubt, however, that the situation will forever
remain benign. Either Americans address the problem soon in a way we select,
or at some point the problem will likely address us in an unpleasant way of its
own.
As our U.S. trade problems worsen, the probability that the dollar will
weaken over time continues to be high. I fervently believe in real trade—the
more the better for both us and the world. We had about $1.44 trillion of this
honest-to-God trade in 2006. But the U.S. also had $.76 trillion of pseudo-trade
last year—imports for which we exchanged no goods or services. (Ponder, for a
moment, how commentators would describe the situation if our imports were
$.76 trillion—a full 6% of GDP—and we had no exports.)
Making these purchases that weren’t reciprocated by sales, the U.S.
necessarily transferred ownership of its assets or IOUs to the rest of the world.
Like a very wealthy but self-indulgent family, we peeled off a bit of what we
owned in order to consume more than we produced.
The U.S. can do a lot of this because we are an extraordinarily rich country
that has behaved responsibly in the past. The world is therefore willing to accept

our bonds, real estate, stocks and businesses. And we have a vast store of these
to hand over.
These transfers will have consequences, however. Already the prediction I
made last year about one fall-out from our spending binge has come true: The
“investment income” account of our country—positive in every previous year
since 1915—turned negative in 2006. Foreigners now earn more on their U.S.
investments than we do on our investments abroad. In effect, we’ve used up our
bank account and turned to our credit card. And, like everyone who gets in hock,
the U.S. will now experience “reverse compounding” as we pay ever-increasing
amounts of interest on interest.
I want to emphasize that even though our course is unwise, Americans will
live better ten or twenty years from now than they do today. Per-capita wealth
will increase. But our citizens will also be forced every year to ship a significant
portion of their current production abroad merely to service the cost of our huge
debtor position. It won’t be pleasant to work part of each day to pay for the over-
consumption of your ancestors. I believe that at some point in the future U.S.
workers and voters will find this annual “tribute” so onerous that there will be a
severe political backlash. How that will play out in markets is impossible to
predict—but to expect a “soft landing” seems like wishful thinking.
G. Home Ownership: Practice and Policy36
As is well-known, the U.S. went off the rails in its home-ownership and
mortgage-lending policies, and for these mistakes our economy is now paying a
huge price. All of us participated in the destructive behavior—government,
lenders, borrowers, the media, rating agencies, you name it. At the core of the
folly was the almost universal belief that the value of houses was certain to
increase over time and that any dips would be inconsequential. The acceptance
of this premise justified almost any price and practice in housing transactions.
Homeowners everywhere felt richer and rushed to “monetize” the increased
value of their homes by refinancings. These massive cash infusions fueled a
consumption binge throughout our economy. It all seemed great fun while it
lasted. (A largely unnoted fact: Large numbers of people who have “lost” their
house through foreclosure have actually realized a profit because they carried
out refinancings earlier that gave them cash in excess of their cost. In these
cases, the evicted homeowner was the winner, and the victim was the lender.)
I will write here at some length about the mortgage operation of Clayton

Homes because Clayton’s recent experience may be useful in the public-policy
debate about housing and mortgages.
Clayton is the largest company in the manufactured home industry,
delivering 27,499 units last year. This came to about 34% of the industry’s
81,889 total. Our share will likely grow in 2009, partly because much of the rest
of the industry is in acute distress. Industry wide, units sold have steadily
declined since they hit a peak of 372,843 in 1998.
At that time, much of the industry employed sales practices that were
atrocious. Writing about the period somewhat later, I described it as involving
“borrowers who shouldn’t have borrowed being financed by lenders who
shouldn’t have lent.”
To begin with, the need for meaningful down payments was frequently
ignored. Sometimes fakery was involved. (“That certainly looks like a $2,000 cat
to me” says the salesman who will receive a $3,000 commission if the loan goes
through.) Moreover, impossible-to-meet monthly payments were being agreed to
by borrowers who signed up because they had nothing to lose. The resulting
mortgages were usually packaged (“securitized”) and sold by Wall Street firms
to unsuspecting investors. This chain of folly had to end badly, and it did.
Clayton, it should be emphasized, followed far more sensible practices in
its own lending throughout that time. Indeed, no purchaser of the mortgages it
originated and then securitized has ever lost a dime of principal or interest. But
Clayton was the exception; industry losses were staggering. And the hangover
continues to this day.
This 1997-2000 fiasco should have served as a canary-in-the-coal-mine
warning for the far-larger conventional housing market. But investors,
government and rating agencies learned exactly nothing from the manufactured-
home debacle. Instead, in an eerie rerun of that disaster, the same mistakes were
repeated with conventional homes in the 2004-07 period: Lenders happily made
loans that borrowers couldn’t repay out of their incomes, and borrowers just as
happily signed up to meet those payments. Both parties counted on “house-price
appreciation” to make this otherwise impossible arrangement work. It was
Scarlett O’Hara all over again: “I’ll think about it tomorrow.” The consequences
of this behavior are now reverberating through every corner of our economy.
Clayton’s 198,888 borrowers, however, have continued to pay normally
throughout the housing crash, handing us no unexpected losses. This is not
because these borrowers are unusually credit-worthy, a point proved by FICO
scores (a standard measure of credit risk). Their median FICO score is 644,
compared to a national median of 723, and about 35% are below 620, the
segment usually designated “sub-prime.” Many disastrous pools of mortgages on

conventional homes are populated by borrowers with far better credit, as
measured by FICO scores.
Yet at year-end, our delinquency rate on loans we have originated was
3.6%, up only modestly from 2.9% in 2006 and 2.9% in 2004. (In addition to our
originated loans, we’ve also bought bulk portfolios of various types from other
financial institutions.) Clayton’s foreclosures during 2008 were 3.0% of
originated loans compared to 3.8% in 2006 and 5.3% in 2004.
Why are our borrowers—characteristically people with modest incomes and
far-from-great credit scores—performing so well? The answer is elementary,
going right back to Lending 101. Our borrowers simply looked at how full-bore
mortgage payments would compare with their actual—not hoped-for—income
and then decided whether they could live with that commitment. Simply put,
they took out a mortgage with the intention of paying it off, whatever the course
of home prices.
Just as important is what our borrowers did not do. They did not count on
making their loan payments by means of refinancing. They did not sign up for
“teaser” rates that upon reset were outsized relative to their income. And they
did not assume that they could always sell their home at a profit if their
mortgage payments became onerous. Jimmy Stewart would have loved these
folks.
Of course, a number of our borrowers will run into trouble. They generally
have no more than minor savings to tide them over if adversity hits. The major
cause of delinquency or foreclosure is the loss of a job, but death, divorce and
medical expenses all cause problems. If unemployment rates rise—as they surely
will in 2009—more of Clayton’s borrowers will have troubles, and we will have
larger, though still manageable, losses. But our problems will not be driven to
any extent by the trend of home prices.
Commentary about the current housing crisis often ignores the crucial fact
that most foreclosures do not occur because a house is worth less than its
mortgage (so-called “upside-down” loans). Rather, foreclosures take place
because borrowers can’t pay the monthly payment that they agreed to pay.
Homeowners who have made a meaningful down-payment—derived from
savings and not from other borrowing—seldom walk away from a primary
residence simply because its value today is less than the mortgage. Instead, they
walk when they can’t make the monthly payments.
Home ownership is a wonderful thing. My family and I have enjoyed my
present home for 50 years, with more to come. But enjoyment and utility should
be the primary motives for purchase, not profit or refi possibilities. And the
home purchased ought to fit the income of the purchaser.

The present housing debacle should teach home buyers, lenders, brokers
and government some simple lessons that will ensure stability in the future.
Home purchases should involve an honest-to-God down payment of at least 10%
and monthly payments that can be comfortably handled by the borrower’s
income. That income should be carefully verified.
Putting people into homes, though a desirable goal, shouldn’t be our
country’s primary objective. Keeping them in their homes should be the
ambition.
28 [Introductory essay, 1987; repeated without the first sentence in 1988 and
1989.]
29 [2011.]
30 [Divided by hash lines: 2002; 1990; 1990 Wesco Financial Corporation
Letter to Shareholders, by Charles T. Munger. Reprinted with permission.]
31 [1989.]
32 [Divided by hash lines: 1989; 1994; 1996; 1990; 1995; 1997.]
33 [See the essay “Value” Investing: A Redundancy in Part II.D. The per
share figures in the two essays differ because of stock splits.]
34 [2002; 2005; 2006; 2008.]
35 [Divided by hash lines: 2003; 2004; 2005; 2006.]
36 [2011; 2008.]

IV. COMMON STOCK
Occasional outbreaks of those two super-contagious diseases, fear and
greed, will forever occur in the investment community. The timing of these
epidemics will be unpredictable. And the market aberrations produced by them
will be equally unpredictable, both as to duration and degree. Therefore, we
never try to anticipate the arrival or departure of either disease. Our goal is more
modest: we simply attempt to be fearful when others are greedy and to be greedy
only when others are fearful.
As this is written, little fear is visible in Wall Street. Instead, euphoria
prevails—and why not? What could be more exhilarating than to participate in a
bull market in which the rewards to owners of businesses become gloriously
uncoupled from the plodding performances of the businesses themselves.
Unfortunately, however, stocks can’t outperform businesses indefinitely.
Indeed, because of the heavy transaction and investment management costs
they bear, stockholders as a whole and over the long term must inevitably
underperform the companies they own. If American business, in aggregate, earns
about 12% on equity annually, investors must end up earning significantly less.
Bull markets can obscure mathematical laws, but they cannot repeal them.37
A. The Bane of Trading: Transaction Costs38
It’s been an easy matter for Berkshire and other owners of American
equities to prosper over the years. Between December 31, 1899 and December
31, 1999, to give a really long-term example, the Dow rose from 66 to 11,497.
(Guess what annual growth rate is required to produce this result; the surprising
answer is at the end of this [essay].) This huge rise came about for a simple
reason: Over the century American businesses did extraordinarily well and
investors rode the wave of their prosperity. Businesses continue to do well. But
now shareholders, through a series of self-inflicted wounds, are in a major way
cutting the returns they will realize from their investments.
The explanation of how this is happening begins with a fundamental truth:
With unimportant exceptions, such as bankruptcies in which some of a
company’s losses are borne by creditors, the most that owners in aggregate can
earn between now and Judgment Day is what their businesses in aggregate earn.
True, by buying and selling that is clever or lucky, investor A may take more

than his share of the pie at the expense of investor B. And, yes, all investors feel
richer when stocks soar. But an owner can exit only by having someone take his
place. If one investor sells high, another must buy high. For owners as a whole,
there is simply no magic—no shower of money from outer space—that will
enable them to extract wealth from their companies beyond that created by the
companies themselves.
Indeed, owners must earn less than their businesses earn because of
“frictional” costs. And that’s my point: These costs are now being incurred in
amounts that will cause shareholders to earn far less than they historically have.
To understand how this toll has ballooned, imagine for a moment that all
American corporations are, and always will be, owned by a single family. We’ll
call them the Gotrocks. After paying taxes on dividends, this family—generation
after generation—becomes richer by the aggregate amount earned by its
companies. Today that amount is about $700 billion annually. Naturally, the
family spends some of these dollars. But the portion it saves steadily compounds
for its benefit. In the Gotrocks household everyone grows wealthier at the same
pace, and all is harmonious.
But let’s now assume that a few fast-talking Helpers approach the family
and persuade each of its members to try to outsmart his relatives by buying
certain of their holdings and selling them certain others. The Helpers—for a fee,
of course—obligingly agree to handle these transactions. The Gotrocks still own
all of corporate America; the trades just rearrange who owns what. So the
family’s annual gain in wealth diminishes, equaling the earnings of American
business minus commissions paid. The more that family members trade, the
smaller their share of the pie and the larger the slice received by the Helpers.
This fact is not lost upon these broker-Helpers: Activity is their friend and, in a
wide variety of ways, they urge it on.
After a while, most of the family members realize that they are not doing so
well at this new “beat-my-brother” game. Enter another set of Helpers. These
newcomers explain to each member of the Gotrocks clan that by himself he’ll
never outsmart the rest of the family. The suggested cure: “Hire a manager—yes,
us—and get the job done professionally.” These manager-Helpers continue to
use the broker-Helpers to execute trades; the managers may even increase their
activity so as to permit the brokers to prosper still more. Overall, a bigger slice
of the pie now goes to the two classes of Helpers.
The family’s disappointment grows. Each of its members is now employing
professionals. Yet overall, the group’s finances have taken a turn for the worse.
The solution? More help, of course.
It arrives in the form of financial planners and institutional consultants, who

weigh in to advise the Gotrocks on selecting manager-Helpers. The befuddled
family welcomes this assistance. By now its members know they can pick
neither the right stocks nor the right stock-pickers. Why, one might ask, should
they expect success in picking the right consultant? But this question does not
occur to the Gotrocks, and the consultant-Helpers certainly don’t suggest it to
them.
The Gotrocks, now supporting three classes of expensive Helpers, find that
their results get worse, and they sink into despair. But just as hope seems lost, a
fourth group—we’ll call them the hyper-Helpers—appears. These friendly folk
explain to the Gotrocks that their unsatisfactory results are occurring because the
existing 
Helpers—brokers, 
managers, 
consultants—are 
not 
sufficiently
motivated and are simply going through the motions. “What,” the new Helpers
ask, “can you expect from such a bunch of zombies?”
The new arrivals offer a breathtakingly simple solution: Pay more money.
Brimming with self-confidence, the hyper-Helpers assert that huge contingent
payments—in addition to stiff fixed fees—are what each family member must
fork over in order to really outmaneuver his relatives.
The more observant members of the family see that some of the hyper-
Helpers are really just manager-Helpers wearing new uniforms, bearing sewn-on
sexy names like HEDGE FUND or PRIVATE EQUITY. The new Helpers,
however, assure the Gotrocks that this change of clothing is all-important,
bestowing on its wearers magical powers similar to those acquired by mild-
mannered Clark Kent when he changed into his Superman costume. Calmed by
this explanation, the family decides to pay up.
And that’s where we are today: A record portion of the earnings that would
go in their entirety to owners—if they all just stayed in their rocking chairs—is
now going to a swelling army of Helpers. Particularly expensive is the recent
pandemic of profit arrangements under which Helpers receive large portions of
the winnings when they are smart or lucky, and leave family members with all of
the losses—and large fixed fees to boot—when the Helpers are dumb or unlucky
(or occasionally crooked).
A sufficient number of arrangements like this—heads, the Helper takes
much of the winnings; tails, the Gotrocks lose and pay dearly for the privilege of
doing so—may make it more accurate to call the family the Hadrocks. Today, in
fact, the family’s frictional costs of all sorts may well amount to 20% of the
earnings of American business. In other words, the burden of paying Helpers
may cause American equity investors, overall, to earn only 80% or so of what
they would earn if they just sat still and listened to no one.
Long ago, Sir Isaac Newton gave us three laws of motion, which were the

work of genius. But Sir Isaac’s talents didn’t extend to investing: He lost a
bundle in the South Sea Bubble, explaining later, “I can calculate the movement
of the stars, but not the madness of men.” If he had not been traumatized by this
loss, Sir Isaac might well have gone on to discover the Fourth Law of Motion:
For investors as a whole, returns decrease as motion increases.
Here’s the answer to the question posed at the beginning of this [essay]: To
get very specific, the Dow increased from 65.73 to 11,497.12 in the 20th century,
and that amounts to a gain of 5.3% compounded annually. (Investors would also
have received dividends, of course.) To achieve an equal rate of gain in the 21st
century, the Dow will have to rise by December 31, 2099 to—brace yourself—
precisely 2,011,011.23. But I’m willing to settle for 2,000,000; six years into this
century, the Dow has gained not at all.
It is likely that in a few months Berkshire shares will be traded on the New
York Stock Exchange. Our move there would be made possible by a new listing
rule that the Exchange’s Board of Governors has passed and asked the SEC to
approve. If that approval is forthcoming, we expect to apply for a listing, which
we believe will be granted.
Up to now, the Exchange has required newly-listed companies to have a
minimum of 2,000 shareholders who each own 100 shares or more. The purpose
of this rule is to insure that NYSE-listed companies enjoy the broad investor
interest that facilitates an orderly market. The 100-share standard corresponds to
the trading unit (“round lot”) for all common stocks now listed on the Exchange.
Because [in 1988] Berkshire ha[d] relatively few shares outstanding
(1,146,642), it [did] not have the number of 100-shares-or-more holders that the
Exchange has required. A ten-share holding of Berkshire, however, represents a
significant investment commitment. In fact, ten Berkshire shares have a value
greater than that of 100 shares of any NYSE-listed stock. The Exchange,
therefore, is willing to have Berkshire shares trade in ten-share “round lots.”
The Exchange’s proposed rule simply changes the 2,000 shareholder
minimum from one measured by holders of 100 shares or more to one measured
by holders of a round lot or more. Berkshire can easily meet this amended test.
Charlie Munger, Berkshire’s Vice Chairman, and I are delighted at the
prospect of listing, since we believe this move will benefit our shareholders. We
have two criteria by which we judge what marketplace would be best for
Berkshire stock. First, we hope for the stock to consistently trade at a price
rationally related to its intrinsic business value. If it does, the investment result
achieved by each shareholder will approximate Berkshire’s business result

during his period of ownership.
Such an outcome is far from automatic. Many stocks swing between levels
of severe undervaluation and overvaluation. When this happens, owners are
rewarded or penalized in a manner wildly at variance with how the business has
performed during their period of ownership. We want to avoid such capricious
results. Our goal is to have our shareholder-partners profit from the
achievements of the business rather than from the foolish behavior of their co-
owners.
Consistently rational prices are produced by rational owners, both current
and prospective. All of our policies and communications are designed to attract
the business-oriented long-term owner and to filter out possible buyers whose
focus is short-term and market-oriented. To date we have been successful in this
attempt, and Berkshire shares have consistently sold in an unusually narrow
range around intrinsic business value. We do not believe that a NYSE listing will
improve or diminish Berkshire’s prospects for consistently selling at an
appropriate price; the quality of our shareholders will produce a good result
whatever the marketplace.
But we do believe that the listing will reduce transaction costs for
Berkshire’s shareholders—and that is important. Though we want to attract
shareholders who will stay around for a long time, we also want to minimize the
costs incurred by shareholders when they enter or exit. In the long run, the
aggregate pre-tax rewards to our owners will equal the business gains achieved
by the company less the transaction costs imposed by the marketplace—that is,
commissions charged by brokers plus the net realized spreads of market-makers.
Overall, we believe these transaction costs will be reduced materially by a
NYSE listing.
[T]ransaction costs are very heavy for active stocks, often amounting to
10% or more of the earnings of a public company. In effect, these costs act as a
hefty tax on owners, albeit one based on individual decisions to “change chairs”
and one that is paid to the financial community rather than to Washington. Our
policies and your investment attitude have reduced this “tax” on Berkshire
owners to what we believe is the lowest level among large public companies. A
NYSE listing should further reduce this cost for Berkshire’s owners by
narrowing the market-maker’s spread.
One final comment: You should clearly understand that we are not seeking
a NYSE listing for the purpose of achieving a higher valuation on Berkshire
shares. Berkshire should sell, and we hope will sell, on the NYSE at prices
similar to those it would have commanded in the over-the-counter market, given
similar economic circumstances. The NYSE listing should not induce you to buy

or sell; it simply should cut your costs somewhat should you decide to do either.
B. Attracting the Right Sort of Investor39
Berkshire’s shares were listed on the [NYSE] on November 29, 1988. Let
me clarify one point not dealt with in the letter [set forth above]: Though our
round lot for trading on the NYSE is ten shares, any number of shares from one
on up can be bought or sold.
As the [foregoing] letter explains, our primary goal in listing was to reduce
transaction costs, and we believe this goal is being achieved. Generally, the
spread between the bid and asked price on the NYSE has been well below the
spread that prevailed in the over-the-counter market.
Henderson Brothers, Inc., the specialist in our shares, is the oldest
continuing specialist firm on the Exchange; its progenitor, William Thomas
Henderson, bought his seat for $500 on September 8, 1861. (Recently, seats were
selling for about $625,000.) Among the 54 firms acting as specialists, HBI ranks
second in number of stocks assigned, with 83. We were pleased when Berkshire
was allocated to HBI, and have been delighted with the firm’s performance. Jim
Maguire, Chairman of HBI, personally manages the trading in Berkshire, and we
could not be in better hands.
In two respects our goals probably differ somewhat from those of most
listed companies. First, we do not want to maximize the price at which Berkshire
shares trade. We wish instead for them to trade in a narrow range centered at
intrinsic business value (which we hope increases at a reasonable—or, better yet,
unreasonable—rate). Charlie and I are bothered as much by significant
overvaluation as significant undervaluation. Both extremes will inevitably
produce results for many shareholders that will differ sharply from Berkshire’s
business results. If our stock price instead consistently mirrors business value,
each of our shareholders will receive an investment result that roughly parallels
the business results of Berkshire during his holding period.
Second, we wish for very little trading activity. If we ran a private business
with a few passive partners, we would be disappointed if those partners, and
their replacements, frequently wanted to leave the partnership. Running a public
company, we feel the same way.
Our goal is to attract long-term owners who, at the time of purchase, have
no timetable or price target for sale but plan instead to stay with us indefinitely.
We don’t understand the CEO who wants lots of stock activity, for that can be
achieved only if many of his owners are constantly exiting. At what other

organization—school, club, church, etc.—do leaders cheer when members
leave? (However if there were a broker whose livelihood depended upon the
membership turnover in such organizations, you could be sure that there would
be at least one proponent of activity, as in: “There hasn’t been much going on in
Christianity for a while; maybe we should switch to Buddhism next week.”)
Of course, some Berkshire owners will need or want to sell from time to
time, and we wish for good replacements who will pay them a fair price.
Therefore we try, through our policies, performance, and communications, to
attract new shareholders who understand our operations, share our time horizons,
and measure us as we measure ourselves. If we can continue to attract this sort of
shareholder—and, just as important, can continue to be uninteresting to those
with 
short-term 
or 
unrealistic 
expectations—Berkshire 
shares 
should
consistently sell at prices reasonably related to business value.40
C. Dividend Policy and Share Repurchases41
Dividend policy is often reported to shareholders, but seldom explained. A
company will say something like, “Our goal is to pay out 40% to 50% of
earnings and to increase dividends at a rate at least equal to the rise in the CPI.”
And that’s it—no analysis will be supplied as to why that particular policy is best
for the owners of the business. Yet, allocation of capital is crucial to business and
investment management. Because it is, we believe managers and owners should
think hard about the circumstances under which earnings should be retained and
under which they should be distributed.
The first point to understand is that all earnings are not created equal. In
many businesses—particularly those that have high asset/profit ratios—inflation
causes some or all of the reported earnings to become ersatz. The ersatz portion
—let’s call these earnings “restricted”—cannot, if the business is to retain its
economic position, be distributed as dividends. Were these earnings to be paid
out, the business would lose ground in one or more of the following areas: its
ability to maintain its unit volume of sales, its long-term competitive position, its
financial strength. No matter how conservative its payout ratio, a company that
consistently distributes restricted earnings is destined for oblivion unless equity
capital is otherwise infused.
Restricted earnings are seldom valueless to owners, but they often must be
discounted heavily. In effect, they are conscripted by the business, no matter how
poor its economic potential. (This retention-no-matter-how-unattractive-the-
return situation was communicated unwittingly in a marvelously ironic way by

Consolidated Edison a decade ago. At the time, a punitive regulatory policy was
a major factor causing the company’s stock to sell as low as one-fourth of book
value: i.e., every time a dollar of earnings was retained for reinvestment in the
business, that dollar was transformed into only 25¢ of market value. But, despite
this gold-into-lead process, most earnings were reinvested in the business rather
than paid to owners. Meanwhile, at construction and maintenance sites
throughout New York, signs proudly proclaimed the corporate slogan, “Dig We
Must.”)
Restricted earnings need not concern us further in this dividend discussion.
Let’s turn to the much-more-valued unrestricted variety. These earnings may,
with equal feasibility, be retained or distributed. In our opinion, management
should choose whichever course makes greater sense for the owners of the
business.
This principle is not universally accepted. For a number of reasons
managers like to withhold unrestricted, readily distributable earnings from
shareholders—to expand the corporate empire over which the managers rule, to
operate from a position of exceptional financial comfort, etc. But we believe
there is only one valid reason for retention. Unrestricted earnings should be
retained only when there is a reasonable prospect—backed preferably by
historical evidence or, when appropriate, by a thoughtful analysis of the future—
that for every dollar retained by the corporation, at least one dollar of market
value will be created for owners. This will happen only if the capital retained
produces incremental earnings equal to, or above, those generally available to
investors.
To illustrate, let’s assume that an investor owns a risk-free 10% perpetual
bond with one very unusual feature. Each year the investor can elect either to
take his 10% coupon in cash, or to reinvest the coupon in more 10% bonds with
identical terms: i.e., a perpetual life and coupons offering the same cash-or-
reinvest options. If, in any given year, the prevailing interest rate on long-term,
risk-free bonds is 5%, it would be foolish for the investor to take his coupon in
cash since the 10% bonds he could instead choose would be worth considerably
more than 100¢ on the dollar. Under these circumstances, the investor wanting to
get his hands on cash should take his coupon in additional bonds and then
immediately sell them. By doing that, he would realize more cash than if he had
taken his coupon directly in cash. Assuming all bonds were held by rational
investors, no one would opt for cash in an era of 5% interest, not even those
bondholders needing cash for living purposes.
If, however, interest rates were 15%, no rational investor would want his
money invested for him at 10%. Instead, the investor would choose to take his

coupon in cash, even if his personal cash needs were nil. The opposite course—
reinvestment of the coupon—would give an investor additional bonds with
market value far less than the cash he could have elected. If he should want 10%
bonds, he can simply take the cash received and buy them in the market, where
they will be available at a large discount.
An analysis similar to that made by our hypothetical bondholder is
appropriate for owners in thinking about whether a company’s unrestricted
earnings should be retained or paid out. Of course, the analysis is much more
difficult and subject to error because the rate earned on reinvested earnings is not
a contractual figure, as in our bond case, but rather a fluctuating figure. Owners
must guess as to what the rate will average over the intermediate future.
However, once an informed guess is made, the rest of the analysis is simple: you
should wish your earnings to be reinvested if they can be expected to earn high
returns, and you should wish them paid to you if low returns are the likely
outcome of reinvestment.
Many corporate managers reason very much along these lines in
determining whether subsidiaries should distribute earnings to their parent
company. At that level, the managers have no trouble thinking like intelligent
owners. But payout decisions at the parent company level often are a different
story. Here managers frequently have trouble putting themselves in the shoes of
their shareholder-owners.
With this schizoid approach, the CEO of a multi-divisional company will
instruct Subsidiary A, whose earnings on incremental capital may be expected to
average 5%, to distribute all available earnings in order that they may be
invested in Subsidiary B, whose earnings on incremental capital are expected to
be 15%. The CEO’s business school oath will allow no lesser behavior. But if his
own long-term record with incremental capital is 5%—and market rates are 10%
—he is likely to impose a dividend policy on shareholders of the parent
company that merely follows some historical or industry-wide payout pattern.
Furthermore, he will expect managers of subsidiaries to give him a full account
as to why it makes sense for earnings to be retained in their operations rather
than distributed to the parent-owner. But seldom will he supply his owners with
a similar analysis pertaining to the whole company.
In judging whether managers should retain earnings, shareholders should
not simply compare total incremental earnings in recent years to total
incremental capital because that relationship may be distorted by what is going
on in a core business. During an inflationary period, companies with a core
business characterized by extraordinary economics can use small amounts of
incremental capital in that business at very high rates of return (as was discussed

in last year’s section on Goodwill).42 But, unless they are experiencing
tremendous unit growth, outstanding businesses by definition generate large
amounts of excess cash. If a company sinks most of this money in other
businesses that earn low returns, the company’s overall return on retained capital
may nevertheless appear excellent because of the extraordinary returns being
earned by the portion of earnings incrementally invested in the core business.
The situation is analogous to a Pro-Am golf event: even if all of the amateurs are
hopeless duffers, the team’s best-ball score will be respectable because of the
dominating skills of the professional.
Many corporations that consistently show good returns both on equity and
on overall incremental capital have, indeed, employed a large portion of their
retained earnings on an economically unattractive, even disastrous, basis. Their
marvelous core businesses, however, whose earnings grow year after year,
camouflage repeated failures in capital allocation elsewhere (usually involving
high-priced acquisition of businesses that have inherently mediocre economics).
The managers at fault periodically report on the lesson they have learned from
the latest disappointment. They then usually seek out future lessons. (Failure
seems to go to their heads.)
In such cases, shareholders would be far better off if earnings were retained
only to expand the high-return business, with the balance paid in dividends or
used to repurchase stock (an action that increases the owners’ interest in the
exceptional business while sparing them participation in subpar businesses).
Managers of high-return businesses who consistently employ much of the cash
thrown off by those businesses in other ventures with low returns should be held
to account for those allocation decisions, regardless of how profitable the overall
enterprise is.
Nothing in this discussion is intended to argue for dividends that bounce
around from quarter to quarter with each wiggle in earnings or in investment
opportunities. Shareholders of public corporations understandably prefer that
dividends be consistent and predictable. Payments, therefore, should reflect
long-term expectations for both earnings and returns on incremental capital.
Since the long-term corporate outlook changes only infrequently, dividend
patterns should change no more often. But over time distributable earnings that
have been withheld by managers should earn their keep. If earnings have been
unwisely retained, it is likely that managers, too, have been unwisely retained.
The companies in which we have our largest investments have all engaged
in significant stock repurchases at times when wide discrepancies existed

between price and value. As shareholders, we find this encouraging and
rewarding for two important reasons—one that is obvious, and one that is subtle
and not always understood. The obvious point involves basic arithmetic: major
repurchases at prices well below per-share intrinsic business value immediately
increase, in a highly significant way, that value. When companies purchase their
own stock, they often find it easy to get $2 of present value for $1. Corporate
acquisition programs almost never do as well and, in a discouragingly large
number of cases, fail to get anything close to $1 of value for each $1 expended.
The other benefit of repurchases is less subject to precise measurement but
can be fully as important over time. By making repurchases when a company’s
market value is well below its business value, management clearly demonstrates
that it is given to actions that enhance the wealth of shareholders, rather than to
actions that expand management’s domain but that do nothing for (or even harm)
shareholders. Seeing this, shareholders and potential shareholders increase their
estimates of future returns from the business. This upward revision, in turn,
produces market prices more in line with intrinsic business value. These prices
are entirely rational. Investors should pay more for a business that is lodged in
the hands of a manager with demonstrated pro-shareholder leanings than for one
in the hands of a self-interested manager marching to a different drummer. (To
make the point extreme, how much would you pay to be a minority shareholder
of a company controlled by Robert Vesco?)
The key word is “demonstrated.” A manager who consistently turns his
back on repurchases, when these clearly are in the interests of owners, reveals
more than he knows of his motivations. No matter how often or how eloquently
he mouths some public relations-inspired phrase such as “maximizing
shareholder wealth” (this season’s favorite), the market correctly discounts assets
lodged with him. His heart is not listening to his mouth—and, after a while,
neither will the market.
[A] number of shareholders have suggested to us that Berkshire repurchase
its shares. Usually the requests were rationally based, but a few leaned on
spurious logic.
There is only one combination of facts that makes it advisable for a
company to repurchase its shares: First, the company has available funds—cash
plus sensible borrowing capacity—beyond the near-term needs of the business
and, second, finds its stock selling in the market below its intrinsic value,
conservatively-calculated. To this we add a caveat: Shareholders should have
been supplied all the information they need for estimating that value. Otherwise,

insiders could take advantage of their uninformed partners and buy out their
interests at a fraction of true worth. We have, on rare occasions, seen that
happen. Usually, of course, chicanery is employed to drive stock prices up, not
down.
The business “needs” that I speak of are of two kinds: First, expenditures
that a company must make to maintain its competitive position (e.g., the
remodeling of stores at Helzberg’s) and, second, optional outlays, aimed at
business growth, that management expects will produce more than a dollar of
value for each dollar spent (R. C. Willey’s expansion into Idaho).
When available funds exceed needs of those kinds, a company with a
growth-oriented shareholder population can buy new businesses or repurchase
shares. If a company’s stock is selling well below intrinsic value, repurchases
usually make the most sense. In the mid-1970s, the wisdom of making these was
virtually screaming at managements, but few responded. In most cases, those
that did made their owners much wealthier than if alternative courses of action
had been pursued. Indeed, during the 1970s (and, spasmodically, for some years
thereafter) we searched for companies that were large repurchasers of their
shares. This often was a tipoff that the company was both undervalued and run
by a shareholder-oriented management.
That day is past. Now, repurchases are all the rage, but are all too often
made for an unstated and, in our view, ignoble reason: to pump or support the
stock price. The shareholder who chooses to sell today, of course, is benefitted
by any buyer, whatever his origin or motives. But the continuing shareholder is
penalized by repurchases above intrinsic value. Buying dollar bills for $1.10 is
not good business for those who stick around.
Charlie and I admit that we feel confident in estimating intrinsic value for
only a portion of traded equities and then only when we employ a range of
values, rather than some pseudo-precise figure. Nevertheless, it appears to us
that many companies now making repurchases are overpaying departing
shareholders at the expense of those who stay. In defense of those companies, I
would say that it is natural for CEOs to be optimistic about their own businesses.
They also know a whole lot more about them than I do. However, I can’t help
but feel that too often today’s repurchases are dictated by management’s desire
to “show confidence” or be in fashion rather than by a desire to enhance per-
share value.
Sometimes, too, companies say they are repurchasing shares to offset the
shares issued when stock options granted at much lower prices are exercised.
This “buy high, sell low” strategy is one many unfortunate investors have
employed—but never intentionally! Managements, however, seem to follow this

perverse activity very cheerfully.
Of course, both option grants and repurchases may make sense—but if
that’s the case, it’s not because the two activities are logically related. Rationally,
a company’s decision to repurchase shares or to issue them should stand on its
own feet. Just because stock has been issued to satisfy options—or for any other
reason—does not mean that stock should be repurchased at a price above
intrinsic value. Correspondingly, a stock that sells well below intrinsic value
should be repurchased whether or not stock has previously been issued (or may
be because of outstanding options).
You should be aware that, at certain times in the past, I have erred in not
making repurchases. My appraisal of Berkshire’s value was then too
conservative or I was too enthused about some alternative use of funds. We have
therefore missed some opportunities—though Berkshire’s trading volume at
these points was too light for us to have done much buying, which means that
the gain in our per-share value would have been minimal. (A repurchase of, say,
2% of a company’s shares at a 25% discount from per-share intrinsic value
produces only a ½% gain in that value at most—and even less if the funds could
alternatively have been deployed in value-building moves.)
Some of the letters we’ve received clearly imply that the writer is
unconcerned about intrinsic value considerations but instead wants us to trumpet
an intention to repurchase so that the stock will rise (or quit going down). If the
writer wants to sell tomorrow, his thinking makes sense—for him!—but if he
intends to hold, he should instead hope the stock falls and trades in enough
volume for us to buy a lot of it. That’s the only way a repurchase program can
have any real benefit for a continuing shareholder.
We will not repurchase shares unless we believe Berkshire stock is selling
well below intrinsic value, conservatively calculated. Nor will we attempt to talk
the stock up or down. (Neither publicly or privately have I ever told anyone to
buy or sell Berkshire shares.) Instead we will give all shareholders—and
potential shareholders—the same valuation-related information we would wish
to have if our positions were reversed.
Recently, when the A shares fell below $45,000, we considered making
repurchases. We decided, however, to delay buying, if indeed we elect to do any,
until shareholders have had the chance to review this report. If we do find that
repurchases make sense, we will only rarely place bids on the New York Stock
Exchange (“NYSE”). Instead, we will respond to offers made directly to us at or
below the NYSE bid. If you wish to offer stock, have your broker call Mark
Millard at 402-346-1400. When a trade occurs, the broker can either record it in
the “third market” or on the NYSE. We will favor purchase of the B shares if

they are selling at more than a 2% discount to the A. We will not engage in
transactions involving fewer than 10 shares of A or 50 shares of B.
Please be clear about one point: We will never make purchases with the
intention of stemming a decline in Berkshire’s price. Rather we will make them
if and when we believe that they represent an attractive use of the Company’s
money. At best, repurchases are likely to have only a very minor effect on the
future rate of gain in our stock’s intrinsic value.
[In September 2011], we announced that Berkshire would repurchase its
shares at a price of up to 110% of book value. We were in the market for only a
few days—buying $67 million of stock—before the price advanced beyond our
limit. Nonetheless, the general importance of share repurchases suggests I should
focus for a bit on the subject.
Charlie and I favor repurchases when two conditions are met: first, a
company has ample funds to take care of the operational and liquidity needs of
its business; second, its stock is selling at a material discount to the company’s
intrinsic business value, conservatively calculated.
We have witnessed many bouts of repurchasing that failed our second test.
Sometimes, of course, infractions—even serious ones—are innocent; many
CEOs never stop believing their stock is cheap. In other instances, a less benign
conclusion seems warranted. It doesn’t suffice to say that repurchases are being
made to offset the dilution from stock issuances or simply because a company
has excess cash. Continuing shareholders are hurt unless shares are purchased
below intrinsic value. The first law of capital allocation—whether the money is
slated for acquisitions or share repurchases—is that what is smart at one price is
dumb at another. (One CEO who always stresses the price/value factor in
repurchase decisions is Jamie Dimon at J.P. Morgan; I recommend that you read
his annual letter.)
Charlie and I have mixed emotions when Berkshire shares sell well below
intrinsic value. We like making money for continuing shareholders, and there is
no surer way to do that than by buying an asset—our own stock—that we know
to be worth at least x for less than that—for .9x, .8x or even lower. (As one of
our directors says, it’s like shooting fish in a barrel, after the barrel has been
drained and the fish have quit flopping.) Nevertheless, we don’t enjoy cashing
out partners at a discount, even though our doing so may give the selling
shareholders a slightly higher price than they would receive if our bid was
absent. When we are buying, therefore, we want those exiting partners to be
fully informed about the value of the assets they are selling.

At our limit price of 110% of book value, repurchases clearly increase
Berkshire’s per-share intrinsic value. And the more and the cheaper we buy, the
greater the gain for continuing shareholders. Therefore, if given the opportunity,
we will likely repurchase stock aggressively at our price limit or lower. You
should know, however, that we have no interest in supporting the stock and that
our bids will fade in particularly weak markets. Nor will we buy shares if our
cash-equivalent holdings are below $20 billion. At Berkshire, financial strength
that is unquestionable takes precedence over all else.
This discussion of repurchases offers me the chance to address the irrational
reaction of many investors to changes in stock prices. When Berkshire buys
stock in a company that is repurchasing shares, we hope for two events: First, we
have the normal hope that earnings of the business will increase at a good clip
for a long time to come; and second, we also hope that the stock underperforms
in the market for a long time as well. A corollary to this second point: “Talking
our book” about a stock we own–were that to be effective—would actually be
harmful to Berkshire, not helpful as commentators customarily assume.
Let’s use IBM as an example. As all business observers know, CEOs Lou
Gerstner and Sam Palmisano did a superb job in moving IBM from near-
bankruptcy twenty years ago to its prominence today. Their operational
accomplishments were truly extraordinary.
But their financial management was equally brilliant, particularly in recent
years as the company’s financial flexibility improved. Indeed, I can think of no
major company that has had better financial management, a skill that has
materially increased the gains enjoyed by IBM shareholders. The company has
used debt wisely, made value-adding acquisitions almost exclusively for cash
and aggressively repurchased its own stock.
Today, IBM has 1.16 billion shares outstanding, of which we own about
63.9 million or 5.5%. Naturally, what happens to the company’s earnings over
the next five years is of enormous importance to us. Beyond that, the company
will likely spend $50 billion or so in those years to repurchase shares. Our quiz
for the day: What should a long-term shareholder, such as Berkshire, cheer for
during that period?
I won’t keep you in suspense. We should wish for IBM’s stock price to
languish throughout the five years.
Let’s do the math. If IBM’s stock price averages, say, $200 during the
period, the company will acquire 250 million shares for its $50 billion. There
would consequently be 910 million shares outstanding, and we would own about
7% of the company. If the stock conversely sells for an average of $300 during
the five-year period, IBM will acquire only 167 million shares. That would leave

about 990 million shares outstanding after five years, of which we would own
6.5%.
If IBM were to earn, say, $20 billion in the fifth year, our share of those
earnings would be a full $100 million greater under the “disappointing” scenario
of a lower stock price than they would have been at the higher price. At some
later point our shares would be worth perhaps $11/2 billion more than if the
“high-price” repurchase scenario had taken place.
The logic is simple: If you are going to be a net buyer of stocks in the
future, either directly with your own money or indirectly (through your
ownership of a company that is repurchasing shares), you are hurt when stocks
rise. You benefit when stocks swoon. Emotions, however, too often complicate
the matter: Most people, including those who will be net buyers in the future,
take comfort in seeing stock prices advance. These shareholders resemble a
commuter who rejoices after the price of gas increases, simply because his tank
contains a day’s supply.
Charlie and I don’t expect to win many of you over to our way of thinking
—we’ve observed enough human behavior to know the futility of that—but we
do want you to be aware of our personal calculus. And here a confession is in
order: In my early days I, too, rejoiced when the market rose. Then I read
Chapter Eight of Ben Graham’s The Intelligent Investor, the chapter dealing with
how investors should view fluctuations in stock prices. Immediately the scales
fell from my eyes, and low prices became my friend. Picking up that book was
one of the luckiest moments in my life.
In the end, the success of our IBM investment will be determined primarily
by its future earnings. But an important secondary factor will be how many
shares the company purchases with the substantial sums it is likely to devote to
this activity. And if repurchases ever reduce the IBM shares outstanding to 63.9
million, I will abandon my famed frugality and give Berkshire employees a paid
holiday.
D. Stock Splits and Trading Activity43
We often are asked why Berkshire does not split its stock. The assumption
behind this question usually appears to be that a split would be a pro-shareholder
action. We disagree. Let me tell you why.
One of our goals is to have Berkshire Hathaway stock sell at a price
rationally related to its intrinsic business value. (But note “rationally related,”
not “identical”: if well-regarded companies are generally selling in the market at

large discounts from value, Berkshire might well be priced similarly.) The key to
a rational stock price is rational shareholders, both current and prospective.
If the holders of a company’s stock and/or the prospective buyers attracted
to it are prone to make irrational or emotion-based decisions, some pretty silly
stock prices are going to appear periodically. Manic-depressive personalities
produce manic-depressive valuations. Such aberrations may help us in buying
and selling the stocks of other companies. But we think it is in both your interest
and ours to minimize their occurrence in the market for Berkshire.
To obtain only high quality shareholders is no cinch. Mrs. Astor could
select her 400, but anyone can buy any stock. Entering members of a shareholder
“club” cannot be screened for intellectual capacity, emotional stability, moral
sensitivity or acceptable dress. Shareholder eugenics, therefore, might appear to
be a hopeless undertaking.
In large part, however, we feel that high quality ownership can be attracted
and maintained if we consistently communicate our business and ownership
philosophy—along with no other conflicting messages—and then let self
selection follow its course. For example, self selection will draw a far different
crowd to a musical event advertised as an opera than one advertised as a rock
concert—even though anyone can buy a ticket to either.
Through our policies and communications—our “advertisements”—we try
to attract investors who will understand our operations, attitudes and
expectations. (And, fully as important, we try to dissuade those who won’t.) We
want those who think of themselves as business owners and invest in companies
with the intention of staying a long time. And, we want those who keep their
eyes focused on business results, not market prices.
Investors possessing those characteristics are in a small minority, but we
have an exceptional collection of them. I believe well over 90%—probably over
95%—of our shares are held by those who were shareholders of Berkshire or
Blue Chip five years ago. And I would guess that over 95% of our shares are
held by investors for whom the holding is at least double the size of their next
largest. Among companies with at least several thousand public shareholders and
more than $1 billion of market value, we are almost certainly the leader in the
degree to which our shareholders think and act like owners. Upgrading a
shareholder group that possesses these characteristics is not easy.
Were we to split the stock or take other actions focusing on stock price
rather than business value, we would attract an entering class of buyers inferior
to the exiting class of sellers. At $1300, there are very few investors who can’t
afford a Berkshire share. Would a potential one-share purchaser be better off if
we split 100 for 1 so he could buy 100 shares? Those who think so and who

would buy the stock because of the split or in anticipation of one would
definitely downgrade the quality of our present shareholder group. (Could we
really improve our shareholder group by trading some of our present clear-
thinking members for impressionable new ones who, preferring paper to value,
feel wealthier with nine $10 bills than with one $100 bill?) People who buy for
non-value reasons are likely to sell for non-value reasons. Their presence in the
picture will accentuate erratic price swings unrelated to underlying business
developments.
We will try to avoid policies that attract buyers with a short-term focus on
our stock price and try to allow policies that attract informed long-term investors
focusing on business values. Just as you purchased your Berkshire shares in a
market populated by rational informed investors, you deserve a chance to sell—
should you ever want to—in the same kind of market. We will work to keep it in
existence.
One of the ironies of the stock market is the emphasis on activity. Brokers,
using terms such as “marketability” and “liquidity,” sing the praises of
companies with high share turnover (those who cannot fill your pocket will
confidently fill your ear). But investors should understand that what is good for
the croupier is not good for the customer. A hyperactive stock market is the
pickpocket of enterprise.
For example, consider a typical company earning, say, 12% on equity.
Assume a very high turnover rate in its shares of 100% per year. If a purchase
and sale of the stock trades at book value, the owners of our hypothetical
company will pay, in aggregate, 2% of the company’s net worth annually for the
privilege of transferring ownership. This activity does nothing for the earnings of
the business, and means that 1/6 of them are lost to the owners through the
“frictional” cost of transfer. (And this calculation does not count option trading,
which would increase frictional costs still further.)
All that makes for a rather expensive game of musical chairs. Can you
imagine the agonized cry that would arise if a governmental unit were to impose
a new 162⁄3% tax on earnings of corporations or investors? By market activity,
investors can impose upon themselves the equivalent of such a tax.
(We are aware of the pie-expanding argument that says that such activities
improve the rationality of the capital allocation process. We think that this
argument is specious and that, on balance, hyperactive equity markets subvert
rational capital allocation and act as pie shrinkers. Adam Smith felt that all
noncollusive acts in a free market were guided by an invisible hand that led an
economy to maximum progress; our view is that casino-type markets and hair-

trigger investment management act as an invisible foot that trips up and slows
down a forward-moving economy.)
E. Shareholder Strategies44
Late last year Berkshire’s stock price crossed $10,000. Several shareholders
have mentioned to me that the high price causes them problems: They like to
give shares away each year and find themselves impeded by the tax rule that
draws a distinction between annual gifts of $10,000 or under to a single
individual and those above $10,000. That is, those gifts no greater than $10,000
are completely tax-free; those above $10,000 require the donor to use up a
portion of his or her lifetime exemption from gift and estate taxes, or, if that
exemption has been exhausted, to pay gift taxes.
I can suggest three ways to address this problem. The first would be useful
to a married shareholder, who can give up to $20,000 annually to a single
recipient, as long as the donor files a gift tax return containing his or her
spouse’s written consent to gifts made during the year.
Secondly, a shareholder, married or not, can make a bargain sale. Imagine,
for example, that Berkshire is selling for $12,000 and that one wishes to make
only a $10,000 gift. In that case, sell the stock to the giftee for $2,000. (Caution:
You will be taxed on the amount, if any, by which the sales price to your giftee
exceeds your tax basis.)
Finally, you can establish a partnership with people to whom you are
making gifts, fund it with Berkshire shares, and simply give percentage interests
in the partnership away each year. These interests can be for any value that you
select. If the value is $10,000 or less, the gift will be tax-free.
We issue the customary warning: Consult with your own tax advisor before
taking action on any of the more esoteric methods of gift-making.
We hold to the view about stock splits that we set forth in the [preceding
essay]. Overall, we believe our owner-related policies—including the no-split
policy—have helped us assemble a body of shareholders that is the best
associated with any widely-held American corporation. Our shareholders think
and behave like rational long-term owners and view the business much as
Charlie and I do. Consequently, our stock consistently trades in a price range that
is sensibly related to intrinsic value.
Additionally, we believe that our shares turn over far less actively than do
the shares of any other widely-held company. The frictional costs of trading—
which act as a major “tax” on the owners of many companies—are virtually non-

existent at Berkshire. (The market-making skills of Jim Maguire, our New York
Stock Exchange specialist, definitely help to keep these costs low.) Obviously a
split would not change this situation dramatically. Nonetheless, there is no way
that our shareholder group would be upgraded by the new shareholders enticed
by a split. Instead we believe that modest degradation would occur.
F. Berkshire’s Recapitalization45
At the Annual Meeting you will be asked to approve a recapitalization of
Berkshire, creating two classes of stock. If the plan is adopted, our existing
common stock will be designated as Class A Common Stock and a new Class B
Common Stock will be authorized.
Each share of the “B” will have the rights of 1/30th of an “A” share with
these exceptions: First, a B share will have 1/200th of the vote of an A share
(rather than 1/30th of the vote). Second, the B will not be eligible to participate
in Berkshire’s shareholder-designated charitable contributions program.
When the recapitalization is complete, each share of A will become
convertible, at the holder’s option and at any time, into 30 shares of B. This
conversion privilege will not extend in the opposite direction. That is, holders of
B shares will not be able to convert them into A shares.
We expect to list the B shares on the New York Stock Exchange, where they
will trade alongside the A stock. To create the shareholder base necessary for a
listing—and to ensure a liquid market in the B stock—Berkshire expects to make
a public offering for cash of at least $100 million of new B shares. The offering
will be made only by means of a prospectus.
The market will ultimately determine the price of the B shares. Their price,
though, should be in the neighborhood of 1/30th of the price of the A shares.
Class A shareholders who wish to give gifts may find it convenient to
convert a share or two of their stock into Class B shares. Additionally, arbitrage-
related conversions will occur if demand for the B is strong enough to push its
price to slightly above 1/30th of the price of A.
However, because the Class A stock will entitle its holders to full voting
rights, these shares will be superior to the Class B shares and we would expect
most shareholders to remain holders of the Class A—which is precisely what the
Buffett and Munger families plan to do, except in those instances when we
ourselves might convert a few shares to facilitate gifts. The prospect that most
shareholders will stick to the A stock suggests that it will enjoy a somewhat
more liquid market than the B.

There are tradeoffs for Berkshire in this recapitalization. But they do not
arise from the proceeds of the offering—we will find constructive uses for the
money—nor in any degree from the price at which we will sell the B shares. As I
write this—with Berkshire stock at $36,000—Charlie and I do not believe it
undervalued. Therefore, the offering we propose will not diminish the per-share
intrinsic value of our existing stock. Let me also put our thoughts about
valuation more baldly: Berkshire is selling at a price at which Charlie and I
would not consider buying it.
What Berkshire will incur by way of the B stock are certain added costs,
including those involving the mechanics of handling a larger number of
shareholders. On the other hand, the stock should be a convenience for people
wishing to make gifts. And those of you who have hoped for a split have gained
a do-it-yourself method of bringing one about.
We are making this move, though, for other reasons—having to do with the
appearance of expense-laden unit trusts purporting to be low-priced “clones” of
Berkshire and sure to be aggressively marketed. The idea behind these vehicles
is not new: In recent years, a number of people have told me about their wish to
create an “all-Berkshire” investment fund to be sold at a low dollar price. But
until recently, the promoters of these investments heard out my objections and
backed off.
I did not discourage these people because I prefer large investors over
small. Were it possible, Charlie and I would love to turn $1,000 into $3,000 for
multitudes of people who would find that gain an important answer to their
immediate problems.
In order to quickly triple small stakes, however, we would have to just as
quickly turn our present market capitalization of $43 billion into $129 billion
(roughly the market cap of General Electric, America’s most highly valued
company). We can’t come close to doing that. The very best we hope for is—on
average—to double Berkshire’s per-share intrinsic value every five years, and
we may well fall far short of that goal.
In the end, Charlie and I do not care whether our shareholders own
Berkshire in large or small amounts. What we wish for are shareholders of any
size who are knowledgeable about our operations, share our objectives and long-
term perspective, and are aware of our limitations, most particularly those
imposed by our large capital base.
The unit trusts that have recently surfaced fly in the face of these goals.
They would be sold by brokers working for big commissions, would impose
other burdensome costs on their shareholders, and would be marketed en masse
to unsophisticated buyers, apt to be seduced by our past record and beguiled by

the publicity Berkshire and I have received in recent years. The sure outcome: a
multitude of investors destined to be disappointed.
Through our creation of the B stock—a low-denomination product far
superior 
to 
Berkshire-only 
trusts—we 
hope 
to 
make 
the 
clones
unmerchandisable.
But both present and prospective Berkshire shareholders should pay special
attention to one point: Though the per-share intrinsic value of our stock has
grown at an excellent rate during the past five years, its market price has grown
still faster. The stock, in other words, has outperformed the business.
That kind of market overperformance cannot persist indefinitely, neither for
Berkshire nor any other stock. Inevitably, there will be periods of
underperformance as well. The price volatility that results, though endemic to
public markets, is not to our liking. What we would prefer instead is to have the
market price of Berkshire precisely track its intrinsic value. Were the stock to do
that, every shareholder would benefit during his period of ownership in exact
proportion to the progress Berkshire itself made in the period.
Obviously, the market behavior of Berkshire’s stock will never conform to
this ideal. But we will come closer to this goal than we would otherwise if our
present and prospective shareholders are informed, business-oriented and not
exposed to high-commission salesmanship when making their investment
decisions. To that end, we are better off if we can blunt the merchandising efforts
of the unit trust—and that is the reason we are creating the B stock.
[W]e made two good-sized offerings through Salomon [during 1996], both
with interesting aspects. The first was our sale in May of 517,500 shares of Class
B Common, which generated net proceeds of $565 million. As I have told you
before, we made this sale in response to the threatened creation of unit trusts that
would have marketed themselves as Berkshire look-alikes. In the process, they
would have used our past, and definitely nonrepeatable, record to entice naive
small investors and would have charged these innocents high fees and
commissions.
I think it would have been quite easy for such trusts to have sold many
billions of dollars worth of units, and I also believe that early marketing
successes by these trusts would have led to the formation of others. (In the
securities business, whatever can be sold will be sold.) The trusts would have
meanwhile indiscriminately poured the proceeds of their offerings into a supply
of Berkshire shares that is fixed and limited. The likely result: a speculative
bubble in our stock. For at least a time, the price jump would have been self-

validating, in that it would have pulled new waves of naive and impressionable
investors into the trusts and set off still more buying of Berkshire shares.
Some Berkshire shareholders choosing to exit might have found that
outcome ideal, since they could have profited at the expense of the buyers
entering with false hopes. Continuing shareholders, however, would have
suffered once reality set in, for at that point Berkshire would have been burdened
with both hundreds of thousands of unhappy, indirect owners (trustholders, that
is) and a stained reputation.
Our issuance of the B shares not only arrested the sale of the trusts, but
provided a low-cost way for people to invest in Berkshire if they still wished to
after hearing the warnings we issued. To blunt the enthusiasm that brokers
normally have for pushing new issues—because that’s where the money is—we
arranged for our offering to carry a commission of only 1½%, the lowest payoff
that we have ever seen in common stock underwriting. Additionally, we made
the amount of the offering open-ended, thereby repelling the typical IPO buyer
who looks for a short-term price spurt arising from a combination of hype and
scarcity.
Overall, we tried to make sure that the B stock would be purchased only by
investors with a long-term perspective. Those efforts were generally successful:
Trading volume in the B shares immediately following the offering—a rough
index of “flipping”—was far below the norm for a new issue. In the end we
added about 40,000 shareholders, most of whom we believe both understand
what they own and share our time horizons.
Salomon could not have performed better in the handling of this unusual
transaction. Its investment bankers understood perfectly what we were trying to
achieve and tailored every aspect of the offering to meet these objectives. The
firm would have made far more money—perhaps ten times as much—if our
offering had been standard in its make-up. But the investment bankers involved
made no attempt to tweak the specifics in that direction. Instead they came up
with ideas that were counter to Salomon’s financial interest but that made it
much more certain Berkshire’s goals would be reached. Terry Fitzgerald
captained this effort, and we thank him for the job that he did.
Given that background, it won’t surprise you to learn that we again went to
Terry when we decided late in the year to sell an issue of Berkshire notes that
can be exchanged for a portion of the Salomon shares that we hold. In this
instance, once again, Salomon did an absolutely first-class job, selling $500
million principal amount of five-year notes for $447.1 million. Each $1,000 note
is exchangeable into 17.65 shares and is callable in three years at accreted value.
Counting the original issue discount and a 1% coupon, the securities will provide

a yield of 3% to maturity for holders who do not exchange them for Salomon
stock. But it seems quite likely that the notes will be exchanged before their
maturity. If that happens, our interest cost will be about 1.1% for the period prior
to exchange.
In recent years, it has been written that Charlie and I are unhappy about all
investment-banking fees. That’s dead wrong. We have paid a great many fees
over the last 30 years—beginning with the check we wrote to Charlie Heider
upon our purchase of National Indemnity in 1967—and we are delighted to
make payments that are commensurate with performance. In the case of the 1996
transactions at Salomon Brothers we more than got our money’s worth.
37 [Introductory essay, 1986.]
38 [2005; Letter dated August 5, 1988 sent to Berkshire shareholders and
reprinted 1988.]
39 [1988.]
40 [The following is from 1989:]
With more than a year behind him of trading Berkshire’s stock on the New
York Stock Exchange, our specialist, Jim Maguire of [HBI] continues his
outstanding performance. Before we listed, dealer spreads often were 3% or
more of market price. Jim has maintained the spread at 50 points or less, which
at current prices is well under 1%. Shareholders who buy or sell benefit
significantly from this reduction in transaction costs.
Because we are delighted by our experience with Jim, HBI and the NYSE, I
said as much in ads that have been run in a series placed by the NYSE. Normally
I shun testimonials, but I was pleased in this instance to publicly compliment the
Exchange.
41 [Divided by hash lines: 1984; 1984; 1999; 2011.]
42 [See the essay Economic versus Accounting Goodwill in Part VI.D.]
43 [1983.]
44 [1992.]
45 [Divided by hash lines: 1995; 1996.]

V. MERGERS AND ACQUISITIONS
Of all our activities at Berkshire, the most exhilarating for Charlie and me is
the acquisition of a business with excellent economic characteristics and a
management that we like, trust and admire. Such acquisitions are not easy to
make but we look for them constantly. In the search, we adopt the same attitude
one might find appropriate in looking for a spouse: It pays to be active,
interested, and open-minded, but it does not pay to be in a hurry.
In the past, I’ve observed that many acquisition-hungry managers were
apparently mesmerized by their childhood reading of the story about the frog-
kissing princess. Remembering her success, they pay dearly for the right to kiss
corporate toads, expecting wondrous transfigurations. Initially, disappointing
results only deepen their desire to round up new toads. (“Fanaticism,” said
[Santayana], “consists of redoubling your effort when you’ve forgotten your
aim.”) Ultimately, even the most optimistic manager must face reality. Standing
knee-deep in unresponsive toads, he then announces an enormous
“restructuring” charge. In this corporate equivalent of a Head Start program, the
CEO receives the education but the stockholders pay the tuition.
In my early days as a manager I, too, dated a few toads. They were cheap
dates—I’ve never been much of a sport—but my results matched those of
acquirers who courted higher-priced toads. I kissed and they croaked.
After several failures of this type, I finally remembered some useful advice
I once got from a golf pro (who, like all pros who have had anything to do with
my game, wishes to remain anonymous). Said the pro: “Practice doesn’t make
perfect; practice makes permanent.” And thereafter I revised my strategy and
tried to buy good businesses at fair prices rather than fair businesses at good
prices.46
A. Bad Motives and High Prices47
As our history indicates, we are comfortable both with total ownership of
businesses and with marketable securities representing small portions of
businesses. We continually look for ways to employ large sums in each area.
(But we try to avoid small commitments—“If something’s not worth doing at all,
it’s not worth doing well.”) Indeed, the liquidity requirements of our insurance
businesses mandate major investments in marketable securities.

Our acquisition decisions will be aimed at maximizing real economic
benefits, not at maximizing either managerial domain or reported numbers for
accounting purposes. (In the long run, managements stressing accounting
appearance over economic substance usually achieve little of either.)
Regardless of the impact upon immediately reportable earnings, we would
rather buy 10% of Wonderful Business T at X per share than 100% of T at 2X
per share. Most corporate managers prefer just the reverse, and have no shortage
of stated rationales for their behavior.
However, we suspect three motivations—usually unspoken—to be, singly
or in combination, the important ones in most high-premium takeovers:
(1) Leaders, business or otherwise, seldom are deficient in animal
spirits and often relish increased activity and challenge. At Berkshire,
the corporate pulse never beats faster than when an acquisition is in
prospect.
(2) Most organizations, business or otherwise, measure themselves, are
measured by others, and compensate their managers far more by the
yardstick of size than by any other yardstick. (Ask a Fortune 500
manager where his corporation stands on that famous list and,
invariably, the number responded will be from the list ranked by size
of sales; he may well not even know where his corporation places on
the list Fortune just as faithfully compiles ranking the same 500
corporations by profitability.)
(3) 
Many 
managements 
apparently 
were 
overexposed 
in
impressionable childhood years to the story in which the imprisoned
handsome prince is released from a toad’s body by a kiss from a
beautiful princess. Consequently, they are certain their managerial kiss
will do wonders for the profitability of Company T(arget).
Such optimism is essential. Absent that rosy view, why else should the
shareholders of Company A(cquisitor) want to own an interest in T at the 2X
takeover cost rather than at the X market price they would pay if they made
direct purchases on their own?
In other words, investors can always buy toads at the going price for toads.
If investors instead bankroll princesses who wish to pay double for the right to
kiss the toad, those kisses had better pack some real dynamite. We’ve observed
many kisses but very few miracles. Nevertheless, many managerial princesses
remain serenely confident about the future potency of their kisses—even after
their corporate backyards are knee-deep in unresponsive toads. In fairness, we
should acknowledge that some acquisition records have been dazzling. Two
major categories stand out.

The first involves companies that, through design or accident, have
purchased only businesses that are particularly well adapted to an inflationary
environment. Such favored business must have two characteristics: (1) an ability
to increase prices rather easily (even when product demand is flat and capacity is
not fully utilized) without fear of significant loss of either market share or unit
volume, and (2) an ability to accommodate large dollar volume increases in
business (often produced more by inflation than by real growth) with only minor
additional investment of capital. Managers of ordinary ability, focusing solely on
acquisition possibilities meeting these tests, have achieved excellent results in
recent decades. However, very few enterprises possess both characteristics, and
competition to buy those that do has now become fierce to the point of being
self-defeating.
The second category involves the managerial superstars—men who can
recognize that rare prince who is disguised as a toad, and who have managerial
abilities that enable them to peel away the disguise. We salute such managers as
Ben Heineman at Northwest Industries, Henry Singleton at Teledyne, Erwin
Zaban at National Service Industries, and especially Tom Murphy at Capital
Cities Communications (a real managerial “twofer,” whose acquisition efforts
have been properly focused in Category 1 and whose operating talents also make
him a leader of Category 2). From both direct and vicarious experience, we
recognize the difficulty and rarity of these executives’ achievements. (So do
they; these champs have made very few deals in recent years, and often have
found repurchase of their own shares to be the most sensible employment of
corporate capital.)
Your Chairman, unfortunately, does not qualify for Category 2. And,
despite a reasonably good understanding of the economic factors compelling
concentration in Category 1, our actual acquisition activity in that category has
been sporadic and inadequate. Our preaching was better than our performance.
(We neglected the Noah principle: predicting rain doesn’t count, building arks
does.)
We have tried occasionally to buy toads at bargain prices with results that
have been chronicled in past reports. Clearly our kisses fell flat. We have done
well with a couple of princes—but they were princes when purchased. At least
our kisses didn’t turn them into toads. And, finally, we have occasionally been
quite successful in purchasing fractional interests in easily-identifiable princes at
toad-like prices.
Berkshire and Blue Chip are considering merger in 1983. If it takes place, it

will involve an exchange of stock based upon an identical valuation method
applied to both companies. The one other significant issuance of shares by
Berkshire or its affiliated companies that occurred during present management’s
tenure was in the 1978 merger of Berkshire with Diversified Retailing Company.
Our share issuances follow a simple basic rule: we will not issue shares
unless we receive as much intrinsic business value as we give. Such a policy
might seem axiomatic. Why, you might ask, would anyone issue dollar bills in
exchange for fifty-cent pieces? Unfortunately, many corporate managers have
been willing to do just that.
The first choice of these managers in making acquisitions may be to use
cash or debt. But frequently the CEO’s cravings outpace cash and credit
resources (certainly mine always have). Frequently, also, these cravings occur
when his own stock is selling far below intrinsic business value. This state of
affairs produces a moment of truth. At that point, as Yogi Berra has said, “You
can observe a lot just by watching.” For shareholders then will find which
objective the management truly prefers—expansion of domain or maintenance
of owners’ wealth.
The need to choose between these objectives occurs for some simple
reasons. Companies often sell in the stock market below their intrinsic business
value. But when a company wishes to sell out completely, in a negotiated
transaction, it inevitably wants to—and usually can—receive full business value
in whatever kind of currency the value is to be delivered. If cash is to be used in
payment, the seller’s calculation of value received couldn’t be easier. If stock of
the buyer is to be the currency, the seller’s calculation is still relatively easy: just
figure the market value in cash of what is to be received in stock.
Meanwhile, the buyer wishing to use his own stock as currency for the
purchase has no problems if the stock is selling in the market at full intrinsic
value.
But suppose it is selling at only half intrinsic value. In that case, the buyer
is faced with the unhappy prospect of using a substantially undervalued currency
to make its purchase.
Ironically, were the buyer to instead be a seller of its entire business, it too
could negotiate for, and probably get, full intrinsic business value. But when the
buyer makes a partial sale of itself—and that is what the issuance of shares to
make an acquisition amounts to—it can customarily get no higher value set on
its shares than the market chooses to grant it.
The acquirer who nevertheless barges ahead ends up using an undervalued
(market value) currency to pay for a fully valued (negotiated value) property. In
effect, the acquirer must give up $2 of value to receive $1 of value. Under such

circumstances, a marvelous business purchased at a fair sales price becomes a
terrible buy. For gold valued as gold cannot be purchased intelligently through
the utilization of gold—or even silver—valued as lead.
If, however, the thirst for size and action is strong enough, the acquirer’s
manager will find ample rationalizations for such a value-destroying issuance of
stock. Friendly investment bankers will reassure him as to the soundness of his
actions. (Don’t ask the barber whether you need a haircut.)
A few favorite rationalizations employed by stock-issuing managements
follow:
(a) “The company we’re buying is going to be worth a lot more in the
future.” (Presumably so is the interest in the old business that is being
traded away; future prospects are implicit in the business valuation
process. If 2X is issued for X, the imbalance still exists when both
parts double in business value.)
(b) “We have to grow.” (Who, it might be asked, is the “we”? For
present shareholders, the reality is that all existing businesses shrink
when shares are issued. Were Berkshire to issue shares tomorrow for
an acquisition, Berkshire would own everything that it now owns plus
the new business, but your interest in such hard-to-match businesses as
See’s Candy Shops, National Indemnity, etc. would automatically be
reduced. If (1) your family owns a 120-acre farm and (2) you invite a
neighbor with 60 acres of comparable land to merge his farm into an
equal partnership—with you to be managing partner, then (3) your
managerial domain will have grown to 180 acres but you will have
permanently shrunk by 25% your family’s ownership interest in both
acreage and crops. Managers who want to expand their domain at the
expense of owners might better consider a career in government.)
(c) “Our stock is undervalued and we’ve minimized its use in this deal
—but we need to give the selling shareholder 51% in stock and 49% in
cash so that certain of those shareholders can get the tax-free exchange
they want.” (This argument acknowledges that it is beneficial to the
acquirer to hold down the issuance of shares, and we like that. But if it
hurts old owners to utilize shares on a 100% basis, it very likely hurts
on a 51% basis. After all, a man is not charmed if a spaniel defaces his
lawn, just because it’s a spaniel and not a St. Bernard. And the wishes
of sellers can’t be the determinant of the best interests of the buyer—
what would happen if, heaven forbid, the seller insisted that as a
condition of merger the CEO of the acquirer be replaced?)
There are three ways to avoid destruction of value for old owners when

shares are issued for acquisitions. One is to have a true business-value-for-
business-value merger, such as the Berkshire-Blue Chip combination is intended
to be. Such a merger attempts to be fair to shareholders of both parties, with each
receiving just as much as it gives in terms of intrinsic business value. The Dart
Industries-Kraft and Nabisco-Standard Brands mergers appeared to be of this
type, but they are the exceptions. It’s not that acquirers wish to avoid such deals;
it’s just that they are very hard to do.
The second route presents itself when the acquirer’s stock sells at or above
its intrinsic business value. In that situation, the use of stock as currency actually
may enhance the wealth of the acquiring company’s owners. Many mergers were
accomplished on this basis in the 1965–69 period. The results were the converse
of most of the activity since 1970: the shareholders of the acquired company
received very inflated currency (frequently pumped up by dubious accounting
and promotional techniques) and were the losers of wealth through such
transactions.
During recent years the second solution has been available to very few large
companies. The exceptions have primarily been those companies in glamorous
or promotional businesses to which the market temporarily attaches valuations at
or above intrinsic business valuation.
The third solution is for the acquirer to go ahead with the acquisition, but
then subsequently repurchase a quantity of shares equal to the number issued in
the merger. In this manner, what originally was a stock-for-stock merger can be
converted, effectively, into a cash-for-stock acquisition. Repurchases of this kind
are damage-repair moves. Regular readers will correctly guess that we much
prefer repurchases that directly enhance the wealth of owners instead of
repurchases that merely repair previous damage. Scoring touchdowns is more
exhilarating than recovering one’s fumbles. But, when a fumble has occurred,
recovery is important and we heartily recommend damage-repair repurchases
that turn a bad stock deal into a fair cash deal.
The language utilized in mergers tends to confuse the issues and encourage
irrational actions by managers. For example, “dilution” is usually carefully
calculated on a pro forma basis for both book value and current earnings per
share. Particular emphasis is given to the latter item. When that calculation is
negative (dilutive) from the acquiring company’s standpoint, a justifying
explanation will be made (internally, if not elsewhere) that the lines will cross
favorably at some point in the future. (While deals often fail in practice, they
never fail in projections—if the CEO is visibly panting over a prospective
acquisition, subordinates and consultants will supply the requisite projections to
rationalize any price.) Should the calculation produce numbers that are

immediately positive—that is, anti-dilutive—for the acquirer, no comment is
thought to be necessary.
The attention given this form of dilution is overdone: current earnings per
share (or even earnings per share of the next few years) are an important variable
in most business valuations, but far from all-powerful.
There have been plenty of mergers, non-dilutive in this limited sense, that
were instantly value-destroying for the acquirer. And some mergers that have
diluted current and near-term earnings per share have in fact been value-
enhancing. What really counts is whether a merger is dilutive or anti-dilutive in
terms of intrinsic business value (a judgment involving consideration of many
variables). We believe calculation of dilution from this viewpoint to be all-
important (and too seldom made).
A second language problem relates to the equation of exchange. If
Company A announces that it will issue shares to merge with Company B, the
process is customarily described as “Company A to Acquire Company B”, or “B
Sells to A.” Clearer thinking about the matter would result if a more awkward
but more accurate description were used: “Part of A sold to acquire B”, or
“Owners of B to receive part of A in exchange for their properties”. In a trade,
what you are giving is just as important as what you are getting. This remains
true even when the final tally on what is being given is delayed. Subsequent
sales of common stock or convertible issues, either to complete the financing for
a deal or to restore balance sheet strength, must be fully counted in evaluating
the fundamental mathematics of the original acquisition. (If corporate pregnancy
is going to be the consequence of corporate mating, the time to face that fact is
before the moment of ecstasy.)
Managers and directors might sharpen their thinking by asking themselves
if they would sell 100% of their business on the same basis they are being asked
to sell part of it. And if it isn’t smart to sell all on such a basis, they should ask
themselves why it is smart to sell a portion. A cumulation of small managerial
stupidities will produce a major stupidity—not a major triumph. (Las Vegas has
been built upon the wealth transfers that occur when people engage in
seemingly-small disadvantageous capital transactions.)
The “giving versus getting” factor can most easily be calculated in the case
of registered investment companies. Assume Investment Company X, selling at
50% of asset value, wishes to merge with Investment Company Y. Assume, also,
that Company X therefore decides to issue shares equal in market value to 100%
of Y’s asset value.
Such a share exchange would leave X trading $2 of its previous intrinsic
value for $1 of Y’s intrinsic value. Protests would promptly come forth from

both X’s shareholders and the SEC, which rules on the fairness of registered
investment company mergers. Such a transaction simply would not be allowed.
In the case of manufacturing, service, financial companies, etc., values are
not normally as precisely calculable as in the case of investment companies. But
we have seen mergers in these industries that just as dramatically destroyed
value for the owners of the acquiring company as was the case in the
hypothetical illustration above. This destruction could not happen if management
and directors would assess the fairness of any transaction by using the same
yardstick in the measurement of both businesses.
Finally, a word should be said about the “double whammy” effect upon
owners of the acquiring company when value-diluting stock issuances occur.
Under such circumstances, the first blow is the loss of intrinsic business value
that occurs through the merger itself. The second is the downward revision in
market valuation that, quite rationally, is given to that now-diluted business
value. For current and prospective owners understandably will not pay as much
for assets lodged in the hands of a management that has a record of wealth-
destruction through unintelligent share issuances as they will pay for assets
entrusted to a management with precisely equal operating talents, but a known
distaste for anti-owner actions. Once management shows itself insensitive to the
interests of owners, shareholders will suffer a long time from the price/value
ratio afforded their stock (relative to other stocks), no matter what assurances
management gives that the value-diluting action taken was a one-of-a-kind
event.
Those assurances are treated by the market much as one-bug-in-the-salad
explanations are treated at restaurants. Such explanations, even when
accompanied by a new waiter, do not eliminate a drop in the demand (and hence
market value) for salads, both on the part of the offended customer and his
neighbors pondering what to order. Other things being equal, the highest stock
market prices relative to intrinsic business value are given to companies whose
managers have demonstrated their unwillingness to issue shares at any time on
terms unfavorable to the owners of the business.
I’ve mentioned that we strongly prefer to use cash rather than Berkshire
stock in acquisitions. A study of the record will tell you why: If you aggregate all
of our stock-only mergers (excluding those we did with two affiliated
companies, Diversified Retailing and Blue Chip Stamps), you will find that our
shareholders are slightly worse off than they would have been had I not done the
transactions. Though it hurts me to say it, when I’ve issued stock, I’ve cost you

money.
Be clear about one thing: This cost has not occurred because we were
misled in any way by sellers or because they thereafter failed to manage with
diligence and skill. On the contrary, the sellers were completely candid when we
were negotiating our deals and have been energetic and effective ever since.
Instead, our problem has been that we own a truly marvelous collection of
businesses, which means that trading away a portion of them for something new
almost never makes sense. When we issue shares in a merger, we reduce your
ownership in all of our businesses—partly-owned companies such as Coca-Cola,
Gillette and American Express, and all of our terrific operating companies as
well. An example from sports will illustrate the difficulty we face: For a baseball
team, acquiring a player who can be expected to bat .350 is almost always a
wonderful event—except when the team must trade a .380 hitter to make the
deal.
Because our roster is filled with .380 hitters, we have tried to pay cash for
acquisitions, and here our record has been far better. Starting with National
Indemnity in 1967, and continuing with, among others, See’s, Buffalo News,
Scott Fetzer and GEICO, we have acquired—for cash—a number of large
businesses that have performed incredibly well since we bought them. These
acquisitions have delivered Berkshire tremendous value—indeed, far more than I
anticipated when we made our purchases.
We believe that it is almost impossible for us to “trade up” from our present
businesses and managements. Our situation is the opposite of Camelot’s
Mordred, of whom Guenevere commented, “The one thing I can say for him is
that he is bound to marry well. Everybody is above him.” Marrying well is
extremely difficult for Berkshire.
[I]n contemplating business mergers and acquisitions, many managers tend
to focus on whether the transaction is immediately dilutive or anti-dilutive to
earnings per share (or, at financial institutions, to per-share book value). An
emphasis of this sort carries great dangers. [I]magine that a 25-year-old first-year
MBA student is considering merging his future economic interests with those of
a 25-year-old day laborer. The MBA student, a non-earner, would find that a
“share-for-share” merger of his equity interest in himself with that of the day
laborer would enhance his near-term earnings (in a big way!). But what could be
sillier for the student than a deal of this kind?
In corporate transactions, it’s equally silly for the would-be purchaser to
focus on current earnings when the prospective acquiree has either different

prospects, a different mix of operating and non-operating assets, or a different
capital structure. At Berkshire, we have rejected many merger and purchase
opportunities that would have boosted current and near-term earnings but that
would have reduced per-share intrinsic value. Our approach, rather, has been to
follow Wayne Gretzky’s advice: “Go to where the puck is going to be, not to
where it is.” As a result, our shareholders are now many billions of dollars richer
than they would have been if we had used the standard catechism.
The sad fact is that most major acquisitions display an egregious imbalance:
They are a bonanza for the shareholders of the acquiree; they increase the
income and status of the acquirer’s management; and they are a honey pot for
the investment bankers and other professionals on both sides. But, alas, they
usually reduce the wealth of the acquirer’s shareholders, often to a substantial
extent. That happens because the acquirer typically gives up more intrinsic value
than it receives. Do that enough, says John Medlin, the retired head of Wachovia
Corp., and “you are running a chain letter in reverse.”
Over time, the skill with which a company’s managers allocate capital has
an enormous impact on the enterprise’s value. Almost by definition, a really
good business generates far more money (at least after its early years) than it can
use internally. The company could, of course, distribute the money to
shareholders by way of dividends or share repurchases. But often the CEO asks a
strategic planning staff, consultants or investment bankers whether an
acquisition or two might make sense. That’s like asking your interior decorator
whether you need a $50,000 rug.
The acquisition problem is often compounded by a biological bias: Many
CEOs attain their positions in part because they possess an abundance of animal
spirits and ego. If an executive is heavily endowed with these qualities—which,
it should be acknowledged, sometimes have their advantages—they won’t
disappear when he reaches the top. When such a CEO is encouraged by his
advisors to make deals, he responds much as would a teenage boy who is
encouraged by his father to have a normal sex life. It’s not a push he needs.
Some years back, a CEO friend of mine—in jest, it must be said—
unintentionally described the pathology of many big deals. This friend, who ran
a property-casualty insurer, was explaining to his directors why he wanted to
acquire a certain life insurance company. After droning rather unpersuasively
through the economics and strategic rationale for the acquisition, he abruptly
abandoned the script. With an impish look, he simply said: “Aw, fellas, all the
other kids have one.”
At Berkshire, our managers will continue to earn extraordinary returns from
what appear to be ordinary businesses. As a first step, these managers will look

for ways to deploy their earnings advantageously in their businesses. What’s left,
they will send to Charlie and me. We then will try to use those funds in ways that
build per-share intrinsic value. Our goal will be to acquire either part or all of
businesses that we believe we understand, that have good, sustainable underlying
economics, and that are run by managers whom we like, admire and trust.
B. Sensible Share Repurchases Versus Greenmail48
Our endorsement of repurchases is limited to those dictated by price/value
relationships and does not extend to the “green-mail” repurchase—a practice we
find odious and repugnant. In these transactions, two parties achieve their
personal ends by exploitation of an innocent and unconsulted third party. The
players are: (1) the “shareholder” extortionist who, even before the ink on his
stock certificate dries, delivers his “your-money-or-your-life” message to
managers; (2) the corporate insiders who quickly seek peace at any price—as
long as the price is paid by someone else; and (3) the shareholders whose money
is used by (2) to make (1) go away. As the dust settles, the mugging, transient
shareholder gives his speech on “free enterprise,” the muggee management gives
its speech on “the best interests of the company,” and the innocent shareholder
standing by mutely funds the payoff.
C. Leveraged Buyouts49
If successful corporate business acquisition is so hard, how does one
explain the widespread recent success of most of the leveraged-buy-out (“LBO”)
operators who have purchased corporations? A huge part of the answer comes
from income-tax effects and other simple effects. When, in a typical LBO, the
typical mostly equity corporate capitalization was replaced by 90% debt plus a
new 10%-of-capitalization common stock position:
(1) the combined market value of all the new common stock plus all
the new debt became much higher than the previous market value of
all the older common stock, because the existing stream of pre-tax
earnings was no longer shared with corporate income tax collectors
who, in many cases, had previously received more cash each year than
shareholders; and
(2) even after the value-enhancing effect of the corporate tax reduction
was shared with former shareholders by paying them extra-high prices
to leave, a retained residue of value-enhancing tax effect made the new

common stock (which now became much like a speculative warrant
with good terms) worth considerably more than cost as the ink dried
on acquisition papers; and
(3) the new “owners” then resorted to strategies, difficult neither to
conceive nor implement, including the following:
(a) they eliminated many of the easily removable costs (largely
personnel costs) and sub-par segments which in some mix (i)
bedevil successful corporations (including ours) with sloth and
folly and (ii) create their humane grace and, through present
sacrifice, good long-term prospects, justifying sacrifice endured;
and
(b) they sold off a few operations at super-high prices, sometimes
exercising the easiest microeconomic insight by selling to a direct
competitor and sometimes selling to a surprisingly easy-to-find
non-competitive corporate buyer, not owned by its managers,
willing to pay almost as high a price as a competitor would; and
(4) the new “owners” then profited, in due course, not only from the
tax effect and other simple reshuffling activities described above, but
also from the wonderful upside effects of extreme financial leverage
during a long business boom accompanied by a rising stock market.
Whether the country wants a large number (or even any) of its large
corporations to have extremely leveraged capitalizations, except through
occasional adversity, presents interesting social questions. Is one social function
of corporations to be financially strong so that they act as shock absorbers,
protecting dependent employees, suppliers and customers from part of the
volatility implicit in capitalism? Was Ben Franklin right when he included the
following folk wisdom in Poor Richard’s Almanac: “It is hard for an empty sack
to stand upright.” Is a weak corporation, borrowed to the hilt, the social
equivalent of a bridge with an inadequate reserve of structural strength?
Granting that leveraged buy outs have some favorable effects (as well as
unfavorable effects) on long term efficiency, how many thousands of able people
do we wish to attract into promotional corporate recapitalization activity which
(1) reduces corporate income taxes, (2) often tests the limits of antitrust law, and
(3) focuses business attention on short-term cash generation to pay down
oppressive levels of debt? Finally, as Columbia Law School’s Professor Lou
Lowenstein puts it (more or less): “Do we really want entire corporate
businesses, as important social institutions, continuously traded like pork belly
contracts?”
However the social questions are answered, three aspects of the present

situation are clear. First, the corporate tax effect is so large in LBO transactions
that easy success in such transactions does not imply that success is easy in
ordinary corporate acquisitions. Second, the hordes of leveraged-buy-out
operators now with us raise the general level of acquisition prices to the
detriment of other would-be acquirers, including Wesco, which are not willing to
maximize tax benefits through maximized borrowing. And, third, the LBO
operator will not go away so long as present permissive laws last. The operators
have a real advantage under such laws, not just a fig leaf aiding promotion. Even
though failure and disgrace will reduce their number, and prices paid in
leveraged-buy-out transactions will fall, the capitalized value of reducing the
corporate income tax will remain. Therefore, plenty of rational incentive will
remain for transactions. The LBO genie will encounter reverses, but he is not
going back in the bottle unless ordered to do so by new laws.
It should also be noted that the LBO operators’ incentives to bid high do not
end with real advantages derived from tax law and willingness to reshuffle
businesses with much speed and few scruples. Additional incentives for high
bids come from typical structures in which general partners of LBO partnerships
risk little of their own money (often less than none after fees are taken into
account), yet share significantly in gains. Such arrangements are similar to the
system of the race track tout. And who has ever seen a tout who didn’t want his
backer to make a lot of bets?
To Wesco, as a non-LBO operator, the good-corporate-acquisition game
was always tough. And that game in each recent year has become more like
fishing for muskies at Leech Lake, in Minnesota, where the writer’s earliest
business partner, Ed Hoskins, had the following conversation with his Indian
guide:
“Are any muskies caught in this lake?”
“More muskies are caught in this lake than in any other lake in Minnesota.
This lake is famous for muskies.”
“How long have you been fishing here?”
“19 years.”
“And how many muskies have you caught?”
“None.”
When a management has our point of view, infrequency of business
acquisition may safely be predicted. Whether this happens, as we like to believe,
because the game is hard for almost everyone, or merely because the game is
hard for us, the result for Wesco shareholders is the same: less worthwhile
activity than we all would like. But there may be one consolation: A series of
big, incorrectable acquisition troubles, with no meaningful salvage, is seldom

caused by people who think the acquisition game is like fishing for muskies at
Leech Lake.
D. Sound Acquisition Policies50
It may seem strange that we exult over a year in which we made three
acquisitions, given that we have regularly used these pages to question the
acquisition activities of most managers. Rest assured, Charlie and I haven’t lost
our skepticism: We believe most deals do damage to the shareholders of the
acquiring company. Too often, the words from HMS Pinafore apply: “Things are
seldom what they seem, skim milk masquerades as cream.” Specifically, sellers
and their representatives invariably present financial projections having more
entertainment value than educational value. In the production of rosy scenarios,
Wall Street can hold its own against Washington.
In any case, why potential buyers even look at projections prepared by
sellers baffles me. Charlie and I never give them a glance, but instead keep in
mind the story of the man with an ailing horse. Visiting the vet, he said: “Can
you help me? Sometimes my horse walks just fine and sometimes he limps.” The
vet’s reply was pointed: “No problem—when he’s walking fine, sell him.” In the
world of mergers and acquisitions, that horse would be peddled as Secretariat.
At Berkshire, we have all the difficulties in perceiving the future that other
acquisition-minded companies do. Like [them] also, we face the inherent
problem that the seller of a business practically always knows far more about it
than the buyer and also picks the time of sale—a time when the business is likely
to be walking “just fine.”
Even so, we do have a few advantages, perhaps the greatest being that we
don’t have a strategic plan. Thus we feel no need to proceed in an ordained
direction (a course leading almost invariably to silly purchase prices) but can
instead simply decide what makes sense for our owners. In doing that, we
always mentally compare any move we are contemplating with dozens of other
opportunities open to us, including the purchase of small pieces of the best
businesses in the world via the stock market. Our practice of making this
comparison—acquisitions against passive investments—is a discipline that
managers focused simply on expansion seldom use.
Talking to Time magazine a few years back, Peter Drucker got to the heart
of things: “I will tell you a secret: Dealmaking beats working. Dealmaking is
exciting and fun, and working is grubby. Running anything is primarily an
enormous amount of grubby detail work . . . dealmaking is romantic, sexy.

That’s why you have deals that make no sense.”
In making acquisitions, we have a further advantage: As payment, we can
offer sellers a stock backed by an extraordinary collection of outstanding
businesses. An individual or a family wishing to dispose of a single fine
business, but also wishing to defer personal taxes indefinitely, is apt to find
Berkshire stock a particularly comfortable holding. I believe, in fact, that this
calculus played an important part in the two acquisitions for which we paid
shares in 1995.
Beyond that, sellers sometimes care about placing their companies in a
corporate home that will both endure and provide pleasant, productive working
conditions for their managers. Here again, Berkshire offers something special.
Our managers operate with extraordinary autonomy. Additionally, our ownership
structure enables sellers to know that when I say we are buying to keep, the
promise means something. For our part, we like dealing with owners who care
what happens to their companies and people. A buyer is likely to find fewer
unpleasant surprises dealing with that type of seller than with one simply
auctioning off his business.
In addition to the foregoing being an explanation of our acquisition style, it
is, of course, a not-so-subtle sales pitch. If you own or represent a business
earning $[75] million or more before tax, and it fits the criteria [set forth below],
just give me a call. Our discussion will be confidential. And if you aren’t
interested now, file our proposition in the back of your mind: We are never going
to lose our appetite for buying companies with good economics and excellent
management.
Concluding this little dissertation on acquisitions, I can’t resist repeating a
tale told me last year by a corporate executive. The business he grew up in was a
fine one, with a long-time record of leadership in its industry. Its main product,
however, was distressingly glamorless. So several decades ago, the company
hired a management consultant who—naturally—advised diversification, the
then-current fad. (“Focus” was not yet in style.) Before long, the company
acquired a number of businesses, each after the consulting firm had gone
through a long—and expensive—acquisition study. And the outcome? Said the
executive sadly, “When we started, we were getting 100% of our earnings from
the original business. After ten years, we were getting 150%.”
It’s discouraging to note that though we have on four occasions made major
purchases of companies whose sellers were represented by prominent investment
banks, we were in only one of these instances contacted by the investment bank.

In the other three cases, I myself or a friend initiated the transaction at some
point after the investment bank had solicited its own list of prospects. We would
love to see an intermediary earn its fee by thinking of us—and therefore repeat
here what we’re looking for:
(1) Large purchases,
(2) Demonstrated consistent earning power (future projections are of
no interest to us, nor are “turnaround” situations),
(3) Businesses earning good returns on equity while employing little or
no debt,
(4) Management in place (we can’t supply it),
(5) Simple businesses (if there’s lots of technology, we won’t
understand it),
(6) An offering price (we don’t want to waste our time or that of the
seller by talking, even preliminarily, about a transaction when price is
unknown).
We will not engage in unfriendly takeovers. We can promise complete
confidentiality and a very fast answer—customarily within five minutes—as to
whether we’re interested. We prefer to buy for cash, but will consider issuing
stock when we receive as much in intrinsic business value as we give.
Our favorite form of purchase is one [in which] the company’s owner-
managers wish to generate significant amounts of cash, sometimes for
themselves, but often for their families or inactive shareholders. At the same
time, these managers wish to remain significant owners who continue to run
their companies just as they have in the past. We think we offer a particularly
good fit for owners with such objectives, and we invite potential sellers to check
us out by contacting people with whom we have done business in the past.
Charlie and I frequently get approached about acquisitions that don’t come
close to meeting our tests: We’ve found that if you advertise an interest in
buying collies, a lot of people will call hoping to sell you their cocker spaniels. A
line from a country song expresses our feeling about new ventures, turnarounds,
or auction-like sales: “When the phone don’t ring, you’ll know it’s me.”51
E. On Selling One’s Business52
Most business owners spend the better part of their lifetimes building their
businesses. By experience built upon endless repetition, they sharpen their skills
in merchandising, purchasing, personnel selection, etc. It’s a learning process,
and mistakes made in one year often contribute to competence and success in

succeeding years.
In contrast, owner-managers sell their business only once—frequently in an
emotionally-charged atmosphere with a multitude of pressures coming from
different directions. Often, much of the pressure comes from brokers whose
compensation is contingent upon consummation of a sale, regardless of its
consequences for both buyer and seller. The fact that the decision is so
important, both financially and personally, to the owner can make the process
more, rather than less, prone to error. And, mistakes made in the once-in-a-
lifetime sale of a business are not reversible.
Price is very important, but often is not the most critical aspect of the sale.
You and your family have an extraordinary business—one of a kind in your field
—and any buyer is going to recognize that. It’s also a business that is going to
get more valuable as the years go by. So if you decide not to sell now, you are
very likely to realize more money later on. With that knowledge you can deal
from strength and take the time required to select the buyer you want.
If you should decide to sell, I think Berkshire Hathaway offers some
advantages that most other buyers do not. Practically all of these buyers will fall
into one of two categories:
(1) A company located elsewhere but operating in your business or in a
business somewhat akin to yours. Such a buyer—no matter what promises are
made—will usually have managers who feel they know how to run your
business operations and, sooner or later, will want to apply some hands-on
“help.” If the acquiring company is much larger, it often will have squads of
managers, recruited over the years in part by promises that they will get to run
future acquisitions. They will have their own way of doing things and, even
though your business record undoubtedly will be far better than theirs, human
nature will at some point cause them to believe that their methods of operating
are superior. You and your family probably have friends who have sold their
businesses to larger companies, and I suspect that their experiences will confirm
the tendency of parent companies to take over the running of their subsidiaries,
particularly when the parent knows the industry, or thinks it does.
(2) A financial maneuverer, invariably operating with large amounts of
borrowed money, who plans to resell either to the public or to another
corporation as soon as the time is favorable. Frequently, this buyer’s major
contribution will be to change accounting methods so that earnings can be
presented in the most favorable light just prior to his bailing out. [T]his sort of
transaction is becoming much more frequent because of a rising stock market
and the great supply of funds available for such transactions.
If the sole motive of the present owners is to cash their chips and put the

business behind them—and plenty of sellers fall in this category—either type of
buyer that I’ve just described is satisfactory. But if the sellers’ business
represents the creative work of a lifetime and forms an integral part of their
personality and sense of being, buyers of either type have serious flaws.
Berkshire is another kind of buyer—a rather unusual one. We buy to keep,
but we don’t have, and don’t expect to have, operating people in our parent
organization. All of the businesses we own are run autonomously to an
extraordinary degree. In most cases, the managers of important businesses we
have owned for many years have not been to Omaha or even met each other.
When we buy a business, the sellers go on running it just as they did before the
sale; we adapt to their methods rather than vice versa.
We have no one—family, recently recruited MBAs, etc.—to whom we have
promised a chance to run businesses we have bought from owner-managers. And
we won’t have.
You know of some of our past purchases. I’m enclosing a list of everyone
from whom we have ever bought a business, and I invite you to check with them
as to our performance versus our promises. You should be particularly interested
in checking with the few whose businesses did not do well in order to ascertain
how we behaved under difficult conditions.
Any buyer will tell you that he needs you personally—and if he has any
brains, he most certainly does need you. But a great many buyers, for the reasons
mentioned above, don’t match their subsequent actions to their earlier words. We
will behave exactly as promised, both because we have so promised, and
because we need to in order to achieve the best business results.
This need explains why we would want the operating members of your
family to retain a 20% interest in the business. We need 80% to consolidate
earnings for tax purposes, which is a step important to us. It is equally important
to us that the family members who run the business remain as owners. Very
simply, we would not want to buy unless we felt key members of present
management would stay on as our partners. Contracts cannot guarantee your
continued interest; we would simply rely on your word.
The areas I get involved in are capital allocation and selection and
compensation of the top man. Other personnel decisions, operating strategies,
etc. are his bailiwick. Some Berkshire managers talk over some of their
decisions with me; some don’t. It depends upon their personalities and, to an
extent, upon their own personal relationship with me.
If you should decide to do business with Berkshire, we would pay in cash.
Your business would not be used as collateral for any loan by Berkshire. There
would be no brokers involved.

Furthermore, there would be no chance that a deal would be announced and
that the buyer would then back off or start suggesting adjustments (with
apologies, of course, and with an explanation that banks, lawyers, boards of
directors, etc. were to be blamed). And finally, you would know exactly with
whom you are dealing. You would not have one executive negotiate the deal
only to have someone else in charge a few years later, or have the president
regretfully tell you that his board of directors required this change or that (or
possibly required sale of your business to finance some new interest of the
parent’s).
It’s only fair to tell you that you would be no richer after the sale than now.
The ownership of your business already makes you wealthy and soundly
invested. A sale would change the form of your wealth, but it wouldn’t change
its amount. If you sell, you will have exchanged a 100%-owned valuable asset
that you understand for another valuable asset—cash—that will probably be
invested in small pieces (stocks) of other businesses that you understand less
well. There is often a sound reason to sell but, if the transaction is a fair one, the
reason is not so that the seller can become wealthier.
I will not pester you; if you have any possible interest in selling, I would
appreciate your call. I would be extraordinarily proud to have Berkshire, along
with the key members of your family, own _______; I believe we would do very
well financially; and I believe you would have just as much fun running the
business over the next 20 years as you have had during the past 20.
Sincerely,
/s/ Warren E. Buffett
Our acquisitions usually develop [as referrals from other managers who
have sold to us in the past]. At other companies, executives may devote
themselves to pursuing acquisition possibilities with investment bankers,
utilizing an auction process that has become standardized. In this exercise the
bankers prepare a “book” that makes me think of the Superman comics of my
youth. In the Wall Street version, a formerly mild-mannered company emerges
from the investment banker’s phone booth able to leap over competitors in a
single bound and with earnings moving faster than a speeding bullet. Titillated
by the book’s description of the acquiree’s powers, acquisition-hungry CEOs—
Lois Lanes all, beneath their cool exteriors—promptly swoon.
What’s particularly entertaining in these books is the precision with which
earnings are projected for many years ahead. If you ask the author-banker,
however, what his own firm will earn next month, he will go into a protective

crouch and tell you that business and markets are far too uncertain for him to
venture a forecast.
Here’s one story I can’t resist relating: In 1985, a major investment banking
house undertook to sell Scott Fetzer, offering it widely—but with no success.
Upon reading of this strikeout, I wrote Ralph Schey, then and now Scott Fetzer’s
CEO, expressing an interest in buying the business. I had never met Ralph, but
within a week we had a deal. Unfortunately, Scott Fetzer’s letter of engagement
with the banking firm provided it a $2.5 million fee upon sale, even if it had
nothing to do with finding the buyer. I guess the lead banker felt he should do
something for his payment, so he graciously offered us a copy of the book on
Scott Fetzer that his firm had prepared. With his customary tact, Charlie
responded: “I’ll pay $2.5 million not to read it.”
At Berkshire, our carefully-crafted acquisition strategy is simply to wait for
the phone to ring. Happily, it sometimes does so, usually because a manager who
sold to us earlier has recommended to a friend that he think about following suit.
F. The Buyer of Choice53
Two economic factors probably contributed to the rush of acquisition
activity we experienced last year. First, many managers and owners foresaw
near-term slowdowns in their businesses—and, in fact, we purchased several
companies whose earnings will almost certainly decline this year from peaks
they reached in 1999 or 2000. The declines make no difference to us, given that
we expect all of our businesses to now and then have ups and downs. (Only in
the sales presentations of investment banks do earnings move forever upward.)
We don’t care about the bumps; what matters are the overall results. But the
decisions of other people are sometimes affected by the near-term outlook,
which can both spur sellers and temper the enthusiasm of purchasers who might
otherwise compete with us.
A second factor that helped us in 2000 was that the market for junk bonds
dried up as the year progressed. In the two preceding years, junk bond
purchasers had relaxed their standards, buying the obligations of ever-weaker
issuers at inappropriate prices. The effects of this laxity were felt last year in a
ballooning of defaults. In this environment, “financial” buyers of businesses—
those who wish to buy using only a sliver of equity—became unable to borrow
all they thought they needed. What they could still borrow, moreover, came at a
high price. Consequently, LBO operators became less aggressive in their bidding
when businesses came up for sale last year. Because we analyze purchases on an

all-equity basis, our evaluations did not change, which means we became
considerably more competitive.
Aside from the economic factors that benefited us, we now enjoy a major
and growing advantage in making acquisitions in that we are often the buyer of
choice for the seller. That fact, of course, doesn’t assure a deal—sellers have to
like our price, and we have to like their business and management—but it does
help.
We find it meaningful when an owner cares about whom he sells to. We
like to do business with someone who loves his company, not just the money
that a sale will bring him (though we certainly understand why he likes that as
well). When this emotional attachment exists, it signals that important qualities
will likely be found within the business: honest accounting, pride of product,
respect for customers, and a loyal group of associates having a strong sense of
direction. The reverse is apt to be true, also. When an owner auctions off his
business, exhibiting a total lack of interest in what follows, you will frequently
find that it has been dressed up for sale, particularly when the seller is a
“financial owner.” And if owners behave with little regard for their business and
its people, their conduct will often contaminate attitudes and practices
throughout the company.
When a business masterpiece has been created by a lifetime—or several
lifetimes—of unstinting care and exceptional talent, it should be important to the
owner what corporation is entrusted to carry on its history. Charlie and I believe
Berkshire provides an almost unique home. We take our obligations to the
people who created a business very seriously, and Berkshire’s ownership
structure ensures that we can fulfill our promises. When we tell John Justin that
his business (Justin Industries) will remain headquartered in Fort Worth, or
assure the Bridge family that its operation (Ben Bridge Jeweler) will not be
merged with another jeweler, these sellers can take those promises to the bank.
How much better it is for the “painter” of a business Rembrandt to
personally select its permanent home than to have a trust officer or uninterested
heirs auction it off. Throughout the years we have had great experiences with
those who recognize that truth and apply it to their business creations. We’ll
leave the auctions to others.
Our long-avowed goal is to be the “buyer of choice” for businesses—
particularly those built and owned by families. The way to achieve this goal is to
deserve it. That means we must keep our promises; avoid leveraging up acquired
businesses; grant unusual autonomy to our managers; and hold the purchased

companies through thick and thin (though we prefer thick and thicker).
Our record matches our rhetoric. Most buyers competing against us,
however, follow a different path. For them, acquisitions are “merchandise.”
Before the ink dries on their purchase contracts, these operators are
contemplating “exit strategies.” We have a decided advantage, therefore, when
we encounter sellers who truly care about the future of their businesses.
Some years back our competitors were known as “leveraged-buyout
operators.” But LBO became a bad name. So in Orwellian fashion, the buyout
firms decided to change their moniker. What they did not change, though, were
the essential ingredients of their previous operations, including their cherished
fee structures and love of leverage.
Their new label became “private equity,” a name that turns the facts upside-
down: A purchase of a business by these firms almost invariably results in
dramatic reductions in the equity portion of the acquiree’s capital structure
compared to that previously existing. A number of these acquirees, purchased
only two to three years ago, are now in mortal danger because of the debt piled
on them by their private-equity buyers. Much of the bank debt is selling below
70¢ on the dollar, and the public debt has taken a far greater beating. The private
equity firms, it should be noted, are not rushing in to inject the equity their wards
now desperately need. Instead, they’re keeping their remaining funds very
private.
In the regulated utility field there are no large family-owned businesses.
Here, Berkshire hopes to be the “buyer of choice” of regulators. It is they, rather
than selling shareholders, who judge the fitness of purchasers when transactions
are proposed.
There is no hiding your history when you stand before these regulators.
They can—and do—call their counterparts in other states where you operate and
ask how you have behaved in respect to all aspects of the business, including a
willingness to commit adequate equity capital.
When MidAmerican proposed its purchase of PacifiCorp in 2005,
regulators in the six new states we would be serving immediately checked our
record in Iowa. They also carefully evaluated our financing plans and
capabilities. We passed this examination, just as we expect to pass future ones.
[W]e hope to buy more regulated utilities in the future—and we know that
our business behavior in jurisdictions where we are operating today will
determine how we are welcomed by new jurisdictions tomorrow.
46 [Introductory essay, 1992.]

47 [Divided by hash lines: 1981; 1982; 1997; 1994.]
48 [1984.]
49 [1989 Wesco Financial Corporation Letter to Shareholders, by Charles T.
Munger. Reprinted with permission.]
50 [Divided by hash lines: 1995; 1991 (the latter with similar versions
beginning in 1982 and continuting thereafter).]
51 [In 1988 and 1989, the last sentence read: “Our interest in new ventures,
turnarounds, or auction-like sales can best be expressed by the Goldwynism:
‘Please include me out.’”]
52 [Divided by hash lines: 1990 Appendix B—form of letter sent to
potential sellers of businesses; 1999.]
53 [2000; 2008.]

VI. VALUATION AND ACCOUNTING
To those of you who are uninterested in accounting, I apologize for this
dissertation. I realize that many of you do not pore over our figures, but instead
hold Berkshire primarily because you know that: (1) Charlie and I have the bulk
of our money in Berkshire; (2) we intend to run things so that your gains or
losses are in direct proportion to ours; (3) the record has so far been satisfactory.
There is nothing necessarily wrong with this kind of “faith” approach to
investing. Other shareholders, however, prefer an “analysis” approach and we
want to supply the information they need. In our own investing, we search for
situations in which both approaches give us the same answer.54
A. Aesop and Inefficient Bush Theory55
The formula for valuing all assets that are purchased for financial gain has
been unchanged since it was first laid out by a very smart man in about 600 B.C.
(though he wasn’t smart enough to know it was 600 B.C.).
The oracle was Aesop and his enduring, though somewhat incomplete,
investment insight was “a bird in the hand is worth two in the bush.” To flesh out
this principle, you must answer only three questions. How certain are you that
there are indeed birds in the bush? When will they emerge and how many will
there be? What is the risk-free interest rate (which we consider to be the yield on
long-term U.S. bonds)? If you can answer these three questions, you will know
the maximum value of the bush—and the maximum number of the birds you
now possess that should be offered for it. And, of course, don’t literally think
birds. Think dollars.
Aesop’s investment axiom, thus expanded and converted into dollars, is
immutable. It applies to outlays for farms, oil royalties, bonds, stocks, lottery
tickets, and manufacturing plants. And neither the advent of the steam engine,
the harnessing of electricity nor the creation of the automobile changed the
formula one iota—nor will the Internet. Just insert the correct numbers, and you
can rank the attractiveness of all possible uses of capital throughout the universe.
Common yardsticks such as dividend yield, the ratio of price to earnings or
to book value, and even growth rates have nothing to do with valuation except to
the extent they provide clues to the amount and timing of cash flows into and
from the business. Indeed, growth can destroy value if it requires cash inputs in

the early years of a project or enterprise that exceed the discounted value of the
cash that those assets will generate in later years. Market commentators and
investment managers who glibly refer to “growth” and “value” styles as
contrasting approaches to investment are displaying their ignorance, not their
sophistication. Growth is simply a component—usually a plus, sometimes a
minus—in the value equation.
Alas, though Aesop’s proposition and the third variable—that is, interest
rates—are simple, plugging in numbers for the other two variables is a difficult
task. Using precise numbers is, in fact, foolish; working with a range of
possibilities is the better approach.
Usually, the range must be so wide that no useful conclusion can be
reached. Occasionally, though, even very conservative estimates about the future
emergence of birds reveal that the price quoted is startingly low in relation to
value. (Let’s call this phenomenon the IBT—Inefficient Bush Theory.) To be
sure, an investor needs some general understanding of business economics as
well as the ability to think independently to reach a well-founded positive
conclusion. But the investor does not need brilliance nor blinding insights.
At the other extreme, there are many times when the most brilliant of
investors can’t muster a conviction about the birds to emerge, not even when a
very broad range of estimates is employed. This kind of uncertainty frequently
occurs when new businesses and rapidly changing industries are under
examination. In cases of this sort, any capital commitment must be labeled
speculative.
Now, speculation—in which the focus is not on what an asset will produce
but rather on what the next fellow will pay for it—is neither illegal, immoral nor
un-American. But it is not a game in which Charlie and I wish to play. We bring
nothing to the party, so why should we expect to take anything home?
The line separating investment and speculation, which is never bright and
clear, becomes blurred still further when most market participants have recently
enjoyed triumphs. Nothing sedates rationality like large doses of effortless
money. After a heady experience of that kind, normally sensible people drift into
behavior akin to that of Cinderella at the ball. They know that overstaying the
festivities—that is, continuing to speculate in companies that have gigantic
valuations relative to the cash they are likely to generate in the future—will
eventually bring on pumpkins and mice. But they nevertheless hate to miss a
single minute of what is one helluva party. Therefore, the giddy participants all
plan to leave just seconds before midnight. There’s a problem, though: They are
dancing in a room in which the clocks have no hands.
Last year, we commented on the exuberance—and, yes, it was irrational—

that prevailed, noting that investor expectations had grown to be several
multiples of probable returns. One piece of evidence came from a Paine Webber-
Gallup survey of investors conducted in December 1999, in which the
participants were asked their opinion about the annual returns investors could
expect to realize over the decade ahead. Their answers averaged 19%. That, for
sure, was an irrational expectation: For American business as a whole, there
couldn’t possibly be enough birds in the 2009 bush to deliver such a return.
Far more irrational still were the huge valuations that market participants
were then putting on businesses almost certain to end up being of modest or no
value. Yet investors, mesmerized by soaring stock prices and ignoring all else,
piled into these enterprises. It was as if some virus, racing wildly among
investment professionals as well as amateurs, induced hallucinations in which
the values of stocks in certain sectors became decoupled from the values of the
businesses that underlay them.
This surreal scene was accompanied by much loose talk about “value
creation.” We readily acknowledge that there has been a huge amount of true
value created in the past decade by new or young businesses, and that there is
much more to come. But value is destroyed, not created, by any business that
loses money over its lifetime, no matter how high its interim valuation may get.
What actually occurs in these cases is wealth transfer, often on a massive
scale. By shamelessly merchandising birdless bushes, promoters have in recent
years moved billions of dollars from the pockets of the public to their own
purses (and to those of their friends and associates). The fact is that a bubble
market has allowed the creation of bubble companies, entities designed more
with an eye to making money off investors rather than for them. Too often, an
IPO, not profits, was the primary goal of a company’s promoters. At bottom, the
“business model” for these companies has been the old-fashioned chain letter,
for which many fee-hungry investment bankers acted as eager postmen.
But a pin lies in wait for every bubble. And when the two eventually meet,
a new wave of investors learns some very old lessons: First, many in Wall Street
—a community in which quality control is not prized—will sell investors
anything they will buy. Second, speculation is most dangerous when it looks
easiest.
At Berkshire, we make no attempt to pick the few winners that will emerge
from an ocean of unproven enterprises. We’re not smart enough to do that, and
we know it. Instead, we try to apply Aesop’s 2,600-year-old equation to
opportunities in which we have reasonable confidence as to how many birds are
in the bush and when they will emerge (a formulation that my grandsons would
probably update to “A girl in a convertible is worth five in the phone book.”).

Obviously, we can never precisely predict the timing of cash flows in and out of
a business or their exact amount. We try, therefore, to keep our estimates
conservative and to focus on industries where business surprises are unlikely to
wreak havoc on owners. Even so, we make many mistakes: I’m the fellow,
remember, who thought he understood the future economics of trading stamps,
textiles, shoes and second-tier department stores.
Lately, the most promising “bushes” have been negotiated transactions for
entire businesses, and that pleases us. You should clearly understand, however,
that these acquisitions will at best provide us only reasonable returns. Really
juicy results from negotiated deals can be anticipated only when capital markets
are severely constrained and the whole business world is pessimistic. We are 180
degrees from that point.
B. Intrinsic Value, Book Value, and Market Price56
[Intrinsic value is] an all-important concept that offers the only logical
approach to evaluating the relative attractiveness of investments and businesses.
Intrinsic value can be defined simply: It is the discounted value of the cash that
can be taken out of a business during its remaining life.
The calculation of intrinsic value, though, is not so simple. As our
definition suggests, intrinsic value is an estimate rather than a precise figure, and
it is additionally an estimate that must be changed if interest rates move or
forecasts of future cash flows are revised. Two people looking at the same set of
facts, moreover—and this would apply even to Charlie and me—will almost
inevitably come up with at least slightly different intrinsic value figures. That is
one reason we never give you our estimates of intrinsic value. What our annual
reports do supply, though, are the facts that we ourselves use to calculate this
value.
Meanwhile, we regularly report our per-share book value, an easily
calculable number, though one of limited use. The limitations do not arise from
our holdings of marketable securities, which are carried on our books at their
current prices. Rather the inadequacies of book value have to do with the
companies we control, whose values as stated on our books may be far different
from their intrinsic values.
The disparity can go in either direction. For example, in 1964 we could
state with certitude that Berkshire’s per-share book value was $19.46. However,
that figure considerably overstated the company’s intrinsic value, since all of the
company’s resources were tied up in a sub-profitable textile business. Our textile

assets had neither going-concern nor liquidation values equal to their carrying
values. Today, however, Berkshire’s situation is reversed: Our March 31, 1996
book value of $15,180 far understates Berkshire’s intrinsic value, a point true
because many of the businesses we control are worth much more than their
carrying value.
Inadequate though they are in telling the story, we give you Berkshire’s
book-value figures because they today serve as a rough, albeit significantly
understated, tracking measure for Berkshire’s intrinsic value. In other words, the
percentage change in book value in any given year is likely to be reasonably
close to that year’s change in intrinsic value.
You can gain some insight into the differences between book value and
intrinsic value by looking at one form of investment, a college education. Think
of the education’s cost as its “book value.” If this cost is to be accurate, it should
include the earnings that were foregone by the student because he chose college
rather than a job.
For this exercise, we will ignore the important non-economic benefits of an
education and focus strictly on its economic value. First, we must estimate the
earnings that the graduate will receive over his lifetime and subtract from that
figure an estimate of what he would have earned had he lacked his education.
That gives us an excess earnings figure, which must then be discounted, at an
appropriate interest rate, back to graduation day. The dollar result equals the
intrinsic economic value of the education.
Some graduates will find that the book value of their education exceeds its
intrinsic value, which means that whoever paid for the education didn’t get his
money’s worth. In other cases, the intrinsic value of an education will far exceed
its book value, a result that proves capital was wisely deployed. In all cases,
what is clear is that book value is meaningless as an indicator of intrinsic value.
An interesting accounting irony overlays a comparison of the reported
financial results of our controlled companies with those of the permanent
minority holdings. [These holdings] have a market value of over $2 billion. Yet
they produced only $11 million in reported after-tax earnings for Berkshire in
1987.
Accounting rules dictate that we take into income only the dividends these
companies pay us—which are little more than nominal—rather than our share of
their earnings, which in 1987 amounted to well over $100 million. On the other
hand, accounting rules provide that the carrying value of these three holdings—
owned, as they are, by insurance companies—must be recorded on our balance

sheet at current market prices. The result: GAAP accounting lets us reflect in our
net worth the up-to-date underlying values of the businesses we partially own,
but does not let us reflect their underlying earnings in our income account.
In the case of our controlled companies, just the opposite is true. Here, we
show full earnings in our income account but never change asset values on our
balance sheet, no matter how much the value of a business might have increased
since we purchased it.
Our mental approach to this accounting schizophrenia is to ignore GAAP
figures and to focus solely on the future earning power of both our controlled
and non-controlled businesses. Using this approach, we establish our own ideas
of business value, keeping these independent from both the accounting values
shown on our books for controlled companies and the values placed by a
sometimes foolish market on our partially-owned companies. It is this business
value that we hope to increase at a reasonable (or, preferably, unreasonable) rate
in the years ahead.
Historically, Berkshire shares have sold modestly below intrinsic business
value. With the price there, purchasers could be certain (as long as they did not
experience a widening of this discount) that their personal investment experience
would at least equal the financial experience of the business. But recently the
discount has disappeared, and occasionally a modest premium has prevailed.
The elimination of the discount means that Berkshire’s market value
increased even faster than business value (which, itself, grew at a pleasing pace).
That was good news for any owner holding while that move took place, but it is
bad news for the new or prospective owner. If the financial experience of new
owners of Berkshire is merely to match the future financial experience of the
company, any premium of market value over intrinsic business value that they
pay must be maintained.
Over the long term there has been a more consistent relationship between
Berkshire’s market value and business value than has existed for any other
publicly-traded equity with which I am familiar. This is a tribute to you. Because
you have been rational, interested, and investment-oriented, the market price for
Berkshire stock has almost always been sensible. This unusual result has been
achieved by a shareholder group with unusual demographics: virtually all of our
shareholders are individuals, not institutions. No other public company our size
can claim the same.
Ben Graham told a story 40 years ago that illustrates why investment
professionals behave as they do: An oil prospector, moving to his heavenly

reward, was met by St. Peter with bad news. “You’re qualified for residence,”
said St. Peter, “but, as you can see, the compound reserved for oil men is packed.
There’s no way to squeeze you in.” After thinking a moment, the prospector
asked if he might say just four words to the present occupants. That seemed
harmless to St. Peter, so the prospector cupped his hands and yelled, “Oil
discovered in hell.” Immediately the gate to the compound opened and all of the
oil men marched out to head for the nether regions. Impressed, St. Peter invited
the prospector to move in and make himself comfortable. The prospector paused.
“No,” he said, “I think I’ll go along with the rest of the boys. There might be
some truth to that rumor after all.”
In [the 1995] letter, with Berkshire shares selling at $36,000, I told you: (1)
Berkshire’s gain in market value in recent years had outstripped its gain in
intrinsic value, even though the latter gain had been highly satisfactory; (2) that
kind of overperformance could not continue indefinitely; (3) Charlie and I did
not at that moment consider Berkshire to be undervalued.
Since I set down those cautions, Berkshire’s intrinsic value has increased
very significantly while the market price of our shares has changed little. This,
of course, means that in 1996 Berkshire’s stock underperformed the business.
Consequently, today’s price/value relationship is both much different from what
it was a year ago and, as Charlie and I see it, more appropriate.
Over time, the aggregate gains made by Berkshire shareholders must of
necessity match the business gains of the company. When the stock temporarily
overperforms or underperforms the business, a limited number of shareholders—
either sellers or buyers—receive outsized benefits at the expense of those they
trade with. Generally, the sophisticated have an edge over the innocents in this
game.
Though our primary goal is to maximize the amount that our shareholders,
in total, reap from their ownership of Berkshire, we wish also to minimize the
benefits going to some shareholders at the expense of others. These are goals we
would have were we managing a family partnership, and we believe they make
equal sense for the manager of a public company. In a partnership, fairness
requires that partnership interests be valued equitably when partners enter or
exit; in a public company, fairness prevails when market price and intrinsic value
are in sync. Obviously, they won’t always meet that ideal, but a manager—by his
policies and communications—can do much to foster equity.
Of course, the longer a shareholder holds his shares, the more bearing
Berkshire’s business results will have on his financial experience—and the less it

will matter what premium or discount to intrinsic value prevails when he buys
and sells his stock. That’s one reason we hope to attract owners with long-term
horizons. Overall, I think we have succeeded in that pursuit. Berkshire probably
ranks number one among large American corporations in the percentage of its
shares held by owners with a long-term view.
[C]alculations of intrinsic value, though all-important, are necessarily
imprecise and often seriously wrong. The more uncertain the future of a
business, the more possibility there is that the calculation will be wildly off-base.
Here Berkshire has some advantages: a wide variety of relatively-stable earnings
streams, combined with great liquidity and minimum debt. These factors mean
that Berkshire’s intrinsic value can be more precisely calculated than can the
intrinsic value of most companies.
Yet if precision is aided by Berkshire’s financial characteristics, the job of
calculating intrinsic value has been made more complex by the mere presence of
so many earnings streams. Back in 1965, when we owned only a small textile
operation, the task of calculating intrinsic value was a snap. Now we own 68
distinct businesses with widely disparate operating and financial characteristics.
This array of unrelated enterprises, coupled with our massive investment
holdings, makes it impossible for you to simply examine our consolidated
financial statements and arrive at an informed estimate of intrinsic value.
We have attempted to ease this problem by clustering our businesses into
four logical groups, each of which we discuss later in this report. Of course, the
value of Berkshire may be either greater or less than the sum of these four parts.
The outcome depends on whether our many units function better or worse by
being part of a larger enterprise and whether capital allocation improves or
deteriorates when it is under the direction of a holding company. In other words,
does Berkshire ownership bring anything to the party, or would our shareholders
be better off if they directly owned shares in each of our 68 businesses? These
are important questions but ones that you will have to answer for yourself.
[L]et’s review two sets of figures that show where we’ve come from and
where we are now. The first set is the amount of investments (including cash and
cash-equivalents) we own on a per-share basis. In making this calculation, we
exclude investments held in our finance operation because these are largely
offset by borrowings:
Year
Per-Share Investments*
1965
$ 4

1975
159
1985
2,407
1995
21,817
2005
74,129
Compound Growth Rate 1965–2005
28.0%
Compound Growth Rate 1995–2005
13.0%
*Net of minority interests
In addition to these marketable securities, which with minor exceptions are
held in our insurance companies, we own a wide variety of non-insurance
businesses. Below, we show the pre-tax earnings (excluding goodwill
amortization) of these businesses, again on a per-share basis:
Year
Per-Share Earnings*
1965
$ 4
1975
4
1985
52
1995
175
2005
2,441

Compound Growth Rate 1965-2005
17.2%
Compound Growth Rate 1995-2005
30.2%
*Pre-tax and net of minority interests
When growth rates are under discussion, it will pay you to be suspicious as
to why the beginning and terminal years have been selected. If either year was
aberrational, any calculation of growth will be distorted. In particular, a base
year in which earnings were poor can produce a breathtaking, but meaningless,
growth rate. In the table above, however, the base year of 1965 was abnormally
good; Berkshire earned more money in that year than it did in all but one of the
previous ten.
As you can see from the two tables, the comparative growth rates of
Berkshire’s two elements of value have changed in the last decade, a result
reflecting our ever-increasing emphasis on business acquisitions. Nevertheless,
Charlie and I want to increase the figures in both tables.
C. Look-Through Earnings57
When one company owns part of another company, appropriate accounting
procedures pertaining to that ownership interest must be selected from one of
three major categories. The percentage of voting stock that is owned, in large
part, determines which category of accounting principles should be utilized.
Generally accepted accounting principles require (subject to exceptions,
naturally . . . ) full consolidation of sales, expenses, taxes, and earnings of
business holdings more than 50% owned. Blue Chip Stamps, 60% owned by
Berkshire Hathaway Inc., falls into this category. Therefore, all Blue Chip
income and expense items are included in full in Berkshire’s Consolidated
Statement of Earnings, with the 40% ownership interest of others in Blue Chip’s
net earnings reflected in the Statement as a deduction for “minority interest.”
Full inclusion of underlying earnings from another class of holdings,
companies owned 20% to 50% (usually called “investees”), also normally
occurs. Earnings from such companies—for example, Wesco Financial,
controlled by Berkshire but only 48% owned—are included via a one-line entry
in the owner’s Statement of Earnings. Unlike the over-50% category, all items of
revenue and expense are omitted; just the proportional share of net income is
included. Thus, if Corporation A owns one-third of Corporation B, one-third of
B’s earnings, whether or not distributed by B, will end up in A’s earnings. There
are some modifications, both in this and the over-50% category, for
intercorporate taxes and purchase price adjustments, the explanation of which

we will save for a later day. (We know you can hardly wait.)
Finally come holdings representing less than 20% ownership of another
corporation’s voting securities. In these cases, accounting rules dictate that the
owning companies include in their earnings only dividends received from such
holdings. Undistributed earnings are ignored. Thus, should we own 10% of
Corporation X with earnings of $10 million in 1980, we would report in our
earnings (ignoring relatively minor taxes on intercorporate dividends) either (a)
$1 million if X declared the full $10 million in dividends; (b) $500,000 if X paid
out 50%, or $5 million, in dividends; or (c) zero if X reinvested all earnings.
We impose this short—and over-simplified—course in accounting upon you
because Berkshire’s concentration of resources in the insurance field produces a
corresponding concentration of its assets in companies in that third (less than
20% owned) category. Many of these companies pay out relatively small
proportions of their earnings in dividends. This means that only a small
proportion of their current earning power is recorded in our own current
operating earnings. But, while our reported operating earnings reflect only the
dividends received from such companies, our economic well-being is determined
by their earnings, not their dividends.
Our holdings in this third category of companies have increased
dramatically in recent years as our insurance business has prospered and as
securities markets have presented particularly attractive opportunities in the
common stock area. The large increase in such holdings, plus the growth of
earnings experienced by those partially-owned companies, has produced an
unusual result; the part of “our” earnings that these companies retained last year
(the part not paid to us in dividends) exceeded the total reported annual
operating earnings of Berkshire Hathaway. Thus, conventional accounting only
allows less than half of our earnings “iceberg” to appear above the surface, in
plain view. Within the corporate world such a result is quite rare; in our case it is
likely to be recurring.
Our own analysis of earnings reality differs somewhat from generally
accepted accounting principles, particularly when those principles must be
applied in a world of high and uncertain rates of inflation. (But it’s much easier
to criticize than to improve such accounting rules. The inherent problems are
monumental.) We have owned 100% of businesses whose reported earnings
were not worth close to 100 cents on the dollar to us even though, in an
accounting sense, we totally controlled their disposition. (The “control” was
theoretical. Unless we reinvested all earnings, massive deterioration in the value
of assets already in place would occur. But those reinvested earnings had no
prospect of earning anything close to a market return on capital.) We have also

owned small fractions of businesses with extraordinary reinvestment possibilities
whose retained earnings had an economic value to us far in excess of 100 cents
on the dollar.
The value to Berkshire Hathaway of retained earnings is not determined by
whether we own 100%, 50%, 20% or 1% of the businesses in which they reside.
Rather, the value of those retained earnings is determined by the use to which
they are put and the subsequent level of earnings produced by that usage. This is
true whether we determine the usage, or whether managers we did not hire—but
did elect to join—determine that usage. (It’s the act that counts, not the actors.)
And the value is in no way affected by the inclusion or non-inclusion of those
retained earnings in our own reported operating earnings. If a tree grows in a
forest partially owned by us, but we don’t record the growth in our financial
statements, we still own part of the tree.
Our view, we warn you, is non-conventional. But we would rather have
earnings for which we did not get accounting credit put to good use in a 10%-
owned company by a management we did not personally hire, than have
earnings for which we did get credit put into projects of more dubious potential
by another management—even if we are that management.
The term “earnings” has a precise ring to it. And when an earnings figure is
accompanied by an unqualified auditor’s certificate, a naive reader might think it
comparable in certitude to p, calculated to dozens of decimal places.
In reality, however, earnings can be as pliable as putty when a charlatan
heads the company reporting them. Eventually truth will surface, but in the
meantime a lot of money can change hands. Indeed, some important American
fortunes have been created by the monetization of accounting mirages.
Berkshire’s own reported earnings are misleading in a different, but
important, way: We have huge investments in companies (“investees”) whose
earnings far exceed their dividends and in which we record our share of earnings
only to the extent of the dividends we receive. The extreme case is Capital
Cities/ABC, Inc. Our 17% share of the company’s earnings amounted to more
than $83 million last year. Yet only about $530,000 ($600,000 of dividends it
paid us less some $70,000 of tax) is counted in Berkshire’s GAAP earnings. The
residual $82 million-plus stayed with Cap Cities as retained earnings, which
work for our benefit but go unrecorded on our books.
Our perspective on such “forgotten-but-not-gone” earnings is simple: The
way they are accounted for is of no importance, but their ownership and
subsequent utilization is all-important. We care not whether the auditors hear a

tree fall in the forest; we do care who owns the tree and what’s next done with it.
When Coca-Cola uses retained earnings to repurchase its shares, the
company increases our percentage ownership in what I regard to be the most
valuable franchise in the world. (Coke also, of course, uses retained earnings in
many other value-enhancing ways.) Instead of repurchasing stock, Coca-Cola
could pay those funds to us in dividends, which we could then use to purchase
more Coke shares. That would be a less efficient scenario: Because of taxes we
would pay on dividend income, we would not be able to increase our
proportionate ownership to the degree that Coke can, acting for us. If this less
efficient procedure were followed, however, Berkshire would report far greater
“earnings.”
I believe the best way to think about our earnings is in terms of “look-
through” results, calculated as follows: Take $250 million, which is roughly our
share of the 1990 operating earnings retained by our investees; subtract $30
million, for the incremental taxes we would have owed had that $250 million
been paid to us in dividends; and add the remainder, $220 million, to our
reported operating earnings of $371 million. Thus our 1990 “look-through
earnings” were about $590 million.
In our view, the value to all owners of the retained earnings of a business
enterprise is determined by the effectiveness with which those earnings are used
—and not by the size of one’s ownership percentage. If you have owned .01 of
1% of Berkshire during the past decade, you have benefited economically in full
measure from your share of our retained earnings, no matter what your
accounting system. Proportionately, you have done just as well as if you had
owned the magic 20%. But if you have owned 100% of a great many capital-
intensive businesses during the decade, retained earnings that were credited fully
and with painstaking precision to you under standard accounting methods have
resulted in minor or zero economic value. This is not a criticism of accounting
procedures. We would not like to have the job of designing a better system. It’s
simply to say that managers and investors alike must understand that accounting
numbers are the beginning, not the end, of business valuation.
In most corporations, less-than-20% ownership positions are unimportant
(perhaps, in part, because they prevent maximization of cherished reported
earnings) and the distinction between accounting and economic results we have
just discussed matters little. But in our own case, such positions are of very large
and growing importance. Their magnitude, we believe, is what makes our
reported operating earnings figure of limited significance.

Within [the] gigantic auction arena [composed of the entire array of major
American corporations], it is our job to select businesses with economic
characteristics allowing each dollar of retained earnings to be translated
eventually into at least a dollar of market value. Despite a lot of mistakes, we
have so far achieved this goal. In doing so, we have been greatly assisted by
Arthur Okun’s patron saint for economists—St. Offset. In some cases, that is,
retained earnings attributable to our ownership position have had insignificant or
even negative impact on market value, while in other major positions a dollar
retained by an investee corporation has been translated into two or more dollars
of market value. To date, our corporate over-achievers have more than offset the
laggards. If we can continue this record, it will validate our efforts to maximize
“economic” earnings, regardless of the impact upon “accounting” earnings.
We also believe that investors can benefit by focusing on their own look-
through earnings. To calculate these, they should determine the underlying
earnings attributable to the shares they hold in their portfolio and total these. The
goal of each investor should be to create a portfolio (in effect, a “company”) that
will deliver him or her the highest possible look-through earnings a decade or so
from now.
An approach of this kind will force the investor to think about long-term
business prospects rather than short-term stock market prospects, a perspective
likely to improve results. It’s true, of course, that, in the long run, the scoreboard
for investment decisions is market price. But prices will be determined by future
earnings. In investing, just as in baseball, to put runs on the scoreboard one must
watch the playing field, not the scoreboard.
The primary test of managerial economic performance is the achievement
of a high earnings rate on equity capital employed (without undue leverage,
accounting gimmickry, etc.) and not the achievement of consistent gains in
earnings per share. In our view, many businesses would be better understood by
their shareholder owners, as well as the general public, if managements and
financial analysts modified the primary emphasis they place upon earnings per
share, and upon yearly changes in that figure.
D. Economic versus Accounting Goodwill58
[O]ur intrinsic business value considerably exceeds book value. There are
two major reasons:
(1) Standard accounting principles require that common stocks held by

our insurance subsidiaries be stated on our books at market value, but
that other stocks we own be carried at the lower of aggregate cost or
market. At the end of 1983, the market value of this latter group
exceeded carrying value by $70 million pre-tax, or about $50 million
after tax. This excess belongs in our intrinsic business value, but is not
included in the calculation of book value;
(2) More important, we own several businesses that possess economic
Goodwill (which is properly includable in intrinsic business value) far
larger than the accounting Goodwill that is carried on our balance
sheet and reflected in book value.
You can live a full and rewarding life without ever thinking about Goodwill
and its amortization. But students of investment and management should
understand the nuances of the subject. My own thinking has changed drastically
from 35 years ago when I was taught to favor tangible assets and to shun
businesses whose value depended largely upon economic Goodwill. This bias
caused me to make many important business mistakes of omission, although
relatively few of commission.
Keynes identified my problem: “The difficulty lies not in the new ideas but
in escaping from the old ones.” My escape was long delayed, in part because
most of what I had been taught by the same teacher had been (and continues to
be) so extraordinarily valuable. Ultimately, business experience, direct and
vicarious, produced my present strong preference for businesses that possess
large amounts of enduring Goodwill and that utilize a minimum of tangible
assets.
I recommend the [following essay] to those who are comfortable with
accounting terminology and who have an interest in understanding the business
aspects of Goodwill. Whether or not you wish to tackle the [essay] you should
be aware that Charlie and I believe that Berkshire possesses very significant
economic Goodwill value above that reflected in our book value.
[The following discussion] deals only with economic and accounting
Goodwill—not the goodwill of everyday usage. For example, a business may be
well liked, even loved, by most of its customers but possess no economic
goodwill. (AT&T, before the breakup, was generally well thought of, but
possessed not a dime of economic Goodwill.) And, regrettably, a business may
be disliked by its customers but possess substantial, and growing economic
Goodwill. So, just for the moment, forget emotions and focus only on economics
and accounting.

When a business is purchased, accounting principles require that the
purchase price first be assigned to the fair value of the identifiable assets that are
acquired. Frequently the sum of the fair values put on the assets (after the
deduction of liabilities) is less than the total purchase price of the business. In
that case, the difference is assigned to an asset entitled “excess of cost over
equity in net assets acquired.” To avoid constant repetition of this mouthful, we
will substitute “Goodwill.”
Accounting Goodwill arising from businesses purchased before November
1970 has a special standing. Except under rare circumstances, it can remain an
asset on the balance sheet as long as the business bought is retained. That means
no amortization charges to gradually extinguish that asset need be made against
earnings.
The case is different, however, with purchases made from November 1970
on. When these create Goodwill, it must be amortized over not more than 40
years through charges—of equal amount in every year—to the earnings account.
Since 40 years is the maximum period allowed, 40 years is what managements
(including us) usually elect.
That’s how accounting Goodwill works. To see how it differs from
economic reality, let’s look at an example close at hand. We’ll round some
figures, and greatly oversimplify, to make the example easier to follow. We’ll
also mention some implications for investor and manager.
Blue Chip Stamps bought See’s early in 1972 for $25 million, at which time
See’s had about $8 million of net tangible assets. (Throughout this discussion,
accounts receivable will be classified as tangible assets, a definition proper for
business analysis.) This level of tangible assets was adequate to conduct the
business without use of debt, except for short periods seasonally. See’s was
earning about $2 million after tax at the time, and such earnings seemed
conservatively representative of future earning power in constant 1972 dollars.
Thus our first lesson: businesses logically are worth far more than net
tangible assets when they can be expected to produce earnings on such assets
considerably in excess of market rates of return. The capitalized value of this
excess return is economic Goodwill.
In 1972 (and now) relatively few businesses could be expected to
consistently earn the 25% after tax on net tangible assets that was earned by
See’s—doing it, furthermore, with conservative accounting and no financial
leverage. It was not the fair market value of the inventories, receivables or fixed
assets that produced the premium rates of return. Rather it was a combination of
intangible assets, particularly a pervasive favorable reputation with consumers
based upon countless pleasant experiences they have had with both product and

personnel.
Such a reputation creates a consumer franchise that allows the value of the
product to the purchaser, rather than its production cost, to be the major
determinant of selling price. Consumer franchises are a prime source of
economic Goodwill. Other sources include governmental franchises not subject
to profit regulation, such as television stations, and an enduring position as the
low cost producer in an industry.
Let’s return to the accounting in the See’s example. Blue Chip’s purchase of
See’s at $17 million over net tangible assets required that a Goodwill account of
this amount be established as an asset on Blue Chip’s books and that $425,000
be charged to income annually for 40 years to amortize that asset. By 1983, after
11 years of such charges, the $17 million had been reduced to about $12.5
million. Berkshire, meanwhile, owned 60% of Blue Chip and, therefore, also
60% of See’s. This ownership meant that Berkshire’s balance sheet reflected
60% of See’s Goodwill, or about $7.5 million.
In 1983 Berkshire acquired the rest of Blue Chip in a merger that required
purchase accounting as contrasted to the “pooling” treatment allowed for some
mergers. Under purchase accounting, the “fair value” of the shares we gave to
(or “paid”) Blue Chip holders had to be spread over the net assets acquired from
Blue Chip. This “fair value” was measured, as it almost always is when public
companies use their shares to make acquisitions, by the market value of the
shares given up.
The assets “purchased” consisted of 40% of everything owned by Blue
Chip (as noted, Berkshire already owned the other 60%). What Berkshire “paid”
was more than the net identifiable assets we received by $51.7 million, and was
assigned to two pieces of Goodwill: $28.4 million to See’s and $23.3 million to
Buffalo Evening News.
After the merger, therefore, Berkshire was left with a Goodwill asset for
See’s that had two components: the $7.5 million remaining from the 1971
purchase, and $28.4 million newly created by the 40% “purchased” in 1983. Our
amortization charge now will be about $1.0 million for the next 28 years, and $.7
million for the following 12 years, 2002 through 2013.
In other words, different purchase dates and prices have given us vastly
different asset values and amortization charges for two pieces of the same asset.
(We repeat our usual disclaimer: we have no better accounting system to suggest.
The problems to be dealt with are mind boggling and require arbitrary rules.)
But what are the economic realities? One reality is that the amortization
charges that have been deducted as costs in the earnings statement each year
since acquisition of See’s were not true economic costs. We know that because

See’s last year earned $13 million after taxes on about $20 million of net
tangible assets—a performance indicating the existence of economic Goodwill
far larger than the total original cost of our accounting Goodwill. In other words,
while accounting Goodwill regularly decreased from the moment of purchase,
economic Goodwill increased in irregular but very substantial fashion.
Another reality is that annual amortization charges in the future will not
correspond to economic costs. It is possible, of course, that See’s economic
Goodwill will disappear. But it won’t shrink in even decrements or anything
remotely resembling them. What is more likely is that the Goodwill will increase
—in current, if not in constant, dollars—because of inflation.
That probability exists because true economic Goodwill tends to rise in
nominal value proportionally with inflation. To illustrate how this works, let’s
contrast a See’s kind of business with a more mundane business. When we
purchased See’s in 1972, it will be recalled, it was earning about $2 million on
$8 million of net tangible assets. Let us assume that our hypothetical mundane
business then had $2 million of earnings also, but needed $18 million in net
tangible assets for normal operations. Earning only 11% on required tangible
assets, that mundane business would possess little or no economic Goodwill.
A business like that, therefore, might well have sold for the value of its net
tangible assets, or for $18 million. In contrast, we paid $25 million for See’s,
even though it had no more in earnings and less than half as much in “honest-to-
God” assets. Could less really have been more, as our purchase price implied?
The answer is “yes”—even if both businesses were expected to have flat unit
volume—as long as you anticipated, as we did in 1972, a world of continuous
inflation.
To understand why, imagine the effect that a doubling of the price level
would subsequently have on the two businesses. Both would need to double their
nominal earnings to $4 million to keep themselves even with inflation. This
would seem to be no great trick: just sell the same number of units at double
earlier prices and, assuming profit margins remain unchanged, profits also must
double.
But, crucially, to bring that about, both businesses probably would have to
double their nominal investment in net tangible assets, since that is the kind of
economic requirement that inflation usually imposes on businesses, both good
and bad. A doubling of dollar sales means correspondingly more dollars must be
employed immediately in receivables and inventories. Dollars employed in fixed
assets will respond more slowly to inflation, but probably just as surely. And all
of this inflation-required investment will produce no improvement in rate of
return. The motivation for this investment is the survival of the business, not the

prosperity of the owner.
Remember, however, that See’s had net tangible assets of only $8 million.
So it would only have had to commit an additional $8 million to finance the
capital needs imposed by inflation. The mundane business, meanwhile, had a
burden over twice as large—a need for $18 million of additional capital.
After the dust had settled, the mundane business, now earning $4 million
annually, might still be worth the value of its tangible assets, or $36 million. That
means its owners would have gained only a dollar of nominal value for every
new dollar invested. (This is the same dollar-for-dollar result they would have
achieved if they had added money to a savings account.)
See’s, however, also earning $4 million, might be worth $50 million if
valued (as it logically would be) on the same basis as it was at the time of our
purchase. So it would have gained $25 million in nominal value while the
owners were putting up only $8 million in additional capital—over $3 of
nominal value gained for each $1 invested.
Remember, even so, that the owners of the See’s kind of business were
forced by inflation to ante up $8 million in additional capital just to stay even in
real profits. Any unleveraged business that requires some net tangible assets to
operate (and almost all do) is hurt by inflation. Businesses needing little in the
way of tangible assets simply are hurt the least.
And that fact, of course, has been hard for many people to grasp. For years
the traditional wisdom—long on tradition, short on wisdom—held that inflation
protection was best provided by businesses laden with natural resources, plants
and machinery, or other tangible assets (“In Goods We Trust”). It doesn’t work
that way. Asset-heavy businesses generally earn low rates of return—rates that
often barely provide enough capital to fund the inflationary needs of the existing
business, with nothing left over for real growth, for distribution to owners, or for
acquisition of new businesses.
In contrast, a disproportionate number of the great business fortunes built
up during the inflationary years arose from ownership of operations that
combined intangibles of lasting value with relatively minor requirements for
tangible assets. In such cases earnings have bounded upward in nominal dollars,
and these dollars have been largely available for the acquisition of additional
businesses. This phenomenon has been particularly evident in the
communications business. That business has required little in the way of tangible
investment—yet its franchises have endured. During inflation, Goodwill is the
gift that keeps giving.
But that statement applies, naturally, only to true economic Goodwill.
Spurious accounting Goodwill—and there is plenty of it around—is another

matter. When an overexcited management purchases a business at a silly price,
the same accounting niceties described earlier are observed. Because it can’t go
anywhere else, the silliness ends up in the Goodwill account. Considering the
lack of managerial discipline that created the account, under such circumstances
it might better be labeled “No-Will”. Whatever the term, the 40-year ritual
typically is observed and the adrenalin so capitalized remains on the books as an
“asset” just as if the acquisition had been a sensible one.
*
If you cling to any belief that accounting treatment of Goodwill is the best
measure of economic reality, I suggest one final item to ponder.
Assume a company with $20 per share of net worth, all tangible assets.
Further assume the company has internally developed some magnificent
consumer franchise, or that it was fortunate enough to obtain some important
television stations by original FCC grant. Therefore, it earns a great deal on
tangible assets, say $5 per share, or 25%.
With such economics, it might sell for $100 per share or more, and it might
well also bring that price in a negotiated sale of the entire business.
Assume an investor buys the stock at $100 per share, paying in effect $80
per share for Goodwill (just as would a corporate purchaser buying the whole
company). Should the investor impute a $2 per share amortization charge
annually ($80 divided by 40 years) to calculate “true” earnings per share? And,
if so, should the new “true” earnings of $3 per share cause him to rethink his
purchase price?
*
We believe managers and investors alike should view intangible assets from
two perspectives:
(1) In analysis of operating results—that is, in evaluating the
underlying economics of a business unit—amortization charges should
be ignored. What a business can be expected to earn on unleveraged
net tangible assets, excluding any charges against earnings for
amortization of Goodwill, is the best guide to the economic
attractiveness of the operation. It is also the best guide to the current
value of the operation’s economic Goodwill.
(2) In evaluating the wisdom of business acquisitions, amortization
charges should be ignored also. They should be deducted neither from
earnings nor from the cost of the business. This means forever viewing
purchased Goodwill at its full cost, before any amortization.
Furthermore, cost should be defined as including the full intrinsic

business value—not just the recorded accounting value—of all
consideration given, irrespective of market prices of the securities
involved at the time of merger and irrespective of whether pooling
treatment was allowed. For example, what we truly paid in the Blue
Chip merger for 40% of the Goodwill of See’s and the News was
considerably more than the $51.7 million entered on our books. This
disparity exists because the market value of the Berkshire shares given
up in the merger was less than their intrinsic business value, which is
the value that defines the true cost to us.
Operations that appear to be winners based upon perspective (1) may pale
when viewed from perspective (2). A good business is not always a good
purchase—although it’s a good place to look for one.
When Berkshire buys a business for a premium over the GAAP net worth
of the acquiree—as will usually be the case, since most companies we’d want to
buy don’t come at a discount—that premium has to be entered on the asset side
of our balance sheet. There are loads of rules about just how a company should
record the premium. But to simplify this discussion, we will focus on
“Goodwill,” the asset item to which almost all of Berkshire’s acquisition
premiums have been allocated. For example, when we recently acquired the half
of GEICO we didn’t previously own, we recorded goodwill of about $1.6 billion.
GAAP requires Goodwill to be amortized—that is, written off—over a
period no longer than 40 years. Therefore, to extinguish our $1.6 billion in
GEICO Goodwill, we will annually take charges of about $40 million against
our earnings.
In an accounting sense, consequently, our GEICO Goodwill will disappear
gradually in even-sized bites. But the one thing I can guarantee you is that the
economic Goodwill we have purchased at GEICO will not decline in the same
measured way. In fact, my best guess is that the economic goodwill assignable to
GEICO will not decline at all, but rather will increase—and probably in a very
substantial way.
I made a similar statement in our 1983 Annual Report about the Goodwill
attributed to See’s Candy, when I used that company as an example in a
discussion of Goodwill accounting. At that time, our balance sheet carried about
$36 million of See’s Goodwill. We have since been charging about $1 million
against earnings every year in order to amortize the asset, and the See’s
Goodwill on our balance sheet is now down to about $23 million. In other
words, from an accounting standpoint, See’s is now presented as having lost a

good deal of goodwill since 1983.
The economic facts could not be more different. In 1983, See’s earned
about $27 million pre-tax on $11 million of net operating assets; in 1995 it
earned $50 million on only $5 million of net operating assets. Clearly See’s
economic Goodwill has increased dramatically during the interval rather than
decreased. Just as clearly, See’s is worth many hundreds of millions of dollars
more than its stated value on our books.
We could, of course, be wrong, but we expect GEICO’s gradual loss of
accounting value to be paired with increases in its economic value. Certainly that
has been the pattern at most of our subsidiaries, not just See’s. That is why we
regularly present our operating earnings in a way that allows you to ignore all
purchase-accounting adjustments.
In the future, also, we will adopt a similar policy for look-through earnings,
moving to a form of presentation that rids these earnings of the major purchase-
accounting adjustments of investees. We will not apply this policy to companies
that have only small amounts of goodwill on their books, such as Coca-Cola or
Gillette. We will extend it, however, to Wells Fargo and Disney, which have both
recently made huge acquisitions and are consequently dealing with exceptionally
large goodwill charges.
Before leaving this subject, we should issue an important warning:
Investors are often led astray by CEOs and Wall Street analysts who equate
depreciation charges with the amortization charges we have just discussed. In no
way are the two the same: With rare exceptions, depreciation is an economic cost
every bit as real as wages, materials, or taxes. Certainly that is true at Berkshire
and at virtually all the other businesses we have studied. Furthermore, we do not
think so-called EBITDA (earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and
amortization) is a meaningful measure of performance. Managements that
dismiss the importance of depreciation—and emphasize “cash flow” or EBITDA
—are apt to make faulty decisions, and you should keep that in mind as you
make your own investment decisions.
E. Owner Earnings and the Cash Flow Fallacy59
[Many business acquisitions require] major purchase-price accounting
adjustments, as prescribed by generally accepted accounting principles (GAAP).
The GAAP figures, of course, are the ones used in our consolidated financial
statements. But, in our view, the GAAP figures are not necessarily the most
useful ones for investors or managers. Therefore, the figures shown for specific

operating units are earnings before purchase-price adjustments are taken into
account. In effect, these are the earnings that would have been reported by the
businesses if we had not purchased them.
A discussion of our reasons for preferring this form of presentation
[follows. It] will never substitute for a steamy novel and definitely is not
required reading. However, I know that among our 6,000 shareholders there are
those who are thrilled by my essays on accounting—and I hope that both of you
enjoy [it].
First a short quiz: below are abbreviated 1986 statements of earnings for
two companies. Which business is the more valuable?
As you’ve probably guessed, Companies O and N are the same business—
Scott Fetzer. In the “O” (for “old”) column we have shown what the company’s
1986 GAAP earnings would have been if we had not purchased it; in the “N”
(for “new”) column we have shown Scott Fetzer’s GAAP earnings as actually
reported by Berkshire.
It should be emphasized that the two columns depict identical economics—
i.e., the same sales, wages, taxes, etc. And both “companies” generate the same
amount of cash for owners. Only the accounting is different.

So, fellow philosophers, which column presents truth? Upon which set of
numbers should managers and investors focus?
Before we tackle those questions, let’s look at what produces the disparity
between O and N. We will simplify our discussion in some respects, but the
simplification should not produce any inaccuracies in analysis or conclusions.
The contrast between O and N comes about because we paid an amount for
Scott Fetzer that was different from its stated net worth. Under GAAP, such
differences—such premiums or discounts—must be accounted for by “purchase-
price adjustments.” In Scott Fetzer’s case, we paid $315 million for net assets
that were carried on its books at $172.4 million. So we paid a premium of $142.6
million.
The first step in accounting for any premium paid is to adjust the carrying
value of current assets to current values. In practice, this requirement usually
does not affect receivables, which are routinely carried at current value, but often
affects inventories. Because of a $22.9 million LIFO reserve and other
accounting intricacies,60 Scott Fetzer’s inventory account was carried at a $37.3
million discount from current value. So, making our first accounting move, we
used $37.3 million of our $142.6 million premium to increase the carrying value
of the inventory.
Assuming any premium is left after current assets are adjusted, the next step
is to adjust fixed assets to current value. In our case, this adjustment also
required a few accounting acrobatics relating to deferred taxes. Since this has
been billed as a simplified discussion, I will skip the details and give you the
bottom line: $68.0 million was added to fixed assets and $13.0 million was
eliminated from deferred tax liabilities. After making this $81.0 million
adjustment, we were left with $24.3 million of premium to allocate.
Had our situation called for them, two steps would next have been required:
the adjustment of intangible assets other than Goodwill to current fair values,
and the restatement of liabilities to current fair values, a requirement that
typically affects only long-term debt and unfunded pension liabilities. In Scott
Fetzer’s case, however, neither of these steps was necessary.
The final accounting adjustment we needed to make, after recording fair
market values for all assets and liabilities, was the assignment of the residual
premium to Goodwill (technically known as “excess of cost over the fair value
of net assets acquired”). This residual amounted to $24.3 million. Thus, the
balance sheet of Scott Fetzer immediately before the acquisition, which is
summarized below in column O, was transformed by the purchase into the
balance sheet shown in column N. In real terms, both balance sheets depict the
same assets and liabilities—but, as you can see, certain figures differ

significantly.
The higher balance sheet figures shown in column N produce the lower
income figures shown in column N of the earnings statement presented earlier.
This is the result of the asset write-ups and of the fact that some of the written-up
assets must be depreciated or amortized. The higher the asset figure, the higher
the annual depreciation or amortization charge to earnings must be. The charges
that flowed to the earnings statement because of the balance sheet write-ups
were numbered in the statement of earnings shown earlier:
1. $4,979,000 for non-cash inventory costs resulting, primarily, from
reductions that Scott Fetzer made in its inventories during 1986; charges of
this kind are apt to be small or non-existent in future years.

2. $5,054,000 for extra depreciation attributable to the write-up of fixed
assets; a charge approximating this amount will probably be made annually
for 12 more years.
3. $595,000 for amortization of Goodwill; this charge will be made annually
for 39 more years in a slightly larger amount because our purchase was
made on January 6 and, therefore, the 1986 figure applies to only 98% of
the year.
4. $998,000 for deferred-tax acrobatics that are beyond my ability to explain
briefly (or perhaps even non-briefly); a charge approximating this amount
will probably be made annually for 12 more years.
By the end of 1986 the difference between the net worth of the “old” and
“new” Scott Fetzer had been reduced from $142.6 million to $131.0 million by
means of the extra $11.6 million that was charged to earnings of the new entity.
As the years go by, similar charges to earnings will cause most of the premium
to disappear, and the two balance sheets will converge. However, the higher land
values and most of the higher inventory values that were established on the new
balance sheet will remain unless land is disposed of or inventory levels are
further reduced.
*
What does all this mean for owners? Did the shareholders of Berkshire buy
a business that earned $40.2 million in 1986 or did they buy one earning $28.6
million? Were those $11.6 million of new charges a real economic cost to us?
Should investors pay more for the stock of Company O than of Company N?
And, if a business is worth some given multiple of earnings, was Scott Fetzer
worth considerably more the day before we bought it than it was worth the
following day?
If we think through these questions, we can gain some insights about what
may be called “owner earnings.” These represent (a) reported earnings plus (b)
depreciation, depletion, amortization, and certain other non-cash charges such as
Company N’s items (1) and (4) less (c) the average annual amount of capitalized
expenditures for plant and equipment, etc. that the business requires to fully
maintain its long-term competitive position and its unit volume. (If the business
requires additional working capital to maintain its competitive position and unit
volume, the increment also should be included in (c). However, businesses
following the LIFO inventory method usually do not require additional working
capital if unit volume does not change.)
Our owner-earnings equation does not yield the deceptively precise figures

provided by GAAP, since (c) must be a guess—and one sometimes very difficult
to make. Despite this problem, we consider the owner earnings figure, not the
GAAP figure, to be the relevant item for valuation purposes—both for investors
in buying stocks and for managers in buying entire businesses.
The approach we have outlined produces “owner earnings” for Company O
and Company N that are identical, which means valuations are also identical,
just as common sense would tell you should be the case. This result is reached
because the sum of (a) and (b) is the same in both columns O and N, and because
(c) is necessarily the same in both cases.
And what do Charlie and I, as owners and managers, believe is the correct
figure for the owner earnings of Scott Fetzer? Under current circumstances, we
believe (c) is very close to the “old” company’s (b) number of $8.3 million and
much below the “new” company’s (b) number of $19.9 million. Therefore, we
believe that owner earnings are far better depicted by the reported earnings in the
O column than by those in the N column. In other words, we feel owner earnings
of Scott Fetzer are considerably larger than the GAAP figures that we report.
That is obviously a happy state of affairs. But calculations of this sort
usually do not provide such pleasant news. Most managers probably will
acknowledge that they need to spend something more than (b) on their
businesses over the longer term just to hold their ground in terms of both unit
volume and competitive position. When this imperative exists—that is, when (c)
exceeds (b)—GAAP earnings overstate owner earnings. Frequently this
overstatement is substantial. The oil industry has in recent years provided a
conspicuous example of this phenomenon. Had most major oil companies spent
only (b) each year, they would have guaranteed their shrinkage in real terms.
All of this points up the absurdity of the “cash flow” numbers that are often
set forth in Wall Street reports. These numbers routinely include (a) plus (b)—
but do not subtract (c). Most sales brochures of investment bankers also feature
deceptive presentations of this kind. These imply that the business being offered
is the commercial counterpart of the Pyramids—forever state-of-the-art, never
needing to be replaced, improved or refurbished. Indeed, if all U.S. corporations
were to be offered simultaneously for sale through our leading investment
bankers—and if the sales brochures describing them were to be believed—
governmental projections of national plant and equipment spending would have
to be slashed by 90%.
“Cash Flow,” true, may serve as a shorthand of some utility in descriptions
of certain real estate businesses or other enterprises that make huge initial
outlays and only tiny outlays thereafter. A company whose only holding is a
bridge or an extremely long-lived gas field would be an example. But “cash

flow” is meaningless in such businesses as manufacturing, retailing, extractive
companies, and utilities because, for them, (c) is always significant. To be sure,
businesses of this kind may in a given year be able to defer capital spending. But
over a five-or ten-year period, they must make the investment—or the business
decays.
Why, then, are “cash flow” numbers so popular today? In answer, we
confess our cynicism: we believe these numbers are frequently used by
marketers of businesses and securities in attempts to justify the unjustifiable (and
thereby to sell what should be the unsaleable). When (a)—that is, GAAP
earnings—looks by itself inadequate to service debt of a junk bond or justify a
foolish stock price, how convenient it becomes for salesmen to focus on (a) +
(b). But you shouldn’t add (b) without subtracting (c): though dentists correctly
claim that if you ignore your teeth they’ll go away, the same is not true for (c).
The company or investor believing that the debt-servicing ability or the equity
valuation of an enterprise can be measured by totalling (a) and (b) while
ignoring (c) is headed for certain trouble.
*
To sum up: in the case of both Scott Fetzer and our other businesses, we
feel that (b) on an historical-cost basis—i.e., with both amortization of
intangibles and other purchase-price adjustments excluded—is quite close in
amount to (c). (The two items are not identical, of course. For example, at See’s
we annually make capitalized expenditures that exceed depreciation by $500,000
to $1 million, simply to hold our ground competitively.) Our conviction about
this point is the reason we show our amortization and other purchase-price
adjustment items separately . . . and is also our reason for viewing the earnings
of the individual businesses . . . as much more closely approximating owner
earnings than the GAAP figures.
Questioning GAAP figures may seem impious to some. After all, what are
we paying the accountants for if it is not to deliver us the “truth” about our
business. But the accountants’ job is to record, not to evaluate. The evaluation
job falls to investors and managers.
Accounting numbers of course, are the language of business and as such are
of enormous help to anyone evaluating the worth of a business and tracking its
progress. Charlie and I would be lost without these numbers: they invariably are
the starting point for us in evaluating our own businesses and those of others.
Managers and owners need to remember, however, that accounting is but an aid
to business thinking, never a substitute for it.

F. Option Valuation61
The Black-Scholes formula has approached the status of holy writ in
finance, and we use it when valuing our equity put options for financial
statement purposes. Key inputs to the calculation include a contract’s maturity
and strike price, as well as the analyst’s expectations for volatility, interest rates
and dividends.
If the formula is applied to extended time periods, however, it can produce
absurd results. In fairness, Black and Scholes almost certainly understood this
point well. But their devoted followers may be ignoring whatever caveats the
two men attached when they first unveiled the formula.
It’s often useful in testing a theory to push it to extremes. So let’s postulate
that we sell a 100-year $1 billion put option on the S&P 500 at a strike price of
903 (the index’s level on 12/31/08). Using the implied volatility assumption for
long-dated contracts that we do, and combining that with appropriate interest and
dividend assumptions, we would find the “proper” Black-Scholes premium for
this contract to be $2.5 million.
To judge the rationality of that premium, we need to assess whether the
S&P will be valued a century from now at less than today. Certainly the dollar
will then be worth a small fraction of its present value (at only 2% inflation it
will be worth roughly 14¢). So that will be a factor pushing the stated value of
the index higher. Far more important, however, is that one hundred years of
retained earnings will hugely increase the value of most of the companies in the
index. In the 20th Century, the Dow-Jones Industrial Average increased by about
175-fold, mainly because of this retained-earnings factor.
Considering everything, I believe the probability of a decline in the index
over a one-hundred-year period to be far less than 1%. But let’s use that figure
and also assume that the most likely decline—should one occur—is 50%. Under
these assumptions, the mathematical expectation of loss on our contract would
be $5 million ($1 billion X 1% X 50%).
But if we had received our theoretical premium of $2.5 million up front, we
would have only had to invest it at 0.7% compounded annually to cover this loss
expectancy. Everything earned above that would have been profit. Would you
like to borrow money for 100 years at a 0.7% rate?
Let’s look at my example from a worst-case standpoint. Remember that
99% of the time we would pay nothing if my assumptions are correct. But even
in the worst case among the remaining 1% of possibilities—that is, one
assuming a total loss of $1 billion—our borrowing cost would come to only
6.2%. Clearly, either my assumptions are crazy or the formula is inappropriate.

The ridiculous premium that Black-Scholes dictates in my extreme example
is caused by the inclusion of volatility in the formula and by the fact that
volatility is determined by how much stocks have moved around in some past
period of days, months or years. This metric is simply irrelevant in estimating
the probability weighted range of values of American business 100 years from
now. (Imagine, if you will, getting a quote every day on a farm from a manic-
depressive neighbor and then using the volatility calculated from these changing
quotes as an important ingredient in an equation that predicts a probability-
weighted range of values for the farm a century from now.)
Though historical volatility is a useful—but far from foolproof—concept in
valuing short-term options, its utility diminishes rapidly as the duration of the
option lengthens. In my opinion, the valuations that the Black-Scholes formula
now place on our long-term put options overstate our liability, though the
overstatement will diminish as the contracts approach maturity.
Even so, we will continue to use Black-Scholes when we are estimating our
financial-statement liability for long-term equity puts. The formula represents
conventional wisdom and any substitute that I might offer would engender
extreme skepticism. That would be perfectly understandable: CEOs who have
concocted their own valuations for esoteric financial instruments have seldom
erred on the side of conservatism. That club of optimists is one that Charlie and I
have no desire to join.
Both Charlie and I believe that Black-Scholes produces wildly
inappropriate values when applied to long-dated options. [Besides the
hypothetical example given above,] we put our money where our mouth was by
entering into our equity put contracts. By doing so, we implicitly asserted that
the Black-Scholes calculations used by our counterparties or their customers
were faulty.
We continue, nevertheless, to use that formula in presenting our financial
statements. Black-Scholes is the accepted standard for option valuation—almost
all leading business schools teach it—and we would be accused of shoddy
accounting if we deviated from it. Moreover, we would present our auditors with
an insurmountable problem were we to do that: They have clients who are our
counterparties and who use Black-Scholes values for the same contracts we hold.
It would be impossible for our auditors to attest to the accuracy of both their
values and ours were the two far apart.
Part of the appeal of Black-Scholes to auditors and regulators is that it
produces a precise number. Charlie and I can’t supply one of those. We believe

the true liability of our contracts to be far lower than that calculated by Black-
Scholes, but we can’t come up with an exact figure—anymore than we can come
up with a precise value for GEICO, BNSF, or for Berkshire Hathaway itself. Our
inability to pinpoint a number doesn’t bother us: We would rather be
approximately right than precisely wrong.
John Kenneth Galbraith once slyly observed that economists were most
economical with ideas: They made the ones learned in graduate school last a
lifetime. University finance departments often behave similarly. Witness the
tenacity with which almost all clung to the theory of efficient markets
throughout the 1970s and 1980s, dismissively calling powerful facts that refuted
it “anomalies.” (I always love explanations of that kind: The Flat Earth Society
probably views a ship’s circling of the globe as an annoying, but
inconsequential, anomaly.)
54 [Introductory essay, 1988.]
55 [2000.]
56 [Divided by hash lines: 1996 Owner’s Manual; 1987; 1985; 1996; 2005,
with condensed updated version in 2006.]
57 [Divided by hash lines: 1980; 1990; 1982; 1991, 1979.]
58 [Divided by hash lines: 1983; 1983 Appendix; 1996 Owner’s Manual.]
59 [Divided by hash lines: 1986; 1986 Appendix]
60 [A LIFO reserve is the difference between the current cost to replace
inventory and the amount shown as the cost of inventory on a balance sheet.
This difference can grow significantly, especially during inflationary periods.]
61 [2008; 2010.]

VII. ACCOUNTING SHENANIGANS
Despite the shortcomings of generally accepted accounting principles
(GAAP), I would hate to have the job of devising a better set of rules. The
limitations of the existing set, however, need not be inhibiting: CEOs are free to
treat GAAP statements as a beginning rather than an end to their obligation to
inform owners and creditors—and indeed they should. After all, any manager of
a subsidiary company would find himself in hot water if he reported barebones
GAAP numbers that omitted key information needed by his boss, the parent
corporation’s CEO. Why, then, should the CEO himself withhold information
vitally useful to his bosses—the shareholder-owners of the corporation?
What needs to be reported is data—whether GAAP, non-GAAP, or extra-
GAAP—that helps financially-literate readers answer three key questions: (1)
Approximately how much is this company worth? (2) What is the likelihood that
it can meet its future obligations? and (3) How good a job are its managers
doing, given the hand they have been dealt?
In most cases, answers to one or more of these questions are somewhere
between difficult and impossible to glean from the minimum GAAP
presentation. The business world is simply too complex for a single set of rules
to effectively describe economic reality for all enterprises, particularly those
operating in a wide variety of businesses, such as Berkshire.
Further complicating the problem is the fact that many managements view
GAAP not as a standard to be met, but as an obstacle to overcome. Too often
their accountants willingly assist them. (“How much,” says the client, “is two
plus two?” Replies the cooperative accountant, “What number did you have in
mind?”) Even honest and well-intentioned managements sometimes stretch
GAAP a bit in order to present figures they think will more appropriately
describe their performance. Both the smoothing of earnings and the “big bath”
quarter are “white lie” techniques employed by otherwise upright managements.
Then there are managers who actively use GAAP to deceive and defraud.
They know that many investors and creditors accept GAAP results as gospel. So
these charlatans interpret the rules “imaginatively” and record business
transactions in ways that technically comply with GAAP but actually display an
economic illusion to the world.
As long as investors—including supposedly sophisticated institutions—
place fancy valuations on reported “earnings” that march steadily upward, you

can be sure that some managers and promoters will exploit GAAP to produce
such numbers, no matter what the truth may be. Over the years, Charlie and I
have observed many accounting-based frauds of staggering size. Few of the
perpetrators have been punished; many have not even been censured. It has been
far safer to steal large sums with a pen than small sums with a gun.62
A. A Satire on Accounting Shenanigans63
U.S. STEEL ANNOUNCES SWEEPING MODERNIZATION SCHEME*
Myron C. Taylor, Chairman of U.S. Steel Corporation, today announced the
long awaited plan for completely modernizing the world’s largest industrial
enterprise. Contrary to expectations, no changes will be made in the company’s
manufacturing or selling policies. Instead, the bookkeeping system is to be
entirely revamped. By adopting and further improving a number of modern
accounting and financial devices the corporation’s earning power will be
amazingly transformed. Even under the subnormal conditions of 1935, it is
estimated that the new bookkeeping methods would have yielded a reported
profit of close to $50 per share on the common stock. The scheme of
improvement is the result of a comprehensive survey made by Messrs. Price,
Bacon, Guthrie & Colpitts; it includes the following six points:
1. Writing down of Plant Account to Minus $1,000,000,000.
2. Par Value of Common Stock to be reduced to 1¢.
3. Payment of all wages and salaries in option warrants.
4. Inventories to be carried at $1.
5. Preferred Stock to be replaced by non-interest bearing bonds redeemable at
50% discount.
6. A $1,000,000,000 Contingency Reserve to be established.
The official statement of this extraordinary Modernization Plan follows in
full:
The Board of Directors of U.S. Steel Corporation is pleased to announce
that after intensive study of the problems arising from changed conditions in the
industry, it has approved a comprehensive plan for remodeling the Corporation’s
accounting methods. A survey by a Special Committee, aided and abetted by
Messrs. Price, Bacon, Guthrie & Colpitts, revealed that our company has lagged
somewhat behind other American business enterprises in utilizing certain
advanced bookkeeping methods, by means of which the earning power may be

phenomenally enhanced without requiring any cash outlay or any changes in
operating or sales conditions. It has been decided not only to adopt these newer
methods, but to develop them to a still higher stage of perfection. The changes
adopted by the Board may be summarized under six heads, as follows:
1. Fixed Assets to be written down to Minus $1,000,000,000.
Many representative companies have relieved their income accounts of all
charges for depreciation by writing down their plant account to $1. The Special
Committee points out that if their plants are worth only $1, the fixed assets of
U.S. Steel Corporation are worth a good deal less than that sum. It is now a well-
recognized fact that many plants are in reality a liability rather than an asset,
entailing not only depreciation charges, but taxes, maintenance, and other
expenditures. Accordingly, the Board has decided to extend the writedown
policy initiated in the 1935 report, and to mark down the Fixed Assets from
$1,338,522,858.96 to a round Minus $1,000,000,000.
The advantages of this move should be evident. As the plant wears out, the
liability becomes correspondingly reduced. Hence, instead of the present
depreciation charge of some $47,000,000 yearly there will be an annual
appreciation credit of 5%, or $50,000,000. This will increase earnings by no less
than $97,000,000 per annum.
2. Reduction of Par Value of Common Stock to 1¢, and
3. Payment of Salaries and Wages in Option Warrants.
Many corporations have been able to reduce their overhead expenses
substantially by paying a large part of their executive salaries in the form of
options to buy stock, which carry no charge against earnings. The full
possibilities of this modern device have apparently not been adequately realized.
The Board of Directors have adopted the following advanced form of this idea:
The entire personnel of the Corporation are to receive their compensation in
the form of rights to buy common stock at $50 per share, at the rate of one
purchase right for each $50 of salary and/or wages in their present amounts. The
par value of the common stock is to be reduced to 1¢.
The almost incredible advantages of this new plan are evident from the
following:
A. The payroll of the Corporation will be entirely eliminated, a saving of
$250,000,000 per annum, based on 1935 operations.
B. At the same time, the effective compensation of all our employees will
be increased severalfold. Because of the large earnings per share to be shown on
our common stock under the new methods, it is certain that the shares will
command a price in the market far above the option level of $50 per share,

making the readily realizable value of these option warrants greatly in excess of
the present cash wages that they will replace.
C. The Corporation will realize an additional large annual profit through the
exercise of these warrants. Since the par value of the common stock will be fixed
at 1¢, there will be a gain of $49.99 on each share subscribed for. In the interest
of conservative accounting, however, this profit will not be included in the
income account, but will be shown separately as a credit to Capital Surplus.
D. The Corporation’s cash position will be enormously strengthened. In
place of the present annual cash outgo of $250,000,000 for wages (1935 basis),
there will be annual cash inflow of $250,000,000 through exercise of the
subscription warrants for 5,000,000 shares of common stock. The Company’s
large earnings and strong cash position will permit the payment of a liberal
dividend which, in turn, will result in the exercise of these option warrants
immediately after issuance which, in turn, will further improve the cash position
which, in turn, will permit a higher dividend rate—and so on, indefinitely.
4. Inventories to be carried at $1.
Serious losses have been taken during the depression due to the necessity of
adjusting inventory value to market. Various enterprises—notably in the metal
and cotton-textile fields—have successfully dealt with this problem by carrying
all or part of their inventories at extremely low unit prices. The U.S. Steel
Corporation has decided to adopt a still more progressive policy, and to carry its
entire inventory at $1. This will be effected by an appropriate writedown at the
end of each year, the amount of said writedown to be charged to the Contingency
Reserve hereinafter referred to.
The benefits to be derived from this new method are very great. Not only
will it obviate all possibility of inventory depreciation, but it will substantially
enhance the annual earnings of the Corporation. The inventory on hand at the
beginning of the year, valued at $1, will be sold during the year at an excellent
profit. It is estimated that our income will be increased by means of this method
to the extent of at least $150,000,000 per annum which, by a coincidence, will
about equal the amount of the writedown to be made each year against
Contingency Reserve.
A minority report of the Special Committee recommends that Accounts
Receivable and Cash also be written down to $1, in the interest of consistency
and to gain additional advantages similar to those just discussed. This proposal
has been rejected for the time being because our auditors still require that any
recoveries of receivables and cash so charged off be credited to surplus instead
of to the year’s income. It is expected, however, that this auditing rule—which is

rather reminiscent of the horse-and-buggy days—will soon be changed in line
with modern tendencies. Should this occur, the minority report will be given
further and favorable consideration.
5. Replacement of Preferred Stock by Non-Interest Bearing Bonds Redeemable
at 50% Discount.
During the recent depression many companies have been able to offset their
operating losses by including in income profits arising from repurchases of their
own bonds at a substantial discount from par. Unfortunately the credit of U.S.
Steel Corporation has always stood so high that this lucrative source of revenue
has not hitherto been available to it. The Modernization Scheme will remedy this
condition.
It is proposed that each share of preferred stock be exchanged for $300 face
value of non-interest-bearing sinking-fund notes, redeemable by lot at 50% of
face value in 10 equal annual installments. This will require the issuance of
$1,080,000,000 of new notes, of which $108,000,000 will be retired each year at
a cost to the Corporation of only $54,000,000, thus creating an annual profit of
the same amount.
Like the wage-and/or-salary plan described under 3. above, this
arrangement will benefit both the Corporation and its preferred stockholders.
The latter are assured payment for their present shares at 150% of par value over
an average period of five years. Since short-term securities yield practically no
return at present, the non-interest-bearing feature is of no real importance. The
Corporation will convert its present annual charge of $25,000,000 for preferred
dividends into an annual bond-retirement profit of $54,000,000—an aggregate
yearly gain of $79,000,000.
6. Establishment of a Contingency Reserve of $1,000,000,000.
The Directors are confident that the improvements hereinbefore described
will assure the Corporation of a satisfactory earning power under all conditions
in the future. Under modern accounting methods, however, it is unnecessary to
incur the slightest risk of loss through adverse business developments of any
sort, since all these may be provided for in advance by means of a Contingency
Reserve.
The Special Committee has recommended that the Corporation create such
a Contingency Reserve in the fairly substantial amount of $1,000,000,000. As
previously set forth, the annual writedown of inventory of $1 will be absorbed
by this reserve. To prevent eventual exhaustion of the Contingency Reserve, it
has been further decided that it be replenished each year by transfer of an
appropriate sum from Capital Surplus. Since the latter is expected to increase

each year by not less than $250,000,000 through the exercise of the Stock
Option Warrants (see 3. above), it will readily make good any drains on the
Contingency Reserve.
In setting up this arrangement, the Board of Directors must confess
regretfully that they have been unable to improve upon the devices already
employed by important corporations in transferring large sums between Capital,
Capital Surplus, Contingency Reserves and other Balance Sheet Accounts. In
fact, it must be admitted that our entries will be somewhat too simple, and will
lack that element of extreme mystification that characterizes the most advanced
procedure in this field. The Board of Directors, however, have insisted upon
clarity and simplicity in framing their Modernization Plan, even at the sacrifice
of possible advantage to the Corporation’s earning power.
In order to show the combined effect of the new proposals upon the
Corporation’s earning power, we submit herewith a condensed Income Account
for 1935 on two bases, viz:
A. As
Reported
B. Pro-Forma
Giving Effect to
Changes Proposed
Herewith
Gross Receipts from all Sources (Including
Inter Company)
$765,000,000
$765,000,000

Salaries and Wages 251,000,000 —

Other Operating Expenses and Taxes 461,000,000 311,000,000

Depreciation 47,000,000 (50,000,000)

Interest 5,000,000 5,000,000

Discount on Bonds Retired — (54,000,000)

Preferred Dividends 25,000,000 —

Balance for Common (24,000,000) 553,000,000

Average Shares Outstanding 8,703,252 11,203,252

Earned Per Share ($2.76)
$49.80
In accordance with a somewhat antiquated custom there is appended
herewith a condensed pro-forma Balance Sheet of the U.S. Steel Corporation as
of December 31, 1935, after giving effect to proposed changes in asset and
liability accounts.

ASSETS
Fixed Assets, net ($1,000,000,000)

Cash Assets 142,000,000

Receivables 56,000,000

Inventory 1

Miscellaneous Assets
27,000,000
Total
($774,999,999)

LIABILITIES
Common Stock Par 1¢ (Par Value $87,032.52) Stated Value* ($3,500,000,000)
Subsidiaries’ Bonds and Stocks
113,000,000

New Sinking Fund Notes 1,080,000,000

Current Liabilities 69,000,000

Contingency Reserve 1,000,000,000

Other Reserves 74,000,000

Initial Surplus
389,000,001
Total
($774,999,999)
* Given a Stated Value differing from Par Value, in accordance with the
laws of the State of Virginia, where the company will be re-incorporated.
It is perhaps unnecessary to point out to our stockholders that modern
accounting methods give rise to balance sheets differing somewhat in
appearance from those of a less advanced period. In view of the very large
earning power that will result from these changes in the Corporation’s Balance
Sheet, it is not expected that undue attention will be paid to the details of assets
and liabilities.
In conclusion, the Board desires to point out that the combined procedure,
whereby plant will be carried at a minus figure, our wage bill will be eliminated,
and inventory will stand on our books at virtually nothing, will give U.S. Steel
Corporation an enormous competitive advantage in the industry. We shall be
able to sell our products at exceedingly low prices and still show a handsome
margin of profit. It is the considered view of the Board of Directors that under
the Modernization Scheme we shall be able to undersell all competitors to such a
point that the anti-trust laws will constitute the only barrier to 100% domination
of the industry.
In making this statement, the Board is not unmindful of the possibility that
some of our competitors may seek to offset our new advantages by adopting
similar accounting improvements. We are confident, however, that U.S. Steel
will be able to retain the loyalty of its customers, old and new, through the
unique prestige that will accrue to it as the originator and pioneer in these new
fields of service to the user of steel. Should necessity arise, moreover, we believe
we shall be able to maintain our deserved superiority by introducing still more
advanced bookkeeping methods, which are even now under development in our
Experimental Accounting Laboratory.
B. Standard Setting64
A few decades ago, an Arthur Andersen audit opinion was the gold standard
of the profession. Within the firm, an elite Professional Standards Group (PSG)
insisted on honest reporting, no matter what pressures were applied by the client.
Sticking to these principles, the PSG took a stand in 1992 that the cost of stock
options should be recorded as the expense it clearly was. The PSG’s position was
reversed, however, by the “rainmaking” partners of Andersen who knew what

their clients wanted—higher reported earnings no matter what the reality. Many
CEOs also fought expensing because they knew that the obscene mega-grants of
options they craved would be slashed if the true costs of these had to be
recorded.
Soon after the Andersen reversal, the independent accounting standards
board (FASB) voted 7-0 for expensing options. Predictably, the major auditing
firms and an army of CEOs stormed Washington to pressure the Senate—what
better institution to decide accounting questions?—into castrating the FASB. The
voices of the protesters were amplified by their large political contributions,
usually made with corporate money belonging to the very owners about to be
bamboozled. It was not a sight for a civics class.
To its shame, the Senate voted 88-9 against expensing. Several prominent
Senators even called for the demise of the FASB if it didn’t abandon its position.
(So much for independence.) Arthur Levitt, Jr., then Chairman of the SEC—and
generally a vigilant champion of shareholders—has since described his reluctant
bowing to Congressional and corporate pressures as the act of his chairmanship
that he most regrets. (The details of this sordid affair are related in Levitt’s
excellent book, Take on the Street.)
With the Senate in its pocket and the SEC outgunned, corporate America
knew that it was now boss when it came to accounting. With that, a new era of
anything-goes earnings reports—blessed and, in some cases, encouraged by big-
name auditors—was launched. The licentious behavior that followed quickly
became an air pump for The Great Bubble.
After being threatened by the Senate, FASB backed off its original position
and adopted an “honor system” approach, declaring expensing to be preferable
but also allowing companies to ignore the cost if they wished. The disheartening
result: Of the 500 companies in the S&P, 498 adopted the method deemed less
desirable, which of course let them report higher “earnings.” Compensation-
hungry CEOs loved this outcome: Let FASB have the honor; they had the
system.
C. Stock Options65
The most egregious case of let’s-not-face-up-to-reality behavior by
executives and accountants has occurred in the world of stock options. In
Berkshire’s 1985 annual report, I laid out my opinions about the use and misuse
of options.66 But even when options are structured properly, they are accounted
for in ways that make no sense. The lack of logic is not accidental: For decades,

much of the business world has waged war against accounting rulemakers, trying
to keep the costs of stock options from being reflected in the profits of the
corporations that issue them.
Typically, executives have argued that options are hard to value and that
therefore their costs should be ignored. At other times managers have said that
assigning a cost to options would injure small start-up businesses. Sometimes
they have even solemnly declared that “out-of-the-money” options (those with
an exercise price equal to or above the current market price) have no value when
they are issued.
Oddly, the Council of Institutional Investors has chimed in with a variation
on that theme, opining that options should not be viewed as a cost because they
“aren’t dollars out of a company’s coffers.” I see this line of reasoning as
offering exciting possibilities to American corporations for instantly improving
their reported profits. For example, they could eliminate the cost of insurance by
paying for it with options. So if you’re a CEO and subscribe to this “no cash-no
cost” theory of accounting, I’ll make you an offer you can’t refuse: Give us a call
at Berkshire and we will happily sell you insurance in exchange for a bundle of
long-term options on your company’s stock.
Shareholders should understand that companies incur costs when they
deliver something of value to another party and not just when cash changes
hands. Moreover, it is both silly and cynical to say that an important item of cost
should not be recognized simply because it can’t be quantified with pinpoint
precision. Right now, accounting abounds with imprecision. After all, no
manager or auditor knows how long a 747 is going to last, which means he also
does not know what the yearly depreciation charge for the plane should be. No
one knows with any certainty what a bank’s annual loan loss charge ought to be.
And the estimates of losses that property casualty companies make are
notoriously inaccurate.
Does this mean that these important items of cost should be ignored simply
because they can’t be quantified with absolute accuracy? Of course not. Rather,
these costs should be estimated by honest and experienced people and then
recorded. When you get right down to it, what other item of major but hard-to-
precisely-calculate cost—other, that is, than stock options—does the accounting
profession say should be ignored in the calculation of earnings?
Moreover, options are just not that difficult to value. Admittedly, the
difficulty is increased by the fact that the options given to executives are
restricted in various ways. These restrictions affect value. They do not, however,
eliminate it. In fact, since I’m in the mood for offers, I’ll make one to any
executive who is granted a restricted option, even though it may be out of the

money: On the day of issue, Berkshire will pay him or her a substantial sum for
the right to any future gain he or she realizes on the option. So if you find a CEO
who says his newly-issued options have little or no value, tell him to try us out.
In truth, we have far more confidence in our ability to determine an appropriate
price to pay for an option than we have in our ability to determine the proper
depreciation rate for [a] corporate jet.
The accounting profession and the SEC should be shamed by the fact that
they have long let themselves be muscled by business executives on the option-
accounting issue. Additionally, the lobbying that executives engage in may have
an unfortunate by-product: In my opinion, the business elite risks losing its
credibility on issues of significance to society—about which it may have much
of value to say—when it advocates the incredible on issues of significance to
itself.
Our General Re acquisition put a spotlight on an egregious flaw in
accounting procedure. Sharp-eyed shareholders reading our proxy statement
probably noticed an unusual item on page 60. In the pro-forma statement of
income—which detailed how the combined 1997 earnings of the two entities
would have been affected by the merger—there was an item stating that
compensation expense would have been increased by $63 million.
This item, we hasten to add, does not signal that either Charlie or I have
experienced a major personality change. (He still travels coach and quotes Ben
Franklin.) Nor does it indicate any shortcoming in General Re’s accounting
practices, which have followed GAAP to the letter. Instead, the pro-forma
adjustment came about because we are replacing General Re’s longstanding
stock option plan with a cash plan that ties the incentive compensation of
General Re managers to their operating achievements. Formerly what counted
for these managers was General Re’s stock price; now their payoff will come
from the business performance they deliver.
The new plan and the terminated option arrangement have matching
economics, which means that the rewards they deliver to employees should, for a
given level of performance, be the same. But what these people could have
formerly anticipated earning from new option grants will now be paid in cash.
(Options granted in past years remain outstanding.)
Though the two plans are an economic wash, the cash plan we are putting
in will produce a vastly different accounting result. This Alice-in-Wonderland
outcome occurs because existing accounting principles ignore the cost of stock
options when earnings are being calculated, even though options are a huge and

increasing expense at a great many corporations. In effect, accounting principles
offer management a choice: Pay employees in one form and count the cost, or
pay them in another form and ignore the cost. Small wonder then that the use of
options has mushroomed. This lop-sided choice has a big downside for owners,
however: Though options, if properly structured, can be an appropriate, and even
ideal, way to compensate and motivate top managers, they are more often wildly
capricious in their distribution of rewards, inefficient as motivators, and
inordinately expensive for shareholders.
Whatever the merits of options may be, their accounting treatment is
outrageous. Think for a moment of that $190 million we are going to spend for
advertising at GEICO this year. Suppose that instead of paying cash for our ads,
we paid the media in ten-year, at-the-market Berkshire options. Would anyone
then care to argue that Berkshire had not borne a cost for advertising, or should
not be charged this cost on its books?
Perhaps Bishop Berkeley—you may remember him as the philosopher who
mused about trees falling in a forest when no one was around—would believe
that an expense unseen by an accountant does not exist. Charlie and I, however,
have trouble being philosophical about unrecorded costs. When we consider
investing in an option-issuing company, we make an appropriate downward
adjustment to reported earnings, simply subtracting an amount equal to what the
company could have realized by publicly selling options of like quantity and
structure. Similarly, if we contemplate an acquisition, we include in our
evaluation the cost of replacing any option plan. Then, if we make a deal, we
promptly take that cost out of hiding.
Readers who disagree with me about options will by this time be mentally
quarreling with my equating the cost of options issued to employees with those
that might theoretically be sold and traded publicly. It is true, to state one of
these arguments, that employee options are sometimes forfeited—that lessens
the damage done to shareholders—whereas publicly-offered options would not
be. It is true, also, that companies receive a tax deduction when employee
options are exercised; publicly-traded options deliver no such benefit. But
there’s an offset to these points: Options issued to employees are often repriced,
a transformation that makes them much more costly than the public variety.
It’s sometimes argued that a non-transferable option given to an employee
is less valuable to him than would be a publicly-traded option that he could
freely sell. That fact, however, does not reduce the cost of the non-transferable
option: Giving an employee a company car that can only be used for certain
purposes diminishes its value to the employee, but does not in the least diminish
its cost to the employer.

The earning revisions that Charlie and I have made for options in recent
years have frequently cut the reported per-share figures by 5%, with 10% not all
that uncommon. On occasion, the downward adjustment has been so great that it
has affected our portfolio decisions, causing us either to make a sale or to pass
on a stock purchase we might otherwise have made.
A few years ago we asked three questions to which we have not yet
received an answer: “If options aren’t a form of compensation, what are they? If
compensation isn’t an expense, what is it? And, if expenses shouldn’t go into the
calculation of earnings, where in the world should they go?”
[T]he most important accounting mechanism still available to CEOs who
wish to overstate earnings [is] the non-expensing of stock options. The
accomplices in perpetuating this absurdity have been many members of
Congress who have defied the arguments put forth by all Big Four auditors, all
members of the Financial Accounting Standards Board and virtually all
investment professionals. [T]o his great credit, Bill Donaldson, the investor-
minded Chairman of the SEC [from 2003 to 2005], stood firm against massive
political pressure, generated by the check-waving CEOs who first muscled
Congress in 1993 about the issue of option accounting and then repeated the
tactic last year.
Because the attempts to obfuscate the stock-option issue continue, it’s
worth pointing out that no one—neither the FASB, nor investors generally, nor I
—are talking about restricting the use of options in any way. Indeed, my
successor at Berkshire may well receive much of his pay via options, albeit
logically-structured ones in respect to (1) an appropriate strike price, (2) an
escalation in price that reflects the retention of earnings, and (3) a ban on his
quickly disposing of any shares purchased through options. We cheer
arrangements that motivate managers, whether these be cash bonuses or options.
And if a company is truly receiving value for the options it issues, we see no
reason why recording their cost should cut down on their use.
The simple fact is that certain CEOs know their own compensation would
be far more rationally determined if options were expensed. They also suspect
that their stock would sell at a lower price if realistic accounting were employed,
meaning that they would reap less in the market when they unloaded their
personal holdings. To these CEOs such unpleasant prospects are a fate to be
fought with all the resources they have at hand—even though the funds they use
in that fight normally don’t belong to them, but are instead put up by their
shareholders. Option-expensing [became] mandatory on June 15 [2005].

D. “Restructuring” Charges67
The role that managements have played in stock-option accounting has
hardly been benign: A distressing number of both CEOs and auditors have in
recent years bitterly fought FASB’s attempts to replace option fiction with truth
and virtually none have spoken out in support of FASB. Its opponents even
enlisted Congress in the fight, pushing the case that inflated figures were in the
national interest.
Still, I believe that the behavior of managements has been even worse when
it comes to restructurings and merger accounting. Here, many managements
purposefully work at manipulating numbers and deceiving investors. And, as
Michael Kinsley has said about Washington: “The scandal isn’t in what’s done
that’s illegal but rather in what’s legal.”
It was once relatively easy to tell the good guys in accounting from the bad:
The late 1960’s, for example, brought on an orgy of what one charlatan dubbed
“bold, imaginative accounting” (the practice of which, incidentally, made him
loved for a time by Wall Street because he never missed expectations). But most
investors of that period knew who was playing games. And, to their credit,
virtually all of America’s most-admired companies then shunned deception.
In recent years, probity has eroded. Many major corporations still play
things straight, but a significant and growing number of otherwise high-grade
managers—CEOs you would be happy to have as spouses for your children or as
trustees under your will—have come to the view that it’s okay to manipulate
earnings to satisfy what they believe are Wall Street’s desires. Indeed, many
CEOs think this kind of manipulation is not only okay, but actually their duty.
These managers start with the assumption, all too common, that their job at
all times is to encourage the highest stock price possible (a premise with which
we adamantly disagree). To pump the price, they strive, admirably, for
operational excellence. But when operations don’t produce the result hoped for,
these CEOs resort to unadmirable accounting stratagems. These either
manufacture the desired “earnings” or set the stage for them in the future.
Rationalizing this behavior, these managers often say that their shareholders
will be hurt if their currency for doing deals—that is, their stock—is not fully-
priced, and they also argue that in using accounting shenanigans to get the
figures they want, they are only doing what everybody else does. Once such an
everybody’s-doing-it attitude takes hold, ethical misgivings vanish. Call this
behavior Son of Gresham: Bad accounting drives out good.
The distortion du jour is the “restructuring charge,” an accounting entry that
can, of course, be legitimate but that too often is a device for manipulating

earnings. In this bit of legerdemain, a large chunk of costs that should properly
be attributed to a number of years is dumped into a single quarter, typically one
already fated to disappoint investors. In some cases, the purpose of the charge is
to clean up earnings misrepresentations of the past, and in others it is to prepare
the ground for future misrepresentations. In either case, the size and timing of
these charges is dictated by the cynical proposition that Wall Street will not mind
if earnings fall short by $5 per share in a given quarter, just as long as this
deficiency ensures that quarterly earnings in the future will consistently exceed
expectations by five cents per share.
This dump-everything-into-one-quarter behavior suggests a corresponding
“bold, imaginative” approach to—golf scores. In his first round of the season, a
golfer should ignore his actual performance and simply fill his card with
atrocious numbers—double, triple, quadruple bogeys—and then turn in a score
of, say, 140. Having established this “reserve,” he should go to the golf shop and
tell his pro that he wishes to “restructure” his imperfect swing. Next, as he takes
his new swing onto the course, he should count his good holes, but not the bad
ones. These remnants from his old swing should be charged instead to the
reserve established earlier. At the end of five rounds, then, his record will be
140, 80, 80, 80, 80 rather than 91, 94, 89, 94, 92. On Wall Street, they will
ignore the 140—which, after all, came from a “discontinued” swing—and will
classify our hero as an 80 shooter (and one who never disappoints).
For those who prefer to cheat up front, there would be a variant of this
strategy. The golfer, playing alone with a cooperative caddy-auditor, should
defer the recording of bad holes, take four 80s, accept the plaudits he gets for
such athleticism and consistency, and then turn in a fifth card carrying a 140
score. After rectifying his earlier scorekeeping sins with this “big bath,” he may
mumble a few apologies but will refrain from returning the sums he has
previously collected from comparing scorecards in the clubhouse. (The caddy,
need we add, will have acquired a loyal patron.)
Unfortunately, CEOs who use variations of these scoring schemes in real
life tend to become addicted to the games they’re playing—after all, it’s easier to
fiddle with the scorecard than to spend hours on the practice tee—and never
muster the will to give them up. Their behavior brings to mind Voltaire’s
comment on sexual experimentation: “Once a philosopher, twice a pervert.”
In the acquisition arena, restructuring has been raised to an art form:
Managements now frequently use mergers to dishonestly rearrange the value of
assets and liabilities in ways that will allow them to both smooth and swell
future earnings. Indeed, at deal time, major auditing firms sometimes point out
the possibilities for a little accounting magic (or for a lot). Getting this push from

the pulpit, first-class people will frequently stoop to third-class tactics. CEOs
understandably do not find it easy to reject auditor-blessed strategies that lead to
increased future “earnings.”
An example from the property-casualty insurance industry will illuminate
the possibilities. When a p-c company is acquired, the buyer sometimes
simultaneously increases its loss reserves, often substantially. This boost may
merely reflect the previous inadequacy of reserves—though it is uncanny how
often an actuarial “revelation” of this kind coincides with the inking of a deal. In
any case, the move sets up the possibility of “earnings” flowing into income at
some later date, as reserves are released.
Berkshire has kept entirely clear of these practices: If we are to disappoint
you, we would rather it be with our earnings than with our accounting. In all of
our acquisitions, we have left the loss reserve figures exactly as we found them.
After all, we have consistently joined with insurance managers knowledgeable
about their business and honest in their financial reporting. When deals occur in
which liabilities are increased immediately and substantially, simple logic says
that at least one of those virtues must have been lacking—or, alternatively, that
the acquirer is laying the groundwork for future infusions of “earnings.”
Here’s a true story that illustrates an all-too-common view in corporate
America. The CEOs of two large banks, one of them a man who’d made many
acquisitions, were involved not long ago in a friendly merger discussion (which
in the end didn’t produce a deal). The veteran acquirer was expounding on the
merits of the possible combination, only to be skeptically interrupted by the
other CEO: “But won’t that mean a huge charge,” he asked, “perhaps as much as
$1 billion?” The “sophisticate” wasted no words: “We’ll make it bigger than that
—that’s why we’re doing the deal.”
A preliminary tally by R.G. Associates, of Baltimore, of special charges
taken or announced during 1998—that is, charges for restructuring, in-process
R&D, merger-related items, and writedowns—identified no less than 1,369 of
these, totaling $72.1 billion. That is a staggering amount as evidenced by this bit
of perspective: The 1997 earnings of the 500 companies in Fortune’s famous list
totaled $324 billion.
Clearly the attitude of disrespect that many executives have today for
accurate reporting is a business disgrace. And auditors, as we have already
suggested, have done little on the positive side. Though auditors should regard
the investing public as their client, they tend to kowtow instead to the managers
who choose them and dole out their pay. (“Whose bread I eat, his song I sing.”)
A big piece of news, however, is that the SEC, led by its chairman, Arthur
Levitt, seems determined to get corporate America to clean up its act. In a

landmark speech last September, Levitt called for an end to “earnings
management.” He correctly observed, “Too many corporate managers, auditors
and analysts are participants in a game of nods and winks.” And then he laid on
a real indictment: “Managing may be giving way to manipulating; integrity may
be losing out to illusion.”
I urge you to read the Chairman’s speech (you can find it on the Internet at
www.sec.gov) and to support him in his efforts to get corporate America to
deliver a straight story to its owners. Levitt’s job will be Herculean, but it is hard
to think of another more important for him to take on.
E. Pension Estimates68
[Continuing problem-areas arise from] accounting choices—important
among these the investment-return assumption a company uses in calculating
pension expense. It will come as no surprise that many companies continue to
choose an assumption that allows them to report less-than-solid “earnings.” For
the 363 companies in the S&P that have pension plans, this assumption in 2006
averaged 8%. Let’s look at the chances of that being achieved.
The average holdings of bonds and cash for all pension funds is about 28%,
and on these assets returns can be expected to be no more than 5%. Higher
yields, of course, are obtainable but they carry with them a risk of commensurate
(or greater) loss.
This means that the remaining 72% of assets—which are mostly in equities,
either held directly or through vehicles such as hedge funds or private-equity
investments—must earn 9.2% in order for the fund overall to achieve the
postulated 8%. And that return must be delivered after all fees, which are now
far higher than they have ever been.
How realistic is this expectation? During the 20th Century, the Dow
advanced from 66 to 11,497. This gain, though it appears huge, shrinks to 5.3%
when compounded annually. An investor who owned the Dow throughout the
century would also have received generous dividends for much of the period, but
only about 2% or so in the final years. It was a wonderful century.
Think now about this century. For investors to merely match that 5.3%
market-value gain, the Dow—recently below 13,000—would need to close at
about 2,000,000 on December 31, 2099. We are now eight years into this
century, and we have racked up less than 2,000 of the 1,988,000 Dow points the
market needed to travel in this hundred years to equal the 5.3% of the last.
It’s amusing that commentators regularly hyperventilate at the prospect of

the Dow crossing an even number of thousands, such as 14,000 or 15,000. If
they keep reacting that way, a 5.3% annual gain for the century will mean they
experience at least 1,986 seizures during the next 92 years. While anything is
possible, does anyone really believe this is the most likely outcome?
Dividends continue to run about 2%. Even if stocks were to average the
5.3% annual appreciation of the 1900s, the equity portion of plan assets—
allowing for expenses of .5%—would produce no more than 7% or so. And .5%
may well understate costs, given the presence of layers of consultants and high
priced managers (“helpers”).
Naturally, everyone expects to be above average. And those helpers—bless
their hearts—will certainly encourage their clients in this belief. But, as a class,
the helper-aided group must be below average. The reason is simple: 1)
Investors, overall, will necessarily earn an average return, minus costs they
incur; 2) Passive and index investors, through their very inactivity, will earn that
average minus costs that are very low; 3) With that group earning average
returns, so must the remaining group—the active investors. But this group will
incur high transaction, management, and advisory costs. Therefore, the active
investors will have their returns diminished by a far greater percentage than will
their inactive brethren. That means that the passive group—the “know-
nothings”—must win.
I should mention that people who expect to earn 10% annually from
equities during this century—envisioning that 2% of that will come from
dividends and 8% from price appreciation—are implicitly forecasting a level of
about 24,000,000 on the Dow by 2100. If your adviser talks to you about double
digit returns from equities, explain this math to him—not that it will faze him.
Many helpers are apparently direct descendants of the queen in Alice in
Wonderland, who said: “Why, sometimes I’ve believed as many as six
impossible things before breakfast.” Beware the glib helper who fills your head
with fantasies while he fills his pockets with fees.
Some companies have pension plans in Europe as well as in the U.S. and, in
their accounting, almost all assume that the U.S. plans will earn more than the
non-U.S. plans. This discrepancy is puzzling: Why should these companies not
put their U.S. managers in charge of the non-U.S. pension assets and let them
work their magic on these assets as well? I’ve never seen this puzzle explained.
But the auditors and actuaries who are charged with vetting the return
assumptions seem to have no problem with it.
F. Realization Events69

Let’s focus on a number [that] many in the media feature above all others:
net income. Important though that number may be at most companies, it is
almost always meaningless at Berkshire. Regardless of how our businesses
might be doing, Charlie and I could—quite legally—cause net income in any
given period to be almost any number we would like.
We have that flexibility because realized gains or losses on investments go
into the net income figure, whereas unrealized gains (and, in most cases, losses)
are excluded. For example, imagine that Berkshire had a $10 billion increase in
unrealized gains in a given year and concurrently had $1 billion of realized
losses. Our net income—which would count only the loss—would be reported as
less than our operating income. If we had meanwhile realized gains in the
previous year, headlines might proclaim that our earnings were down X% when
in reality our business might be much improved.
If we really thought net income important, we could regularly feed realized
gains into it simply because we have a huge amount of unrealized gains upon
which to draw. Rest assured, though, that Charlie and I have never sold a
security because of the effect a sale would have on the net income we were soon
to report. We both have a deep disgust for “game playing” with numbers, a
practice that was rampant throughout corporate America in the 1990s and still
persists, though it occurs less frequently and less blatantly than it used to.
Operating earnings, despite having some shortcomings, are in general a
reasonable guide as to how our businesses are doing. Ignore our net income
figure, however. Regulations require that we report it to you. But if you find
reporters focusing on it, that will speak more to their performance than ours.
Both realized and unrealized gains and losses are fully reflected in the
calculation of our book value. Pay attention to the changes in that metric and to
the course of our operating earnings, and you will be on the right track.
62 [Introductory essay, 1988.]
63 [1990 Appendix A.]
* An unpublished satire by Ben Graham, written in 1936 and given by the
author to Warren Buffett in 1954.
64 [2002.]
65 [Divided by hash lines: 1992; 1998; 2004.]
66 [See the essay A Principled Approach to Executive Pay in Part I.F.]
67 [1998.]
68 [2007.]
69 [2010.]

VIII. ACCOUNTING POLICY
A. Mergers70
[The application of accounting to acquisitions] is currently a very
contentious topic and, before the dust settles, Congress may even intervene (a
truly terrible idea).
When a company is acquired, generally accepted accounting principles
(“GAAP”) currently condone two very different ways of recording the
transaction: “purchase” and “pooling.” In a pooling, stock must be the currency;
in a purchase, payment can be made in either cash or stock. Whatever the
currency, managements usually detest purchase accounting because it almost
always requires that a “goodwill” account be established and subsequently
written off—a process that saddles earnings with a large annual charge that
normally persists for decades. In contrast, pooling avoids a goodwill account,
which is why managements love it.
Now, the Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”) has proposed an
end to pooling, and many CEOs are girding for battle. It will be an important
fight, so we’ll venture some opinions. To begin with, we agree with the many
managers who argue that goodwill amortization charges are usually spurious.71
For accounting rules to mandate amortization that will, in the usual case,
conflict with reality is deeply troublesome: Most accounting charges relate to
what’s going on, even if they don’t precisely measure it. As an example,
depreciation charges can’t with precision calibrate the decline in value that
physical assets suffer, but these charges do at least describe something that is
truly occurring: Physical assets invariably deteriorate. Correspondingly,
obsolescence charges for inventories, bad debt charges for receivables and
accruals for warranties are among the charges that reflect true costs. The annual
charges for these expenses can’t be exactly measured, but the necessity for
estimating them is obvious.
In contrast, economic goodwill does not, in many cases, diminish. Indeed,
in a great many instances—perhaps most—it actually grows in value over time.
In character, economic goodwill is much like land: The value of both assets is
sure to fluctuate, but the direction in which value is going to go is in no way
ordained. At See’s, for example, economic goodwill has grown, in an irregular
but very substantial manner, for 78 years. And, if we run the business right,

growth of that kind will probably continue for at least another 78 years.
To escape from the fiction of goodwill charges, managers embrace the
fiction of pooling. This accounting convention is grounded in the poetic notion
that when two rivers merge their streams become indistinguishable. Under this
concept, a company that has been merged into a larger enterprise has not been
“purchased” (even though it will often have received a large “sell-out”
premium). Consequently, no goodwill is created, and those pesky subsequent
charges to earnings are eliminated. Instead, the accounting for the ongoing entity
is handled as if the businesses had forever been one unit.
So much for poetry. The reality of merging is usually far different: There is
indisputably an acquirer and an acquiree, and the latter has been “purchased,” no
matter how the deal has been structured. If you think otherwise, just ask
employees severed from their jobs which company was the conqueror and which
was the conquered. You will find no confusion. So on this point the FASB is
correct: In most mergers, a purchase has been made. Yes, there are some true
“mergers of equals,” but they are few and far between.
Charlie and I believe there’s a reality-based approach that should both
satisfy the FASB, which correctly wishes to record a purchase, and meet the
objections of managements to nonsensical charges for diminution of goodwill.
We would first have the acquiring company record its purchase price—whether
paid in stock or cash—at fair value. In most cases, this procedure would create a
large asset representing economic goodwill. We would then leave this asset on
the books, not requiring its amortization. Later, if the economic goodwill became
impaired, as it sometimes would, it would be written down just as would any
other asset judged to be impaired.
If our proposed rule were to be adopted, it should be applied retroactively
so that acquisition accounting would be consistent throughout America—a far
cry from what exists today. One prediction: If this plan were to take effect,
managements would structure acquisitions more sensibly, deciding whether to
use cash or stock based on the real consequences for their shareholders rather
than on the unreal consequences for their reported earnings.
B. Segment Data and Consolidation72
Under one major change mandated by GAAP for 1988, we have been
required to fully consolidate all our subsidiaries in our balance sheet and
earnings statement. In the past, Mutual Savings and Loan, and Scott Fetzer
Financial (a credit company that primarily finances installment sales of World

Book and Kirby products) were consolidated on a “one-line” basis. That meant
we (1) showed our equity in their combined net worths as a single-entry asset on
Berkshire’s consolidated balance sheet and (2) included our equity in their
combined annual earnings as a single-line income entry in our consolidated
statement of earnings. Now the rules require that we consolidate each asset and
liability of these companies in our balance sheet and each item of their income
and expense in our earnings statement.
This change underscores the need for companies also to report segmented
data: The greater the number of economically diverse business operations
lumped together in conventional financial statements, the less useful those
presentations are and the less able investors are to answer the three questions
posed earlier. Indeed, the only reason we ever prepare consolidated figures at
Berkshire is to meet outside requirements. On the other hand, Charlie and I
constantly study our segment data.
Now that we are required to bundle more numbers in our GAAP statements,
we have decided to publish additional supplementary information that we think
will help you measure both business value and managerial performance.
(Berkshire’s ability to discharge its obligations to creditors—the third question
we listed [in the introductory essay in this Part]—should be obvious, whatever
statements you examine.) In these supplementary presentations, we will not
necessarily follow GAAP procedures, or even corporate structure. Rather, we
will attempt to lump major business activities in ways that aid analysis but do
not swamp you with detail. Our goal is to give you important information in a
form that we would wish to get it if our roles were reversed.
C. Deferred Taxes73
I referred earlier to a major change in GAAP that is expected in 1990. This
change relates to the calculation of deferred taxes, and is both complicated and
controversial—so much so that its imposition, originally scheduled for 1989,
was postponed for a year.
When implemented, the new rule will affect us in various ways. Most
important, we will be required to change the way we calculate our liability for
deferred taxes on the unrealized appreciation of stocks held by our insurance
companies.
Right now, our liability is layered. For the unrealized appreciation that dates
back to 1986 and earlier years, $1.2 billion, we have booked a 28% tax liability.
For the unrealized appreciation built up since, $600 million, the tax liability has

been booked at 34%. The difference reflects the increase in tax rates that went
into effect in 1987.
It now appears, however, that the new accounting rule will require us to
establish the entire liability at 34% in 1990, taking the charge against our
earnings. Assuming no change in tax rates by 1990, this step will reduce our
earnings in that year (and thereby our reported net worth) by $71 million. The
proposed rule will also affect other items on our balance sheet, but these changes
will have only a minor impact on earnings and net worth.
We have no strong views about the desirability of this change in calculation
of deferred taxes. We should point out, however, that neither a 28% nor a 34%
tax liability precisely depicts economic reality at Berkshire since we have no
plans to sell the stocks in which we have the great bulk of our gains.
A new accounting rule is likely to be adopted that will require companies to
reserve against all gains at the current tax rate, whatever it may be. With the rate
at 34%, such a rule would increase our deferred tax liability, and decrease our
net worth, by about $71 million—the result of raising the reserve on our pre-
1987 gain by six percentage points. Because the proposed rule has sparked
widespread controversy and its final form is unclear, we have not yet made this
change.
[W]e would owe taxes of more than $1.1 billion were we to sell all of our
securities at yearend market values. Is this $1.1 billion liability equal, or even
similar, to a $1.1 billion liability payable to a trade creditor 15 days after the end
of the year? Obviously not—despite the fact that both items have exactly the
same effect on audited net worth, reducing it by $1.1 billion.
On the other hand, is this liability for deferred taxes a meaningless
accounting fiction because its payment can be triggered only by the sale of
stocks that, in very large part, we have no intention of selling? Again, the answer
is no.
In economic terms, the liability resembles an interest-free loan from the
U.S. Treasury that comes due only at our election (unless, of course, Congress
moves to tax gains before they are realized). This “loan” is peculiar in other
respects as well: It can be used only to finance the ownership of the particular,
appreciated stocks and it fluctuates in size—daily as market prices change and
periodically if tax rates change. In effect, this deferred tax liability is equivalent
to a very large transfer tax that is payable only if we elect to move from one
asset to another. Indeed, we sold some relatively small holdings in 1989,
incurring about $76 million of “transfer” tax on $224 million of gains.

Because of the way the tax law works, the Rip Van Winkle style of
investing that we favor—if successful—has an important mathematical edge
over a more frenzied approach. We have not, we should stress, adopted our
strategy favoring long-term investment commitments because of these
mathematics. Indeed, it is possible we could earn greater after-tax returns by
moving rather frequently from one investment to another. Many years ago, that’s
exactly what Charlie and I did.
Now we would rather stay put, even if that means slightly lower returns.
Our reason is simple: We have found splendid business relationships to be so
rare and so enjoyable that we want to retain all we develop. This decision is
particularly easy for us because we feel that these relationships will produce
good—though perhaps not optimal—financial results. Considering that, we think
it makes little sense for us to give up time with people we know to be interesting
and admirable for time with others we do not know and who are likely to have
human qualities far closer to average.
A new accounting rule having to do with deferred taxes becomes effective
in 1993. It undoes a dichotomy in our books that I have described in previous
annual reports and that relates to the accrued taxes carried against the unrealized
appreciation in our investment portfolio. At yearend 1992, that appreciation
amounted to $7.6 billion. Against $6.4 billion of that, we carried taxes at the
current 34% rate. Against the remainder of $1.2 billion, we carried an accrual of
28%, the tax rate in effect when that portion of the appreciation occurred. The
new accounting rule says we must henceforth accrue all deferred tax at the
current rate, which to us seems sensible.
The new marching orders mean that in the first quarter of 1993 we will
apply a 34% rate to all of our unrealized appreciation, thereby increasing the tax
liability and reducing net worth by $70 million. The new rule also will cause us
to make other minor changes in our calculation of deferred taxes.
Future changes in tax rates will be reflected immediately in the liability for
deferred taxes and, correspondingly, in net worth. The impact could well be
substantial. Nevertheless, what is important in the end is the tax rate at the time
we sell securities, when unrealized appreciation becomes realized.
D. Retiree Benefits74
Another major accounting change, whose implementation is required by
January 1, 1993, mandates that businesses recognize their present-value liability

for post-retirement health benefits. Though GAAP has previously required
recognition of pensions to be paid in the future, it has illogically ignored the
costs that companies will then have to bear for health benefits. The new rule will
force many companies to record a huge balance-sheet liability (and a consequent
reduction in net worth) and also henceforth to recognize substantially higher
costs when they are calculating annual profits.
In making acquisitions, Charlie and I have tended to avoid companies with
significant post-retirement liabilities. As a result, Berkshire’s present liability
and future costs for post-retirement health benefits—though we now have [tens
of thousands of] employees—are inconsequential. I need to admit, though, that
we had a near miss: In 1982 I made a huge mistake in committing to buy a
company burdened by extraordinary post-retirement health obligations. Luckily,
though, the transaction fell through for reasons beyond our control. Reporting on
this episode in the 1982 annual report, I said: “If we were to introduce graphics
to this report, illustrating favorable business developments of the past year, two
blank pages depicting this blown deal would be the appropriate centerfold.”
Even so, I wasn’t expecting things to get as bad as they did. Another buyer
appeared, the business soon went bankrupt and was shut down, and thousands of
workers found those bountiful health-care promises to be largely worthless.
In recent decades, no CEO would have dreamed of going to his board with
the proposition that his company become an insurer of uncapped post-retirement
health benefits that other corporations chose to install. A CEO didn’t need to be a
medical expert to know that lengthening life expectancies and soaring health
costs would guarantee an insurer a financial battering from such a business.
Nevertheless, many a manager blithely committed his own company to a self-
insurance plan embodying precisely the same promises—and thereby doomed
his shareholders to suffer the inevitable consequences. In health-care, open-
ended promises have created open-ended liabilities that in a few cases loom so
large as to threaten the global competitiveness of major American industries.
I believe part of the reason for this reckless behavior was that accounting
rules did not, for so long, require the booking of post-retirement health costs as
they were incurred. Instead, the rules allowed cash-basis accounting, which
vastly understated the liabilities that were building up. In effect, the attitude of
both managements and their accountants toward these liabilities was “out-of-
sight, out-of-mind.” Ironically, some of these same managers would be quick to
criticize Congress for employing “cash-basis” thinking in respect to Social
Security promises or other programs creating future liabilities of size.
Managers thinking about accounting issues should never forget one of
Abraham Lincoln’s favorite riddles: “How many legs does a dog have if you call

his tail a leg?” The answer: “Four, because calling a tail a leg does not make it a
leg.” It behooves managers to remember that Abe’s right even if an auditor is
willing to certify that the tail is a leg.
70 [1999.]
71 [See the essay Economic versus Accounting Goodwill in Part VI.D.]
72 [1988.]
73 [Divided by hash lines: 1988; 1989; 1992.]
74 [1992.]

IX. TAX MATTERS
A. Distribution of the Corporate Tax Burden75
The Tax Reform Act of 1986 affects our various businesses in important
and divergent ways. Although we find much to praise in the Act, the net
financial effect for Berkshire is negative: our rate of increase in business value is
likely to be at least moderately slower under the new law than under the old. The
net effect for our shareholders is even more negative: every dollar of increase in
per-share business value, assuming the increase is accompanied by an equivalent
dollar gain in the market value of Berkshire stock, will produce 72¢ of after-tax
gain for our shareholders rather than the 80¢ produced under the old law. This
result, of course, reflects the rise in the maximum tax rate on personal capital
gains from 20% to 28%.
Here are the main tax changes that affect Berkshire:
• The tax rate on corporate ordinary income is scheduled to decrease from
46% in 1986 to 34% in 1988. This change obviously affects us positively—and
it also has a significant positive effect on two of our three major investees,
Capital Cities/ABC and The Washington Post Company.
I say this knowing that over the years there has been a lot of fuzzy and often
partisan commentary about who really pays corporate taxes—businesses or their
customers. The argument, of course, has usually turned around tax increases, not
decreases. Those people resisting increases in corporate rates frequently argue
that corporations in reality pay none of the taxes levied on them but, instead, act
as a sort of economic pipeline, passing all taxes through to consumers.
According to these advocates, any corporate-tax increase will simply lead to
higher prices that, for the corporation, offset the increase. Having taken this
position, proponents of the “pipeline” theory must also conclude that a tax
decrease for corporations will not help profits but will instead flow through,
leading to correspondingly lower prices for consumers.
Conversely, others argue that corporations not only pay the taxes levied
upon them, but absorb them also. Consumers, this school says, will be
unaffected by changes in corporate rates.
What really happens? When the corporate rate is cut, do Berkshire, The
Washington Post, Cap Cities, etc., themselves soak up the benefits, or do these
companies pass the benefits along to their customers in the form of lower prices?

This is an important question for investors and managers, as well as for
policymakers.
Our conclusion is that in some cases the benefits of lower corporate taxes
fall exclusively, or almost exclusively, upon the corporation and its shareholders,
and that in other cases the benefits are entirely, or almost entirely, passed through
to the customer. What determines the outcome is the strength of the
corporation’s business franchise and whether the profitability of the franchise is
regulated.
For example, when the franchise is strong and after-tax profits are regulated
in a relatively precise manner, as is the case with electric utilities, changes in
corporate tax rates are largely reflected in prices, not in profits. When taxes are
cut, prices will usually be reduced in short order. When taxes are increased,
prices will rise, though often not as promptly.
A similar result occurs in a second arena—in the price-competitive industry,
whose companies typically operate with very weak business franchises. In such
industries, the free market “regulates” after-tax profits in a delayed and irregular,
but generally effective, manner. The marketplace, in effect, performs much the
same function in dealing with the price-competitive industry as the Public
Utilities Commission does in dealing with electric utilities. In these industries,
therefore, tax changes eventually affect prices more than profits.
In the case of unregulated businesses blessed with strong franchises,
however, it’s a different story: the corporation and its shareholders are then the
major beneficiaries of tax cuts. These companies benefit from a tax cut much as
the electric company would if it lacked a regulator to force down prices.
Many of our businesses, both those we own in whole and in part, possess
such franchises. Consequently, reductions in their taxes largely end up in our
pockets rather than the pockets of our customers. While this may be impolitic to
state, it is impossible to deny. If you are tempted to believe otherwise, think for a
moment of the most able brain surgeon or lawyer in your area. Do you really
expect the fees of this expert (the local “franchise-holder” in his or her specialty)
to be reduced now that the top personal tax rate is being cut from 50% to 28%?
Your joy at our conclusion that lower rates benefit a number of our
operating businesses and investees should be severely tempered, however, by
another of our convictions: scheduled 1988 tax rates, both individual and
corporate, seem totally unrealistic to us. These rates will very likely bestow a
fiscal problem on Washington that will prove incompatible with price stability.
We believe, therefore, that ultimately—within, say, five years—either higher tax
rates or higher inflation rates are almost certain to materialize. And it would not
surprise us to see both.

• Corporate capital gains tax rates have been increased from 28% to 34%,
effective in 1987. This change will have an important adverse effect on
Berkshire because we expect much of our gain in business value in the future, as
in the past, to arise from capital gains. For example, our three major investment
holdings—Cap Cities, GEICO, and Washington Post—at year-end had a market
value of over $1.7 billion, close to 75% of the total net worth of Berkshire, and
yet they deliver us only about $9 million in annual income. Instead, all three
retain a very high percentage of their earnings, which we expect to eventually
deliver us capital gains.
The new law increases the rate for all gains realized in the future, including
the unrealized gains that existed before the law was enacted. At year-end, we had
$1.2 billion of such unrealized gains in our equity investments. The effect of the
new law on our balance sheet will be delayed because a GAAP rule stipulates
that the deferred tax liability applicable to unrealized gains should be stated at
last year’s 28% tax rate rather than the current 34% rate. This rule is expected to
change soon. The moment it does, about $73 million will disappear from our
GAAP net worth and be added to the deferred tax account.
• Dividend and interest income received by our insurance companies will be
taxed far more heavily under the new law. First, all corporations will be taxed on
20% of the dividends they receive from other domestic corporations, up from
15% under the old law. Second, there is a change concerning the residual 80%
that applies only to property/casualty companies: 15% of that residual will be
taxed if the stocks paying the dividends were purchased after August 7, 1986. A
third change, again applying only to property/casualty companies, concerns tax-
exempt bonds: interest on bonds purchased by insurers after August 7, 1986 will
only be 85% tax-exempt.
The last two changes are very important. They mean that our income from
the investments we make in future years will be significantly lower than would
have been the case under the old law. My best guess is that these changes alone
will eventually reduce the earning power of our insurance operation by at least
10% from what we could previously have expected.
• The new tax law also materially changes the timing of tax payments by
property/casualty insurance companies. One new rule requires us to discount our
loss reserves in our tax returns, a change that will decrease deductions and
increase taxable income. Another rule, to be phased in over six years, requires us
to include 20% of our unearned premium reserve in taxable income.
Neither rule changes the amount of the annual tax accrual in our reports to
you, but each materially accelerates the schedule of payments. That is, taxes
formerly deferred will now be front-ended, a change that will significantly cut

the profitability of our business. An analogy will suggest the toll: if, upon
turning 21, you were required to immediately pay tax on all income you were
due to receive throughout your life, both your lifetime wealth and your estate
would be a small fraction of what they would be if all taxes on your income were
payable only when you died.
Attentive readers may spot an inconsistency in what we say. Earlier,
discussing companies in price-competitive industries, we suggested that tax
increases or reductions affect these companies relatively little, but instead are
largely passed along to their customers. But now we are saying that tax increases
will affect profits of Berkshire’s property/casualty companies even though they
operate in an intensely price-competitive industry.
The reason this industry is likely to be an exception to our general rule is
that not all major insurers will be working with identical tax equations.
Important differences will exist for several reasons: a new alternative minimum
tax will materially affect some companies but not others; certain major insurers
have huge loss carry-forwards that will largely shield their income from
significant taxes for at least a few years; and the results of some large insurers
will be folded into the consolidated returns of companies with non-insurance
businesses. These disparate conditions will produce widely-varying marginal tax
rates in the property/casualty industry. That will not be the case, however, in
most other price-competitive industries, such as aluminum, autos and department
stores, in which the major players will generally contend with similar tax
equations.
The absence of a common tax calculus for property/casualty companies
means that the increased taxes falling on the industry will probably not be passed
along to customers to the degree that they would in a typical price-competitive
industry. Insurers, in other words, will themselves bear much of the new tax
burdens.
• A partial offset to these burdens is a “fresh start” adjustment that occurred
on January 1, 1987 when our December 31, 1986 loss reserve figures were
converted for tax purposes to the newly-required discounted basis. (In our
reports to you, however, reserves will remain on exactly the same basis as in the
past—undiscounted except in special cases such as structured settlements.) The
net effect of the “fresh start” is to give us a double deduction: we will get a tax
deduction in 1987 and future years for a portion of our incurred-but-unpaid
insurance losses that have already been fully deducted as costs in 1986 and
earlier years.
The increase in net worth that is produced by this change is not yet reflected
in our financial statements. Rather, under present GAAP rules (which may be

changed), the benefit will flow into the earnings statement and, consequently,
into net worth over the next few years by way of reduced tax charges. We expect
the total benefit from the fresh-start adjustment to be in the $30-$40 million
range. It should be noted, however, that this is a one-time benefit, whereas the
negative impact of the other insurance-related tax changes is not only ongoing
but, in important respects, will become more severe as time passes.
• The General Utilities Doctrine was repealed by the new tax law. This
means that in 1987 and thereafter there will be a double tax on corporate
liquidations, one at the corporate level and another at the shareholder level. In
the past, the tax at the corporate level could be avoided. If Berkshire, for
example, were to be liquidated—which it most certainly won’t be—shareholders
would, under the new law, receive far less from the sales of our properties than
they would have if the properties had been sold in the past, assuming identical
prices in each sale. Though this outcome is theoretical in our case, the change in
the law will very materially affect many companies. Therefore, it also affects our
evaluations of prospective investments. Take, for example, producing oil and gas
businesses, selected media companies, real estate companies, etc. that might
wish to sell out. The values that their shareholders can realize are likely to be
significantly reduced simply because the General Utilities Doctrine has been
repealed—though the companies’ operating economics will not have changed
adversely at all. My impression is that this important change in the law has not
yet been fully comprehended by either investors or managers.
Berkshire’s tax situation is sometimes misunderstood. First, capital gains
have no special attraction for us: A corporation pays a 35% rate on taxable
income, whether it comes from capital gains or from ordinary operations. This
means that Berkshire’s tax on a long-term capital gain is fully 75% higher than
what an individual would pay on an identical gain.
Some people harbor another misconception, believing that we can exclude
70% of all dividends we receive from our taxable income. Indeed, the 70% rate
applies to most corporations and also applies to Berkshire in cases where we
hold stocks in non-insurance subsidiaries. However, almost all of our equity
investments are owned by our insurance companies, and in that case the
exclusion is 59.5%. That still means a dollar of dividends is considerably more
valuable to us than a dollar of ordinary income, but not to the degree often
assumed.
B. Taxation and Investment Philosophy76

Berkshire is a substantial payer of federal income taxes. In aggregate, we
will pay 1993 federal income taxes of $390 million, about $200 million of that
attributable to operating earnings and $190 million to realized capital gains.77
Furthermore, our share of the 1993 federal and foreign income taxes paid by our
investees is well over $400 million, a figure you don’t see on our financial
statements but that is nonetheless real. Directly and indirectly, Berkshire’s 1993
federal income tax payments will be about ½ of 1% of the total paid last year by
all American corporations.78
Speaking for our own shares, Charlie and I have absolutely no complaint
about these taxes. We know we work in a market-based economy that rewards
our efforts far more bountifully than it does the efforts of others whose output is
of equal or greater benefit to society. Taxation should, and does, partially redress
this inequity. But we still remain extraordinarily well-treated.
Berkshire and its shareholders, in combination, would pay a much smaller
tax if Berkshire operated a partnership or “S” corporation, two structures often
used for business activities. For a variety of reasons, that’s not feasible for
Berkshire to do. However, the penalty our corporate form imposes is mitigated—
though far from eliminated—by our strategy of investing for the long term.
Charlie and I would follow a buy-and-hold policy even if we ran a tax-exempt
institution. We think it the soundest way to invest, and it also goes down the
grain of our personalities. A third reason to favor this policy, however, is the fact
that taxes are due only when gains are realized.
Through my favorite comic strip, Li’l Abner, I got a chance during my
youth to see the benefits of delayed taxes, though I missed the lesson at the time.
Making his readers feel superior, Li’l Abner bungled happily, but moronically,
through life in Dogpatch. At one point he became infatuated with a New York
temptress, Appassionatta Van Climax, but despaired of marrying her because he
had only a single silver dollar and she was interested solely in millionaires.
Dejected, Abner took his problem to Old Man Mose, the font of all knowledge in
Dogpatch. Said the sage: Double your money 20 times and Appassionatta will be
yours (1, 2, 4, 8 . . . . 1,048,576).
My last memory of the strip is Abner entering a roadhouse, dropping his
dollar into a slot machine, and hitting a jackpot that spilled money all over the
floor. Meticulously following Mose’s advice, Abner picked up two dollars and
went off to find his next double. Whereupon I dumped Abner and began reading
Ben Graham.
Mose clearly was overrated as a guru: Besides failing to anticipate Abner’s
slavish obedience to instructions, he also forgot about taxes. Had Abner been

subject, say, to the 35% federal tax rate that Berkshire pays, and had he managed
one double annually, he would after 20 years only have accumulated $22,370.
Indeed, had he kept on both getting his annual doubles and paying a 35% tax on
each, he would have needed 7½ years more to reach the $1 million required to
win Appassionatta.
But what if Abner had instead put his dollar in a single investment and held
it until it doubled the same 27½ times? In that case, he would have realized
about $200 million pre-tax or, after paying a $70 million tax in the final year,
about $130 million after-tax. For that, Appassionatta would have crawled to
Dogpatch. Of course, with 27½ years having passed, how Appassionatta would
have looked to a fellow sitting on $130 million is another question.
What this little tale tells us is that taxpaying investors will realize a far, far
greater sum from a single investment that compounds internally at a given rate
than from a succession of investments compounding at the same rate. But I
suspect many Berkshire shareholders figured that out long ago.
There’s a powerful financial reason behind Berkshire’s preference [to
acquire 100% of a business rather than a small fraction], and that has to do with
taxes. The tax code makes Berkshire’s owning 80% or more of a business far
more profitable for us, proportionately, than our owning a smaller share. When a
company we own all of earns $1 million after tax, the entire amount inures to our
benefit. If the $1 million is upstreamed to Berkshire, we owe no tax on the
dividend. And, if the earnings are retained and we were to sell the subsidiary—
not likely at Berkshire!—for $1 million more than we paid for it, we would owe
no capital gains tax. That’s because our “tax cost” upon sale would include both
what we paid for the business and all earnings it subsequently retained.
Contrast that situation to what happens when we own an investment in a
marketable security. There, if we own a 10% stake in a business earning $10
million after tax, our $1 million share of the earnings is subject to additional
state and federal taxes of (1) about $140,000 if it is distributed to us (our tax rate
on most dividends is 14%); or (2) no less than $350,000 if the $1 million is
retained and subsequently captured by us in the form of a capital gain (on which
our tax rate is usually about 35%, though it sometimes approaches 40%). We
may defer paying the $350,000 by not immediately realizing our gain, but
eventually we must pay the tax. In effect, the government is our “partner” twice
when we own part of a business through a stock investment, but only once when
we own at least 80%.

On May 20, 2003, The Washington Post ran an op-ed piece by me that was
critical of the Bush tax proposals. Thirteen days later, Pamela Olson, Assistant
Secretary for Tax Policy at the U.S. Treasury, delivered a speech about the new
tax legislation saying, “That means a certain mid-western oracle, who, it must be
noted, has played the tax code like a fiddle, is still safe retaining all his
earnings.” I think she was talking about me.
Alas, my “fiddle playing” will not get me to Carnegie Hall—or even to a
high school recital. Berkshire, on your behalf and mine, will send the Treasury
$3.3 billion for tax on its 2003 income, a sum equaling 2½% of the total income
tax paid by all U.S. corporations in fiscal 2003. (In contrast, Berkshire’s market
valuation is about 1% of the value of all American corporations.)
Our payment will almost certainly place us among our country’s top ten
taxpayers. Indeed, if only 540 taxpayers paid the amount Berkshire will pay, no
other individual or corporation would have to pay anything to Uncle Sam. That’s
right: 290 million Americans and all other businesses would not have to pay a
dime in income, social security, excise or estate taxes to the federal government.
(Here’s the math: Federal tax receipts, including social security receipts, in fiscal
2003 totaled $1.782 trillion and 540 “Berkshires,” each paying $3.3 billion,
would deliver the same $1.782 trillion.)
Our federal tax return for 2002, when we paid $1.75 billion, covered a mere
8,905 pages. As is required, we dutifully filed two copies of this return, creating
a pile of paper seven feet tall. At World Headquarters, our small band of 15.8
[personnel], though exhausted, momentarily flushed with pride: Berkshire, we
felt, was surely pulling its share of our country’s fiscal load.
I can understand why the Treasury is now frustrated with Corporate
America and prone to outbursts. But it should look to Congress and the
Administration for redress, not to Berkshire. Corporate income taxes in fiscal
2003 accounted for 7.4% of all federal tax receipts, down from a post-war peak
of 32% in 1952. With one exception (1983), last year’s percentage is the lowest
recorded since data was first published in 1934.
Even so, tax breaks for corporations (and their investors, particularly large
ones) were a major part of the Administration’s 2002 and 2003 initiatives. If
class warfare is being waged in America, my class is clearly winning. Today,
many large corporations—run by CEOs whose fiddle-playing talents make your
Chairman look like he is all thumbs—pay nothing close to the stated federal tax
rate of 35%.
In 1985, Berkshire paid $132 million in federal income taxes, and all
corporations paid $61 billion. The comparable amounts in 1995 were $286
million and $157 billion respectively. And, as mentioned, we will pay about $3.3

billion for 2003, a year when all corporations paid $132 billion. We hope our
taxes continue to rise in the future—it will mean we are prospering—but we also
hope that the rest of Corporate America antes up along with us. This might be a
project for Ms. Olson to work on.
75 [Divided by hash lines: 1986; 1998.]
76 [Divided by hash lines: 1993; 2000; 2003.]
77 [For 1996, the aggregate figure was $860 million; for 1998, $2.7 billion;
for 2003, $3.3 billion.]
78 [The 1998 letter includes the following:]
One beneficiary of our increased size has been the U.S. Treasury. The
federal income taxes that Berkshire and General Re have paid, or will soon pay,
in respect to 1998 earnings total $2.7 billion. That means we shouldered all of
the U.S. Government’s expenses for more than a half-day.
Follow that thought a little further: If only 625 other U.S. taxpayers had
paid the Treasury as much as we and General Re did last year, no one else—
neither corporations nor 270 million citizens—would have had to pay federal
income taxes or any other kind of federal tax (for example, social security or
estate taxes). Our shareholders can truly say that they “gave at the office.”

EPILOGUE79
We will keep most of our major holdings, regardless of how they are priced
relative to intrinsic business value. This ‘til-death-do-us-part attitude, combined
with the full prices these holdings command, means that they cannot be expected
to push up Berkshire’s value in the future as sharply as in the past. In other
words, our performance to date has benefited from a double-dip: (1) the
exceptional gains in intrinsic value that our portfolio companies have achieved;
(2) the additional bonus we realized as the market appropriately “corrected” the
prices of these companies, raising their valuations in relation to those of the
average business. We will continue to benefit from good gains in business value
that we feel confident our portfolio companies will make. But our “catchup”
rewards have been realized, which means we’ll have to settle for a single-dip in
the future.
We face another obstacle: In a finite world, high growth rates must self-
destruct. If the base from which the growth is taking place is tiny, this law may
not operate for a time. But when the base balloons, the party ends: A high
growth rate eventually forges its own anchor.
Carl Sagan has entertainingly described this phenomenon, musing about the
destiny of bacteria that reproduce by dividing into two every 15 minutes. Says
Sagan: “That means four doublings an hour, and 96 doublings a day. Although a
bacterium weighs only about a trillionth of a gram, its descendants, after a day of
wild asexual abandon, will collectively weigh as much as a mountain [ . . . ] in
two days, more than the sun—and before very long, everything in the universe
will be made of bacteria.” Not to worry, says Sagan: Some obstacle always
impedes this kind of exponential growth. “The bugs run out of food, or they
poison each other, or they are shy about reproducing in public.”
Even on bad days, Charlie Munger (Berkshire’s Vice Chairman and my
partner) and I do not think of Berkshire as a bacterium. Nor, to our unending
sorrow, have we found a way to double its net worth every 15 minutes.
Furthermore, we are not the least bit shy about reproducing—financially—in
public. Nevertheless, Sagan’s observations apply.
A fat wallet is the enemy of superior investment results. And Berkshire now
has a net worth of $11.9 billion compared to about $22 million when Charlie and
I began to manage the company. Though there are as many good businesses as

ever, it is useless for us to make purchases that are inconsequential in relation to
Berkshire’s capital. We now consider a security for purchase only if we believe
we can deploy at least $100 million in it. Given that minimum, Berkshire’s
investment universe has shrunk dramatically.
Nevertheless, we will stick with the approach that got us here and try not to
relax our standards. Ted Williams, in The Story of My Life, explains why: “My
argument is, to be a good hitter, you’ve got to get a good ball to hit. It’s the first
rule in the book. If I have to bite at stuff that is out of my happy zone, I’m not a
.344 hitter. I might only be a .250 hitter.” Charlie and I agree and will try to wait
for opportunities that are well within our own “happy zone.”
We will continue to ignore political and economic forecasts, which are an
expensive distraction for many investors and businessmen. Thirty years ago, no
one could have foreseen the huge expansion of the Vietnam War, wage and price
controls, two oil shocks, the resignation of a president, the dissolution of the
Soviet Union, a one-day drop in the Dow of 508 points, or treasury bill yields
fluctuating between 2.8% and 17.4%.
But, surprise—none of these blockbuster events made the slightest dent in
Ben Graham’s investment principles. Nor did they render unsound the negotiated
purchases of fine businesses at sensible prices. Imagine the cost to us, then, if we
had let a fear of unknowns cause us to defer or alter the deployment of capital.
Indeed, we have usually made our best purchases when apprehensions about
some macro event were at a peak. Fear is the foe of the faddist, but the friend of
the fundamentalist.
A different set of major shocks is sure to occur in the next 30 years. We will
neither try to predict these nor to profit from them. If we can identify businesses
similar to those we have purchased in the past, external surprises will have little
effect on our long-term results.
What we promise you—along with more modest gains—is that during your
ownership of Berkshire, you will fare just as Charlie and I do. If you suffer, we
will suffer; if we prosper, so will you. And we will not break this bond by
introducing compensation arrangements that give us a greater participation in the
upside than the downside.
We further promise you that our personal fortunes will remain
overwhelmingly concentrated in Berkshire shares: We will not ask you to invest
with us and then put our own money elsewhere. In addition, Berkshire dominates
both the investment portfolios of most members of our families and of a great
many friends who belonged to partnerships that Charlie and I ran in the 1960s.
We could not be more motivated to do our best.
We achieved our gains through the efforts of a superb corps of operating

managers who get extraordinary results from some ordinary-appearing
businesses. Casey Stengel described managing a baseball team as “getting paid
for home runs other fellows hit.” That’s my formula at Berkshire, also.
It’s far better to own a significant portion of the Hope diamond than 100%
of a rhinestone, and the companies just mentioned easily qualify as rare gems.
Best of all, we aren’t limited to simply a few of this breed, but instead possess a
growing collection.
Stock prices will continue to fluctuate—sometimes sharply—and the
economy will have its ups and downs. Over time, however, we believe it is
highly probable that the sort of businesses we own will continue to increase in
value at a satisfactory rate.
I think it’s appropriate that I conclude with a discussion of Berkshire’s
management, today and in the future. As our first owner-related principle tells
you, Charlie and I are the managing partners of Berkshire. But we subcontract
all of the heavy lifting in this business to the managers of our subsidiaries.
Charlie and I mainly attend to capital allocation and the care and feeding of
our key managers. Most of these managers are happiest when they are left alone
to run their businesses, and that is customarily just how we leave them. That puts
them in charge of all operating decisions and of dispatching the excess cash they
generate to headquarters. By sending it to us, they don’t get diverted by the
various enticements that would come their way were they responsible for
deploying the cash their businesses throw off. Furthermore, Charlie and I are
exposed to a much wider range of possibilities for investing these funds than any
of our managers could find in his or her own industry.
Most of our managers are independently wealthy, and it’s therefore up to us
to create a climate that encourages them to choose working with Berkshire over
golfing or fishing. This leaves us needing to treat them fairly and in the manner
that we would wish to be treated if our positions were reversed.
As for the allocation of capital, that’s an activity both Charlie and I enjoy
and in which we have acquired some useful experience. In a general sense, grey
hair doesn’t hurt on this playing field: You don’t need good hand-eye
coordination or well-toned muscles to push money around (thank heavens). As
long as our minds continue to function effectively, Charlie and I can keep on
doing our jobs pretty much as we have in the past.
As owners, you are naturally concerned about whether I will insist on
continuing as CEO after I begin to fade and, if so, how the board will handle that

problem. You also want to know what happens if I should die tonight. That
second question is easy to answer. Most of our many businesses have strong
market positions, significant momentum, and terrific managers. The special
Berkshire culture is deeply ingrained throughout our subsidiaries, and these
operations won’t miss a beat when I die. Moreover, we have three managers at
Berkshire who are reasonably young and fully capable of being CEO. Any of the
three would be much better at certain management aspects of my job than I.
On the minus side, none has my crossover experience that allows me to be
comfortable making decisions in either the business arena or in investments.
That problem will be solved by having another person in the organization handle
marketable securities. That’s an interesting job at Berkshire, and the new CEO
will have no problem in hiring a talented individual to do it. Indeed, that’s what
we have done at GEICO for 26 years, and our results have been terrific.
Berkshire’s board has fully discussed each of the three CEO candidates and has
unanimously agreed on the person who should succeed me if a replacement were
needed today.
The directors stay updated on this subject and could alter their view as
circumstances change—new managerial stars may emerge and present ones will
age. The important point is that the directors know now—and will always know
in the future—exactly what they will do when the need arises.
The other question that must be addressed is whether the Board will be
prepared to make a change if that need should arise not from my death but rather
from my decay, particularly if this decay is accompanied by my delusionally
thinking that I am reaching new peaks of managerial brilliance. That problem
would not be unique to me. Charlie and I have faced this situation from time to
time at Berkshire’s subsidiaries.
Humans age at greatly varying rates—but sooner or later their talents and
vigor decline. Some managers remain effective well into their 80s—Charlie is a
wonder at 82—and others noticeably fade in their 60s. When their abilities ebb,
so usually do their powers of self-assessment. Someone else often needs to blow
the whistle. When that time comes for me, our board will have to step up to the
job. From a financial standpoint, its members are unusually motivated to do so. I
know of no other board in the country in which the financial interests of
directors are so completely aligned with those of shareholders. Few boards even
come close. On a personal level, however, it is extraordinarily difficult for most
people to tell someone, particularly a friend, that he or she is no longer capable.
If I become a candidate for that message, however, our board will be doing
me a favor by delivering it. Every share of Berkshire that I own is destined to go
to philanthropies, and I want society to reap the maximum good from these gifts

and bequests. It would be a tragedy if the philanthropic potential of my holdings
was diminished because my associates shirked their responsibility to (tenderly, I
hope) show me the door. But don’t worry about this. We have an outstanding
group of directors, and they will always do what’s right for shareholders.
Berkshire has three outstanding candidates to replace me as CEO and that
the Board knows exactly who should take over if I should die tonight. Each of
the three is much younger than I. The directors believe it’s important that my
successor have the prospect of a long tenure.
Frankly, we are not as well-prepared on the investment side of our business.
At our October board meeting, we discussed that subject fully. And we emerged
with a plan. Under this plan, I intend to hire a younger man or woman with the
potential to manage a very large portfolio, who we hope will succeed me as
Berkshire’s chief investment officer when the need for someone to do that arises.
As part of the selection process, we may in fact take on several candidates.
Picking the right person(s) will not be an easy task. It’s not hard, of course,
to find smart people, among them individuals who have impressive investment
records. But there is far more to successful long-term investing than brains and
performance that has recently been good.
Over time, markets will do extraordinary, even bizarre, things. A single, big
mistake could wipe out a long string of successes. We therefore need someone
genetically programmed to recognize and avoid serious risks, including those
never before encountered. Certain perils that lurk in investment strategies cannot
be spotted by use of the models commonly employed today by financial
institutions.
Temperament is also important. Independent thinking, emotional stability,
and a keen understanding of both human and institutional behavior is vital to
long-term investment success. I’ve seen a lot of very smart people who have
lacked these virtues.
Finally, we have a special problem to consider: our ability to keep the
person we hire. Being able to list Berkshire on a resume would materially
enhance the marketability of an investment manager. We will need, therefore, to
be sure we can retain our choice, even though he or she could leave and make
much more money elsewhere.
I [have] arranged for the bulk of my Berkshire holdings to go to five
charitable foundations, thus carrying out part of my lifelong plan to eventually
use all of my shares for philanthropic purposes. In my will I’ve stipulated that

the proceeds from all Berkshire shares I still own at death are to be used for
philanthropic purposes within ten years after my estate is closed. Because my
affairs are not complicated, it should take three years at most for this closing to
occur. Adding this 13-year period to my expected lifespan of about 12 years
(though, naturally, I’m aiming for more) means that proceeds from all of my
Berkshire shares will likely be distributed for societal purposes over the next 25
years or so.
I’ve set this schedule because I want the money to be spent relatively
promptly by people I know to be capable, vigorous and motivated. These
managerial attributes sometimes wane as institutions—particularly those that are
exempt from market forces—age. Today, there are terrific people in charge at the
five foundations. So at my death, why should they not move with dispatch to
judiciously spend the money that remains?
Those people favoring perpetual foundations argue that in the future there
will most certainly be large and important societal problems that philanthropy
will need to address. I agree. But there will then also be many super-rich
individuals and families whose wealth will exceed that of today’s Americans and
to whom philanthropic organizations can make their case for funding.
These funders can then judge first-hand which operations have both the
vitality and the focus to best address the major societal problems that then exist.
In this way, a market test of ideas and effectiveness can be applied. Some
organizations will deserve major support while others will have outlived their
usefulness. Even if the people above ground make their decisions imperfectly,
they should be able to allocate funds more rationally than a decedent six feet
under will have ordained decades earlier. Wills, of course, can always be
rewritten, but it’s very unlikely that my thinking will change in a material way.
Lest we end on a morbid note, I also want to assure you that I have never
felt better. I love running Berkshire, and if enjoying life promotes longevity,
Methuselah’s record is in jeopardy.80
79 [Divided by hash lines: 1989; 1994; 1996 Owner’s Manual, updated
annually; 2005; 2006; 2006; 1996 Owner’s Manual updated annually.]
80 [According to the Bible, Methuselah lived 969 years. Genesis 5:27.]

INDEX
Acquisition philosophy, 30-31, 197-208, 211-214
Aesop, 221-224
Airline industry, 142-145
Alice in Wonderland, 101, 266, 273
Allen, Woody, 55-56, 131
American Cancer Society, 66
American Express, 117, 146, 150, 204
American Heart Assn., 66
Annual meetings, 37
Arcata Corp., 87-89
Arthur Andersen, 262
Asset intensity, 235-241
Astor, Lady, 188
AT&T, 236
Audit committees, 47, 79-80
Auto racing (analogies), 32
Banking industry, 128-130
Bargain purchases, 102, 115-118, 197
Baseball (analogies), 51, 73, 115, 206, 235, 295
Basketball (analogies), 109
Bear Stearns, 158
Being There, 87
Benchley, Robert, 115
Berkeley, Bishop, 266
Berra, Yogi, 90, 200
Beverage industry, 94, 110
Black-Scholes formula, 251-253
Blue Chip Stamps, 189, 200, 202, 205, 230, 237-238, 242
Boards of directors, 40-53
Boesky, Ivan, 86
Bogle, John, 46
Bonds,
junk, 127-134

pay-in-kind, 136-139
zero-coupon, 134-140
Brady Report, 101
Branson, Richard, 144
Bridge, Ben, 219
Bridge Jeweler, 219
Broadcasting business, 107
Buffalo News, The, 57, 58, 206
Buffett, Howard, 49
Buffett Partnership, Ltd., 53, 92
Burke, Dan, 102, 107, 128
Burlington Industries, 56
Burlington Northern Santa Fe Corporation (BNSF), 33, 56, 59, 253
Camelot, 206
Candler, Asa, 110
Capital Cities/ABC, Inc., 99, 107, 128, 199, 233, 283
Carnegie, Andrew, 102
Carnegie Hall, 103, 291
Cash flow, 96, 105-106, 136, 139, 222-224, 244-251
Chace, Ken, 53
Champion International, 140, 147
Chief executive officers (CEOs), 51-52, 67-68, 72, 75-77, 79, 93, 103, 141, 152,
157, 159, 177, 180, 184-185, 197, 200, 202-203, 207, 218, 243, 252, 255,
262-271, 280, 291
Chrysler Corporation, 69
Churchill, Winston, 84, 146
Cigar butt investing, 115-118
Cinderella, 82, 222
Circle of competence, 97-98, 112-114
Class B shares, 127, 192-196
Clayton Homes, 166-168
Coca-Cola Company, The, 29, 30, 47, 85, 94, 96, 110, 126, 127, 164, 205, 233,
243
Colodny, Ed, 140, 144, 145
Common Sense on Mutual Funds (John Bogle), 46
Competitive advantages, 97-98, 113
Comte, Auguste, 54
Concentration of investments, 94-95, 100, 109, 231

Consolidated Edison, 178
Corporate compliance, 77-79
Corporate philanthropy, 61-67
Council of Institutional Investors, 264
Crash, market (1987), 100-102
Current account deficit (US), 161-166
Dairy Queen, 48
Dart Industries, 202
Davis, Shelby, 124
Debt, 32-33, 118, 119-121 (see also Leverage) Deferred tax liabilities, 246, 248,
277-280
Denham, Robert, 149
Department stores, 102, 116, 118, 224, 286
Depreciation, 39-40, 136-137, 243-244, 247-251
Derivatives, 150-159
DeVoe, Ray, 91
Dimon, Jamie, 186
Disclosure, 37-40
Disney Company, The Walt, 99, 243
Diversification of investments, 94, 98, 133, 213
Diversified Retailing, 116, 200, 205
Dividends, 178-188
D&O (Directors’ & Officers’) insurance, 49
Donaldson, Bill, 267
Dow Jones, 43, 251
Drucker, Peter, 212
Earnings, accounting, 230-231
ersatz, 178-179
look-through, 32, 113, 230-235
owner, 244-251
restricted, 178-179
EBITD(A), 38, 40, 244
Efficient market theory, 81-85, 91-102, 112, 133, 221-224, 253
Enron Corp., 40, 151
Executive compensation, 67-77, 117
Exxon Mobil, 125-126

Fannie Mae, 157
Fechheimer Brothers Co., 82
Federal Savings and Loan Insurance Corporation (FSLIC), 140
Fields, W.C., 160
Finance theory,
generally, 82-85, 91-102
junk bonds, 127-134
market efficiency, 81-85, 91-102
option valuation, 251-252
risk, 95-98
Financial Accounting Standards Board (FASB), 262-263, 267-268, 275-276
Financial crisis of 2008, 120-121, 126, 158-159, 168
First Boston, 90
First Empire, 148
Fisher, Phil, 28
Fitzgerald, Terry, 196
Flat Earth Society, 253
Float, 32
Ford Motor Co., 101
Foreign exchange, 159-166
Franklin, Benjamin, 52, 65 (note), 209, 265
Freddie Mac, 157
Galbraith, Kenneth, 138
Galileo, 65 (note)
Gambling (analogies), 133, 204
GEICO Corporation, 32, 51, 52, 99, 102, 104, 107, 117, 127, 206, 242, 243, 253,
266, 285, 296
General Electric Co., 101, 193
General Motors Co., 111
General Theory, The (John Maynard Keynes), 164
General Utilities Doctrine, 287

Generally accepted
accounting principles (GAAP), 226, 233, 242, 244, 245, 248-250, 255-
256, 265, 275, 277, 280, 285, 287
Gen Re Corporation, 151, 155-157
Gerstner, Lou, 186
Gillespie, George, 150
Gillette Company, The, 29, 96-97, 110-112, 140, 147, 148, 205, 243
Gin rummy trading behavior, 34
Goizueta, Roberto, 110
Gold, 125-127, 201
Goldwyn, Samuel, 214 (note)
Golf (analogies), 35, 50, 85, 101, 197, 269, 270
Golub, Harvey, 150
Gompers, Samuel, 76
Goodwill, 235-244, 246-247, 275-276
Graham, Benjamin, 35, 81, 82, 86, 92, 94 (note), 95, 106, 131, 188, 227, 256,
289, 294
Graham, Kay, 102
Graham-Newman Corp., 92
Great Crash, The (Kenneth Galbraith), 138
Greenmail, 208
Gretzky, Wayne, 206
Gutfreund, John, 140
Hazen, Paul, 128
Hedge funds, 154, 173
Heider, Charlie, 196
Heineman, Ben, 199
Helzberg’s, 183
Henderson Brothers, Inc., 176
Henderson, William Thomas, 176
Hershey Foods, 43
Hertz, 150
H.H. Brown Shoe Co., 75, 96
HMS Pinafore, 211
Hochschild, Kohn, 116
Hockey (analogies), 206
Home ownership, 166-169
Horse racing (analogies), 116, 211

Hoskins, Ed, 210
Housing market, 166-169
IBM, 111, 126, 128, 186-188
Independent directors, 45-49
Index funds, 98, 112, 113
Inevitables, the 110-111
Inflation, 114, 123-124, 126, 162, 164, 178, 180, 199, 232, 239-241, 251, 285
Initial public offerings, 195, 223
Insurance business, 30, 32, 35, 53, 83-84, 119, 121, 151, 153, 155, 198
Intelligent Investor, The (Benjamin Graham), 95, 131, 188
Internet stocks, 125 (see also Technology) Intrinsic value, 33, 36, 81, 83, 121,
183-186, 191-194, 200-201, 204, 206, 207, 224-230, 293
Investment banking, 138, 148, 195-196, 217
Ivester, Doug, 110
Jesus Christ, 44, 48
Johnson, Samuel, 56
Jordan, Michael, 109
Junk bonds, 127-134
Justin Industries, 219
Justin, John, 219
Katrina, Hurricane, 119, 121, 156
Kelleher, Herb, 143
Kent, Clark, 173
Keough, Don, 110
Keynes, John Maynard, 100, 164, 236
Kiewit, Peter, 58
Kinsley, Michael, 268
Kirby Co., 277
Kitty Hawk, 105
Kohlberg Kravis Roberts & Co., 87-91
Kraft, 202
Lane, Lois, 217
Las Vegas, 133, 204
Lehman Brothers, 121
Leverage, 32, 118, 119-121, 128-129, 136, 154, 157, 159, 208-211, 210, 235,

237 (see also Debt) Leveraged buyouts, 208-211
Levitt, Arthur, 263, 271
Li’l Abner, 289
Lincoln, Abraham, 281
Loews, 135
Long Term Capital Management (LTCM), 154
Lowenstein, Lou, 209-210
Lynch, Peter, 93, 97
Maguire, Jim, 176, 177 (note), 192
Management and integrity, 49, 50, 108, 110, 117, 182
Manufactured housing industry, 166-168
Margin of safety, 106, 131
Market prices, 33, 36, 70, 78, 81, 112, 133, 134, 182, 189, 194, 205, 224-230,
235
Marriage (analogies), 51, 88, 102, 107, 118, 206
Marx, Karl, 54
Mason, Jackie, 140
Maughan, Deryck, 149
McGwire, Mark, 51
Medlin, John, 207
Methuselah, 299
MidAmerican Energy, 60, 77, 119, 220
Milken, Michael, 133
Millard, Mark, 185
Moat (protective business), 52, 97
Mockler, Colman, Jr., 140
Morrison, Garry, 53
Motorola, 135
Mr. Market, 81-85, 95, 101, 104
Munger, Charles T., passim
Murphy, Tom, 102, 107, 128, 199
Mutual funds, 46-47
Mutual Savings & Loan, 277
National Indemnity, 53, 65, 196, 201, 206
National Service Industries, 199
Newspaper business, 55, 57-59
Newton, Isaac, 117, 174

New York Federal Reserve, 158
New York Stock Exchange, 134, 174, 177 (note), 185, 192
Nicely, Tony, 51
Nicklaus, Jack, 50
Noah, 199
Northern Natural Gas, 60
Northwest Industries, 199
OFHEO, 157-158
Ogilvy, David, 50, 84
Ogilvy & Mather, 50
O’Hara, Scarlett, 136, 167
Okun, Arthur, 234
Olson, Frank, 150
Olson, Pamela, 290, 292
Optimism, 38-39, 91, 130, 198
Option valuation, 251-253
Owner orientation, 29, 43
Oxley, Michael, 158
PacifiCorp, 220
Palmer, Arnold, 50
Palmisano, Sam, 186
Pampered Chef, The, 67
Pension liabilities, 272-273
Peter Pan, 138
Philanthropy,
corporate, 61-67
personal, 298-299
Piedmont, 145
Poker (analogies), 82
Poor Richard’s Almanac (Benjamin Franklin), 209
Pope, The, 50
Portfolio insurance, 101
Preferred stock, 140-150
Pritzker, Jay, 87, 90
Private equity, 173, 220, 272
Procter & Gamble, 96 (note)

Railroad business, 121
Ratios (financial), 104-105, 221-222
R.C. Willey, 183
Reagan, Ronald, 75
Realization (accounting), 273-274
Regulated industries, 59-61, 121, 126, 158, 220, 284
Regulation, 60, 142, 144, 237
Regulators, 59-61, 124, 154, 156, 157, 158
Regulatory effectiveness, 158-159
Reichardt, Carl, 128
Reputation (see also Management and integrity), 57, 77, 117, 164, 195, 237
Restructurings, 35, 99, 103, 197, 268-271
Risk,
aversion to, 117-118, 155
meaning, 94-98
Risk control and management, 77
RJR Nabisco, 90, 130, 133
Rockwood & Co., 86-87
Russell, Bertrand, 130
Sagan, Carl, 65 (note), 293
Salomon Inc, 78, 90, 134, 135, 140, 146, 148, 149, 194, 195-196
Salvation Army, 99
Santayana, George, 197
Sarbanes, Paul, 158
Schey, Ralph, 73-74, 217
Schofield, Seth, 143, 145
Schroeder Trust, 87
Science of Hitting, The (Ted Williams), 115
Scott, F.C., 100
Scott & Fetzer Co. (Scott Fetzer), 73-74, 206, 217-218, 245-250, 277
Sears, 111
Secretariat, 211
Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC), 38, 76, 174, 204, 263, 265, 267,
271
See’s Candies, 72, 96, 99, 110, 126, 127, 201, 206, 237-241, 243, 250, 275
Sellers, Peter, 87
Share repurchases, 178-188
Sigler, Andy, 140

Simmons, Dick, 102
Simpson, Louis, 102
Singleton, Henry, 199
Smith, Adam, 54, 163, 190
Snyder, Bill, 102
Social compact, 59-61
Southwest Airlines, 143
Soviet Union, 294
Standard Brands, 202
St. Augustine, 65 (note)
Stein, Herb, 91
Stewart, Potter, 96

Stock options
accounting for, 263-268
use of, 33-34, 68-77, 184
Stock splits, 188-190
Story of My Life, The (Ted Williams), 294
Stengel, Casey, 295
St. Peter, 227
Succession (at Berkshire), 42-44, 295-299
Superman, 173, 217
Take on the Street (Arthur Levitt, Jr.), 263
Tax Reform Act of 1986, 283
Technology, 97-98, 109, 111, 213
Teledyne, 199
Tennis (analogies), 145
Textile industry, 34, 53-57, 102, 115, 116, 118, 224, 225, 228, 258
Theory of Investment Value, The (John Burr Williams), 105
Total return swap, 154
Trade account deficit (US), 159-166
Trading and transaction costs, 171-176, 188-192
Travelers Group, 149

Treasury
Inflation-Protected
Securities (TIPS), 114
Twain, Mark, 155
United Way, 62
Unruh, Jesse, 129
USAir, 149

Valuation
book value, 33, 36, 104-105, 116, 178, 185, 186, 190, 203, 206, 221,
224-230, 235-236, 274
cash flows, 38, 96, 105, 106, 134, 136, 139, 222, 224, 244-251
economic goodwill, 235-249, 275-276
generally, 102-108
intrinsic value, see this index
Van Winkle, Rip, 69, 279
Vesco, Robert, 182
Vietnam War, 294
Virgin Atlantic Airways, 144
Visa, 150
Wachovia Corp., 207
Washington Post Company, The, 81, 85, 95, 99, 102, 104, 107, 283, 285, 290
Watson, Thomas J., Sr., 128
Waumbec Mills, 54
Wells Fargo & Co., 85, 128-130, 243
Wesco Financial Corporation, 127 (note), 133, 208 (note), 210-211, 231
West, Mae, 98, 117
Williams, John Burr, 105
Williams, Ted, 115, 294
Wilmers, Bob, 148
Wizard of Oz, 91
Wolf, Stephen, 144, 149
World Book, 82, 277
Wright, Orville, 105
Wrigley, 97
Zaban, Erwin, 199
Zero-coupon bonds, 134-140

CONCEPT GLOSSARY
Cigar Butt Investing. A foolish method of investing akin to taking the last puff
on a cigar, it is the purchase of a stock at a sufficiently low price that there will
be some short-term profit, though the business’ long-term performance is likely
to be terrible. See Part II.F.
Circle of Competence. The limits of one’s ability to judge the economics of
businesses, intelligent investors draw a thick boundary and stick with companies
they can understand. See Part II.E.
Dividend Test. Retention of earnings is only justified if each dollar retained
produces at least a one dollar increase in per share market value. See Part IV.C.
Double-Barreled Acquisition Style. A sensible acquisition policy of buying
either 100% of businesses in negotiated acquisitions or less than 100% in stock
market purchases. See Prologue.
Institutional Imperative. A pervasive force in organizations that leads to
irrational business decisions from resistance to change, absorption of corporate
funds in suboptimal projects or acquisitions, indulgence of the cravings of senior
executives, and mindless imitation of peer companies. See Part II.F.
Intrinsic Value. A hard-to-calculate but crucial measure of business value, it is
the discounted present value of the cash that can be taken out of a business
during its remaining life. See Part VI.B.
Look-through Earnings. An alternative to GAAP rules governing investments
in marketable securities of the investee less than 20%, this measures the
investor’s economic performance based on its percentage interest of the
investee’s undistributed earnings (after an incremental reduction for income
taxes). See Part VI.C.
Margin-of-Safety. Probably the single most important principle of sound and
successful investing, Ben Graham’s principle says not to purchase a security
unless the price being paid is substantially lower than the value being delivered.
See Part II.D.
Mr. Market. Ben Graham’s allegory for the overall stock market, a moody
manic-depressive where price and value diverge, making superior intelligent
investing possible. See Part II.A.
Owner Earnings. A better measure of economic performance than cash flow or
GAAP earnings, equal to (a) operating earnings plus (b) depreciation and other
non-cash charges minus (c) required reinvestment in a business to maintain

present competitive position and unit volume. See Part VI.E.

DISPOSITION SUMMARY
The disposition table on the opposite page shows where in this collection
you may find excerpts from various annual letters. The far columns on the left
and right indicate the year of each letter, beginning with 79 for 1979 and going
through 11 for 2011. Across the top of the rows the table divides the collection
according to its Parts (I through IX) and its sub-headings (such as A through G).
Letters excerpted in the opening paragraphs of a Part are reported in the table as
being excerpted in Section A of that Part. The Prologue is from 1979 and 1996;
the Epilogue contains selections from 1989, 1994, 1996, 2005 and 2006. This
disposition table may be of special interest to those who have read previous
editions carefully, to see what is new and some rearrangements that have been
made.


