


PORTFOLIO / PENGUIN
Published by the Penguin Group
Penguin Group (USA) LLC
375 Hudson Street
New York, New York 10014
USA | Canada | UK | Ireland | Australia | New Zealand | India | South Africa | China
penguin.com
A Penguin Random House Company
First published by Portfolio / Penguin, a member of Penguin Group (USA) LLC, 2015
Copyright © 2015 by Zac Bissonnette
Penguin supports copyright. Copyright fuels creativity, encourages diverse voices, promotes free speech, and creates a vibrant culture.
Thank you for buying an authorized edition of this book and for complying with copyright laws by not reproducing, scanning, or
distributing any part of it in any form without permission. You are supporting writers and allowing Penguin to continue to publish
books for every reader.
This book was not authorized, prepared, approved, licensed or endorsed by Ty, Inc.
Courtesy Joy Warner: Insert Image 1, Image 2, Image 3
Courtesy Harold Nizamian: Image 4, Image 5
Courtesy of the author: Image 6
Courtesy Sondra Schlossberg: Image 7, Image 12, Image 13, Image 17, Image 18, Image 19, Image 22
Courtesy Patricia Smith-Roche: Image 8
Courtesy Lina Trivedi: Image 9, Image 10, Image 16
Courtesy Peggy Gallagher: Image 11, Image 14
Courtesy Lauren Boldebuck: Image 15
© Kevin R. Johnson/Press Line Photos/Corbis: Image 20
© Andrew Nelles/AP/Corbis: Image 21
Nick Presniakov: Image 23
LIBRARY OF CONGRESS CATALOGING-IN-PUBLICATION DATA
Bissonnette, Zac.
The great Beanie Baby bubble : mass delusion and the dark side of cute / Zac Bissonnette.
pages cm
Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN 978-1-10160698-8
1. Warner, Ty, 1944– 2. Ty, Inc.—History. 3. Beanie Babies (Trademark)—Collectors and collecting—History. 4. Toy industry—
United States—History. I. Title.
HD9993.T694T923 2015
338.7'688724—dc23
2014038639
Version_1

CONTENTS
Title Page
Copyright
INTRODUCTION
1 The Greatest Toy Show on Earth: No Kids Allowed
2 The Lower Level
3 Selling the Dream Pets
4 Plush Dreams
5 “You Can Make a Lot of Money with a Good Cat.”—Ty Warner
6 Business and Pleasure
7 Patti’s Last Stand
8 New Beginnings
9 Ty’s Big Idea
10 A Lamb Named Lovie
11 The First Collectors
12 The Return
13 Force Multipliers
14 Peanut the Royal Blue Elephant
15 The $12-per-Hour Sociology Major Who Made Ty Warner a Billionaire
16 The Efficient Market
17 The Beanie Chase
18 Shovel Dealers in the Gold Rush
19 The Point of No Return
20 Peak
21 The Feedback Loop Spins Out of Control
22 Money Changes People
23 The P. T. Barnum of Plush
24 Lights Out

25 Limping into the New Millennium
26 Faith’s Problem
27 Ty’s Problem
28 Departures
29 Endurance
30 Exit Strategy
PHOTOGRAPHS
NOTE ON SOURCES
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
INDEX

INTRODUCTION
The greatest toy salesman in the world looked out at his 250 employees gathered
for the Ty Inc. holiday party.
“Wow!” fifty-four-year-old Ty Warner said. “I’ve never been in a room with
so many millionaires!”
The salespeople cheered because it wasn’t an exaggeration. It was December
12, 1998, and Ty Inc. was three weeks away from closing out a year of sales that
would break nearly every record in the annals of the toy industry. Andi Van
Guilder was seated in the back with the relatives she’d hired to answer the
phones that hadn’t stopped ringing with orders for Beanie Babies in close to
three years. She thought about it. In 1993, she’d made less than $30,000 lugging
trunks of porcelain figurines and collector plates to stores in two states. In 1998,
selling Beanie Babies to independently owned toy and gift shops in Chicago’s
northern suburbs had paid her more than $800,000 in commissions. She was
thirty years old. Life was perfect.
The applause died down. Ty made the announcement he’d been planning for
weeks: he would be giving all his employees Christmas bonuses equal to their
annual salaries.
Pandemonium ensued. “Ty was their God,” Faith McGowan, Ty’s then
girlfriend, remembers. He basked in the adulation of the workers who, in the
span of three years, had helped make him the richest man in the American toy
industry. His annual sales for 1998 had surpassed $1.4 billion—virtually all of it
coming from the $2.50 wholesale price on beanbag animals that frenzied
speculators had turned into a craze that was the twentieth-century American
version of the tulip bubble in 1630s Holland.
Ty had created the toys in 1993 in the hope that they would be popular
among children, but they had become so much more than that; and they had also
become so much less than that because most collectors, aware of the soaring
values for the rarest styles, wouldn’t let their children anywhere near them.
Humorist Dave Barry explained the mania in a 1998 column: “Beanie Babies
were originally intended as fun playthings for children, but as the old saying
‘Wh
h
hi
i
d d
i
f
f
hild

goes, ‘Whenever you have something intended as innocent fun for children, you
can count on adults to turn it into an obsessive, grotesquely over-commercialized
“hobby” with the same whimsy content as the Bataan Death March.’”
The first buyers had been children with allowances. Then their moms had
started collecting. By the time of the 1998 Ty Christmas party, Van Guilder
remembers, it was mostly “creepy, belligerent men” she saw lined up when she
dropped in to check on retailers. The little animals with names like Seaweed the
Otter and Gigi the Poodle had become, as Van Guilder puts it, “something really
cute that just brought out the worst in people.”
The “worst in people” was inspired by a popular belief that Beanie Babies
were a long-term investment. A self-published author sold more than three
million copies of a book that touted ten-year predictions for their values. The
magazine Mary Beth’s Beanie World, started by a self-described soccer mom,
reached one million copies in paid monthly circulation. In it, a full-page, full-
color ad for Smart Heart tag protectors led with this headline: “How Do You
Protect an Investment That Increases by 8,400%?” The answer was to buy hard-
shell lockets in which to encase the animals’ heart-shaped paper tags that read
“Safety Precaution: Please remove all swing tags before giving this item to a
child.” More than any other consumer good in history, Beanie Babies were
carried to the height of success by a collective dream that their values would
always rise.
Warner’s announcement of bonuses wasn’t his only gift to his employees at
the Christmas party. He also presented them with #1 Bear, a signed and
numbered red Beanie Baby with the number 1 stitched onto the chest. The inside
of the hangtag explained that only 253 of the bears had been produced. It also
listed the company’s achievements for the year: more than $3 billion in retail
sales, number one in the gift category, number one in collectibles, and number
one in cash register area sales.
The workers inspected the bears and cheered some more. No doubt some
were moved by sentiment, but they also knew that the bear could be listed on
eBay, where Beanie Babies comprised 10 percent of all sales. On eBay, Beanie
Babies sold for an average of $30—six times the price they had originally
retailed for. Within a few weeks, #1 Bears would be selling for $5,000 or more
apiece.
Not everyone at the luncheon was so thrilled. Faith McGowan sat quietly. In
late 1993, Warner had shown her and her two daughters from her previous
marriage who lived with them the first prototype for Legs the Frog. Since then,
the animals had been the sole focus of their time together. Even as sales

t e a
a s ad bee t e so e ocus o t e
t
e toget e .
ve as sa es
exploded, Ty personally designed every piece the company put out, and that
meant spending several months each year at the factories in Asia. The frantic
pace of their life together was exhausting, and Ty, a throwback to an
entrepreneurial archetype that no longer exists, wasn’t slowing down. Today,
most rags-to-megariches stories involve hot technology, venture capital, and
high-profile initial public offerings. Ty skipped all of that, marketing his own
products based on his own ideas and the feedback of everyone around him
without ever hiring a marketing consultant or assembling a focus group. He’d
been the business’s only shareholder since he’d started it in his condo in 1983,
and when the investment bankers came peddling nine-and then ten-figure deals,
Warner declined the dinner invitations. “Most guys would at least have the
decency to jerk you around,” remembers one banker. “He wouldn’t even talk to
you.”
McGowan worried that she was losing him. He’d told her they would get
married, and he’d even shown her father the ring he’d gotten her. But that had
been more than a year ago, and there was no sign of a wedding on the horizon.
She was terrified about what would happen if their life together came to an end.
A few weeks after the party, Ty informed her that his pretax income for the year
had come in at $700 million—more than Mattel’s and Hasbro’s earnings
combined. Over in England, Ty’s ex-girlfriend Patricia Roche had become rich
running the company’s distribution there. Faith was apprehensive about Ty’s
continuing relationship with Roche. More pressingly, Faith was worried that, for
all the money Ty had made, she had no assets in her own name. “If Ty changed
the locks on the Oak Brook house while the girls were at school or I was at
work, I had nothing,” Faith remembered in an unpublished memoir. “No house.
No money in the bank. No employee severance. Not even a credit card.”
After the party was over, McGowan prepared for the worst. Ty had
presented her with the first #1 Bear—1 of 253—and she quickly sold it to a local
collectibles dealer for ten thousand dollars and a promise not to tell anyone
where he’d gotten it. She used the money to seed an emergency fund in case her
five-year relationship with a man who was now a billionaire imploded.
Her decision to sell was well timed. That Christmas party happened to mark
the absolute height of the Beanie craze, and the beginning of its spectacularly
rapid decline. The new millennium was approaching, and the bubble was about
to burst.
_______

I was in middle school when the Beanies hit and I remember a couple I had. But
mostly I remember the Beanie Baby dealers who sprouted at Cape Cod’s Dick &
Ellie’s flea market, which my mother and I visited every weekend. I remember
the adults wearing fanny packs and visors, eagerly discussing the “secondary
market” fluctuations driving up the prices of pieces they’d paid $5 for a few
weeks earlier. The Beanie sellers had the busiest booths and, for a couple of
years, it really did look like the dealers sticking with Shaker furniture and oil
paintings were as out of touch as Warren Buffett seemed to be when he
eschewed Internet stocks in favor of acquiring Dairy Queen in late 1997.
I hadn’t thought about Beanie Babies at all in at least ten years until, on a
wintry day in 2010, I stopped at Kimballs, an auction house down the road from
the University of Massachusetts, Amherst. I was a year away from graduating
into the worst job market in a generation, and the fallout from the recent
speculative mania in real estate was never far from anyone’s mind.
At Kimballs, I was given a reminder of the aftermath of a smaller
speculative mania: three large Rubbermaid containers on a table in the back of
the room holding at least five hundred Beanie Babies, all with plastic lockets
protecting their hangtags. Some were preserved individually in Lucite
containers. There was another large box of magazines and price guides with
names like Beanies & More, Beanie Collector, Beans! Magazine, and Beanie
Mania. Then there were spreadsheets and checklists—how many of each Beanie
Baby the collector/speculator had, which ones she was missing, how much was
paid, and estimates of current value (as of 1998 or 1999). More interesting than
the Beanies themselves was the manifest conviction of whoever had assembled
the collection that it would one day be of great value. Everything on display was
perfectly preserved and, as we found out when the auction started at 6:00 p.m.,
almost worthless. The entire lot sold for less than a hundred dollars—probably
well below 2 percent of its value at the height of the Beanie Babies market,
which, not coincidentally, was also the height of the Internet stock bubble.
That the speculative episode in Beanie Babies took place in tandem with the
Internet bubble suggests that the cultural forces that were alchemizing Internet
stocks had the same effect on Beanie Babies. They rose in an era of unreality
defined by magical thinking; as economist Dr. Robert Shiller writes in Irrational
Exuberance: “Speculative market expansions have often been associated with
popular perceptions that the future is brighter or less uncertain than it was in the
past.” They also, Shiller notes, have a way of clustering around century turns—
as if the prospect of going from ’99 to ’00 is so fantastic as to make all things

seem possible. In the new millennium, the residents of America’s high culture
thought, the Internet would change everything, making everyone who bought
Internet stocks rich, no matter how much they paid. Those in the lower culture
adapted that optimism to a belief in the investment potential of stuffed animals,
and it’s hard to say which view was proven more wrong.
_______
When I got home from the auction, I Googled Beanie Babies. There were
pictures of Beanie Babies and stories noting that there had once been a craze for
them, but nothing of any depth. Why had anyone ever thought Beanie Babies
were a good investment? How had people decided that they were no longer
worth anything?
There was also almost nothing on the man behind them. Ty Warner had an
education that consisted of one year studying drama at Kalamazoo College and a
net worth that Forbes estimated at $2.6 billion, all of it the product of the three-
year Beanie Babies craze. That was enough to make him the 209th richest man
in America. That was about the extent of the publicly available information
about him. He hadn’t done an interview since 1996, before the height of the
craze, and no one who had known him personally or worked for him had ever
spoken about him publicly. A Chicago magazine profile of Warner once
described his life as hidden “behind an impenetrable wall of plush.”
Wondering whether there might be a story worth telling about Ty Warner
and the Beanie Babies that had driven a large swath of America into a state of
greed-fueled delusion, I called one of the handful of people connected to the
company I found mentioned in an old news clipping: “It was an incredible ride,”
a man named Bill Harlow told me. “But it’s a shame it ended as badly as it did
for us.”
But don’t focus on the negative, Harlow said. If you want to understand Ty
Warner and how he became who he became, which was also the story of how
Beanie Babies became what they became, he said, go see him at a toy and gift
industry trade show. That was where Harlow had first met Warner in the late
1980s when Harlow was in his twenties, running a quilting store with his wife.
Warner was in his forties—a flamboyantly dressed, perfectly coiffed bit player
in the sleepy industry of stuffed animals, fastidiously grooming his plush
Himalayan cats, the first toys he’d ever created. Everyone who saw him at trade
shows in those days remembers him, usually alone, plucking around the cats’
i h
“
”
h
i
d bl
d
i

eyes with tweezers to accentuate “eye contact,” as he put it, and blow-drying
them to enhance the thickness of their fur.
Ty stopped the Harlows when they walked by his booth, asked them about
their store, and then declared that nothing could possibly sell a quilt better than a
stuffed cat sitting on top of it. They were skeptical, but they ordered when Ty’s
then girlfriend and business partner of sorts, Patricia Roche—Patti, as Ty called
her—made the decision easier: “I guarantee this order,” she scribbled on the
invoice, and signed it.
As it turned out, Warner was right. Cats sold quilts and quilts sold cats, and
Harlow reordered quickly. That $125 order set in motion a chain of events that
led to Harlow becoming the exclusive Ty Inc. distributor for all of Canada a few
years later. At his peak, Harlow’s annual revenue was more than $80 million—a
level of Canadian sales no other plush-toy seller had ever reached. Harlow
became a multimillionaire in his thirties, and it just went to show: Ty Warner’s
presence at trade shows could lead to incredible things. A trade show, Harlow
said: that was the place to see the king of the stuffed animals in his natural
habitat.

1

The Greatest Toy Show on Earth: No Kids Allowed
American International Toy Fair, February 2012, Javits Center, New York City
No children are admitted to the exhibit halls. Absolutely no one under the age of 18 (including
infants and toddlers) is permitted to attend Toy Fair. There are no childcare facilities at the
Javits Center. Please save yourself and your child the stress and embarrassment of being
turned away.
—FROM THE BACK OF MY ADMISSIONS TAG
“He’ll be here in eight minutes,” said a company vice president, looking down at
his cell phone.
Instantly, the twelve or so employees manning Ty Inc.’s booth got to work.
Dust was brushed from the pink pedestals displaying stuffed bears, cats, and
gorillas. A pair of handlers wielding lint brushes furiously patted down the
costumes on the three people who, with the help of a cockney-accented jester,
were promoting the company’s latest toy: Monstaz, a line of small, round,
multicolored beanbags that retail for around $6.99 and spew gibberish when you
squeeze them.
“Remember Beanies Babies?” the jester asked a group of five onlookers.
“When everybody went c-c-c-craaazy?!” he said, twirling his finger at his
temple. It wasn’t the cuteness, affordability, or long-term play value of Beanie
Babies that he was evoking; it wasn’t even the volume of sales. It was the
memory that, for a few years, Beanie Babies had driven many Americans insane.
The jester’s reference to the time when everybody went “c-c-c-crazy” is
about as much information as the company provides about itself. Ty Inc. is the
most successful stuffed-animal brand ever, but there is no “About Us” or
“Corporate” page on its Web site. There’s no Ty Warner archive at a university
library, no corporate-financed vanity history, and Warner has never given a
public speech of any kind. A single 1996 interview with People magazine is the
source of the biographical sketch in every news story about him, but, as I would
learn, very little of what he told the reporter was true.
At Toy Fair 2012, a Ty employee told me that earlier in the day Warner had
sent people to change the fabric on a curtain (a different shade of pink was

sent people to change the fabric on a curtain (a different shade of pink was
needed, he’d decided) and swap out the eyes in a display model. There was still
more to be done. When I asked one of the workers how much involvement
Warner had in Ty’s day-to-day operations, her eyes widened. “You have no
idea,” she said.
It is strange and noteworthy that Warner is still so focused on plush. He’s at
an age where most people are eyeing retirement—and, in any case, these days
the stuffed-animal business is a small portion of his wealth. His annual income
from Ty Inc. is well under 5 percent of what it was in the late 1990s and his real
estate investments are a much bigger part of his financial life. In the early 2000s,
he handed off day-to-day operations of his toy company to focus on renovating
the hotels he was buying. He devoted seven years to renovating the Ty Warner
Penthouse at his Four Seasons Hotel in New York City, spending $50 million on
the 4,300-square-foot suite and then making it the most expensive hotel
reservation in North America at $45,000 a night.
But beginning in the mid-2000s, his first love called him back. He spends
several months each year at factories in China, working on designs for new
products and making sure that his standards for quality control are upheld. For
all of his company’s thirty-year existence, Ty Warner has been involved in the
selection of every piece of fabric that goes into each of the more than five
thousand distinctly designed plush animals he’s sold. He recently turned down
dozens of samples for the eyes in Beanie Boos, another of his new lines because,
as Warner knows, the eyes are the most important part of any stuffed animal.
Wandering around the Ty booth, I told the company’s vice president of
global sales about the book I intended to write and my hopes for an interview
with Warner.
“There’s no way,” he said. “He’s just a very private person.” Then, after a
pause: “Sucks, doesn’t it?”
Finally, with no fanfare, the sixty-seven-year-old billionaire who, one Ty
sales rep told me, was “the Steve Jobs of plush” arrived. Ty Warner is just short
of five-foot-ten—shorter than you always expect someone you’ve waited hours
to meet to be. College classmates remember mocking him for wearing lifts in his
shoes. He had on a black suit over a black turtleneck, with a wedding band that
had led to speculation among the company’s sales reps that he’d finally married
for the first time. (He hadn’t.)
The twenty-year odyssey of plastic surgery funded by the largest personal
fortune in the history of stuffed animals is the first thing anyone who sees
Warner will notice—although the cosmetic work began years before he was

g
g
y
notably wealthy. A former teddy bear designer for the company told me that Ty
would “get his face stretched” a few months before Toy Fair every year. More
recently, he’s used black sheep embryo injections to further maintain his youth.
His face was tight and pale, and it had a certain porcelain-doll-like appearance.
One former employee thought that the work focused around his eyes made him
look Asian, and others said he was having sinus issues as a result of too-frequent
procedures. Cosmetic surgeons had warned him that he had long ago reached the
point of diminishing returns, but he persevered in an obsession with his own face
that mirrored his meticulous micromanagement of his company’s stuffed
animals. His eyebrows were sculpted and his light hair was colored and carefully
styled into a sort of mullet that had been his look for at least fifteen years—
partly because it helped to hide any incision marks from the cosmetic
procedures.
Standing away from the booth, Ty whispered a list of changes to a
thirtysomething female assistant, and then he smiled. “It looks pretty good,
doesn’t it?” he said.
“Mr. Warner,” I said as I approached him.
He walked over, stuck out his hand, and looked at me while I introduced
myself.
“Nice to meet you,” he said.
I told him that I was working on a book about Beanie Babies; I told him that
I thought it was the most intriguing entrepreneurial success story in American
history—I really thought that and I still do. I said I knew that in the past he
hadn’t exactly been media-friendly but that he had the most incredible story to
tell and that I hoped he would tell it to me: how, starting with nothing, he had
become a billionaire with beanbag animals that he’d convinced the American
public were rare even while ships from China delivered them by the tens of
millions as quickly as the factories could make them.
“There’s a lot of people who can tell the story a lot better than I can,”
Warner told me in a deep but soft-spoken Midwestern voice that had a certain
folksiness to it. But there was no hesitation in his delivery that suggested he’d
cooperate. “It was a lot of trials and a lot of tribulations, a lot of ups and downs
—and we were just trying to keep up with it. A lot of good and a lot of bad. And
I would probably just tell you the good and then it wouldn’t be balanced.”
“Well, I would talk to other people, too,” I said.
“No, I think it’s better if you just talk to other people.”
That, over the next two years, is what I did. I talked to current (but mostly
former) Ty employees and executives and the two women who were by

former) Ty employees and executives and the two women who were by
Warner’s side during the most exciting parts of his career: the first from the
beginning of the company up until the launch of Beanie Babies, and the second
from the launch on through the end of the craze. I also talked with his sister, who
told me the story of an early life that Ty himself described as “unhappy” in a
2013 court filing. I learned that that was a profoundly understated assessment.
Perhaps most important, I met with the collectors, dealers, and bestselling
authors who transformed Ty Warner’s creation from a popular toy into a
collectible and, finally, a token for speculation. I talked with a retired soap opera
star who, with too much time on his hands in the twilight of his career, lost his
children’s six-figure college funds hoarding Beanies at the peak of the market.
The story of Ty Warner and his Beanie Babies shows the dynamics that
drive people into and out of speculative manias, but it’s also about every other
manner of human dysfunction, turmoil, and trauma. “As you have learned,”
Faith McGowan once told me, “this is a dark story.”
But first, while I was at the Javits Center, I walked just a couple hundred feet
downstairs—but a long drop in other ways—to talk to the man who gave Ty his
start in the toy business.

2

The Lower Level
I can see the world without many things, but I cannot see the world without a teddy bear.
—HAROLD NIZAMIAN
The lower level of the Javits Center is filled mostly with smaller, less elaborate
booths for the upstarts who can’t afford prime space on the upper floor. With
exhibition costs starting in the four digits, every aspiring Geppetto with some
credit cards or a home equity loan has a chance to get his toys in front of every
buyer worth courting. Catch the eye of the right buyer, and a fortune-making
share of the global toy industry’s $80 billion in annual revenue can be yours.
With that bump in sales might come the means to afford a larger booth, which
will make you easier for the buyers to spot and, maybe more important,
announce that you’ve arrived.
Held annually since the turn of the century, Toy Fair tracks the history of the
industry and, in many ways, the rise of consumerism in America. The U.S.
market is so dominant that although major manufacturers exhibit on every
continent, retailers from more than a hundred countries come to New York City
to see what’s hot. It was easy to get distracted as I walked away from the Ty
booth and downstairs to find Harold Nizamian, who had been the CEO of Dakin
Inc., a plush-industry leader, when Ty Warner worked there in the 1960s and
1970s. The Lennon Sisters of The Lawrence Welk Show fame—now in their
sixties and seventies—were at Toy Fair to personally take orders for their line of
Best Pals rag dolls, inspired by their childhood in Venice, California. Elsewhere,
a fiftysomething Italian man wearing a seersucker suit galloped by,
demonstrating his product: a life-size mechanical pony. “Why don’t you already
order?” he hissed at an older woman who was watching him.
Forty years ago, Harold Nizamian would have had a booth not all that
different from the one Ty has now. Harry, as everyone at Dakin called him,
would have been the star, posing for reporters with the company’s newest
products, smiling and enthusiastically pointing out every feature on whatever
teddy bear he was pushing. Dakin’s sales force came from all over the country to
man the booth; they loved Harry and Harry loved them. “It was Harry’s

enthusiasm and love of people that built the company,” remembers one former
Dakin executive.
When I met Harry, close to fifty years after he gave Warner his first job in
plush, he was back on Toy Fair’s lower level, trying to show his toys to
everyone who walked by. Harry, who once ran a $200 million toy business,
watched his empire crumble just as Warner’s was ascending. He’s in his early
eighties now, and he manned the booth for his company, Timeless-Toys Inc.,
alone. His son had risen at dawn to help set up. Nizamian’s been at Toy Fair to
sell something nearly every year since 1962, and age and ailing finances haven’t
stopped him. Things had gotten so bad recently, he confided, that he was
struggling to find the $3,000 he needed to fill a retailer’s order for an out-of-
stock line of hand puppets.
He showed me a set of jumbo-size pick-up sticks, rolled a multicolored die,
and then bent over wearily to pick up the stick of corresponding color. These
sticks, which he’s had in inventory since 2001, help kids develop spatial skills,
social skills, integrity, and critical thinking, he said. But the thing that still gets
Harry most excited is plush. When he put down the pick-up sticks to show me a
big black bear puppet named Bart, and Sasha, a Russian blue cat, decades
seemed to evaporate from his face, and it was easy to see Harry as he had once
been: a child of poverty raised in a string of orphanages, separated from his
father, clinging to any form of sweetness that happened to enter his life.
Nizamian was born in Philadelphia in 1930. His father was an Armenian
candy maker and his mother died shortly after Harry was born. When his father’s
financial fortunes crumbled with the Depression, Harry and his three siblings
were placed in foster care on a farm run by the Edwin Gould Foundation for
Children. Once a year, a bus brought them to New York, where they had medical
and dental work done at Columbus Circle—about a mile and a half from the
Javits Center. Nizamian is reminded of his youth every year when he makes the
trip to Toy Fair. He has no memories of any stuffed toys from his childhood. It
is, perhaps, that lifelong thirst for comforting objects that has kept Harry in the
soft-toy business, even though it hasn’t treated him well in decades.
“It’s the look on a kid’s face when he gets a teddy bear,” Harry told me. “I
love that. I love the game.” He paused. “A teddy bear, to me . . . is just endless
and unconditional love.”
_______
Th
t ff d
i
l b
i
h
d
li
d
th
t
l
f d
d
b t

The stuffed-animal business has declined over the past couple of decades, but
with a funny quirk: the people who find the most success in it seem almost
without exception to come from deeply broken childhoods, and few of them ever
really leave the industry. Ty Warner still goes to Toy Fair every year. Virginia
Benes-Kemp, who was creative director at Dakin in the 1960s and remembers
Warner’s frequent drop-ins to discuss ideas for new products, is in her eighties
now. Every day she goes to work at Down to Earth Designer Gifts, her store in
Pacifica, California, where she sells—for reasons that will later become clear—
pretty much every major plush line except for Ty Inc. Sally Winey, who was a
star designer for Ty and a celebrity of the 1990s collectibles world, ended up
bankrupt after the decline of the mania and a legal battle with Warner. Still,
every summer, she rents a shop in Southport, North Carolina, and tries—mostly
without success—to sell her handmade bears.
Part of this is a gambler’s mentality: every toy manufacturer is one break
away from striking it rich, and if you’ve had that happen once, you spend the
rest of your life fantasizing about its happening again. Yet there’s more to it than
money. Like the Velveteen Rabbit of Margery Williams’s perennially best-
selling children’s book, plush makers are animated by the prospect of their
creations becoming the first thing a child loves and values. The speculative
bubble that emerged for Beanie Babies is probably best understood as late-1990s
speculative capitalism merged with a massive collective flashback to the comfort
stuffed animals provided in our early years.
Psychology textbooks tell us that a stuffed animal is the most common
transitional object for American children—the thing that helps them detach from
their mothers and begin life as independent beings. In his 1984 memoir, They
Cage the Animals at Night, Jennings Michael Burch recounts the violence and
neglect he faced in a childhood spent in orphanages and foster homes. One
incident stood out above all others: at age eight, when he was removed from an
orphanage and placed in foster care, a nun told him he couldn’t take his stuffed
dog with him. “Doggie was gone,” he recounted. “I felt the worst pain I had ever
known. It wouldn’t go away.”
The nurturing that stuffed animals provide doesn’t exactly mesh with the
reputation of the industry behind them. Several toy executives I spoke with
repeated the same old joke about the plush business: “It’s for people who aren’t
nice enough for the Garment District.”
_______

Ty Warner met Harry Nizamian in the mid-1960s, when Warner was selling
vacuum cleaners door to door in Northern California—a gig he worked in
between pumping gas, stocking shelves at a grocery store, and auditioning for
roles in movies. Warner, vacuum cleaner in hand, knocked on the door of a
lavish mansion; when the homeowner opened it, Ty tossed a handful of dirt on
the man’s carpet, then quickly vacuumed it up. The homeowner turned out to be
Harold Nizamian, and he was impressed. “Kid, you’re a hell of a salesman,” he
said. “You ought to come work for me.” Thus began Warner’s entry into the
world of soft toys.
Once Warner had his own company, this story was recited to every new
salesman he hired. He also told it to the women he dated, and it’s easy to see
why: it reads as if plagiarized from a Horatio Alger novel. As a story about the
wonderful things that can happen to anyone with pluck and a willingness to take
some risks to close a sale, it’s hard to beat. And so, naturally, it isn’t true.
Actually, Ty got the job through his father, Hal, who sold Dakin’s line of
plush products all over Ohio. Ty had recently dropped out after a year of college
to move to California to try to become an actor. That didn’t work out, so he tried
selling cameras door to door. Joy remembers Ty excitedly bringing home the
samples and how deflated he was after his father mocked the business idea. Hal
was proven right and when the camera buyers failed to materialize, Ty was left
badly in need of an opportunity. But his father still had to push him to take a job
with Dakin. “It’s a good company,” Hal told him again and again. Reluctantly,
Ty agreed to start work as his dad’s sub-rep.
The vacuum cleaner story wasn’t true, but Warner quickly established
himself as such a gifted salesman that it’s easy to see why people believed it.
“He was the best salesman I have ever known in my forty-four years of being a
manager,” says Paul Roche, who was Nizamian’s head of sales and Warner’s
direct supervisor. As Dakin grew from a small business into a global leader in
plush during the 1960s and 1970s, Ty Warner became its highest-paid employee
within just a few years of entering the business—outearning Dakin’s CEO, an
unusual accomplishment for a commissioned sales rep with no college degree
and no significant prior sales experience.
Warner had found his passion; and it was at Dakin that he began to develop
the ideas—low prices and high volume, selling only to independently owned
retailers, obsessive attention to every detail of product design, and a fixation on
putting PVC pellets in stuffed animals—that would make him rich. As he told
journalist Joni Blackman in the only extended interview of his life, “I learned
marketing impulse items
I learned this company [Ty Inc ] from Dakin They

marketing, impulse items—I learned this company [Ty Inc.] from Dakin. They
were the best.” Later, when he had his own business and new employees to train,
his notes on the philosophies that he hoped to convey to them always began
here.
_______
On April 1, 1955, San Francisco entrepreneur Richard Dakin started a business
importing shotguns from Europe. In 1957 Richard’s son Roger joined him and
tried to spur growth with a line of imported battery-operated trains. Along with
the trains, the manufacturer sent samples of six small, sawdust-filled toys
covered with a cotton velveteen fabric. At the urging of his employees, Roger
took the samples down to a notions buyer at a nearby department store. They
immediately ordered three hundred pieces, and Dakin was in the toy business.
Roger branded the line Dakin Dream Pets, and they quickly became a steady
seller in gift and toy stores. The trains and the money-losing gun business were
jettisoned shortly thereafter, completing Dakin’s improbable transformation
from the Dakin Gun Company to a fast-growing stuffed-animal concern.
The Dream Pets look dated today, but they were quite a novelty at the time.
The velveteen gave them a boldness of color that softer plush with a thicker pile
lacked. They were stuffed with willow sawdust and a small amount of straw, and
the look was vibrant and expressive. They were too hard to be cuddly, but they
had wonderfully creative designs and characters, and at a wholesale price of
sixty cents, they sold well as impulse buys. When the popular antiques guide
Warman’s published its 101 Greatest Baby Boomer Toys, Dream Pets made the
list at number sixty-six. They were probably the Beanie Babies’ closest ancestor,
and in the late 1990s many antiques dealers peddling Dream Pets marketed them
as “the original Beanie Babies” although they had no knowledge of the Ty
Warner connection: the Dream Pets were the first toys that Ty Warner ever sold.
The first stage of Dakin’s growth ended on December 20, 1966, when
Richard Dakin, his son Roger, both of their wives, and four of Roger’s children
died in a plane crash. By then Dakin was large enough to have a small board of
directors, which handed control over to Nizamian, the company’s executive vice
president, then in his midthirties. Dakin was up to $3.5 million a year in sales,
with virtually all of it coming from plush toys—mostly Dream Pets.
Under Nizamian Dakin rose to become one of the most prominent sellers of
stuffed animals in the world. By the late 1970s Dakin was selling close to 70
million toys per year in 87 countries, divided among a product line of 650–700

o toys pe yea
8 cou t es, d v ded a o g a p oduct
e o 650
00
pieces, and Ty Warner was the company’s star salesman.

3

Selling the Dream Pets
No one who remembers Ty Warner in the first two decades of his life remembers
him for any notable ambitions or for any interest in business. “I would swear in a
court of law,” says high school classmate Donald Danald of Warner’s billion-
dollar net worth, “that aliens kidnapped the real Ty Warner.” The alchemy of Ty
Warner happened almost instantaneously upon his entry into the plush business.
Before Dream Pets, Warner had no particular dreams—other than a vague,
adolescent aspiration for wealth and fame, but no plans for how to achieve it. All
that changed when he started at Dakin. As his lawyers described his time there in
a 2013 legal filing, “Ty especially enjoyed selling a product intended for
children, and he developed a keen sense of what particular plush toys children
enjoyed.”
That knowledge brought him tremendous success at a young age: earnings of
well over $100,000 per year in the late 1960s, a time when the median household
income was less than $7,000. With that income came the hatred of almost
everyone Warner worked with. “He was a smart-assed shithead,” remembers
Mike Ingram, a former Dakin sales rep. “He was arrogant and thought he was
somebody that he wasn’t. I would guess you’re gonna be hard-pressed to find
anybody who liked him.”
Paul Roche, Warner’s supervisor, adds that “I never liked him as a human
being. I found him to be niggardly and not honest in his dealings with people. I
didn’t find any level of trust between him and the company or him and anybody
else. At that time in his life, he was very selfish, totally into himself.”
But couldn’t some of that antipathy be attributed to professional jealousy?
“I don’t think anybody was jealous of him because we all knew he had a
lousy life. He had no close relationships; they were close insofar as they served
him. There were no relationships with men, only if he could get something out of
you at the moment. No real friends. None. That was part of the guy’s problem.
He didn’t have a lot of contact. He was into work and pussy, in that order. He
was a very persuasive character, a salesman. He was endearing to his customers,
and ladies loved him. Once you scrape the surface away just a little bit, he was
an asshole.”
Former Dakin employees saw his father Hal as one dimensional and

Former Dakin employees saw his father, Hal, as one-dimensional and
excessively materialistic. He had no hobbies outside of selling, according to
Roche, save for an antiques collection. When Roche asked him about it, the elder
Warner quickly pointed to its investment value. Nizamian adds that “you
couldn’t talk to him about anything except the business.”
Roche says Ty Warner was similar, but with a stronger work ethic. “He was
persuasive, tenacious, wouldn’t take no for an answer,” he says. “He kept
coming back to the sale, as most good salespeople do. I just think he practices
that better than most people.”
Success aside, Warner’s relationship with his father was strained at best and,
by most accounts, bizarre and dysfunctional. Ty and his father dated the same
women on several occasions. “Dad really knew how to treat a woman,” Ty’s
sister remembers. She says that Ty was jealous of his father’s charms, and
channeled that energy into seducing women his father had been with. Nizamian
took a personal interest in Warner—and sought to become a mentor to the young
salesman. “Ty, there’s so much more to life than money,” Nizamian lectured
him. “Learn about the arts, learn about history.”
Unlike his father, Ty seemed to have a genuine passion for the product. He
was making a lot of money, but he was also using it as an extremely well-paid
internship in the business of plush. Retailers Warner once sold to recall him
quizzing them on which products were selling and which ones weren’t; Warner
sought feedback on competitors’ products, too. What did they think of this idea?
What about that? What if you combined this with that?
He also pitched his ideas to the executives at Dakin. Dressed in a camel hair
coat, he frequently strolled into product development head Virginia Benes-
Kemp’s office with advice about new products. “He thought he was God’s gift to
women,” she remembers, and she mostly ignored his suggestions. Sometimes
Warner took his ideas straight to the CEO. Nizamian is quick to admit that
Warner’s product sense was uncanny. Ty could look at a new product and
declare on the spot whether it would sell—and he turned out to be right far more
often than the executives were. One idea Nizamian declined to pursue: a line of
teddy bears holding World’s Best Dad plaques.
Warner developed his entire arsenal of knowledge on the road in his Rolls-
Royce, fur coat, and top hat; sometimes he even carried a cane. He knew what it
took to get the attention of buyers, and his devotion to learning about plush gave
him knowledge of the industry totally unheard of among the ranks of
commissioned salespeople. Warner had been a shy high school athlete, but he
transformed himself from a guy who, as one classmate put it, “went out of his

way to avoid being noticed” into one of the most persuasive and eccentric
personalities in an industry known for them. Other salesmen might throw their
hats into a slamming door to try to get a retailer’s attention, but Warner never
resorted to that. He was always smooth and, with women, especially, flirtatious.
Warner had carefully crafted a stage persona that was perfect for toy sales.
He remained largely inscrutable and distant from other Dakin employees,
with the exception of Roger and Betty Ericson, a husband-and-wife team who
represented Dakin to retailers in Indiana while Warner was selling in Ohio. The
Ericsons, by all accounts, were extremely nice people—and were able to bond
with Warner in a way that few others did. When they told him they planned to
name their son Roger, Warner scoffed: “Nobody needs more than two letters.”
So R. J. Ericson it was. When Warner was in Indiana for toy shows, he stayed
with them at their house; when they were in Ohio, where Warner was based,
they stayed in hotels. Warner once offered to take their five-year-old daughter
out for ice cream, but when he pulled up in his Rolls-Royce, he asked her if she
had any money. She said no and he told her to go ask her parents because he
didn’t want to pay for it. They were puzzled but handed her a few dollars, and
she and Warner had a nice time together. Betty found the incident bizarre, but
that was Ty. She didn’t hold his idiosyncrasies against him.
Warner’s attitude was less endearing to the company’s management: he
skipped the sales conferences to play tennis—while still taking advantage of the
all-expenses-paid junkets. On the court he was a fierce competitor and a bad
loser; Nizamian remembers beating him once and then watching Warner storm
back to his car without saying good-bye. He was also stingy—a bad tipper who
was focused on the return on investment on every purchase; the strong resale
value was behind his decision to buy a Rolls-Royce instead of a Mercedes. And
when it came to health insurance, Warner wasn’t seeing a good expected rate of
return. His father approached head of sales Paul Roche with concern. Roche
called Ty and told him, “Just listen to Hal,” but Warner wasn’t buying it. “I’m
healthy, I don’t need it, I’m not gonna spend the money,” he said.
Warner’s success and product instincts made Nizamian consider bringing
him in to work on the corporate side, but Warner’s relationships with other
employees—he was in a constant state of war with some members of
management—and his lack of formal education led Nizamian to decide against
it. He worried that Warner was too “narrowly concentrated” for the vagaries of
corporate life.

_______
After fifteen years as a top salesman at Dakin, Warner overstepped. Dakin had
built itself first as a traditional plush business, but as brand-and licensing-driven
products took over the industry, it adapted with great success. It started
manufacturing products based on the cartoon cat Garfield in 1978; sales
exploded with a line of plush Garfields with suction-cup paws that people stuck
to the windows of their cars. As Dakin grew, it sought to expand its sales ranks
and, as a consequence, shrink the territories of the existing account reps. It’s a
common practice—Warner later did the same thing at Ty Inc.—and with sales
increasing at each account and more accounts being opened in each market,
salespeople often make more money with less work. Yet it is also not uncommon
for existing salespeople to be displeased with the changes. And Warner was
pissed. He started pitching his own stuffed animals to the same buyers he was
paid to sell Dakin products to.
Paul Roche received a few calls from customers who were surprised by
Warner’s behavior. Ty had been smart enough not to approach the biggest
accounts that had the strongest relationships with Dakin, but he overestimated
his customers’ loyalty to him relative to their loyalty to Dakin. Roche and
Nizamian hired a private investigator to look into it, and he reported back that it
was true: Warner had rented office space for his new venture. Roche gave the
greatest salesman he’d ever worked with thirty days’ notice.
On Warner’s last day with the company, he approached Roche and another
executive at the Chicago Gift Show. He insisted that the whole thing had been a
misunderstanding. The other executive asked whether there was a way to give
Warner another chance. “You can manage this whole company by yourself
because it’s either him or me,” Roche replied.
That night, Warner showed up at a company dinner, with a date. “He had
just been fired, he wasn’t wanted. That’s the way the man was,” says Roche,
speculating that Warner was mostly there for the free food. Roche also tells a
bizarre story illustrating Warner’s vindictive side. When Warner dropped off his
final retailer orders at Roche’s hotel room, Roche took the sales sheets, and
Warner left without incident. Years later, Roche found out that Warner had told
some of their coworkers that Roche had greeted him wearing a dress and had hit
on him. This story illustrates three of Warner’s defining characteristics from this
period and, most say, the rest of his life: creativity, ruthlessness, and, judging
from the apparent credulity of some of his former coworkers, an aptitude for
persuasion.

pe suas o .
As for the plush Warner was selling that got him fired from Dakin? Nothing
ever came of that: inflation soared to 13.5 percent in 1980, and unemployment
reached historically high levels as consumer spending tanked. It was a bad time
to fund a small business and a worse time to try to sell impulse items. Interest
rates soared, savings and loans failed, and Warner’s little stuffed start-up
disappeared. He sank into a depression that some of his former coworkers and
industry contacts worried might end his life.

4

Plush Dreams
Hal Warner left Dakin shortly after Ty did, and the two teamed up to import a
line of jewelry boxes. That business didn’t go anywhere, though, and Ty’s
listlessness worsened. In letters to Ty’s sister, Joy, from around this time, Hal
expressed concern about his son and his seemingly zapped ambition.
“Ty’s been here for better than three weeks eating breakfast and just about
every meal available during this time,” Hal wrote. “I am sure that he must sense
that I am very irritated and very sick both mentally and physically because he is
not working and is not looking for a job, and avoids doing anything unless it is
mandatory. He is just waiting to sell one of his condominiums so he can get
some cash, but so far no buyers. But in my mind this is a poor excuse for being
idle, non-productive and failing to earn his daily bread. I guess this run-in with
me doesn’t set very well with him. I can only hope he’ll see the light and take
some kind of action. He’s sure not like you or me.”
With his relationship with his father in trouble, Warner invested some of his
savings in a partnership with Pasquale Capra, an Italian American craftsman
he’d hired to refinish furniture for his condo. “He didn’t have no social life,”
remembers Capra. “When I got involved with him, he was very withdrawn. I
said ‘Guy! You better wake up; you’re the mega-million-dollar salesman!’”
They were equal partners, with Capra working on design and manufacturing
and Warner providing a few thousand dollars and his sales prowess. Their
product was a line of Otagiri-style music boxes, but from the beginning, the
relationship was troubled. Capra and Warner butted heads on pricing almost
instantly. Capra felt that the margins were too low to make a living, even though
Warner could move close to $100,000 in merchandise at a single trade show.
“He had this thing that low price could make you rich,” says Capra, who felt
strongly that they needed to raise prices, particularly given the supply constraints
that prevented them from turning it into a high-volume business. Warner was
adamantly opposed to the idea of price increases; to compound the problem, he
was obsessed with maximizing the quality of the product. “We were buying a
fifty-cent musical movement, and he wanted to hire a pianist to tune them.
That’s the perfectionist that he was,” says Capra.

The partnership was short-lived. “He didn’t see the light at the end of the
tunnel and so he picked up his briefcase and left,” says Capra. Capra couldn’t
make a go of the business and filed for bankruptcy. He’s still tinkering with
music boxes but has struggled ever since, having watched in horror as Warner
ascended the Forbes list with the very idea—low prices and obsessive attention
to quality could make you rich—that had been the source of their conflict. In Ty
catalogs Warner sometimes brags that his company has never raised its
wholesale prices; how many of your suppliers, he asks, can say that?
After Warner ditched Capra, he continued to spend down his savings while
turning over ideas in his head. He knew that his neighbor, Patricia Roche, a bold,
brassy lady who looks and acts like Liza Minnelli, was taking classes at a nearby
community college, so one day he approached her in the garage: Could he, he
asked, use the college’s library for some research?
Warner explained that he was looking into obscure patent issues. He’d been
told that in the aftermath of World War II, an American company had sold a
portfolio of patents to the Japanese. One of these patents was for a process for
making an exceptionally soft synthetic fur. Warner had an idea for a line of
plush but was concerned that the thickness of fabric he wanted was available
only in Japan. By the early 1980s, the cost of manufacturing there was
prohibitively high. He was seeking some sort of industrial-espionage loophole—
a way to get the thickness of the pile that he sought while manufacturing it at a
lower cost in Korea.
Roche was intrigued by Warner. She’d caught him on a rare good day, and
his charisma and ambitious plans lured her in.
He and Roche started spending a lot of time together—hanging out in his
condo after she’d finished up her day job at a convenience store. They were, as
she puts it, “after-school buddies.” She was married to a wheelchair-bound man,
and she helped him with his car-painting business, but the marriage was
disintegrating. She spent most nights at Warner’s, trying to keep his spirits up,
kicking around his ideas, and learning about business from him.
Roche loved Warner’s condo. He kept everything immaculate, and he had
beautiful Persian carpets and antiques from all over the world. There was also a
baby grand piano in the living room. Warner only played it when he was badly
depressed, but when he did play, he played exceptionally well. His father could
play jazz by ear and his mother had been a concert pianist; she’d required Ty and
his sister to practice for several hours each day when they were children. Hal
Warner told Dakin coworkers that Ty might have made a career of music if he’d
stayed with it

stayed with it.
Warner was probably playing the piano a fair amount in those days because
he was still depressed. He was neglecting his personal hygiene and flailing about
for some new venture that would bring in cash and restore the swagger that had
once made him prosperous and something approximating happy. Two concerned
friends from the gift industry were calling regularly to make sure he wasn’t
going to hurt himself. In his late thirties, Ty had been selling plush full time
from his early twenties until the day Dakin fired him. For the first time since
he’d entered the business, he was going nowhere—which was also, not
coincidentally, what he’d been doing before he discovered his love of stuffed
animals.
Finally, Roche told him to trim his nose hair. In Roche’s telling of it, the
nose hair was “down to his chin.” Roche describes the nose-hair confrontation as
an inflection point in Warner’s psyche, the beginning of his return to superstar
salesman status.
On the way out of his depression, Warner was still devoting most of his time
to the music box idea (by then, without Capra), and he went to Korea to explore
manufacturing possibilities. Six weeks later he came back.
“I’m going back and forth with this,” he told Patricia Roche. “There’s no
way to mass-produce it because it takes too long for the varnish to dry.”
And then he told her of a vision he’d had.
“I was in my room and I couldn’t sleep. There’s this flashing light going on
outside my window, and I looked outside, and it was the Dakin Bear.”
The Dakin Bear was the old-fashioned yellow teddy bear that had been
Dakin’s logo for Warner’s entire tenure at the company.
“It’s an omen,” he continued. “Plush is what I should be doing.”
Warner asked Roche what she thought about going into the stuffed-animal
business.
“Wait a minute. I’ve gone from a convenience store to cars with my husband
to music boxes to plush. I don’t know anything about plush.”
“I can teach you,” he said.
Roche didn’t know it at the time, but the idea of starting a plush company in
the early 1980s was no one’s idea of smart. It was a stagnant industry, fifty years
past its prime, with no growth in sight. Ty Warner might have brought a level of
perfectionism to it that no one else did, but it seemed unlikely that could
compensate for the business’s horrible economics. At one end, the rise of
technological toys attracting younger fans each year was squeezing demand for
plush. At the other end, vertically integrated Asian factories were crushing

margins as they churned out cheap, low-quality animals that were good enough
to put on the shelves of the big-box stores that were destroying the locally owned
toy and gift shops. There seemed to be little demand for a better product. Yet a
vision told Warner to start his own plush company, and so plush it was.
How exactly Ty Warner got the money to start his stuffed-animal business is
a subject of some dispute. I went to Camano Island, Washington, to meet with
his sister, Joy, and see what I could find out—and to learn a little more about his
early life.
While Ty and Joy were growing up in a Frank Lloyd Wright house in the
Chicago suburb of La Grange, Hal was on the road, selling toys all over Ohio
and, at times, three other states. He provided well for his family in a material
sense—but not in any other way. Warner’s mother, Georgia, at that point not yet
diagnosed as a paranoid schizophrenic, spent many of her days lying in bed with
a washcloth over her face, getting up only to puke green bile into the toilet. She
stood in front of the mirror and screamed at people who weren’t there. Once, Joy
awoke to see her mother hovering over her with a butcher’s knife. When Hal
was home, Georgia demanded that he hit the children with a belt; Hal hated the
idea, but, not wanting to incur his unstable wife’s wrath, he did it. Ty and Joy
were generally on their own for the most basic needs of childhood. Georgia was
rarely up to cooking, and Ty poured cereal for himself and his sister most nights.
Joy remembered how kind Ty was to her then. He always made sure to
include her in baseball games with the neighborhood kids, and when they were
on a boat with their grandfather going so fast that it terrified her, Ty, then around
ten, held her hand and told her that everything would be okay. But their parents
offered little comfort.
“There’s really nothing to say,” Joy told me of their childhood. “I don’t
think they knew how to give us love. That’s the one thing I can say, and I think
Ty would agree with that.”
When Hal died of a heart attack while playing tennis on May 15, 1983, Ty
was living a short drive away—and he didn’t tell Joy, who was then living in
New Mexico, about it for five days. During that time, she says, he cleaned out
their father’s antiques collection. “By the time I got there, Mom was talking
about what a crook Ty is, and what a good crook he is.”
Warner told People magazine that his inheritance was $50,000, but others
say it was more; while he was ostensibly broke, Patricia Roche found documents
for a $200,000 savings account Warner had. He told her he’d gotten the money
from his father. Whatever the case, with money in hand and Patricia Roche’s

moral support, Warner’s post-Dakin depression lifted. He was ready to return to
plush stardom, with a chance to execute the ideas that Dakin’s product
development office had ignored during his impromptu pitch sessions.
When it was time to name the business, Ty Warner figured that with Russell
Berrie’s toy company being called Russ, and the Dakin family founding Dakin,
his company would be called Ty. The logo he chose later made people who
knew him earlier in his career snicker: a heart with just his own first name inside
it. His first product idea was a line of Himalayan cats he’d designed based on
pieces he’d seen while traveling in Italy. He went to Korea with no contacts and
knocked on doors until he found a factory that agreed to make samples. Then he
flew back to Chicago, drove home, called Patricia Roche, dumped the samples
out on the floor of his condo, and smiled. It was 1983, and the cats were out of
the bag. Ty was now a stuffed-animal brand. His first product would be a long-
haired white cat he named Kashmir, after one of his favorite Led Zeppelin songs.

5

“You Can Make a Lot of Money with a Good Cat.” —
Ty Warner
They were indeed good cats. Prized collectors’ items that still occasionally sell
for hundreds of dollars on eBay, the cats had thick hair, a light texture, and a
certain floppiness that made them cuddlier than anything else on the market.
And in a foreshadowing of future glory, there were beans in the buttocks and
feet to provide weight and “poseability,” as Ty put it.
“No one had put the combination of under-stuffed with beans. All the
animals were stiff and hard,” Warner told People in 1996. He was on to
something with his under-stuffing. Rigid animals couldn’t do much except sit,
but softer ones with less stuffing were moveable—more realistic, he thought,
than hard stuffed animals that lacked flexibility and had all the long-term play
value of papier-mâché. Beans made it possible for you to pose his stuffed
animal, and posing it anthropomorphized it: a stuffed cat that was under-stuffed
and had beans could, in the hands of a child, wave, dance, and cuddle. A stuffed
cat did the same thing in Ty Warner’s hands. At toy shows Warner sometimes
spent as much as ten minutes showing anyone who agreed to watch all the ways
the head on a single animal could be cocked. One man Warner was trying to
recruit to be a salesperson was seriously unnerved by Ty’s enthusiasm for the
product but signed on anyway and became a multimillionaire in his late twenties
once the Beanie craze hit.
Nina Terzian, who owned a Chicago toy store called Beauty and the Beast
and had known Warner in his Dakin days, placed the company’s first order for
$200—Warner kept the check on display in his office for years. “They were
these beautiful animals,” she later told a reporter. (She declined to be
interviewed for this book, citing her professional relationship with Warner.)
“Everything about them was impeccable. They were cuddly and the material was
the softest, and the eyes and everything about them was just right. He really paid
attention to the details. I bought everything that he had, because they were done
so beautifully.”
Then Warner returned to the trade shows where he’d shined as a Dakin rep
—this time with his own brand and a valuable sidekick in Patricia Roche. She

didn’t have any more formal business training than Warner did, but she made up
for it with a sense of organization and office management skills. Their ability to
play off each other during sales calls and trade shows quickly made them stars of
the plush circuit. Their first show was in Chicago, and their space was six feet
long—tiny, but money was tight and Warner had a plan to attract attention. He
arrived hours before anyone else to set up his booth so that his venture’s sign,
with the big heart logo, towered twenty feet in the air, dominating the auditorium
and ensuring that his company would be the name on everyone’s lips. When
groups arrived at the show, Roche remembers, the plan was obvious: “Meet me
in forty-five minutes under that enormous ‘Ty’ sign.”
And so it began: the seasoned toy salesman but first-time entrepreneur and
the neophyte, barnstorming every regional trade show they could find and
soliciting orders from everyone who walked by. They went to the Atlanta Gift
Show, rented part of a table from another vendor, and sold $30,000 worth of cats
in a single hour—the same cat in ten different colors, each with its own name.
Of those early trade shows, Roche remembers: “Oh my God, that man could sell
sand to an Arab.” She pauses. “I don’t think you can say that anymore.” Within
three months of the business’s founding, Warner’s condo association told him to
get an office after neighbors complained about the UPS trucks backing up to his
door.
Warner wore fur coats with ostentatious Italian scarves, and one year, when
he’d designed his catalog and booth around a pink theme, he wore nothing but
pink to every show: hot pink suits with pink ties and pink socks. He was as good
at selling to men as he was to women, Roche says—not a small feat given that so
much of Warner’s sales ability came from his magnetism. When he was dealing
with a husband-and-wife team of buyers, Warner knew just when to shift his
attention back to the guy.
“If for two seconds that man thought he was flirting with the woman, you
just lost the sale,” says Roche. “So you better get the focus back on the man.”
For this, Warner had a go-to move: picking up George, a baby gorilla that
was among the company’s most popular offerings, placing it on the man’s chest,
and saying, “I want you to look into his eyes and tell him you hate him.”
“He would groom those animals the entire show,” Roche says. “If somebody
picked one up and set it back down, he would brush the hair on the cat so it
would look perfect.” He used tweezers to pluck around the eyes to accentuate
them, and blow-dryers were brought out to fluff the fur. Make sure the animals
are set up to make eye contact with the buyers, he explained. There was never

any excuse for a cat to be looking down; it had to be posed so that it had good
posture and was looking straight ahead. It was, recalls one former employee
from the early shows, just part of the “values of the company.” As Ty grew,
Warner was equally demanding of the workers who accompanied him to the
shows to help sell his expanded line of stuffed animals. “Why aren’t you
grooming them?” he’d ask any employee who was standing idle. “That woman
just touched that animal! Get over there and brush it!”
If Warner arrived at his booth after his staff had already set it up and it
wasn’t to his liking, he didn’t hesitate to tear everything down—even if the sales
reps were in the middle of presenting the line to a possible buyer. “He’d flip over
everything in the booth while you were in the middle of showing them,”
remembers one early employee. “He’d shout ‘What is this? This looks
atrocious!’” Some buyers walked away appalled, and his antics cost Ty more
than a few sales.
But that didn’t matter. Everything had to be perfect—far more meticulous,
certainly, than any of the competitors’ displays at the same events. Often those
competitors found him annoying. “If he had ten feet, he’d take fifteen feet,” one
remembers. “He would take his tables with his pink shit all over the place and in
order to get into his booth to see the product, you’d have to walk through
someone else’s space.” Warner was also vigilant about keeping overweight
women away from his cats. “He was afraid they’d sweat on [them],” Roche
remembers.
His fear of competitors’ stealing his designs was also present, years before
anyone was paying much attention to him. When Russ Berrie—the “trolls”
tycoon who had created the gift shop model by persuading sellers of greeting
cards to carry other impulse items—approached the Ty booth, Warner greeted
him warmly while simultaneously trying to hide his newest toys. “Hi, Russ!”
he’d say, his arms spread out, pushing his plush to the back of the table.
“Ty, you look a little crazy,” Roche would chide, but Warner was insistent:
the toy industry was rife with copying, and he didn’t want any competitors
seeing his newest products. Even at the height of Beanie mania, Warner insisted
on personally filling out all of his own trademark and patent forms—and
sometimes he flew to Washington, DC, to file them personally. Ty Inc.’s 1989
catalog had this on the back cover: “WARNING: If anyone dare copy our
creative designs or patents without written permission, ownership of your eternal
soul passes to us and we have the right to negotiate the sale of said soul.
Furthermore, our attorneys will see to it that life on Earth, as you know it, is not
worth living ”

worth living.
Yet he also went into toy and gift stores almost every day in search of design
inspiration. “You can’t reinvent the wheel!” he always told his employees.
Warner frequented a mall in Geneva, Illinois, where he bought pieces from
Boyds, Russ, Gund, and Steiff. He carefully inspected the fabrics, tags, and
stitching, and he dissected them in his office to learn how they were made. When
he went to the factories in Asia, his carry-on bag often contained competitors’
products. He showed them to the factory owners and seamstresses, and spoke in
clipped English with a twangy accent to describe his ideas for ribbon colors and
how much distance there should be between the eyes on his cats. Back in the
United States, he often lay in bed late into the night, talking on the phone in that
same twangy voice, telling the factory exactly how each animal needed to look.
The animals—and the desire to make them softer, cuter, and better—consumed
every part of Warner’s life.
In the early days he sometimes used freelance designers, especially for the
traditional jointed teddy bears that he couldn’t quite figure out how to create
himself. Sometimes he paid them a few hundred dollars for their drawings. As
his company grew, he offered them just a credit on the hangtag in exchange for
the rights to their work. The credit helped drive demand for the designers’
upscale, handmade pieces—and gave Ty Inc. the cachet of being associated with
“designers,” thereby making the company seem a little more high-end than other
lines where a bear was just a bear. Ruth Fraser, a teddy bear designer who ran a
Toronto gift shop, met Warner when he came into her store and wandered
around with his hands behind his back, saying nothing, carefully examining
every piece she had. Then he offered her $800 for one of her patterns. She made
the deal and was later annoyed to discover that Warner had produced endless
variations based on the design she’d sold him. Then Warner decided that he
didn’t want the designers’ names on his pieces after all, and removed them
peremptorily, leading to a lawsuit with one designer.
“He wanted to think he designed everything,” Fraser says—but Warner’s
actions were never a source of conflict for her. “We’re not Americans. We don’t
sue, we don’t argue.”
By the late 1980s Warner was frequently shouting at his subordinates, “I am
the designer! I designed everything!” Controlling every aspect of the animals’
existence was a fixation, and it stood in stunning contrast to his nearly total
disregard for the feelings of the people he was closest to. He carefully excised
everyone else from the story of his rise: his father hadn’t gotten him his first job,
he hadn’t used freelance designers to create his bears, and he’d started the

company all by himself.
“It was all him,” says Roche of the personal myth that Warner was
concocting. To his credit, though, he combined his self-absorption with an
incredible work ethic.
An early high point in Warner’s plush-focused compulsiveness came at the
photo shoot for the cover of Ty Inc.’s 1988 catalog, the first the company ever
distributed to retailers—a simple full-color foldout brochure printed on glossy
paper. That cover features Angel, a white stuffed cat with a Ty tag around the
collar and a pink ribbon, posed against a black background with no props of any
kind. The photo shoot was a last-minute affair in the office of a local printer.
“Ty would look at it and say, ‘Nah, it’s not right. Take another picture. It’s
not right. I don’t like it,’” Roche says.
“His attitude was, ‘I am the designer, I know how I want it to look,’” she
remembers. The single-image photo shoot took nine hours, but the result is a
cover that is equal parts regal and seductive—to the extent that a stuffed cat can
convey either of those things. He had taken the primary colors out of his sales
copy—they’re ubiquitous in ads for Dakin and other manufacturers of that era—
and displayed the cats in a way that might capture the sensibilities of adults, not
just adults looking to attract the attention of children.
The catalog also evangelized Warner’s ideas about under-stuffing: “Ty’s
introduction of POSEABLE PLUSH™ is featured throughout this catalog. Ty
has formulated a special weighted lining . . . that enables you to ‘pose your
plush’ into many different positions creating a look that is totally unique in the
marketplace today.” The catalog features the toys carefully posed in positions
made possible by the beans and carefully sewn stuffing. Jake the Monkey is
shown holding his hands over his head—as though he’s been caught in the
middle of a jumping jack. Beanie Bear, a large teddy bear, is shown midsprint.
Lovie Lamb is lying with her front and back legs stretched out, her head angled
toward the camera. Some of those early animals had the words “bean bag” on
the hangtag to further promote Warner’s ideas about the play value that his
stuffed-with-beans animals provided.
For the first few years, Roche and Warner personally trimmed and brushed
every single piece that came in from the factories; it was work too painstaking
for any supplier to undertake, but Warner didn’t want any of his cats going out
the door looking anything other than their best. As sales grew, such
punctiliousness risked becoming a liability. In fact, says Roche, the primping
demands of the bigger, furrier animals were part of the motivation for a line
called Beanie Bunnies; their smaller size and flat pile made brushing and

called Beanie Bunnies; their smaller size and flat pile made brushing and
primping unnecessary—there was no fur to brush. Without his obsession with
grooming his long-haired, full-size stuffed animals by hand, Ty might never
have found it necessary to create Beanie Babies.
In a crowded category full of better-financed competitors, Warner had
created something that stood out. His two biggest competitive advantages—
obsessive attention to detail and trade-show charisma—outweighed his myriad
disadvantages: lack of scale, no advertising budget, a small and not especially
competent sales force, a limited product line, and little in the way of a track
record with retailers. He was also selling only to the small stores—a market that
was in decline. As Russ Berrie wrote in 1981, “Seventy percent of all stuffed
animals and plush purchases used to be made in toy stores. . . . [T]he toy store’s
share of the market has declined to less than 50 percent.” Warner wasn’t
interested in selling to discounters, however. He wanted his pieces to be special,
and each hangtag had a note about his dedication to quality. While this sounds
like typical corporate hyperbole, it really did reflect the Ty Warner ethos: “Ty
represents the ultimate in soft toys. Only the world’s finest fabrics are selected
and meticulously tailored by dedicated craftsmen to provide maximum quality
for many years of love.”
The only problem was that, as Ty Inc.’s sales climbed steadily, the company
had no employees with any background in business, accounting, or law—or
human resources.

6

Business and Pleasure
Within about six months of Ty’s founding, Warner’s relationship with Patricia
Roche became romantic—a “twenty-four-hour obsession,” as she puts it. Or,
alternatively, as she wrote in an e-mail, “Two neurotics feeding off one another’s
insecurities.”
In the beginning Warner was endlessly romantic. If they were in a
restaurant, he always made sure they sat on the same side of the table, and if they
were out walking, they had to be holding hands at all times. There wasn’t much
money, and they often split value meals at a local diner—although Ty was
always ready to splurge on clothing. She questioned his judgment when he
showed her a hundred-dollar belt he’d just bought, but Ty was adamant: you had
to look successful before you could be successful.
For Roche, who was coming out of a marriage that had ended badly,
Warner’s energy was wonderful. Even the bad times were good because Roche
felt like she was in business with the man she loved. When some of the animals
were declared to be choking hazards because of the tags around their necks,
Warner and Roche went through four container loads—around forty-eight
thousand animals in all—to remove all the tags and then photograph the
dumpster they filled with them to satisfy the demands of the Consumer Product
Safety Commission. It was tedious, and a run-in with regulators was never fun,
but they worked together magically—almost able to read each other’s minds
when it came to the business, Roche remembers. Nothing stressed them out as
they traveled to trade shows together, and Roche managed the office when
Warner went to Korea to work on designs.
When it came to the finances of a rapidly growing business, neither of them
knew anything. Within a few months of starting Ty Inc., of which Warner was
the sole owner, they were running everything free of debt, using only letters of
credit from Harris Bank to float inventory costs. The bank required annual
budgets, which Warner and Roche had a strategy for: go to Barbados for the
holidays, sit in beach chairs by the pool, and create sales projections—double
every year. “We were just making it up,” remembers Roche. Their banker
laughed at them but continued to sign off on their accounts. The pair delivered
what they’d promised year after year

what they d promised, year after year.
“He can be a lot of fun,” Roche says. They often sneaked onto construction
sites to look at new buildings, and on Sundays when they were bored, they might
go test-drive Jaguars and Mercedes-Benzes. “He always had to have something
to do,” she says. In California on a business trip, they drove by a lavish home
with a FOR SALE sign in front; Warner insisted that they stop and knock on the
door. He had nothing like the means to afford a Southern California mansion,
but he told the owner that he was in town only for a day and was looking for a
nice place to stay when he was on business trips. Just as Ty could sell toys to
anyone, he could talk his way into anything. The homeowner took them on a
tour of the house, and Roche ogled the Sub-Zero appliances and expensive
modern finishes while Warner shushed her, whispering that she shouldn’t act so
impressed.
He was also something of a cultural polymath and a prodigious name-
dropper; he read business magazines obsessively and knew who owned every
major hotel in America. When he went shopping for a new car, he made sure he
knew the name of the owner of the dealership—and any other biographical
tidbits that might help him look connected. He was more up to date on popular
culture than anyone, following the headlines closely and constantly making
predictions about which songs were going to be hits. Usually, just as with his
predictions about which toys would sell, he was right. There was one exception:
“He was wrong about Billy Ray Cyrus,” Roche says. “Ty thought he was gonna
be the next Elvis. But now the daughter is . . . really something. So who knows?”
Their relationship was also defined by drama. They argued constantly. One
of their first employees remembers entering the office on her second day to hear
Ty and Patricia screaming at each other. When they noticed that she was there,
they moved their argument to the parking lot. Their most pleasant moments,
Roche says, were always punctured when Warner needled her with the things he
knew she didn’t want him talking about—one of which was her mother. On a
romantic interlude at the St. James Hotel in San Diego, Warner opened the door
to the suite; while Roche started to unpack, he stretched out in the bathtub, still
wearing his suit, and called out to her, “It’s a beautiful tub!”
“Yeah, it sure is!” she replied.
“I bet your mother would never fit in it!” he yelled back.
Nasty comments about overweight people were a recurring theme with
Warner. In restaurants he sometimes loudly remarked on the physical fitness of
patrons at other tables. If his meal was too big for his liking, he’d send it back to
the kitchen to be halved—with a lecture about how such portion sizes were

making America the fattest country in the world. He also made a habit of
entering a restaurant, sitting down, looking at a menu, blowing his nose on the
napkin, and then announcing that he wanted to go somewhere else.
He also introduced Patricia to his mother, Georgia. Ty and Patricia went
over to the apartment where Georgia was staying to sew stuffing into the cats’
bellies. Warner had told Patricia about his difficult childhood: how his father had
once locked him in a closet as punishment for showing affection to his mother;
how Hal had gotten rid of his puppy because Ty, then five years old, hadn’t
cleaned up after it. He also told her that he’d taken his mother to an Illinois
mental hospital in the late 1970s where she was diagnosed as paranoid
schizophrenic.
Roche still wasn’t prepared for Mrs. Warner.
“You’re an ugly whore!” Georgia screamed at her while they worked. “My
son will never marry you because you’re so ugly!”
“Can you leave us alone?” Patricia yelled back. “We’re trying to work.”
“You’re in my house!” Georgia shouted.
She started telling neighbors that the stuffed animals were filled with illegal
drugs. Once she was kicked out of a Piggly Wiggly for shouting racial epithets
in the middle of the store. She was also tossed out of a hotel after she tried to hit
people with her car.
Ty’s father’s letters from a few years earlier show the difficulty Ty had had
trying to maintain a relationship with her. “Ty’s here but mother wouldn’t let
him drive her car,” he wrote to Joy. “She thought he’d run it into flood waters
and ruin the brakes. He’s breaking his back for her in every way that I can see
without the slightest thanks or appreciation. At times she’s not sure if he’s trying
to poison her, [or whether it’s] the mafia. [She] has conversations with herself
and other people through airwaves.”
While there was stuffing to attend to, however, Warner somehow tuned out
his mother’s ranting.
“He did teach me about focus,” Roche says. “That’s the secret: focus. If this
is what you want, then go for it. Nothing crosses that road, nothing gets in the
way, nobody changes it.
“This man wakes up in the morning, and he’s thinking about the product. He
goes to bed at night, and he’s thinking about the product: Should it be a blue
ribbon or a red ribbon? I can’t tell you what we went through to get the eyes to
be absolutely what he considered perfect. Every detail on every animal was gone
over fifty times. It had to be as close to perfect as you could possibly get. Or do
it again: ‘Do it over I don’t like this Do it over ’” Roche remembers late night

it again: Do it over, I don t like this. Do it over.  Roche remembers late-night
conversations about product when she was just trying to get out of the office.
“‘What do you think about that? What do you think?’ he’d say. And then you’d
agree, because you’d get worn out. And then he’d go, ‘What about if it was
purple?’ And you’d go, ‘No! Goddamn! There he goes again! Now we’ve got to
go through the same thing, over and over.’”
After a few days of harassing Patricia while Ty demonstrated his
superhuman capacity for focus, Georgia packed up, stole her son’s car, and left.
Ty seemed to be the only person on the planet with any interest in her, but he
couldn’t figure out where she’d gone. It would be years—and half-a-billion
dollars in stuffed animal sales—before Ty found her.

7

Patti’s Last Stand
By late 1992, Ty Warner’s deal with Patricia Roche was falling apart both
personally and professionally—mostly because of the unexpectedly strong
business he had built with her by his side. What had begun almost a decade
earlier with selling stuffed cats out of his condo had become a bustling business
with twelve employees and sales that doubled every year. Warner was in Korea
for several months at a time, designing an ever-expanding and ever-changing
line of plush cats, dogs, rabbits, and bears. Sales for 1992 topped $6 million.
Warner had done this without building much of a brand: his charisma pushed the
products on retailers at trade shows, and the charm of the stuffed animals made
them top sellers in gift stores, even though few consumers went in looking for
the Ty logo.
Warner understood things about toy sales that others didn’t. He understood
the importance not just of low pricing but also of simple pricing. Other
manufacturers had dozens of wholesale price points, but Warner stuck with two.
As he wrote in a 2008 letter to retailers, “In 1983, I built my company on great
quality and great prices. My only retail price points were $5 and $10. I believe
that these retail price points were critical to our success.”
As part of keeping to a limited number of price points, Warner also kept a
very tight, focused product line. Dakin, in its heyday, offered 650 to 700
products; Ty Inc.’s roster of offerings rarely topped 100, and in the early days it
was well below 25 pieces. This hurt Ty’s chances with retailers who needed a
wide variety—and Warner never did build a particularly large share of the zoo
market—but it kept his costs down by allowing larger orders of a smaller
number of pieces. As one retailer told Playthings, the industry’s leading trade
magazine, in 1994—the first media mention Warner received anywhere—he had
“come on very strong . . . [and] put pressure on some of the larger companies to
bring down their prices.”
Warner’s other stroke of weirdness was to demand payment in full, up front,
while his competitors were offering as much as four months to pay. This was
partly out of necessity—Warner didn’t want to take on a lot of debt or factor his
receivables, which would have forced him to raise prices. Collecting cash

quickly allowed him to float his costs without lenders or investors. “We couldn’t
afford to carry people,” Patricia Roche remembers. “[They’d say] ‘Well,
everyone else gets thirty days.’ And everybody thought we were crazy. We
didn’t want to carry people for that thirty-day crap.” The payment terms also
demonstrated a certain bravado that might have been enticing to retailers. Trust
me, Warner seemed to be saying, with my high quality, impeccable taste, and
low price points, you won’t need extended terms on these babies.
It was audacious and arrogant. “He was trying to build his business out of
nowhere, and yet he wasn’t giving them time,” says Julie Lynn, a retailer who
sold Ty Inc. products long before the company was an industry leader. He was
able to get away with it, she says, on the strength of his product and the fact that
he passed the savings that came with his lower cost of capital on to stores in the
form of reduced prices: “No one was doing plush like that with that kind of price
point,” she remembers.
Just as he had done at Dakin, Warner focused on a certain kind of store:
mom-and-pop toy and gift shops, retailers who had little bargaining power and
sold to customers who weren’t going to check prices against mass merchants.
“By keeping them in the mom-and-pops, you kept them really loyal to Ty,” Bill
Harlow of Ty Canada remembers. Warner liked the idea of being in stores small
enough that his sales would be crucial to their bottom lines. He was also focused
on getting his products distributed in airport stores—partly because he thought
the small toys were a perfect last-minute gift but also because he knew that
putting his animals in places where they’d be flown around the country would
help spread his brand. In a big-box toy store, plush was an afterthought: higher-
priced, TV-advertised toys commanded the bulk of the attention, and even a
category killer in plush wasn’t material to a company’s results.
With five-hundred-square-foot gift shops, however, Warner’s sales reps
could push for better space, visiting each account at least once a month, per Ty
Inc.’s training manual and distributor agreements, to count inventory and ensure
that his stuffed animals were well promoted. Warner once explained his focus on
the mom-and-pops: “[I]t’s better selling 40,000 accounts than it is 5 accounts.
It’s more difficult to do, but for the longevity of the company and the profit
margins, it’s the better of the two. . . . If we were to sell to Wal-Mart, we would
not be paid in 30 days.”
One company that was selling to Walmart was Dakin; like the rest of the
plush industry, Dakin was in trouble. The business model for decades had been
to import products from Korea, slap a logo on them, and hire a sales force to get
them in stores By the 1980s the Koreans had grown wise to the markup the

them in stores. By the 1980s the Koreans had grown wise to the markup the
U.S.-based brands were making and started hiring their own teams to sell plush
direct to retailers, cutting out the middlemen. Dakin’s suppliers had become its
competitors in a market that was in decline.
Dakin tried desperately to lure kids away from the plastic, marketing-driven
violence that was gaining market share. In 1988 it partnered with the antiwar
group Alliance for Survival to give teddy bears to kids in exchange for their
violent toys. In a single year Dakin spent $2 million on an ad campaign blasting
violent video games, action figures, and toy weapons. It didn’t accomplish
much. According to the Toy Manufacturers of America, sales of traditional plush
toys and dolls without an electronic component fell by 44 percent in 1988.
Facing fading prospects as an independent business, Dakin’s board of
directors sought out a deal to sell the company to Hallmark, the greeting-card
and gift empire. Hallmark was among Dakin’s biggest customers, and it was,
Nizamian says now, a “match made in heaven.” On January 6, 1990, the
companies issued simultaneous press releases announcing the sale. Nizamian’s 8
percent stake in the $120 million sale was set to let him walk away with $9.6
million.
The deal never closed. A few weeks later, Nizamian says, one of the Dakin
heirs—an aunt whose nephew owned 52 percent of the company’s stock—called
an emergency meeting and announced that the family was backing out of the
sale. She also asked Nizamian to resign and handed control of Dakin over to a
team of management consultants she’d hired to evaluate the Hallmark offer.
Others say that it was Hallmark that backed out of the sale over concerns about
Dakin’s international business.
Either way, Nizamian found himself out of a job; as the company plunged
into insolvency over the next few years, his life’s work—and that equity stake—
evaporated. Between 1989 and 1991, Dakin sales fell from $225 million to $75
million, and in just two years the company lost $50 million. In 1991 a majority
stake was sold at scrap value to a private-equity firm. The business Nizamian
took over after its founders died in a plane crash was, in every meaningful way,
gone. He was unable to look at a toy again for almost a decade. During that
decade, Nizamian’s one-time protégée made more money in stuffed animals than
anyone ever had, adding his own unique spin to the business model he’d
marinated in as Dakin’s top salesman.
_______

The seeds of the Beanie Baby mania were sown by Warner’s strange approach to
product development, which began with the very beginning of his company. He
changed his product mix more frequently than any of his competitors. Other
companies were content to keep strong sellers in their lineup for years, but
Warner, a designer-artist at heart, was always tinkering and always discontinuing
old products, changing existing ones, and adding new ones.
A constantly changing product line is sometimes referred to as a “rolling
mix.” Mattel implemented a rolling mix strategy in 1994 to revive Hot Wheels,
which were rapidly losing market share to Matchbox cars. Faced with stagnant
sales and low consumer excitement for the line of toy cars, Mattel changed the
product introduction schedule based on research showing that increased in-store
variety—and frequent changes—could drive sales. The idea of the rolling mix
was to change the assortment of each seventy-two-car display every two weeks.
Instead of introducing all new products once or twice a year, Mattel rotated
pieces in and out in a random and unpredictable way; collectors went into stores
to check the displays more frequently, and there was a “ticking clock” incentive
to buy new pieces because you never knew when they’d disappear from the
rolling mix. Over the next three years, Hot Wheels picked up enormous market
share as sales of Matchbox cars fell. In a paper on the toy industry, Professor M.
Eric Johnson, associate dean of the Tuck School of Business at Dartmouth
College, calls the rolling mix “the most interesting and successful variety
strategy” that toy marketers use to manage supply-chain risk. When Warner
introduced Beanie Babies a couple of years later, he combined the Hot Wheels
rolling mix strategy with P. T. Barnum–style showmanship.
In the beginning, this wasn’t a strategy. It was a reflection of Warner’s own
creativity and, perhaps more important, his compulsion to create the most perfect
stuffed animals possible before affixing the swing tag featuring his first name
inside a heart. His name on the tag, he once told an employee, was part of the
reason that he could never sell the company. It was more than a business. Ty’s
life, Patricia Roche explains, is “about a never-ending striving for a perfect that
doesn’t exist.”
_______
As the company grew, Warner began to resent the deal he’d struck with Roche
when Ty Inc. became her full-time job. For the first three years, neither he nor
Patricia had taken any money out of the business. Then he started paying her on
f
l
d
T I
f
d
h
i
f
d

a percentage of sales—and as Ty Inc. found success, her earnings far surpassed
either of their expectations. In 1992 Roche’s annual income soared to more than
$200,000. Yet with no formal role within the company—“I didn’t exist,” Roche
explains—she would have had little leverage if Warner decided he wanted to get
rid of her.
He called her one day to suggest that she switch to a flat salary of $50,000;
she bristled, and the dispute over how she should be paid was magnified by
issues in their personal lives. Roche didn’t want to leave the business and Ty
didn’t want to end their relationship.
Ultimately, Roche says, she ended it with Warner because of his
possessiveness. He had been physically abusive in the past, she says, but that had
stopped. The relational issues hadn’t.
“I had to get away from him. His control—basically, it’s the control. He
mesmerizes you into thinking that you are the only person on earth that he cares
about,” she says. “And then, gradually, after he’s brought you up and gotten you
into this thing, then he starts stripping away the layers, and then he’s the only
one in the world who likes you, because you have walked away from friends. I
have friends who didn’t see me for a year and a half—I was busy. And he didn’t
go out with anyone! He didn’t need anybody!”
The finale of their personal relationship—Warner told the same story to
others—came in February 1993. They were on the outs, but she dropped him off
at the airport for his flight to Korea regardless. Two hours later, he called her; he
had canceled his flight and wanted her to come get him.
“And I said, ‘I can’t.’ And he said, ‘What do you mean, you can’t?’ I said, ‘I
have a date. I can’t sit here and wait anymore for you for when you’re going to
call so I can come get you. So I have a date.’ Well, I went to dinner, and I came
back. And when I came back—and he did follow me several times in my life—
he came through the back parking lot and called me, and I turned around and
said, ‘What are you doing?’ And I told my date, ‘Oh, just go in. Go in the
building.’ And I said to Ty, ‘Why are you here?’ And he goes, ‘I wanted to see
this date. Is that your date?’ And I said, ‘Why do you care?’”
Warner left and Roche and her new guy went back out. Roche assured him
that nothing had changed: they would still go on vacation to Cancun the next day
as planned. When they got back home, Roche’s passport was missing; Warner
had taken it. She went and got a birth certificate the next day and the pair left for
Cancun.
On their second day in Cancun, there was a knock at the door: “Room
service!”

se v ce!
“We didn’t order anything!” Roche’s date shouted back, groggy from a night
of partying.
“It’s complimentary!”
Roche’s date got out of bed to open the door.
“And all I hear is, ‘Hi. I’m Ty Warner,’” Roche remembers. “I’m thinking,
No no no! Son of a bitch! So we sat there for three hours and talked. About how
he had wanted to marry me, how he had wanted to have children with me. And
[my date] said, ‘Do you want me to leave?’ And I said, ‘No. I don’t want you
going anywhere. I don’t know what he’ll do.’”
Warner left Cancun feeling more depressed than he’d felt in years—and
Roche’s tenure with the company and with Warner was over. Ty Inc. was
closing in on $10 million in annual sales at that point; Roche left with around
$100,000 and started selling insurance.
Warner banned her from his office after she started showing up daily to
harangue him, and he contemplated filing for a restraining order. “She was super
pissed—like psychotic pissed,” one employee remembers. “Everybody was
really nervous because we didn’t know what she was going to do.” It was 1993,
and the woman Warner had started the business with was out of the picture; just
as he’d excised his father from the stories about how he got started in the plush
industry, Warner now dropped Roche from his narrative about the early days of
the company. From the day he and Roche split up, it was, in Warner’s telling of
it, a company he’d run entirely on his own in the beginning.
After the breakup, Warner started seeing a psychotherapist. He was reading
Melody Beattie’s Codependent No More, and, now that he had the income to
finance it, beginning to experiment with plastic surgery, focusing especially on
his eyes and nose.
Yet the plush show had to go on; from the time Warner had joined Dakin, it
had been the one constant in his life. He was about to turn fifty, he’d never
married, and he had no kids. In 1993 he reported a personal income of $1.3
million—a fortune but, he hoped, just the beginning. Within a few months of his
breakup with Patricia, Ty had two new things in his life: designs for a line of $5
beanbag animals and a new girlfriend named Faith McGowan—a tall, redheaded
Chicago native fourteen years his junior.

8

New Beginnings
Faith McGowan met Warner at the lighting store where she worked when he
came in looking for help. Faith was recently divorced with two children in
elementary school, and her first impression of Ty was that he was charming: “A
little peculiar; cute. Very boyish. He was very intense—you could feel the
intensity of what he was doing with the lighting.” Former Ty Inc. executives
recall Warner’s obsession with lighting; he had memorized the serial numbers on
dozens of light bulbs, and, once he was a billionaire, he would wander his
hotels’ corridors with complaints about lights. New hires were instantly warned:
when Warner had a complaint about lights, chain of command didn’t matter.
Whether you were the CFO or a warehouse worker, it was your responsibility to
fix the problem—immediately.
On the day he met McGowan, Warner was working on a complicated plan to
install lights under a set of cabinets. McGowan explained why his plan wouldn’t
work, and Warner seemed impressed. He asked her to come to his home on her
day off to look at the kitchen and help him with ideas, and she agreed.
When McGowan arrived at the expensive modernist house in Oak Brook, he
wasn’t there yet. His contractor filled her in on the work. The house had been
under continuous renovation since Warner had moved in more than two years
earlier. When Warner showed up, wearing alligator shoes with three-inch heels,
he showed her his makeshift bedroom, which had no lighting except for the
ambient light provided by a window. The room had green shag carpeting,
peeling wallpaper, and magazine cutouts about lighting fixtures taped to the
walls. There were other, finished rooms Ty could have lived in; his choice of the
worst room in the house struck Faith as a sort of self-flagellation for his inability
to finish the renovations.
Ty was oddly forthcoming about his personal life. He told her about his
breakup with Patricia Roche and that his therapist had told him he was
codependent, and he talked about the plastic surgery he’d had. He showed her
how he had his hair cut in a bob to hide the still-healing incisions. McGowan
later wrote of him in an unpublished memoir, “His sexually explicit references in
talking about Patti, his cosmetic surgery, and his lifestyle warned that this man
was very different But I was struck by the drama he created and his personal

was very different. But I was struck by the drama he created and his personal
flair. His unique presence and obvious intelligence started to suck me into his
drama, almost as if I were auditioning for a part.”
Not that Warner told her about all the drama in his life: not only was he
depressed about the breakup with Roche, but he was also keeping a close eye on
her. “He stalked me for two years after we broke up,” Roche remembers. “Ty
knew where I was morning, noon, and night.” He had concealed an audio
recorder in her home and once, years later, played for her the tapes he had made
of her with another man.
A few days after their first meeting, McGowan went back to Warner’s home
to discuss lighting possibilities with the electrician. When she arrived, Warner
asked her to count all the switches and receptacles in the house and help the
electrician order parts, and then he retreated to his bedroom to call his lawyer.
McGowan felt manipulated into working for free, and told the contractor that she
was leaving. However, when she went out to her car, she saw that Ty had parked
his black Mercedes behind her jalopy. She went back inside. “Excuse me,” she
said. “You need to move your car. I’m leaving.” Later she called him to explain
that she wasn’t a salesperson, she was a manager. She told him she had kids to
pick up, and didn’t have time to count receptacles for free while he talked to his
lawyer. “I’ve got tickets to the White Sox game tomorrow night,” he told her.
“I’ve gotten to know you a little bit. I really want you to get to know me better. I
think you’ll find I’m not such a bad guy.”
She accepted the invitation, and on the following night, as they sat in the
bleachers together, Ty told her his life story—about his dysfunctional family and
his time at Dakin and the high hopes he had for his plush company. She was
hooked: they became a couple almost immediately.
The first time they went to his bedroom together, he was more interested in
showing her his pillow collection than he was in taking her clothes off. He told
her in detail about each of the pillows on his bed and where he’d gotten them;
some he’d bought on trips to Asia, others he’d pilfered during stays at luxury
hotels. He asked her to try out each one. Just as he grilled customers about plush
products, he wanted to know which pillows Faith liked best.
The questions about how she could help with his business came quickly—
after he helped her get fired from her job. He told her that she was underpaid at
$30,000 per year and that if she didn’t demand a doubling of her salary and a
more prestigious title, he couldn’t be with her: “You let them take advantage of
you, and I don’t want to be with someone like that,” he said. She took a stand,
lost her job as a result, and, in a panic, called Warner in Korea. He told her not to

worry, but when her unemployment ran out and she started to fall behind on
bills, he wasn’t helpful. He advised her to cancel her cable-TV subscription.
Finally, he told her to send him a tally of her monthly expenses and presented
her with a check—for the exact amount, down to the penny—held in the arms of
a stuffed bear, a combination of romance and exactitude that she thought was
strange.
Once McGowan and her two daughters had moved in with him a few months
later, keeping his white carpets clean was an all-consuming family affair, with
bottles of cleaner scattered throughout the house. Living with Warner also meant
developing the same devotion to the business that he had. She and her children
remember dinners at Boston Market where they weren’t allowed to eat until
they’d settled on a name for a new stuffed rabbit or frog.
As the relationship heated up, most of the discussions concerned the
development of the line he’d started thinking about right after his decade-long
relationship with Patricia Roche ended: $5 beanbags that were small enough for
kids to slip into their pockets and then, Warner hoped, bring to school to show
their friends. “Unfortunately, as Beanie Babies came to dominate our evenings,”
McGowan remembered, “our lovemaking became less frequent.”

9

Ty’s Big Idea
In late 1993 Warner summoned Bill Harlow, the quilting store operator he’d met
at a trade show who was by then the exclusive distributor for Ty products in
Canada, to his office in Oak Brook, Illinois. Warner had considered a handful of
people as partners for the Canadian business, many of whom had much more
experience than Harlow and some who were better capitalized. Warner,
however, had conditions. He wanted someone who would focus exclusively on
Ty products full time; he wasn’t interested in wrapping his line in with a sales
organization that sold dozens of other gift products.
He also didn’t want anyone who brought a lot of his own ideas and strategies
to the business. “He wanted someone he could mold,” Harlow remembers.
“Someone he could control. I knew nothing about plush toys at all, and I learned
everything about it from him. I was young, I was full of energy, and I was
moldable. I knew nothing and had no preconceived notions. Ty is the closest guy
I’ve met to someone who understood every facet of a business: the design, the
manufacturing, the sales. Everything. He was my mentor.”
The Ty Inc. world headquarters and distribution center that Harlow beheld
consisted of a few thousand square feet and fifteen employees. The warehouse
and the office were all in one building, making it a terrible place to host visitors
—which was fine, because in those days no one much worth impressing went
there anyway. The furniture and office supplies looked like they’d been
assembled from the leavings of dozens of yard sales; nothing matched. Ty’s
promotional items from trade shows were stacked all over the office because
they’d have gotten too dusty in the warehouse. There was a big Dry-erase board
with a calendar for all the trade shows the company went to each year, and the
office was filled with messy wires and arts-and-crafts decorations put up by
Warner’s secretary—much to the annoyance of his more corporate-minded head
of sales, Karmen Kohlwes.
Harlow sat across from Warner, who reached into his immaculately
organized desk filled with plush prototypes. He pulled out the first factory
sample for the first Beanie Baby—Legs, a frog with little detail and, competitors
soon snickered, a serious problem with under-stuffing. He placed it in Harlow’s
hand Warner was always excited about his products but he was particularly

hand. Warner was always excited about his products, but he was particularly
enthused about Legs because Legs didn’t have much stuffing—a little in the
legs, a little in the head, and a little everywhere else, but mostly what you
noticed about Legs was his beans and his floppiness. Legs was the platonic ideal
of what Warner had been searching for since his drop-ins at the Dakin product
office in the 1960s. He’d started his own business with under-stuffed cats with
beans in the feet, then moved on to beans in other stuffed animals. Now, Warner
had made beans the defining characteristic of his plush; the stuffing was
incidental. The result was incredibly floppy and “poseable,” that word Ty had
liked enough to trademark back in the 1980s.
“From now on, every penny you have goes into this,” he told Harlow.
When Harlow first told me about the conversation, my reaction was Oh,
come on. He did not really say that. It just sounded like an obvious turning-point
line in a bad version of Citizen Kane—a cocky line from a cocky entrepreneur
ready to put it all on the line for the thing he’d concocted and believed in with
everything he had.
However, the conversation probably did happen exactly that way. Everyone
who was in Warner’s life at the time remembers how entirely absorbed he was
with excitement over the creation of Legs the Frog. McGowan’s daughter Jenna,
then in elementary school, recalls the first time Warner showed Legs to her. He
was ecstatic, she says, because of how little stuffing it had, and he kept pointing
that out to her—how floppy Legs was, how you could toss him into the air and
he’d land with a satisfying plop. Jenna’s sister, Lauren, also remembered Ty’s
excitement over the new animal. He tossed Legs to her and smiled. “See!” he
told her. “It’s fun to play with!”
In consultation with Faith McGowan, who had no official role with the
company but with whom Ty discussed everything, he changed the original dark
green color to a lighter, more child-friendly shade. He was ready to introduce
Legs, along with eight other Beanie Babies he had painstakingly designed to
complete the collection: Brownie the Bear, Chocolate the Moose, Pinchers the
Lobster, Spot the Dog, Squealer the Pig, Splash the Whale, Flash the Dolphin,
and, not coincidentally, Patti the Platypus—“Patti the Puss!” Ty told Faith.
_______
Beanie Babies were first introduced at Gatlinburg, Tennessee’s Smoky Mountain
Gift Show in November 1993. Always prepared to build hype, Warner had only
two of the Beanies available for sale at that event: Brownie and Patti. The other

two o t e Bea es ava ab e o sa e at t at eve t: B ow e a d
att .
e ot e
seven were on display, but he told retailers they couldn’t be ordered just yet. He
had thought up the line, in part, to have an affordable impulse item on hand to
get his foot in the door with retailers at trade shows. Sell them the cute, colorful,
completely irresistible low-priced beanbags, he thought, and then he’d be able to
upsell them on his full line of more traditional plush. Warner was wary of
novelty items: the problem with trying to chase or create trends was that they
could evaporate quickly, leaving you with a lot of worthless inventory and no
steady, sustainable business. He thought that traditional animals like bears,
rabbits, cats, and dogs were the way to go. The Beanie Babies were mostly a
means to an end: not expensive enough to be much of a cash machine on their
own but so perfect that they were destined to be a hit.
“For the first year—at least—they just didn’t move,” says Lina Trivedi, who
worked for Ty at the company’s trade shows in the early and mid-1990s. She
remembers walking buyers through all of the larger animals, clipboard in hand,
taking their orders for cats, dogs, rabbits, and gorillas—but when she got to the
Beanie Babies, they passed. Gift shops were more interested in traditional teddy
bears and animals with stuffing, not beans, and certainly not more beans than
stuffing. And the thin pile and bold colors had some retailers worried that they
would cheapen the look of their stores. Some told the Ty sales force that the
inexpensive Beanie Babies would cannibalize sales of higher-priced products.
Whatever the reason, almost no one ordered them. Warner was originally
soliciting orders for Beanie Babies in twelve-packs of each style, and the
company’s former sales reps remember calling the head of sales seeking
permission to split the twelve-packs and accept orders for six. Warner was
hesitant: If he couldn’t sell a store twelve beanbag animals at a wholesale price
of $2.50 each, why even bother at all?
This was the opposite of what Warner was used to. In the past he’d
sometimes told buyers that they could only purchase a maximum of twelve of a
stuffed cat, then watch in astonishment as a buyer who was probably going to
buy only eight bought twelve instead. There’s some research suggesting that
limiting order sizes can promote the idea of scarcity and lead to larger purchases.
A 1995 study, “Framing the Deal: The Role of Restrictions in Accentuating Deal
Value,” found that advertising limited quantities leads consumers to associate
the limited-quantity brands with higher quality.
Warner agreed to accept orders for six pieces. Ty’s sales for 1994 climbed to
$28 million, which was more than double the previous year, but that was driven
by his traditional plush lines and a new brand he named Attic Treasures. The
A i T
d l d f
i
ff d
i
l

Attic Treasures were modeled after antique stuffed animals—some were
designed by artists, all had textured fur, and many of them were jointed. They
were selling well in gift shops to adult collectors, and seemed like they might be
the future of the company.
Still, Warner wasn’t ready to give up on the Beanies. In June 1994, more
than six months after their inauspicious launch, he introduced a bunch more:
Ally the Alligator, Blackie the Bear, Bones the Dog, Chilly the Bear, Daisy the
Cow, Digger the Crab, Goldie the Goldfish, Happy the Hippo, Humphrey the
Camel, Inky the Octopus, Lucky the Ladybug, Mystic the Unicorn, Peking the
Panda, Quackers the Duck, Seamore the Seal, Slither the Snake, Speedy the
Turtle, Trap the Mouse, and Web the Spider, along with a teddy Beanie that was
available in brown, cranberry, jade, magenta, teal, and violet.
On January 7, 1995, he released Nip the Cat, Tank the Armadillo, Tusk the
Walrus, Zip the Cat, and Valentino, a Valentine’s Day–themed white bear. He
also added wings to Quackers and changed the design on the colored teddy
bears, making the faces less flat and, incidentally at the time, creating the first
discontinued Beanie Babies that anyone looking to build a complete set would
have a hard time finding. Soon “New Face Teddy” and “Old Face Teddy” would
be household names among collectors, and a pair of Old Face Teddies would be
worth enough to pay for a semester of college. For the time being, though,
Beanie Babies were selling poorly enough that most traditionally minded
businesspeople would have considered scrapping the whole line.
The future of the company changed with a lamb named Lovie.

10

A Lamb Named Lovie
One of Ty’s more popular traditional stuffed animals was Lovie, a lamb that sold
especially well in hospitals. However, at the Atlanta Gift Show of 1995, there
was a problem: Lovie had been discontinued because of supplier issues in China
—something to do with the fabric—and the buyers were none too pleased to
hear it. Companies have always discontinued poorly performing products;
usually, no one cares because the pieces they stop selling are the ones consumers
aren’t buying.
Lovie, though, was different: no one was eager to see her go, and the buyers
complained endlessly to the salespeople. The tension over a stuffed lamb was
complicating the sale of the rest of the Ty collection.
The King brothers (Bryan, Chris, and Kevin) were a trio of siblings who sold
Ty products in the southern United States through their company, RBT
Enterprises (Rich Before Thirty—a goal they accomplished with the help of the
conversation they had on this day). They were working at the Ty booth at the
Atlanta Gift Show, listening to angry buyers lament the unavailability of Lovie.
When they broke for lunch they sat in the food court, eating sandwiches and
talking about Lovie. And then one of the brothers recalled a microphenomenon
he had seen at their parents’ gift shop in Clearwater, Florida, where they sold a
line of figurines called Tom Clark gnomes.
Tom Clark gnomes were designed by Dr. Tom Clark, a professor of religion
at Davidson College. Each of Clark’s gnomes, with names like Coastie and
Hogan, was manufactured in a large quantity. Without warning, though, Clark
would break the mold for one of the figurines and inform retailers that the piece
had been “retired.” When the King brothers’ parents heard about a newly retired
piece, they moved it to a special shelf and charged double for it. It wasn’t a
craze, but a few collectors were willing to pay the premium prices.
“Let’s just tell people Lovie’s been retired,” one of the King brothers
suggested, and that’s what they did after lunch. It worked: customers who were
upset by the idea of a discontinued Lovie were intrigued by the prospect of a
retired Lovie. Retailers who were pissed off if you told them you were
discontinuing a piece they wanted out of necessity were delighted if you told
them you were doing it on purpose A few buyers asked the King brothers

them you were doing it on purpose. A few buyers asked the King brothers
whether other pieces were going to be retired. The brothers said they weren’t
sure—but suggested that it might not be a bad idea to stock up just in case.
They told Warner about it later that day, and he was intrigued. He’d tried
selling an Annual Collectible Bears line a few years back, but that hadn’t really
gone anywhere. His use of artist-designed bears, with the names of the designers
printed on the tags, showed that he was definitely interested in the possibility of
moving his product from popular gift into object of desire.
Warner started thinking and talking about how to use “retirements” to create
demand for the $5 beanbags he had thought would become his breakout product
but that were, to date, mostly a flop. He had reservations: Ty Inc. was producing
as many of each piece as it hoped to sell, which seemed to undermine the idea of
promoting them as scarce. Yet in other ways Beanie Babies were ideally suited
to the retirement gimmick: they had sold too poorly to have many of the early,
already “retired” (i.e., discontinued) pieces in circulation, so it wouldn’t take
much of a cult following to start to create a market for them.
“Most importantly, we would plant the seed in consumers’ minds that the
Beanies they could buy on the primary market for $5 would be retired and
immediately take on a higher value on the secondary market,” Faith McGowan
remembered in her unpublished memoir. This assessment, however, overstates
the depth of planning that went into the retirement idea; for the time being,
retiring Beanie Babies was a random marketing stunt that came with no costs
and few expectations.
“He was open to listening to the guys in the field. A lot of CEOs didn’t do
that,” says Bryan King. While Warner is almost universally described as a
micromanager obsessed with controlling every aspect of the market for his toys,
he was also constantly on the prowl for new ideas and new insights, wherever
they might come from. At home with Faith McGowan’s daughters, plush was
never far from anyone’s lips. “Constantly, all the time. The prototypes were all
over the place. What would make this one or that one better was always a topic
of conversation,” is how Faith’s daughter Jenna Boldebuck describes it. Ty
generally interacted little with his company’s fans, but when he did, he always
asked children the same question: What’s one animal we haven’t done that you’d
like to see? In February 1999, a child at a trade show told him she’d like to see a
snail Beanie; Ty introduced Swirly the Snail four months later.
At a family dinner at a local restaurant in early 1995, Ty mused on his desire
to create a ghost Beanie—but said he couldn’t figure out how to do it because
ghosts don’t have legs and he hadn’t done one without legs before. Jenna, then in

elementary school, drew her idea for a ghost on the paper tablecloth, and Warner
was impressed. He tore it off and put it in his wallet. Within a few months Spook
the Ghost was ready to ship—with “Designed by Jenna Boldebuck” on the
hangtag. Two months later, Warner changed his mind and removed her name
from the tag and changed Spook to Spooky. Jenna was hurt by it, and Faith was
puzzled: Was Ty’s self-esteem really so fragile that giving a designer credit to
his girlfriend’s school-age daughter was a problem? But it worked in everyone’s
favor: once Beanie Babies got hot, a Spook with Jenna’s name on the hangtag
was instantly one of the most highly sought variations, and collectors paid as
much as $1,000 for mint-condition examples.
A couple of years later, Faith McGowan suggested creating a Princess Diana
bear to raise money for her memorial fund, and Ty dismissed it outright—only to
announce it later that night as his own idea.
“I sat there stunned but not surprised,” McGowan remembered. “At that
point, all good ideas were Ty’s, regardless of who first suggested them. The idea
for Beanie birthdays, Beanie poems, the Beanie Web site, and even the
retirement of Beanies, had all originated with other people. One thing you can
say for Ty: when he recognized a good idea, he got it done. But he also took
ownership of it.”
The release of a purple Princess Diana bear on October 29, 1997, generated
more headlines promoting the craze. Warner announced that stores were only
allowed to order twelve Princess bears; and while that was just an initial-order
size limit, many speculators assumed that Princess would be a limited-edition
bear. The price soared into the hundreds of dollars, and Princess remains one of
the best-remembered Beanie Babies, sparking memories of minor fortunes paid
for this bear. Yet Ty was more generous in filling reorders, and as the supply
increased, prices tanked. The Princess bear raised more than $20 million for the
memorial fund; fifteen years later, McGowan was still irked by Warner’s
unwillingness to give her any credit for it. But all that would come later.
In late 1995, at the suggestion of the King brothers, Warner had begun
subtly marketing his products as collectibles. There was no sophisticated
packaging and no complex strategy involved. But by directing its sales force to
tell retailers that certain pieces had been “retired,” the company was now
moving its plush animals into the category that was, at the time, a major driver
of sales at the same gift shops where Beanie Babies were being sold as a toy.
Still, the strategy had no immediate impact. A few weeks before Christmas
1995, McGowan set up a kiosk at the Yorktown Shopping Center, not far from
Ty Inc headquarters She hoped to push Beanie Babies as stocking stuffers but

Ty Inc. headquarters. She hoped to push Beanie Babies as stocking stuffers but
didn’t end up making enough to cover the rent. She closed the booth on
Christmas Eve and went on vacation; retirements or no, Beanie Babies still
weren’t hot.
In 2005, in a rare e-mail exchange with a reporter from the Santa Barbara
News-Press (offered as part of an effort to drum up support for Warner’s plans to
renovate the Miramar Hotel, which preservationists were opposing), Warner
offered this as his best piece of business advice: “If you know in your heart it is
a good idea, don’t give up or compromise it. Before I started the Beanie Baby
line, the industry rule was that a $5 collectable item could not work. Enough
said?”
That was true. Before Warner, no one had had the gall to try to market such
low-priced items as heirlooms to be put in display cases and held for investment.
However, the business model had its roots in the 1960s, when another
entrepreneur, Joseph Segel, had a similar idea: manufacture something of little
intrinsic value and then, through hype, marketing, and sometimes outright
misrepresentation, persuade people to believe that the trinket is actually a
precious heirloom. At the very least, you convince the public your heirs will be
honored to receive it when you pass, and perhaps (and more likely) you’ll sell it
at some point for a handsome profit.
When I asked one former top-level executive at Ty about Warner’s greatest
strength, he was succinct: “He was a master of selling useless shit to people and
making it seem really important.” That business of mass-produced collectibles
began with Segel, a 1951 University of Pennsylvania graduate who became the
youngest faculty member in the history of the university’s Wharton School when
he began teaching Marketing 101 and 102 there at age twenty. He was also
running several of his own businesses on the side. Little more than a decade
later, he had the idea that made him spectacularly rich—and provided the capital
for his next big idea, which turned out to be the cable shopping channel QVC.
“In June of 1964, I saw an article in Time magazine about the last U.S. silver
dollars being sold by the government,” Segel remembered years ago. “A picture
showed people [lined up] around the block waiting to buy silver dollars from the
United States Treasury Department in Washington. That gave me a brainstorm.
My idea was to issue a series of solid sterling-silver medals, a little larger than a
silver dollar, of the highest quality . . . and the edition would be extremely
limited. Only one hundred specimen[s] of each medal would be available, at a
fixed price, to each member of a society formed to issue the medals.

Membership in the society would be open for a short period of time. . . . I called
it the National Commemorative Society.” The National Commemorative Society
was a direct-marketing invention and was not a society of any kind. It launched
without an office or members.
The ad first ran in June 1964 and used a ticking clock to drive sales: if the
“membership application” (i.e., order form) was postmarked within the first two
weeks, the price was $10. It rose to as much as $40 the longer you waited. Segel
gained 5,250 members on the strength of that ad—and more important, the
medal appreciated in value because the price of silver was soaring. It was
perfectly timed and incredibly lucky. Segel’s medals had increased in value
because of commodities prices, not some sort of alchemy on his part.
Nevertheless, the auspicious timing launched a perfect feedback loop, and the
word spread. Segel’s commemoratives went up in value, and the actual reason—
the price of silver—was obscured because who really cared? “Buy the National
Commemorative Society’s medallions and get rich” was a better story.
Segel quickly expanded the National Commemorative Society and renamed
it the Franklin Mint—another fabricated title with no connection to anyone
named Franklin. I asked Mr. Segel in an e-mail about the marketing strategy:
Had he really set out with the idea of creating something out of nothing—and
selling it as an investment? “Initially, I thought it was important,” he wrote back.
”But, very soon thereafter, I changed my thinking based on the realization that
the more a collectible is promoted as an investment, the less likely it will turn
out to be a good investment . . . because promoting collectibles as an investment
tends to cause too many people to buy the product primarily for that reason,
eventually resulting in too many people trying to sell at a profit and too few
people interested in buying.”
Yet once Segel made his venture a public company aiming for the annual
revenue and income growth that would boost the stock price, the probable long-
term failure of the Franklin Mint’s products to generate returns for consumers
wasn’t much of a concern. All that mattered was the perception and the quarterly
sales growth that perception could drive. In 1972, with his company’s sales at
more than $50 million, Segel told UPI that “new as they are, collections of our
medals have already appreciated in value since issued, some fairly significantly.”
Segel (and especially the copycats who followed him) began introducing
pieces of less intrinsic value than the medals, promoting them both for their
aesthetic merit and their chance at appreciation. The company’s 1971 annual
report noted that “Norman Rockwell’s 1971 Christmas plate sold out even faster
than his trend setting 1970 plate Meanwhile resale price of the 1970 limited

than his trend-setting 1970 plate. Meanwhile, resale price of the 1970 limited
edition soared in the collector market. A major market in silver plates appears to
have formed, posting bright prospects for 1972.” In 1974 sales soared 48 percent
to more than $166 million.
The Wall Street Journal juxtaposed the performance of collector plates with
the bear market in stocks: “While You Were Going Under, Grannie Got In at
$100, Out at $450” was the headline for a page one story on December 21, 1971.
“Over the past few years,” it began, “you, being a clever, with-it affluent fellow,
have played the stock market like a plane, buying, selling and swapping up and
down the Dow Jones average. Meanwhile, your sweet old Grannie in Grundy
Center, who doesn’t know a short sale from shortbread, has been using her
savings to buy those corny Christmas plates that come out each year adorned
with engravings of Norman Rockwell paintings or bas relief angels or other such
sentimentalities. . . . We have some news for you. While you’ve been taking a
bath in the market, Grannie has been getting rich.”
A 1973 advertisement in the Boston Globe led with the headline, “How to
Double Your Money in Collector’s Plates: Guaranteed Return with No Risk.”
The free booklet promised readers an opportunity to learn how to “guarantee a
return of at least 30% per year on your investment with no risk what-so-ever.”
And lest the appeal seem avaricious, readers were also assured that they could
“own and enjoy the beauty of true works of art.”
Eventually, the watchdog media barked. On November 12, 1978, 60
Minutes’s Morley Safer took Segel and his Franklin Mint to task in a devastating
exposé. Noting that precious metals had been a powerful inflation hedge of late,
Safer explained, “There is one area of collecting in which you almost certainly
would have lost your shirt and that’s in the material sold and advertised by the
Franklin Mint.” More than 75 percent of Franklin Mint pieces, Safer estimated,
were worth substantially less than their issue price. Yet the growth continued.
The Bradford Exchange—a knockoff of Segel’s business—created a murky
secondary market for its collector plates, complete with advertisements featuring
its “brokers” hovering over computers, tracking plate prices. To underscore the
idea of these mass-produced tchotchkes as upmarket, sophisticated investments,
the company deployed some of its most aggressive ads (which later led to
lawsuits) in magazines like Kiplinger’s Personal Finance and Architectural
Digest. A 1986 sales pitch offered “The Sound of Music,” the first plate in a new
series from the Edwin M. Knowles China Company, at a price of $19.50. Yet the
ad copy didn’t emphasize the plate itself. Rather, bold type introduced two so-
called facts: “Fact: ‘Scarlett,’ the 1976 first issue in Edwin M. Knowles’

landmark series of collector’s plates inspired by the classic film Gone With the
Wind, cost $21.60 when it was issued. It recently traded at $245.00—an increase
of 1,040% in just seven years.” And “Fact: ‘The Sound of Music,’ the first issue
in Knowles’ The Sound of Music series, inspired by the classic film of the same
name, is now available for $19.50.” Later the ad advised that “it’s likely to
increase in value.” Currently, those plates can be had on eBay for less than $5
each.
In 1993 U.S. direct mail sales of collectibles totaled $1.7 billion; in 1994 the
Franklin Mint spent $121 million on advertising, enough to make it the twenty-
seventh most advertised brand in the United States and the number one
advertiser in Sunday magazines. The close to one hundred Franklin Mint
employees on the advertising side made it the largest in-house ad agency in
America, according to Advertising Age.
Segel left the industry in 1973 and calls the hard-sell tactics that
predominated in the following years despicable. “I was sickened by aggressive
pitching of those products as investments, but there was nothing I could do about
it. It’s a shame. A lot of people got burned,” he says. Segel had invented an
industry that used marketing to circumvent a process that the market, over
centuries, had taken to organically determine what was valuable. The collectibles
business preyed on all the behavioral fallacies that cost investors money: our
overreliance on past performance as a predictor of future results, our tendency to
have an inflated concept of the value of things we own (known as the
endowment effect), and our tendency toward movement in herds.
It worked. By the mid-1990s, selling less-than-limited limited editions was a
bigger business than ever. Brands like Department 56 and Boyds Bears were
growing quickly and drawing the interest of investment bankers looking for hot
IPO candidates. Warner followed the gift industry obsessively, reading every
article in every trade magazine, carefully monitoring all his competitors’ moves,
and now he was entering the red-hot collectibles business.
It was the smartest decision he’d made yet, and he was to make more money
in collectibles than anyone ever had. First, though, he needed a few collectors to
get the sentimental little scheme going.

11

The First Collectors
“When I look back, the one thing I remember so much about Beanie Babies was
how they made people feel so warm and fuzzy inside,” Mary Beth Sobolewski
explained from her home in Naperville, Illinois. She’d been one of the first
collectors in the Chicago suburbs—chasing Beanie Babies with her kids and
trading with other mothers in the area to get the harder-to-find ones. “It was so
much fun.”
She paused as her mood darkened. “Then it just became people who saw
dollar signs—that was by far the majority of it at the height of it.”
By early 1996, following close to two years of weak sales, Beanie Babies
were a popular toy for children, just as Warner had hoped and predicted.
Demand was strongest in the Midwest, where Ty Inc.’s suburban Chicago
headquarters gave it an in with local stores, and the low-priced toys sold well on
impulse. Kids who grew up in Naperville remember trading them in the first half
of 1995, close to a year before the rest of the country had heard of them, and a
few teachers had banned Beanies from their classrooms because they’d become
a distraction.
One sales rep remembers that when the product was first building a
following on Chicago’s North Shore, the company was shipping more than half
of all Beanie Babies to stores in Illinois. Merchants had disagreed with Warner
at first about the potential of Beanie Babies, but as he once wrote in a Steve
Jobs–like note to an employee, “Most retailers don’t know what they’re doing.
When retailers are angry with you, it means you have a good product.” Warner
thought that the play value of a stuffed animal with mostly beans and a little
stuffing would appeal to kids, and he also thought that a stuffed animal that
could be slipped into a backpack would spread through word of mouth far more
quickly than one that required at-home play dates. He was right on both counts.
On December 9, 1995, nearly two years after the Beanies’ launch, J.T.
Puffin’s in Madison, Wisconsin, placed one of the first newspaper ads for them:
“Beanie Babies: At Puffins, on Dec. 6, we had 27 different styles of Beanie
Babies. At only $5 they disappear quickly. Puffins, trying hard to be your Beanie
Baby Boutique.” On December 7, Crescent Bear & Bath Boutique advertised

“Beanie Babies Bean Bag Animals. Only $3.99.” On February 27, 1996, the
Wisconsin State Journal reported on their popularity: J.T. Puffin’s had sold out
of forty-eight Bongo the Monkeys instantly and was ordering more as quickly as
Ty could ship them. A nine-year-old told the newspaper, “One of the things I
like is they’re really soft. You can like toss them up. I just find it kind of fun to
watch them when they’re coming down.”
A local newspaper story in April 1996 noted that a few had been retired, but
no collectibles craze was mentioned. In June 1996, Playthings gave Beanies
their first bit of industry trade press, mentioning that two gift shops had singled
them out as a fast mover in a recent survey. Other papers in the Midwest began
reporting on the popularity of Beanies in April 1996, tracing their rise to the
1995 Christmas season. “I had a few in October [1995],” one retailer told a
reporter. “They weren’t selling. Then in mid-January [1996] they took off like
crazy.”
No one was talking about an emerging secondary market, and there were no
references to rare pieces. Occasionally, a reporter noted that retailers had
explained that certain Beanie Babies were being “retired,” but with no further
discussion of any impact on values. A couple of midyear stories mentioned that
some parents were willing to pay $10 to $20 each for Beanies they were having
trouble finding—but that wasn’t out of the ordinary for an in-demand toy whose
supply hadn’t yet caught up with demand.
The beginning of the Beanie Baby’s transition from children’s toy to adult
obsession was a product of the 1990s relationship between mothers and children
—a connection that was often centered on shopping. The term “soccer mom”
entered the lexicon in 1995, a year before the Beanie craze began. In her 2010
paper, “Public Choices, Private Control,” Boston University professor D. Lynn
O’Brien Hallstein writes that America’s soccer moms are part of an ethos that
“encourage[s] consumerism as the solution to the work/life struggle.” Quickly,
though, at least in suburban Chicago, the mother-daughter toy collecting hobby
was taken over by the mothers.
_______
Becky Phillips of Naperville, Illinois, started collecting Beanies with her
daughter in early 1996, just as they were catching on with other kids in the
neighborhood.
Becky’s daughter lost interest quickly—but Becky was just getting going.
Al
d
d
d
ll
f Di
bili
h
l
T
A

Already a devoted collector of Disney memorabilia, she was also a Type A
elementary school teacher who was intensely focused on organization. When I
met with Becky at the Coldwell Banker office in Naperville, where she now sells
real estate, she was prepared with two boxes full of carefully filed, pristine
documents from her days first as a Beanie collector, then as a Beanie maven.
In mid-1996, Becky started noticing which ones were harder to find and
which ones had been discontinued. The first Beanie Baby to be retired, with no
announcement or reaction, was Humphrey the Camel in mid-1995. With four
long legs, he was difficult to pose, and his tan color wasn’t particularly
appealing; kids didn’t buy him, so Ty stopped making him. Slither the Snake,
Web the Spider, Peking the Panda, and Trap the Mouse were retired later that
year for similar reasons. Other Beanie Babies were redesigned because Warner
was constantly looking for ways to make them cuter. Becky was trying to sort
through it all. She devoted days to tracking down the differences between Old
Face Teddy and New Face Teddy—and she was the one who first noted the
distinction for the benefit of other enthusiasts.
For a compulsive collector with a desire to create order and organization,
there was a lot to do. Becky Phillips roped in her friend Becky Estenssoro, and
they started collecting together, acquiring multiples of some pieces that they then
used to trade for hard-to-find ones with the handful of other collectors they met
at gift shops. It was “two Tabascos for one Kiwi,” as Estenssoro later
remembered. Still, it was mostly just trading, and if parents occasionally paid
more than $5 for a hard-to-find Beanie Baby, it was probably because they were
trying to please their kids. No one was cataloging values, and certainly no one
could see that the collecting had the makings of a speculative episode.
Not far from Becky and Becky, local children introduced Glenview, Illinois,
collectibles dealer Richard Gernady to Beanie Babies. His store was named the
Cat’s Meow, and he became one of the first retailers to place large orders. He
also saw the collectability potential that came with the so-called retirements the
Ty salespeople were telling him about. He displayed Beanie Babies alongside
the more traditional limited-edition lines like Precious Moments, the Franklin
Mint, and the Bradford Exchange.
Before there was an established market for Beanies, Gernady started
highlighting the retired pieces for his customers and pricing them at a premium,
just as the King brothers’ parents had done with Tom Clark gnomes. This would
never have worked at Toys “R” Us or even most independent toy stores, but
Richard had the advantage of a built-in customer base used to paying high prices
for rare Hummel figurines. At first the reaction was slow, but Gernady was an

o
a e
u
e
gu
es.
t
st t e eact o was s ow, but Ge
ady was a
enthusiastic evangelist, and he offered his customers a chance to get in on the
ground floor of an affordable collectible. Sharon Altier, Ty Inc.’s general
manger before, during, and after the craze, says that more than anything, it was
retailers who made the product a hit. Selling to the mom-and-pops meant that
Ty’s account executives could explain the idea of the retired pieces to the store
owners—who were also, as often as not, the people who were interacting with
the shoppers. As the Ty reps started to get stores on board with Beanie Babies,
word of the retirements spread. When early collectors called the company’s
office in search of information about Beanie Babies, Warner’s secretary usually
referred them to Richard Gernady.
I called Gernady, who was excited to tell his story and meet with me in
person. He said he could show me tapes of his TV appearances commenting on
the toy craze. He also mentioned that he’d spoken with Warner occasionally and
that in their initial conversations, when Beanie Babies were starting to pick up
locally, Warner was nonplussed. As good as the sales were, he wasn’t sure he’d
ever be able to monetize such a low-priced item in a big way. Gernady said he
assured Warner that there was room to run with Beanie Babies; Gernady, it
seems, believed in the collectability potential of Beanies more than Warner did.
The next time I was in Chicago, I called Gernady. This time, he was less
friendly. He’d thought about it and decided that he didn’t want to talk—he was
afraid of Warner’s penchant for litigation and didn’t want any trouble. “He’s
cuckoo,” Gernady told me before hanging up.
Gernady’s contribution to the rise of the Beanie Baby bubble was
significant. He was the first retailer to produce a checklist of all the Beanies he
knew of, current and retired. Gernady had seen the power of checklists to induce
collecting, and he was hoping to make that happen for Beanie Babies—at a
lower entry point. Give a person who is genetically hardwired for collecting a
checklist and he’ll attempt to buy everything on it, Gernady knew.
Richard and his wife brought Beanie Babies to collectibles shows, where he
wore a homemade hat with Beanies dangling off the rim. They told everyone
that Beanies were the next big thing. In the week before Valentine’s Day 1996,
Gernady sold five thousand of them, and he made this prediction in an interview
with one of the first reporters to write about Beanie Babies: they might become
“the biggest thing ever in retailing—Elvis, Sinatra and the Beatles combined.”
As for the kiosk that McGowan had set up and then quickly closed at the
Yorktown Shopping Center: when she and Warner got back from a post-
Christmas vacation in St. Bart’s, her mother phoned her with news. The leasing
h d b
i
i
h b
h
ll h d b
h l
d

manager had been trying to get in touch because the mall had been overwhelmed
with chatter about Beanie Babies. He wanted to know if McGowan would be
interested in reopening the booth. At Toy Fair in February 1996, a stranger
approached Warner and offered him $2 million for the Beanie Baby line. Warner
replied that he’d consider $100 million—which at the time was just a gibe. But it
would soon represent less than one month’s sales. The biggest toy craze of all
time had begun.
_______
It’s tempting to view the market that was developing for Beanie Babies as
something entirely apart from the product itself: a greed-fueled lust for objects
that might have been anything. However, like few other things, the stuffed
animal is completely entrenched in the childhood experience of the Western
world, and its place in our lives often lingers into adulthood. According to one
British survey, 25 percent of men bring a stuffed animal along when they travel
—and the deep, strange, and seldom-discussed connection between people and
plush toys is a not insignificant part of the answer to the question “Why Beanie
Babies?” Stuffed toys’ popularity has risen and fallen over the years, and the
business model has certainly changed. Yet almost from the day they came into
existence, they’ve captured our imaginations and driven us to do things we
wouldn’t ordinarily do.
In 1880 a German polio survivor named Apollonia Margarete Steiff used the
proceeds from teaching zither lessons to buy a sewing machine. She started
making elephant-shaped pincushions as gifts for her friends and relatives. They
were probably always intended as toys or ornaments, but calling them
pincushions assuaged the nineteenth-century guilt that came with making
something frivolous. Steiff had grown up in a well-to-do but dour and toy-less
family and later recalled her gratitude at being allowed once to play with a pile
of lentils, which she poured between cups. Whatever her initial intent, Steiff had
created the first stuffed animal. On December 29, 1880, she went into business
selling her elephants, and in 1886 she sold 5,170 of them; a line of dogs, lions,
camels, and monkeys followed in quick succession.
It was a struggle. Steiff’s grandniece writes of the challenges that a polio
survivor faced in starting her own business: “School was easy and fun for her,
but learning to sew was not. . . . When she realized that she should learn to use a
sewing machine—a new thing then—it again seemed to pose a special problem:

the wheel that gave the machine its impetus was on the right, and her weak right
hand simply could not turn it. . . . But then she had a great idea: she would turn
the machine around and learn to sew everything backwards!” In the beginning
Steiff employed almost exclusively the physically disabled—people who were
then considered unemployable—based on her belief that gratitude for the
opportunity would inspire them to overcome their obstacles.
Margarete Steiff’s introduction of stuffed animals revolutionized the world
of toys. Up until then, toys had been hard; there were dolls, but their heads were
generally made of porcelain, and the bodies might have been stuffed, but the
fabric was coarse. The sales side also left room for improvement. Before Steiff,
dolls were grouped by material type (primarily bisque, wood, and rubber);
creepily, the body parts were often sold separately. This was possible because
when parents made purchasing decisions without the input of children,
sentimentality could (it was thought) be stripped from the sale.
The rise of teddy bears paralleled the rise of industrialization and the rise of
the child as a person seen as worthy of pampering. Between 1880 and 1910, the
percentage of the American labor force that worked in farming fell from 49
percent to 31 percent, and as the population moved away from the realities of
life with animals, it romanticized them in its children’s toys. Steiff’s company
was growing rapidly; then she got lucky.
On November 14, 1902, President Teddy Roosevelt was in the South to
mediate a dispute over the Louisiana-Mississippi border and took a few days off
to go hunting. He hadn’t shot anything in four days; his hosts, feeling sorry for
him, found a bear—an elderly female according to some accounts, a bear cub
according to others—and tied it up so that Roosevelt would have something to
kill. Roosevelt was offended and refused to shoot—although the fact that a
member of his party subsequently slit the bear’s throat with a hunting knife has
been dropped from the popular recollection.
The story—or, rather, a romanticized version of it—was immortalized by
Washington Post cartoonist Clifford K. Berryman, whose cartoon “Drawing the
Line in the Mississippi” depicted Roosevelt standing indignantly, refusing even
to face the leashed bear being offered by an eager local. By the end of the month,
the phrase “teddy’s bear” had entered the lexicon (although the phrase didn’t
appear in the cartoon), and toy sellers had begun peddling teddy bears.
Many later retellings of this incident—especially the dozens of children’s
books about it—neglect to mention that the bear had been tied up, which
changes the connotation significantly, substituting a pleasant myth for a darker
reality The popular version says that Roosevelt refused to shoot the bear out of

reality. The popular version says that Roosevelt refused to shoot the bear out of
pity; actually, Roosevelt refused to be patronized. For an industry that was to
become as cutthroat and tinged with tragedy as the cuddly business of stuffed
animals, it’s perfect that the teddy bear’s genesis—and the birth of the stuffed
animal as a popular toy that was linked, from the beginning, with President
Roosevelt—was an act of pride misconstrued as an act of mercy. Yet while
Roosevelt might have been the spark that ignited the teddy bear boom, the
popularity was really driven by the uniqueness of the product: its softness was
unheard of in toys up to that time.
Margarete Steiff introduced her first stuffed bears in 1902, and sales
skyrocketed. Steiff was also among the first toy companies to build a brand and
sell its products as something other than an easily substituted commodity. The
Knopf im Ohr (Button in Ear) was Steiff’s signature bit of branding, and the
company fought hard against knockoffs and counterfeiters. By 1906 teddy bears
were a full-blown phenomenon that approached, without the speculative
element, the mania that enveloped Beanie Babies ninety years later. An ad in
Ladies’ World magazine that year advised that a teddy-less child “now-a-days is
quite out of fashion.” Even then, it wasn’t just children. A story in Playthings
from the same year advised that “the Teddy Bear fad has not confined itself to
children. . . . If the German toymaker who invented these new playthings had
been told, when he [Steiff avoided publicity, and it was generally assumed that a
man was behind the company] put them on the market, that grown women would
be making a fad of them, toting them around, he probably would have remarked
‘Ach, himmel! Nein!’—‘Oh, heavens! No!’” The story added that teddy bears
were especially popular among New York’s wealthy and cited a Newport, Rhode
Island, socialite who always kept one with her in her carriage.
Playthings predicted that “any toy in the shape of an animal will have a good
sale in 1908,” but that didn’t happen. Contrary to its bullishness of a year earlier,
Playthings reported in 1908 that “the so-called craze for them has entirely
subsided, that is, as far as women carrying them around is concerned.” Steiff
remains the most prestigious stuffed-animal maker in the world, but it never
again shipped more bears than the 975,000 it sold in 1907. The real decline in
the relevance of teddy bears—and all traditional toys—came forty-five years
later.
Hasbro launched the first seasonal television toy commercials in 1952, and
Mattel followed with the first year-round commercials in 1955. They were the
first two toy companies to take their marketing directly to children. Those first
ads were wildly successful and reshuffled the ranks of toy companies in

America: Hasbro and Mattel, once also-rans, became the two biggest toy brands.
The business of toy selling became corporatized; the big companies that
failed to jump into TV saw their sales dwindle, and the start-up toymakers who
lacked the resources to advertise found themselves shut out of an industry that
had once had few barriers to entry. As Michael Lewis wrote in Next: The Future
Just Happened, “Without the television, there never would have been Tide or
Rice Krispies or Alpo, but fifty smaller versions of Tide and Rice Krispies and
Alpo.”
Close to half a century later, the market for consumer goods was still driven
by television—and toys were more dependent on TV than any other industry.
That Ty Warner’s Beanie Babies were able, without the benefit of a single ad, to
outpace the combined annual profits of the largest toymakers in the world for
even a few years was an astounding and unprecedented achievement. That he did
it in spite of the interpersonal drama that reentered his life right as the toys were
taking off is perhaps equally impressive.

12

The Return
In January 1996 Faith McGowan walked into Ty Warner’s office, looked down
at his desk, and screamed.
McGowan had been with Warner for close to three years by then—living
with him, raising her children with him, “doing the business with him,” as she
puts it, and ceding to his demand that she reinvent herself in his image. He’d
hired a personal trainer for her, and he’d begun picking out her clothes—
spending hours at a mall with her in search of a winter coat, only to leave empty-
handed after proclaiming there wasn’t a single one that he liked. At his
insistence she’d had jaw surgery to correct a slightly open bite, even as she tried
to tell him that his own obsession with cosmetic surgery had gone too far. She’d
gone to Dallas to visit him while he recuperated from a touch-up he’d had
because he was concerned that his eyes didn’t match.
His appearance shocked her: he’d opted to have both eyes redone, and he’d
gotten another face-lift, too. His rapidly changing visage scared Faith and her
daughters, but they loved him. They loved the time they’d been spending with
him and had no reason to question his devotion. They traveled all over the world
with him, played tennis almost every day, and enjoyed his slapstick comedic
sensibility. When he played with Faith’s dog he pretended to be a dog. The
Beanie Babies business had taken off after the 1995 Christmas season, at least
regionally, and things couldn’t have been going better—personally or
professionally.
Yet there it was, sitting on his desk, peeking out of an envelope: a one-way
plane ticket to London for the woman Warner had insisted was completely out of
his life. Patricia Roche was back.
There was a perfectly innocent explanation, Warner told Faith. A few weeks
earlier, he had called Roche to express concern about his company’s flagging
sales in England. He’d contracted with a few Jehovah’s Witnesses to run
distribution there—and they’d recruited more Jehovah’s Witnesses while Warner
was busy focusing on the booming U.S. business. The Jehovah’s Witnesses’
experience with rejected soliciting probably prepared them well for selling
plush, but the territory wasn’t making money.
“How would you like to go to England?” Warner had asked Roche at a

How would you like to go to England?  Warner had asked Roche at a
meeting he’d set up under the guise of giving her some stuffed animals that her
mother could use for a charity fund-raiser.
“How the hell far away do you want me?” she’d replied.
Going back to work with Warner would be awkward, but in the three or so
years since he’d booted her out of the company they’d started together, she’d
barely been able to make a living. And she’d never wanted to leave the business
in the first place. For Warner, the appeal was obvious: he knew she would never
steal from him, and she’d been the one who’d run his office in the early days.
They’d worked well together once, and she knew the business and Warner’s
unique approach to it better than anyone. And so, three years after their dramatic
confrontation in a Cancun hotel room, Patricia Roche went to England.
While she ran Ty UK, buying product from him at below wholesale and then
selling it to stores at a markup, Roche made a point of giving Warner every
possible reason to regret their new partnership. As his Oak Brook office started
to pick up MBAs and industry veterans to serve as executives, Ty insisted that
people call him Mr. Warner. He even went through a phase where he asked to be
addressed as Owner. He started to call meetings even though the social
requirements bored him. He often read magazines while his executives discussed
ideas, and sometimes interrupted to share a fun fact he’d come across. “Like a
child,” Roche says. During conference calls, if he droned on pompously, she
called him out—and not tactfully.
“Oh, shove it up your ass, Ty!” she once shouted.
“Patricia, you know I hate it when you swear, and a little decorum would be
nice. You’re on speakerphone,” he replied.
“Good, I’ll talk louder, you dumb shit,” she said. No one at Ty talked to
Warner like Patricia did. She also believed that she was above talking to anyone
at the company other than Warner himself. She screamed at Sharon Altier, the
general manager who had been her replacement after the episode in Cancun,
whenever she called to discuss inventory. After a few months, Altier started
answering the phone with “Hello, Patricia. If you swear at me, I’m going to hang
up.”
In time, Sharon and Patricia developed a certain rapport. When Ty’s
behavior struck Sharon as odd—like when she discovered that he had bugged
her office—she would call Patricia for advice. “No one understands Ty better
than her,” Sharon remembers, and there was one tip Roche gave her that she
never forgot: everything, Patricia told her, was a manipulation. “He doesn’t fart
without planning it weeks in advance,” Roche explained.

_______
With Faith and her daughters, Warner, now in his fifties, had a basically
conventional personal life for the first time, which surprised those who’d known
him as a perennial playboy. At Toy Fair, an old acquaintance of Warner’s
approached him and McGowan and exclaimed, “I want to meet the woman who
would live in a house with this man and her children!” There were still
eccentricities, some of them fun: a resolute individualist, Ty instructed the girls
to pay no attention to peer pressure about fashion. Create your own style, he told
them. He also, as everyone who’s ever driven with him recalls, indoctrinated
people in his philosophy of never paying tolls. “Just throw pennies and keep
driving! It’s an illegal tax!” he’d shout.
Other eccentricities were more off-putting. When Faith’s daughters were
preteens, he insisted that everyone join him to watch his favorite movie: a 1945
adaptation of Oscar Wilde’s novel The Picture of Dorian Gray, the dark story of
a wealthy and immoral young man who never ages. He took them on lavish
vacations and paid for everything, but they generally experienced him as stingy.
When the girls were older, he never bought them cars or contributed to college
funds. Ty was a master of appealing to sentimentality about family life when it
came to his products, but family life opened a Pandora’s box for Warner. He
once stayed home with McGowan’s daughters while she went to a Christmas
party. He was distraught when she returned. “I don’t know what I’m doing. I’m
out of here,” he told her, and left immediately. When she didn’t hear from him
for two days, McGowan drove over to his house—they were living at her house
while his was under construction—and found him sitting in a dark closet
upstairs. “He said that while babysitting for Lauren and Jenna, he felt
responsible for them,” she remembers. “This triggered bad memories of when
his parents failed to provide the care and nurturing that he needed during his
childhood. Because his parents had emotionally abandoned him, he said he
couldn’t do the family thing.”
“I need to be taken care of like a five-year-old boy,” he told her.
While Ty Inc.’s sales grew tenfold in the span of a few months, Warner
received word that his mother, who had fallen out of communication with both
of her children, was living in the Palm Beach area. Warner was eager to see her,
so he and McGowan got on the next flight, then drove to the hotel where she was
staying. “The manager called the room, but she refused to see us,” McGowan
ll
“W
b
k
ibl
d d
h
h h
ki
l

recalls. “We went back to our convertible and drove through the parking lot,
where Ty spotted his old brown Mercedes, which was now in bad condition.
When we looked back at the hotel, we saw a woman with long black hair
peeking out from behind the drapes. So we went back into the hotel and Ty
knocked on her door. No response. Ty then told her in a loud, firm voice that he
was there and he loved her.” Georgia told them to leave.
A few months later, Ty received a call from a hospital in Palm Beach:
Georgia had recently been there for treatment. She had no money, no insurance,
no home, and had told the hospital that she was living out of her car.
Ty wasn’t known for his empathy or his willingness to accommodate other
people—but he would do anything for his mother. He rented a hotel suite for her
and arranged for the hospital to move her there under some false pretense he’d
concocted with the staff. Next he flew to Palm Beach and hid in the bushes at the
hotel while Faith, dressed as a nurse, went to the desk, asked for Georgia’s room
number, and knocked on the door. They sat talking in the living room for half an
hour. Georgia said, “My son would like you. He’d charm you.” She told Faith
that Ty was a criminal who imported drugs in stuffed animals from Asia. Faith
replied that she doubted that and that Ty sounded like a successful businessman.
Yet Faith’s protest came off a bit too eager, and Georgia caught on to the ruse.
She spit at Faith and ordered her out. Faith walked out the front door and found
Ty, who was still waiting in the bushes. They flew home in tears.
Back in the Chicago suburbs, not far from the home he was returning to, a
few women Warner had never even heard of were doing the groundwork that
was to make him richer than even he, the supremely cocky salesman, ever could
have dreamed of becoming.

13

Force Multipliers
It had been a half century since a major toy craze had started locally; even the
Hula Hoop fad, which is generally thought to have begun with product
giveaways on the playgrounds of Southern California, really only began with a
demonstration on The Dinah Shore Show.
The rise of Beanie Babies, by contrast, really was an incremental, peer-to-
peer phenomenon that began in the Chicago suburbs. The localized variations in
knowledge about rare Beanie Babies created a natural way for the craze to
spread. As local collectors geographically expanded their search for early and
rare Beanies, awareness of a Beanie craze expanded. Had demand started out
strong, there would have been no early Beanie Babies produced in small
quantities for collectors to hunt for—and, more important, spread stories about.
While Richard Gernady was promoting Beanies in his store and at local
collectibles shows, two pairs of intelligent, well-educated Chicago women—
Becky Phillips and Becky Estenssoro, along with a doctor and her sister—were
working to assemble complete collections, egged on by the checklists they
obtained from Gernady. “My downfall was the checklists,” one early collector
told me. “Once you have a checklist, you don’t look at what you have. You look
at what you don’t have.”
Dr. Paula Benchik-Abrinko first got hooked by a pile of Beanie Babies she
saw in the gift shop at the hospital where she worked. She bought several dozen
and brought them along when she met her sister Peggy Gallagher for lunch a few
days later. “She said, ‘Look at these little stuffed animals,’” remembers
Gallagher. “She said, ‘Peggy, you figure this out for me—how many of them
there are and who makes them.’” Benchik-Abrinko wanted to collect them all for
her daughter, and while Peggy didn’t have any children, she decided she’d start a
collection, too. Then she decided she wanted Beanie Baby collections for her
older sister’s two daughters as well. “I started showing them to people, and
they’d say, ‘Well, when you get them, get me one,’” she remembers.
Gallagher and Benchik-Abrinko, along with the two Beckys, were the first
serious, systematic Beanie Baby collectors. Demand was already high among
children in the Chicago suburbs, so they needed to cast a wider net to find the
rarest pieces Once you got out of the Midwest piles of Beanie Babies
even

rarest pieces. Once you got out of the Midwest, piles of Beanie Babies—even
the early retired pieces—could still be found in Hallmark stores, toy stores, zoos,
and hospital gift shops. This set the stage for a classic arbitrage trade: buying
something in a market where it’s not in demand and then selling it where it is in
demand.
That was when the phone calls started.
Dr. Benchik-Abrinko was working as an internist on a study about women
who were undergoing dialysis while pregnant. She was calling hospitals all over
the country in search of patient records. At the end of each call, she’d ask to be
transferred to the hospital gift shop. Credit card in hand, she asked puzzled
clerks who’d only vaguely heard of Beanie Babies to describe the ones they had
in inventory. Benchik-Abrinko ordered the ones she didn’t have, along with the
ones that were hard to find in Chicago. When she found stores with duplicates of
hard-to-find Beanies, she ordered as many as she could to build a stockpile for
trading.
“It was trading in the beginning,” remembers her sister Peggy. “But then
Richard Gernady started telling us what he was selling them for. He’d say,
‘These are retired so they cost more.’ So we’d pay. Then we’d tell other people
that we paid more, and so they would need to pay more. That was how the
higher prices started happening.”
At this point, none of it was especially insane. Higher prices were being
paid, but only by parents and collectors. No one thought of them as an
investment. There were many things for which people with discretionary income
overpaid—so why not tick off another box on the Beanie Baby checklist? In
March 1996 a local newspaper reported that “people are so desperate to collect
the Beanie Babies, they’re now offering to pay $10 to $25, plus shipping and
handling charges, for animals that are still on sale in stores for just $5.” Once
people could buy them for $5 and flip them for two to five times that much, the
speed of the fad’s spread multiplied—because humans have an insatiable need to
brag. The idea of making money reselling stuffed animals was so bizarre—so
fantastic—that everyone who did it told everyone they knew about it. Even with
relatively tiny volume, stories about profits on Beanies spread word virally of an
otherwise unremarkable product.
Gallagher and Benchik-Abrinko compiled lists of retailers all over the
country and racked up $1,000-per-month long-distance charges. Peggy tried to
hide the phone bills and all other evidence of her new hobby from her husband,
who was a lawyer. “At first I had them hiding in my office because I said, ‘If my
husband sees me buying these little animals, he’s going to say, “What the hell is

wrong with her?”’”
A year later, Peggy was telling collectors who lined up at her lectures and
book signings about the treasures she’d scored in the first days of Beanie
collecting: In early 1996 the Camelback Mountain Resort in Pennsylvania sold
her twelve Humphrey the Camels for $5 each. Back in Chicago she traded some
of those for Beanies she hadn’t been able to find. She was fortunate to hold on to
a few: by late 1997 Humphrey was selling reliably online for more than $2,000.
On February 12, 1996, Gallagher scored the biggest hit of her Beanie collecting
career: through a little sleuthing, she found the contact information for the Ty
distributor in Nuremberg, Germany, and phoned to see what they had. Beanies
hadn’t yet caught on there, and Gallagher placed her first order, paying retail
prices for 198 Beanie Babies that were already impossible to find in Chicago—
and once the collecting craze turned speculative, they would be worth a fortune.
Among her finds: 30 Chilly the Polar Bears purchased for the equivalent of
$7 each; within a year and a half, those sold for more than $1,800 each. Her 36
Peking the Pandas were worth around $2,000 each; the 84 Old Face Teddies
were worth $1,800 each; the 36 Trap the Mouse Beanies, $1,200 each; and 12
Patti the Platypuses, $800 each. Unfortunately, her requests for the royal blue
Peanut the Elephant and Spot the Dog, along with a few other Beanies, went
unfilled.
Still, a few months later that $2,000 order, which included shipping fees
from Germany, was worth more than $300,000—far higher than the annual sales
of Ty Germany at the time. Peggy Gallagher knew far more about which pieces
were sought after than the company did.
While Benchik-Abrinko and her sister were building their collections and
asking their mother for help with the phone bills, just across town, the two
Beckys were doing the same thing. Sometimes a store manager explained that a
day earlier a mysterious lady from suburban Chicago had called and bought out
his entire inventory. As the Chicago women called around the country, asking
retailers about Beanie Babies and purchasing everything stores had—even if that
was only thirty or forty pieces per store—they served as the force multipliers of
the local interest.
Fads and trends are often seen as spreading virally through word of mouth—
as a steady process of regular people telling one another about something until
everyone has heard about it. However, journalist and best-selling author
Malcolm Gladwell says that, in reality, fads are often spread “by the efforts of a
handful of exceptional people.” In this case it was the exceptional dedication of a

few Chicago women that spread Beanie Baby collecting nationally. When they
called friends in different time zones to ask them to be on the lookout for rare
pieces that could fetch five times their retail price in the suburban Chicago
market, they created new collectors who were equipped with stories they
couldn’t resist telling. As Seth Godin notes in his book Unleashing the
Ideavirus, the investments they were making in their own collections gave them
a powerful incentive to build the broader market for Beanie Babies: “If other
people start collecting, your collection increases in value.” While consumer
goods have always gained popularity through word of mouth, word of a
profitable investment always spreads more quickly. The actual universe of
collectors for these early pieces was tiny—but their existence drove Beanie
Babies to become something much bigger.
In late 1996, Richard Gernady introduced Peggy Gallagher to his friend
Rosie Wells, a collectibles impresario and the publisher of Rosie’s Collectors’
Bulletin, a popular magazine among collectors. Wells and Gernady knew each
other from the world of Precious Moments collecting, and Gernady hoped to get
her on the Beanie bandwagon. At first Wells was cool to the idea of Beanie
Babies as a collectible, but as she saw the momentum gathering in Illinois, she
jumped on board and gave Gallagher the assignment for the first magazine piece
on the emerging craze.
In that magazine Gallagher also placed an ad: send her a self-addressed
stamped envelope, she wrote, and she’d send you a price list of all the Beanie
Babies. Admittedly, her research left something to be desired; as Gallagher
explained it to me, she was essentially making up prices based on the pieces that
seemed to be the hardest to find. She tried to cull values based on what Gernady
was charging and what the collectors in America Online’s collectibles chat room
were saying, but there was no transparent market yet. In the beginning she
simply decreed that most retired Beanie Babies were worth $10 or $20 each, and
then watched in amazement as the market went there. Gallagher, with her own
collection, naturally had a strong incentive to be optimistic about her estimates.
Among the small group of Chicago suburbs collectors, the price lists that
Gallagher—and then the two Beckys—put out became the market.
“All the people who were driving this lived within ten miles of each other,”
remembers Mary Beth Sobolewski. Anyone who was collecting Beanie Babies
in early 1996 was either in the Chicago suburbs or connected with someone in
the Chicago suburbs who told them about the booming trade in collectible plush.
As I researched the earliest Beanie mavens and collectors, one apparent outlier
was Sara Nelson who created BeanieMom com one of the first and by far the

was Sara Nelson, who created BeanieMom .com, one of the first and by far the
most popular of the fan sites. She was living in Virginia at the time of the craze;
how could she have been one of the early Beanie collectors?
One of Nelson’s best friends moved to suburban Chicago in early 1996.
When the friend returned to Virginia to visit, she told Nelson about Beanie
Babies, and Nelson started her own collection, ostensibly for her daughters. She
went online and found a woman named Becky Phillips who had a fine-mane
Mystic—a rare variation of Mystic the Unicorn, then worth about $100. When
Phillips gave her the address to send the check, Nelson was shocked: Phillips
lived across the street from the friend who had introduced Nelson to Beanie
Babies. Being Becky Phillips’s neighbor made it nearly impossible to avoid
becoming a Beanie collector. Also on that same block lived Joni Blackman—the
People magazine reporter who did the first national story on Beanie Babies after
Phillips told her about them. The world of early collectors hoarding the rarest
pieces was indeed a tiny one, and all of the major collectors can be traced back
to the cul-de-sac where Becky Phillips lived, not far from Mary Beth, Peggy, and
Paula.
As I talked to the early collectors, their lack of insight into what became
their obsession was fascinating. Beanie Babies, almost from the beginning,
seemed to have people doing things they didn’t even really want to do—and
more than fifteen years later, they struggled to explain their thinking. It was fun;
they wanted complete sets, so they acquired duplicates when they could in order
to trade for ones they couldn’t find. The trouble, as with so many things, came
later—once the money involved escalated.

14

Peanut the Royal Blue Elephant
The early collectors’ excitement preceded the broader public’s. In mid-1996
Becky Phillips and Becky Estenssoro began placing ads in toy and collector
magazines to try to sell some of their earliest Beanie Babies—but they didn’t get
much response. In October they set up a booth at the Kane County Flea Market
in Saint Charles, Illinois, but that didn’t work either. Few people were interested
in paying $20 or $25 for a retired Beanie Baby. The two Beckys were only able
to recoup the $125 they’d paid for the table by buying out the stock of a dealer
who had Beanies for $5 and marking them up to $6.50. Still, they persisted.
As the collectors chased Beanies and compiled lists, they realized there were
a few oddities that were nearly impossible to find. The hunt for oddball
specimens has always fueled collectors: philatelists made the rare Inverted Jenny
one of the most valuable stamps of the twentieth century. Baseball card
collectors obsessed over the 1909 Honus Wagner card that was pulled from
production after Wagner threatened legal action. News accounts of the card’s
soaring value helped to spur a speculative market for mass-produced
contemporary cards in the 1980s and early 1990s. In the tulip mania of the
1630s, the Semper Augustus bulb was the rarest and most coveted—and helped
to spread the burgeoning market for tulips to its sad and inevitable conclusion:
naive latecomers paid too much for tulips that weren’t even a little bit rare. Just
as the legitimate business model of eBay drove demand for shares of hundreds
of Internet stocks without business models, it was the discovery of hard-to-find
oddities that started to turn harmless toy collecting into something truly insane.
Peanut the Elephant originally shipped in mid-1995 with royal blue fabric;
after a few thousand Peanuts had already been sold, Warner decided that the
color was too dark to appeal to children. He stopped production and switched the
fabric color to baby blue—and those original royal blue Peanuts became the
most coveted of all Beanie Babies, worth more than $5,000 each. By 1997 there
were few people who hadn’t heard of the royal blue version of Peanut the
Elephant. The toy and its incredible value became such a ubiquitous cultural
meme that columnist Dave Barry could mock it in a 1998 column without
bothering to provide much context: “So now Beanie Babies are big business,
with grown men and women fighting over them and paying thousands of dollars

with grown men and women fighting over them and paying thousands of dollars
for certain rare models, such as Peanut the Royal Blue Elephant (not to be
confused with Peanut the LIGHT Blue Elephant, which only a total loser would
pay thousands of dollars for).”
Spot the Dog originally shipped without a spot, and Quackers the Duck
originally shipped without wings. “The reason people are willing to pay so much
for a Beanie when it’s first released,” Myrtle Cecil, one of the first Beanie
collectors and later an official Beanie expert for eBay, told Good Housekeeping,
“is that Ty is famous for changing an animal after the first production run. That
makes the earlier version much more valuable.” Warner changed the design of
Tank the Armadillo after a biologist phoned to inform him that it wasn’t
anatomically correct; when his redesign wasn’t quite right, he changed it again,
and each new variation made the older versions highly sought after by collectors
seeking complete sets.
Collectors and reporters gave Ty Warner credit for brilliant marketing when
it came to the variations, but that wasn’t the case. In the beginning, the variations
weren’t driven by a desire to create buzz. Rather, Warner was just tinkering with
already-released products out of his obsessive desire to create a perfect toy—the
goal that had been the sole driver of his life since he’d started his own business.
The variations were dutifully cataloged by the collectors. There was Derby
the Horse, introduced in mid-1995—but then there was Derby with a star on his
head, and Derby without a star on his head, and both of those variations came
with “fine manes” and “coarse manes,” with values ranging from $5 to $4,000
by 1998. Inky the Octopus was originally tan and didn’t have a mouth; then he
was tan with a mouth; then he was pink with a mouth. His value, depending on
which edition you had, ranged from roughly $30 up to around $1,000 by 1998.
The number of spots on Lucky the Ladybug also varied; Nip the Cat’s paws and
face went through several changes during his production, and Patti the Platypus
went from maroon to magenta. When Sly the Fox’s belly was changed from
white to brown, the original Beanie’s value soared to close to $200.
The self-styled market experts stoked the idea that in the new Beanies there
was the possibility of finding examples that would experience the same
appreciation patterns the earlier ones had. The reasoning was of course flawed:
by the time Beanie Babies had caught on, the Chinese factories were pumping
them out in huge quantities—although the diffused distribution masked just how
many Ty was selling. No one ever walked into a store and saw a pile of five
hundred Beanie Babies; Ty’s sales went through large numbers of small stores
rather than small numbers of large stores. Every day, Ty generated eight

thousand to ten thousand packing slips, and during the holiday season the
company shipped fifteen thousand orders per day to retailers across America.
Warner knew that keeping small numbers of Beanies in many stores was the key
to the craze, telling a reporter in 1996, “This thing could grow and be around for
many years just as long as I don’t take the easy road and sell it to a mass
merchant who’s going to put it in bins.”
“People didn’t understand that the ones people were making $800 on were
really rare,” says Paula Benchik-Abrinko. “By the time they had heard that
people were making money, the really hot ones were all gone”—mostly into the
hands of that small group of Chicago women. In July 1996 Mary Beth
Sobolewski had paid $25 each for five New Face teddy bears of various colors.
“Naysayers were quick to say I was throwing money away on a fad that would
be tomorrow’s disaster,” she later remembered. “As history played out, my
investment in Teddy New Face Magenta, Cranberry, Violet, Jade, and Teal
would realize an eighty-eight hundred percent increase over the next couple of
years.” By mid-1998 the bears were selling for at least $2,000 each, and all of
the earliest Chicago collectors were sitting on six-figure fortunes. As new
collectors started backtracking to acquire the earliest pieces, Benchik-Abrinko
quietly sold a few of her rarest Beanies and used the proceeds to adopt her first
child.
Had the initial sales of Beanie Babies been stronger, it’s unlikely that a craze
ever could have developed. There would have been no early oddities and
limited-production rarities for collectors to hunt for—and for which to pay the
high prices that would spread word of an investment opportunity. As the
Chicago Tribune reported, “Start talking Beanies, and just about everybody
knows somebody who financed a wedding, a vacation, a new van or what have
you with the proceeds of Beanie sales.” In his 1978 book, Manias, Panics, and
Crashes: A History of Financial Crises, the economist Charles Kindleberger
explained the self-perpetuating feeding frenzy that develops when speculators
start making money: “There is nothing so disturbing to one’s well-being and
judgment as to see a friend get rich.”
The money and the stories were flowing. Vicki Chalmers of Cockeysville,
Maryland, left her sales job at AT&T to become a full-time Beanie trader.
Jennifer Sykes, a forty-one-year-old mother from Northridge, California,
bragged to a reporter about the Slither the Snake Beanie Baby she’d paid $600
for in a store—and then flipped online for more than $1,000. “Now that was
pretty addicting,” she said.

The idea of people making money with Beanie Babies was too good for fact-
checking. As Dr. Robert Shiller notes in Irrational Exuberance, it is perhaps no
coincidence that “the history of speculative bubbles begins roughly with the
advent of newspapers. Although the news media—newspapers, magazines, and
broadcast media, along with their new outlets on the Internet—present
themselves as detached observers of market events, they are themselves an
integral part of these events.” The Wall Street Journal ran a feature story on
Michael Podraza, a thirteen-year-old who, it said, had grossed more than $1
million with the Beanie-trading Web site BeanieX.com, which he’d started with
his father. In 1998, the Chicago Tribune reported that “the corporation earned
$2.3 million in gross sales; this year, Podraza expects sales to top $3 million.”
Other collectors doubt the veracity of that sales figure—BeanieX.com was a site
most collectors had never heard of—and today Podraza works as a stylist at a
Hair Cuttery in suburban Illinois.
“The media actively shape public attention and categories of thought, and
they create the environment within which the speculative market events we see
are played out,” writes Dr. Shiller. The microphenomenon in the Chicago
suburbs was transformed by the power of the press.
The ability of stories to shape values and valuations is at the heart of every
speculative event. Shiller tells the story of how Leonardo da Vinci’s Mona Lisa
became the most famous and most valuable painting in the world. It started with
Giorgio Vasari’s profile of Leonardo in his 1550 book, Lives of the Most
Excellent Painters, Sculptors, and Architects. Vasari is considered to have been
the first art historian, and the book and its stories circulated widely—especially
its story about the model’s famous smile: Vasari reported that Leonardo had
difficulty capturing it and that he’d tried a number of entertainers who, he hoped,
would get the model to assume the correct facial expression. In the end, Vasari
writes, the result was “a thing more divine than human, and it was held to be a
marvel.” That story, apocryphal at the time and believed to be entirely untrue by
many modern art historians, spread the idea of the painting as something more
than just a painting—and poets and songwriters responded with tributes to it.
Sigmund Freud published a widely circulated essay psychoanalyzing Mona Lisa
in 1910; when the masterpiece was stolen from the Louvre in 1911, media
reports fixated on the smile. In 1950 Nat “King” Cole’s recording of the song
“Mona Lisa” was the number one record in the country for eight weeks. While
it’s interesting that the stories that made Mona Lisa the most famous painting in
the world probably aren’t even true, no one really cares.
And so it was with Beanie Babies: incredible stories about vast riches being

And so it was with Beanie Babies: incredible stories about vast riches being
made, predictions about rising prices, then books and magazines extolling their
investment merits circulated. Preteens were making millions with Beanie-trading
Web sites; soccer moms were accumulating collections that would cover the cost
of college. The stories might not have started out as accurate ones, but the
momentum they created sometimes helped them become true.
_______
In early 1997 Peggy Gallagher released the first book on Beanie Babies—a thin,
self-published volume featuring photos of every Beanie she’d been able to
accumulate so far. Between the book and her wheeling and dealing over the
phone, in a few months she netted $200,000. She celebrated with a new
Mercedes and a vanity license plate: BBABIES. She was also appearing once a
month for two hours on WGN Radio, the most popular talk station in the
Chicago market with a strong signal that often made it audible all over America.
When Gallagher entered each caller into a drawing to win a basket of Beanie
Babies, the phone lines jammed. During one summer show, a caller asked, “Do
you think there is a seasonal cycle for Beanie Babies?”
“It’s not different than any other kind of investment—the stock market or
the commodities market,” was Gallagher’s reply. Then she explained that she
used to be a trader on the Chicago Mercantile Exchange. “There are peaks and
valleys. It’s an investment for people. There’s nobody as big as the market. The
Hunt [brothers] tried to do it with the silver market. There is nobody bigger than
the market. The prices have stabilized a bit right now, but now they’re starting to
get more active. So it’s just like any other type of investment.”
As the women of suburban Chicago built their collections, Beanie Babies
also found their way into the classroom. On January 3, 1997, the Daily Herald
reported that two kindergarten teachers were working to incorporate Beanies into
their lesson plans. Pep Tobin brought her collection into the classroom to
educate the students about Beanies: “Besides showing the students 91 of her
Beanie Babies, Tobin talked to them about sorting the toys and about how she
finds out more about her hobby from the World Wide Web. . . . Beanie Babies
sell for about $5, but Tobin told children that rare versions and ones that no
longer are manufactured may fetch hundreds of dollars.” One Minnesota mother
told a skeptical reporter that the toys had educational value: “They read the little
poems that come with the Beanies, so it helps their reading. They’ve learned the

concept of retiring.” Why it would be valuable for children to learn the concept
of retiring was a question left unasked.
It was a reasonably normal-size mania, but still a mania. Ty’s sales for 1996
rose to $280 million—up tenfold in a year but only a slightly larger business
than that of Department 56, a seller of similarly collectible Christmas cottages.
Ty was becoming a major player in the world of toys and collectibles, but not on
a scale that transcended the industry. A few suburban Chicago collectors trading,
then spending cash to fill holes in their collections had combined with demand
from children bringing the pocket-size toys to school to ignite a bull market in
Beanies. Now collector-speculators were lining up to acquire the newest pieces
because who knew? Might Bruno the Bull Terrier be the next royal blue Peanut
the Elephant? At $5 it certainly seemed worth a try, and they were cute enough
as toys to overcome skepticism: even if they didn’t go up in value, they still
made great gifts.
_______
As for Ty Warner, he was watching the developing rage surrounding his line
with a mixture of astonished joy—the collectors were driving his sales—and
contempt. Because Ty wasn’t providing any information, Becky Phillips and
Becky Estenssoro had taken the lead as Beanie Baby historians, sorting through
thousands of Beanies and photographing the hangtags to try to trace the history
of the line. They categorized the tags into different “generations” based on when
Ty had used which designs. Their efforts helped turn the hangtags into cult
objects: the key to determining how early a piece was and, once the
counterfeiting started, whether it was authentic. They tried to drop off a copy of
their book, Beanie Mania, one of the first guides to collecting, at Ty Inc., but
Warner’s secretary wouldn’t let them into the office. Warner thought the women
were “totally nuts,” as one former employee puts it.
He also wasn’t helping with the media coverage, telling his employees that
he was only interested in interviews if it was Oprah Winfrey or People
magazine. Robin Smith Kollman, a reporter for suburban Chicago’s Daily
Herald, wrote several of the first stories about Beanie Babies, but without any
input from the company. “I recall the frustration in trying numerous times to
reach him before some secretary took pity on me and flat-out told me he would
not return my phone calls because he did not do interviews at the time,” she told
me.
H
’
i
d i
i
i h h i d
l
d

He wasn’t even interested in meeting with the industry analysts and
investment bankers who, at a moment’s notice, could have put together a billion-
dollar IPO or sale of the company. “I tried calling Ty,” remembers Sean
McGowan (no relation to Faith McGowan), then a top-ranked toy industry
analyst at the investment bank Gerard Klauer Mattison. “You got a recorded
message saying send us a fax [and] if we deem you worthy maybe we’ll call you
back.” Warner didn’t call him back.
Part of this was that Ty was busy and stressed: he reported a pretax income
of around $90 million in 1996, and he wasn’t delegating much even as sales
continued to soar.
He was spending several months each year at the factories in China, and
wherever he was, he visited a few toy and gift shops almost every day, partly to
make sure that retailers were displaying his toys to his specifications. His
handbook for his salespeople required them to hand-count inventory in every
store each month; the handbook advised that if the store owner said he would
count the inventory himself, the sales rep should insist otherwise. He also
required them to provide at least one piece of merchandising advice during every
meeting with a store owner. But his rules weren’t always followed. When a visit
to a Harrods in London turned up Beanie Babies with price stickers covering the
Ty logo on the tag, he called Patricia Roche and demanded that she immediately
stop selling to all three hundred Harrods locations. “They put a sticker over my
name!” he “shrieked,” as Roche put it. (She told him to shut up, and he
eventually let it go.)
As the toys became an investment, Warner’s in-store visits picked up a more
specific purpose: figuring out which Beanies to announce were up for retirement.
If he saw that an animal was stacking up unsold, he’d announce its retirement to
clear out inventory and keep the dream of ever-rising prices alive. He later hit on
another strategy: by retiring pieces that were already hard to find, you could
drive collectors really nuts, and get them thinking that no Beanie was safe and
that all Beanies must be accumulated as quickly as possible as soon as they were
available.
When Warner announced that a Beanie was retired, that meant that he
immediately stopped shipping it to retailers: all outstanding orders were
canceled, even on pieces he had in the warehouse that had secondary-market
values of ten or twenty times their retail prices. Ty’s whimsical, anecdote-based
retirement decisions came with a cost: at the height of Beanie Baby mania, even
as he couldn’t manufacture product fast enough to keep up with demand, he
filled a 370,000-square-foot warehouse with retired Beanie Babies—more than

ed a 3 0,000 squa e oot wa e ouse w t
et ed Bea e Bab es
o e t a
$100 million worth of product he could no longer sell only because he had
announced that he wouldn’t.
He sometimes shipped products to the United Kingdom only to tell Patricia
Roche, while they were en route, that she couldn’t sell them because they’d been
retired. She’d respond, “Well, if you’re charging me for them, they’re not retired
in England, Ty,” but he wouldn’t budge. Such tactics made Roche furious, and
she did call him at his office every now and then to hurl obscenities at him.
Nickel-and-diming aside, however, the Ty UK distributorship was making
her richer than she ever could have imagined becoming. So she reluctantly spent
more than $10,000 on a machine that could rip apart the toys customers would
have lined up to buy, discard the fabric, and collect the PVC pellets—which
were then sold back to the factories in Asia.
For the time being, Warner had control of Patricia Roche—and now he
wanted more control of everything. “Control the fad” was a phrase he used
frequently around the office, but there was a problem that was starting to annoy
him: his biggest fans. The collectors cataloging and profiting from his creatures
weren’t entirely to his liking, even if it was clear that they were making him rich.
Claudia Dunne, one of the early collectors and experts, remembers the Beanie
moms’ limited interactions with Warner: “He hated us. He hated us. He
absolutely hated us. And I never understood why. I don’t know what the deal
was and why it made him so angry.”
“Who better to control it than him?” is how Faith McGowan summarizes
Warner’s deep distrust of the experts, Webmasters, promoters, and publishers
who were proselytizing the idea of his under-stuffed animals as an investment.
To harness the cult following that was building around Beanie Babies, Warner
needed something to connect directly with his customers, and connect them with
each other. The technology was there, but Warner knew nothing about
computers. Like many parents and small-business owners in 1996, he found the
expertise he needed from a younger generation when a twentysomething part-
time employee told him about this “new thing called the Internet.”

15

The $12-per-Hour Sociology Major Who Made Ty
Warner a Billionaire
Most of the negative stories about Ty Warner come from his former high-level
employees. “You get beat with a stick and there is no carrot,” one of them said
of his management style. “And if you still want the carrot, you get beat again.
Then he’ll tell you that maybe there is a carrot after all, and then he’ll go to
Europe and fire you while he’s out of the country.”
With hourly workers, though, it was entirely different. When Warner was
running things with Patricia, he made sure everyone knew that Ty was basically
a family business; he was the dad and Patricia was the mom, and everyone was
valued and loved. When he hired his first warehouse worker from a job-board
posting at a for-profit college across the street, he offered the young man the use
of his home—Warner was living in a condo while the house was under
renovation—to help him save for college.
He allowed a local police officer to use space in his warehouse to start a dog
training business, and when one of his early employees was diagnosed with
cancer, Warner arrived at work the next day with research he’d done on top
specialists. He knew all the workers in the warehouse by name and regularly
asked them about their families; he especially enjoyed talking with a four-foot-
tall employee. And years before there was media attention to the problem, he
was obsessed with the living and working conditions of the workers at the
Chinese factories that manufactured Ty’s products. He always made sure they
were paid above-market wages—and he was especially concerned with making
sure they had enough light.
If you didn’t have power that threatened Warner and he wasn’t paying you
too much money, he could be extremely kind. Lina Trivedi was the nineteen-
year-old daughter of Indian immigrants when she answered a classified ad for a
telemarketer in 1992. She became the company’s twelfth employee, making a
little over minimum wage while studying sociology at DePaul University in
Chicago. Trivedi, former top employees at Ty told me, was the key to
understanding how Beanie Babies became a speculative phenomenon—although
most had trouble remembering her name and its spelling. “An Indian law school

student,” one remembered. “See if you can find her.”
Trivedi spent her first year at Ty working the phones, calling retailers who
had placed orders in the past but weren’t within a territory where the company’s
limited sales force could make regular calls.
“From the very beginning Ty was the type who would always ask people’s
opinions. Always, always,” she says. The People magazine reporter who in 1996
scored Warner’s last interview, before the craze had reached its zenith, later
described her visit to his office this way, and it was an experience that matched
the memories of most of the people who knew him: “At the beginning of our
meeting, I wondered whether I was interviewing him or vice versa. He
frenetically jumped around the room, grabbing Beanies off the floor and out of
drawers and showing them to me: new ones, old ones, prototypes. He wanted my
opinion on everything and listened as if it were the most important opinion in the
world. What did I think of the new poems? What should we name this one?
Which color do you like better for this one?”
Most of Ty’s hourly employees lacked any industry experience and, unsure
of how to respond to their plush-expert boss and his queries, provided effusive
praise. Yet Trivedi, who was planning on law school in a couple years anyway,
felt she had nothing to lose.
“I’d be the first person to say, ‘I think the eyes suck!’” she recalls. “For a
while I was one of the only people that would tell him what I really thought.”
Lina’s constant and honest feedback on new products delighted Warner, and her
responsibilities increased. She went to the company’s trade shows, setting up the
pink pedestals that are still its signature. Most employees were, at some point, on
the receiving end of his tantrums over imperfect aesthetics, but Trivedi always
managed to satisfy him. When she came to him with an idea, he listened: she
told him she thought the insides of the tags were boring and generic—with the
spaces for To and From—and suggested adding birthdates and poems for each
Beanie. She did a mock-up on the computer for Stripes the Tiger: “Stripes was
never fierce nor strong/So with tigers, he didn’t get along/Jungle life was hard
getting by/So he came to his friends at Ty!” Then she gave him a birthday: the
month and day of her own birth, June 11, and 1995, the year he was introduced.
Warner looked at it over his glasses; he liked it. The poems could give the
Beanie Babies “charisma,” he said—just a little outline of a possible personality,
nothing that would prevent kids from projecting their own ideas into the
characters. He figured that the birthdates might also make them good gifts for
people who shared the same day. It was Monday, he was leaving for Asia that
afternoon and they had a new shipment ready for tagging at the warehouse

afternoon, and they had a new shipment ready for tagging at the warehouse.
Could she create a poem for every Beanie in the collection by Wednesday?
Charged with writing eighty-six poems in three days, she bounced back and
forth between her desk and the warehouse, pulling five Beanies at a time in order
of serial number, staring into their eyes, asking them what they did, seeking
inspiration. Warner wrote one of the poems himself. Patti the Platypus, whom he
had named for Patricia Roche, was paired with this: “Ran into Patti one day
while walking/Believe me, she wouldn’t stop talking/Listened and listened to her
speak/That would explain her extra-large beak.”
However, Trivedi’s really big idea—the one that was to change the future of
Ty and raise Warner to an echelon of wealth he otherwise wouldn’t have reached
—came in late 1995 when she approached him with a suggestion: create a Web
site.
In 1995 about 10 percent of Americans were online, according to the Pew
Research Center’s Internet & American Life Project, and growth was strong
without yet being in the triple digits. In October of that year, Pew Internet
reported, “Our findings indicate that currently 18 million homes have modem-
equipped computers, compared to 1994 when 11 million households had such
machines.” Warner’s wasn’t one of them, and neither was the Ty office. The
Internet was the province mainly of nerds and academics; fortunately for the
future of Ty Inc., Trivedi was both. She had been introduced to the Web by a
DePaul professor, and the school provided every student with an Internet
account and a 14.4 Kb dial-up modem.
She brought her modem into the Ty office to introduce Warner to the idea
that people used the Internet to connect with others with similar interests. She
showed him the Beanie Baby message boards and chat rooms that were starting
to pop up. Warner immediately had WebTV installed in his home and office so
he could follow the action. He stayed up late into the night browsing Internet
message boards to learn what people were saying, and he called McGowan over
to show her posts that described him as a marketing genius. When Lina
suggested that she could create a Web site for the company, he told her to go for
it.
But first, as always, drama: the domain name Ty.com had already been
registered by Philip Giacalone, a Californian with a son named Ty; he used the
site to promote his tech consulting business. Trivedi contacted him to offer a
small sum for the site; when he declined to sell, Warner filed a claim to have the
domain name suspended on the grounds that he owned the trademark for “Ty.”
Giacalone responded by suing Ty Inc. and won an injunction. Warner

capitulated and paid him $150,000, plus legal fees, to acquire the domain name.
That Warner, who was generally stingy, paid what was at the time an
exceptionally high price for a domain suggests that he had some inkling of how
valuable it might be for his business.
As Lina prepared to create the Ty Web site, the first research step was
obvious: scope out the competition and find out what Mattel and Hasbro were
doing with Web sites for Barbie and G.I. Joe.
Just one problem: they weren’t doing much.
Mattel hadn’t created a Web site until mid-1995 and the site, such as it was,
was extremely corporate: addresses, contact information, lists of product lines—
nothing even remotely consumer facing and certainly nothing that would spur
repeat visits from children or collectors. Mattel didn’t even register an official
site for Barbie until mid-1996, and Hasbro didn’t launch a site for its Matchbox
line until 1998. The inspiration Trivedi had hoped to find was absent; she would
have to make it up as she went along.
From the beginning, Trivedi and her brother and part-time assistant, Nikhil,
focused on making Ty.com more than a source of information and marketing. In
order to really work Lina knew that it needed to become a resource that people
logged on to multiple times per day. Her experience and resources were limited,
but so were the expectations of consumers. She used the Ty Web site to
experiment with every possible gimmick to stoke interest in Beanie Babies and
speculation about what was coming next. “The whole idea behind it was to
centralize the information and have a voice to provide official information, and
we wanted to do it in a fun way because Ty is a little bit elusive,” she says.
By mid-1996 the site was up and running; on the Ty hangtags, right below
the poems Trivedi had written, was the call to
Visit our web page!!!
http://www.ty.com.
Ty was one of the first toy companies to promote its Web site on its products
and definitely the first to aggressively—three exclamation points!—drive its
customers to the Internet. With the Beanie Baby trend already low-tech viral—
Beanie moms and small Beanie conventions—featuring the company’s Web
page prominently on the tag offered a chance to centralize it, to reach out to the
mob and bring the collectors together under the Ty umbrella, where they could
communicate with one another and be informed about new products. “Seeing the
response and the marketing potential of bringing collectors together was

amazing,” Trivedi says.
One of Trivdei’s first creations was the Info Beanie; every month, Ty.com
users voted for which Beanie Baby they wanted to be their source of
information. Trivedi would then upload a post every few hours with updates
written in the voice of that animal: vague gossip about what was going on at Ty,
allusions to new product lines, and hints about when retirements might be
coming and which Beanie Babies might be affected. On May 3, 1997, for
instance, Nanook the Husky wrote of the difficulty he was having finding one of
the other Beanies in the nursery: “The only thing that I have noticed—I don’t
know if this means anything or not—but I have not seen Stripes anywhere in the
last few WEEKS! Where is Stripes? . . . He was not even at my birthday party! I
was sad about that because everyone was there. I have been trying to find Garcia
to tell him, but he is so hard to track down because when he is not running
around trying to find this or that Beanie Baby, he is under cover. He hides in
different places and just waits to see if anything happens. You know what is
going to happen?” Eight days later, under legal pressure from the Jerry Garcia
estate, the tie-dyed bear was renamed Peace—and Garcia’s value rose
dramatically, immediately enriching speculators who bought based on the Info
Beanie’s hints rather than waiting for the official announcement.
Messages like that caused prices on Internet auctions to shoot up as
collectors speculated about retirements. Flea market dealers called their spouses
at home to get the latest updates from the Info Beanies—and changed their
prices accordingly. The highest-trafficked part of the Web site was the guest
book: fifteen to twenty messages per minute flying back and forth with requests
to buy, sell, and trade current and retired Beanies, along with rumors and
speculation. “Let’s talk about how you can get rich investing in Beanie Babies,”
Dave Barry wrote in 1998. “I have here an Associated Press story stating that in
Andover, Mass., police caught somebody trying to sell a stolen Happy the Hippo
for $900. The story also states that a couple in Nashua, N.H., allegedly bought
Beanie Babies with forged checks, then sold them and used the proceeds to buy
heroin. Fortunately, not all of the people involved in this craze are criminal
heroin addicts. Many of them are merely insane. If you don’t believe me, you
should read their discussions on the Internet.”
One collector wrote, “I have **Teddy97 and Snowball** I need **Maple**
so . . . if you have Maple and don’t have Teddy97 and Snowball..e-mail me and
we can trade. Remember..after all the back-orders are out..these 2 beanies are
history!”
Another collector wrote:

Another collector wrote:
Hello! I need mint or nonmint: Spook (not Spooky), Coral, Grunt,
Kiwi, Lefty, Libearty, Manny, Radar, Righty, Sting, Tabasco, Tusk,
Bongo (brown tail), Happy (grey), Inch (felt antennae), Inky (tan), Lucky
(retired versions), Bumble, Magic (different thread), Mystic (fine main),
Nip (old versions), Patti (Magenta), Pride, Sly (brown belly), Stripes
(dark), Tank (old versions), and Zip (old versions). Im also interested in
buying old retires. These beanies can be mint or nonmint, I will pay $$
(have lots to spend, but will only pay reasonable prices). I have Princess
to trade for May or Jan retires (might sell). Email me! THANX &
GODBLESS.
The Ty guest book was mostly a place for buying, selling, and trading
Beanie Babies—but other sites were alive with rumors concerning new releases
and upcoming retirements. On a home shopping show, host Don West hawked a
$2,000 collection of ninety-four Beanie Babies by explaining that many of the
pieces in the collection would be retired soon: “A retirement is coming up either
September first or October first. We’ve been hearing rumors.” If the still hard-to-
find Princess bear was retired as part of the announcement, he said, its value
would rise by enough to cover the cost of the entire collection he was selling. “If
you can afford it, buy it!” he shouted.
On Peggy Gallagher’s WGN radio show, a caller wondered about rumors:
“What about a Ty retirement in October?” she asked breathlessly.
“There’s warnings,” Gallagher replied. “If you start watching Ty’s Web site,
the Beanies will start talking in the nursery like two or three weeks ahead of
time. The Beanies start giving clues. There’s warnings that something’s going to
happen. There’s like a new rumor every week.”
“We were able to use that voice to kind of manipulate the market, so to
speak,” Trivedi says. A single cryptic message from the Info Beanie could spark
a buying frenzy. She and her brother were still full-time students—he was in
high school and she was still studying sociology at DePaul—and updating the
site often meant racing to the library between classes.
“I was having fun and just going by intuition and just trying to entertain
people,” she says. The Cincinnati Post described the site: “Updated constantly
(some sections daily), the folks at Ty have created a kid/collector friendly site
that weaves products in so smoothly you might forget that ‘.com’ is short for

commercial.”
In contrast to his obsessive management of the product, Warner was largely
disengaged from the Ty Web site. His advice to Trivedi mainly consisted of
“Keep doing what you’re doing” and “From now on, devote all your time to the
Web site. If anyone asks you to do anything else, tell them to come talk to me.”
On January 1, 1997, Trivedi posted an announcement listing nine pieces that
were to be retired. Trivedi had decided that it would be fun to announce the
retirement with a forty-minute-long Shockwave animation featuring Kiwi the
Toucan, one of the retiring Beanies, performing a magic show, with the voices
provided by Lina and her brother. The millions of users trying to load the
animation rendered the site unavailable for most of the day, and many collectors,
confused and frustrated, had their first brush with the addictive power of the
Internet.
Sara Nelson, who ran BeanieMom.com, had invited friends over for dinner
that night. “I spent all of New Year’s Day hitting ‘Reload’ as did countless other
collectors,” she later remembered. “My guests arrived for dinner, and I was
barely civil—constantly hitting ‘Reload’—almost certain I’d miss the magical
moment when the announcement was made. Finally, sometime after 9:00 P.M.,
long after my guests had left, the announcement finally appeared.” However,
most people had to download Shockwave in order to view it, and that could take
an hour on a dial-up modem. Nelson, who already had Shockwave and a high-
speed connection, was one of the first to get it to load. When she posted the list
of retirees on her BeanieMom site, traffic hit a record high. Peggy Gallagher
called her in the middle of the night and asked her to hold her computer’s
speakers up to the phone (for forty minutes!) so that she could hear Kiwi the
Toucan make the announcement.
The retirement announcement was a massive success. Traffic to the site
soared 3,500 percent in one day, and for the first time, prices rose instantly as the
information was assimilated into the marketplace.
Mary Beth’s Beanie World magazine reported, “Seeing a potentially
profitable opportunity, many savvy collectors hit the streets and begin
purchasing all Beanies that were retired 24 hours earlier. The market value of
Chops jumps 500 percent (from $5 to $25 overnight).” As Beanie Mania
reported of that date, “The prices started to escalate out of control. Many of the
collectors pulled their Beanie Baby postings off the internet, waiting for a
settling of the market. The settling just didn’t happen and the prices continued to
rise.”
As Mary Beth Sobolewski remembered it later: “What originally began as

As Mary Beth Sobolewski remembered it later: What originally began as
just changes to the annual retailer catalogs [became] international events,
prompting millions of Beanie fans to stay glued to their computers to wait for
anticipated Ty announcements.”
On March 19, riding high on the momentum of the retirement
announcement, Karmen Kohlwes, a Ty vice president, appeared on The Today
Show to announce that a new Beanie Baby was being released—but told viewers
that they’d have to log on to Ty.com to find out what it was. Today, that sort of
tease would be seen as tacky and intolerable by TV producers; in 1997, however,
it was innovative. On May 11, Mother’s Day, Trivedi posted another
announcement: eight Beanies were to be retired, and fourteen new ones were to
be introduced.
The Ty site also brought the company real-time feedback from its customers;
when an Info Beanie diary entry implied that one of the Beanie Babies thought
that Canada was part of the United States, hundreds of e-mails arrived from
perturbed Canadians. The characters of the Info Beanies provided Ty—who
wasn’t comfortable with the idea of being the public face of a company—with
an outlet to communicate with consumers. It was unorthodox but it worked.
When people wrote to Ty Inc. to ask why Beanies weren’t available in big-box
stores, it was a Beanie Baby that responded that he was afraid of being in a
building with high ceilings. It was also a Beanie Baby that took to the Web site
to defend his “friends” on the Ty legal team, whose aggressive litigiousness had
resulted in disillusioned message board chatter. Sometimes retailers wrote to the
site to complain about slow shipping and incomplete order fulfillment—and they
too would receive an unhelpful response from a Beanie Baby.
The Web site was most valuable, however, as a means of driving collectors
to stores in search of soon-to-be-rare pieces. Beanie Digest described the frenzy
that Trivedi’s announcements caused:
The recent Ty retirement announcement has turned previously
normal, level-headed individuals into crazed Beanie hoarding fanatics.
How many times did we hear that people had formed Beanie teams—one
at the computer waiting for the big announcement, the other team
member wearing comfortable walking shoes, cell phone in hand at the
mall waiting to receive the purchase orders and jockeying for position in
the various stores that carry Beanies? . . . [W]ithin days after the
announcement, store shelves had cleared and prices began rising for

these recently retired gems. . . . Experienced collectors were . . . buying
these retired items in bulk to store for the future.
“It’s exactly like the stock market,” explained Mary Beth Sobolewski. “A
rumor that one of them is about to be retired makes the prices go up on the
secondary market. There’s a lot of greed out there. If they don’t retire it, you
have a bunch of them worth five dollars each.”
The retirement announcements were a closely guarded secret: at flea markets
and shows, and in online auctions, sellers often manipulated the market into
paying higher prices by floating rumors of upcoming retirements. Yet the more
advanced collectors understood that only Warner knew which Beanies were up
for retirement.
“There are few announcements that grab a Beanie collector’s attention as
intensely as rapid, strategic retirements,” Mary Beth explained. “An unexpected,
carefully timed retirement causes a ripple effect of Beanie gossip, Beanie
purchases . . . and an almost sure-fire increase in internet auction prices.”
Beanie Power magazine, to its credit more level-headed than most of the
cheerleaders, warned collectors about buying into the hype that came with
retirement announcements:
With Ty having ritualized Beanie-retirement dates, the well-
publicized retirement that occurred on May 1, 1998 is on everyone’s
mind. Each of the 28 Beanies that have just been taken out of circulation
has already shown some increase. . . . However, speculators should be
warned that each successive Beanie Baby generation has a little less
growth potential on the secondary market than the previous one.
Unfortunately, too many collectors are buying lots of them, dreaming
they’ll buy a common Beanie for $6 and be able to watch it increase in
value over time until it reaches the dizzying, four-digit prices of the
original retired Beanies.
No one, though, was paying much attention to the naysayers. For now
Beanie Baby prices were soaring, the early collectors were rich, and the dealers
and promoters who’d been pumping up the market looked like geniuses. John
Tumpack, a suburban Chicago father and construction contractor, started going
to Beanie shows every weekend after he realized there was money to be made.
“The first [rare] one I was able to get ahold of was in rural Illinois,” he

g
,
remembers. “I paid a hundred and fifty dollars and sent it to my uncle in
California, and he sold it for five hundred dollars. It just snowballed.” By late
1997 the arbitrage trade had inverted: the early Beanie Babies the suburban
Chicago collectors had hoarded were no longer in other states’ stores. In those
states, new collectors were entering the market, looking to backtrack to buy the
Beanie Babies that had been retired before they’d even heard of them. The early
Chicago collectors could earn triple-digit profits selling Beanies back into the
states where they’d been buying them by mail for $5 each plus shipping less than
a year earlier.
“There were people you’d meet at the shows who were now personally
coming to my office to stock their shelves,” Tumpack says. “I’d become my own
little store. I had thousands of them. I’m running out and buying them for five
dollars and selling them for ten dollars. And they’re taking them and selling for
twenty dollars.”
Tumpack was spending, as he recalls, at least thirty hours per week on the
hunt—often slipping away from construction sites to hit Hallmark stores when
he got a call from a source about an upcoming shipment. The Beanies were
providing him with a decent income—probably at least $15,000 per year, he
remembers—and as the money poured in, he gained the confidence to spend
more time and more money building his own collection for long-term value.
As Bob Swarup writes in Money Mania: Booms, Panics, and Busts from
Ancient Rome to the Great Meltdown, “Each increase in value rubber-stamps and
diffuses the innate superiority of our chosen gurus until by the end we are all
self-affirming experts and inevitably oblivious to the increasingly shaky ground
underneath.” Beanie Babies had increased substantially in value since the first
collectors started paying premium prices for them and spending their days
calling out-of-state retailers; now those suburban Chicago women looked like
geniuses. Their husbands, and anyone else who’d doubted them, looked like
idiots as their collections were all of a sudden worth hundreds of thousands of
dollars. At first Peggy Gallagher had been hiding her collection, and especially
her phone bills, from her husband. However, once those little animals started to
increase in value and the media started calling on her for prognostications, she
told him all about it. He became her biggest fan—and had the first magazine
story she wrote on the craze framed for display in his law office. In a larger
sense Peggy’s husband’s capitulation was mirrored by the rest of America. Rosie
Wells, Richard Gernady’s friend and the collectibles publisher who had initially
been skeptical of Beanie Babies, launched her own Beanies-only magazine in

late 1997 and a heart-shaped Beanie Babies book in 1998. Ty Warner responded
to her change of heart with a copyright infringement lawsuit.
In the end Tumpack gave back most of his profits as the inventory he kept
accumulating depreciated during the waning period of the craze. When I spoke
with him by phone, he said that he still had several thousand Beanie Babies—
along with at least a thousand more Disney beanbag animals that came out in the
wake of Beanie Babies. As the Beanie craze escalated, Tumpack thought the
new Disney line offered a chance to get in on the ground floor—just as the
soaring price of eBay stock lured investors in to start-ups with weaker prospects.
“It happened so fast,” he says—and, like most of the people whose lives
were overtaken by Beanie collecting, he offers little insight into his own
behavior.
The next leg up in the Beanie market came when the collectors congregating
online concentrated their activity on another Web site, the idea for which had
been hatched right as the King brothers were introducing Ty Warner to the idea
of retiring Beanie Babies to create a sense of scarcity.

16

The Efficient Market
The story of eBay’s genesis was such a media sensation that anyone who
followed business news in the late 1990s can recite it from memory. In the
summer of 1995 twenty-eight-year-old French-born Iranian American Web
developer Pierre Omidyar had dinner with his fiancée. She complained of her
difficulty in finding trading partners for the Pez dispensers she collected. In
response Omidyar created AuctionWeb, a site for her to trade the dispensers, and
launched it on September 3 of that year. That site became eBay, and Omidyar
became a billionaire. As an inspiring story about a guy who just wants to make
life better for someone he loves and ends up spectacularly rich as a result, it’s
hard to beat.
And just as with the story of Ty Warner and the vacuum cleaner, it isn’t true.
In 1997 Mary Lou Song, eBay’s twenty-seven-year-old public relations
manager, was given the task of bringing mainstream media attention to a site that
was mostly used by geeks buying antiques or trading computer parts. Omidyar
was an idealist and had been trying to explain to reporters that he’d created the
site as part of a utopian vision for more efficient, friction-free markets, but the
media didn’t care. “Nobody wants to hear about a thirty-year-old genius who
wanted to create a perfect market,” Song explained in Adam Cohen’s book The
Perfect Store. “They want to hear that he did it for his fiancée.” So she made up
the story about Pez dispensers, and started pitching it to reporters.
The creation myth generated enormous amounts of publicity. Coincidentally,
it led to some of eBay’s most explosive early growth among toy collectors who
had heard the Pez dispenser story. With Beanie Babies as the leader in the toy
category—and the most difficult brand to find at retail—it wasn’t long before
they emerged as the dominant product on eBay. Seeing the momentum, eBay
ramped up its efforts to court Beanie collectors. Jill Finlayson, one of the
company’s first three category managers, was in charge of toys, games, and
dolls. She spent much of her time at collectors’ conventions, “evangelizing” the
benefits of eBay and cutting deals with some of the first suburban Chicago
Beanie Baby collectors—who by then were Internet celebrities among the later
adopters—to promote eBay as a trading hub.

eBay’s decision to target collectors aggressively came with ambivalence. In
the days of the Internet bubble, a sexy story was often more important than a
viable business model. When eBay was looking to raise venture capital money—
and later on preparing for its IPO—its dependence on collectors led to eye-
rolling among investors and analysts. How could a Web site that was mostly
used to help people buy and sell vintage lunch boxes and Beanie Babies possibly
be worth $1 billion? As the stock price rose, investors asked whether a company
could really sustain a $5 billion valuation with 10 percent of its sales tied to
collectors swapping Beanie Babies? Did that mean the market was valuing
eBay’s business selling Beanie Babies at $500 million? Was that sane? Many
analysts urged the company to move away from collectors and toward something
more respectable: computers, cars, anything other than rare beanbag animals.
That the media linked eBay and Beanie Babies constantly was something of a
sore spot. A 1998 New York Times profile of Pierre Omidyar quips, “[S]ince its
public offering in September, the stock has become a more treasured addition to
Internet stock portfolios than the Princess Diana bear is to Beanie Baby fans.”
Yet in regulatory filings, eBay admitted it needed Beanie Babies. The risk-
factors section of the company’s 1998 annual report filed with the U.S.
Securities and Exchange Commission notes eBay’s dependence on the continued
strength of the market: “For example, during the three months ended December
31, 1998, we had, at times, approximately 7% of our listings involved in ‘Beanie
Babies.’”
Inside eBay, some wondered whether the company could achieve better
results—or similar or only slightly worse financial results with more respect
from Wall Street—by building its business on, for instance, anything that wasn’t
Beanie Babies.
Meg Whitman, whom Omidyar had installed as CEO, thought about it. In
her memoir Whitman notes, “[D]uring my first few years as eBay’s CEO, I
realized that to be successful, what we as a company needed to collect was
collectors. We needed to build a core community interested in collectibles; from
there, I was confident, we would be able to expand almost infinitely.” Obsessive
types, Whitman knew, could drive growth like no one else. Finlayson recalls that
“eBay grew because people would come for a specific item, and then they’d
happen upon other things.” As Meg Whitman later put it in an interview with
Charlie Rose on 60 Minutes, it took eBay four years to go from Beanie Babies to
BMWs. Without Beanies, however, it’s doubtful whether eBay ever would have
gotten to BMWs.

As fast as the Internet was growing, it’s often forgotten that in its early years
the growth of e-commerce was lagging expectations. In a piece on holiday
shopping in November 1997, the Pittsburgh Post-Gazette reported that “online
shopping holds more promise than profit.” Only one in five households had
Internet access, but that alone wasn’t the problem—because those one in five
households tended to be the ones with the most discretionary income. According
to the report, “[O]f those shoppers in the technological know, some are scared
off by lingering security fears.” Others were put off by the limited selection on
most sites and, above all else, the lack of any pressing reason to buy most things
online. Shipping was expensive, and online retailers hadn’t yet achieved the
economies of scale that eventually let them undercut retail stores on price. In
order to lure people out of their comfort zone and into the idea of e-commerce—
and, even scarier, peer-to-peer e-commerce—eBay needed to offer consumers
something that was easy to ship, couldn’t be found anywhere else, and elicited
passion among the people who were looking for it.
Adam Cohen describes the impact of Beanies on the company’s rise in The
Perfect Store:
It would be an exaggeration to say that eBay was built on Beanie
Babies, but not by much. . . . It turned out that Beanie Babies, which
were gaining popularity just as [eBay] was, were the ideal product to
sell through an online auction. Auction theory teaches that auctions are
not, in fact, an efficient way of selling most goods. They are too labor
intensive and time consuming for items that are likely to sell at a price
the parties could have anticipated in advance. But auctions excel when
they are called on to set prices for items whose value is inherently
indeterminate. . . . Beanie Babies, whose value rose and fell daily based
on popular whim, could take full advantage of the dynamic pricing
mechanism that auctions provided.
As Faith McGowan writes in her unpublished memoir, “The final link in
creating an easily-accessible, worldwide, 24-hour a day market for Beanie
Babies was the Internet. More than anything, it was the coincidental and
simultaneous emergence of e-trading on the worldwide Web that took the market
for Beanie Babies to the stratosphere.”
The role of auction fever in the rise of Beanie Babies can’t be ignored.
Business school professors have been writing for decades about the tendency of

people to overpay at auctions, and the effect is thought to be most profound in
novices. eBay brought millions of people into the world of auctions for the first
time—and the combination of the newness of the Internet and the newness of
bidding probably contributed to irrationality. In the late 1990s Kimberly Young,
a clinical postdoc at the University of Rochester’s Strong Memorial Hospital,
became one of the first researchers to study the field of Internet addiction. She
found that online auction addicts made up about 15 percent of all Internet
addicts.
Predictably, Ty Warner wasn’t entirely comfortable with this new secondary
market for his products. Finlayson says that eBay had no contact with Ty Inc.,
save for a single awkward trip to the company’s headquarters to pitch the idea of
an eBay co-branded Beanie Baby. The online auction house was shot down
immediately; Ty was Warner’s company, and he wasn’t interested in partnering
with anyone on anything. Ty threatened legal action against eBay for using its
trademarked name, Beanies, as a category on its site. The perplexed auction
house changed the name to “Beanbag Plush” and Ty backed off.
As the Internet gained mass adoption, few people acquired computers with
any real idea what they were going to do with them. Beanie Babies gave people
a ready-made hobby to indulge online. The collecting of Beanies was made so
much more novel and exciting when speculators could watch the market’s
gyrations and keep track of their wins and losses in real time in the same way
that the rise of day trading was facilitated by the rise of online stock brokerages.
Beanie Babies were more likely to attract bidders than any of eBay’s other
categories. In May 1997 the site sold $500,000 worth of the animals at an
average price of $30 each. The volume, while it seems high, wasn’t in relation to
Ty’s sales: $500,000 in Beanie Babies sold on the site represented about $83,000
in retail purchases—or $41,500 at wholesale. Ty’s wholesale shipments at the
time were closing in on $100 million per month. That is to say, the monthly sales
of Beanie Babies on eBay constituted about 0.04 percent of the Beanie Babies
Ty was shipping each month. But the prices they were fetching on eBay helped
drive sales volume by a huge multiplier. People who had collections could go
online and see that they were in the money, which made stocking up on more
retail-priced Beanies an easy decision. The media was full of stories about
people flipping Beanie Babies for a profit—but most people were not flipping
them for a profit. Most people were hoarding them for long-term investment.
Just as relatively minor discoveries of gold had fueled the gold rush of 1849,
it only took $500,000 per month in eBay sales to help drive, at Beanie Babies’

height, $200 million per month in retail sales. In his book Contagious: Why
Things Catch On, Wharton School professor Jonah Berger explains, “People
don’t think in terms of information. They think in terms of narratives.” The
stories of people buying $5 Beanie Babies and then selling them to pay for cars
spread the word of Beanie Babies more efficiently than any deliberate marketing
strategy could have. As antiques expert Harry Rinker told me, “In the antiques
business we sell stories and dreams. With Beanie Babies the dream was one of
the most spectacular dreams ever sold.”

17

The Beanie Chase
At the heart of the market for Beanie Babies was what was known almost
universally as the Beanie Chase, which was enabled by the eccentricities of
Warner’s distribution. In March 1997 he’d started limiting retailers to ordering
thirty-six of each Beanie per month at a time when most stores were trying to
buy them by the gross. The decision to constrict supply originated with the
supply issues Warner was having, but it also reflected his desire to control the
fad. As soon as the supply caught up to the demand, he knew, it would be over.
Warner had been in the toy industry long enough to know just how quickly a fad
could end. He was devoted to doing whatever he could to make Beanie Babies
last.
Even within those severely restricted limits on order sizes, there was no
guarantee stores would get the merchandise they wanted. Ann Kanaby, former
head of customer service at Ty, left the company relatively early into the Beanie
craze but lasted long enough to be puzzled by its prescribed response to retailers’
questions about shipping. A Ty vice president had instructed her to inform them
that products would be shipped within five days, when in reality they wouldn’t
be ready for at least a month and a half. When she got to work each day, she had
literally hours of voice mail from angry customers to listen to.
“It’s ridiculous,” she complained at the time. “We don’t have the product.
We’re just going to get another call in six days if we tell them it’s shipping in
five days. Why don’t we just tell the truth?” She was rebuffed—told that the
word had come down from the top: tell the retailers that you’ll be shipping the
Beanie Babies immediately even when you know that isn’t possible.
Predictability, Ty thought, could only hurt the market for Beanie Babies.
“Expect the unexpected,” was his motto around the office and that extended to
his approach to customer service. Sure, it would piss off retailers when their
orders didn’t come—but they’d come eventually and with demand as hot as it
was, what were the stores going to do about it anyway? A Ty marketing manager
told a reporter that the hunt was part of the fun and that having the product easily
locatable was not among the company’s goals. As Warner himself said, “As long
as kids keep fighting over the products and retailers are angry at us because they
cannot get enough I think those are good signs ”

cannot get enough, I think those are good signs.
Even Ty’s biggest accounts had to grovel. Noodle Kidoodle was a chain of
specialty toy stores; with around fifty locations, it was the second-biggest Beanie
seller in the United States. It was deriving more than 20 percent of its revenue
from Beanie Babies, according to Stanley Greenman, its founder. Even as CEO
of a publicly traded company, Greenman valued the sales enough that he took
procurement into his own hands.
“I would fly to Chicago and just sit in Ty’s lobby all day trying to get his
attention,” Greenman remembers. “We took all his people out to dinner. You
could sell every Beanie Baby you could get, so we spent a lot of our time
begging.”
Yet no amount of begging guaranteed results when it came to dealing with
Ty Inc. “They’d ship you everything but the most popular one,” remembers Phil
Wrzesinski of Toy House, located in Jackson, Michigan. “Then they’d cancel the
back order on you. You never really knew what you were going to get until it
showed up.”
Many stores passed Ty’s promises about shipping on to customers; the result
was that the Beanie Baby hunters called the stores daily and sometimes lined up
outside to look for the boxes with Ty’s heart logo.
“The UPS truck would show up at our back door,” remembers Wrzesinski.
“Somebody at UPS was tipping people on when we were getting shipments. I
would be at the back door unloading the UPS truck, and there would be people at
the front door saying, ‘We heard you got Beanie Babies today.’ The frontline
staff didn’t know that; the customers knew it.
“We’d set up big tables in the middle of our store. We’d open the bag and
dump them on the table. The word got out real fast, and the people came in and
they went. The people that bought Beanie Babies didn’t really buy anything else.
It was just collectors looking for Beanie Babies; they found out we had them,
they bought them, and then they left. It looked like the county fair the day after.”
In 1998, concerned about customers stalking UPS trucks and merchandise
disappearing from warehouses, Ty removed its heart logo from the shipping
boxes. Shrinkage shrunk dramatically. “If you were shipping diamonds, would
you put a picture of a diamond on the box?” says one former executive. “That’s
what it was.”
There wasn’t a single store in America that could get as many Beanie Babies
as it wanted. It was not uncommon for accounts to have $10,000 in back orders
outstanding with no communication on when—or even whether—they might

expect delivery. One customer-service worker at Ty headquarters quit, citing
religious convictions that told her it wasn’t right to lie to the customers. One
retailer told Playthings that, as popular as Beanie Babies were, she had stopped
carrying them as a matter of principle: “We had shipping issues, there was a lack
of communication, we couldn’t get questions answered about invoices and we
were totally ignored. They are solid marketers, but they have treated their
customers—both resellers and end-customers—poorly. I don’t believe it will
serve them well in the end.”
To his sales force, Warner seemed more interested in the products
themselves than in the fulfillment issues. Andi Van Guilder, who was a sales rep
beginning in 1995, sometimes worried that there wasn’t much direction at the
company. “As a sales team we were worried about who was in charge,” she says.
“We were like, ‘He’s creative but where’s the sales manager?’ I think he was
passionate about product, so driven about product that the business part of it was
not his passion.”
Van Guilder remembers walking into Ty’s office one day with a complaint:
she was carrying a stack of orders an inch and a half thick that had gone unfilled
for months—several million dollars in product. She wanted to know what was
going to be done about it, what she could tell her accounts, and, as a
commissioned salesperson who wasn’t paid until goods were delivered, what
was going to happen with her pay. Her complaint reflected the concerns of most
of the salespeople: the call center took one hundred thousand requests from
retailers per day, and many of those were irate follow-ups about unfilled orders.
When Van Guilder entered Warner’s office, he was, as always, surrounded
by bolts of fabric. “He was wearing this velour sweat suit and I was like, ‘Wow,
you are wearing a strange outfit, and you are a billionaire,’” she remembers. He
listened to her complaint and then announced, “I’m looking for a felt color for
my Pillow Pal,” a line of plush animals for babies that Ty Inc. marketed from
1995 until 1999. He next asked her for her opinion on the colors for the Pillow
Pals’ eyes, and she never did get an answer about those unfilled orders.
Once, Ty was sitting in his office alone, inspecting a factory sample for a
new bear he was planning. He wanted it to be a pearl color, but it didn’t look
quite right to him. He picked up the phone and summoned an employee he knew
wore pearl earrings. She walked in and was confused when he instructed her to
take off her earrings and hand them over. He held them up to the bear and then
looked at both under a light. “It is not pearl!” he proclaimed, handing back the
earrings. She never would have noticed it but she could see that he was right: the
bear’s fur wasn’t quite the same shade as the pearl earrings Why this was

bear s fur wasn t quite the same shade as the pearl earrings. Why this was
important remains a mystery to her, but it was; the prototype went back to China
with instructions that the color needed to be more pearl-like.
Another executive remembered Ty wandering the office carrying artists’
renderings of new animals he was contemplating. Ty stopped him in the hall one
day to ask, “Do you think the ass on this one is too big?”
“Ty, I’m an accountant,” the executive replied.
_______
Talk with collectors of anything for more than about a minute, and you’re almost
guaranteed to hear the phrase “the thrill of the hunt.” Sigmund Freud, a noted
collector himself, saw the root of collecting, not surprisingly, in sex and toilet
training. He wrote in 1908, “The core of paranoia is the detachment of the libido
from objects. A reverse course is taken by the collector who directs his surplus
libido into an inanimate object: a love of things.” Psychologists believe that the
ownership of objects—often teddy bears and blankets—gives young children a
sense of power and control in a world where they are otherwise vulnerable, and
enables them to develop a sense of self independent from their parents.
Collecting is generally seen as a harmless and possibly positive influence on
people’s lives, but at its most extreme it seems to reflect a regression to the
soothing and comfort provided by objects during childhood. Ty’s retirements
and scarcity allowed the acquisition of $5 beanbags to activate the same
endorphins that people chasing rare books and fine art thrive on—but at an
initially negligible cost and without any immediate need for specialized
knowledge.
In 1998 Paula Benchik-Abrinko wrote about her sister Peggy Gallagher’s
quest to find every Beanie—a task she’d completed in mid-1996 and then kept
up to date with new releases. At the time her collection was worth enough to
cover the cost of four years at Harvard:
The calm experienced with owning the collection comes only after
the storm of the hunt. . . . How did she do it? Thousands of dollars to Ma
Bell looking for them; hours on the computer trying to find people who
could trade for what she needed; harassing poor Ty reps; following
overnight couriers thinking they had her beanies. . . . Why this happens
or how this happens is beyond me. . . . Peggy has had many sleepless

nights thinking of places she hasn’t searched and nightmares of calling
a store as the targeted piece leaves the store to a lucky buyer. . . . It is
just about that time when hopelessness overcomes you that you then
happen upon the animal that has eluded you for so long.
Or, as Saint Augustine put it, “What is sought with difficulty is discovered
with more pleasure.”
_______
In 1998 Ellie Kiehls was on maternity leave from her legal-assistant job at the
Ford Motor Company in Dearborn, Michigan. She was a crazed Beanie Baby
collector, and more than fifteen years later Kiehls describes those days with a
mixture of nostalgia and remorse—the former for the excitement of finding a
Beanie she didn’t yet have and the latter for the time she smashed her two-year-
old’s head into a door while rushing a gift shop with a mob who’d learned of a
new delivery. The idea for a board game called The Beanie Chase came to her in
a dream during her maternity leave. A few months later, she put her family’s life
savings of $100,000 on the line. The Beanie Chase, designed for between two
and nine players, featured nine profile cards, each adorned with a poem
representing each of the collector types Kiehls had encountered: her crazy
mother-in-law, her brother-in-law who bought for resale, and the rest of the
collectors who fought their way from store to store each day.
There’s Retired Ben, whose poem reads: “Retired Ben works no more/Hangs
around all day at the Beanie store/Carries his phone so he can call/All of his
friends from mall to mall.” Best Friend Melody is a housewife with an incurable
urge to collect: “Best Friend Melody, she’s so funny/Hops around town like the
Easter Bunny/Takes more money for the grocery store/But it’s Beanies, she’s out
to score.” There is a card for the hard-core reseller: “Dealer Dave, he’s a
dog/Buys those Beanies like a hog/Buys them up, not to keep/It’s a profit he’s
out to reap.” Almost as an afterthought, one of the collectors in the game is a
child who actually likes Beanie Babies: “Sweet Young Gretchen, pure as
snow/What they’re worth, she doesn’t know/Been collecting Beanies since they
were born/All of hers are loved and worn.”
Buoyed by an endorsement from the influential Beanie guru Janie Daniels of
MsJanie.com, Kiehls ordered ten thousand copies of the game from the printer.
Before they were even ready to ship, she had two thousand preorders at $24.95

each. The gamble was looking like it would pay off; dreams of a larger second
printing and perhaps a deal with a publisher that could provide better distribution
and marketing didn’t seem so far-fetched. However, shortly before the game was
set to ship, a cease-and-desist letter from Ty arrived; it was the day after Ellie
had started back at work following her maternity leave. Bypassing hiring
lawyers for fear of running up expenses she couldn’t afford, Ellie phoned the
company’s law firm herself to make her case. They were just a family, she’d
invested her life savings, and could she please just sell the ones she’d already
had made? Ellie couldn’t get an answer and, thinking it had blown over, started
shipping the ones she’d sold. Then Ty sued her in the U.S. District Court in
Chicago.
Her husband had an idea: tell the media. The reporters who had helped bring
the message of Beanie mania to the public were now going to take the company
down a peg. Regardless of the merits of the lawsuit, few people were going to be
impressed with Warner’s attack on a young family’s first business venture. Local
stories quickly emerged, and on August 15, 1998, the Associated Press picked it
up; other outlets piled on behind the young suburban mother who was being
sued by the most powerful toymaker in the world.
In addition to generating interest in the board game, the press also pushed
Warner into a position he rarely found himself in and liked even less: on the
ropes facing a barrage of criticism and pressured to yield to a weaker foe. In an
uncharacteristic act of mercy that was probably motivated almost entirely by the
fear of this kind of publicity, Ty settled, allowing Kiehls two months to sell all
the copies she’d already printed. She’d have to report her sales weekly and, at
the end of two months, turn whatever games were left over to Ty to be
destroyed. Borrowing a line from the Ty playbook, she marketed the board game
as a collectible; Beanie fans, knowing that there would never be another printing,
bought them on the premise that they would have investment potential of their
own.
After expenses, Ellie had more than doubled her $100,000 life savings. The
legal drama was nerve-racking, but she counts herself among the lucky ones who
came out okay after a legal battle with Warner, who was suing more than thirty
companies per year on top of the hundred-plus cease-and-desist letters his
lawyers were sending each month to competitors manufacturing anything that
resembled a Beanie Baby.
Judge Richard Posner—a renowned jurist and prolific author—presided over
many of the Beanie Babies lawsuits in the Seventh Circuit Court of Appeals.

“They were litigating very aggressively, and they brought a large number of
lawsuits,” he told me by phone. “I can understand their aggressive strategy
because this is a simple product to make, so it’s very difficult to fend off
competition. . . . Their basic strategy seemed to be to try to obtain exclusive
rights over the term ‘Beanie.’”
Was there any legitimacy to the idea that Ty owned the word?
“We didn’t think so,” said Judge Posner, chuckling. Internal memos
introduced as evidence found Warner himself referring to other companies’
products by this name: “We want to emphasize our Beanies are not just any
Beanies—But special. Set us apart from our competitors’ Beanies,” he’d written.
Other memos from trade shows, written by Ty employees, included references to
competitors’ products as “beanies”: “They had beanies’ [sic] that were similar in
look, but fabric was inexpensive and it looked like a cheap knockoff of [our]
product.”
How, Posner asked in a ruling, could Ty Inc. really claim that the term
wasn’t generic when its own documents revealed that Warner himself was using
it generically?
“Those were really fun cases; I was sad they went away,” Posner said. In
one lawsuit involving allegations of copyright infringement in the design of a
stuffed pig, Posner attached a photograph of a real pig to refute the defendant’s
claim that it had designed its pig based on nature. Toy industry executives talk
about the “10 percent rule”; there’s no law about it, but in general it’s thought
that changing a competitor’s product by 10 percent is enough to minimize
litigation risk. What that even means is confusing: Who’s to say what 10 percent
of a stuffed pig’s design is? All of this makes for extremely complicated and
expensive litigation. That’s yet another advantage for big companies.
There are few industry types who take seriously the idea that competition
from other brands was a threat to the sales of Beanie Babies. In 1997, when
Warner sued Imperial Toys over its line of beanbag toys, Friendly Pebble Pets,
the defense recruited a seventh-grader named Katy Clune to testify about her
collection of 108 Beanie Babies. “You shouldn’t be so worried about them
taking the business,” she told a reporter she planned to tell Warner in her
testimony. “You are better. Everyone knows that Beanie Babies are cuter.” In
any case, it was collector-investors who were driving the success of Beanie
Babies; the toys’ cuteness and quality was mostly a back story that had enabled
the materialistic craze to ensue. No one was interested in beanbag plush that
didn’t have a Ty heart tag attached to it. None of the lines that launched to
capitalize on the success of Beanies would have stuck around for long even if Ty

capitalize on the success of Beanies would have stuck around for long even if Ty
hadn’t sued them.
Collectors cared about the brand, and while counterfeits designed to mislead
consumers were a serious problem—one that nobody faulted Warner for
pursuing—the devotion of significant resources to bringing lawsuits against
start-ups’ selling beanbag animals was probably a mistake. For Warner, though,
it wasn’t about money.
“I think he really wanted to be the only one who was doing beanbag toys.
Maybe it was like an ego thing. I think he sort of felt like he invented it,” says
Jenna Boldebuck. She and her mother, Faith McGowan, often accompanied Ty
on his frequent mall trips where he rounded up what he thought were knockoffs
to bring to his lawyers—much to the chagrin of McGowan, who felt that he was
ruining family outings.
HolyBears, which sold beanbag teddy bears with biblical references on the
hangtags as fund-raising items, found itself on the receiving end of a lawsuit
from Ty over, among other things, the design of the bears’ feet.
“I think they used litigation as a marketing tool, and you tie up all these
small businesses that can’t even afford an attorney,” the company’s founder and
CEO, Robert LeClair, told me. LeClair decided that he too could use litigation as
a marketing tool. He responded to Ty’s lawsuit with a press release. “Using
teddy bears to help spread the Word of God apparently does not sit well with the
maker of Beanie Babies products. Ty, Inc. has filed a lawsuit against HolyBears,
Inc. asking for all HolyBears teddy bears to be ‘impounded for destruction,’”
began the press release.
“We will fight to protect them from destruction even as we pray for their
aggressors,” LeClair blustered. “With all the potential good deeds that Ty, Inc.
could pursue with their vast resources, they chose instead to ask the courts to
impound and destroy all HolyBears teddy bears. When materialism challenges
religion, there is often an interesting result—and I believe HolyBears has been
put in this position for a reason.
“I’m asking everyone who understands and respects the mission of
HolyBears to pray for our teddy bears—and to add a prayer on behalf of Ty,
Inc.,” LeClair wrote.
Finally LeClair took a shot at Ty’s gimmick-laden marketing and
distribution: “Unlike Ty, Inc. and other manufacturers, HolyBears neither
‘retires’ its teddy bears nor limits their production—thereby preventing
speculators from inflating prices in the secondary market that caters to
collectors.”

To raise money for legal expenses, HolyBears released a “David” bear
holding a slingshot to symbolize the battle with Ty. That bear included 1 Samuel
17:37 on the hangtag: “David said moreover, the Lord that delivered me out of
the paw of the lion, and out of the paw of the bear, He will deliver me out of the
hand of this Philistine . . .”
As Ty’s litigiousness began to make headlines, collectors filled message
boards and the in-boxes of Beanie authorities with complaints about what they
saw as bullying tactics. One commenter noted, “He hurt himself tremendously
by suing HolyBears. Many people found this to show how money hungry Ty
really is.” Another added, “Too many law suits. No one wants to support, or be
associated with a company that goes around an[d] sues everyone. It just isn’t
right. . . . The bottom line is he is a control freak, and he is out of control.”
Added another, “His endless lawsuits, scare tactics, and silliness boggle the
mind. Does this man believe he is the first one to create a bean filled teddy bear
or stuffed animal? Has he ever heard of the Boyd’s Co.? How about Dakin? I
have a stuffed bean dog called Drooper from the late seventies. He is an exact
likeness to Bones. Who do you think came first? I also have a pure white seal
made from that co., a dead ringer for Seamore! Mr. Warner needs a reality
check.” Summarized another poster, “And the more I learn about TY, the less I
like it. The Holybears thing is disgusting.”
Another of Ty’s tactics was causing discontent: releasing new pieces in
small quantities, then following up with larger shipments the next month. When
Erin, a St. Patrick’s Day–themed bear, was released on January 31, 1998,
retailers were limited to just twelve pieces—and secondary-market values soared
to $250 immediately. In March Ty informed stores that they’d be able to place
an order for thirty-five, and the price fell to between $150 and $200. “Continued
supply should bring this figure down,” Mary Beth’s Beanie World told readers.
Ann Atkins of Chandler, Arizona, wrote in to Mary Beth’s to complain about the
difficulty in finding Glory—another rare $100-plus bear, this one patriot-
themed: “I’m very, very disappointed in Ty Warner keeping Glory from the
general public, especially since this Beanie represents our nation. How very
uncouth that they would put [money] ahead of customers in this respect. . . .
There is no way I can afford the prices being put on this bear, nor can the
children that Ty Warner says he has made these toys for.” A parent wrote in to
excoriate the very idea of adult Beanie collectors: “You should be encouraging
people to let the children have their toys and find their own items to collect.”
Perhaps to counterbalance the materialism that was taking over what was

supposed to be a toy, the collecting magazines started to heavy-handedly
emphasize the more altruistic, prosocial elements of the hobby. The September
1998 issue of Mary Beth’s Beanie World—shortly before the name was changed
in response to litigation from Ty—told the story of Tim Holmes, a twelve-year-
old with cerebral palsy who’d acquired a Princess bear from a retailer for $6.50
by entering his name into the store’s lottery system. Not long after his purchase,
Tim saw on the news that three paramedics and a child had died in a helicopter
crash while en route to Children’s Hospital Los Angeles, where Tim had
received brain surgery months earlier. He paired up with a local store to raffle
off his Princess bear, and raised $3,400 for the hospital. Holmes became a poster
child for Beanie collecting. This story also circulated among collectors: on April
15, 1998, the Kankakee City Police Department just outside Chicago melted
down forty guns that locals had traded in at an exchange rate of one retired
Beanie Baby per gun.
There were two popular books, Heartfelt Stories About Beanie Babies and
Those Who Collect Them and Beanie Baby Stories, that collected the cloying
tales of the impact Beanies had on people’s lives. In Heartfelt Stories, a twenty-
three-year-old writes about how Beanie Babies saved her marriage after a move
that had left the couple feeling depressed and unconnected: “When we returned
to Tucson, we realized the Beanie craze hadn’t hit there yet. Chris and I began to
spend our free time together hunting for Beanies, learning each time we went out
more information about what to look for, which ones are hard to find, etc. We
began to have fun together again. . . . We have something in common that we
can talk about and laugh about. . . . I know it sounds weird to say Beanie Babies
have saved my marriage. . . . One day we hope the excitement we have felt about
the hunt for our treasures will help our son to enjoy his own dreams, whether it
helps to pay for his college or as a cherished memory to pass on to his own
children.”
Sentimentality combined with a quest for riches makes many of the stories
unsettling: “My daughter who is ten thinks I am addicted. . . . Yes, we are behind
on our house payment, and I beg my husband to buy me ‘oh, just one’ . . . My
fifteen year old son has cerebral palsy. I tell myself that he can use the proceeds
from these Beanies to help himself maintain a decent lifestyle after I am gone.”
In the afterword to Heartfelt Stories, Angela M. S. Nelson, a Bowling Green
State University professor in the Department of Popular Culture, writes, “When
a mother says that her daughter’s self-esteem has improved, when a mother’s
grief over her daughter’s suicide has been relieved . . . the impact of Beanie

Babies is apparent as well as the various ways people are united because of
them. . . . I’m sure that people of the Christian faith will agree that the message
of Jesus Christ is present in the actions of these Beanie collectors, even though
Jesus is not.”
Never mind all that, however: there were a few people who became
millionaires in less than two years by spreading the idea that never, under any
circumstances, ever, should anyone let a child touch a Beanie Baby. Beanies,
they said, were destined for greater things.

18

Shovel Dealers in the Gold Rush
Henry Blodget was a thirty-two-year-old Wall Street analyst in December 1998
when he predicted that Amazon.com’s shares, already flying high at $240, would
rise to $400. Within weeks the prediction came true—and it made Blodget a star.
He was young and good-looking, and when Blodget talked on CNBC, people
listened. After the Nasdaq bubble burst, he was pilloried as the traders who rode
his advice up to riches rode it back down to poverty. New York attorney general
Eliot Spitzer pursued him over e-mails showing that he was trashing some dicey
Internet start-ups privately while promoting them publicly for the benefit of his
firm’s investment banking business. Blodget was banned for life from working
in the securities industry.
Blodget has been philosophical about the affair. In an interview with
journalist Maggie Mahar for her book Bull!: A History of the Boom and Bust,
1982–2004, he talks about his recent research that helped him understand his
place in the world of speculative episodes. “Have you ever read John Kenneth
Galbraith’s book about the history of bubbles?” he asks her, referring to 1990’s
A Short History of Financial Euphoria. “Well I hadn’t—until recently. I just
finished it. It’s amazing how Galbraith spells it all out—what happens in every
bubble, every time. He’s almost yawning as he lays it out. First some new thing
comes along and captures the public’s imagination. Then everyone starts making
money. After that, some person of average intelligence is held up as a genius. Hi,
that was me.”
All speculative manias rely on self-proclaimed and media-anointed
soothsayers for amplification, and Beanie Babies were no different. The craze
never could have inflated as much as it did without the implied credibility that
came from the books, magazines, and charismatic prognosticators extolling the
toys’ investment value. Internet stocks had Henry Blodget, and Beanie Babies
had scores of would-be experts promoting the line as a retirement strategy. The
relationship between price guides and values is reflexive, antiques experts tell
me. Each drives the other in a market-making cycle. Between 1997 and 1999,
books about Beanie Babies were more popular than books about Y2K. A very
abbreviated list: The Beanie Encyclopedia: A Complete Unofficial Guide to

Collecting Beanie Babies; Beanie Mania; Beanie Mania II; For the Love of
Beanies; Encyclo-Beanie-A; The Complete Idiot’s Guide to Beanie Babies;
Beanie Mania Guidebook; The Unauthorized Beanie Baby Guide; Beanie Babies
Collectors Guide; Rosie’s Price Guide for Ty’s Beanie Babies; Pocket Idiot’s
Guide to Beanie Babies; The Official Beanie Basher Handbook; Ty Beanie
Values Guide; The Beanie Invasion; and The Unofficial Beanie Baby Coloring
Book #4.
The presence of price guides, self-published and from major publishers, in
bookstores—and especially in gift shops, stacked amid the Beanies themselves
—reinforced the notion of Beanie Babies as a vehicle for speculation. Indeed,
the earliest secondary-market price lists actually predated the rise of a
speculative market.
The bubble in baseball cards came a decade before the Beanie craze. In the
book Mint Condition, journalist Dave Jamieson, himself a former collector,
explains the impact of the price guides put out by Beckett Publications, a
publisher of popular baseball card price guides founded by statistics professor
James Beckett. “What none of us understood at the time, however,” he writes,
“was that Beckett’s guides were probably creating prices just as much as they
were reporting them.” In a copyright infringement lawsuit Beckett filed against a
competitor, a judge noted that “it is entirely possible that the prices in [his]
publication not only reflect market prices, but in fact can determine market
prices.” The Beanie price guides and the prices they were reporting contributed
to an upward-spiraling feedback loop that benefited publishers, dealers, and most
of all, the manufacturer.
According to Faith McGowan, though, “Ty didn’t see it that way.” Warner
saw the experts as overhyping his product beyond the benefits that it could
reasonably be expected to produce—especially when the price guides
exaggerated current market prices, as they often did. Warner was focused on the
long term, and the rise of a speculative market was at odds with the longevity he
sought. He once said that he wanted the Ty brand to be the Coca-Cola of
collectibles, and even as the fad was making him rich, its ephemeral nature
grated on him.
Others say Warner was mostly just irked by the notion that anyone else was
making money from his creatures. Whatever his issue, he sued the price guide
publishers relentlessly. If Warner was concerned that the publishers were getting
rich off him, the financials he found during discovery proved him right. When
Ty Inc. won on summary judgment in a case against one obscure publisher, it
was awarded all the profits
an astonishing $1 36 million plus more than

was awarded all the profits—an astonishing $1.36 million plus more than
$200,000 in interest on a few low-budget, poorly researched exploitation books
that were not even close to being among the most popular of the Beanie guides.
It is often said of the gold rush that the people who got rich were the shovel
dealers who profited from the greed of the forty-niners. With Beanie Babies,
most of the lasting personal fortunes came from selling books and tag protectors,
not from speculating in plush. Late in the craze Ty began collecting licensing
fees from some publishers in exchange for the right to produce Beanie Baby
price guides. The existence of these licensing deals was used by Ty in litigation
as a justification for the lawsuits. Judge Richard Posner pointed to a different
motive behind the price guide lawsuits: a fear that independent commentators on
the market would make note of declining Beanie Baby values and hurt demand
on the primary market.
Warner probably didn’t need to worry about that: the mavens and publishers,
even if they weren’t themselves Beanie dealers, had powerful incentives to keep
prices high. As collectibles expert and author Harry Rinker says, “A price guide
is only valuable as long as you can raise prices. The premise of selling second-,
third-, and fourth-edition price guides is to show people how much more
valuable their stuff has become.” Just as business news viewership tanks after a
market crash, no one is interested in buying a price guide that tells them their
stuff is worth less than it was last year. Robert L. Miller, who published price
guides for the collectible Hummel figurines for decades, solved that problem by
simply raising his value estimates by 10 percent every year.
Everyone wanted to be a Beanie expert. Les Fox, a New Jersey coin dealer
and aspiring novelist, ran a coin business with his wife and spent decades trying
to carve out a publishing career. Les and Sue Fox were married in September
1968, began publishing their own coin guides in the 1970s, and made their first
attempt at cracking the best-seller lists with 1995’s self-published Return to
Sender, a fictional account of the life of Elvis Presley’s secret son. They printed
5,000 copies, sold 200, and lost $60,000. When they threw an Elvis birthday
party and book signing at a Borders in Fort Lauderdale, hundreds of Elvis fans
showed up for the free cake and Elvis impersonator they’d hired. The Foxes
failed to sell a single book. They followed it up with The Pizza and Ice Cream
Diet, which Les Fox said sold eleven copies.
In early 1997, following three weeks of research, writing, and
photographing, the Foxes self-published The Beanie Baby Handbook—using
their daughter’s $100,000 college fund as capital. If that seemed reckless given
their track record of publishing failures, the quality of the book made it even

crazier. Its 128 pages included poems, quizzes, and a “Match Game” of
suggested names for future Beanie Babies. It’s a wonderful combination of bad
writing, uninformed speculation, and wild optimism. Every current Beanie Baby
available at retail for $5 was projected to be worth at least $40 by 2007. Fox
bought virtually all the Beanie Babies he used for the photos from Peggy
Gallagher, paying her, by her own admission, inflated prices and then using
those prices as the basis for his valuations. “It was obscene what I was charging
him,” she remembers. “He didn’t really care about the actual true pricing. He
cared more about selling a gazillion books.”
“It’s our own personal ‘theory of scarcity’ that at least 90% of almost
everything gets lost, stolen, or destroyed within 10 years,” the Foxes explain in
the book. “Why should Beanies defy the laws of human nature? . . . The point is,
only a tiny percentage of Beanies will be sealed in Zip-Loc bags and treated with
TLC until the year 2007, no matter how well-intentioned their owners. . . .
Whoever is lucky (and smart) enough to hang on to some top grade Beanie
Babies for the long haul will be the future supplier for tomorrow’s collectors.
“If this hobby continues to grow, as we believe it will, 10 years from now
even today’s ‘shocking’ high prices may seem low,” they add. “After all, people
were shocked when Picasso’s paintings surpassed the million-dollar mark.
Recently one sold for $25 million.”
The Foxes also provided “estimates” of how many of each Beanie Baby had
been produced, but those guesses turned out to be woefully low—as evidenced
by the size of the fortune Warner had accumulated by the time the market
crashed. However, the estimates did provide consumers with enough
misinformation to make the idea of long-term Beanie scarcity seem plausible.
Les and Sue Fox were confident that this was the work that would make
their mark in publishing. At first they found no buyers. Distributors turned it
down, and Barnes & Noble, thinking that Beanie Babies were a two-season fad,
declined to place an order. Out of traditional options, the Foxes started mailing
the book and a brochure to gift and toy shops all over America. After decades of
publishing failures, Les and Sue had their hit. Fifteen thousand stores placed
orders, apparently sensing the synergy of selling a book that predicted the $5
stuffed animals next to it were going to be worth thousands.
The Beanie Baby Handbook sold more than one million copies in its first
year and was a mainstay on the New York Times best-seller list—an über-rarity
for a self-published book, especially back then. It also appeared on the harder-to-
crack USA Today best-seller list, spending fifty-five weeks there and peaking at

number three—an astonishing accomplishment for a collector’s guide on a list
that included all books of every genre, including perennials. It hit number one on
the Publishers Weekly list and was selling twenty thousand copies per week at
Barnes & Noble. It was the fastest-selling collectibles book ever, and one of the
best-selling self-published books of all time.
When Warner sued the Foxes for copyright infringement, Les told a
magazine that he felt like he’d been betrayed by an old friend after all he had
done to promote Beanie mania. The Foxes agreed to a cease-and-desist order
and, reportedly, a cash settlement that still left them with millions in profits.
Today, Les Fox remains all too happy to reminisce about the failure of his Elvis
novel; it’s the success of his nonfictional work on Beanie Babies that he wishes
people would forget. More accurately, he wishes they’d remember the success
but forget the topic. Les has refashioned himself as an expert on the fine arts. He
and his wife have another self-published book, The Art Hunters Handbook: How
to Buy Art for $5 and Sell It for $1,000,000, although he freely admits he’s never
done anything the title suggests. The cover includes the boast “N.Y. Times
Bestselling Authors,” but neither the book nor any of the Foxes’ Web sites
include a single reference to Beanie Babies.
In the YouTube video introducing this 2012 book, Les Fox is wearing an
Abercrombie & Fitch sweatshirt over a green T-shirt with some kind of logo on
it. He stands in front of an impressionist landscape and a primitive portrait,
talking in a thick New Jersey accent.
He is, as always, enthusiastic about what he’s selling.
“You’re gonna love this book,” he says, after introducing himself as a New
York Times best-selling author. “This book actually teaches you even if you’re
not an art expert. In fact the book is not written for art experts. It’s probably the
only really serious art book that’s ever been written that is not written for art
collectors. It’s written for the average person, people that play the lottery, people
that go to garage sales and flea markets hoping to find something exciting. You
will, you can; this book will help you do it. . . . Please buy a copy of our book. It
will be the best fourteen ninety-five investment you ever make.”
When I asked him about Beanie Babies, he replied via e-mail, “After
thinking about our current business strategies, we have decided not to do an
interview for your book. . . . If you are interested in our art or rare coin activities,
please let me know as I will be happy to talk about that. But I think we are done
with Beanie Babies.” Today he lives in New Jersey in a multimillion-dollar
home financed by the Beanie bubble, and his neighbor is Fox News anchor Steve

Doocy. Fox pitches his projects to Doocy routinely in the hope of getting on TV,
so far without luck. The topics he’s tried to sell himself as an expert on over the
past decade include online shopping, electing Arnold Schwarzenegger president,
selling on eBay, publishing, and the stock market. Perhaps sensing the publicity
it once brought Henry Blodget, Fox predicted in 2005 that shares of Amazon
would triple by 2009—a call that worked out a lot better than his Beanie
prognostications.
The Foxes and their best-selling price guides did a lot to take Beanie Babies
out of the hands of children. With their best-selling book came a popular
recognition that the toys were mostly for investment. None of the original
Beanie collectors have anything nice to say about Les and Sue Fox. They say
that they lifted material from their books, did essentially no research of their
own, and made up prices and projections that were irresponsibly optimistic and,
in the long run, hurt the market by giving buyers false hope and luring in too
many quick-buck artists. Still, Becky Estenssoro readily admits, “It helped us,”
at least as far as their business selling Beanies at shows and online was
concerned. After the craze had ended, a reporter asked Les Fox about the
predictions, and his response was dismissive: “We had a lot of fun making
predictions. We’ve been involved with collecting for thirty years, and we’re
pretty good at guessing. However, these were just guesses.”
During the craze, however, the two Beckys had complete collections that
were worth $100,000. John Orozco, a toy dealer who’d taken a beating in the
stock market, watched the inflating Beanie market and then plowed his portfolio
into early retired pieces. He claimed in an interview with the Wall Street Journal
to have made back all his losses in less than a month and a half as prices
continued to inflate.
The final step that moved Ty Warner’s creations fully into the realm of
financial assets, however, started with a well-meaning psychotherapist who just
wanted to help frightened children find the comfort stuffed into these endearing,
soft, and “poseable” little animals.

19

The Point of No Return
In mid-1996, psychotherapist Nancee Biank was running an eight-week therapy
group for children between ages six and twelve who had a family member, often
a parent, battling cancer. “We were talking about heavy stuff: their parents being
sick and what that felt like,” she says. “They knew their parents could die.”
To help ease elementary school students into a comfort zone, Biank used
Beanie Babies as a “transitional object,” she says. The children in her group
loved them instantly. “They were soft and they were cushy,” she remembers. “It
wasn’t obtrusive. They weren’t throwing them at each other. They could just
hold it and touch it. The Beanie Baby was there to comfort them.”
Biank’s program was held at the Wellness House in Hinsdale, Illinois—
about ten minutes from Ty headquarters as well as McDonald’s headquarters;
those two companies were located only about five minutes from each other.
McDonald’s was a major sponsor of the Wellness House, and one day Jane
Hulbert, who worked in corporate communications at the fast-food chain,
stopped by to sit in on Biank’s program. Some say that it was Hulbert’s story
about how well the kids at Wellness House responded to the toys that led
McDonald’s to explore the idea of a Beanie Babies promotion, but Hulbert
doubts that. “I really believe that it was a high-level marketing initiative when
they saw the craze for Beanie Babies,” she says. Whatever the impetus,
McDonald’s executives approached Ty in mid-1996 with an idea for a Happy
Meal promotion that would include Beanie Babies.
Warner’s fixation on control of the line and control of the market had helped
make Beanie Babies an incredible cult phenomenon yet threatened their ability
to catch on in a larger way. His sales were on track to surpass the $500 million
mark, but that was all in gift shops—mostly in upper-middle-class areas, with a
heavy concentration in the suburbs. Warner had opportunities to do things with
Beanie Babies he never could have imagined, and he’d hired Kristin Edstrom as
his vice president of licensing to explore the possibilities. Her initial assignment
was to set up a deal for a Beanie Babies TV show. That was the kind of product-
based programming that was responsible for billions per year in sales and could
turn toys no one wanted into hits through sheer exposure. Lines such as He-Man,
My Little Pony and the ThunderCats had all become hundred million dollar

My Little Pony, and the ThunderCats had all become hundred-million-dollar
brands with the help of the product-based TV shows that accompanied their
launches.
Warner wanted in; at least he thought he did. Edstrom met with five top
television studios and returned, delighted, with an offer from each one. Then
Warner pulled the plug on the whole idea. He’d grown concerned that fleshing
out the Beanie Babies into fully developed characters with personalities and
voices would hurt the ability of children to interact creatively with them. He also
worried that it would alienate the independent toy retailers who frowned on
overly commercialized products. Virtually all toys were sold on television—and
Warner liked the idea of Beanie Babies being special and staying special,
something apart from the rest of the industry.
Edstrom’s two-year tenure at Ty consisted almost entirely of saying no.
Every month, hundreds of phone calls came in from companies wanting to
license the Beanie Babies brand. Mattel CEO Jill Barad called personally to see
about making a deal to package Beanie Babies to be sold with Barbie dolls;
Warner wouldn’t take the call. Ty turned down repeated calls from Steven
Spielberg’s office seeking to use Beanie Babies in movies. He turned down deals
for breakfast cereal, apparel, children’s books, and pretty much every other
consumer good for which you could possibly imagine a marketing tie-in with a
Beanie Baby—and a bunch that you couldn’t imagine, including perfume.
McGowan pushed Warner to introduce a line of plastic tag protectors after
she saw customers in a store upset over bent hangtags, but Warner demurred.
When the opportunists took over and introduced their own tag protectors,
Warner eventually did create an official one—but the licensed protectors never
took off.
Most would-be partners couldn’t even get a response. The New York City
Hawks, an Arena Football League team, wanted to distribute ten thousand
Beanie Babies to attendees at a July 25, 1998, game. John Hall, the team’s vice
president and general manager, had trouble finding someone to reject his
request: “We kept faxing requests to Ty, because their phone number and
address are unlisted. It’s like The X-Files. We faxed them every day or two for
three weeks. Finally, I got the person in charge of the Beanie Baby sales. She
told me they get five hundred faxes a day, and they’re not opening up to any
football league.”
“He didn’t want to prostitute the brand,” says Edstrom—and in an industry
where creating a brand that could be prostituted was the goal of nearly every
product launch, it was hard not to admire him.

Eventually, Edstrom became concerned that her role at Ty would destroy her
long-term career. “I’m getting a reputation as the person who handles licensing
who doesn’t do any licensing,” she told him. Edstrom and Ty parted ways
amicably, though she was somewhat puzzled. Why had Warner hired her to do
licensing if he wasn’t going to license anything? It seemed to reflect
ambivalence about his business instincts and how they conflicted with his desire
for purity and control. Yes, licensing would bring in no-risk, no-capital-needed
cash—and if done right, help to spread the brand. That’s what every other brand
with a hot toy did, but the same obsession that had Warner turning down Toys
“R” Us also had him turning down T-shirt deals.
Before Edstrom left, though, there was one licensing deal that Warner
couldn’t say no to: McDonald’s wouldn’t stop calling.

20

Peak
McDonald’s pursued Warner for months before they got him to engage with the
idea of a Teenie Beanie Babies promotion. Part of this was logistics. In late 1996
and early 1997 he was spending much of his time in China, focused on the
enormous task of finding factories that could ramp up manufacturing to meet
demand that was increasing tenfold per month.
The cut-and-sew nature of plush creates quality-control problems as volume
increases: there is little room for standardization. It costs Lego between $50,000
and $80,000 to create a mold that will produce a single standardized brick, but
that one mold can create sixty million perfectly identical Legos before it wears
out. An entrepreneur can start making stuffed animals with no money down, and
Warner was printing cash by late 1996: the company was buying Beanie Babies
from the overseas factories for twenty-five to sixty-five cents apiece, selling
them at a wholesale price of $2.50, and paying a 10 percent commission on the
sales. Customers paid for UPS shipping, and Warner ran a super-lean operation
with no staff anywhere in the United States other than at the company’s
headquarters in Oak Brook, Illinois, and at a call center in Texas. He offered no
bulk discounts to anyone, ever—a deal breaker with bigger accounts, but it kept
anyone from undercutting the mom-and-pops on which he was building his
business.
It was easy money except that clones can’t just be stamped out. Some in the
toy industry say it’s that cost differential that helps plush attract the strangest
characters: people with little money but a willingness to risk it all based on a
belief that they can create something with a pair of eyes that will call to a child
from a store’s shelf. It’s funny and almost sad to think about someone as
persnickety as Ty Warner trying to manage exponentially increasing production
on something that had to be sewn by hand each time. That task, combined with
his desire to keep Beanie Babies exclusive, deflected his focus from
McDonald’s.
Still, Warner knew that McDonald’s could offer him something no one else
could. As hot as they were, Beanie Babies were primarily a phenomenon of
middle-and upper-middle-class suburban women. McDonald’s could get the Ty
logo in front of lower income consumers who never set foot inside specialty

logo in front of lower-income consumers who never set foot inside specialty
stores and drive them to the gift shops in search of the larger Babies, which were
made with better fabric than any Happy Meal giveaway would be and came in
more varieties. There was really no other way to bring the mass market to
Beanies without messing up the entire distribution strategy that was fueling the
craze.
In her unpublished memoir, Faith McGowan writes of another problem with
the deal McDonald’s was proposing: “McDonald’s didn’t want to pay anything
for it. And, if McDonald’s flooded the market with Teenie Beanies, it might kill
the market for Beanie Babies.
“Still, anything with McDonald’s was big money, and Ty and I figured there
had to be a way to make it pay. Through a brilliant set of maneuvers and
negotiations,” McGowan reports, they made a deal. “The business deal we
pulled off would net Ty, Inc. more than $100 million. At the time, we had a hard
time comprehending such a sum. But it was only a small fraction of the profits
that the Beanie-stalk would produce.” The consummation of the McDonald’s
deal marked one of the few times McGowan could remember Warner ever
visibly expressing enjoyment of his success. They danced around his Oak Brook
house and made champagne toasts.
Expectations were enormous. McDonald’s reported production of one
hundred million Teenie Beanie Babies, enough to fill the largest Happy Meal
order in history. It was a prediction that there would be enough demand to sell
one for every household in America within a span of just a few weeks. The
expectation was that the cult following of speculators surrounding a specialty toy
could drive greater demand than the Teenie Beanies McDonald’s produced to
coincide with the release of mega-budget Disney movies. That should have
warned consumers that these were unlikely to be scarce enough to appreciate in
value, but it didn’t. Warner had complained to McDonald’s that their production
plans would be insufficient, but McDonald’s insisted that, either way, its
restaurants were simply not staffed to hand out more Happy Meals than that.
With the mass promotion of Teenie Beanies and the TV advertising that
McDonald’s was planning on the way, the obvious strategy was to ramp up
distribution for Beanie Babies. That would bring the toy to the masses while
McDonald’s brought the masses to a smaller version of the toy. The big-box
stores were banging down Warner’s door with enormous orders, but he decided
to keep everything the same. “They won’t give us any,” Toys “R” Us’s main
buyer for plush toys told a reporter. “I have not been able to get them to return
my phone calls. We’re extremely concerned. We’ve been shut out by Ty.”

Bill Harlow, the president of Ty Canada, remembers the incredulous calls
from the Canadian heads of major retailers: some screamed at him and most of
them swore, but his hands were tied. Warner had decided he didn’t want his
product in bins, and that was that. Harlow knew that if he did sell to chains, Ty
would somehow find out. And when he did find out he’d stop shipping to
Harlow, and Harlow would be out of business.
On April 11, 1997, the first Teenie Beanies landed at McDonald’s stores
nationwide. “We’re getting fifteen to twenty, sometimes twenty-five calls every
half hour since six o’clock this morning: ‘Do you have the Beanie Babies?
Which ones do you have? What time are you going to start selling them?’” the
franchise owner of a McDonald’s in Elmhurst, Illinois, told CNN. Some
customers ordered a hundred Happy Meals and asked the cashier to keep the
food. Stores received hundreds of calls per hour and set up automated recordings
for anyone who called. “Good morning. McDonald’s. We have the moose and
the lamb,” one Ohio franchisee instructed employees to answer the phone.
When the restaurants started posting per-customer limits, collectors headed
to message boards to swap tips on disguises that could be shuffled in the car
between runs. Initially, demand in California had been weak, but as people from
the rest of the country asked friends to pick them up and curious Californians
browsed eBay, West Coast locations sold out within a few days, too. And as the
Teenie Beanie demand spread to California, it brought with it demand for the
full-size ones. The craze became truly national—and, not surprisingly, more rife
with criminality than ever. An eighteen-year-old in Riviera Beach, Florida, was
arrested for stealing $6,000 worth of Teenie Beanie Babies from the McDonald’s
where she worked and then selling three hundred of them to a coworker.
Two weeks into a planned five-week promotion, McDonald’s took out ads to
apologize and announce that it was ending the giveaway early because it had run
out of product. As for the TV commercials promoting Teenie Beanies, the
company canceled those after just a couple of days, worried that massive crowds
were putting employees’ safety in jeopardy. “The stores were just devastated by
it,” one former executive remembers. “It really created a frenzy. The customers
become deranged.” McDonald’s employees were given pins that read “I
survived the attack of the Teenie Beanie Babies.”
“When I talk to my former colleagues, all I have to do is just say, ‘Teenie
Beanie Babies,’ and we all just go, ‘Oh my God, shoot me,’” says Jane Hulbert,
who by then was running public relations for McDonald’s after her initial
sighting of the Beanies at the Wellness House. “There were reporters who, for
ethical reasons would not let me take them for lunch in New York City who

ethical reasons, would not let me take them for lunch in New York City who
were calling me and saying ‘Don’t tell anybody, but do you think you can send
me a press kit with them?’” She wasn’t sure why they wanted the press kits. At
first she assumed the reporters were acting on behalf of their kids, but then it
occurred to her that at least some of the requests were being made with an eye
toward resale.
Miraculous as it was, the speculators were proven right. In the short term, at
least, one hundred million pieces was a limited-enough edition to leave anyone
who’d spent two weeks staking out drive-throughs with a tidy profit. The
hoarding was driving up prices. Everyone thought their values would keep
rising, so there were too few sellers to accommodate the buyers. Oxford Bank of
Chicago bought one thousand Teenie Beanies on the secondary market to bait
people into opening savings accounts. The pitch was simple: open an account
with at least $1,000 in it and you get a Teenie Beanie. A penalty was added if
you withdrew the money in less than a year: “We didn’t want people opening the
account just to get the Teenie Beanie Baby and then closing it,” the company’s
vice president of retail banking and marketing told a reporter.
The McDonald’s promotion brought massive mainstream buzz to a product
with distribution only outside the mainstream. It’s a combination that hardly ever
happens, and it amplified an already enormous imbalance between demand and
supply—the equivalent of buying Super Bowl ads to promote a church bake sale.
Most products that are on the receiving end of large-scale publicity are also part
of a large-scale distribution system. Yet Warner hadn’t changed his distribution
even a little bit in anticipation of the response.
Media coverage of Beanie Babies soared, bringing in still more new
collectors. That made the toys harder than ever to find at retail, which only
increased their perceived value. Zany Brainy, now defunct but then the largest of
the national specialty-toy chain stores, had its clerks answering the phones this
way: “Thank you for calling Zany Brainy. We do not have any Beanie Babies in
stock right now.” The McDonald’s promotion and ensuing publicity also marked
the beginning of a true frenzy in Canada—monthly wholesale orders soared
from a little over $1 million to $7 million.
As new collectors entered the market in the United States and abroad,
secondary-market prices skyrocketed—and anyone who had gotten into the
Beanie game pre-McDonald’s was sitting pretty. On May 11, 1997, just after the
Happy Meal promotion ended, Ty posted a new retirement announcement on its
Web site. Flash the Dolphin and Splash the Whale instantly shot up to $25 to
$50 each on eBay, and as collectors scrambled to find the last remaining Flashes

and Splashes on store shelves, the company introduced ten new Beanie Babies.
The new releases instantly sold online for five or more times their retail value.
Warner was on top of the world and decided to make an exception to his ban
on partnerships for one more entity: Major League Baseball.
Warner had been a great outfielder in high school, but the connection ran
deeper. His father had named him after Ty Cobb, the early-twentieth-century
Detroit Tigers star. While Cobb still holds the major league record for career
batting average, his off-the-field conduct earned him a reputation as the meanest
man in baseball. Violently racist and with a reputation for injuring competitors
on purpose, he wasn’t an obvious choice for a namesake, but so it was: Ty’s full
name was H. Ty Warner—the H, an initial that didn’t stand for anything, was an
affectation his mother had insisted on.
On May 18, three days after the McDonald’s giveaway ended, the Chicago
Cubs were in the midst of one of the worst seasons in team history. They’d lost
their first fourteen games, with average attendance well below 20,000, but they
had a special event that day: a Beanie Baby giveaway that 37,958 paying
spectators showed up for. It was the first sellout crowd the team had had in a
long time, making Cubbie the Bear, the Beanie given to the first ten thousand
fans, a bigger draw for the team than Sammy Sosa. “Beanie Babies Sure Winner
for Hapless Cubs,” ran the Chicago Tribune headline. Aside from the Cubs’ first
home night game in 1988, the team said, the giveaway had done more to drive
ticket sales than any event in its history.
Other teams followed. Major League Baseball took in $2.5 billion in revenue
in 1998, the year Sammy Sosa and Mark McGwire broke Roger Maris’s all-time
home run record in the midst of a chemically fueled bubble that had taken over
baseball—just as Internet stocks and Beanie Babies were doing their work on the
rest of the culture. Yet steroid-enhanced sluggers weren’t even the league’s most
exciting draw that year. At games that included a Beanie Baby giveaway,
attendance rose by an average of 37.4 percent. Sporting News named Glory the
Bear, given out at the 1998 All-Star Game on July 7, the one-hundredth-biggest
person in sports, just below Don King.
_______
As Ty’s sales grew, Warner sometimes neglected the operational side of the
business. His lack of focus on logistics hampered distribution—which
inadvertently helped the craze grow by exacerbating supply shortages and
d i i
d
k
i
A
h
k
h
d
d h
’

driving up secondary-market prices. As the market heated up and the company’s
facilities became inadequate for the sales volume, Warner resisted the idea of
expanding his warehouse beyond the one he had attached to his office. Faith
McGowan remembers that Warner “could not separate himself from his office
and his distribution. He couldn’t fathom that in his mind.” Even though it was
obvious that a company doing Ty’s volume couldn’t function with a small
distribution center tacked on to a corporate headquarters, Warner dismissed the
idea of expansion as “goofy.” McGowan scouted locations by herself, and
eventually Warner agreed to shell out $1 million per year for 270,000 square feet
of off-site distribution in Bolingbrook, Illinois.
He also broke ground on a new 75,000-square-foot, $14 million
headquarters just down the road from the old office—with plans that there was
to be no signage of any kind and certainly no colorful allusions to Beanie
Babies. The company’s mailing address remained a post office box in Oak
Brook; the mystique was preserved. Warner had a giant fish tank installed in his
office but then had it removed when he decided he didn’t like it. The CEO’s
suite was under constant renovations for years after the rest of the building was
complete, but Warner never used it. He preferred to work in a conference room
where he could see everything that was going on in his building.
Finally, in November 1997 he hired Bob Ricciardi, a gift industry veteran, to
serve as president and focus on the management tasks Warner wasn’t interested
in. Prior to meeting with Ricciardi to indoctrinate him into the Ty Warner
method of business, Warner made notes on a legal pad—beginning, as he always
did, with what he’d learned from his days at Dakin. “Be a company that
predominantly has classics such as Teddy Bears, cats, dogs, [and] bunnies,” he
wrote. “Stick to smaller stores . . . Don’t sell to stores where shoppers are price
checking (mass merchants). The WORST mistakes in business are made in good
times, not in bad times. Run a TIGHT SHIP—hold down OVERHEAD. Keep
[Beanie Babies] on tight supply to keep them in demand. You want kids fighting
for them.”
One of Ricciardi’s first tasks was to inform the sales force that the
commission on Beanie Babies was being cut from 10 percent to 6 percent. In
1997 the account executives earned an average of more than $120,000 ($170,000
in 2012 dollars), with many of them working part time. Even for full-timers,
little talent was required. Retailers were having as many Beanies delivered as
possible, and Ty saw the account executives as glorified order takers. “I didn’t
start my own business to make other people rich!” he once bellowed at them.
The increasing delegation at Ty also created problems for Internet guru Lina

e
c eas g de egat o at
y a so c eated p ob e s o
te
et gu u
a
Trivedi, the company’s twelfth employee. She was used to reporting to Warner
and his information technology head. When another layer of management was
added, she clashed with her new supervisor. Trivedi approached Ricciardi with
her request for a salaried position following years of making no more than $12
per hour; she now wanted $120,000 plus $60,000 for her younger brother.
Ricciardi, however, felt that her demands were excessive. Warner had wanted
her to stay, she says, and had promised her a plush office at the new
headquarters, but he didn’t intervene when the negotiations broke down. Trivedi
and her brother walked. At the age of twenty-five, she sold ten thousand dollars’
worth of rare Beanie Babies she’d accumulated and started her own business.
“We’re going to be the Microsoft of Web design,” she told a reporter.
Ricciardi left after less than six months of being limited to little more than
slashing commissions and hunting for minor cost-saving measures. Warner
wasn’t ready to relinquish any serious control; he hadn’t even shown Ricciardi
the company’s financial statements. Ricciardi had left a secure career at Enesco
for the job, and while he bears no ill will toward Warner, others say that his stint
at Ty torpedoed his career. “The Ricciardi events had an effect on my perception
of Ty,” McGowan wrote. “I began to see that he could be ruthless and callous in
his dealings with the people who were helping him. The thought crossed my
mind that it could happen to me.”
_______
By 1998 a USA Weekend poll found that 64 percent of Americans owned at least
one Beanie Baby. The second McDonald’s giveaway in May 1998 was even
more successful than the first—partly because by that point, complete sets of the
1997 Teenie Beanies were selling for close to $200, or about ten times the total
cost of the Happy Meals it took to acquire them. Warner was ambivalent about
all this: he knew the secondary market was making him rich, and he knew that
keeping it going was important. However, Beanie Babies were supposed to be a
toy; if children could no longer buy them, the craze’s days were numbered. It
was a delicate balancing act: fuel the secondary market while still keeping it
popular with kids—two goals that were intrinsically at odds with each other.
“We firmly believe that the recommended $5 ‘magic’ retail price point has
contributed to the success of the BEANIE BABIES phenomenon,” he wrote in
an April 1998 letter to retailers. “BEANIES are cute, limited, well-made and
affordable. Well, guess what, now in far too many cases, they’re not affordable.”

Warner said that he would discontinue sales to retailers who weren’t marketing
his products in accordance with his “pricing philosophy,” and he set up a hotline
for consumers to report price gouging. Yet it was like the arcade game Whac-A-
Mole: Warner was largely helpless to police the more than ten thousand gift
shops selling his toys.
Emblematic of the conflict between Beanie Babies as toys and Beanie
Babies as investments is the story of what happened to Nancee Biank’s therapy
group at the Wellness House. Once the Teenie Beanie promotion she’d inspired
began and the speculative market continued to soar, there was a problem. When
the eight-week programs came to an end and each child had a chance to bring
home a Beanie Baby, they arrived for the last meeting armed with instructions.
“My mom told me to make sure I take Squealer the Pig because it’s going to be
worth a lot of money,” a boy might tell her—and then another kid would explain
that he had received the same instructions from his father. Arguments about
Beanie Babies shattered the therapeutic atmosphere that Beanie Babies had once
been central to creating. “The parents,” Biank says, “actually ruined the whole
thing.”
As popular as Beanie Babies were, Biank had to stop using them for therapy.
These particular stuffed animals were now too valuable to be given to children
whose parents were dying of cancer. It had gone from cute to heinous, and there
was no good way for it to end.

21

The Feedback Loop Spins Out of Control
The collectors had joined the craze in waves: early adopters in 1996, a national
spread in early 1997, then an influx driven by the McDonald’s promotion and
accompanying media wave that started in April of that year. The increasing
demand led to ever-rising secondary-market prices; Beanie Babies that were
selling between $25 and $35 in March 1997 jumped to between $50 and $70 by
May, and the market continued to go up. The trio of Beanies released for the
1996 presidential election, Lefty, Righty, and Libearty, were all retired on
January 1, 1997. They were selling for $50 each by October of that year. By
December 1997 they were up to $125 each, and by March 1998 they were
selling for $625 each.
John Kenneth Galbraith writes of the price increases during the seventeenth-
century tulip mania, “In keeping with the immutable rules governing such
episodes, each upsurge in prices persuaded more speculators to participate. This
justified the hopes of those already participating, paving the way for yet further
action and increase, and so assuring yet more and ever-continued enrichment.”
The continuing escalating demand and prices were driven by one of the most
fundamental fallacies identified by behavioral economists: humans extrapolate
trends and assume that historical price-appreciation patterns will continue even
when it is future demand, not past returns, that will impact prices in the long
term.
In Irrational Exuberance, economist Robert Shiller writes of how, far from
eliciting skepticism about an overheating market, inflated prices serve to lure
more investors in. That is, he says, the very definition of a bubble: “I define a
speculative bubble as a situation in which news of price increases spurs investor
enthusiasm, which spreads by psychological contagion from person to person, in
the process amplifying stories that might justify the price increases and bringing
in a larger and larger class of investors, who, despite doubts about the real value
of an investment, are drawn to it partly through envy of others’ successes, and
partly through a gambler’s excitement.”
A few commentators were warning about the risks. Harry Rinker, the
antiques expert, frequently devoted his syndicated column to blasting Beanie
Babies He earned the nickname Beanie Meanie during his TV and radio debates

Babies. He earned the nickname Beanie Meanie during his TV and radio debates
with the experts who insisted that the run-up in values was sustainable. In honor
of Rinker’s steadfast skepticism, a group of antiques dealers presented him with
a crucified Stinky the Skunk Beanie Baby. It was inscribed: “King of the Fools.
Presented to Harry L. Rinker, Speaker of the Truth, from the Dealers in Central
Indiana Who Refuse to Sell Ty Items.”
“Hoarding is a major issue,” he wrote in mid-1998. “There is no way of
knowing the hoarded number of each Beanie Baby. The safest assumption is
pick a number and multiply it by 10.” But just like the mutual fund managers
who resisted Internet stocks until the worst possible moment, some of the flea
market vendors who had been smart enough to avoid Beanies in the early days
jumped on the bandwagon as the craze peaked.
Manias are often remembered for the peak—the most spectacular period of a
frenzy that seemed to have come out of nowhere. Yet in every case it’s the slow
growth in the beginning, from a tiny base, which ignites the stories that spread
the excitement. The year after most outside experts predicted the Beanie Baby
fad had already peaked, Ty’s wholesale shipments doubled again—and prices on
the secondary market continued to climb. It was too late to get any of the really
rare Beanies at bargain prices; the Chicago women, whose credibility had
increased as the doubters’ had diminished, already had those. The ones
collectors were clamoring to buy in gift shops were arriving from China by the
tens of millions. Monthly circulation of Mary Beth’s Beanie World had reached
over one million copies—and the page count was increasing with every issue as
entrepreneurs bid up the rates for ad space.
Brian Wallos, in his midtwenties with a degree in finance from SUNY–
Binghamton, was taking out full-color, multipage ads in all the Beanie collecting
magazines to promote his Wallos.com site—one of the largest secondary-market
dealers for Beanie Babies. He sold dozens of royal blue Peanut the Elephants for
$5,000 each and once bought one thousand of the Princess Diana bears with a
single cashier’s check for $100,000. Wallos went to England regularly in search
of undiscovered stashes, and he had at least one thousand of all but the rarest
Beanies in stock at all times. He was also flying high on his own supply—
keeping an inventory but also hoarding some pieces for himself for long-term
investment.
In 1998 he had twenty-five employees, a huge warehouse, and an advertising
budget of close to seven figures per year. “PLEASE NOTE,” read the fine print
at the bottom of every ad, “Prices may change up or down due to the extremely
volatile nature of the Beanie business.” Buyers were advised to call or go online

for up-to-the-minute pricing. As Rinker was warning, it was the worst possible
time to start collecting Beanie Babies, so naturally, more people than ever started
collecting Beanie Babies.
Chris Robinson, who’d starred as Dr. Rick Webber on General Hospital
from 1978 until 1986, began collecting in 1998 when his son pointed Beanie
Babies out to him on a trip to Boston. The store owner told Robinson that retired
Beanie Babies were soaring in value, and Robinson started researching it. “They
had these books that were out, and they would project the value in ten years,” his
son remembers. “My dad was reading these books, and he was taking them to
heart. We thought we were going to pay for our college with them. It consumed
every part of our lives.”
The family spent each day compiling lists of local stores, following UPS
trucks, and making calls to keep track of shipments. They built relationships
with store owners and bought five of each animal from each store each month,
claiming to have five kids. When stores placed limits on the number of Beanies
each family could buy, Robinson instructed his kids to pretend they didn’t know
him. During the second McDonald’s giveaway, a friend threw up in their car
after eating too many Happy Meals as the family bought them by the dozen.
Weekends were devoted to inventory management: putting each Beanie’s tag in
a protector, then storing them in plastic bins categorized by “species.” Robinson
spent more than $100,000 on Beanie Babies at a time when he was not working
steadily.
Oversupply and hype weren’t the only threats to the secondary market.
Collectors estimated that roughly one-quarter of Beanies on the market for
$1,000 or more were fakes. Knockoffs of rare pieces like the royal blue Peanut
the Elephant, the Old Face Teddy the Bear, and the spotless Spot the Dog burned
high-ticket collectors, leaving them reluctant to pay up for more rare Beanies. In
a weird way, though, the presence of counterfeits—and the endless warnings in
magazines, books, and local news shows—also seemed to legitimize the
collectability of real Beanie Babies. Peggy Gallagher and the two Beckys, three
of the first collectors who’d chased Beanies by phone, started authenticating
pieces by mail—for $20 each. That business alone gave Gallagher a six-figure
income: Beanie Babies were an investment, and serious collectors didn’t blink at
paying up to legitimize their rarest pieces.
In July 1998 U.S. Trade Representative Charlene Barshefsky traveled to
China with President Clinton and purchased about forty Beanie Babies to take
home. She was stopped at Customs and told that her loot was illegal because of
trade restrictions Ty had pushed for Republican National Committee chairman

trade restrictions Ty had pushed for. Republican National Committee chairman
Jim Nicholson denounced her: “Instead of trying to reduce our $50 billion trade
deficit with China, our trade representative was scouring the street markets of
Beijing grabbing up every illegal, black-market Beanie Baby she could get her
hands on.”
_______
On May 1, 1998, Ty announced the retirement of twenty-eight Beanie Babies—
double the number in the company’s previous largest retirement announcement.
Beanie Mania Bulletin, a popular biweekly newsletter for collectors, reported,
“Equally surprising was that no new Beanie Babies were announced at the same
time, although Daisy, the Ty ‘Info Beanie’ is presently hinting at some changes
in the Ty nursery.”
Mary Beth’s two cents: “When 24 Beanies are retired on May 1, they
literally disappear off store shelves. The hoarding of retired Ty product by
collectors, secondary-market dealers and even retailers becomes the norm rather
than the exception. Everyone is a Beanie dealer. Children clean out their toy
boxes to make a profit. It is not uncommon to hear about Beanie dealers making
enough to go on vacations, purchase vehicles and even put down payments on
houses. . . . Beanie Collectors are turning into the equivalent of Wall Street
speculators.”
By June of 1998, the royal blue Peanut the Elephant was selling for $5,200,
the brown Old Face Teddy the Bear was $3,500, and many other Beanies sold in
the $1,000 range. The baseball card business was declining and many card stores
were rebranding themselves as outposts for rare Beanie Babies: the Texas
Sportcard Company in Deer Park, Texas, reported that it was now making more
from Beanie Babies than it was from cards. “There’s never been a product in the
history of collectibles that has had the impact of Beanies,” a Connecticut store
owner told one magazine. “Nothing compares to it.” As 1998 came to a close,
collectors eagerly awaited the latest retirement announcement; seven Beanies
had been retired on December 31, 1997, and rumors of a similar event circulated
on message boards and at flea markets. On December 1 Ty.com posted a poem:
Surprise! Guess What? We’re letting you know
One month in advance, so your collection can grow.
The countdown’s begun so don’t hesitate
Get out to the store before you’re too late

Get out to the store before you re too late
This is our promise, our guarantee
Never again, in stores they will be.
Our final goodbye to our retirees,
Will be on December 31st, New Year’s Eve.
Over the next twelve days Ty announced retiring pieces one by one—
discontinuing twenty-six Beanie Babies, along with seven Attic Treasures and
one Beanie Buddy, although collectors had limited interest in those two lines.
Traffic soared, and collectors stripped the soon-to-be retiring Beanies off store
shelves.
At the end of 1998, 48 percent of Mary Beth’s readers said they’d started
collecting within the past year—which the recently renamed Mary Beth’s Bean
Bag World Monthly interpreted as a sign that the craze was still on the ascent. In
December 1998 the Home Shopping Network announced its best month of sales
in company history—buoyed by the sale of 550,000 Beanie Babies at prices far
higher than the prevailing values on online auction sites. Ty’s sales for 1998
came in at $1,348,418,778—and Warner’s pretax income surpassed $700
million. Still, there was enough talk about a peaking market that the experts
needed to reassure collectors.
Claudia Dunne, one of the early experts, wrote at the time, “Attending
Beanie shows around the country, I see the panic in people’s eyes, and I want to
say, ‘Relax, Beanies are here to stay.’” Jessica Benuzzi, a staff writer for Mary
Beth’s Bean Bag World Monthly, explained that low interest rates would
continue to drive Beanie sales. Brian Devany, a Beanie dealer, wrote that “the
Beanie market has consistently bucked the odds, and evidence of this continues
as 1998 nears a close. The demand in the market for current and retired Beanies
almost always exceeds supply, making a mockery of those calling the Beanie
phenomenon a fad.” The promoters pointed—with some justification—to the
collectible categories that had endured for decades: Hummel figurines had been
popular since World War II, and Barbie had been a hit since 1959, with values
for rare examples rising each year. Why not Beanie Babies? the speculators
asked.
Signs of trouble came with the new year. In mid-1998 all retired Beanie
Babies were worth more than they had retailed for; that high-wire act had fueled
the continuing growth of the market. Yet when the pieces that had been
announced for retirement stopped shipping in January 1999, the expected price
increases didn’t happen. There were now only forty current Beanie Babies out of

pp
y
y
a total collection of two hundred. However, the calculus had changed. The
hoarders were stunned to see that the notion of Beanies going up in value upon
retirement was not an immutable law of nature.
There were a few reasons for this. First, the rising volume of listings on
eBay, which had initially contributed to the excitement of Beanie collecting, was
now making it easier for collectors to find the Beanies they were missing. The
market had become more transparent, and price guide publishers had lost their
ability to impact prices. Now you could see values in real time, and any
slowdown in growth could instantly stoke pessimism.
More important, the secondary market for Beanie Babies had become a
victim of its own success. Soaring prices had led to intensifying demand on the
primary market, and Ty’s skyrocketing sales were starting to satiate that
demand. The imbalance had been corrected, and people were starting to see that
the new issues had no hope of ever producing the returns that Old Face Teddy,
Brownie the Brown Bear, Humphrey the Camel, and Slither the Snake had.
The dream of Beanie Babies as a long-term investment was unraveling. So
was Faith McGowan’s dream of a life with Ty Warner.

22

Money Changes People
On Christmas Eve, 1998, Faith McGowan’s daughters went to stay with their
father. Faith chilled a bottle of wine and prepared a filet while she waited for
Warner’s return from an afternoon meeting with a printing company. When he
still hadn’t arrived at six thirty, Faith was worried. She drove by the office; he
wasn’t there.
Her worry turned to suspicion when she remembered that Patricia Roche,
living in England and running Ty UK, was in town for the holidays with her
family. Faith called Patricia’s parents’ home posing as an old friend and asked
whether she was around. She was told Patricia was staying at the Embassy Suites
Hotel in Oak Brook—not far from Ty’s office.
Faith drove her Porsche through the snow and when she reached the hotel,
she saw Warner’s black Mercedes in the parking lot. She went to the desk and
asked for Roche’s room number. The clerk, initially reluctant, dialed the room
and handed her the phone. Patricia picked up.
“I want to speak to Ty,” Faith said. “I know he’s there.”
“Leave us alone!” Roche screamed. “You have the house. You have the car.
You have him. What more do you want?”
“I want to speak to Ty,” she said. “Now!”
Warner took the phone and calmly explained that he had just stopped by to
show Roche the new catalog. He hung up, and Roche told him to go out the side
entrance and drive home—deal with it later, she told him. Do not under any
circumstances take the elevator downstairs to have a Christmas Eve brawl with
your girlfriend, who just caught you cheating, in the echo-filled atrium of a hotel
ten minutes from the office where your stuffed-animal company employs
hundreds of people.
Not surprisingly, Warner chose the latter option. As he emerged from the
elevator a few minutes later, McGowan punched him in the face and was
promptly grabbed by the police officers the marginally clairvoyant manager had
summoned right as McGowan had arrived. The police wanted to file a report, but
Warner shooed them away and he and Faith went home.
“That was funny to him. ‘Oh boy, look at her go,’” Roche remembers of the
incident “‘She really cares about me ’

incident. She really cares about me.
“If you didn’t scream at him, you didn’t care about him,” she adds. “You
would think a billionaire with his unbelievable brain would not need to be
chastised twenty-four-seven by women. But he does.”
McGowan forgave Warner for the infidelity, but their relationship had other
problems. He bought her an engagement ring and showed it off to her father, but
she never really believed that he was on the brink of marrying her. He’d never
asked her to marry him, but he did tell her that they were engaged—and
sometimes he told other people that, too. The first time she told him that she
loved him his response had been, “For how long?” When Faith’s daughters
asked Ty why he wouldn’t marry their mother or do something to give her a
sense of financial security, his response was, “Because then your mother will
leave me.”
Faith McGowan wasn’t a gold digger. She’d been with Ty before he was
especially wealthy, and by all accounts she loved him more than anyone else
ever had. However, in 1999 Faith was living with a billionaire and not earning
any money. She was terrified at the prospect of being reduced to poverty the
moment he decided he was done with her.
“Relax,” he said. “You’re on the big paycheck.”
She wasn’t reassured.
_______
On January 8, 1999, the Wall Street Journal reported on Warner’s decision to
reward his employees with bonuses unheard of in the industry: “After working
all year to keep small-time retailers stocked with Beanie Babies, Ty’s 300
employees received cash bonuses equal to their entire 1998 income. Some wept.
No company fixated on annual results would ever do that—but neither would it
inspire such gratitude.”
It was exactly the kind of good-guy publicity that Warner liked (“He did it
for ego,” remembers Sharon Altier, the company’s general manager at the time),
but he wasn’t entirely thrilled with it. Here was the central conflict for Warner
from a PR perspective: he wanted to be seen as the biggest, smartest, most
successful toy company out there—it had his name on it, after all. McGowan
said that Warner’s driving force in life was the desire to make other people
jealous, and showing his capacity for generosity was one way of doing that. Yet
he’d also worked diligently to make sure that the company’s sales volume was
hard to trace: that was the only way the product could work as a collectible.

a d to t ace: t at was t e o y way t e p oduct cou d wo
as a co ect b e.
The Wall Street Journal’s assertion that Ty Inc. was not a “company fixated
on annual results” wasn’t quite in line with the image Ty wanted to project. He
decided to open the kimono and show everyone just how successful he was. He
responded to the story with a full-page ad—his first mainstream one—in the
Wall Street Journal: “By reading the single paragraph, as it has appeared on
many web sites, one might conclude that Ty Inc. does not concern itself with
profitability. For the record, Ty Inc. earnings, before interest and taxes, exceeded
Mattel during 1998. In fact, in 1998, Ty Inc. was more prosperous than any other
toy company, and on an annual basis, is the most successful and profitable
company in the history of the toy industry. Bonuses inspire gratitude and loyalty
from employees, and hopefully profit margins can inspire publicly held toy
companies to question both short and long-term marketing strategies.”
Warner’s awarding of bonuses coincided perfectly with the complete end of
Beanie Babies as a popular toy for children. Pokémon had emerged as the toy
craze for the middle school set, and when it came to Beanie Babies, there was no
longer any market other than the speculative one. It had begun as a popular
children’s toy; over the previous two years the share of Beanies being sold to
speculators had steadily risen from 10 percent to 30 percent, then to 70 percent.
By 1999 it was nearing 100 percent, and the only thing that seemed to bring
Beanie collectors together was greed. One former Ty sales rep, who once traded
a single rare Beanie Baby for a set of braces for her daughter, recalls that as
much money as she was making, her visits to retailers had become dark and
depressing by 1999. “I was in a store in South Bend, Indiana, and there were
these women who could not afford shoes for their children, but they were carting
wheelbarrows full of Beanie Babies.” The “warm and fuzzy” feeling Mary Beth
remembered from the early days was gone.
Two Las Vegas divorcees, unable to agree on how to divide up their Beanie
collection, were ordered to make their picks one by one under the supervision of
Family Court judge Gerald Hardcastle, who rested his head on the bench in
agony. “This isn’t about toys. It’s about control,” he told them. “Because you
folks can’t solve it, it takes the services of a District Court judge, a bailiff, and a
court reporter.” Maple, a bear released only in Canada who became the subject
of Customs drama as prices soared in the United States, was the first one drafted.
In Sherman Oaks, California, a masked man walked into a gift shop with a
gun, ordered everybody to the ground, and broke a display case to steal forty
Beanie Babies valued at a total of $5,000, escaping into the alley through a back
door. “He didn’t want the cash register,” a detective told the Los Angeles Times.

“All he wanted was the Beanie Babies. With the amount of money these are
getting on the market, it was bound to happen sometime.”
One story above all others shows just how little the Beanie Baby market of
late 1998 and all of 1999 had to do with the sentimentality and play value of
toys.
_______
I drove to Moundsville, West Virginia, to visit the Northern Correctional
Facility. I knew I was close when I saw the CORRECTIONAL FACILITY AHEAD;
BEWARE OF HITCHHIKERS sign. I was there to come face-to-face—in an
unsupervised interview room with nothing but a badly chipped blue Formica
table between us—with the man who, according to a detective who’d
investigated the case, had killed someone over a “Beanie Baby deal gone bad.”
Jeff White was twenty-nine years old when he murdered Harry Simmons;
he’s forty-two now, with a shaved head, and he sports the yellowed “prison
pallor” most Caucasian inmates acquire. He’s spent close to one-third of his life
in maximum security prison. When he was escorted into the room he had one
question for me before we got started: “So, them Beanie Babies. Are those still
hot?”
No, they aren’t, I told him as I shook his hand. The Millennium Bear—a
Beanie Baby released to commemorate the approaching year 2000—had been
his introduction to the world of plush toys. The bear was one of Ty’s more
volatile releases: first sold on January 1, 1999, it was so scarce that it instantly
traded at over $100 online. However, a few months after its release, Ty’s
shipping caught up, and they were more readily available in stores. Prices at
collector shows slipped to $15. But White had timed it well. He bought the bear
for $60 and sold it for $80. He was all of a sudden interested in Beanie Babies.
It wasn’t as if Jeff White had been unlikely ever to end up in prison. He had
a long rap sheet that began with an AWOL-related dishonorable discharge from
the army in 1989, a string of convictions for writing bad checks, and a grand
theft auto conviction. He comes from a long run of Whites who’ve had
encounters with the West Virginia penal system. His brother is in prison, his
uncle killed a U.S. Marshal, and his son did a year on a weapons charge. A
corrections officer told me that he thought Mr. White might be a member of the
infamous White family of criminals chronicled in the 2009 documentary The
Wild and Wonderful Whites of West Virginia, but White dismissed that family as

a “novelty act. My family is more vicious.” That a guy like this was ever running
around West Virginia staking out Hallmark stores waiting for Beanie shipments
speaks to just how far the craze penetrated.
In 1999 Jeff White was working as a boilerman at the Elkins Hardwood
sawmill in Elkins, West Virginia. White had also started his own business of
sorts out of his trailer. He called it Half Court Cards, and he bought and sold
everything from sports cards and stereos to guns. After he’d bought and sold the
Millennium Bear, a friend called with a problem. She’d run up $5,000 in credit
card debt buying Beanie Babies and told White she was concerned her husband
would be upset, possibly even divorce her, if he found out. White started selling
them for her via word of mouth. Even in a trailer park in Elkins, West Virginia,
people wanted Beanie Babies. Without the wealth to speculate in the stock
market, spending $50 on plush was their connection to the so-called new
economy. White had Beanies in boxes and bags in his trailer—mostly in the
kitchen, which he didn’t use because he and his son ate all their meals at
Hardee’s—and he was selling them when he could. It wasn’t much, but it was
steady and supplemented his sawmill work and drug dealing.
While all this was going on, White, who is something of a firearms
aficionado, invited the sawmill’s night shift supervisor, Harry Simmons, to his
trailer to show him the nineteenth-century prison-issue riot gun Simmons was
looking to get rid of. Simmons pointed to the Beanie Babies and said to White,
“You know, my daughter collects them Beanie Babies.”
The deal was struck: five retired Beanie Babies in exchange for one riot gun.
A few weeks later White called Harry Simmons and asked to borrow some
money. This was not unusual, and Harry agreed to lend him $200 to finance the
purchase of some Beanie Babies that White hoped to flip for a quick profit.
Meanwhile, White was also caught in the throes of binge alcoholism. He
stopped showing up for work; his boss there phoned to advise him to get his
“head right” and that he could have his job back once he’d dealt with his
substance abuse issues.
What exactly happened to the $200 that Simmons lent White was lost in the
haze of inebriation. He vaguely recalls that the Beanie Baby deal “fell through,”
and witnesses later told police that they had heard the two argue about Beanie
Babies on several occasions. The loan coincided with the decline of the Beanie
mania, so that might have had something to do with it. When Simmons called to
find out what had happened to the money, White assured him that everything
was fine and that he’d repay him soon. Simmons knew he was lying and was
sick of it He called White’s home spoke with his cousin and White says told

sick of it. He called White s home, spoke with his cousin and, White says, told
him that he wanted his money back and that if he didn’t get it, he was going to
make sure that White didn’t get his job back.
White told his cousin that he was “done with Harry”—a comment that was
later used by prosecutors to suggest that the murder was premeditated,
something that White steadfastly denied even as he pled guilty.
On October 5, 1999, Jeff White and his cousins began their day at a Denny’s
at 7:00 a.m. where they had egg sandwiches and biscuits and washed it all down
with Bud Light. They spent the day cruising around, then White took his cousins
to a local carnival. To this day he insists that when he showed up at the sawmill
at two in the morning, he did so without any intention of hurting anyone. He had
just been passing through the neighborhood and thought it would be a good time
to stop by and try to smooth things over with Harry.
Fair enough, I said, but why did you bring a gun with you?
“The people I was with at that time in my life were not the bedrock of
mental health,” he said, smiling through his mostly missing teeth. White, ever
the responsible adult, said he brought the gun in with him rather than leaving it
in the car because there were two gun-curious future criminals waiting in the car,
and he feared one of them would get shot. White parked outside the sawmill,
noted that Harry Simmons’s truck was in the lot, and entered the building
through a back door.
He found Simmons in the break room—sprawled out, half-asleep on a table.
“When we have a break, we lie on the table and stretch out,” White said in
his confession. “We had a joke we played on each other when one was lying on
the table and that one would [throw] a board to scare the one on the table so I
went and found a board and threw it.”
“How the hell did you get in here?” Simmons asked him.
An argument about Beanie Babies ensued—White says Simmons pulled a
knife, but police found the knife in its case on Simmons’s corpse—and White
shot Simmons three times in the chest with a Smith & Wesson 9mm
semiautomatic he’d paid $410 for. Then he took Simmons’s wallet—to make it
look like a robbery, he says—and turned his face away before shooting him one
last time in the head. He was apprehended shortly thereafter.
White began his time in prison as a wild child—never turning down a fight
and spending weeks in solitary confinement. This was at least in part a response
to the ribbing he was taking for the nature of his crime.
“I cannot go into prison as the Beanie Baby Killer,” the twenty-nine-year-
old told his mother over the phone while he awaited sentencing. “I’m gonna

have to kill someone else just to get my credibility back.” His ex-wife had called
him too, after she saw the headline in the National Examiner. Friends told him
there were jokes about the murder on The Late Show.
After a few years in prison, White settled down. He was certified in hospice
care at the recommendation of an associate warden; he has since taken care of
forty-five men as they died.

23

The P. T. Barnum of Plush
At midnight on January 1, 1999, Ty released twenty-four new Beanie Babies—
the largest product introduction in the company’s history. It was a mistake.
Collectors of all things tend to be focused on building complete sets, and as the
size of the Ty product line became unmanageably large, collectors were
discouraged. With twenty-four new releases at an average retail price of around
$5 each, Ty was asking enthusiasts to come up with $120. Many collectors
simply gave up. It was the same mistake—oversaturation of too many new styles
—that had tanked the baseball card craze of the 1980s and early 1990s. “Ty was
introducing so many new product lines and so many new Beanie Babies that
general collector psychology started working against him,” says Leon
Schlossberg, one of the last and largest remaining obsessive Beanie Baby
collectors. “Collectors collect because they hope to acquire ‘all’ or ‘most’ of
some particular item. It had become virtually impossible to collect ‘all’ of the
Beanie Babies. Through sheer production and new introductions [Warner]
inadvertently forced them to look for new, alternate opportunities to collect ‘all’
of something. That’s just the way collectors are.”
Ty’s wholesale shipments for January slipped by about 20 percent compared
with the previous year—still the second-greatest pace of sales for a plush
company in history, behind only Ty’s 1998 results, but a sign that the run was
nearing its end.
Some of the new releases were still in short supply, and collectors wrote in
to magazines to complain about retailers trying to charge $30 to $40 for Beanies
that were supposed to be in stores for $5. Yet some overproduced “commons”—
Beanies that had been in production for more than a year without being retired—
were stacking up and selling below retail. At flea markets some sellers offered
them at two for $6—a once unheard-of price. Few dealers could remember the
last time they’d seen a child buy a Beanie Baby. “We’re selling the ones we have
on shelves, but after that, we’re done,” one retailer told a reporter. “I think
there’s still interest in a secondary market, but the retail fad is over.” On eBay
Beanie volume had continued to surge; on May 9, 1999, there were more than
seventy-nine thousand items listed in its beanbag plush category—triple-digit
growth over the past couple of years that was rapidly outpacing the growth in

growth over the past couple of years that was rapidly outpacing the growth in
sales of Beanies on the primary market. At last there were more sellers than
buyers. The strategy at Ty headquarters was basically this: keep some Beanies in
limited supply to help foment the secondary market, then make money by
overproducing other ones in the hope that the stories spread by the rare pieces
will lift demand for the entire line. When the overproduced pieces were retired,
they still lingered on shelves at $5 each. The collectors and promoters noticed it,
and they weren’t happy.
Mary Beth Sobolewski wrote in the May issue of her Bean Bag World
Monthly, “On a recent trip, I noticed an overabundance of Bruno, Snort, and
Ants packed into the O’Hare International Airport’s 30 W.H. Smith gift stores. I
returned four days later and saw the same shelves overflowing with the same
retired Beanies. It’s quite ironic that not too long ago, one would feel
exceptionally blessed to find a Beanie retired months before just sitting on a
shelf.” Claudia Dunne, one of the first collectors trading Beanies online before
they were a national craze, now blames the oversupply of commons in 1999 for
the end of the craze: “I don’t know why [Warner] decided to flood the market
and kill it. Instead of limiting the number like he did before, [he was] putting out
hundreds in every store of the same one.” The third McDonald’s promotion,
which ran from May 21 to June 18, 1999, was something of a flop. “[T]he lines
were easily manageable, and in many cases there were no lines,” reported Beanie
Mania.
By August the tone of the mavens had become frantic. Sobolewski wrote,
“[R]etirement does not necessarily mean great investment potential anymore; it
appears that most Ty items are now overproduced by the time they reach the
retirement stage.” In the September 1999 issue of her magazine, Sobolewski
followed up with, “Ty Warner, if you are listening, there is one thing that
collectors want to tell you. There are simply too many Beanie Babies on store
shelves everywhere!” Collectors had previously lamented shortages and price
gouging, but now, desperate to keep the craze going and maintain the value of
the collections they’d already built, they were demanding that Warner curb
production to stoke demand.
Warner’s main goal at the time was planning his company for life after
Beanie Babies, which constituted around 90 percent of his sales. In the late
1990s mom-and-pop retailers were struggling: big-box stores accounted for
nearly all the growth in retailing, and for many small gift and toy stores, the
Beanie craze was a lifeline. Warner knew that and took advantage of it. “Your
mission is to use your talents and take everything that we offer you into your

accounts and make Ty the dominant (if not only) plush vendor in your territory,”
the handbook provided to all salespeople admonished. The salespeople were told
that their goal was to “eliminate the need for competition.”
“Ty Warner totally believed that every store should have a minimum order
of every single plush he sold,” says Irene Plummer, a former sales rep for the
company. “And if you didn’t, you’d better have a darn good excuse why not.”
The policy of leaning hard on retailers to stock non-hit items was not unique to
Ty; executives from other companies describe similar antics surrounding other
such products. It was, as Patricia Roche puts it, about “survival”—and a
recognition that the mania would not last forever. However, Ty seemed to take
the pushing of unpopular items to heights most manufacturers did not. A
Connecticut toy store owner told the Los Angeles Times about a visit he’d
received from a Ty Inc. regional manager. They went to lunch together and the
manager congratulated him on the volume of Beanie Babies he was moving.
Then the manager informed him that if he wanted to continue receiving
shipments of Beanies, he should place a $10,000 order for some of the
company’s less-coveted product lines. “I felt like the Mafia was leaning on me,”
the toy store owner told the reporter—but he placed the order for fear of losing
his cash cow.
While his sales force was pushing retailers for orders to diversify away from
Beanie Babies, Warner was also diversifying his assets. On March 16, 1999, he
acquired the Four Seasons Hotel in New York City for $275 million and started
to retreat from his day-to-day role at Ty Inc. to manage an $86 million
renovation. By that point, Warner was unwilling to listen to anyone about
anything, Faith McGowan recalls. Faith suggested that he might want to find
someone who could teach him the basics of the hotel business, and Ty responded
with hostility. He owned a hotel, and that made him an expert.
The New Yorker ran a story, “Beanie Babies Take East Fifty-seventh Street.”
I. M. Pei, the hotel’s architect, noted that he’d used the same French limestone at
the Four Seasons that he’d used in his work on the Louvre. “I’ve never met
them, and they’ve not paid me any visit,” he said of Warner. “I guess they’ll
keep it nice. My guess is they will. Since the room rates are so high.” Asked
about the possibility of Beanie giveaways to be included with the rooms, which
cost $600 per night, Pei was quiet and then replied, “I hope not.” Perhaps in
response to that interview, Warner introduced Issy the Bear, named for Four
Seasons founder Isadore Sharp, as a Four Seasons New York exclusive Beanie
Baby.
At Ty Inc ’s annual picnic held on September 12 1999 at the Oak Brook

At Ty Inc. s annual picnic, held on September 12, 1999, at the Oak Brook
Polo Club, Warner gave his employees Billionaire 2—the second bear
celebrating a year of $1 billion in sales and stronger profitability than his
entrenched competitors. The poem was cocky: “Ty is the company that can’t be
beat/Mattel and Hasbro can take a back seat/We did it again and it was fun/In the
toy biz, we’re #1.” Beanie dealers camped out near the picnic, cash in hand,
ready to pay thousands for the bears that would come with an impeccable
provenance. The authenticators were there alongside the dealers, ready to slap
their seals of approval on the Beanies that were selling for $5,000 each online
the following day.
Even as Warner turned down interviews and cultivated a mysterious image,
he still wanted to make sure everyone knew that the “Ty” in Ty Inc. was Ty
Warner. Beginning in 1999, Ty issued an annual Signature Bear with a heart on
its chest featuring a sewn facsimile of his signature. As Patricia Roche had put it,
he wanted “everyone talking about him without knowing anything.”
Patricia and Ty continued to bicker constantly, as they had for the previous
fifteen years. But, for now at least, Warner was also making Patricia Roche rich.
Running the company’s UK operations had landed her on a list of the
highest-paid female executives in England. In the first six months of operation,
beginning in January 1996, Ty UK ran up $2.8 million in sales. Sales for the last
six months of the year came in at $4.2 million; 1998 brought in $47 million; and
in 1999 Roche did $67 million in sales. Warner waxed enthusiastic about her
success to everyone he knew, although she says she found his praise
condescending. She still asked him for advice now and then—especially about
what to do with the piles of money that were flowing in. “Whatever you do,” he
told her, “don’t go offshore with it. You’ll regret it.”
In Canada Bill Harlow had seen similar growth. When he’d signed on with
Ty Inc. in 1992, his pie-in-the-sky dream was to sell more than Gund—which, at
$10 million in sales, was the top plush brand in Canada. Starting from nothing,
Harlow had built to $2.3 million in sales in 1996. Sales in 1997 went up to $23
million, and 1998’s total was $55 million. In 1999, a year when Ty Inc.’s sales
fell 25 percent, Harlow pulled in $83 million—his best year yet, and more than
eight times the sales of what had been the country’s longtime plush leader.
Warner knew that things were coming to an end. He had always said that as
long as kids were fighting over Beanie Babies his business would be fine, but
now there were enough Beanies being shipped to eliminate the need for fighting
—and it was only adults who cared about Beanie Babies anymore anyway.

Speculative bubbles rely on constant upward movement; once the
momentum slows, the bubble collapses. By 1999 every single person who could
become a Beanie Baby collector already was one. With no prospects for an
influx of increased demand, prices stagnated because there was nothing else for
them to do. Once casual collectors could no longer count on quick price
appreciation on recently retired pieces, they dropped out—and then prices fell as
the market contracted, driving out still more collectors. “How did you go
bankrupt?” Mike Campbell is asked in Ernest Hemingway’s The Sun Also Rises.
Campbell replies, “Two ways. . . . Gradually and then suddenly.” So it is with
bubbles: a pause in a market that relied on momentum had led to an irreversible
slide, as the lack of continued growth helped the public to come to its senses—
slowly at first and then suddenly.
Collectors held out hope that smaller production runs on some new pieces
and quicker retirements might reignite the mania, but Warner had other plans.
First he called Faith McGowan, whose relationship with Warner was in the late
stages of its bitter end, and money—and a dispute about how much she’d
contributed to the business—was at the heart of their conflict. “All you did was
pick colors!” Ty screamed at her once, but Faith always believed that she played
a pivotal role in the business—a claim others at the company dispute.
Illinois was not a palimony state, she had no employment agreement with
the company, and while a lawyer told her she could pursue a quantum meruit
lawsuit—a claim for reasonable compensation even without a formal agreement
—it would be an uphill battle and also mean the end of her relationship with the
man she loved. Warner had told her that they would get married “when the time
is right,” but the time never seemed to be right. McGowan’s desire to have some
assets in her name further damaged their relationship. “You’re a bitch!” he once
screamed at her. “You’re not getting a dime from me!” However, with his
biggest publicity stunt ever in the pipeline, she was still the first person he
called.
“Look, I’ve designed a black bear with gold fireworks on its chest, and I
need you to give it a name and write a poem for it,” he said. “This will be the
last Beanie Baby.”
“Why?” she asked, not understanding. “I was almost afraid of him at that
point,” remembers McGowan.
When Warner talked to Patricia Roche, the conversation was equally abrupt.
“We’re shutting it down,” he told her.
“What do you mean, ‘We’re shutting it down’?” she replied.
“I’m not going to do Beanies anymore We’re going to do Beanie Kids ”

I m not going to do Beanies anymore. We re going to do Beanie Kids.
This was to be a line of Cabbage Patch Kids–like plush toddlers that Ty was
planning to release in January 2000.
“He believed his own publicity,” Roche says slowly now, enunciating every
syllable at the memory of the conversation. “He thought he controlled it.”
Warner was determined to assert his power over the market that everyone around
him could see was running and then stopping of its own momentum. “He
thought he would retire Beanie Babies and come out with a new line.”
“Ty, they’re ugly,” she told him at the mention of the Beanie Kids.
Warner’s previously exacting standards of quality, however, seemed to have
disappeared. “They’ll buy it, Patricia!” he told her, excitement in his voice. “I
could put the Ty heart on manure and they’d buy it!”
Just as he had adamantly insisted that he was the designer on pieces he’d
pilfered from competitors, Warner seemed genuinely to believe that he had been
solely responsible for the mania that surrounded Beanie Babies. He seemed to
think that he could end it at will and then duplicate it with a new line. In her
unpublished memoir, McGowan describes how Warner’s personality was
changed by his success: “Ty began to believe that he was a genius, and that
every idea he had was brilliant. . . . [A]fter the Beanie mania had produced huge
financial results, he focused on the money rather than the people.”
When anyone disagreed with him, his response was: “Who’s the billionaire
here? I am!” When he first appeared on the 1999 Forbes list of the four hundred
richest Americans, he gave a copy of the magazine to every employee, a gesture
McGowan thought tacky. He also handed out copies of a motivational
management book written by Jack Welch. He’d done that, he conceded to
McGowan, because he wanted his employees to see him as Welch-like.
McGowan thought about Warner’s idea for a last Beanie Baby, and they
went back and forth with possibilities. She puzzled over names: Fini, Ending,
Midnight, Forever, Bye, or possibly Never. Finally, Warner settled on The End,
and Faith suggested a poem:
Are they a fad, were they a trend?
A way to show love to a friend
Wishes for happiness, Ty continues to send
From the beginning to whenever . . . The End
A few weeks later, back at his house in Oak Brook, Warner startled
McGowan when she came out of the bathroom: he’d changed his plan for getting

McGowan when she came out of the bathroom: he d changed his plan for getting
rid of Beanie Babies (perhaps after taking note of the tepid interest in Beanie
Kids from retailers who’d seen the prototypes).
“Faith, I have a good idea,” he said. “First I’m going to retire all the Beanie
Babies. Then we can hold an election on the Web site and let everyone vote on
whether people will want us to bring them back. Of course, millions of people
will and then we can introduce our new Millennium Beanie Baby line in January
2000.” Faith told him it was a stupid idea; so did Patricia Roche and others.
They told him it would come across as an obvious gimmick, that people
wouldn’t fall for it, and that it would make him look manipulative and desperate.
While he was planning a new-millennium end to Beanie Babies, Warner
capitulated in his battle with McGowan and gave her some of the money she’d
asked for. During their time together Warner had gone from small-time toy
mogul to billionaire. “The Deal,” as the two called it, left McGowan with about
$6 million—mostly tied up in a Santa Barbara mansion he signed over to her. “It
was like pulling teeth . . . to even get that,” remembers a friend of McGowan’s.
What Faith didn’t realize was that the $6 million gift was Ty’s way of marking
the end of their relationship.
On Tuesday, August 31, 1999, Ty.com posted a list of new Beanie Babies,
followed by a cryptic announcement: “VERY IMPORTANT NOTICE: On
December 31, 1999—11:59 p.m. (CST) All Beanies will be retired . . . including
the above!” One of the new releases was The End—the black bear with
fireworks on his chest and a hangtag featuring this poem:
All good things come to an end
It’s been fun for everyone
Peace and hope are never gone
Love you all and say, “So long!”

24

Lights Out
Traffic to the site soared, and the media pounced. Ty Warner declined to offer
any comment, and bidding activity shot up 75 percent in one day on the leading
Beanie-only auction site. Reporters who tracked down Ty Inc. employees turned
up no answers; customer-service representatives told them that they had found
out about the mass retirement half an hour before it went live on Ty.com. Annie
Nickels, Warner’s secretary, told the Atlanta Journal-Constitution that “the news
flash is what it was. We have nothing further to add to it.” Michael Kanzler, then
Ty Inc.’s CFO, told the Wall Street Journal that “what we have on the web site
is all the information we’re prepared to give out.” Stores reported a rush of sales,
and the announcement of The End Bear sparked a frenzy of its own for a Beanie
that was current but still nearly impossible to find.
“It has been crazy to say the least,” Dee McKnight, assistant manager at
Toys Unique in Fort Worth, Texas, told a reporter. “It almost makes you think of
the runs on the banks in the 1920s. Most people, honest to goodness, are in a
panic.” On October 18, the cartoon feature Nancy parodied the publicity stunt
with a strip featuring a girl pondering a school assignment to write a persuasive
letter about a topic of historical significance: “Dear Mr. Ty, You can NOT stop
making Beanie Babies!” she writes.
Beanie dealer Brian Wallos told the Chicago Sun-Times, “Our whole
business has increased since the Ty announcement, and all Ty and plush
products are picking up.” By then, however, Wallos was putting on a brave face.
Wholesalers were underpricing him at shows, and he complained to other dealers
that he could never sell his inventory for what he’d paid for it. Every day the
spread between his costs and current values was widening. Dealers at first
blamed the new show attendees who, armed with bags of inventory, were driving
down prices—but it quickly became clear that the game was over. Beanie Babies
had spent close to three years defying all rules of intrinsic value, and those who
hadn’t realized it would end were about to give back most of the profits they’d
made.
In the past Warner had passed on the short-term philosophy that most
entrepreneurs embraced. He had turned down massive orders from chain
retailers because he knew that having Beanie Babies in bins would kill the

retailers because he knew that having Beanie Babies in bins would kill the
demand. He had turned down licensing opportunities that guaranteed huge
checks because he didn’t want to prostitute his brand. And he never wavered
from the $2.50 wholesale price even as retailers were gouging shoppers.
The announcement seemed out of character. Bob Ricciardi, who had left the
company by then, followed it through the media with puzzlement. He told me he
thought it seemed like trying to turn a battleship in the Panama Canal. If Warner
wanted to stoke demand for styles that were in oversupply, Ricciardi thought,
there were ways to do that; collectibles manufacturers had been thinking of
creative ways to manipulate consumers for decades. That’s what the industry
was: a giant manipulation. He might have tried releasing some limited-edition
Beanies or perhaps cutting back sales to lower-end stores. But a surprise online
announcement that on December 31 an entire product line would be completely
retired, including a bunch of Beanies introduced in the same post? That was a
new one.
On the other hand, Ty might just have been delusional. McGowan
remembers that Warner had recently begun taking a new antidepressant in the
weeks leading up to the retirement announcement. Between that and the looming
end of his relationship with Faith, he certainly had a lot on his mind. When the
announcement went out, McGowan remembers, Warner expected a throng of
reporters to descend on his headquarters. He put on a caramel-and-gold-colored
Armani suit jacket and rode to work in his Ferrari with the top down—adopting
the persona of the movie star he had once hoped to become. He strolled without
comment past the few local news trucks that had arrived. His executives and
lawyers had told him that he was the new P. T. Barnum, and Warner seemed to
have come under the sway of his own reputation—a personalized version of the
delusional bubble that had surrounded his product.
“I don’t know what he was trying to create. I think he was losing his mind,”
says McGowan.
Fellow giftware mogul Russ Berrie was watching, as he had throughout the
entire mania, with wistful memories of the millions he’d made during the troll
craze (which was similarly weird, but smaller and lacked a speculative
component). He told a reporter that he was skeptical. ”I would think that what
they might be saying is, OK, look, let’s call them something else . . . and let’s
make it in a little different size and let’s maybe use a little bit different material
and we’ll repeat the success of the Beanie Babies.” Retailers surveyed by
reporters also didn’t think much of the stunt. Store owner John Gagaoudakis told

one reporter that Ty Warner was “not going to stop making” toys: “He doesn’t
want to be in The Guinness Book of World Records under Stupid People.”
A poll on Mary Beth’s Web site found that more than half of collectors had
been inspired by the announcement to start selling off their collections. Fewer
than one-quarter of respondents said that the announcement had encouraged
them to buy Beanies. One-eighth of respondents clicked on the option “Stop
collecting—this is just too much.”
Analyst Sean McGowan seemed to take the announcement at face value:
“With any other company I would expect this is nothing more than a clever or
perhaps even cynical ploy to artificially create debate over a new product launch.
But very much of what Ty has done and achieved with Beanie Babies has been
unorthodox and unprecedented, including no TV advertising. I would expect
they would have some new Beanie Baby product on the market in early 2000
and it will be sufficiently different from what they’ve had in the past so it won’t
look so cynical.”
Advertising Age wrote that the announcement was “over the top and smacks
of the desperation of a company whose star product is about to be obliterated by
the Pokémon craze. The lack of follow-up information of any kind resulted in a
flood of media exposure but showed a complete lack of respect for consumers
who have already been manipulated by artificial scarcity and other tricks of the
trade.”
The discontinuation announcement stimulated one last run on stores,
goosing sales of some of the styles that had been in plentiful supply and getting
the national media focused on Beanie Babies once again. The problem was that
while before everything looked to have happened organically—and in many
ways had happened organically—this was an extremely transparent market
manipulation. It couldn’t possibly last. On December 25, 1999, Warner, as
planned, reversed course with a posting on Ty.com: “After much thought, I am
willing to put the fate of Beanie Babies in your hands,” he wrote. “You make the
decision. You have inspired the Beanie Babies line through your devotion to
them.”
Warner announced a forty-eight-hour period during which people could call
in and pay fifty cents to vote on whether Beanie Babies should be continued,
with the proceeds going to the Elizabeth Glaser Pediatric AIDS Foundation—
although the question of what kind of psycho would spend fifty cents to vote to
discontinue a stuffed animal was left unanswered. Predictably, in a vote that
ended on January 2, 2000, at 6:00 a.m. Central Time, 91 percent of the reported
209 763 votes cast went in favor of more Beanie Babies Ty Inc announced that

209,763 votes cast went in favor of more Beanie Babies. Ty Inc. announced that
it would contribute three times the amount raised by voters to the charity.
McGowan says that the actual number of votes cast was closer to one-tenth the
number Warner reported and that the whole stunt was a flop.
The announcement that Beanie Babies were coming back barely made a
ripple. The media had gotten bored with Ty and his Beanie Babies. Worse,
during the nearly four months when no new Beanie Babies were released, prices
and sales did not rise—other than that momentary, media-driven blip. Former Ty
rep Irene Plummer pegs the end of the Beanie bubble to the day Warner
announced the end of Beanie Babies.
“In that three and a half months that there were no new Beanie Babies, all
these people that had been buying all of a sudden were thinking, Oh my God,
look at how much money I was spending on Beanie Babies,” Plummer says.
“When he announced that he was shutting them off, the value did not escalate.
They started thinking, Whoa, maybe I’m not thinking right on this. And so sales
didn’t go back up, never went back up. Suddenly, every single month, you could
see the sales going further and further down.” Within less than a year Plummer’s
$250,000-per-year sales job was no longer bringing in a living wage.
Nearly all of the Beanie collectors, gurus, dealers, and Ty employees say the
craze died with the announcement that all Beanie Babies would be retired, and
chronologically that’s true. Yet few of the participants seem able to acknowledge
the inherent time limit on a speculative episode. That’s always what happens
after a mania ends. There is some cause that everyone points to (although few
are as clearly delineated as the Beanie bubble was), and the intrinsic
impermanence is cast aside.
As John Kenneth Galbraith explains in A Short History of Financial
Euphoria, “[I]n the aftermath of speculation, the reality will be all but
ignored. . . . So there is a need to find some cause for the crash, however
farfetched, that is external to the market itself. Or some abuse of the market that
has inhibited its normal performance.” The same capacity for delusion that
fueled the bubble at its height allowed its participants both to maintain their self-
esteem after it was over and fail to learn anything from it. Few of the craze’s
acolytes acknowledge its insanity even in hindsight. If the mass retirement
announcement just had not happened, they all seem to believe, the Beanie craze
might still be on.
Ty Inc. announced the release of 71 products on January 5, 2000: 21 Ty
Classics, 12 Attic Treasures, 6 Baby Ty pastel animals, and 31 Beanie Buddies.
On January 8, 2000, the Beanie Kids were unveiled—and Mary Beth’s

speculated that they would be “undoubtedly . . . attractive as collectibles.”
Instead they were the most spectacular flop of Ty’s career. Kids didn’t like them,
collectors didn’t care, and, for the first time anyone could remember, Warner’s
instincts about what people would buy had cost him money. They had weird
stitching on the faces, and unfortunate hair placement gave them a receded look
—the appearance of baby-faced Joe Biden rag dolls. Shortly after their release
and likely in response to poor sales, the company sent a memo to retailers urging
them to carefully groom and style the Beanie Kids’ hair prior to display. “Want
to sell more Beanie Kids? Make sure they’re having a good hair day!” It didn’t
work.
On March 1, 2000, Ty introduced twenty new Beanie Babies, with some of
the best detail and most varied fabrics in the company’s history. However, by
that point there were already several hundred Beanies in circulation, and some of
the animals were at odds with the company’s history of cuddly: Swoop the
Pterodactyl, Wiggly the Octopus, Scurry the Beetle, and Glow the Lightning
Bug. Also in 2000, Ty introduced the Zodiac Beanie Babies—a collection of
twelve brilliantly colorful pieces, each representing an animal from the Chinese
zodiac. The line was promoted with billboards in major cities—the company’s
first nontrade advertising ever—but failed to ignite much of a buzz, even though
these Beanies were more aesthetically pleasing than all but a few of the ones
from the craze’s height.
Even Mary Beth’s Bean Bag World Monthly had to concede that the Beanie
investment craze had passed. In February 2000, just a month after the
announcement that Beanies were to continue, the magazine reported, “The
Beanie Baby market has softened. . . . Most Beanies are selling for $5. Some
large discount chains have purchased newer retired Beanies on the secondary
market and are reselling them for as low as $3.99 each or three for $10.”
On November 25, 2000, Ty Inc. noted on its Web site that retired Beanie
Babies were showing up in chain dollar stores. Ty had nothing to do with the
sales; the dealers and speculators who’d been hoarding plush had finally
capitulated. Ty suggested that the Beanies might be counterfeit or sold by a
charitable group that had received a donation from the company. It didn’t really
matter, though: once Beanie Babies were in Dollar Tree, the fantasy was gone.
Just as Ty’s distribution exclusively through gift shops and high-end toy stores
had enabled Beanie Babies to become a collectible, their arrival at discounters
announced the end.
Of the remaining collectors, Mary Beth’s noted, “Collecting more for fun

and satisfaction than investment potential, they are frustrated because of the
oversupply of newer retired Beanie Babies on the market. Now they can walk
into any gift store and have their pick of 20 or more retired Beanie styles for $5
each. Although children can again afford to buy the majority of Beanies with
their allowance money, their interest now lies elsewhere. . . . The problem is
over-abundance. Many of the dealers from 1998 are now ‘dumping’ their
inventory, causing prices to plummet. Beanie collecting has waned
significantly.”
The market for truly rare pieces—the royal blue Peanut the Elephant,
Humphrey the Camel, and the early bears—had evaporated. The original brown
teddy that had sold reliably for $3,500 a year earlier was by mid-2000 said to be
worth $1,800. Realistically though, there was almost no market left for the
scarcest Beanies.
In one of the more prescient market predictions in the history of children’s
picture books, The Berenstain Bears’ Mad, Mad, Mad Toy Craze was published
in March 1999—even as the craze was still mostly going strong. In the book
Brother and Sister, the two children, come running home and announce to Mama
and Papa Bear that they absolutely must have an advance on their allowances
because “if we don’t get it, Herb’s Hobby Shop is gonna run out” of Beary
Bubbies. Cousin Fred already had six of them, Lizzy had eight, and Queenie had
ten. Papa Bear gives the cubs the money, and he and Mama Bear reflect on how
silly it is that “otherwise sensible cubs can get pulled into any silly thing that
comes along.” The next day, after the cubs show the Beary Bubbies to their
parents, Mama Bear reads an article in the paper about a man who had acquired
a bunch of Bubbies before they were popular and sold his collection for a lot of
money. Pretty soon, Papa Bear is driving all over in search of the Beary Bubbies
that seem like a path to riches.
“Of course, not many things are forever—and Beary Bubbies certainly
weren’t,” the book explains. “Pretty soon, Beary Bubbies were everywhere.
They came in Krinkly Krumbles cereal boxes. You could get them with a Krazy
Meal at the Burger Bear. After a while, just about everybody in Bear Country
had so many Beary Bubbies that they didn’t know what to do with them.
“All you could do was look at them—except they had a way of looking back
at you and making you think about all the money you had spent on them. The
only thing you could really do with them is brag about how many you had. And
no matter how many you had, there was always somebody who had more.”
The book reads like most Berenstain Bears books—light and fun with great,
cartoony illustrations
but according to several Amazon reviewers who gave it

cartoony illustrations—but according to several Amazon reviewers who gave it
some of the worst reviews of any title in the series, there was one problem with
it. “True to life story but where’s the ending?” went one review. “The story is
true to the Beanie Baby craze but there is no solution or even an understanding
at the end. My children and myself were for the first time truly confused and
disappointed with an ending of a Berenstain Bear book.”
The critics had a point. The last page features Mama, Papa, Sister, and
Brother sitting in the living room surrounded by dozens of Beary Bubbies.
“Now, what do you suppose that was all about?” Papa Bear asks.
“I don’t really know,” says Brother Bear.

25

Limping into the New Millennium
In the early 2000s Warner was forced to pump his own money back into the
business as sales declined by more than 90 percent from the boom years.
McGowan’s relationship with Warner was mostly over after she’d moved out.
After she’d taken some of the furniture from her daughters’ bedrooms, Ty
ordered exact reproductions of the pieces made in Europe. But Ty and Faith still
talked occasionally. She asked him how the business was doing. “It’s below a
hundred million, isn’t it Ty?” He wouldn’t answer.
At first he tried to win back the sense of scarcity by ceasing sales to florists
and some mall-based stores. That was a lost cause. The mom-and-pop retailers
Warner had courted in his early years and mistreated during the boom started
ordering plush from other manufacturers—if they were able to stay in business at
all without the flow of Beanie money. In 2004, Warner claimed losses of more
than $39 million on his tax return. The oversupply, both to retailers who had
overordered during the good days and collectors who had stocked up on what
they thought was an investment, was filtering back into the marketplace through
jobbers. Web sites like BuyingBeanies.com sprang up to buy pieces at a flat rate,
no price guide needed: forty cents each. That site sells them to carnies, claw
machine operators, and retailers Ty would never have imagined selling to in the
halcyon days. The recirculated Beanies land in grocery stores, drugstores,
convenience stores, and, worst of all, big-box discounters. Once they started
turning up there, the exclusive aura Ty had worked so hard to cultivate was
gone. Ty started selling to chain stores, too. Now you can buy newly released
Beanie Babies at CVS, and Ty has created pieces available only at Walgreens.
As sales collapsed Warner focused on his hotel investments. A year after
buying the Four Seasons in New York, he bought the Biltmore Santa Barbara
and the Coral Casino Beach and Cabana Club for a combined $150 million. In
September 2000 he bought the San Ysidro Ranch, where John and Jackie
Kennedy honeymooned, for a reported $30 million. In June 2003 he added the
Sandpiper Golf Course in Goleta for $25 million. In 2004 he acquired the Kona
Village Resort on Hawaii’s Big Island for $60 million and the Montecito
Country Club for $40 million, followed by a $100 million deal for the resort Las
Ventanas al Paraiso in Los Cabos Mexico
along with several multimillion

Ventanas al Paraiso in Los Cabos, Mexico—along with several multimillion-
dollar homes. He reportedly offered $100 million for enigmatic heiress Huguette
Clark’s empty Santa Barbara mansion but was rebuffed.
H&S Media, the company behind Mary Beth’s Bean Bag World Monthly,
filed for bankruptcy in mid-2001, and the magazine ceased publication. In 2002,
perhaps recognizing the value of courting the expert whose magazine he’d once
sued, Warner partnered with Sobolewski to produce a collector magazine. Mary
Beth’s Beanies & More ran less than a hundred pages, with emphasis on new Ty
products, Beanie-related crafts and activities, and generalist coverage of other
collectibles. The market analysis and predictions, once the centerpiece of any
Beanie publication, were reduced to a few pages at the back. Even with Beanies
selling (and mostly not selling) at yard sales and flea markets for fifty cents
each, Warner wouldn’t allow any of them to be valued at less than $5 to $7. The
magazine lasted less than two years as the collector’s market continued to
shrivel.
_______
The Beanie experts who’d made careers out of the craze moved on to other
things. Peggy Gallagher became a special-education teacher and is currently
trying to sell a handbook for managing children with autism. Becky Phillips
went into real estate as an agent for Coldwell Banker in Naperville, Illinois.
Becky Estenssoro has tried a few entrepreneurial ventures—so far without the
success that Beanie Babies brought her. Mary Beth Sobolewski went back to
being a homemaker; her son Dave is a star basketball player at Northwestern, but
occasionally hecklers for opposing teams bring up his mother and her starring
role in the Beanie craze. “[I’m] glad that’s the biggest dirt they could dig up on
him,” she told me. Most of the women, who at one time spoke daily about the
gyrating market, haven’t seen each other in years.
Brian Wallos, now in his midforties, was probably the biggest and most
successful of the secondary-market dealers. He gave back a large chunk of his
profits in the postcrash years, and plowed what he had left into launching Bench
Warmer International, a line of trading cards featuring porn stars. He says he
modeled the marketing behind the line after Warner’s success with Beanie
Babies. He figured he’d either make a comparable fortune or be broke in two
years. Ten years into the line, Wallos is somewhere in between. He’s his
company’s only full-time employee, but he’s eking out a living. He lives in Los

Angeles and is working on a memoir on his career in the collectibles industry,
along with a screenplay about baseball cards. In 2011 he appeared on Bravo’s
The Millionaire Matchmaker—but, like most things on reality TV, that
millionaire label doesn’t exactly fit with the reality of Wallos’s life.
Ty’s sales reps who became millionaires mostly blew through the money on
cars, boats, and Internet stocks—profiting from a bubble while oblivious to its
inability to last. In the nearly fifteen years since the craze ended, few have come
close to the incomes they achieved then. “I look at most people now, and I think
we had a hard time landing on our feet afterwards,” remembers one former Ty
salesperson who, at her peak in her midtwenties, earned more than $500,000 in a
single year.
_______
Warner’s girlfriend in recent years has been a woman nearly a decade his senior.
It’s difficult to find anyone with anything nice to say about her. A former
finance executive refers to her as “not a nice person.” Faith McGowan says she
has a “little weasel face,” and Patricia Roche says she “looks at you like you’re
something she just peeled off the bottom of her shoe.” Warner’s sister thinks she
must be “blackmailing him with something.” Those who have been close to
them say that Warner mostly just sits quietly while she berates him over things
like reading the newspaper during breakfast. “She has Ty where Ty had
everyone else,” explains Roche.
She had some involvement in the business. A former designer for American
Greetings, she helped Ty create an old-fashioned- looking doll named Angeline.
The doll came with a small children’s book that told the story of an angel with
small wings who, after several tries at making her wings look bigger, realizes
that she’s beautiful just the way she is. The Angeline doll was released in March
2005, and word came down from the top: sell it hard. “When I took it out to the
retailers everybody hated it,” one former sales rep remembers. “No one wanted
to buy it.” The doll had a retail price of $7.99, making it 60 percent more
expensive than the similarly sized and far cuter Beanie Babies line, in an era
when gift shop buyers were focused on value. That didn’t matter. All Ty reps
were told to sell at least a $100 order of Angeline to all of their accounts or face
termination.
“There were several months there where there was incredible pressure,” one
rep remembers. “The economy was bad, and retailers were struggling, and you

wanted to help them. To push Angeline when you knew it was not going to sell
because it already was not selling in the other stores . . . I chose to leave at that
time.”
A few months later, Angeline went away quietly, without any mass firings.
The company no longer had a hot product it could use to beat retailers into
ordering stuff they didn’t want, and eventually Warner realized that. Huge piles
of Angelines were donated to charity.
Ty tried to stabilize sales with new lines. The Ty Girlz series, released in
2007, was modeled after the Bratz fashion doll craze. He discontinued them in
2012. In February 2008, by which time Ganz had taken over the plush industry
with the Web-interactive Webkinz line, Ty unveiled the Beanie Babies 2.0 line
—a copycat product with an online component. “My intention was to take the
original concept of Beanie Babies and reintroduce it to a new generation of
children,” he told the New York Times. However, the product was too late and
too “me-too.” Warner, who knew nothing about technology, micromanaged the
Web developers, and Beanie Babies 2.0 never achieved the functionality of
Webkinz. They sold poorly and in May 2009, Ty quietly canned the line and
accompanying Web site and reverted to the original Beanie Babies.
Following the 2008 presidential election, Ty captured the media’s attention
again ever so briefly—and an inflated secondary market for his products
reemerged. On January 1, 2009, two new dolls were added to the Ty Girlz line:
Marvelous Malia and Sweet Sasha, both of which were produced without
approval from the First Family. Scott Wehrs, the company’s president and COO,
was reportedly adamantly opposed to the idea and thought it would backfire
badly. He left Ty Inc. in January 2009; sources say that the feud over the Sasha
and Malia Ty Girlz might have led to the end of his nearly eleven-year run at the
company.
The publicity stunt did backfire—at least for public relations.
A spokesman for the First Lady commented, “We believe it is inappropriate
to use young private citizens for marketing purposes,” even as Warner’s
spokesperson, Tania Lundeen—the company’s VP of sales and my sole official
point of contact with Ty Inc.—implausibly refused even to acknowledge that the
dolls were named after the president’s daughters. “Information concerning the
development of our products and how we come up with names, how we select
them, how we trademark—that’s considered as proprietary. I can’t go any
further with that question,” she told CNN.
Less than a month after their release, the dolls were renamed Sweet Sydney
and Marvelous Mariah “in deference to the wishes of the first family ” Warner

and Marvelous Mariah in deference to the wishes of the first family,  Warner
himself said in a statement. Warner then announced that all proceeds from the
dolls were to be donated to the Andre Agassi Foundation for Education. The
original, opportunistically named dolls were soon selling for $200 each on eBay
—twenty times their retail price.
Over the past few years the rise and rebirth of Ty Inc. has continued, but it’s
a very different company. In its prime Warner resisted the advice of executives
who told him that there was money to be made as a licensee for leading
entertainment brands. With Ty’s brand power and distribution, they told him, he
could make a ton of money, even after paying out the royalties, by producing
branded plush based on cartoon characters, movies, and sports teams. Warner
refused. Part of it was that he didn’t want to split the money with another
company when he thought he could sell just as many beanbag animals on his
own; but he also wasn’t much interested in giving up creative control over his
plush toys. However, changes in the industry made it impossible for Warner to
carry on with his original business model at anything like the sales volume he
was accustomed to—and so licensing it was.
In 2004, Ty Inc. signed its first character licensing deal, which gave the
company the right to produce Garfield products—the cartoon cat that, twenty-
five years earlier, had launched Dakin into the most successful period of its
existence and precipitated the end of Warner’s career there. According to a
source with knowledge of Ty Inc.’s affairs, brands such as Disney and Hello
Kitty, along with professional baseball, hockey, football, and basketball teams,
and TV shows like SpongeBob SquarePants and Dora the Explorer now
contribute at least 40 percent of the company’s sales. Ty’s sales of around $60
million per year, according to an industry source, make it the most successful
plush company there is—but at a volume of less than 5 percent of its late-1990s
peak. Sales remain strong in Europe, with Ty Europe recording revenues of 11.2
million pounds (18.1 million U.S. dollars) for the year 2013.
Warner’s day-to-day involvement in Ty Inc. has varied in recent years, but it
now seems to be on an upswing. In 2006 he was spending about 80 percent of
his time in Santa Barbara, mostly involved in his hotel empire. Yet by 2009 at
least 75 percent of his focus was back in Chicago with the plush business. That
year, Ty introduced Beanie Boos—a line of beanbag plush similar in size to
Beanie Babies, but each animal in the collection features comically large eyes.
The company recently started announcing retirements for pieces online,
something it hadn’t done in years. Rare Beanie Boos retired just a couple of
years ago occasionally sell for hundreds of dollars on eBay, but they show no

signs of a transformation into a broader phenomenon. Ty.com no longer has an
interactive, community-building component. Although the company does sell its
animals directly to the consumer at Ty .com (a sore point with retailers and
something Ty Inc. never did during the glory days), the site is buggy and dated.
The Web designers have pushed for a redesign, but sources say that these days
Warner isn’t interested in making the site anything other than a place to buy
plush. The company that pioneered the use of the Internet to engage consumers
and encourage them to interact with one another has totally given up on that idea
at a time when it’s all most companies can think about. Lina Trivedi says that
looking at the Web site makes her “sad.” That is a common word among people
who were once a big part of Ty Inc. and the life of Ty Warner.

26

Faith’s Problem
After her split with Ty Warner at the turn of the millennium, Faith McGowan
sank into a depression that was followed by a desire for vengeance. Like
thousands of jilted lovers of public figures before her, McGowan’s bloodlust
took the form of a revenge memoir. In 2004 she and Robert Keck, an attorney
she knew through a friend, created a Web site with the header “Soon to Be
Released: Ty and the Beanie Stalk: Faith McGowan’s personal story of how she
and Ty Warner turned bean bags into billions and lost each other.” Their blurb
for the memoir, whose tone combined a Harlequin Romance novel with The
Wolf of Wall Street, read:
Faith, Warner’s power partner and lover, retained attorney/author
Robert Keck to write the inside story revealing how Warner’s personal
demons prevented him from ever marrying; how they made Beanies the
first great product sold through e-commerce; how work consumed them
and the avalanche of money changed them; and how, in the end, Warner
made the fatal mistake which killed the goose that laid the golden egg.
It’s all there in fascinating detail in Ty and the Beanie Stalk, a soon
to be released 300 page non-fiction book with 16 pages of personal
photos and personal handwritten letters. It is the writing and the
consummate blending of a business story and a love story which
distinguishes Ty and the Beanie Stalk.
They secured a literary agent but failed to attract a major publisher. Keck set
up a deal with a vanity publishing outfit, but McGowan recalls that he wanted
her to pay him a fee for negotiating it—and indemnify him from any legal
liability in the extremely likely event that Warner responded to the book’s
publication with a lawsuit.
That wouldn’t be necessary: when the announcement went up on their Web
site and buzz started building on the few remaining Beanie-collecting message
boards, Warner called her and they talked for ten hours. McGowan put the
manuscript in her closet and stopped talking to Robert Keck. By the time I met

McGowan in the summer of 2012, she was living in a $2,400 per month rental a
few miles from the home Warner bought her as part of their split. That home,
which is worth something like $5 million and owned free and clear, was rented
out; the proceeds finance McGowan’s living expenses. Any financial adviser
would have told her to sell it, but she couldn’t bear to. Once, while checking on
the house between tenants, she found a stuffed Ty cat the previous tenant had
found in a closet and perched on a mantel in the living room. She ran from the
house in tears.
McGowan, tall and lean and with somewhat unruly red hair, was friendly as
she shushed her two large dogs and finished making a meal-replacement
smoothie. Her home was a museum to her time with Ty Warner, and she seemed
to live in a state of suspended reality—surrounded by memories, waiting for the
day when Warner would come back to her, just as the most optimistic
speculators hope that Beanie Babies themselves will soon make a comeback.
The first thing I noticed upon entering was a built-in, glass-fronted bookcase
filled with Ty prototypes, early Ty cats, and a Steiff dog that Ty had bought her.
There was also Kaleidoscope the Cat—a beautiful rainbow-colored Beanie Baby
that Faith’s sister, at one time a creative director at Ty Inc., designed. Faith
showed me a photo of her then preteen daughters at the beach in the mid-1990s;
it was, she said, the first time they had been to Santa Barbara, where Ty was
having cheek implants removed.
The house and the money were nice, but it was clear that what McGowan
really wanted, more than a decade later, was Ty Warner. She’d had other
relationships since him but nothing serious. Faith and I drove around Santa
Barbara in her Jeep SUV and she showed me the homes and hotels Ty had built
and bought with the money he’d made when they were together. She showed me
the landscaping at his Biltmore hotel—which, she said, Warner was constantly
having ripped up. She made the connection between the landscaping and the
constant changes to Beanie Babies that had led, entirely accidentally, to the first
of the rare pieces. “Nothing is ever enough and nothing is ever good enough,”
she told me, “because his soul is empty.”
She cried several times, and after a few hours she told me that she couldn’t
talk about him any more in one day. The hardest part of having a relationship
with Warner end, Patricia Roche once told me, “is realizing that he didn’t care
about you—not even a little bit.” McGowan, Roche says, had never recognized
that her relationship with Warner hadn’t been the fairy tale she’d once thought it
was. Ten years after Faith last had any meaningful contact with him, she stayed
in Santa Barbara—with few friends and no family

in Santa Barbara
with few friends and no family.
Faith and I continued talking by phone regularly. A few months after we
first met, I was visiting my mother on Cape Cod and had given Faith the landline
number. I was out when she called; my mother answered. Faith seemed in no
hurry to get off the phone: she talked about her day, her plans to see Norah Jones
in concert, and the weather in Santa Barbara. My mother, a psychotherapist,
could tell that Faith was lonely. She thought about staying on and chatting with
her but didn’t.
In June 2013 Faith McGowan died suddenly.
Ty Warner was distraught over the news. He called his sister and described
their time together as the best years of his life. He told her that he had left
McGowan with plenty of money. Joy replied that for some people it wasn’t all
about money.
Faith’s daughters, Lauren and Jenna, tried to get in touch with Warner after
their mother’s death. However, they didn’t hear from him until he surprised them
with an appearance at her funeral. They’d remembered him as having been
paranoid; that was also their experience with his reemergence in their lives. He’d
been looking at Faith’s Facebook page, he explained, and was concerned about
the people she’d been associating with. He suspected foul play and told them
that he wanted to hire a private investigator. They declined the offer. A week
after the funeral, he invited Lauren and Jenna to his Oak Brook home for lunch.
“You know,” he said. “I should have married your mother.” “Don’t you ever say
that again!” Lauren screamed at him. Warner apologized.
His sister, Joy, posted this comment on the obituary the funeral home
posted: “Faith, I was so lucky to have met you and your beautiful daughters. Ty
knows you were the best thing in his life. I’m so sorry he threw all of you away.
But now his time is coming . . .”

27

Ty’s Problem
On September 18, 2013, Warner was charged with tax evasion related to a secret
Swiss bank account where he’d been holding more than $100 million—the
largest balance of any of the seventy taxpayers pursued by the government over
such accounts. The income the federal government alleged Warner “went to
great lengths to hide from his accountants and the IRS” was just over $3 million,
and the total taxes evaded amounted to less than $1 million—although the tax
loss for the entire period of conduct was far higher. Warner agreed to pay a
$53.5 million civil penalty and the government announced that he would plead
guilty at his arraignment in October. Federal sentencing guidelines called for
forty-six to fifty-seven months in federal prison.
Public reaction to Warner’s legal plight was swift and negative. It was also
intermingled with the memory of the Beanie Babies that hadn’t lived up to the
expectations for great value. Jimmy Fallon joked, “The Beanie Babies creator
owes $53 million for tax evasion. If he sells them all, he’ll just owe . . . $53
million.”
Faith McGowan had made vague reference to the account when I spoke with
her, suggesting that it had been part of Warner’s contingency plan—if things in
the United States were to somehow go bust with all his hotel deals, he had
squirreled away $100 million in judgment-proof wealth in Europe. When I called
Joy Warner to talk about it, the sixty-four-year-old was on lunch break at her
landscaping job. The account had been opened in 1996—the year, Joy
remembers, that Ty had reneged on his promise to build her a $100,000 house
because, he said, he couldn’t afford it.
Two days before Ty’s sentencing, I went to visit his sister for a second time
at her home in Camano Island, Washington. When I’d first called her, she’d
spoken negatively of “my famous brother,” dismissing him as selfish,
narcissistic, and obsessed with an opulent lifestyle that didn’t interest her. When
I’d first met her, Joy was preparing for a hip replacement surgery in a few weeks
—surgery that her brother had declined to help pay for, instead advising her to
turn to the seven children she’d raised with a former husband, none of whom
Warner had ever met. When she asked him for a $1,000 loan, he’d refused via
text message He’d helped her out briefly in the wake of her divorce more than a

text message. He d helped her out briefly in the wake of her divorce more than a
decade earlier, but for the most part Warner’s tremendous wealth has not eased
her struggles.
Joy has lived in the same home for twenty-seven years—with old carpets,
Native American tourist-grade art, two and a half acres of land, a National Rifle
Association sticker on the door, and the scent of the four dogs that live with her,
all of whom she adopted or rescued. There are also three horses, including two
miniature ponies. “This is the first time I’ve ever had mini horses because you
can’t ride ’em, you can’t do anything with them, but they needed a home, and I
probably have this sign SUCKER written on my head,” she says. Two of the
adopted dogs are blind. Recently, when one of the dogs had to be put down, Joy
brought the body home to show the other dogs where she was burying it.
Previously, when one of her dogs died, she had left the body at the vet’s—and
she says the other dogs spent months looking for him.
The house was a two-story building when she bought it, but Joy had it
downsized to reduce maintenance and give her time for gardening—putting her
at odds with the general trend of homeowners in America and even more at odds
with her brother’s penchant for the palatial. She works two jobs in patient care
and reflexology to complement the landscaping income, and she keeps the spare
bedroom in her house outfitted for patients. She says it’s easy for her to relax in
her “purple space” where she can meditate and that her greatest joy comes from
helping others relax and trust her. “People fall asleep when I’m working on
them,” she says. “And I can get their body balanced because they are that
relaxed.”
She showed me her father’s will, along with his letters to her and some
family photos—including an especially handsome one of Ty when he was in
high school. Then she told me more about the childhood in La Grange, Illinois,
that she’d like to forget.
Hal Warner began molesting his daughter in 1955 when Joy was six years
old. Ty, who knew nothing of the abuse, was eleven. When Hal was home, Joy
often ran away. When the police picked her up and asked why she ran away
(again), she told them—but they didn’t believe her. When she was nine, she told
her mother, who responded by disowning her. Georgia refused to speak to or
interact with the girl who was, as she saw it, sleeping with her husband. That
was the state of the household Ty and Joy lived in through high school. Decades
later, Hal apologized to Joy; he told her that molesting her had been his way of
resisting the need to cheat on his wife, who was unavailable. Joy once mentioned
that explanation to Ty, who was puzzled by it; “Dad cheated on Mom all the

time,” Joy says Ty told her.
In the middle of this family dynamic, Ty acted out in his own ways. During
his freshman year of high school, Joy says she followed him and his friends one
day and discovered a trove of televisions and stereos that she thought they must
have been stealing and selling. She told Hal. Terrified that his son would end up
in jail, Hal, over Georgia’s objections, dispatched Ty to St. John’s Northwestern
Military Academy in Delafield, Wisconsin. After Ty was dropped off at the train
station, his parents separated; the divorce was acrimonious. The legal battle
dragged on for more than a decade until their marriage was officially dissolved
on April 1, 1971.
St. John’s is an elite prep school offering military-style structure to students
who often come from wealthy families. Warner excelled: he was placed in
Company A, the group that comprised the biggest, strongest, most athletic boys.
The divisions ensured fairness in the intracompany tackle football games, which
were played without pads. Warner played tennis and basketball and participated
in the school’s Stars & Circle Club, an elite academic honor society. He
graduated with the rank of Fly Sergeant with five silver stars and stars in choir,
football, basketball, and baseball, where he was a memorably good defensive
center fielder.
Every hour of every day at St. John’s was tightly regimented, and the new
boy–old boy system exposed students to abuse from upperclassmen. For their
first three months at the school, students were new boys and, as one classmate
puts it, “completely stripped of all your authority and pride and arrogance and
everything.” They ran to all their meals and had their personal appearance
inspected by a squad leader three times a day. James Novak, Warner’s roommate
at St. John’s, remembers him as intelligent, popular, and preoccupied with
concerns about his skin. Warner often got up at 5:00 a.m. to play a round of golf,
rushing back to the dorms in time for morning reveille. Warner was an excellent
marcher with perfect posture—and he had a fondness for Chubby Checker’s fad
hit “The Twist.”
St. John’s sought to instill militaristic toughness in its students. As one
former cadet puts it, “They wanted you to be respectful to authority and to
women, and tough as hell.” He remembered changing the words to the cadences
they marched to. (“If I die on the Russian front, box me up with a Russian cunt!”
he bellowed into the phone when I asked him for an example.) Joy says Ty hated
the school and that he was bullied there. Former students remember hazing that
went beyond what would be tolerated today, and Joy recalls Ty calling home in
tears after he’d been knifed in a fight

tears after he d been knifed in a fight.
A spokesman for the school told People magazine that Warner has asked St.
Johns not to comment at all on his time there. One classmate who coordinates
the school’s reunions said that Warner “actually doesn’t want anything to do
with the school”—and said he knew the reason. But he declined to be more
specific.
“I’ve had contact with him three or four times. But he’s very elusive, very
standoffish,” says Gary Richert, St. John’s director of alumni relations.
In the fall of 1962, Warner entered Kalamazoo College, a private liberal arts
school with a freshman class of 250, and his only yearbook photo shows him
with a military-school crew cut, which makes him look more formal than any of
his classmates. He majored in theater, and the Kalamazoo College Index’s
December 7, 1962, edition includes a review of the student production of
Antigone. The critic praises Warner’s performance as Creon, the ruler of Thebes
who orders that Polynices’s corpse be left to rot and then commands that
Antigone be buried alive as punishment for defying him.
“A new face in the cast was that of Ty Warner, as Creon; with his lack of
previous theatre experience, he is to be complimented for his success,” the
review notes. “Playing a role very difficult to make live, because of the necessity
of acting Creon’s [sic] some fifty years, he is to be praised for his near and
sometimes completely successful acting. His voice was a bit tiring, but with
more work in the theatre he should improve and move to even more successful
accomplishments.”
Warner dropped out of college after one year and never returned. His sister
and one former classmate say he got a girl pregnant and brought her home to his
father. Joy says Hal paid the girl off and sent Ty packing. Warner seems to have
left Kalamazoo without a trace. As the school’s most successful former student
(but not graduate—a distinction that is awkward for the college’s marketing
purposes), he is the topic of conversation at every reunion, but no one seems to
remember much about him.
In a sentencing memorandum arguing for probation rather than
incarceration, Ty’s lawyers referred obliquely to these early years of his life as
“unhappy.” The details, however, were fictionalized. Just as Warner has always
told his life story, the memo neglected to mention that it had been Hal who got
Ty his first job in the toy industry. It referred to his childhood, which included
three years of private school, as “devoid of any educational advantages” and
attributed his decision to drop out of college to the difficulty he had in paying for
it. Ty’s sister, however, says their father paid for college. The horrors of Ty’s

childhood were, in his telling of it, mostly reduced to a tale of poverty—perhaps
the only bad thing that it wasn’t.
_______
In October 2013 Warner appeared in federal court in Chicago for his
arraignment. He wore a loose-fitting pin-striped suit. He sat in the front row,
talking quietly with his team of attorneys while he waited for his case to be
called. Outside the courtroom a PR person he’d hired to handle the reporters
seemed as uninformed as anyone else: he wasn’t sure whether Warner had a
girlfriend or wife; he had no kids as far he knew. The only thing he was certain
about was that Warner wouldn’t be available to answer questions.
As he stood before the bench, Warner seemed old and broken. His long,
styled hair had been recut in a more boyish style but its artificial coloring,
combined with his extremely visible plastic surgery and expensive tortoiseshell
glasses, made him appear meek. “He looks like he should be in a wax museum,”
someone whispered, according to a Chicago magazine story. He repeatedly
asked the judge to speak louder, citing his failing hearing. The judge explained
his right to a trial, and the gallery snickered when he said, “If you couldn’t
afford a lawyer, which I think doesn’t apply to you . . .”
Asked about his education, Warner described one year at Kalamazoo
College; when he was asked to explain what his crime was, he started by saying
that he had opened a Swiss bank account and hadn’t told anyone about it.
“I apologize for my conduct,” he said while crying. “I had great success with
my company, and I had so much to be thankful for.” (When I mentioned that
he’d cried to Patricia Roche, she said, “Did the jury stand up and applaud his
performance?” On Twitter, @philvettel joked that while tearfully pleading
guilty, “[Warner] also announced the release of Blubber, the repentant whale.”)
The judge cut him off with, “You’ll have a chance to bare your soul at
sentencing.” Warner agreed to reappear for sentencing in three months, and
when his lawyer explained that Ty’s business obligations required extensive
foreign travel, the prosecutor and the judge quickly agreed that he could keep his
passport. The prosecutor even volunteered that he wouldn’t require Warner to
report his travels to the court. Then it was over. Warner and his entourage
struggled past a throng of media to a waiting car. “Mr. Warner, was this just
about greed?” one local reporter asked.

28

Departures
When I first met Lina Trivedi, the college student who’d had the idea to put
Beanie Babies on the Internet in 1996, she was living modestly in Beaver Dam,
Wisconsin, with her two-and-a-half-year-old daughter. Trivedi shuffles
appointments with the twelve doctors it takes to treat the child’s illness: Goltz
syndrome, a rare skin condition that has cost her a leg and covered her body with
skin lesions. Older Beanie Babies are scattered throughout their apartment.
Sometimes Lina tells her daughter that Mommy wrote the poems, but she’s not
sure she believes her.
The Web development business she and her brother started when they left
Ty Inc. never got off the ground. She landed a short-term contract working on a
Web site for the rock band Mötley Crüe and did some work for the Spice Girls—
but the company quickly fell behind on its bills, and Trivedi was desperate.
A public records search shows nineteen liens and judgments against Trivedi
from creditors, including electric companies, Discover Bank, and several payday
lenders—most of it dating back to her failed start-up. In late 2001 she was
charged with a string of felonies. According to the indictment, the charges
stemmed from Trivedi’s having passed dozens of forged postal money orders—
made on a color printer—over a period of nine months, each in the amount of
$614.70. In a motion for a departure from sentencing guidelines, her attorney
argued that the crime had been committed as she tried to keep a failing business
afloat.
When Trivedi got out of jail, she was homeless. She went to the Chicago
Urban League in search of help finding a job. The caseworkers were skeptical
when Trivedi described her background: she claimed that she had great sales and
customer-service experience, was an experienced Web developer, and had
written the poems for all the Beanie Babies. She started working for the Urban
League, counseling less-skilled felons and helping with outreach and multimedia
projects. In her free time she sang and danced in Chicago clubs as part of a Euro-
trance group while wearing a monitoring ankle bracelet as part of her house
arrest. Sometimes she had to race home from clubs to avoid breaking curfew.
She neither contacted Warner during the bad times nor begrudged him the
money she never made “There probably were days that I would sort of

money she never made. There probably were days that I would sort of
daydream about what I would have done if I did get a small sliver of the pie,”
she says. “But you know, it was not meant for me to have.”
For all the creativity that came out of Ty Inc. and all that the people who
worked there learned, success at the company has rarely been a stepping-stone to
an illustrious career. For most people who worked at Ty, it seems, their time
there represented the peak of their earnings. These days, Trivedi supports herself
through freelance Web development work; a Google search for Lina Trivedi
mostly yields mug shots.
_______
By 2004 Bill Harlow was deeply in debt to Ty Inc. as a result of the failure of
the Beanie Kids line and the excess inventory he was choking on. One of Ty’s
executives came to visit. They discussed Ty Canada’s dwindling cash flow and
the trouble the company was having paying down its line of credit. “The ride on
Ty’s coattails is over,” the man explained—and then the company called the
loan and shut down Harlow’s business. Harlow hasn’t spoken with Warner
since. “The downside to Ty was there was always a little bit of a feeling like
everything is a sale. He’s the ultimate sales guy. The ultimate sales guy. He was
making a sale with everything that he did. When there isn’t a pitch to make or
there isn’t something to be gained, there’s no time in his life for you.” Harlow
had considered Warner a friend for a decade; they’d talked weekly, and when he
was in Chicago, Warner had let him drive his collection of luxury cars. But once
it was over, it was over. Harlow still occasionally has dreams about Warner.
_______
Next it was Patricia Roche’s turn. The pair had spent two decades bickering
endlessly while getting rich together, but things had finally reached a point of no
return. They agreed, at Warner’s insistence, to part ways in 2004. “I told Ty’s
CFO, who is still a good friend, that I wanted Ty to be there for the final
meeting,” Roche remembers. “Not like the way he treated everyone he got rid of,
by sending someone else to do the job.”
She flew to New York City and went to Warner’s Four Seasons Hotel,
where they had arranged to finalize the details ending her involvement with the
company as the head of Ty Europe—the company that had been Ty UK when
she started but had since expanded its distribution to a much larger area When

she started, but had since expanded its distribution to a much larger area. When
she got to the suite at the Four Seasons, she was told Warner wasn’t yet
available. “I’ll wait,” she responded. She was told that that might not be a good
idea and that perhaps they should get on with it without him. Roche was
insistent: she’d met Ty when he was depressed after Dakin fired him, and she’d
sat in his apartment stuffing the first Himalayan cats he ordered from Korea.
She’d been there for everything as he went from rags to riches, and she wasn’t
leaving until he came to talk to her. She plopped her purse down next to her and
waited.
Finally, Ty Warner walked in—nervous and conflict avoidant but probably
unsurprised. He’d been a billionaire for five years, but there was still one person
left who would talk to him however the hell she wanted to talk to him.
“Thank you for twenty years,” she told him, as she stood up and shook his
hand. “You’re a bastard, and I hope to God I never see you again.” It was the last
time she saw him. At her wedding in Chicago three years later, a messenger
arrived with a note from Warner telling her how proud he was of everything
she’d accomplished. The newly marrieds stood in front of their friends, shaking
the envelope in the hope that money would fall out. It did not.
_______
Retired soap-opera-star-turned-Beanie-hoarder Chris Robinson started his
collection in 1998, at the absolute height of the market. During the decline in
1999 and early 2000, he’d doubled down on his gamble: when local gift shops
went out of business, Robinson bought out their Beanie Baby inventories at
wholesale prices, fancying himself a value investor. Between that and his earlier
days lining up at stores as they unloaded shipments, his investment in Beanies
stretched well past the $100,000 mark. Today, much like the stock speculators
who simply stopped logging in to their brokerage accounts post-2000, he can’t
bring himself to go online and check the current values.
“Before I die, I guess I have to find out what they’re currently worth,”
Robinson, now in his midseventies, says. “If it takes twenty years, the kids will
all have them. They can split them up—and play with Beanie Babies. Or sell
them. . . .
“You wanna forget it. Did I really do that? But it was fun, it was exciting,”
he adds. At least some good came of the investment: his son Chris Robinson Jr.
majored in film at the University of Arizona and took a class on documentary
filmmaking. Robinson decided to tell the story of his family’s “sordid history

a
g.
ob so dec ded to te
t e sto y o
s a
y s so d d
sto y
with Beanie Babies.” The visuals were aided by the fact that the elder Robinson
still lives with the horde of nearly twenty thousand Beanie Babies he acquired at
a cost of about $100,000—all meticulously packed away in bookcases, plastic
display cases, and cartons with labels like “6 Beanie Buddies, ALL PEANUT.”
The video was just a class project, but Robinson posted it online in 2009. It
received few views at first. I interviewed father and son about it in late 2011
while I was working on the proposal for this book. Then in July 2013, out of
nowhere, the video went viral. It received hundreds of thousands of views and
was the subject of stories on National Public Radio, ABC News, the Huffington
Post, Gawker, and Entertainment Weekly, among many others. The Beanies
might not have paid for college, but for a new grad looking for his first film
industry job in a tough economy, the cautionary tale that went viral was an
invaluable addition to his résumé.

29

Endurance
The world of plush collecting was in decline before Beanie Babies came along,
but the craze gave the entire industry a reprieve. When Beanies collapsed,
however, stuffed-animal fatigue followed, and most of the teddy bear collecting
magazines and museums shuttered over the next few years. As the role of teddy
bears in the lives of children is crowded out by the ubiquitous miniscreens that
entertain them at ever-younger ages, the number of adults with a nostalgic
connection to plush declines, too. “Kids used to want plush up to age twelve.
Now you can’t sell it to a kid who’s older than five,” says Steven Greenfield,
CEO of Commonwealth Toy & Novelty Co., Inc., which recently scored a hit
with the license for Angry Birds plush—a rare breakout seller but, in a sign of
the times, one that came as a result of the success of a smartphone game.
The implosion of Beanie Babies and the rise of eBay brought the broader
collectibles industry to its knees. Many of the collectibles market’s former stars
say that eBay was responsible for its demise. “Ten years earlier, it was difficult
to connect with people and find pieces,” remembers Dean Griff, the artist behind
the Charming Tails figurines that were popular in the late 1990s. “There was a
perceived value because it was so hard to find that piece. But then people could
go on eBay and find five hundred of that piece. That’s what killed it.”
Many of the major manufacturers went into bankruptcy, and none of them
have anywhere close to the sales they had in the late 1990s. Precious Moments,
one of the most popular figurine lines, saw its sales plunge from $206 million at
its 1996 height to $55.7 million in 2004—and Precious Moments fared better
than most. There was an evaporation of the entire industry that began with
Joseph Segel and his National Commemorative Society and climaxed with
Beanie Babies.
A few Beanie collectors remain, however, and I went to Fayetteville, North
Carolina, to meet the most fanatical of them.
_______
When my friend Ryan dropped me off at the house, he thought it would be the
l
i
h ’d
All h
i h
f
ll k
b
h
i
h
I

last time he’d see me. All that either of us really knew about the trip was that I
was there to meet with a sixty-four-year-old man who owned a collection of
sixteen thousand Ty products and lived with his thirty-two-year-old daughter,
who made a full-time job of cataloging her father’s Beanie Babies. The first
thing we saw when we pulled up in front of the house was that the windows in
one of the rooms on the second floor were covered in tinfoil. “I am not,” Ryan
said, “dropping you off at the home of an obsessive Beanie Baby collector who
covers his windows with tinfoil.” But he did.
You could be forgiven for thinking Leon and Sondra Schlossberg were
married; she’s his daughter, not his wife, but he assured me that lots of people
think they’re a couple.
“People are like, ‘Hey, nice going,’ when they see us together,” Leon says
and looks at Sondra, who is thin and attractive. Their Web site is called
leonandsondra.com and, Sondra writes, “As the site’s name may suggest, and I
hope it does, we have been a close team for a long time. Leon is my father, the
biggest inspiration in my life and my best friend.” On his biography page Leon
writes that “Sondra and I are the greatest team imaginable. She is my best friend,
my partner in a variety of business endeavors and the inspiration for almost
everything I do or write.” When Sondra studied for her undergraduate degree at
the University of Maryland, Leon went to the same school to finish his degree.
Their diplomas are together in one frame in the house they share. It’s a reminder
of their seemingly permanent status as a singular unit.
Sondra generally calls her father Leon rather than Dad. Leon is something of
an illeist, dropping his own name into conversations more than anyone over age
five I’ve ever met, but he is not without charm. He’s tall, portly around the
midsection, and was wearing an untucked, oversize Dickies button-down shirt.
He’s extremely talkative, especially when the topic is Beanie Babies. After our
meeting he e-mailed me to apologize: “I do feel obligated to apologize for
interrupting you so many times. Sondra says I tend to get over-animated and
talkative when it comes to the topic of Ty or Beanie Babies. She normally steps
in to calm me down a little when I start in with wild hand gesturing.”
Their house is a 2,400-square-foot white elephant, and it would be roomy
inside if it weren’t for all the Beanie Babies—which, as is the case when you
have sixteen thousand of them, are everywhere. Leon has to remove hundreds of
Beanies from the bed each night before sleeping in it. The tinfoil, it turned out, is
in the room they use exclusively as a studio for taking professional-quality
photographs of every Ty product they acquire.

Two oversize display-bear Beanies (with X and O lipstick prints) sit on
chairs in the living room. There are also stacks of large plastic bins filled with
Ty products and boxes with an almost complete collection of Beanie-related
magazines.
“Did you pull all this stuff out for me?” I asked—but as soon as I said it, I
was afraid I knew the answer: there was no way they had the closet space for all
this stuff.
“No, this is how it is,” the pro-gun Republican with twenty years of service
in the army and seventeen years in civil service told me.
The home has the look of many houses on the reality TV show Hoarders
except that it isn’t dirty and the clutter is intensely focused—it is virtually all Ty
products. Leon says he devotes about sixty hours per week to his Ty collection,
and his daughter is similarly absorbed. When Ty’s line of squeeze-them-and-
they-shout-gibberish Monstaz was released, Leon digitally recorded the sounds
and then played them back at slower speeds to see whether there was any kind of
hidden message. There wasn’t, but the whole exercise is a nice summation of
how Leon combines his obsession with a children’s toy with his military-honed
affection for technology and order. Sondra spends time trying to connect with
dealers and traders in countries like France and Israel, where special versions of
Ty products not sold in the United States are available.
Leon assures me that Ty products are not the driving force behind his life.
The driving force, he explains, is the Ty Museum he will build.
“Huh?” I respond.
Leon talks about the museum quickly, easily, and in great detail. He
describes the pricing rubric for admissions—discounts for senior citizens and
kids and a free gift included with admission. Next he tells me about the Mobile
Museum, a trailer stocked with rare Beanie Babies that will travel to schools to
raise awareness for the Ty Museum, whose location will be determined by tax
credits and taxpayer matching funds. He’s drawn plans for the museum, but he
wouldn’t show them to me (they’re not ready yet, he says).
He ushers me into a spare bedroom with stacks and stacks and boxes and
boxes of hundreds of Color Me Beanies—a white bear Ty produced in 2002 that
came with markers that could be used to color it and make it one’s own.
“You might be wondering,” Leon says, “why you can’t buy Color Me
Beanies on eBay for less than five dollars or so these days.”
Actually, I admit, I hadn’t been wondering about that.
“Well,” he continues, “this is going to be the official Beanie Baby of the
museum ”

museum.
He explains that the museum will also have a McDonald’s annexed to it—a
food court and homage to the record-breaking Teenie Beanie promotion. The
only problem—Leon says he’s still working on a solution to this—will be
making sure that the smell of fast food doesn’t waft into the museum galleries.
Leon’s museum, like stuffed animals and speculation in general, brings him
happiness, optimism, and the comfort of a finely elaborated dream. Leon’s
descent into Beanie fixation—accompanied by his daughter—came after a tough
divorce. While I was at his home, two more boxes of Ty products arrived,
including more than a dozen different variations of SpongeBob and Hello Kitty
Beanie Babies that Ty had recently released.
It’s these variations, not the rare pieces, Leon says, that will make his
museum an entertaining experience.
“You see one Hello Kitty Beanie Baby and it doesn’t really look like much.
But you see a hundred different ones and all of a sudden, that’s something,” he
says.
When I e-mailed Leon to ask him if he could try to articulate what it was
about Beanie Babies that so captivated him, his response lacked deep
psychological reasoning.
“OK . . . why the Beanie Babies?” he wrote. “I’m speaking for myself
here . . . They are incredibly cute/adorable/precious/endearing/etc. Does that
sound strange coming from a guy? Probably a little, but that’s just the way it is.
They appeal to children and they probably appeal to me in the same way.
“[T]here are so many Ty collectibles, there’s no reason to go looking
elsewhere. Ty made an impact that far exceeds that of any other plush
manufacturer. We enjoy documenting that and I look forward to watching the
looks of awe when visitors enter the main exhibit hall of our museum to discover
just how many thousands of collectibles Ty produced. Bottom line, we needed
something to do after I retire and nobody appeared to be doing the ‘Ty Museum’
thing. What a great niche.
“We’re not thin-skinned. We know we have a lot of planning, coordination,
purchasing and fund-raising ahead of us but it’s an enjoyable challenge that will
translate into a lot of smiles from children and adults who will be able to visit
our museum.”
In a follow-up e-mail, he attached a photo of Burrows the Meerkat—a late-
model Beanie Baby that came after Ty had worked his way through all the
common animals. Burrows, Leon told me, “decided to volunteer as my keyboard
guard.”

“Try to convince me these critters don’t have personalities,” he wrote.
_______
The allure of plush is also irresistible for some within the industry. Few people
who experience success here are ever able to extricate themselves, even long
after anyone from the outside can see that they should have moved on.
Robert Solomon built Applause into a worldwide leader in stuffed toys and
then used it to acquire Dakin in 1995 before selling the whole thing for a fat
payday. Other than Ty Warner, he was the most successful stuffed-animal
impresario of his generation. He took over Dakin once again in 2001, with
backing from Prudential Life Insurance. It was a small acquisition and one that,
in his prime, Solomon easily would have been able to fund on his own. But he’d
lost his entire net worth in the stock market and was starting over—with his
reputation as a onetime wunderkind as his only asset following a long battle with
bipolar disorder. “The money was wired about an hour ago,” he told cheering
employees as they assembled in the company’s cafeteria, according to a Fortune
Small Business profile. “The documents have been signed, and it’s our
company.”
In interviews after the acquisition Solomon was frank in his assessment of
industry challenges: “Over the years what’s changed in the stuffed animal or
plush business is that, with all of the direct importing coming out of Asia, plush
in many ways has become a commodity, and price is what matters to many
major retailers.”
Solomon, a charismatic visionary, had a plan to escape the cost-driven rat
race: revive Dream Pets, the line of velveteen toys that had launched the Dakin
brand prior to the plane crash that killed its founding family. It was the line that
Harold Nizamian had sold while speeding around California, accumulating
tickets on his way back to his MBA classes, and the line that had transformed Ty
Warner from a layabout college dropout into a superstar salesman. Solomon
hoped that Dream Pets also had the power to revive him and relaunch him to the
top of the toy industry. In early 2004 Solomon decided that Dream Pets would
be the next Beanie Baby. He told everyone he knew that it was going to happen.
It made a certain sense: Warner had learned the plush business at Dakin, and
with their small size and endless, whimsical variety, Dream Pets were one of the
lines whose success had inspired Beanie Babies.
Solomon designed them painstakingly. First he pulled the original drawings
d
d
i
l
f
h
hi
Th
h d
i

and production samples from the company archives. These were the drawings
that Virginia Benes-Kemp, the Dakin product chief in the 1960s, had been
working on when Warner, clad in a camel hair coat, knocked on her door to talk
about his product ideas. Next Solomon spent endless hours trying to replicate the
exact feel of the original Dream Pets that had been introduced in 1957. In a
heavy-handed effort to capture the Beanie Baby magic, he also hand numbered
each piece to promote collectability.
Then, just as Warner had done forty years ago, he went out to sell them.
When Solomon met with the buyer for Cracker Barrel Old Country Store (the
first chain to carry Ty products), he offered, without notes, detailed biographical
sketches for each of the twelve samples he’d brought. Cracker Barrel responded
with a huge order for the five hundred stores it operated in forty-one states.
Beanie Babies had begun as a toy inspired by Dream Pets and then had become a
collectible; now Dream Pets were relaunching as a collectible inspired by Beanie
Babies.
“I know that our Dream Pets will find a place in so many hearts just as they
have in mine,” Solomon said in a press release. “Phenomenon’s [sic] happen
because they’re supposed to, not because they are planned.
“I’m sure that everyone will find a Dream Pet that they will want to call their
own, because the Pets are so much more than stuffed animals—like all of us,
they’re individuals.”
On March 15, 2004, the first one million pieces were shipped to stores all
over America. However, consumers weren’t interested, and the Dream Pets
reorders Solomon had been counting on didn’t materialize. His company’s
balance sheet deteriorated, and he lost the license to produce Disney products.
His focus on the specialty retailers that had made Ty Warner so rich failed at a
time when the industry was contracting. Just over five months after the Dream
Pets launch, Solomon died of a self-inflicted gunshot wound to the head.
“He bet the farm on Dream Pets,” one consultant told a reporter. A line that
had brought so much happiness to its creators and customers but had been tinged
with tragedy almost from the beginning was gone forever. Post-Solomon, Dakin
went into bankruptcy, and in late 2005 the brand’s intellectual property was
acquired for $835,000 by Big Lots, the discount retail chain. But Big Lots has
done little with the name: the only Dakin-branded product listed on the
company’s Web site is a fourteen-ounce bottle of baby oil with the teddy bear of
Ty Warner’s dream emblazoned on the label. It’s the first time the Dakin logo
has ever been on baby oil, and it sells for $1.50.

_______
One of Warner’s many lawsuits reunited him with his former boss, Harold
Nizamian. In 2000 Ty sued a start-up, Softbelly’s, over its marketing of Screenie
Beanies, a line of plush toys for cleaning computer monitor screens. Warner’s
legal strategy, as usual, was to assert an exclusive right to the term “beanie”
when it came to the marketing of toys, and the defense’s task was to show that
the word “beanie” was generic. To help make that case, Softbelly’s hired
Nizamian as an expert witness to testify that, for as long as he’d been in the
business, beanbag toys had been called beanies. They had been called that at
Dakin, Nizamian remembered, and that’s what he was prepared to tell the court.
Warner wasn’t pleased. He called Nizamian the day before his scheduled
deposition, and in a seventeen-minute phone conversation, asked him not to
testify. Nizamian says Warner also dangled the possibility of a job working for
Ty in Europe, where he’d finally be able to use his foreign-language skills.
“I realized after speaking to Ty that it was a very important matter to him,
and even though I didn’t understand all of the particulars, I felt if he felt that
strongly about it . . . maybe it would be best if I did not go,” Nizamian told the
court. “Because of the seriousness in his voice and the importance to him . . . I
figured I’d just rather not get involved.” Nizamian then declined to testify. Based
on the witness-tampering issue, in 2005 a judge ordered Ty Inc. to forfeit the
$716,046 it had won in the case—but that was reversed on appeal in 2008.
Warner never did give the struggling toymaker a job, and they haven’t spoken
since.
Right after Warner’s tax evasion case made news, I logged on to Nizamian’s
Timeless-Toys Inc. company Web site to order Bart, the stuffed bear puppet he’d
shown me at Toy Fair the first time we met. A few minutes after I placed the
order, Nizamian called to thank me for my $11.99 purchase and to promise that
he’d drop it at the post office in the morning. Not surprisingly, we also talked
about the Ty Warner indictment news.
Of everyone who has known Warner, only Nizamian seemed especially
sympathetic to his plight. For all his gifts and talents, the best plush peddler
Nizamian had ever known was never able to overcome the worst parts of his
personality. “It was never going to be enough,” Nizamian says. “It’s like a Greek
tragedy.” When I met Nizamian in person he was in the process of moving his
office closer to home, and that move was complete by the time we talked about
Warner’s legal problems. The official Web site for Timeless-Toys lists a new
dd
i S
M
C lif
i
b
i k
h
l
h
i ’ j

address in San Mateo, California—but a quick search reveals that it’s just a
virtual office: rates start at $130 per month, conference rooms are available for
$25 to $45 per hour, and Nizamian keeps his inventory in a self-storage unit.
Still, the toymaker is in business—and if you log on to Timeless-Toys.com and
place an order (payment is via PayPal), the former CEO of what was at one time
the top plush company in the world will mail it to you himself. He might even,
as he did for me, toss in an extra lamb puppet as a special gift.
_______
In December 2013, less than a month before Ty Warner was scheduled to be
sentenced, I sat in a Starbucks near Wrigley Field, discussing Warner’s life with
a former high-level executive at the company. He said Warner had told him to
think of him as a second father. (When I mention this to Patricia Roche, she
laughs. “If you were older than him, he said you were like his father. If you were
younger than him, he said you were like his son. If you were approximately his
age, you were like brothers.”)
“So,” the former Ty Inc. executive told me, “Ty will probably go to prison—
probably for a few years. And then he’ll get out. And sometime in the next
twenty years, he’ll die. And that’ll be that. It will have been a pretty sad life.”
For all of Warner’s gifts, talents, and luck, success was never fulfilling. The
speculative craze for Beanie Babies had left most buyers out however much
they’d spent on the toys, and those dashed dreams made Warner one of the
richest people in the world. On balance, though, he was probably far less content
than the average failed Beanie speculator. Once I had some understanding of
Warner’s character, I started asking everyone who had known him whether he
was happy. Some laughed at the question. Roche quipped that Ty couldn’t be
happy unless he was miserable. His sister said she’d asked him that the last time
they’d spoken and that he hadn’t answered. One former employee said, “Mental
health isn’t his strong suit.” Among a group of former Ty employees who get
together every couple of years, Warner’s capacity for happiness is a frequent
topic of conversation. Even before the tax evasion case, the consensus was that
no one wanted to trade places with him.
At Warner’s sentencing in January 2014, the judge opted for a surprisingly
light sentence. Although federal sentencing guidelines called for him to serve
four to five years in prison, Judge Charles Kocoras opted for two years’
probation and five hundred hours of community service. Kocoras explained his
decision by citing the seventy letters from current and former Ty employees

decision by citing the seventy letters from current and former Ty employees,
business associates (including Warner’s own lawyer), and heads of charitable
organizations who attested to Warner’s good character and philanthropy.
The U.S. government, which is appealing the sentence, noted that in the
context of Warner’s wealth, his total of $35.7 million in charitable contributions
was unremarkable. “Charitable donations over the course of fourteen years that
equal approximately 2 percent of current net worth are not extraordinary,” the
prosecution argued. “The median household net worth was $68,828 in 2011; if
that household gave 2 percent of its net worth, or $1,377, over fourteen years
(less than $100 per year), it would not be deemed an ‘exceptional’ amount.
Given Warner’s net worth, to qualify as extraordinary, he would have had to
donate a much greater percentage of his wealth to charity. Additionally, in no
sense did [the] defendant’s charitable contributions cause him any deprivation or
sacrifice, as his assets include a $153 million residence, numerous luxury
automobiles, and art valued at over $41 million.”
When I texted Warner’s sister about the sentence, she wrote back to say that
her prayers had been answered; their relationship has had its ups and downs, but
she says he’s her brother, and she loves him.
Columnists and bloggers, especially in Chicago, mocked the sentence.
Writing in the Chicago Sun-Times, Mark Brown explained that “to fulfill his
community service, Kocoras ordered Warner to work with three Chicago schools
where the billionaire says he can organize a curriculum to teach students how to
manufacture and sell a product such as a school mascot modeled after his Beanie
Baby success. That’s cool, and maybe on the side, he could help them put on a
school play. I’d recommend the 1959 musical, ‘Never Steal Anything Small,’
starring Jimmy Cagney. These are my favorite lyrics: ‘Steal $100 and they put
you in stir; Steal $100 million they address you as sir.’”
A month after his sentencing, Warner was back at Toy Fair—in unusually
but understandably good spirits. He invited a few dozen industry leaders to his
Ty Warner Penthouse at his Four Seasons Hotel, two and a half miles from the
Javits Center. The cocktail party was scheduled for 6:00 p.m. to 8:00 p.m., and
his guests listened to the pianist he’d hired, drank, ate the hors d’oeuvres offered
by the uniformed staff, and ogled the apartment. For $45,000 a night, it doesn’t
even have a kitchen, but it does have 360-degree views of Manhattan from seven
hundred feet high. Warner was involved in every design decision. He personally
visited a quarry in France to buy $500,000 worth of marble for the bathroom,
and the bed cost $65,000, including the twenty-two-carat gold woven into the
bedspread. He spent $500,000 on gilded bronze for the bookcase.

However, he didn’t show up to his own party until around 7:55—five
minutes before it was scheduled to end, and long after most of his guests had
left. He chatted briefly, mostly about Beanie Boos, and left.
After Toy Fair, it was time to get started on the community-service
requirements.
I called another former high-level Ty executive to ask about Warner’s
prospects as a mentor in an inner-city school. How could a reclusive billionaire
who’d lived inside a bubble for the past seventeen years—and a partial bubble
for close to seventy—all of a sudden drop everything and start mentoring
underprivileged children?
“I think he’s going to do fantastic,” he said. “Ty Warner is one of the best
actors out there. Whether he likes it or not, it won’t show in the way he handles
the kids. Hopefully in the time he’s faking it or not faking it, he’ll genuinely feel
something. That’s what you hope for.
“I truly believe that he has the heart of a kid who was harmed by his mom’s
psycho crap,” he added. “That’s where I always thought that he had a soft spot.
He never really had a childhood. He’s got that, like, Michael Jackson syndrome.
He’s a really sensitive guy, but he’s got so much damage.”
Dan McGrath, president of the Leo Catholic High School, an academically
rigorous all-boys school on Chicago’s South Side, where Warner is doing some
of his community service, met with him and his lawyer in early April of 2014 to
start planning for the program. He was instantly impressed. “The visit went quite
well,” he told me. “Ty was very engaged, and engaging. He’s not just putting in
his time. He really wants our kids to get something from this. He’s giving them
ownership of the project and he expects accountability. He wants to be hands-on,
but he wants the kids to be doing the actual work.”
Later that month, Warner met with the twelve members of the school’s
Entrepreneurs Club to discuss ideas for his community service. In a quiet voice
he answered all the questions the enthusiastic students had about business. “How
did you come up with the idea for Beanie Babies?” someone asked. “I tried to
think like a kid,” he said. Next he talked about the importance of his tactile,
almost visceral response to a new product: “How does it feel when you grab it?
Is it fun?”
McGrath says that Warner is “very comfortable and accessible. He has a
very easygoing manner, and the kids are not at all put off by the fact that he’s
very well-to-do.”
In May Warner came back with an idea he’d been discussing with McGrath.
The Leo School has an eighty eight year history and many proud alumni Its

The Leo School has an eighty-eight-year history and many proud alumni. Its
football team just had an exceptionally good year, and the school had sold out of
all its hats, Tshirts, and sweatshirts. The idea: to stop buying logo merchandise
from a national company and turn the process over to the Entrepreneurs Club—
with Warner there to help them with the product design, sourcing, and
marketing.
Warner, wearing jeans and a blazer over a black sweater, announced the plan
to the students and then told them to start working on designs. He wandered the
room, shedding his blazer as the building grew warmer, and he quizzed them on
their ideas: Had they thought about who their target market was? That V-neck
sweater design you’re working on, he said to one student: Is that something for a
grandfather or a younger person? Always remember, he explained: stay focused
on who you’re selling to. He talked about different kinds of materials, and he
suggested tweaks to their designs. He collected the students’ drawings and left.
In mid-June he arrived for his third meeting with the Entrepreneurs Club, but
this time he had a surprise: several bags of prototypes that he’d personally gone
to the factories in China to have made. There were baseball hats, the V-neck
sweater, plush footballs, and more. “A full product line,” McGrath marvels. The
goal is to have the merchandise ready for the alumni golf outing in August. “We
could sell three tables’ worth of those V-necks,” McGrath says. “When the kids
saw the product line today, they were really, really thrilled. These were their
own designs. It was the fruit of their labors.”
School was out for the summer, but the Leo School remained open daily—a
new policy. “Last year,” McGrath tells me, “kids came back from summer
vacation, and I asked them what they did, and they would say, ‘I didn’t go out of
the house, Mr. McGrath. I don’t live in a neighborhood where you can.’” And so
the school remains open. “Most of it is organized,” McGrath says, “but it’s also
just saying ‘Hey, we’re open. Come sit in the library or come shoot hoops.’” Or,
on some days, come learn about business from the richest man in the history of
toys.

30

Exit Strategy
The life and career of Ty Warner and his toys is probably best summarized by
the logo that is such a ubiquitous symbol of a 1990s childhood that it’s now a
popular costume at retro-themed Halloween parties. The Beanie Baby hangtag,
whose every detail collectors fussed over before securing it in a plastic shell to
protect it from age and mishandling, is a heart, with room in it only for the name
“Ty.” That was how he’d always wanted it, and he dispatched anyone who
threatened what he wanted with a zeal matched only by the dedication he
brought to the design and manufacture of the animals his name was attached to.
A child who has known no healthy love can grow up to be an adult too damaged
to love. The women who loved Ty Warner—Patricia Roche, Faith McGowan,
and his sister, Joy—would ultimately take no more comfort from him than he did
from his abusive father or his mentally ill mother. Warner found himself no
happier than the people he abandoned. The Beanie Babies brought him, as the
Norwegian playwright Henrik Ibsen wrote of money, “the husk of many things
but not the kernel . . . food, but not appetite; medicine, but not health;
acquaintance, but not friends; servants, but not loyalty; days of joy, but not peace
or happiness.”
The last time Warner saw his sister, in the mid-2000s, he took her on a tour
of the Montecito, California, estate he was building at a cost of well over $150
million. He showed her the landscaping and the Mediterranean architecture; then
he led her into the formal dining room with seating for at least forty people.
“And this is where we eat when we have company,” he explained.
“Who would you have over?” Joy asked with an edge she quickly regretted,
because she could see that it had hurt him.
He was quiet. Then: “Nobody,” he said coldly. Then he turned and walked
into the next room to continue his tour of one of the most expensive homes in
America.
_______
The Internet bubble of the late 1990s is mostly remembered as a force for
d
i
i
i
i d bi
i
d A
i
f

destruction: massive overinvestment in dubious start-ups stripped Americans of
their life savings and jobs and undermined confidence in American industry for
years to come. There is, it is often said, a conflict between the real economy and
the speculative economy—with the result being wasted resources and ever-rising
inequality.
Now, however, some economists and revisionist observers are wondering
whether bubbles are really as bad as they so obviously seem. In a column based
on his 2007 book, Pop! Why Bubbles Are Great for the Economy, financial
journalist Daniel Gross argues that speculative manias have enabled the creation
of products and services with broad social benefits that otherwise never would
have happened:
The cheap, pervasive national railroad network led to an integrated
market in goods and commodities—and long-lasting businesses such as
department stores, mail-order retailers like Sears, and national brands
from Coca-Cola to Procter & Gamble. The Internet pop has left us with
Web 2.0—Facebook and Skype, MySpace and YouTube, and, most of all,
Google. Each of these companies either was started or gained critical
mass after the Internet bubble burst. Each gained tremendous scale
overnight thanks to all the cheap excess capacity built during the 1990s
bubble.
Speaking of “cheap excess capacity”: Whatever happened to all those
Beanie Babies people hoarded? Some are still in plastic bags in garages, some
were sold for twenty-five cents each to carnies, and some were thrown in
Dumpsters in disgust.
In March 2000, shortly after the bubble deflated, a collection of DeWitt,
Iowa, Beanie Babies found itself engulfed in flames. As he explained in a
deposition, Robert Sager was tired of his wife Ramona’s Beanie Baby collection.
“She had Beanie Babies everywhere and I was sick of them sons of bitches and I
decided I was going to barbecue them,” he said. “I had a big brush pile that I was
going to burn outside and I had decided I was going to get all her Beanie Babies
and take them out and barbecue the sons of bitches and went to get the charcoal
lighter . . . [It] flared up a lot faster than I thought it was going to.”
Ramona sued the insurance company for denying her claim for $100,000 in
damage to their home. In his ruling, which began, “A battalion of Beanie Babies
has marched a legal question before us,” Iowa Supreme Court justice Michael J.

Streit noted that “150 Beanie Babies and Buddies perished in the fire. . . . Not
surprisingly, Robert and Ramona later divorced.” By the time of the fire, the
collection was not a source of significant value: Ramona filed a claim for just
$1,100 in destroyed Beanie Babies.
A few Beanie Babies, the ones that were retired prior to the craze’s taking
off in 1996, are still worth $50 or $100—occasionally a few hundred for the
rarest pieces, once supposed to be enough to cover the down payment on a
McMansion. At least 99.5 percent of the perfectly preserved Beanie Babies from
the late 1990s are today worth significantly less than they retailed for.
Nicholas Walsh, a twenty-nine-year-old social media marketer who grew up
in Red Bank, New Jersey, remembers lining up at Hallmark stores after school,
jockeying for position with the middle-aged women who were his main
competitors in the Beanie hunt. Inspired by the price guides, he preserved each
of his three hundred Beanies’ hangtags in plastic tag protectors—and added
Lucite containers for the bears, some of which he paid as much as $100 for. The
collection was worthless by his teens but has since found new life: a few months
ago, Walsh started decapitating his Beanie Babies and mounting them on
wooden plaques as mini hunting trophies. He calls it “Beanie taxidermy” and
he’s already sold eighteen at $25 each—giving him, at long last, a tidy return on
his Beanie investment. “I make a point to make sure they still have their tags on
—and people ask me why. I tell them that if the decapitated Beanie Babies don’t
have their tags, they’re not worth anything.”
Usually, though, the speculative dreams of more than a decade ago come to
more heartwarming resting places. Every week, small-town newspapers report
on the donations of mint-condition Ty products to local children’s hospitals,
police departments, and American soldiers stationed overseas, who use the toys
to connect with children in potentially hostile circumstances. The donations are
usually anonymous, because while philanthropy is a source of pride,
philanthropy as the exit strategy of last resort from a comically bad investment
isn’t.
“Thanks to a donor, Spokane police officers have new toys to use to comfort
children in traumatic situations,” reported the Spokesman-Review of Spokane,
Washington, in a 2012 story. The piece was accompanied by a photo of a
smiling patrolman holding two Beanie Babies in his hand, standing in front of
the Beanie-filled open trunk of his cruiser: “A young woman who wishes to
remain anonymous recently gave the Spokane Police Department 1,600 Beanie
Babies in near perfect condition.” The speculative boom for Beanie Babies has

resulted in an unsurpassed volume of high-quality, perfectly preserved,
monetarily worthless plush animals for children most in need of the comfort of
something soft. A few years ago, Warner’s sister emptied her closets of the
hundreds of Beanie Babies she’d accumulated haphazardly during the craze
years—they were made by her brother, after all—and dropped them at the
nearest children’s hospital. Nancee Biank, the psychotherapist who’d introduced
a McDonald’s communications executive to the line and had to pull them from
her practice when parents became consumed by greed, is once again able to use
Beanie Babies in groups with children. Today’s kids know them only as toys
because they’re too young to remember that there was a time when people
abandoned their senses over beanbag animals.
As for what will become of the septuagenarian Ty Warner’s plush winnings:
in a court filing related to his tax case, Warner reported a net worth of more than
$1.7 billion—the product of a thirty-year run in plush that included, at last count,
more than 2,000 Beanie Babies, just under 1,000 Ty Classics, 487 Beanie
Buddies, and enough other pieces for a total of just under 6,000 products, most
of which Warner designed himself. Warner will never be able to spend his entire
fortune. But when one executive who asked to remain anonymous asked Ty’s
lawyer about estate planning, the reply was memorable: “That is a question that
should never be asked.”
Ty Warner poured the best and most focused parts of his powerful mind into
creating the soft toys that are the first loves of more children than any other
brand’s. Whisper the Deer, a Beanie Baby released in May 1998, sits on my desk
as I write this. The difference between average and spectacular, Ty knew, is
often in the minutest details. It was that knowledge that had him sitting alone at
his desk late into the night perseverating over every piece of fabric and
examining hundreds of samples for possible eyes. It was that attention to detail
that made his first cats popular sellers, and the constant quest for a better product
also led to the first “retired” Beanie Babies that collectors fetishized. I’ve been
contemplating Beanie Babies enough to notice, I think, what makes Whisper
special: There’s a stitch in her back and a little pucker in her belly that gives her
attentive, bolt-upright posture—this in spite of the fact that she is under-stuffed
and squishy. It’s the posture that creates her personality and, as Warner himself
describes his toys, “charisma.”
At age seventy, Ty has devoted more time to that stitch on Whisper’s back
than to his estate planning. In his sentencing memorandum his lawyers wrote,
“Counsel for Ty was stunned to learn that he does not even have a current will
nor any structure designed to minimize estate taxes ” His defense team tried to

nor any structure designed to minimize estate taxes.  His defense team tried to
argue, based on the lack of estate planning, that Warner was not the greedy,
calculating, tax-dodging tycoon the prosecution had portrayed in its sentencing
memorandum arguing in favor of incarceration. Rather, they said, he was a
benevolent man who hadn’t gone through his life obsessed with money. Most
people who know Warner disagree: his lack of a will, they say, was a product of
his self-absorption, not a disregard for material concerns.
Unless Ty Warner suddenly gets interested in his estate planning, his mostly
estranged younger sister, now sixty-five years old and relying on aid to the
indigent for medical bills and part-time jobs to feed her half-dozen adopted
animals, will be the sole heir to the largest fortune in the history of stuffed
animals.

Beanie Babies creator Ty Warner and his sister, Joy, circa 1949.


Warner’s mother, Georgia, seen here in 1937, struggled with paranoid schizophrenia. Once, Ty’s sister
awoke to see Georgia hovering over her with a butcher’s knife.

Ty Warner at age sixteen.

Ty’s father, Hal, was a top salesman at Dakin, a leading plush company in the 1960s and 1970s. Hal got Ty
his first job in the toy business, but their relationship was bizarre and dysfunctional. They often dated the
same
omen

same women.

Within a few years of dropping out of Kalamazoo College and then signing on as his father’s sub-rep,
Warner became the most successful salesman Dakin had ever seen, outearning the company’s CEO in the
process.

After he was fired from Dakin at the end of the 1970s, Warner sunk into a depression that industry friends
worried might end his life. It was the bear in Dakin’s logo (lower right) who came to him in a dream, and
told him: start your own plush company, and you can be a star once again.

Warner started his own business in 1983 with a few impeccably designed plush cats that he stuffed himself
and groomed obsessively during trade shows. “You can make a lot of money with a good cat,” he once said.

Warner and his girlfriend Patricia Roche ran the business by themselves for the first few years. When this
photo was taken in 1990, the company was up to a few million dollars per year in sales. Two years later,
their relationship imploded spectacularly. Shortly after they broke up, he named one of the first Beanie
Babies, Patti the Platypus, after her. He wrote this poem for its hangtag: “Ran into Patti one day while
walking/Believe me, she wouldn’t stop talking/Listened and listened to her speak/That would explain her
extra-large beak.”


Lina Trivedi was a sociology major at DePaul University when she became Ty Inc.’s twelfth employee in
1992. Here she is at the Atlanta Gift Show in 1995. A year later, Lina came up with the idea that changed
how the company marketed Beanie Babies and helped make them the weirdest speculative mania of all
time.

The King brothers were distributors for Ty Inc. products in several southern states. After they pitched
Warner the idea of announcing “retirements” for Beanie Babies, a global craze ensued. The brothers
became multimillionaires in their twenties.

Before anyone had heard of Beanie Babies, an eccentric collectibles dealer named Richard Gernady, owner
of the Cat’s Meow, a gift shop in Glenview, Illinois, was telling anyone who would listen that they’d be the
next big thing. He pushed his customers to pay higher prices for retired pieces.

Warner, a perfectionist who one employee called “the Steve Jobs of plush,” was constantly tinkering with
his products to try to create the perfect stuffed animal. When he changed the face design on his Teddy
Beanie Baby in early 1995, he inadvertently created the first rare Beanie Baby, who soon became known as
Old Face Teddy. Within a couple of years, the early Chicago collectors who’d picked up dozens of old-
faced teddies at $5 each were sitting on six-figure fortunes.

At its 1998 peak, Mary Beth’s Beanie World, a monthly magazine edited by a self-described soccer mom
from suburban Chicago, had a paid monthly circulation of more than one million copies. The highlight of
the magazine was the price guide that tracked the Beanies’ rapidly fluctuating values.

Former commodities trader Peggy Gallagher and her sister, Dr. Paula Abrinko, both of suburban Chicago,
were two of the first serious, systematic Beanie collectors. When they had trouble finding some pieces
locally, they ran up four-digit phone bills calling all over the country in search of Beanie Babies and spread
the craze in the process. Perched on Dr. Abrinko’s left hand is Peanut the Royal Blue Elephant, the rarest of
all Beanie Babies, worth more than $5,000 at the height of the market.


Warner and his girlfriend Faith McGowan at the company’s employee appreciation party on Lake
Michigan, September 13, 1997. Ty Inc.’s sales were growing at a rate of more than 1,000 percent per year
as sales of Beanie Babies like Congo the Gorilla (center) soared.

A worker at Ty’s warehouse stands amid the boxes that carried fifteen thousand orders of Beanie Babies per
day to retailers all over America. A few months after this picture was taken, complaints about collectors
stalking UPS trucks and boxes of Beanie Babies disappearing during shipping forced Warner to remove the
company’s logo from its boxes. “If you were shipping diamonds, would you put a diamond on the box?”
said one former executive.

Released in August 1999, The End bear announced the end of the millennium and, Warner hoped, the end
of Beanie Babies.

Warner’s original plan for the new millennium was to replace Beanie Babies with Beanie Kids. “Ty, they’re
ugly,” the head of Ty UK told him. “They’ll buy it,” he replied. “I could put the Ty heart on manure and
they’d buy it!” The Beanie Kids were the biggest flop of Warner’s career.

The living room of Leon and Sondra Schlossberg, a father-daughter team of collectors. Their tens of
thousands of Ty products have taken over their home and, Sondra says, they haven’t been able to use their
living room since 2012.

As the owner of Wallos.com, the biggest of the Beanie Baby dealers, Brian Wallos made millions in his
twenties. When the mania ended, he used his winnings to start a line of trading cards featuring porn stars.


On January 14, 2014, sixty-nine-year-old Ty Warner arrived in court for sentencing in the largest bust of the
government’s crackdown on Swiss bank account tax evasion.

Even after he became a billionaire, Warner never stopped experimenting in his quest to make the most
beautiful stuffed animals in the world poring over every detail of every piece his company ever released

beautiful stuffed animals in the world, poring over every detail of every piece his company ever released.

The day after Warner’s sentencing of probation for tax evasion, a local photographer took this shot of
workers painting the wrought iron gates to his $150 million Montecito, California, home gold.

NOTE ON SOURCES
This is a work of nonfiction. No dialogue has been invented; all dialogue is either lifted from primary
sources, like Faith McGowan’s unpublished memoir, or from interviews I conducted with people who were
present for the conversations. However, please note that remembered dialogue is not necessarily the same
as real-time dialogue.
The bulk of the research and reporting for this book consisted of hundreds of interviews—in person and
by phone. I also used contemporaneous trade publication and mainstream media accounts of the craze.
Where possible, I’ve simply named the source within the text. Most of these accounts are available online
and if you Google the quote “in quotes,” you will be able to find the original source. In the note on sources
in his most recent (and excellent) book, The Price of Silence: The Duke Lacrosse Scandal, the Power of the
Elite, and the Corruption of Our Great Universities, journalist William Cohan writes, “In an era when
digital access to documents of all stripes is becoming increasingly ubiquitous, the idea of providing page
after page of notes on the sources of my research . . . seems somewhat superfluous.” I agree.
To understand the story of Ty Inc., I met and spoke with former Ty executives and employees, freelance
designers, sales representatives, personal connections of Ty Warner’s, executives at competing plush
companies, retailers, and the collectors, authors, and secondary-market dealers who were part of the
Beanie mania. Many of the former Ty employees and independent sales representatives I spoke with
requested anonymity; in other cases, in the interest of concision I have incorporated their recollections into
the story without naming them. Legal and regulatory filings related to the company were also consulted.
There were similar interviews—in person and by phone—with the collectors, dealers, and experts
whose lives were consumed by the fortunes they made and lost during the Beanie craze.
For their insight into Warner’s life and career and early days of Ty Inc. and its founder, I especially
want to thank the volunteers at the La Grange Area Historical Society, Joy Warner, Donald Danald, Gary
Richert, Pasquale Capra, Patricia Roche, Faith McGowan, Jenna Boldebuck, Lauren Boldebuck, Bob
Ricciardi, Lina Trivedi, Bill Harlow, Harold Nizamian, Paul Roche, and Virginia Benes-Kemp.
For a view into the machinations of the secondary market for Beanie Babies, I want to thank in
particular Mary Beth Sobolewski, Becky Phillips, Becky Estenssoro, Brian Wallos, Chris Robinson and his
son Chris Robinson Jr., Claudia Dunne, Leon Schlossberg, Sondra Schlossberg, and Jill Finlayson. Their
patience in answering endless, persnickety questions from a stranger who phoned more than a decade after
the fact to ask about their experiences in the world of Beanie Babies is much appreciated.
For background on the collectibles industry generally, Franklin Mint founder Joseph Segel and
Charming Tails creator Dean Griff provided valuable perspectives.
In his entire career Ty Warner has conducted exactly one extensive interview: with Joni Blackman of
People magazine in 1996—prior to the height of the Beanie mania. Ms. Blackman was unbelievably helpful
in providing her recollections of her time with Mr. Warner at his home and at his office.
As artifacts of the mania, the hundreds of books, VHS tapes, magazines, and cached Beanie Babies fan
sites accessed through the Wayback Machine are tremendously helpful. In particular, Mary Beth’s Beanie
World (changed to Bean Bag World because of litigation from Ty Inc.) and Beanie Mania are useful
—Beanie Collector, Hot Toys, Beans! Magazine, and ToyFare were also consulted. For broader
perspective on the industry during (and before) the period, Collecting Figures and Collector’s Mart

magazines were used. A complete collection of Ty catalogs from 1988 until the present was indispensable in
tracking the evolution of the company, its products, and its marketing. A several-hundred-page handbook
given to all the company’s sales reps in 1998 was also important.
For background on the history of the toy industry, the definitive source is the tremendous volume of
back issues of Playthings magazine, which has served as the definitive and well-reported trade magazine
for the industry since 1903. For a more specific look at the plush industry, and teddy bears in particular,
my favorite is the out-of-print Christie’s Century of Teddy Bears by Leyla Maniera. The Story of the Steiff
Teddy Bear: An Illustrated History from 1902 by Günther Pfeiffer is helpful for the story of that company,
as were several brochures and guides from the Steiff Museum in Germany. There were several teddy bear
magazines with strong followings during the 1990s: Teddy Bear Review was particularly helpful, as was
Teddy Bear and Friends. Peter Bull’s The Teddy Bear Book and Patricia Schoonmaker’s A Collector’s
History of the Teddy Bear were also consulted. For details on the design and production of teddy bears, I
like Sally Winey’s How to Make and Collect Rainbow Bears.
For contextualizing Beanie Babies in the history of speculative manias—and, in so doing, better
understanding how the Beanie mania and other crazes happened—there are two books that stand above all
others: John Kenneth Galbraith’s A Short History of Financial Euphoria and Robert Shiller’s Irrational
Exuberance. Edward Chancellor’s Devil Take the Hindmost: A History of Financial Speculation is also
good, as is Charles Kindleberger’s Manias, Panics, and Crashes: A History of Financial Crises.
Understanding how consumer crazes—and fads in general—happen is difficult: there is at the core of
every fad something intrinsically inexplicable. That’s the gap between rationality and irrationality. Too
often, writers attempt to distill phenomena to clever rules and acronyms when that’s not really how these
things work. However, books that were helpful in at least trying to sort it all out include Malcolm
Gladwell’s The Tipping Point, Chip Heath and Dan Heath’s Made to Stick: Why Some Ideas Survive and
Others Die, and Jonah Berger’s Contagious: Why Things Catch On. Finally, I want to thank Ty Warner. He
continues to produce the best, most affordable plush animals in the world. While he might have preferred
that nothing be written about him, in no way did he interfere with my reporting for this book.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Thanks to everyone at Portfolio/Penguin for their belief and involvement in a
book on a strange topic: Adrian Zackheim, Brooke Carey, Maria Gagliano, Will
Weisser, Rachel Moore, Margot Stamas, Taylor Fleming, Kathy Daneman, Kent
Anderson, and Kary Perez.
At Kuhn Projects: David Kuhn, Kate Mack, Jessie Borkan, Nicole Tourtelot, and
Grant Ginder.
At Amplify Partners: Elizabeth Hazelton and Allison McLean.
Marc Acito, for his insight on how to make the original manuscript read vaguely
like a book.
My family, for accepting my belief that stuffed animals are an appropriate gift
for people of all ages on any occasion. As always, Andrew Tobias. And Ryan—a
thousand violins begin to play.

INDEX
The page numbers in this index refer to the printed version of this book. To find the corresponding locations
in the text of this digital version, please use the “search” function on your e-reader. Note that not all terms
may be searchable.
ad campaign against violent toys, 48
Advertising Age, 71, 195
airport stores, 48
Alliance for Survival, 48
Altier, Sharon, 77, 86, 175
Andre Agassi Foundation for Education, 206
Angeline doll, 204–5
Angry Birds plush, 225
Annual Collectible Bears, 64
Applause, 230
Architectural Digest, 71
The Art Hunters Handbook: How to Buy Art for $5 and Sell It for $1,000,000 (Fox & Fox), 147–48
Associated Press, 113, 135
Atkins, Ann, 139
Atlanta Journal-Constitution, 192
Attic Treasures, 62, 170
auction fever, 125–26
authenticators, 168, 186
Barad, Jill, 151–52
Barbie, 111, 151–52, 171
Barry, Dave, 2, 97, 113
Barshefsky, Charlene, 169
baseball cards, 143–44, 169, 182
Beanie Babies
altruistic/sentimental stories related to collecting of, 139–41
annual sales of, 1998, 1–2, 175
auction fever and, 125–26
authenticators and, 168, 186
Beanie Chase game and, 133–35
beans as defining characteristic of, 59
Biank’s therapeutic program, use in, 150, 163–64
books and magazines fueling craze for, 143–49
in classrooms, 102
collapse of bubble in, 187–88, 196–200
collectibles market develops for, 75–78
f
f

counterfeits of, 168
creation of, in 1993, 2
design of first, 59–60
discontinuation announcement and, 192–95
donations and other post-craze uses of hoarded collections, 242–44
eBay sales, 3, 123–24, 125, 126–27, 183
first collectors of, 75–76, 89–95
first retirements of, 75–76
Gernady’s role in rise of bubble for, 76–78
growth in popularity of, early 1996, 73–75
ideas for ending Beanie Babies, 188–91
introduction of, 60–62
licensing/marketing tie-ins turned down by Warner, 151–53
litigation related to, 134–39, 144–45, 233
McDonald’s promotions and, 150–51, 153, 155–59, 163, 184
news media role in bubble, 100–101
oversaturation of market, in 1999, 182–84
poems adding charisma to, 109–10
poor initial sales of, 61–62
price lists/guides for, 93–94, 143–49
psychology of collecting and, 132–33
reintroduction and poor sales of, in 2000, 197–98
retirement strategy for, 63–67, 75–76, 105, 112–18, 169, 170
secondary market price increases for, 113–21, 165–72
small quantity initial release followed by larger shipments strategy, 139
speculative bubble phase of, 165–72
supply constriction as distribution strategy, 128–32
theft of, 176–77
as toys versus as investments conflict, 163–64
Ty.com Web site and, 110–18
variations in, and craze for, 97–99
voting on continuation of, 195–96
Warner’s lack of interest in fulfillment issues, 131
Warner’s reaction to early mania in, 103–6
White’s murder of Simmons over, 177–81
word of mouth in spreading craze for, 92–93
Zodiac Beanie Babies, 197–98
Beanie Babies 2.0, 205
Beanie Baby Handbook, The (Fox & Fox), 145–47
Beanie Baby Stories, 140
Beanie Bear, 39
Beanie Boos, 207
Beanie Buddy, 170
Beanie Bunnies, 39
Beanie Chase, 133–35
Beanie Collector, 5
Beanie Digest, 117
Beanie Kids, 188–89, 197
Beanie Mania Bulletin, 169
Beanie Mania (Phillips & Estenssoro), 5, 103, 116, 184

BeanieMom.com, 94, 115–16
Beanie Power, 118
Beanies & More, 5
BeanieX.com, 100
Beans! Magazine, 5
Beattie, Melody, 53
Beckett, James, 143
Beckett Publications, 143
Benchik-Abrinko, Paula, 89–90, 91, 92, 99, 133
Benes-Kemp, Virginia, 16–17, 23, 231
Benuzzi, Jessica, 171
Berenstain Bears’ Mad, Mad, Mad Toy Craze (Berenstain & Berenstain), 199–200
Berger, Jonah, 127
Berrie, Russell, 32, 36, 40, 194
Berryman, Clifford K., 80–81
Biank, Nancee, 150, 163–64, 244
Big Lots, 232
Billionaire 2, 186
Blackman, Joni, 19, 94–95
Blodget, Henry, 142, 143
Boldeduck, Jenna, 60, 65–66, 137, 212
bonuses, at Ty, Inc., 1, 3, 175–76
Boston Globe, 70
Boyds Bears, 72
Bradford Exchange, 70–71
Brown, Mark, 236
Brownie the Bear, 60, 172
Buffett, Warren, 5
Bull!: A History of the Boom and Bust, 1982–2004 (Mahar), 142
Burch, Jennings Michael, 17
BuyingBeanies.com, 201
Capra, Pasquale, 27–28
cats, stuffed, 32, 33–40
Cat’s Meow, 76
Cecil, Myrtle, 97
Chalmers, Vicki, 99–100
checklists for collecting, 77–78
Chicago, 7, 219
Chicago Sun-Times, 192, 236
Chicago Tribune, 99, 100, 160
Chilly the Polar Bear, 92
Chocolate the Moose, 60
Cincinnati Post, 115
Clark, Tom, 63–64
Clune, Katy, 137
Cobb, Ty, 159
Codependent No More (Beattie), 53
Cohen, Adam, 122, 125
Cole, Nat King, 101
ll
bl
b

collectibles business, 63–72
Bradford Exchange and, 70–71
checklists for collectors and, 77–78
development of collectibles market for Beanie Babies, 75–78
effect of Beanie Babies collapse and eBay on, 225–26
retirement strategy for Beanie Babies and, 63–67, 75–76, 105, 112–18, 169, 170
Segel’s pioneering of, 67–70, 71
collecting, psychology of, 132–33
collector plates, 69–71
Contagious: Why Things Catch On (Berger), 127
corporatization of toy selling, 82
counterfeits, 168
Cracker Barrel Old Country Store, 232
Crescent Bear & Bath Boutique, 74
Cubbie the Bear, 160
CVS, 202
Daily Herald, 102
Dakin, Inc., 14, 15, 32, 46, 48–49, 207, 230–33
ad campaign against violent toys of, 48
Big Lots acquires, 232–33
Dream Pets and, 19–20, 231–32
failed Hallmark buyout of, 49
firing of Warner, 25–26
founding and growth of, 19–20
insolvency and sale of, 49
Solomon acquires, in 2001, 230–31
Walmart, sales to, 48
Warner as salesperson at, 18–19, 20, 21–25
Dakin, Richard, 19, 20
Dakin, Roger, 19, 20
Danald, Donald, 21
Daniels, Janie, 134
David Bear, 138
Da Vinci, Leonardo, 100–101
Department 56, 72, 103
Derby the Horse, 98
Devany, Brian, 171
Dinah Shore Show, The (TV show), 89
discontinuation announcement, 192–95
donations, of hoarded Beanie Babies collections, 243–44
Down to Earth Designer Gifts, 17
“Drawing the Line in Mississippi” (cartoon), 80–81
Dream Pets, 19–20, 231–32
Dunne, Claudia, 106, 171, 183–84
eBay, 122–27, 225
Beanie Baby sales on, 3, 123–24, 125, 126–27, 183
collector market, targeting of, 123–24
creation myth, 122–23

Edstrom, Kristin, 151, 152–53
Elizabeth Glaser Pediatric AIDS Foundation, 195
The End Bear, 189–91
Ericson, Betty, 24
Ericson, Roger, 24
Erin the Bear, 139
Estenssoro, Becky, 76, 89, 92, 96, 103, 149, 168, 203
Fallon, Jimmy, 213
Finlayson, Jill, 123, 124, 126
Flash the Dolphin, 60, 159
Forbes, 6
Fortune, 231
Four Seasons Hotel, 10, 185–86
Fox, Les, 145–49
Fox, Sue, 145–49
“Framing the Deal: The Role of Restrictions in Accentuating Deal Value,” 61
Franklin Mint, 69, 70, 71. See also National Commemorative Society Fraser, Ruth, 37–38
freelance designers, 36–37
Freud, Sigmund, 101, 132
Friendly Pebble Pets, 136–37
Gagaoudakis, John, 194
Galbraith, John Kenneth, 142, 165, 196–97
Gallagher, Peggy, 90–92, 93–94, 101–2, 114, 116, 120, 133, 146, 168, 202–3
Ganz, 205
Gernady, Richard, 76–78, 89, 93
Giacalone, Philip, 110–11
Gladwell, Malcolm, 93
Glory the Bear, 139, 160
Godin, Seth, 93
Good Housekeeping, 97
Greenfield, Steven, 225
Greenman, Stanley, 129
Griff, Dean, 225
Gross, Daniel, 241
Gund, 187
Hall, John, 152
Hallstein, D. Lynn O’Brien, 75
Hardcastle, Gerald, 176
Harlow, Bill, 7–8, 47–48, 58–60, 156, 187, 221–22
Harris Bank, 42
Hasbro, 82, 111
Heartfelt Stories About Beanie Babies and Those Who Collect Them, 140, 141
He-Man, 151
Hemingway, Ernest, 187
Hoarders (TV show), 228
Holmes, Tim, 140
HolyBears, 137–38

Home Shopping Network, 170
Hot Wheels, 50
H&S Media, 202
Hula Hoop, 89
Hulbert, Jane, 150, 158
Hummel figurines, 145, 171
Humphrey the Camel, 75–76, 91–92, 172, 199
Ibsen, Henrik, 240
Imperial Toys, 136–37
Info Beanie, 112–13
Ingram, Mike, 21
Inky the Octopus, 98
Internet, 122–27
eBay and, 122–27
e-commerce growth in early years of, 124–25
Ty.com Web site and Beanie Baby craze, 110–18
Internet bubble, 5–6, 241
Irrational Exuberance (Shiller), 6, 100, 165–66
Issy the Bear, 186
Jake the Monkey, 39
Jamieson, Dave, 143–44
Johnson, M. Eric, 50
J.T. Puffins, 74
Kanaby, Ann, 128–29
Kanzler, Michael, 192
Kashmir, 32
Keck, Robert, 209, 210
Kiehls, Ellie, 133–35
Kindleberger, Charles, 99
King, Bryan, 63–64, 65
King, Chris, 63–64
King, Kevin, 63–64
Kiplinger’s Personal Finance, 71
Kocoras, Charles, 235, 236
Kohlwes, Karmen, 59, 116
Kollman, Robin Smith, 104
Ladies’ World, 81
Late Show, The (TV show), 181
Lawrence Welk Show, The (TV show), 14–15
LeClair, Robert, 137–38
Lefty, 165
Lego, 154
Legs the Frog, 3, 59, 60
Lennon Sisters, 14–15
Leo Catholic High School, 237–39
leonandsondra.com, 226

,
Lewis, Michael, 82
Liberty, 165
licensing/marketing tie-ins, for Beanie Babies with Major League Baseball, 159–60
McDonald’s Teenie Beanie Babies Happy Meal promotions, 150–51, 153, 155–59, 163, 184, 229
post-craze licensing deals, 206–7
Warner’s turning down of, 151–53
limited quantity sales, 61
Lives of the Most Excellent Painters, Sculptors and Architects (Vasari), 100–101
Los Angeles Times, 177, 185
Lovie the Lamb, 39, 62, 63–64
Lucky the Ladybug, 98
Lundeen, Tania, 206
Lynn, Julie, 47
McDonald’s, 150–51, 153, 155–59, 163, 184, 229
McGowan, Faith, 1, 3, 4, 13, 60, 106, 137, 144, 185, 204, 209–12, 213
death of, 212
distribution center for Ty and, 161
ideas for Beanie Babies and, 65–66
on Internet’s impact on Beanie Baby market, 125
on last Beanie Baby idea, 188, 189–90
on McDonald’s deal, 155
relationship with Warner, 53, 54–58, 84–85, 86–88, 173–75, 188, 190, 201
on retirement of Beanie Babies idea, 65
on success changing Warner’s personality, 189
unreleased memoir of, 209–10
on Warner’s treatment of Ricciardi, 162–63
McGowan, Lauren, 60, 212
McGowan, Sean, 104, 195
McGrath, Dan, 237–38, 239
McGwire, Mark, 160
McKnight, Dee, 192
Mahar, Maggie, 142
Major League Baseball Beanie Baby giveaways, 159–60
Manias, Panics, and Crashes: a History of Financial Crises (Kindleberger), 99
marketing tie-ins, for Beanie Babies. See licensing/marketing tie-ins, for Beanie Babies Marvelous Malia
Ty Girlz, 205–6
Mary Beth’s Beanies & More, 202
Mary Beth’s Beanie World (Mary Beth’s Bean Bag World Monthly), 2, 116, 139, 140, 167, 169, 170, 171,
183, 194, 197, 198–99, 202
mass-produced collectibles business. See collectibles business Matchbox, 50, 111
Mattel, 50, 82, 111
Millenium Bear, 177
Miller, Robert L., 145
Millionaire Matchmaker, The (TV show), 203
Mint Condition (Jamieson), 143–44
mom and pop toy and gift shops, 47–48, 77
Mona Lisa (painting), 100–101
Money Mania: Boom, Panics and Busts from Ancient Rome to the Great Meltdown (Swarup), 119–20
Monstaz, 9

o sta , 9
MsJanie.com, 134
murder, and Beanie Babies, 177–81
My Little Pony, 151
Mystic the Unicorn, 94
Nancy (cartoon), 192
National Commemorative Society, 68–69, 226. See also Franklin Mint National Examiner, 181
Nelson, Angela M. S., 141
Nelson, Sara, 94, 115–16
New Face Teddie the Bear, 62, 76
news media role, in Beanie Babies bubble, 100–101
New Yorker, 185
New York Times, 123, 147, 205
Next: The Future Just Happened (Lewis), 82
Nicholson, Bill, 169
Nickels, Annie, 192
Nip the Cat, 98
Nizamian, Harold, 14–16, 20, 22, 23, 24–25, 48, 231, 233–34
Noodle Kidoodle, 129
Novak, James, 216
#1 Bear, 3
Old Face Teddie the Bear, 62, 76, 92, 169, 172
Omidyar, Pierre, 122, 123–24
101 Greatest Baby Boomer Toys (Warman’s), 20
Orozco, John, 149
oversaturation of Beanie Babies market, in 1999, 182–84
Oxford Bank of Chicago, 158
Patti the Platypus, 60, 92, 98, 110
Peanut the Elephant, 97, 169, 199
Pei, I. M., 185–86
Peking the Panda, 76, 92
People, 10, 32, 33, 108, 217
Perfect Store, The (Cohen), 122, 125
Phillips, Becky, 75–76, 89, 92, 94, 96, 103, 149, 168, 203
Picture of Dorian Gray, The (movie), 87
Pillow Pals, 131
Pinchers the Lobster, 60
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette, 124
Pizza and Ice Cream Diet (Fox & Fox), 145
plates, 69–71
Playthings, 47, 74, 81, 82, 130
Plummer, Irene, 184, 196
plush business. See stuffed-animal business Podraza, Michael, 100
poems, for Beanie Babies, 109–10
Pop! Why Bubbles Are Great for the Economy (Gross), 241
POSEABLE PLUSH™, 39
Posner, Richard, 135–36, 145
Precious Moments 226

Precious Moments, 226
price lists or guides, for Beanie Babies, 93–94, 143–49
Foxes’ guide, 145–49
values, relationship to, 143
Warner sues publishers of, 144–45
Princess Diana bear, 66
product development, 49–51
Prudential Life Insurance, 230
psychology
of collecting, 132–33
of stuffed animals, 17
“Public Choices, Private Control” (Hallstein), 75
Publishers Weekly, 147
Quackers the Duck, 97
QVC, 68
RBT Enterprises, 63
retirement strategy, for Beanie Babies, 63–67, 75–76, 105, 112–18, 169, 170
Return to Sender (Fox & Fox), 145
Ricciardi, Bob, 161–63, 193
Richert, Gary, 217
Righty, 165
Rinker, Harry, 127, 145, 166, 167
Robinson, Chris, 167–68, 223–24
Robinson, Chris, Jr., 223–24
Roche, Patricia, 7, 22, 46, 55, 185, 204, 211, 234
on early years at Ty, Inc., 34, 35, 36, 38, 39, 47
as head of Ty UK, 85–86, 105–6, 186–87
meets and becomes friends with Warner, 28–30, 32
parts ways with Warner and Ty Europe, 222–23
relationship with Warner, 41–45, 51–53, 173–74
on Warner’s Beanie Kids idea, 188–89
Roche, Paul, 19, 21–22, 24, 25–26
rolling mix, 50
Roosevelt, Teddy, 80–81
Rose, Charlie, 124
Rosie’s Collectors’ Bulletin, 93
Russ, 32
Safer, Morley, 70
Sager, Ramona, 242
Sager, Robert, 242
Saint Augustine, 133
St. John’s Northwestern Military Academy, 215–17
Santa Barbara News-Press, 67
Schlossberg, Leon, 182, 226–30
Schlossberg, Sondra, 226–27
Screenie Beanies, 233
Segel, Joseph, 67–70, 71, 226
Sharp Isadore 186

Sharp, Isadore, 186
Shiller, Robert, 6, 100–101, 165–66
Short History of Financial Euphoria, A (Galbraith), 142, 196–97
Signature Bear, 186
Simmons, Harry, 177, 178–80
60 Minutes (TV show), 70, 124
Slither the Snake, 76, 172
Sly the Fox, 98
Sobolewski, Mary Beth, 73, 94, 99, 116, 117–18, 183, 184, 202, 203
Softbelly, 233
Solomon, Robert, 230–32
Song, Mary Lou, 122
Sosa, Sammy, 160
speculative bubble, defined, 166
Spitzer, Eliot, 142
Splash the Whale, 60, 159
Spokesman-Review, 243
Spook the Ghost, 65–66
Sporting News, 160
Spot the Dog, 60, 97
Squealer the Pig, 60
Steiff, 79–82
Steiff, Apollonia Margarete, 79–80, 81
Streit, Michael J., 242
Stripes the Tiger, 109
stuffed-animal business
decline in, since 1990s, 16–18, 40
economics of, 30–31
effect of Beanie Babies collapse on, 225–26
history of, 79–83
psychology of stuffed animals, 17
sales decline, in 1988, 48–49
teddy bears, rise of, 80–82
Warner decides to enter, 30–31
Sun Also Rises, The (Hemingway), 187
supply constriction strategy, 128–32
Swarup, Bob, 119–20
Sweet Sasha Ty Girlz, 205–6
Swirly the Snail, 65
Sykes, Jennifer, 100
Tank the Armadillo, 97
tax evasion conviction, of Ty Warner, 213–14, 218–19, 235–36
teddy bears, 80–82
Teenie Beanie Babies Happy Meal promotion, 155–59, 229
television toy commercials, 82
10 percent rule, and copyright infringement, 136
Terzian, Nina, 33–34
theft, of Beanie Babies, 176–77
They Cage the Animals at Night (Burch), 17
ThunderCats 151

ThunderCats, 151
Time, 68
Timeless-Toys, Inc., 15, 233–34
Tobin, Pep, 102
Today Show, The (TV show), 116
Tom Clark gnomes, 63–64
toy business
corporatization of, 82
stuffed animals (See stuffed-animal business) television commercials and, 82
Toy Manufacturers of America, 48–49
Trap the Mouse, 76, 92
Trivedi, Lina, 61, 108–16, 208, 220–21
Trivedi, Nikhil, 111
tulip mania, 2, 96, 165
Tumpack, John, 119, 120
Ty, Inc., 1. See also Beanie Babies; Warner, Ty airport stores and, 48
Angeline doll and, 204–5
Attic Treasures and, 62
Beanie Kids and other products released, in 2000, 197–98
bonuses to workers, 1998, 1, 3, 175–76
catalog, 1988, 38–39
first products of, 32
freelance designers, use of, 36–37
licensing/marketing tie-ins (See licensing/marketing tie-ins, for Beanie Babies) litigation related to
Beanie Babies of, 134–39, 144–45, 233
mom and pop toy and gift shops as focus of, 47–48, 77
naming of, 32
new corporate facilities and distribution center for, 160–61
post-craze licensing deals and, 206–7
product line offerings, number of, 46–47
retailers pushed to order products other than Beanie Babies, 185–86
sales of
in 1992, 46
in 1994, 62
in 1996, 103
in 1998, 170
in 1999, 187
in 2013, 207
in Canada, 187
in early 2000s, 201
in UK, 186–87
stuffed cats and, 32, 33–40
at Toy Fair, 2012, 9–13
trade show sales and, 34–36
Ty Girlz and, 205–6
up front payment policy of, 47
Warner’s day-to-day involvement in recent years, 10–11, 207
web site, 110–18, 207–8
Ty Girlz, 205–6
Ty Warner Penthouse, at Four Seasons Hotel, 10

Unleashing the Ideavirus (Godin), 93
USA Today, 147
vacuum cleaner story, 18–19
Van Guilder, Andi, 1, 2, 131
variations, in Beanie Babies, 97–99
Vasari, Giorgio, 100–101
Walgreens, 202
Wallos, Brian, 167, 192–93, 203
Wallos.com, 167
Wall Street Journal, 70, 100, 149, 175, 192
Walmart, 48
Walsh, Nicholas, 242–43
Warman’s, 20
Warner, Georgia, 31, 43–44, 45, 87–88, 215
Warner, Hal, 18, 22, 24, 27, 31, 32, 215–16, 218
Warner, Joy, 27, 31–32, 212, 213–15, 217, 240–41
Warner, Ty, 1, 3–4, 6–8. See also Beanie Babies; Ty, Inc.
charisma of, 34–35, 39–40, 46
childhood of, 31–32, 215
community service sentence of, 237–39
death of McGowan and, 212
declines interview, 12–13
depression following Dakin firing, 27–30
design and, 37–38
drops out of college, 217–18
early trade shows of Ty, Inc. and, 34–36
education of, 6, 216–18
estate planning, lack of, 244–45
fear of competitors stealing designs of, 36–37
fired at Dakin, Inc., 25–26
Four Seasons Hotel acquired by, 185–86
hand grooming of stuffed animals obsession with, 39
happiness/fulfillment, lack of, 234–35, 240–41
hotel investments of, 185–86, 202
hourly workers, treatment of, 107–9
ideas for ending Beanie Babies, 188–91
income of
in 1993, 53
in 1996, 104
in 1998, 4, 170
involvement in day to day operations of Ty, Inc., 10–11, 207
losses of, in 2004, 201
music box business with Capra, 27–28
named after Ty Cobb, 159
net worth of, 6, 244
obsessive attention to detail of, 35–36, 39–40
personality of, 21–22, 26
personal myths concocted by, 38

p
y
y,
plastic surgery of, 11–12, 84
pricing philosophy of, 46–47
product development approach of, 49–51
public information on, lack of, 6–7
reaction to early Beanie Babies mania, 103–6
real estate investments of, 10
relationship with father, 22, 27
relationship with McGowan, 53, 54–58, 84–85, 86–88, 173–75, 188, 190, 201
relationship with Roche, 41–45, 51–53, 173–74
as salesman at Dakin, Inc., 18–19, 20, 21–25
as sole designer of Beanie Babies, 3
at St. John’s Northwestern Military Academy, 215–17
tax evasion conviction of, 213–14, 218–19, 235–36
vacuum cleaner story and, 18–19
Webkinz, 205
Web site (Ty.com), 110–18
current state of, 207–8
as customer feedback source, 116–17
domain name, lawsuit related to and acquisition of, 110–111
guest book, 113–14
Info Beanies and, 112–13
promotion of, on Beanie Baby hangtags, 112
retirement rumors and announcements on, 112–18
Trivedi’s idea for, 110–112
Web the Spider, 76
Wehrs, Scott, 205
Wellness House, 150, 163
Wells, Rosie, 93, 120
West, Don, 114
Whisper the Deer, 244–45
White, Jeff, 177–81
Whitman, Meg, 124
Williams, Margery, 17
Winey, Sally, 17
Wisconsin State Journal, 74
word of mouth, in spreading craze for Beanie Babies, 92–93
Wrzesinski, Phil, 129, 130
Young, Kimberly, 126
Zany Brainy, 159
Zodiac Beanie Babies, 197–98

Looking for more?
Visit Penguin.com for more about this author and a
complete list of their books.
Discover your next great read!

