
“The Polyvagal Theory is at the leading edge of psychosomatic medicine and
body-mind therapies. It is a vital contribution to scientifically-informed clinical
practice. Psychologists, analysts, physicians, bodyworkers, and educators are
provided with an essential map to help guide them in tracking the
psychophysiological states of their clients, discern where they are ‘stuck,’ and
help them to heal and move forward in life. Dr. Porges’s great contribution is
now compiled in this one astounding comprehensive volume. It is a must-read
for clinicians and psychobiological researchers.”—Peter A. Levine, PhD, author
of In Unspoken Voice; How the Body Releases Trauma and Restores Goodness
and Trauma Through a Child’s Eyes: Awakening the Ordinary Miracle of
Healing.
“Stephen Porges has developed theories of the autonomic nervous system, based
on his sound research over many years, which have profound importance for our
understanding of human behavior, whether normal or pathological. Based on
evolutionary principles, and firmly embedded in neuroanatomy, his work
considerably broadens our understanding of the representation of emotion in the
brain, reaching parts that most contemporary texts never touch.”—Michael
Trimble, MD, author of The Soul in the Brain: The Cerebral Basis of Language,
Art, and Belief.

The Norton Series on Interpersonal Neurobiology Allan N. Schore, PhD,
Series Editor Daniel J. Siegel, MD, Founding Editor
 
The field of mental health is in a tremendously exciting period of growth
and conceptual reorganization. Independent findings from a variety of
scientific endeavors are converging in an interdisciplinary view of the
mind and mental well-being. An interpersonal neurobiology of human
development enables us to understand that the structure and function of the
mind and brain are shaped by experiences, especially those involving
emotional relationships.
The Norton Series on Interpersonal Neurobiology will provide cutting-
edge, multidisciplinary views that further our understanding of the
complex neurobiology of the human mind. By drawing on a wide range of
traditionally independent fields of research—such as neurobiology,
genetics, memory, attachment, complex systems, anthropology, and
evolutionary 
psychology—these 
texts 
will 
offer 
mental 
health
professionals a review and synthesis of scientific findings often
inaccessible to clinicians. These books aim to advance our understanding
of human experience by finding the unity of knowledge, or consilience,
that emerges with the translation of findings from numerous domains of
study into a common language and conceptual framework. The series will
integrate the best of modern science with the healing art of psychotherapy.

The Polyvagal Theory
Neurophysiological Foundations

of Emotions, Attachment,

Communication, and Self-Regulation
STEPHEN W. PORGES

Dedication
With love and respect
I dedicate this book to Sue Carter,
my wife and intellectual partner.

 

Contents
Cover
Title Page
Dedication
Foreword, by Bessel A. van der Kolk
Introduction: Why Is There a Polyvagal Theory?
PART I: THEORETICAL PRINCIPLES
1. Neuroception: A Subconscious System for Detecting Threat and Safety
2. Orienting in a Defensive World: Mammalian Modifications of Our
Evolutionary Heritage. A Polyvagal Theory
3. The Polyvagal Theory: New Insights Into Adaptive Reactions of the
Autonomic Nervous System
PART II: BIOBEHAVIORAL REGULATION DURING EARLY
DEVELOPMENT
4. Vagal Tone: A Physiological Marker of Stress Vulnerability
5. The Infant’s Sixth Sense: Awareness and Regulation of Bodily Processes
6. Physiological Regulation in High-Risk Infants: A Model for Assessment
and Potential Intervention
7. Infant Regulation of the Vagal “Brake” Predicts Child Behavior
Problems: A Psychobiological Model of Social Behavior
8. The Early Development of the Autonomic Nervous System Provides a

Neural Platform for Social Behavior
PART III: SOCIAL COMMUNICATION AND RELATIONSHIPS
9. Vagal Tone and the Physiological Regulation of Emotion
10. Emotion: An Evolutionary By-Product of the Neural Regulation of the
Autonomic Nervous System
11. Love: An Emergent Property of the Mammalian Autonomic Nervous
System
12. Social Engagement and Attachment: A Phylogenetic Perspective
13. The Polyvagal Hypothesis: Common Mechanisms Mediating Autonomic
Regulation, Vocalizations, and Listening
PART IV: THERAPEUTIC AND CLINICAL PERSPECTIVES
14. The Vagus: A Mediator of Behavioral and Physiological Features
Associated With Autism
15. Borderline Personality Disorder and Emotion Regulation
16. Abuse History Is Related to Autonomic Regulation
17. Music Therapy, Trauma, and the Polyvagal Theory
PART V: SOCIAL BEHAVIOR AND HEALTH
18. Reciprocal Influences Between Body and Brain in the Perception and
Expression of Affect
19. Neurobiology and Evolution: Mechanisms, Mediators, and Adaptive
Consequences of Caregiving

Epilogue
Credits
References
Acknowledgments
Copyright

 
Foreword
Bessel A. van der Kolk
It is an extraordinary experience to hear a new piece of music or a novel
scientific idea that makes you sit up in wonder and turns on a bank of lights in
your mind that permanently transforms how you understand what life is all
about. Seeing Peter Sellers’s production of the Marriage of Figaro, listening to
Elisabeth Kübler-Ross lecture on schizophrenia when I was a medical student,
and hearing Steve Maier talk about the neurobiology of inescapable shock at the
American College of Neuropsychopharmacology in 1984 were three such
unforgettable events for me.
On the morning of May 21, 1999, we had the most memorable series of
lectures of the 22 years that I have run the annual Boston trauma conference.
The day opened with Bruce McEwen talking about stress and the hippocampus.
He introduced the notion of neuroplasticity and showed that Ramon-y-Cahal’s
dire dictum that anatomy is destiny—that the neuronal connections in the brain
are immutably fixed—was incorrect. Jaak Panksepp, whose work has delineated
the brain circuits that underlie nurturance, fear, rage, and rough and tumble play,
was next. The final speaker that morning was Stephen Porges, who talked about
the polyvagal theory of emotions. That lecture caused a fundamental shift in how
I and many of my colleagues understand the work we do.
Clinicians and researchers who deal with people with histories of chronic
trauma are routinely confronted with fight, flight, or freeze reactions. Our
patients (and occasionally colleagues) easily take offense, and they often
disorganize their (and our) lives by becoming too angry, too ashamed, and too
frozen. Minor irritations easily turn into catastrophes; small failures of
communication are difficult to gloss over and easily turn into dramatic
interpersonal conflicts. The milk of human kindness, such an essential nutrient in
making life bearable, all too often fails to have a significant impact on the
despair, rage, and terror of people with histories of trauma and abandonment.
When post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) first made it into the diagnostic
manuals, we only focused on dramatic incidents like rapes, assaults, or accidents

to explain the origins of the emotional breakdowns in our patients. Gradually, we
came to understand that the most severe dysregulation occurred in people who,
as children, lacked a consistent caregiver. Emotional abuse, loss of caregivers,
inconsistency, and chronic misattunement showed up as the principal
contributors to a large variety of psychiatric problems (Dozier, Stovall, & Albus,
1999; Pianta, Egeland, & Adam, 1996). One of the most important discoveries in
psychology, neuroscience, and psychiatry has been that failure in establishing
secure early attachment bonds leads to a diminished capacity to regulate
negative emotions. Harlow and his students were the first to show the
devastating effects of abandonment and loss on affect regulation in nonhuman
primates. Half a century of attachment research has shown that people learn to
regulate their emotional arousal largely as a function of the capacity to establish
physical and rhythmical attunement with important figures in their early
caretaking environment (Trevarthen, 1999). Attachment researchers, starting
with John Bowlby, have long shown that the internal regulatory processes of an
individual reflect to a large degree the attunement with external sources of
regulation early in life (Bowlby, 1973, 1982; Cloitre, Stovall-McClough, Zorbas,
& Charuvastra, 2008; Hofer, 2006).
Having a history of chronic misattunement with one’s caregivers predisposes
people to have difficulties managing negative emotions later in life (Dozier et
al., 1999). Sadly, deficient affect regulation caused by early adverse experiences
is compounded by the resulting off-putting behaviors in the face of stress, such
as temper tantrums and emotional withdrawal (Shaver & Mikulincer, 2002).
Dysregulated behavior alienates potential friends and partners and interferes
with being able to garner support and accumulate restorative experiences. Lack
of affect regulation thus runs the danger of becoming a vicious circle, where
deficient self-control leads to abandonment, which in turn makes it even more
difficult to regulate negative mood states.
The problem does not end there, since routine psychiatric interventions are
quite ineffective in helping people manage their emotions (Cloitre, Stovall-
McClough, Miranda, & Chemtob, 2004), and the best that medications generally
can do is to dull emotional arousal of any kind, thereby robbing people of
pleasure and of pain simultaneously. Traditional psychotherapies also do not
offer much immediate relief, since being unable to manage emotional arousal
interferes with being able to benefit from treatments such as cognitive behavioral
therapy (Jaycox, Foa, & Morral, 1998).
Problems with affect regulation have pervasive effects on the development of

mind and brain and lead to significant increases in the utilization of medical,
correctional, social, and mental health services (Drossman et al., 1990; Teplin,
Abram, McClelland, Dulcan, & Mericle, 2002; Widom & Maxfield, 1996).
Many problems of children and adults with histories of chronic trauma and
neglect can be understood as efforts to minimize objective threat and to regulate
their emotional distress (Pynoos et al., 1987), and hence they are liable to be
labeled as “oppositional,” “rebellious,” “unmotivated,” and “antisocial”
(Cicchetti & White, 1990; Widom & Maxfield, 1996; Streeck-Fischer & van der
Kolk, 2000).
Our study of patients with abuse and neglect histories was helped
enormously by the developments in affective neuroscience, which clarified the
underlying neurobiology of many problems seen in these patients. Particularly
helpful was Panksepp’s (1998) work that elucidated the brain structures and
neural circuits involved in the basic emotional systems: seeking, rage, fear, lust,
care, panic, and play. But understanding the limbic circuits of emotions still did
not account for the precipitous shifts we see in our patients and their lack of
responsiveness to the voices and faces of people who care for them, input that
helps most people calm down and regain mastery over their senses. The question
remained: what causes the emotional systems of some people to be hijacked so
easily by slight changes in visual, auditory, kinesthetic, or olfactory input?
More than a decade ago, we became interested in a possible role of heart rate
variability (HRV) in the maintenance of these emotional roller coasters. This
gave us our first exposure to Porges’s polyvagal theory. When we started to
measure HRV, we observed that people who maintained relatively stable HRV
while remembering horrendous personal events did not seem to suffer from
PTSD, whereas people with PTSD generally had poor HRV. Porges’s polyvagal
theory provided us with an organizing principle for that observation, built on the
work of prior scientists such as Charles Darwin and William James, which
explained the central role of human interactions and body sensations in our
emotional lives.
Up to the time that we learned about the polyvagal theory we had been
taught that the autonomic nervous system is organized by the paired antagonism
between the sympathetic and the parasympathetic nervous systems, which
functionally compete by either increasing or decreasing activity of specific target
organs. The introduction of the polyvagal theory vastly expanded this model
with an emphasis on the social, myelinated vagus as the fine-tuning regulatory
system that opens up a role for the environment to foster or ameliorate stress-

related physiological states. Porges proposes that
phylogenetically, a hierarchical regulatory stress-response system
emerged in mammals that not only relies on the well-known sympathetic-
adrenal activating system and the parasympathetic inhibitory vagal
system, but that these systems are modified by myelinated vagus and the
cranial nerves that regulate facial expression which constitute the social
engagement system. Thus, phylogenetically, self-regulatory development
starts with a primitive behavioral inhibition system, progresses by the
evolution of a fight-flight system, and, in humans (and other primates),
culminates in a complex social engagement system mediated by facial
gestures and vocalizations.
Thus, the mammalian myelinated vagus functions as “an active vagal brake
that supports rapid behavioral mobilization, as well as the capacity to
physiologically stabilize an individual by means of interoceptive visceral
awareness, as well as social interaction.” According to Porges, this evolutionary
development allows social interactions to stabilize physiological arousal by
means of facial expressions, speech, and prosody. When the environment is
appraised as being safe, the defensive limbic structures are inhibited. This makes
it possible to be socially engaged with calm visceral states.
BREAKDOWN OF AFFECT
REGULATION
When that system breaks down, as we witness particularly under conditions of
extreme stress, the social vagus no longer can stabilize the organism. The
physiological cohesion that forms the basis of the interpersonal neurobiological
communication 
between 
different 
organisms 
breaks 
down, 
and 
the
phylogenetically “older” systems will be recruited to regulate metabolic output
to deal with environmental challenges. As long as people (and animals) feel
threatened, they cannot meaningfully engage with members of their tribe and
will resort to more primitive and solipsistic fight-or-flight behaviors
(mobilization mediated by the sympathetic nervous system) to ensure survival.
Under conditions of inescapable danger even fight or flight breaks down, which
leads to immobilization, with a resulting behavioral shutdown, and syncope (via

the unmyelinated vagus).
This theory made perfect sense and tied together numerous observations
from attachment research, animal ecology, anthropology, and trauma research.
To survive and thrive, mammals must be able to distinguish friend from foe,
know when a situation is safe or dangerous, and adjust their behavior to the
demands of the social group. Porges’s observations clarified the mechanisms
that allow humans and animals to be physically approached, what ties members
of the group together, and how the cohesion of the social group is a central
element in managing life’s stresses. The polyvagal theory also helps us
understand the capacity of the tone of voice and rhythms of speech, as well as
faces of our loved ones, to restore our physiological equilibrium.
VISCERAL EXPERIENCES
Another important contribution of the polyvagal theory is a clarification of the
relation between visceral state and emotional expression. Trauma researchers
understood early on that “the body keeps the score” (van der Kolk, 1994)—that
the memory of trauma is encoded in visceral experiences such as heartbreaking
and gut-wrenching emotions, in autoimmune disorders, and in skeletal-muscular
problems. Porges proposed that afferent feedback from the viscera contributes in
a major way to the accessibility of prosocial circuits associated with social
engagement. For example, mobilization changes our ability to detect positive
social cues, and immobilization may make a person impervious to positive input.
Visceral states color our perception of ourselves and our surroundings. The
physiological state the person is in precipitates very different outcomes in
response to the presentation of the same stimuli.
Internal bodily states are represented in the insula and contribute to
subjective feeling states. The insula (which is frequently found to be abnormally
activated in neuroimaging studies of traumatized individuals) is involved in the
perception of danger and mediates the feedback from the viscera into cognitive
awareness. Darwin and James both proposed that visceral experience is a critical
element in the experience of emotions and central to their understanding of
happiness, fear, anger, disgust, and sadness. Most people are able to gauge
danger and love by means of their “gut feelings,” which generally accurately
detect relative the danger or safety of their situation. People with impaired social
engagement systems are prone to misinterpret safety as a threat and objective

danger as safety. Their visceral feedback system fails to protect them, or
prevents them from engaging in the fullness of what life has to offer.
People who are chronically traumatized have a tendency to become
overwhelmed and triggered by their seemingly unmanageable visceral feedback
systems that cannot be modified by a functional social engagement system.
Consequently they try to inhibit sensory feedback from their bodies and
experience the feedback from both their bodies and the world around them as
bland and meaningless. Our observation that traumatized individuals habitually
engage in body-based defensive maneuvers led us to incorporate the work of
such body-based therapists as Peter Levine and Pat Ogden into our treatment
armamentarium. In fact, Peter Levine introduced me to Stephen Porges.
IMPLICATIONS FOR TREATMENT
The polyvagal theory of emotions has had a profound effect on helping us
organize the treatment of abused children and traumatized adults. True, we
might have developed a yoga program for chronically traumatized women
anyway, because they so obviously benefit from learning to calm themselves
down by learning to manage their breathing and engaging in challenging
physical poses that put them in touch with their dissociated bodies. We also
probably would have had a theater program in the Boston inner-city schools
where traumatized kids learn to play by engaging in rhythmical movements and
attuned collaborative exercises. And my friend Tina Packer would have taught
Shakespeare to juvenile delinquents anyway, because her profound knowledge
of the effects of hexameters and embodying the physical roles of Julius Caesar,
Romeo and Juliet, and Richard III compelled her to teach these dysregulated
adolescents to engage in and move between deep and varied physiological (and
hence mental) states by linking the expressive features of emotion with their
visceral responses. My colleagues Robert Macy and Steve Gross would have
developed their play techniques and chi qong–based therapies that they apply in
inner-city schools and to survivors of tsunamis, earthquakes, and political
violence around the world, even if they would never have learned the polyvagal
theory.
But the polyvagal theory ties all these disparate unconventional techniques
together, in that they all activate situations that in the past have precipitated the
participants into uncontrollable flight-or-fight and freeze modes, which, with

these various techniques that rely on interpersonal rhythms, visceral awareness
and the primary use of vocal and facial communication, attempt to reorganize
the perception of danger and capacity to manage emotional engagement.
It is difficult to trace all the sources of one’s inspiration, but Porges’s
polyvagal theory gave us a powerful means of understanding how both bodily
states and mental constructs dynamically interact with environmental triggers to
precipitate maladaptive behaviors. Porges helped us understand how dynamic
our biological systems are and gave us an explanation why a kind face and a
soothing tone of voice can dramatically alter the entire organization of the
human organism—that is, how being seen and understood can help shift people
out of disorganized and fearful states. We had long realized that
psychopathological states rarely are static and tend to fluctuate greatly
depending on the safety of the environment and the physiological state in which
people find themselves. The proposal that our physiological states are flexible,
and depend on both our relationship to our visceral experiences and the state of
our relationsips promises to decrease our dependence on drug treatment alone to
shift people into a different psychological organization. Recognizing the critical
role of visceral afferent feedback on the global functioning of the brain
inevitably leads to curiosity about the nonpharmacological treatments that have
so long been practiced outside of Western medical approaches: age-old traditions
of changing mental states with specific breath exercises, body movements (chi
qong, tai chi, tae kwon do, and yoga) and rhythmical activities (such as kendo
drumming and davening).
Several psychiatric disorders are characterized by difficulties in establishing
and maintaining relationships, including difficulty both in expressing social
behavior and in reading social cues (i.e., social awareness). Several psychiatric
diagnoses are associated with specific deficits in both the behavioral (e.g., poor
gaze, low facial affect, lack of prosody) and visceral (difficulties in autonomic
regulation resulting in cardiopulmonary and digestive problems) components of
the social engagement system.
If physiological mind–brain–viscera communication is the royal road to
affect regulation, this invites a radical shift in our therapeutic approaches to a
number 
of 
psychopathological 
states, 
such 
as 
anxiety, 
attention
deficit/hyperactivity disorder, autism, and trauma-related psychopathology. Such
a shift (for which there appears to be increasing support with increased funding
by both the Department of Defense and the National Institutes of Health of such
approaches as yoga, martial arts, and acupuncture studies) would ask us to

cultivate interpersonal rhythms, nurture the capacity for people to use their
voices and faces to regulate emotional states, and explore various body–mind
techniques that integrate visceral and emotional experiences. The polyvagal
theory legitimates the study of age-old collective and religious practices such as
communal chanting, various breathing techniques, and other methods that cause
shifts in autonomic state. The polyvagal theory implies that more attention needs
to be paid to the development of interventions that either promote activation of
the social vagus or dampen sympathetic tone. One major implication is the need
to pay closer attention to the therapeutic use of play, rough and tumble behaviors
that serve as preliminary exercises to develop adaptive defensive and aggressive
behaviors, as a means of shifting people out of fight-or-flight reactions into
loving and mutually engaged mobilization.

 
Introduction: Why Is There

a Polyvagal Theory?
The polyvagal theory emerged from a dialectic between my curiosity in
biobehavioral systems and my dissatisfaction with the prevalent models that
integrated physiological state with behavior. When I started my scientific career,
I was intrigued with the possibility of using physiological measures to
understand the psychological states of others. In the late 1960s, when I was in
graduate school, I had the vision that monitoring physiological state would be a
helpful guide to the therapist during the clinical interaction. This vision is still
part of my research agenda. I am still working on developing a polyvagal
monitor, which will provide feedback in real time to clinicians of the dynamic
interplay between the three neural circuits described in the polyvagal theory.
In the 1960s, the constructs and models relating physiology to behavior were
limited. Dominant in the human and psychophysiological literature was a
construct of arousal. The defining features of arousal were vague. However,
psychophysiologists assumed that arousal was mediated by the sympathetic
nervous system. Early psychophysiologists, such as Chester Darrow, proposed
continuity between cortical activation measured through electroencephalography
(EEG) and sympathetic arousal measured by the galvanic skin resistance
response on the hands. This view of a peripheral indicator of brain processes was
consistent with Pavlov’s use of autonomic measures in his classical conditioning
experiments. For Pavlov, the “classically” conditioned autonomic responses
were indices of changes in brain circuits. Arousal is still used in sleep research to
describe cortical activation and in research on deception in which traditional
polygraphs are used.
The specific physiological and neurophysiological mechanisms underlying
arousal are often associated with the sympathetic nervous system and the
hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal (HPA) axis. An inferred connection between the
sympathetic nervous system and the HPA axis has resulted in similar research
methods being used to study both arousal and stress. This sympathetic-centric
view has been translated into the popular press and public consciousness as a
cliché that a limited amount of stress is “good” and too much stress is “bad.” But
what were the thresholds of stress necessary for health or illness? In addition,

consistent with this sympathetic-centric view, we all were taught that the stress-
related sympathetic excitation had evolutionary origins in mammalian fight-or-
flight behaviors. Thus, we were taught that the increased sympathetic tone to
novelty and danger was a reflection of our evolutionary history.
At the time of my introduction to psychophysiology, physiological measures
were proposed as a portal into psychological processes without requiring
conscious awareness or verbal responses. This exciting discipline, however, was
constrained by a limited understanding of the neural mechanisms regulating the
physiological measures being monitored and an adequate understanding of the
mediating neural mechanisms linking peripheral autonomic responses to the
psychological processes of interest to the psychophysiologist.
Psychophysiology was established in the early 1960s as a discipline merging
features of psychology, medicine, physiology, and engineering. The Society for
Psychophysiological Research was formed in 1960 and the first issue of
society’s journal, Psychophysiology, was published in 1964. During its early
years, psychophysiology distinguished itself from physiological psychology by
focusing on physiology as a dependent variable and psychological factors (e.g.,
threat, novelty) and processes (e.g., attention, mental effort, emotion) as
independent variables. In contrast, physiological psychology manipulated
physiology (independent variable) and monitored changes in behavior and
psychological 
processes 
(i.e., 
dependent 
variable). 
In 
general,
psychophysiologists studied human subjects in their research paradigms,
whereas physiological psychologists studied animals. I joined the Society for
Psychophysiological Research in 1968 and attended my first meeting in 1969.
The early meetings were exciting, and many of the initial pioneers in the society
had been successful scientists in other domains. During my more than 40 years
of membership, I was involved in the society as a member of the board,
secretary-treasurer, and president. During this period, research interests and
methods shifted from peripheral measures of the autonomic nervous system to
measures of brain function employing EEG, event-related potentials, and
functional 
magnetic 
resonance 
imaging 
methods. 
Current 
issues 
of
Psychophysiology reflect this trend and focus on measures of brain function
during cognitive and affective challenges.
As an important consequence of this history, physiological variables were
seen as correlates of psychological processes. This view allowed researchers to
study parallels between physiology and behavior without understanding the
underlying relationship between these domains. Basically, there are two global

domains in the biobehavioral sciences: (1) behavior (observable) and
psychological (subjective) and (2) physiological (peripheral autonomic) and
neural (brain). Paradigms that correlate physiology and behavior or use
physiological variables as a biomarker of a clinical disorder are the consequence
of a modern Western scientific solution to the historical remnant of the mind–
body problem. The current scientific solutions of dualism are not solutions, but
merely objective descriptions of parallel functions with exquisite technologies.
Many scientists and disciplines are stuck in the dualism trap. New disciplines
have emerged such as cognitive neuroscience, affective neuroscience, social
neuroscience, health psychology, and several subdisciplines within public health
that use the methods that were developed in psychophysiological research to
provide biomarkers of illness. Currently, measures of heart rate variability and
neuroendocrine activity (e.g., cortisol, oxytocin, vasopressin) are frequently
described as potential biomarkers of clinical health and risk. The polyvagal
theory challenges this implicit dualism by providing a bidirectional brain–body
model that interprets the brain regulation of peripheral physiology (e.g., neural
regulation of both cardiovascular and endocrine function) as providing a neural
platform for emergent adaptive social and defensive behaviors (see chapter 8).
The academic arena of the late 1960s had a limited conceptualization of the
brain’s role in regulating peripheral physiology. Because the details of potential
mechanisms mediating the link between psychological processes and physiology
were unknown, scientists were comfortable with investigations applying
physiological measures as correlates of psychological processes and potential
biomarkers of mental and physical health. In 1970, I matriculated into this
academic arena with my doctorate and started conducting independent research
as an assistant professor
The roots of the polyvagal theory emerged while conducting research on
heart rate correlates of attention for my master’s thesis (Porges & Raskin, 1969).
In this study, I noted that when subjects focused their attention on the task
demands, the beat-to-beat heart rate pattern stabilized. The publication of the
master’s thesis became the first quantitative description of heart rate variability
as a response variable sensitive to psychological manipulations. My dissertation
followed this theme by testing the relation between heart rate variability and
reaction time performance. The dissertation confirmed that greater reductions in
heart rate variability were associated with faster reaction times. Moreover, the
study identified that individual differences in heart rate variability predicted
reaction time performance and the degree to which heart rate variability was

suppressed while attending (Porges, 1972). Throughout the following 40 years,
although methodologies and research questions have changed, my laboratory
research has continued to conduct studies monitoring heart rate and quantifying
heart rate variability.
How did an observation that heart rate stabilized during attention lead to the
polyvagal theory? There were a few intervening conceptualizations. First, I had
to link the changes in heart rate variability to vagal mechanisms. This was
accomplished through two stages: first, the development of quantification
techniques to characterize the rhythms in the beat-to-beat heart rate pattern, and
second, conducting validation studies to demonstrate that the amplitude of the
respiratory rhythm in heart rate (i.e., respiratory sinus arrhythmia) was a valid
indicator of vagal influences to the heart. By the early 1980s, this was in place.
The ideas coalesced and the concept of vagal tone was concretized in a vagal
tone monitor and software to enable other laboratories to use this sensitive index.
Although developed 30 years ago, the method I created for quantifying heart
rate variability is still being used in more than 100 laboratories worldwide. The
method has survived because it has five advantages over the scores of methods
that have been proposed during the intervening decades to quantify heart rate
variability: (1) the method enables dynamic monitoring of the shifts in vagal
control of heart over short periods of time, (2) it conforms to the statistical
assumptions necessary for parametric statistics, (3) it enables reliable estimates
even when the baseline of heart rate drifts and violates the assumption of
stationarity, (4) it is not moderated by respiration rate, and (5) the metric reflects
the same changes in vagal function across time and laboratories.
Once the quantification procedures were developed, validated, and packaged
in software and hardware, I thought the research world of autonomic
psychophysiology would expand. I believed that the sensitive quantification
methods would enable scores of scientists to investigate and study the critical
role that cardiac vagal tone played in physical and mental health and in
moderating social, affective, and cognitive behaviors and motor activity. With
these tools dozens of studies were conducted in laboratories around the world
with a common metric, and vagal tone became a familiar measure in
psychological and psychophysiological research.
Everything seemed relatively simple. Once there was a good measure of
parasympathetic activity (i.e., vagal tone), the sympathetic-centric worldview
would be challenged and constructs such as autonomic balance, arousal, and
stress, introduced decades before, could be studied within a more complete

physiological model that included dynamic measures of vagal tone. Interest in
vagal tone and heart rate variability grew, and several other metrics of vagal tone
derived from heart rate variability developed by other scientists also became
available to researchers. The movement from sympathetic-centric to dual
sympathetic-parasympathetic measures provided a comfortable haven for
researchers who had learned autonomic neurophysiology from a paired-
antagonism 
perspective 
(i.e., 
the 
balance 
between 
sympathetic 
and
parasympathetic influences). Thus, my research provided a critical measurement
tool that would enable researchers to study the dynamically changing interplay
between the sympathetic and the parasympathetic components of the autonomic
nervous system. This conceptualization of cardiac vagal tone did not challenge
the existing dogma presented in textbooks of the autonomic nervous system as a
paired-antagonistic system.
VAGAL PARADOX
Although I had vested interests in vagal regulation, I was not uncomfortable with
the paired-antagonism model of the autonomic nervous system. By 1990, I saw
my contribution to psychophysiology and psychobiology as presenting the other
side of autonomic function to a sympathetic-centric research world. I saw the
importance of tonic levels of vagal activity as an index of general neural health
and as a protective feature. In my writings I started to discuss the autonomic
nervous system as a bidirectional system that involved potent visceral feedback
(see chapter 5) and central structures in the regulation of physiological and
emotional state (see chapter 9).
In the early 1990s I had not incorporated into my research perspective the
three important points that led to the conceptualization of the polyvagal theory.
First, although I wrote about the importance of having high vagal tone as a
positive health index, I did not conceptualize autonomic reactions as being
hierarchical. For example, I did not conceptualize the vagus as being inhibitory
of the sympathetic regulation of the heart. Second, I had no understanding of
how the neural regulation of the autonomic nervous system changed during
evolution and how these changes would be related to adaptive physiological and
behavioral functions in mammals. Third, although I knew that vagal pathways
originated from two brainstem nuclei (dorsal motor nucleus of the vagus and the
nucleus ambiguus), I did not think too much about their relative functions.

By 1992, I was confident that my research was on the right track and looked
forward to expanding my projects and collaborations with the technologies I had
developed. I thought the hard work was done and looked forward to new
discoveries applying these technologies to clinical populations. I had no
intention of developing a theory that would require a deep understanding of
evolution and the adaptive behavioral functions that covaried with the
phylogenetic changes in neural regulation of the autonomic nervous system. I
had no intention to challenge either the prevalent theoretical models of the
autonomic nervous system (i.e., paired antagonism) or the application of
physiological monitoring as correlates of psychological processes and as
potential “biomarkers” for health and disease.
My intellectual complacency did not last. The jolt came in the form a
complimentary letter from a neonatologist that I received shortly after I
published an article in September 1992 (see chapter 4). The neonatologist wrote
that although he liked my article, it was not consistent with what he learned in
medical school. The paper described evidence that measuring cardiac vagal tone
(i.e., respiratory sinus arrhythmia) derived from the beat-to-beat heart rate in
newborn infants provided a sensitive index of clinical status. The study reported
consistently higher cardiac vagal tone in healthy full-term newborns, while
lower cardiac vagal tone at about the time of discharge for premature infants. In
his letter he stated that he had learned that high vagal tone was bad for newborns
and could kill them, and he ended by stating that perhaps too much of a good
thing is bad. Something was not right with this conclusion. Having conducted
research in newborn nurseries since 1970, I tried to understand his statements
from his training and observations. When I took his perspective, I immediately
realized that risk to the newborn was associated with vagal-mediated
bradycardia. Bradycardia is a massive slowing of heart rate that if prolonged,
may result in depriving the brain of needed oxygen. In contrast, I was looking at
a protective feature of the vagus, the beat-to-beat variability that had a
respiratory rhythm. By the time I published this paper, we had collected
sufficient data from both human newborns and fetuses to realize that bradycardia
occurred only when the tonic pattern of beat-to-beat heart rate was relatively flat
(i.e., no or very low-amplitude respiratory sinus arrhythmia). I had interpreted
this pattern as a lack of vagal influence to the heart. Now I understood why
obstetricians and neonatologists, who used beat-to-beat heart rate variability as a
biomarker of clinical status, made no inference regarding mechanism.
I was in an intellectual quandary. I had been arguing that cardiac vagal tone

was a positive clinical index that could be measured by respiratory sinus
arrhythmia. Now there was the possibility that there were two heart rate
measures with vagal origins, one protective and the other potentially lethal.
Among neonatologists and obstetricians there was an acceptance that beat-to-
beat heart rate variability had clinical significance, although the neural
mechanisms mediating this clinically relevant biomarker were not known and
there appeared to be no motivation to identify the mechanisms. In contrast, rapid
massive bradycardias were clearly mediated by transitory vagal surges.
How could the vagal regulation of the heart be an index of resilience and
health when it was represented in high-amplitude respiratory sinus arrhythmia
and an index of risk when it was represented in bradycardia? This question
challenged my understanding of the autonomic nervous system. I placed the
letter from the neonatologist in my briefcase, where it remained for about 2 years
as I formulated the basis for the polyvagal theory. I labeled this contradiction in
our understanding of the vagus the vagal paradox. My motivation to solve the
vagal paradox led to new conceptualizations of the autonomic nervous system
and the formulation of the polyvagal theory. Only with the new understandings
gained from the polyvagal theory would the vagal paradox be deciphered and the
hierarchical nature of the neural regulation and the adaptive functions of in the
autonomic nervous system understood.
From fall 1992 through fall 1994, I worked on integrating the literature on
the autonomic nervous system and extracting a series of organizing principles
that became the core of the theory. During this period, in addition to my
professorship at the University of Maryland, I was a visiting scientist at the
National Institutes of Health (NIH). As such, I had access to the excellent NIH
library and the National Library of Medicine. With these resources, I immersed
myself in the literature and read hundreds of articles and numerous books on the
neural regulation of the autonomic nervous system in vertebrates. The polyvagal
theory was the product of this work and was presented on October 8, 1994, in
my presidential address to the Society for Psychophysiological Research (see
chapter 2).
Since the initial presentation, the theory has been refined and expanded (see
Porges, 2001a, 2007a). By selecting and editing previously published papers, the
chapters in this book provide an opportunity to share the discoveries of the
theory. The chapters include the presentation of the initial theory (see chapter 2)
and the expansion and elaboration of ideas dependent on the theory, including
vagal brake (see chapter 7), self-regulation (see chapter 6), development (see

chapter 8), emotion (see chapters 9 and 10), evolution and dissolution (see
chapter 10), immobilization without fear (see chapter 11), the social engagement
system (see chapters 11, 12, and 13), attachment (see chapter 12), love and
monogamy (see chapter 11), neuroception (see chapters 1 and 12), prosody and
vocal communication (see chapter 13), clinical applications (see chapters 14, 15,
16, and 17), and our current work redefining social neuroscience (see chapters
18 and 19). Chapter 3 has been included as a succinct summary of the major
points of the theory (e.g., vagal paradox, dissolution, social engagement system,
neuroception) and may be helpful in clarifying chapters in which the
presentation of the theory has been abridged.

PART I
THEORETICAL PRINCIPLES

CHAPTER 1
Neuroception: A Subconscious System for
Detecting Threat and Safety
What determines how two human beings will act toward each other when they
meet? Is this initial response a product of learning from culture, family
experiences, and other socialization processes? Or is the response the expression
of a neurobiological process that is programmed into the very DNA of our
species? If the response has a neurobiological basis, are there specific features of
the other person’s behavior that trigger either feelings of safety, love, and
comfort or feelings of danger? Why do some children cuddle and warmly
conform to embraces, yet others stiffen and pull back from the same overture?
Why do some children smile and actively engage a new person, while others
avert their gaze and withdraw?
Does knowledge of human biology help us understand the triggers and
mechanisms of these behaviors during normal development? If we learn how
behavioral features trigger neural circuits that facilitate social behavior, will we
be better able to help children with severe developmental disabilities, such as
autism, improve their social behavior?
By processing information from the environment through the senses, the
nervous system continually evaluates risk. I have coined the term neuroception
to describe how neural circuits distinguish whether situations or people are safe,
dangerous, or life-threatening. Because of our heritage as a species, neuroception
takes place in primitive parts of the brain, without our conscious awareness. The
detection of a person as safe or dangerous triggers neurobiologically determined
prosocial or defensive behaviors. Even though we may not be aware of danger
on a cognitive level, on a neurophysiological level, our body has already started
a sequence of neural processes that would facilitate adaptive defense behaviors

such as fight, flight, or freeze.
A child’s (or an adult’s) nervous system may detect danger or a threat to life
when the child enters a new environment or meets a strange person. Cognitively,
there is no reason for them to be frightened. But often, even if they understand
this, their bodies betray them. Sometimes this betrayal is private; only they are
aware that their hearts are beating fast and contracting with such force that they
start to sway. For others, the responses are more overt. They may tremble. Their
faces may flush, or perspiration may pour from their hands and forehead. Still
others may become pale and dizzy and feel precipitously faint.
This process of neuroception would explain why a baby coos at a familiar
caregiver but cries at the approach of a stranger, or why a toddler enjoys a
parent’s gentle embrace but interprets the same gesture from a stranger as an
assault. We can see the process at work when two toddlers encounter each other
in a playground sandbox. They may decide that the situation and each other are
safe if the sandbox is familiar territory, if their pails and shovels have roughly
similar appeal, and if they (the toddlers) are about the same size. The toddlers
may then express positive social engagement behaviors—in other words, they
may start to play.
“Playing nice” comes naturally when our neuroception detects safety and
promotes physiological states that support social behavior. However, prosocial
behavior will not occur when our neuroception misreads the environmental cues
and triggers physiological states that support defensive strategies. After all,
“playing nice” is not appropriate or adaptive behavior in dangerous or life-
threatening situations. In these situations, humans—like other mammals—react
with more primitive neurobiological defense systems. To create relationships,
humans must subdue these defensive reactions to engage, attach, and form
lasting social bonds. Humans have adaptive neurobehavioral systems for both
prosocial and defensive behaviors.
What allows engagement behaviors to occur, while disabling the
mechanisms of defense? To switch effectively from defensive to social
engagement strategies, the nervous system must do two things: (1) assess risk,
and (2) if the environment looks safe, inhibit the primitive defensive reactions to
fight, flee, or freeze.
By processing information from the environment through the senses, the
nervous system continually evaluates risk. As evolution has proceeded, new
neural systems have developed. These systems use some of the same brain
structures that are involved in defense functions to support forms of social

engagement. Neuroception now may encourage the development of social bonds
and provide the opportunity for reproduction.
SOCIAL ENGAGEMENT AND DEFENSIVE BEHAVIOR:
ADAPTIVE OR MALADAPTIVE STRATEGIES?
Social engagement and defense behaviors may be adaptive or maladaptive,
depending on the level of risk that is present in the environment. From a clinical
perspective, the defining features of psychopathology may include either a
person’s inability to inhibit defense systems in a safe environment or the
inability to activate defense systems in a risky environment—or both. Only in a
safe environment is it adaptive and appropriate to simultaneously inhibit defense
systems and exhibit positive social engagement behavior. Faulty neuroception—
that is, an inaccurate assessment of the safety or danger of a situation—might
contribute to the maladaptive physiological reactivity and the expression of
defensive behaviors associated with specific psychiatric disorders. In typically
developing children, however, neuroception detects risk accurately. Children’s
cognitive awareness of risk matches their “gut response” to danger.
When our nervous system detects safety, our metabolic demands adjust.
Stress responses that are associated with fight and flight—such as increases in
heart rate and cortisol mediated by the sympathetic nervous system and
hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis—are dampened. Similarly, a neuroception
of safety keeps us from entering physiological states that are characterized by
massive drops in blood pressure and heart rate, fainting, and apnea—states that
would support “freezing” and “shutdown” behaviors.
How does the nervous system know when the environment is safe,
dangerous, or life-threatening? What neural mechanisms evaluate risk in the
environment? New technologies, such as functional magnetic resonance
imaging, have identified specific neural structures that are involved in detecting
risk. Specific areas of the brain detect and evaluate features, such as body and
face movements and vocalizations that contribute to an impression of safety or
trustworthiness. Researchers have identified an area in the cortex that becomes
activated when we see familiar faces and hear familiar voices. This process of
identifying familiar and trustworthy people and evaluating the intentions of
others based on “biological movements” of face and limbs seems to be located in
the temporal lobe of the cortex. If neuroception identifies a person as safe, then a
neural circuit actively inhibits areas of the brain that organize the defensive

strategies of fight, flight, and freeze. Slight changes in the biological movements
that we see can shift a neuroception from “safe” to “dangerous.” When this shift
occurs, the neural systems associated with prosocial behavior are disrupted, and
the neural systems associated with defensive strategies are triggered.
In the presence of a safe person, then, the active inhibition of the brain areas
that control defense strategies provides an opportunity for social behavior to
occur spontaneously. Thus, the appearance of a friend or caregiver would subdue
the neural circuits in the brain that regulate defensive strategies. As a
consequence, closeness, physical contact, and other social engagement behaviors
become possible. In contrast, when situations appear risky, the brain circuits that
regulate defense strategies are activated. Social approaches are met with
aggressive behavior or withdrawal.
IMMOBILIZATION WITHOUT FEAR
As we have seen, humans have three principal defense strategies—fight, flight,
and freeze. We are familiar with fight and flight behaviors, but know less about
the defense strategy of immobilization, or freezing. This strategy, shared with
early vertebrates, is often expressed in mammals as “death feigning.” In humans,
we observe a behavioral shutdown, frequently accompanied by very weak
muscle tone. We also observe physiological changes: heart rate and breathing
slow, and blood pressure drops.
Immobilization, or freezing, is one of our species’s most ancient mechanisms
of defense. Inhibiting movement slows our metabolism (reducing our need for
food) and raises our pain threshold. But in addition to freezing defensively,
mammals immobilize themselves for essential prosocial activities, including
conception, childbirth, nursing, and the establishment of social bonds. For
example, when an infant nurses, the mother has to restrain her movements.
When a child is embraced, the child is functionally immobilized. Reproductive
behaviors also involve a degree of immobilization. However, immobilization
with fear elicits profound, potentially lethal, physiological changes (i.e.,
dramatic slowing of heart rate, cessation of breathing, and dropping of blood
pressure). Through the process of evolution, neural circuits in the brain that were
originally involved in freezing behaviors were modified to serve intimate social
needs. Over time, these brain structures grew receptors for a neuropeptide
known as oxytocin. Oxytocin is released during the birth process and nursing. It
is also released in the brain during activities that help establish social bonds.

Thus, when we sense that our environment is safe, the release of oxytocin allows
us to enjoy the comfort of an embrace without fear. But if our nervous system
identifies someone as dangerous, although oxytocin may be released, we
struggle against the attempted embrace.
SOCIAL ENGAGEMENT: THE PREAMBLE TO A SOCIAL
BOND
To develop a social bond, it it not enough to inhibit defense systems. People
must also be physically close to each other. This is true whether they are a
mother and baby forming an attachment relationship or two adults forming a
social bond. There are, of course, major differences between the contexts in
which mother–infant attachment and the social bonds of reproductive partners
are established. Consider mobility, for example. Due to immature neural
development, the baby has limited ability to move either toward or away from
the mother. In contrast, two adults who may become reproductive partners are
likely to have similar behavioral repertoires.
If the creation of social bonds depended on voluntary motor behaviors, then
the human newborn would be greatly disadvantaged: The neural regulation of
the spinal motor pathways is immature at the time of birth and takes several
years to develop fully. Fortunately, social engagement does not depend on how
well we can regulate our limbs and move our bodies. Voluntary limb and trunk
movement require neural pathways linking the cortex to spinal nerves (i.e.,
corticospinal pathways). Social engagement depends, rather, on how well we can
regulate the muscles of our faces and heads via pathways linking the cortex with
the brainstem (i.e., corticobulbar pathways). These are the muscles that give
expression to our faces, allow us to gesture with our heads, put intonation into
our voices, direct our gaze, and permit us to distinguish human voices from
background sounds. Corticospinal pathways to spinal nerves regulate the
muscles that control the trunk and limbs; corticobulbar pathways to cranial
nerves regulate the muscles of the face and head. The neural pathways from the
cortex to these nerves (i.e., corticobulbar) are myelinated sufficiently at birth to
allow the infant to signal a caregiver by vocalizing or grimacing and to engage
the social and nutrient aspects of the world by gazing, smiling, and sucking.
The neural regulation of the muscles of the face and head influences how
someone perceives the engagement behaviors of others. More specifically, this
neural regulation can reduce social distance by allowing humans (including

infants) to:
• make eye contact;
• vocalize with an appealing inflection and rhythm;
• display contingent facial expressions; and
• modulate the middle-ear muscles to distinguish the human voice from
background sounds more efficiently.
Alternatively, when the tone of these muscles is reduced, which occurs
spontaneously in response to a neuroception of danger or a life threat in the
external environment (e.g., a dangerous person or situation) or the internal
environment (e.g., fever, pain, or physical illness) environment:
• the eyelids droop;
• the voice loses inflection;
• positive facial expressions dwindle;
• awareness of the sound of the human voice becomes less acute; and
• sensitivity to others’ social engagement behaviors decreases.
It is important to remember that neuroception of danger or a threat to life can
occur with respect to the external environment (e.g., a dangerous person or
situation) or the internal environment (e.g., fever, pain, or physical illness). Even
flat (rather than angry) facial affect might prompt a neuroception of danger or
fear and disrupt the development of normal spontaneous interactive and
reciprocal social engagements. For example, the flat affect of a depressed parent
or the flat affect of an ill child might trigger a transactional spiral that results in
compromised emotional regulation and limited spontaneous social engagement.
POLYVAGAL THEORY: THREE NEURAL CIRCUITS THAT
REGULATE REACTIVITY
Where do humans’ intricate neurobehavioral systems for prosocial and defensive
behaviors come from? As we have suggested earlier, mammals—including
humans—must distinguish friend from foe, evaluate the safety of the
environment, and communicate with their social unit. According to the
polyvagal theory (see chapters 2, 5, 10, and 11; Porges, 2001a), mammals—

especially primates—have evolved brain structures that regulate both social and
defensive behaviors. In other words, evolutionary forces have molded both
human physiology and human behavior. As the vertebrate nervous system
became more complex during the course of evolution, its affective and
behavioral repertoire expanded. A product of this phylogenetic process is a
nervous system that provides humans with the ability to express emotions,
communicate, and regulate bodily and behavioral states.
The polyvagal theory links the evolution of the neural regulation of the heart
to affective experience, emotional expression, facial gestures, vocal
communication, and social behavior that is responsive to the behavior of others.
The theory points out that the neural control of the heart is neuroanatomically
linked to the neural control the muscles of the face and head.
The polyvagal theory describes three stages in the development of a
mammal’s autonomic nervous system. Each of the three major adaptive
behavioral strategies is supported by a distinct neural circuit involving the
autonomic nervous system.
1. Immobilization
• Feigning death, behavioral shutdown.
• The most primitive component, shared with most vertebrates.
• Dependent on the oldest branch of the vagus nerve (an unmyelinated
portion originating in an area of the brainstem known as the dorsal motor
nucleus of the vagus).
2. Mobilization
• Fight-or-flight behaviors.
• Dependent on the functioning of the sympathetic nervous system, a
system associated with increasing metabolic activity and increasing
cardiac output (e.g., faster heart rate, greater ability of the heart to
contract).
3. Social communication or social engagement

• Facial expression, vocalization, listening.
• Dependent on the myelinated vagus, which originates in an area of the
brainstem known as the nucleus ambiguus. The myelinated vagus fosters
calm behavioral states by inhibiting the influence of the sympathetic
nervous system on the heart.
Infants, young children, and adults need appropriate social engagement
strategies in order to form positive attachments and social bonds. At the
University of Illinois at Chicago, we have been developing a model that links
social engagement to attachment and the formation of social bonds through the
following steps.
1. Three well-defined neural circuits support social engagement behaviors,
mobilization, and immobilization.
2. Independent of conscious awareness, the nervous system evaluates risk in
the environment and regulates the expression of adaptive behavior to
match the neuroception of an environment that is safe, dangerous, or life-
threatening.
3. A neuroception of safety is necessary before social engagement behaviors
can occur. These behaviors are accompanied by the benefits of the
physiological states, associated with social support.
4. Social behaviors associated with nursing, reproduction, and the formation
of strong pair bonds requires immobilization without fear.
5. Oxytocin, a neuropeptide involved in the formation of social bonds, makes
immobilization without fear possible by blocking defensive freezing
behaviors.
NEUROCEPTION AND MENTAL HEALTH DISORDERS
So far, we have been discussing neuroception that works. Ideally, a baby’s
neuroception of her environment shows her a safe place to explore. But even if
her neuroception warns her—accurately—of danger from a “frightened or
frightening” caregiver, the baby can take some defensive measures, even though
they are likely to be ineffective and are almost certain to be psychologically
costly. What happens when neuroception itself is impaired? From a theoretical
perspective, faulty neuroception—that is, an inability to detect accurately

whether the environment is safe or another person is trustworthy—might lie at
the root of several psychiatric disorders.
• Areas in the temporal cortex that are assumed to inhibit fight, flight, or
freeze reactions are not activated in people with autism or schizophrenia,
who have difficulty with social engagement.
• Individuals with anxiety disorders and depression have compromised social
behavior; difficulties in regulating heart rate, as reflected in measures of
vagal control of the heart and reduced facial expressiveness.
• Maltreated and institutionalized children with reactive attachment disorder
tend to be either inhibited (emotionally withdrawn and unresponsive) or
uninhibited (indiscriminate in their attachment behavior; Zeanah, 2000).
Both types of behavior suggest faulty neuroception of the risk in the
environment.
Recent research on children raised in Romanian orphanages has stimulated
interest in reactive attachment disorders and in finding ways to remediate the
devastating disturbances in their social development. If the behavior of these
children suggests faulty neuroception of risk in the environment, are there
features in the environment that might help the children feel safer and then begin
to move toward more normal social behavior?
A study of Romanian toddlers being raised in an orphanage (Smyke,
Dumitrescu, & Zeanah, 2002) illustrates the usefulness of the construct of
neuroception in understanding the development of normal and atypical
attachment behaviors. Researchers evaluated two groups of institutionalized
children and compared them to children who had never been institutionalized.
One group of institutionalized children (the standard unit) was cared for
according to prevailing standards: 20 different caregivers worked rotating shifts,
with approximately 3 caregivers for 30 children on each shift. A second group of
children, the pilot unit, consisted of 10 children with 4 caregivers. If we apply
our concept of neuroception to this study, we would hypothesize that familiar
caregivers would be essential to children’s neuroception of safety—which, in
turn, would be essential for the promotion of appropriate social behavior.
Specifically, a child’s ability to recognize a caregiver’s face, voice, and
movements (the features that define a safe and trustworthy person) should set in
motion the process of subduing the limbic system and allowing the social
engagement system to function.

The data from the Smyke et al. (2002) study supports our hypothesis. The
higher the number of caregivers children had contact with, the higher the
incidence of reactive attachment disorder among these children. The standard-
unit children were more likely than the other two groups to have reactive
attachment disorder. On some indices of reactive attachment disorder, the pilot-
group children did not differ from the children who had never been
institutionalized. These findings suggest that once we understand the contextual
and social features that inhibit the neural circuits which mediate defensive
behavioral strategies, we can “optimize” the development of prosocial behavior.
At the University of Illinois at Chicago, we are using a newly developed
biologically based behavioral intervention based on principles derived from the
polyvagal theory. We are testing this approach with children with autism and
individuals with language and social communication problems. Our model
assumes that for many children with social communication deficits, including
those diagnosed with autism, the social engagement system is neuroanatomically
and neurophysiologically intact. Yet these children do not engage in voluntary
prosocial behaviors. To improve spontaneous social behavior, we have reasoned,
an intervention must stimulate the neural circuits that regulate the muscles of the
face and head. The polyvagal theory predicts that once the cortical regulation of
the brainstem structures involved in the social engagement are activated, social
behavior and communication will spontaneously occur as the natural emergent
properties of this biological system. The intervention “stimulates” and
“exercises” the neural pathways involved in listening and simultaneously
stimulates the function of other aspects of the social engagement system. The
intervention provides acoustic stimulation that has been computer altered to
systematically modulate the neural regulation of the middle-ear muscles.
Theoretically, the middle-ear muscles need to be regulated during listening, and
the nerves that regulate these muscles are linked to the nerves that regulate the
other muscles of the face and head involved in social engagement. Preliminary
results are promising. They suggest that interventions designed to improve
spontaneous social behavior should: (1) ensure that the context elicits in
participants a neuroception of safety that will allow the social engagement
system to function; and (2) exercise the neural regulation of the social
engagement system.
CONCLUSIONS

According to the polyvagal theory (including the concept of neuroception), our
range of social behavior is limited by our human physiology, which has evolved
from that of more primitive vertebrates. When we are frightened, we are
dependent on the neural circuits that evolved to provide adaptive defensive
behaviors for more primitive vertebrates. These neural circuits provide
physiological 
mechanisms 
that 
reflexively 
organize 
mobilization 
or
immobilization behaviors before we are consciously aware of what is happening.
When, on the other hand, neuroception tells us that an environment is safe and
that the people in this environment are trustworthy, our mechanisms of defense
are disabled. We can then behave in ways that encourage social engagement and
positive attachment.
Focusing on biologically based behaviors common to all humans allows
practitioners to imagine new intervention paradigms to help children whose
social behavior and attachment are compromised. We can alter the caregiving
environment so that it will appear—and be—safer for children and less likely to
evoke mobilization or immobilization responses. We can also intervene directly
with children, exercising the neural regulation of brainstem structures,
stimulating the neural regulation of the social engagement system, and
encouraging positive social behavior.

CHAPTER 2
Orienting in a Defensive World: Mammalian
Modifications of Our Evolutionary Heritage
A Polyvagal Theory
The systematic investigation of mind–body relations forms the scientific basis
for the science of psychophysiology. Unlike the correlative view of mind–body
evaluations that dominates psychology and psychiatry, psychophysiology
emphasizes a continuity between neurophysiological and psychological
processing. Psychophysiologists assume that the nervous system provides the
functional units for the bidirectional transduction of psychological and
physiological processes. Thus, from a psychophysiological perspective, it is
possible to link psychological processes with neurophysiological processes and
brain structures by measurement and not just theory.
This chapter will focus on neural regulation of the heart by the vagus and
how this regulation evolved to facilitate specific psychological processes. The
polyvagal theory, as described in this chapter, provides an explanation of how
the vagal pathways regulate heart rate in response to novelty and to a variety of
stressors. The theory proposes that through evolution mammals developed two
vagal systems: a phylogenetic relic of amphibians and reptiles and an
evolutionary modification unique to mammals. According to the polyvagal
theory, the two vagal systems are programmed with different response strategies
and may respond in a contradictory manner. Explanations for several
psychophysiological phenomena and psychosomatic disturbances will be
proposed. The theory is based on an established literature in neurophysiology,
neuroanatomy, and psychophysiology.
AROUSAL THEORY: HISTORICAL LEGACY

AROUSAL THEORY: HISTORICAL LEGACY
Early psychophysiological research assumed that peripheral autonomic measures
provided sensitive indicators of arousal or activation (Darrow, Jost, Solomon, &
Mergener, 1942; Duffy, 1957; Lindsley, 1951; Malmo, 1959). This view was
based on a rudimentary understanding of the autonomic nervous system in which
changes in electrodermal activity and heart rate were assumed to be accurate
indicators of sympathetic activity. As the activation-arousal theory developed, a
continuity between peripheral autonomic responses and central mechanisms was
assumed. According to this assumption, any organ influenced by sympathetic
efferent fibers, such as the sudomotor, vascular, or cardiac systems, was a
potential indicator of limbic or cortical activity.
Although the specific pathways relating these various levels were never
outlined and are still sketchy, electrodermal and heart rate measures became the
primary focus of research during the early history of the Society for
Psychophysiological Research. This was due to their presumed sympathetic
innervation and, in part, to their measurement availability. By default, this
emphasis created a research environment that neglected several important
factors: (a) parasympathetic influences, (b) interactions between sympathetic and
parasympathetic processes, (c) peripheral autonomic afferents, (d) central
regulatory structures, (e) the adaptive and dynamic nature of the autonomic
nervous system, and (f) phylogenetic and ontogenetic differences in structural
organization and function.
The neglect of these concepts and an emphasis on a global construct of
arousal still abide within various subdisciplines of psychology, psychiatry, and
physiology. This outdated view of arousal may restrict an understanding of how
the autonomic nervous system interfaces with the environment and the
contribution of the autonomic nervous system to psychological and behavioral
processes. In contrast, more recent neurophysiological data promote a more
integrative view of the autonomic nervous system.
BRAIN-HEART COMMUNICATION: HISTORICAL
PERSPECTIVE
When we view living organisms as a collection of dynamic, adaptive,
interactive, and interdependent physiological systems, it is no longer appropriate
to treat the autonomic nervous system as functionally distinct from the central
nervous system. We start to recognize that peripheral organs do not “float in a

visceral sea.” Rather, they are anchored to central structures by means of efferent
pathways and are continuously signaling central regulatory structures along their
abundant afferent pathways. Thus, the bidirectional connections between
autonomic and central brain structures are becoming apparent. Accordingly, new
theories and research strategies must incorporate the dynamic and interactive
constructs that link central structures with peripheral organs.
Darwin (1872) provided historical insight into the potential importance of the
vagus in bidirectional communication between the brain and the heart. Although
Darwin focused on facial expressions in defining emotions, he acknowledged the
dynamic relationship between the vagus and the central nervous system activity
that accompanied the spontaneous expression of emotions. He speculated that
there were identifiable neural pathways that provided the necessary
communication between specific brain structures and peripheral organs to
promote the unique pattern of autonomic activity associated with emotions. For
example:
when the mind is strongly excited, we might expect that it would
instantly affect in a direct manner the heart; and this is universally
acknowledged . . . when the heart is affected it reacts on the brain; and
the state of the brain again reacts through the pneuma-gastric [vagus]
nerve on the heart; so that under any excitement there will be much
mutual action and reaction between these, the two most important organs
of the body. (p. 69)
For Darwin, when an emotional state occurred, the beating of the heart
changed instantly, the change in cardiac activity influenced brain activity, and
the brainstem structures through the cranial nerves (i.e., vagus) stimulated the
heart. He did not elucidate the neurophysiological mechanisms that translate the
initial emotional expression to the heart. Our current knowledge of the origin of
the brainstem and the neurophysiological function of the various branches of the
vagus was not available to Darwin. At that time, it was not known that vagal
fibers originate in several medullary nuclei and that the branches of the vagus
exert control over the periphery through different feedback systems. However,
Darwin’s statement is important, because it emphasizes the afferent feedback
from the heart to the brain, independent of the spinal cord and the sympathetic
nervous system, and the regulatory role of the pneumogastric nerve (renamed the
vagus at the end of the 19th century) in the expression of emotions.

Darwin attributed these ideas to Claude Bernard as an example of nervous
system regulation of le milieu interieur. Consistent with more contemporary
psychophysiology, Claude Bernard viewed the heart as a primary response
system capable of responding to all forms of sensory stimulation. He explicitly
emphasized the potency of central nervous system pathways to the heart
(Cournand, 1979). These ideas are expressed in the following quotation (Claude
Bernard [1865] quoted in Cournand, 1979):
In man the heart is not only the central organ of circulation of blood, it is
a center influenced by all sensory influences. They may be transmitted
from the periphery through the spinal cord, from the organs through the
sympathetic nervous system, or from the central nervous system itself. In
fact the sensory stimuli coming from the brain exhibit their strongest
effects on the heart. (p. 118)
Although seldom acknowledged as founders of modern psychophysiology,
Bernard and Darwin have contributed to the theoretical basis for a
neuropsychophysiology of the autonomic nervous system. The quotations
document their view that the heart provided not only an output system from the
brain, capable of indexing sensory processing, but also that the heart was a
source of afferent stimulation to the brain, able to change or contribute to
psychological state. Consistent with this theoretical bias, psychophysiologists
during the past century have investigated the functional sensitivity of heart rate
measures to sensory and affective stimuli (e.g., Darrow, 1929; Graham &
Clifton, 1966; Lacey, 1967) and the dynamic feedback between the brain and the
heart in regulating both psychological state and the threshold for sensory stimuli
(e.g., Lacey & Lacey, 1978).
Contemporary psychophysiology gained much of its current theoretical
perspective from intriguing ideas about the interaction between autonomic and
sensory processes introduced by Sokolov (1963). The Sokolov model contained
all the requisite components of an integrative theory relating autonomic function
to psychological state. The model included (a) an acknowledgment of both
afferents and efferents in both autonomic and somatic systems, (b) an autonomic
feedback loop (i.e., autonomic tuning) to regulate sensory thresholds, (c) an
interface between autonomic processes and psychological phenomena (i.e.,
orienting and defensive reflexes), and (d) brain regulation of autonomic
reactivity by habituation.

The Sokolov model included bidirectional communication between brain and
periphery. In the Sokolov model, autonomic processes contributed to the tuning
of receptor systems to engage or disengage with the external environment.
Consistent with the Sokolov view, the Laceys (e.g., Lacey, 1967; Lacey &
Lacey, 1978) emphasized the bidirectional communication between the
cardiovascular system and brain in the regulation of cardiac function and sensory
threshold. In contrast to this emphasis on bidirectional communication, Obrist
(1976) focused on the general concordance between metabolic demands and
heart rate. Both arguments have merit. For example, afferent stimulation of the
baroreceptors has immediate effects on both peripheral cardiovascular function
and central arousal state (Gellhorn, 1964), and the metabolic demands associated
with exercise have deterministic influences, through vagal withdrawal, on heart
rate (Obrist, 1981; Rowell, 1993).
HEART RATE RESPONSES: A NEUROGENIC EMPHASIS
Throughout the history of the Society for Psychophysiological Research,
psychophysiologists have been studying robust phenomena such as the
autonomic components of the orienting reflex, often without explanatory
neurophysiological models. This chapter is in response to this need in providing
a theoretical model based on the evolution of neural structures and the neural
regulation of autonomic processes to explain several psychophysiological
phenomena, including orientation, attention, and emotion.
The orienting reflex provides an excellent point of embarkation. Based on
the convergent theoretical approaches of Sokolov (1963), Lacey (1967), and
Graham and Clifton (1966), the orienting reflex is assumed to have a cardiac
component. This component is characterized by a heart rate deceleration that
functionally influences perceptual thresholds in facilitating the processing of
information about the external environment. However, what are the neural
mechanisms mediating the cardiac orienting response? Or, as Obrist (1976)
argued, is heart rate deceleration merely an epiphenomenon associated with
decreased metabolic demands accompanying the reduced motor activity that
defines orienting and attending behaviors? The time course of the response, the
effects of neural blockades, and studies with clinical populations support the
contention that the cardiac orienting response is neurogenic. First, heart rate
deceleration associated with the cardiac orienting response is rapid, occurring
within a few seconds, and usually returns rapidly to baseline. Second, the latency

characteristics of the cardiac orienting response are similar to other neurogenic
bradycardic reflexes such as optovagal, vasovagal, baroreceptor-vagal, and
chemoreceptor-vagal.
Blockade studies with atropine demonstrate that short latency bradycardia
associated with both orienting reflexes and classical conditioning are mediated
by cholinergic pathways along the vagus (e.g., Berntson, Cacioppo, & Quigley,
1994; Obrist, 1981; Schneiderman, 1974). Studies with the aged and other
clinical populations with peripheral neuropathies or autonomic regulatory
problems (e.g., diabetes) document deficits in vagal function (De Meersman,
1993; Gribben, Pickering, Sleight, & Peto, 1971; Weiling, van Brederode, de
Rijk, Borst, & Dunning, 1982; Weise & Heydenreich, 1991). In addition, studies
of individuals with unilateral brain damage demonstrate that heart rate responses
are diminished more in individuals with right-side damage (Yokoyama,
Jennings, Ackles, Hood, & Boller, 1987). This latter finding is consistent with
evidence that neurophysiological regulation of heart rate is primarily along the
right vagus to the sinoatrial node and that heart rate is under the control of higher
ipsilateral structures in the brain (Warwick & Williams, 1975). Although vagal
influences producing heart rate deceleration may interact synergistically with
sympathetic withdrawal, short latency decelerations are determined primarily by
the vagus. Thus, it may be argued that, because short latency heart rate reactivity
is mediated by the vagus, the magnitude of the cardiac orienting response is an
index of vagal regulation.
THE VAGAL PARADOX
In attempting to structure a neurogenic model of vagal regulation to explain
psychophysiological phenomena, there is an obvious inconsistency between data
and theory. Physiological theory attributes the chronotropic control of the heart
(i.e., heart rate) and the amplitude of respiratory sinus arrhythmia (RSA) to
direct vagal mechanisms (e.g., Jordan, Khalid, Schneiderman, & Spyer, 1982;
Katona & Jih, 1975). However, although there are situations in which both
measures covary (e.g., during exercise and cholinergic blockade), there are other
situations in which the measures appear to reflect independent sources of neural
control.
Several arguments have been made to explain this discrepancy. First, it has
been argued that RSA and average heart rate (during sympathetic blockade)

reflect different dimensions of vagal activity. For example, average heart rate
might be viewed as reflecting tonic vagal influences and RSA as reflecting
phasic vagal influences (e.g., Berntson, Cacioppo, & Quigley, 1993b; Jennings
& McKnight, 1994; Malik & Camm, 1993). Second, it has been argued that the
discrepancy is caused by variations in respiratory parameters (Grossman,
Karemaker, & Wieling, 1991), with RSA being confounded by respiratory
frequency and tidal volume. Third, it has been argued that variation in
quantification methods may contribute to the divergence between RSA and heart
rate (Byrne & Porges, 1993; Porges & Bohrer, 1990). Fourth, it has been argued
that RSA does not reliably measure parasympathetic tone because it decreases
with baroreflex stimulation (Goldberger, Ahmed, Parker, & Kadish, 1994). And
fifth, it has been argued that average heart rate is influenced by a complex and
dynamic interaction between sympathetic and vagal systems, making it difficult
to extract a vagal tone dimension (Berntson, Cacioppo, & Quigley, 1991,
1993a).
The arguments often have been linked to a definition of vagal tone as being
determined by neural blockade. The functional effect of the neural blockade on
heart rate has been used as the criterion measure of vagal tone or
parasympathetic control (e.g., Katona & Jih, 1975). Researchers have argued
that RSA is not an accurate index of vagal tone, because individual preblockade
levels of RSA do not accurately map into pre/post-change in heart rate
(Grossman & Kollai, 1993). Contrary to this argument, Porges (1986) argued
that the discrepancy was in part based on the criterion measure selected. He
demonstrated that RSA exhibited a more sensitive dose-dependent response
curve to vagal blockade with atropine than to heart rate. This suggests the
possibility that RSA, monitored during periods of spontaneous breathing, may
provide a better criterion variable than heart rate. Neurophysiological support
may be offered for this proposal. RSA is a vagal phenomenon in contrast to heart
rate, which is determined by several sources, including vagal, sympathetic, and
mechanical factors. Thus, the efficacy of change in heart rate following
cholinergic blockade as an index of vagal tone may be challenged.
These arguments have created a volatile environment for debating the
neurophysiological interpretation of RSA and the efficacy of specific methods to
quantify RSA. Common to these arguments is the assumption that there is one
central source of cardiac vagal tone. The arguments attribute differences, not to
central mechanisms, but to the response characteristics of heart rate and RSA.
Thus, divergence has been attributed to either the transfer function of the

sinoatrial node that would attenuate high-frequency oscillations (Saul, Berger,
Chen, & Cohen, 1989) or the statistical transfer function of the method of
quantifying RSA (Byrne & Porges, 1993) and not as a function of differential
neural output.
However, independent of the quantification methodology and during periods
of stable respiratory parameters, data have accumulated that demonstrate that
RSA and heart rate (independent of sympathetic influences) often respond
differently. Although both the neurogenic bradycardia and the suppression of
RSA or heart rate variability observed during attention are assumed to be vagal
in origin, they often appear independent of each other or in an apparent
physiological contradiction (Porges, 1972; Porges & Raskin, 1969; Richards &
Casey, 1991). Similar disparities between levels of heart rate and RSA have been
observed during inhalant anesthesia when RSA exhibits a massive depression,
whereas heart rate is not altered (Donchin, Feld, & Porges, 1985). Additional
examples of convergence and divergence between RSA and heart rate can be
observed in both within-and between-subjects designs. For example, individual
differences in heart rate and RSA monitored during resting conditions provide
independent contributions to measures of cardiac vagal tone derived from vagal
blockade (e.g., Grossman & Kollai, 1993). However, convergence may be
observed within an individual during exercise when monotonic increases in
metabolic load are reflected in both faster heart rate and lower RSA (Billman &
DuJardin, 1990) or during neural blockade with atropine when both cardiac
indices diminish in a dose-response manner (Cacioppo et al., 1994; Dellinger,
Taylor, & Porges, 1987; Porges, 1986).
The relationship between RSA and heart rate may change within and
between individuals. In our laboratory, we have observed that the relationship
between RSA and heart rate varies with behavioral state (Riniolo, Doussard-
Roosevelt, & Porges, 1994). Twenty-four-hour ambulatory monitoring of adults
indicates that during states of drowsiness and sleep the correlation between RSA
and heart rate is significantly lower than during alert states. Thus, at times RSA
and heart rate appear to reflect the same physiological processes, whereas at
other times they appear to reflect independent processes.
In contrast to the observable data, neurophysiological research argues for a
covariation between these two parameters, because vagal cardioinhibitory fibers
to the heart have consistent functional properties characterized by bradycardia to
neural stimulation and a respiratory rhythm (e.g., Jordan et al., 1982). This
inconsistency, based on an assumption of a single central vagal source, is labeled

the vagal paradox and is outlined in Table 2.1.
The 
vagal 
paradox 
is 
critical 
to 
the 
interpretation 
of 
several
psychophysiological and clinical conditions. For example, if the bradycardia
occurring during orienting reflexes is vagal, then why is bradycardia often
observed during periods of reduced RSA, also an index of both attention and
vagal control of the heart? If vagal tone is a positive indicator of health of a fetus
or neonate when monitored with RSA, then why is vagal tone a negative
indicator of health when it is manifested as bradycardia? If bradycardia and RSA
can both be removed by severing the vagus or by pharmacological blockade,
then are they both manifestations of vagal tone? If bradycardia and RSA are both
indices of vagal tone, then why do they respond differently? This apparent
paradox provides the stimulus for the following inquiry and the development of
the proposed polyvagal theory that speculates that, in mammals, there are two
anatomically based vagal response systems.
TABLE 2.1. The Vagal Paradox: A Common Central Source?
1. Increased vagal tone produces neurogenic bradycardia.
2. Decreased vagal tone produces suppression of RSA.
3. Bradycardia occur during periods of suppressed RSA.
MAMMALIAN POLYVAGAL SYSTEM
To understand the proposed polyvagal theory, it is necessary to provide
additional information regarding the neuroanatomy and neurophysiology of the
vagus in mammals. First, the vagus is not one nerve but a family of neural
pathways originating in several areas of the brainstem. Second, there are several
branches of the vagus. Third, the vagus is not solely an efferent or motor
pathway; rather, approximately 80% of the vagal fibers are afferent (Agostoni,
Chinnock, DeBurgh Daly, & Murray, 1957). Fourth, the vagus is lateralized with
nerve trunks originating in the left and right sides of the brainstem. Fifth, the
vagus is asymmetrical, with the left and right sides performing different tasks,
with the right vagus most potent in the chronotropic regulation of the heart.
These points are summarized in Table 2.2.
Mammals are polyvagal. The different vagi have different roles in the
regulation of visceral function and originate in different brainstem nuclei with

their respective viscerotropic organization. The different vagi may have
oppositional outputs to the same target organ. For example, it is possible that
during orienting there is an increase in vagal outflow from one branch to
produce bradycardia and a withdrawal of vagal outflow from another branch to
produce a suppression of RSA (e.g., Richards & Casey, 1991). Thus, the concept
of vagal tone may not be generalized to all vagal efferent pathways or even to
the same target organ (e.g., heart), as has been assumed (e.g., Grossman &
Kollai, 1993), but may need to be limited to a specific branch or subsystem of
the vagus being evaluated. And the intriguing concept of autonomic space
proposed by Berntson et al. (1991, 1993a) to deal with dynamic sympathetic-
parasympathetic interactions may require an additional dimension to deal with
potential vagovagal interactions.
The polyvagal theory proposes that neurogenic bradycardia and RSA are
mediated by separate branches of the vagus. Thus, the two commonly used, but
not interchangeable, measures of cardiac vagal tone may represent different
dimensions of vagal tone.
In mammals, the primary motor fibers of the vagus originate from two
separate and definable nuclei in the medulla: the dorsal motor nucleus of the
vagus (DMNX) and the nucleus ambiguus (NA). The DMNX is in the
dorsomedial medulla. The NA is ventral to the DMNX in the ventrolateral
reticular formation (Warwick & Williams, 1975). The name ambiguus
emphasizes the initial difficulties associated with determining its borders and
connections within the reticular formation (Mitchell & Warwick, 1955). A third
medullary nucleus, located near the DMNX, the nucleus tractus solitarius (NTS),
is the terminus of many of the afferent pathways traveling through the vagus
from peripheral organs. This trinity of neural structures in the medulla forms the
primary central regulatory component of the vagal system. The relative locations
of these medullary nuclei are illustrated in Figure 2.1.
TABLE 2.2. Mammalian Polyvagal System
1. Efferent fibers originate primarily in two medullary nuclei (NA,
DMNX).
2. Vagal efferent fibers are clustered into several branches.
3. Approximately 80% of vagal fibers are afferent.
4. The vagus is lateralized.
5. The vagus is asymmetrical with a right bias.

Most cells originating in the DMNX project to subdiaphragmatic structures
(e.g., stomach, intestines, etc.). In contrast, only the rostral portion of the NA
provides vagal innervation of subdiaphragmatic structures (Kalia & Masulam,
1980), whereas most cells in NA project to supradiaphragmatic structures
(larynx, pharynx, soft palate, esophagus, bronchi, and heart).
Neurotracing and electrophysiological techniques with mammals provide
additional evidence that the two vagal nuclei may function independently and
have different central connections. These studies have demonstrated that there
are no apparent connections between the two nuclei, although both nuclei have
input from the NTS, central nucleus of the amygdala, and hypothalamus
(Hopkins, 1987; Leslie, Reynolds, & Lawes, 1992). It is well accepted that in
mammals the primary cardioinhibitory motoneurons are located in the NA.
However, motor fibers from the DMNX join the cardiac vagus (Bennett, Ford,
Kidd, & McWilliam, 1984).
Cardioinhibitory and bronchoconstrictor neurons located in the NA have
myelinated vagal axons that conduct in the fast B fiber range (McAllen & Spyer,
1976, 1978). In contrast, neurons located in the DMNX have axons projecting to
the cardiac vagal branches that are nonmyelinated and conduct in the slower C
fiber range. Although there are reports of cardioinhibitory vagal neurons with
efferent axons conducting in the B fiber range being located in both the DMNX
and the NA, neurons with axons conducting in the C fiber range are restricted to
the DMNX (Jordan et al., 1982). The role of these nonmyelinated vagal fibers on
the heart is not well understood. In research with cats (Ford, Bennett, Kidd, &
McWilliam, 1990) and dogs (Donald, Samueloff, & Ferguson, 1967),
stimulation of these fibers did not affect heart rate. However, although
unsubstantiated at this time, the function of these fibers may be dependent on the
outflow of the myelinated NA fibers and may change during conditions such as
hypoxia. For example, the influence of the unmyelinated fibers on the heart may
be potentiated when the outflow from the myelinated NA fibers is blocked. In
contrast, in the rabbit, stimulation of the nonmyelinated vagal fibers results in
heart rate slowing (Woolley, McWilliam, Ford, & Clarke, 1987).

FIGURE 2.1. Primary brainstem nuclei of the vagus. Nuclei are bilateral, and only one of each bilateral pair
is illustrated.
The cytoarchitecture of the NA illustrates that the dorsal portion contains
source nuclei for special visceral efferents (i.e., voluntary motor fibers) and that
the ventral portion contains source nuclei for general visceral efferents (i.e.,
involuntary motor fibers). Motor projections from the dorsal portion go to target
organs including the larynx, pharynx, soft palate, and esophagus. Motor
projections from the ventral portion go to several target organs, including the
heart and the bronchi. In fact, these projections account for the primary cardiac
and bronchomotor pathways and far outnumber the pathways originating in the
DMNX.
There is an obvious distinction between the viscerotropic organization of the
two vagal nuclei. The DMNX provides the primary vagal efferents to
subdiaphragmatic organs that regulate digestive and alimentary processes. In
contrast, the NA provides the primary vagal efferents to the supradiaphragmatic
target organs, including the soft palate, pharynx, larynx, esophagus, bronchi, and
heart.
THE POLYVAGAL THEORY

The polyvagal theory is based on several premises. Some are firmly grounded in
neurophysiological and neuroanatomical data and others are more speculative.
The first premise articulates the neural regulation of bradycardia and RSA.
Based on the initial premise, it is hypothesized that the neurogenic bradycardia
associated with the orienting reflex are mediated by the DMNX and that the
suppression of heart rate variability (i.e., reduced amplitude of RSA) is mediated
by the NA.
Premise 1: Neurogenic bradycardia and RSA are mediated by different
branches of the vagus and need not respond in concert.
Physiological support for the hypothesis that the DMNX can contribute to
neurogenic bradycardia, independent of the NA, is provided by lesion studies.
Machado and Brody (1988) reported that chronic bilateral lesions of the NA
reduced but did not totally block baroreceptor reflex-mediated bradycardia in
conscious rats. Thus, the DMNX contains vagal neurons capable of producing
bradycardia with a response latency associated with the baroreceptor reflex. This
is supported by Jerrell, Gentile, McCabe, and Schneiderman (1986), who argued
that differential Pavlovian conditioning of bradycardia in rabbits following
sinoaortic denervation was mediated along DMNX pathways. The results pose
the possibility that vagal pathways, originating in both the DMNX and the NA,
have the potential to influence heart rate.
Phylogenetic Development of the Polyvagal System
Investigations of the phylogenetic development of the vagus provide support for
the first premise. Because our interests are in mammals, specifically humans,
this chapter will focus on the evolution of vagal regulation of cardiac function
from reptiles to mammals. There are two questions: Do reptiles produce heart
rate patterns during orienting that are similar to the neurogenic bradycardia
observed in mammals? Do reptiles produce a phenomenon similar to RSA?
The phylogeny of the vagus illustrates two phenomena: one neuroanatomical
and the other physiological. On a neuroanatomical level, differentiation of the
visceral efferent column of the vagus into dorsal motor nucleus (i.e., the DMNX)
and a ventrolateral motor nucleus (i.e., the NA) is first seen in reptiles. In turtles
(e.g., Chelone mydas and Domonia subtrijuga), there is still a connection
between the two nuclei, but in lizards (e.g., Varanus salvator) and crocodiles
(e.g., Caiman crocodilus), the separation between the DMNX and the NA is as
complete as it is in mammals (see Barbas-Henry & Lohman, 1984).

Behavioral orienting in reptiles is characterized by a focusing of
exteroceptors and a freezing of gross motor activity. Paralleling these behaviors,
neurogenic bradycardia has been observed. Belkin (see Regal, 1978) reported
that bradycardia is part of a fear response in iguanas. In addition, McDonald
(1974) reported bradycardia in the hog-nosed snake during death-feigning. Most
researchers found these data incompatible with the prevalent emphasis on
arousal and the use of heart rate as an indicator of arousal. How could
bradycardia reflect increased arousal within the context of a sympathetic nervous
system–oriented arousal theory? In contrast, RSA has not been observed in
reptiles. Research investigating the spectral components of reptilian heart rate
has failed to identify heart rate oscillations associated with ventilation (Gonzalez
Gonzalez & de Vera Porcell, 1988).
Phylogenetic development not only illustrates changes in the neuroanatomy
of the vagus but also parallels changes in behavior. One of these behavioral
shifts is the addition of active or voluntary attention and complex emotions. In
confronting the defensive world, mammals, like reptiles, have an initial reflexive
response to novelty, the orienting reflex. However, mammals have additional
behaviors in their repertoire. Following or independent of reflexive orienting,
mammals may voluntarily respond with sustained attention to foster detailed
information processing or with facial expressions and vocalizations to foster
communication. Thus, reptiles orient; mammals may first orient and then elect to
attend or communicate.
The differences between the reptilian and mammalian cardiac systems
provide insight into the phylogenetic origin of behaviors such as reptilian
orienting and mammalian attention and emotion. The cardiac output and thus
energy production of mammals far exceeds that of reptiles. Mammals have
metabolic demands four to five times that of reptiles. The metaphor of a machine
or vehicle has been proposed by Else and Hulbert (1981) to compare the
efficiency and function of the mammalian and reptilian metabolic systems.
According to Else and Hulbert (1981), when idling, the average mammal
requires four to five times more fuel than the average idling reptile, even when
body weight and ambient temperature are controlled. Elaborating on this
metaphor, reptiles represent vehicles with 1-L engines and mammals represent
vehicles with 4-or 5-L engines. Thus, as in the story about the race between the
tortoise and the hare, reptiles locomote with a reliable but underpowered engine
and mammals locomote with a supercharged engine that can function for only
short periods without refueling.

The energy production capacities of reptiles and mammals contribute to their
respective ways of life. There is a bias among reptiles toward passive feeding
strategies. Reptiles tend to be sit-and-wait feeders, slow cruisers, and sluggish
browsers. In contrast, mammals with four-chambered hearts can actively hunt
and graze and adapt to changing environments (Regal, 1978). To support their
behavioral niche and to ensure their adaptive success, reptiles and mammals use
different vagal strategies to promote their survival. Being underpowered, reptiles
do not maintain a vagal brake on the heart, which would further reduce energy
production during unchallenged situations. For reptiles, during periods of either
quiescence or apnea, usually associated with behavioral freezing or diving, vagal
influences via the DMNX are profound and heart rate is even slower. In contrast,
vagal control of the heart is virtually removed during periods of breathing and
other motor activities (Jacob & McDonald, 1976).
The underpowered reptiles use vagal efferents from the DMNX to the heart
to deal with specific challenges: to orient and freeze in response to predator or
prey and to conserve oxygen while submerged for lengthy periods. In contrast to
underpowered reptiles, supercharged mammals use vagal efferents from the NA
as a persistent brake to inhibit the metabolic potential of this high-powered
system. The high NA vagal tone keeps mammals from, literally, bouncing off
the walls. Thus, in contrast to that observed in reptiles, in mammals vagal tone is
highest during unchallenged situations such as sleep, and vagal tone is actively
withdrawn in response to external demands, including metabolically demanding
states such as exercise, stress, attention, and information processing. For
example, in humans, psychological states perceived as life threatening, such as
panic and rage, are characterized by virtually no NA vagal tone when indexed
with the amplitude of RSA (George et al., 1989). Metaphorically, and consistent
with the model, antisocial and pathological behavioral patterns associated with
rage and hyperreactivity without conscious self-regulation have been labeled
“reptilian.”
If terrestrial mammals adopted the reptilian strategy of reflexive increases in
vagal activity to produce massive neurogenic bradycardia, the result would be
catastrophic to the oxygen-hungry mammalian cortex and myocardium. This
strategy would rapidly produce cardiac ischemia and cortical anoxia. The result
of this sequence would be death. Although still dependent on oxygen, aquatic
mammals use a diving reflex characterized by a regulated neurogenic
bradycardia to reduce metabolic demands. To survive, aquatic mammals have
complex mechanisms, not available to terrestrial mammals, to manage oxygen

resources and shift priorities for oxygen while submerged for long periods.
It is possible that for mammals during states of stress, when metabolic
demands are great and vagal tone from the NA is removed, that the cardiac
pacemakers (SA and AV) may be prone to neurogenic bradycardia mediated by
the DMNX. The neurogenic bradycardia may be massive and lethal. This may be
the case in fetal distress, when bradycardia is observed during hypoxic episodes
or as a factor in either sudden infant death syndrome or sudden death in adults.
Consistent with this model, it has been demonstrated in the dog that progressive
asphyxic hypoxia not only elicits increased cardiac vagal activity but also the
sensitivity of the sinoatrial node to vagal efferent influences is potentiated
(Potter & McCloskey, 1986). Thus, during hypoxia, large bradycardia may be
maintained with limited or reduced vagal efferent activity.
The polyvagal theory provides a potential explanation for the massive
neurogenic bradycardia observed during fetal distress and in high-risk neonates
who have virtually no observable RSA. For example, as illustrated in Figure 2.2,
when massive bradycardia is observed during fetal distress (Figure 2.2a), there is
a background of low beat-to-beat variability (Figure 2.2b). Similarly, neonates
with the lowest amplitude RSA are at greatest risk for apnea and bradycardia
(Sostek, Glass, Molina, & Porges, 1984). Thus, the diminished vagal influences
from the NA, responsible for depressed RSA amplitude, seem to be associated
with a vulnerability to large neurogenic bradycardia. Potter and McCloskey
(1986) provided an explanation of how depressed central nervous system
function associated with hypoxia might result in massive neurogenic
bradycardia. They reported a complex feedback system between duration of
hypoxia, vagal efferent discharge, and potentiation of the vagal output on the
heart. This system is able to maintain bradycardia, despite the massive decline in
the vagal firing associated with hypoxia, by potentiating the influence of the
vagal firing on the SA node. Under these conditions, although the bradycardia is
mediated through a branch of the vagus, the magnitude of the bradycardia is
determined by a peripheral mechanism and no longer reflects a centrally
mediated vagal tone. Although Potter and McCloskey (1986) did not monitor
RSA, we must assume that RSA is low in their preparation because the animals
were anesthetized prior to the surgical, electrical, and hypoxic manipulations and
because both hypoxia and anesthesia are associated with depressed beat-to-beat
heart rate variability, including RSA (e.g., Donchin et al., 1985; Nelson, 1976).
Additional support for this bifurcation of vagal influences is demonstrated by
electrical stimulation of the dorsal motor nucleus in the rabbit. As illustrated in

Figure 2.3, electrical stimulation of the DMNX results in bradycardia without an
increase in RSA. This is in contrast to the effect of stimulation of the aortic
depressor nerve, which communicates with both the NA and the DMNX. Figure
2.4 shows that, in a similarly anesthetized rabbit, stimulation of the aortic
depressor nerve results in an increase in RSA and a massive bradycardia (e.g.,
McCabe, Yongue, Porges, & Ackles, 1984).

FIGURE 2.2 (a) Bradycardia during fetal distress. (b) Background heart period variability at time of
bradycardia.
The polyvagal theory argues that the vagal fibers from the DMNX and NA
are distinguishable in structure and function. Specifically, it has been argued that
the vagal efferent fibers from the NA are myelinated and contain a respiratory
rhythm, and the vagal efferent fibers from the DMNX are unmyelinated and do
not express a respiratory rhythm. However, there are some inconsistencies in the
proposed distinction. For example, Jordan et al. (1982) reported that there are
cardioinhibitory vagal neurons originating in the DMNX, with efferent axons
conducting in the B fiber range, and are, therefore, myelinated. Moreover,
Jordan et al. reported that these had a respiratory rhythm. Although the Jordan et
al. findings support the proposed dual source of vagal efferents, their findings
confound the proposed functional distinction.
FIGURE 2.3. Bradycardia elicited by electrical stimulation of the DMNX in an anesthetized rabbit.

FIGURE 2.4. Bradycardia elicited by aortic depressor nerve stimulation in an anesthetized rabbit.
There are several potential explanations for the inconsistency identified by
Jordan et al. (1982). The first may be method. The Jordan et al. study used
standard neurophysiological stimulation and recording techniques to identify cell
bodies. According to Schwaber (1986), many vagal fibers previously assumed to
originate in the DMNX have been identified with newer methods, such as
retrogradely labeled horseradish peroxidase, as being located in the NA.
Schwaber (1986) also stated that, because axons from the NA pass very near the
border of the DMNX, it is difficult to stimulate or lesion the DMNX without NA
involvement confounding electrical stimulation studies. Thus, additional
research with more accurate labeling techniques may demonstrate that all
neurons in the B fiber range originate in the NA. Our rabbit data reported in
Figures 2.3 and 2.4 provide additional support for the possibility of mislabeling.
According to Jordan et al. (1982), all neurons excited by aortic depressor nerve
stimulation produced a respiratory rhythm in their ongoing discharge. Similarly,
as illustrated in Figure 2.4, stimulation of the aortic depressor nerve resulted in
both bradycardia and increased RSA. However, stimulation of the DMNX
produced only an attenuated bradycardia. These findings suggest that vagal
fibers discharging following stimulation of the DMNX did not have a respiratory
rhythm. Moreover, the bradycardia was immediate and similar in latency to that
observed following aortic depressor nerve stimulation. The magnitude of
bradycardia was about 50% of the magnitude elicited by aortic nerve
stimulation, a technique assumed to recruit vagal fibers from both the NA and
the DMNX. The attribution of 50% of the magnitude of the heart rate component
of the baroreceptor reflex to each vagal system is consistent with Machado and
Brody (1988). A second possibility is that there are species differences in the
organization and function of the DMNX. For example, to facilitate freezing
behavior, the rabbit may have evolved unique myelinated vagal pathways from
the DMNX that were independent of respiratory function. According to this
explanation, the DMNX would have B fibers, but they would not express a
respiratory rhythm. Alternatively, some mammalian species may have neurons
in or near the DMNX that are part of a common cardiopulmonary oscillator
(Richter & Spyer, 1990).
Future research will determine whether or not the proposed functional and
structural distinctions between DMNX and NA efferents as articulated in the
polyvagal theory are accurate. An additional concern relates to generalizing
across mammalian species. Most of the neurophysiological and neuroanatomical

research on the mammalian vagus has been conducted with rat, rabbit, cat, and
dog. Studies investigating vagal regulation with humans have been limited to
pharmacological blockade studies with measures of peripheral physiology. The
few neuroanatomical studies of human brainstem, however, are often conducted
on patients who have died of disease or trauma. Thus, one may question the
generalizability of a polyvagal model developed from investigations of rodent
brainstem to the human. However, existing data illustrate phenomena such as
clinical bradycardia in the absence of RSA in the human fetus (see Figure 2.2),
shifts in RSA independent of heart rate change during inhalant anesthesia (e.g.,
Donchin et al., 1985), and short latency responses from both systems (see
Figures 2.3 and 2.4) that argue for a polyvagal model.
Vagal Strategies in Mammals and Reptiles
Reptilian and mammalian vagal systems have contradictory strategies. Reptiles
are characterized by low ambient vagal tone and transient increases in vagal tone
in response to environmental challenges. In contrast, mammals are characterized
by high ambient vagal tone and transient decreases in vagal tone in response to
environmental challenges (Table 2.3).
To adapt to the hostile world, the reptiles’ behavioral repertoire is driven by
survival. Most behaviors are associated with foraging, stalking, and feeding.
Only limited time and energy are dedicated to social interactions such as
parenting and reproduction. In the reptiles’ defensive world, neurogenic
bradycardia is adaptive and does not compromise physiological status. Reptiles
have smaller metabolically active body organs, have different metabolic
mechanisms, are less oxygen-dependent than mammals, and can go for long
periods without oxygen. In contrast, the adaptive strategy of reptiles is lethal for
mammals. In the defensive world of mammals, it is necessary to increase
metabolic output to foster fight-or-flight behaviors. Therefore, reflexive
neurogenic bradycardia to novelty for a prolonged period would reduce oxygen
resources and metabolic output and compromise the fight-or-flight potential of
mammals. The consequences of reduced oxygen resources also would depress
central nervous system function, reduce behavioral complexity and competent
execution of complex behaviors, induce unconsciousness, damage vital organs,
and finally, if persistent, result in death. Thus, the cardiac component of the
orienting reflex must be of short duration and be replaced by a physiological
response that does not compromise the oxygen-needy nervous system of

mammals. The withdrawal of vagal tone originating in the NA serves this
purpose.
Phylogenetic Origins of Vagal Response Patterns
The neurogenic bradycardia controlled by the DMNX and observed in reptiles
and mammals during orienting may have evolved from the gustatory response
system of primitive vertebrates. Gustation is the primary method for identifying
prey (including other appropriate food sources) and predators in aquatic
environments. For example, in fish, an undifferentiated vagal lobe controls
gustatory, digestive, and alimentary processes (Finger & Dunwiddie, 1992). A
reflexive increase in vagal tone would affect several organs: the heart, where it
would reduce metabolism and enable the animal to freeze momentarily; the
organs containing gustatory receptors, where it would orient toward the source
of stimulation and regulate threshold to detect novelty; and the digestive and
alimentary systems, where it would stimulate gastric secretion and motility.
TABLE 2.3. Vagal Strategies
Reptile
Mammal
Ambient state
low DMNX
high NA/low DMNX
Response to novelty
increase DMNX
decrease 
NA/incr
DMNX
With phylogenetic development, the viscerotropic organization of the vagal
system has become more complex by incorporating pathways from other cranial
nerves, including trigeminal, facial, accessory, and glossopharyngeal. Thus,
more specialized functions, such as head rotation to orient sensory receptors
toward the source of stimulation, mastication to ingest food, and salivation to
initiate gustatory and digestive processes, are integrated into the vagal system.
The motor component of the vagus shares evolutionary origins with four
cranial nerves (trigeminal, facial, accessory, and glossopharyngeal). The vagus
not only innervates smooth and cardiac muscle, but, similar to the other four
cranial nerves, it contains motor pathways that innervate somatic muscles. Vagal
pathways that innervate somatic muscle often are not included in the
neurophysiology of the autonomic nervous system. These fibers are called

special visceral efferents to distinguish them from general visceral efferents, the
motor pathways innervating smooth and cardiac muscle. The critical difference
between the two types of motor pathways is that somatic muscle regulation may
be conscious and voluntary, whereas smooth muscle regulation is reflexive and
unconscious. Because the special visceral efferents innervate voluntary muscles,
they are usually excluded from the autonomic nervous system. Traditionally,
only the general visceral efferents from both sympathetic and parasympathetic
branches are used to define the autonomic nervous system.
The somatic muscles innervated by the five cranial nerves arise from the
branchial arches, embryologically known as the primitive gill arches (Warwick
& Williams, 1975). These muscles are critical to several mammalian behaviors.
For example, the somatic muscles innervated by the trigeminal, arising from the
first branchial arch, are involved in mastication, retraction of the lower jaw, and
closing the mouth. The special visceral efferents from the facial nerve, arising
from the second branchial arch, innervate the muscles of the face, scalp, and
neck to enable facial expressions. The facial nerve also innervates muscles in the
floor of the mouth.
Although the trigeminal and facial nerves originate from branchial arches
and have communications with the other three cranial nerves originating from
the branchial arches, the source nuclei of the special visceral efferents for the
glossopharyngeal, vagus, and accessory nerve originate in the same medullary
nucleus, the NA. Thus, the efferent fibers travel through three different cranial
nerves, but they originate in the same source nucleus.
As a function of phylogenetic development, the source nuclei for the special
visceral efferent pathways in the glossopharyngeal, vagus, and accessory nerves
migrate to form the NA. In mammals, the NA controls the complex coordination
of pharynx, soft palate, larynx, and esophagus. Of special note to
psychophysiological processes is that the third gill arch also gives rise to the
carotid body, containing peripheral chemosensitive receptors sensitive to oxygen
and carbon dioxide levels (Warwick & Williams, 1975). In addition, the
accessory nerve contains fibers originating in the cervical spinal cord that
innervate the positioning of the neck. The critical carotid arteries, internal
jugular veins, and vagus nerves run deep in these muscles (Warwick &
Williams, 1975). Thus, this complex also has the ability to orient visceral
receptors through somatic muscles, to coordinate structures related to ingestion
and expulsion, and to regulate facial expression and emotion. These motor nuclei
receive 
input 
from 
cortex 
to 
coordinate 
complex 
behaviors 
with

cardiopulmonary function. Thus, phylogenetically, even when the gill arches
evolve into the branchiomeric muscles common to all mammals, oxygenation of
blood through a coordination of breathing and heart rate during interactions with
the environment remains a primary functional objective.
The processes associated with NA control of supradiaphragmatic organs
appear to be uniquely mammalian. For example, this subsystem of the vagus
coordinates the complex sequence of sucking, swallowing, and breathing that
allows mammals to feed and breathe actively and voluntarily. Moreover, the NA
provides the primary chronotropic control of the heart and controls the
intonation of vocalizations. Thus, NA efferent projections are involved with
processes associated not only with feeding and breathing but also with
movement, emotion, and communication. These behaviors contribute to the
unique social and survival behaviors observed in mammals. The NA vagus
provides the vagal brake that mammals remove instantaneously to increase
metabolic output to foster fight-or-flight behaviors. The NA vagus provides the
motor pathways to shift the intonation of vocalizations (e.g., cry patterns) to
express emotion and to communicate internal states in a social context.
The behavioral derivatives of the two branches of the vagus suggest a
typology in which one branch of the vagus deals with unconscious reflexive
vegetative functions and the other is involved in more conscious, voluntary,
flexible, and often social activities. There is neuroanatomical support for this
typology. The DMNX contains only general visceral efferents that innervate
smooth and cardiac muscle fibers and regulate glandular secretion. In contrast,
the NA contains special visceral efferents that innervate the somatic musculature
of the soft palate, larynx, pharynx, and esophagus.
Somatomotor and Visceromotor: Coupled Systems
In mammals, we observe two evolutionary strategies that link autonomic
function with somatic muscle activity. First, there is an anatomical linkage
between the segmentation of the spinal nerves and the sympathetic chain. This
linkage is reflected in the motor-related increases in sympathetic tone that have
dogged psychophysiologists by confounding motor and autonomic responses.
The evolution of the segmented sympathetic nervous system parallels the
evolution of voluntary motor activities. The sympathetic nervous system
regulates vasomotor tone to direct blood flow and, thus, oxygen to the specific
muscles being challenged. In addition, there are sudomotor links to hydrate and

protect the skin from tearing. This coupling between sympathetic activity and
movement has been the cornerstone of arousal theory and hypotheses associating
autonomic function with temperament and psychopathologies. It was not many
years ago that Obrist (1976) challenged Lacey’s (1967) notion that autonomic
state was independent of motor activity (i.e., metabolic demands). There is no
doubt that the effects of motor activity are profound on the autonomic nervous
system, yet this profound effect does not mitigate the importance of other
relationships that may be sensitive to specific psychological processes,
independent of movement.
Second, there is an anatomical linkage between the somatic muscles that
arise from the cranial nuclei and parasympathetic function. We can observe this
clearly in the viscerotropic organization of the NA. The NA provides the source
nuclei for somatic muscle fibers that innervate larynx, pharynx, trachea, and
esophagus. Moreover, ventral to these source nuclei, in an area of the NA known
as NAex, are general visceral efferents that control the resistance of the bronchi
(Haselton, Solomon, Motekaitis, & Kaufman, 1992) and heart rate (Bieger &
Hopkins, 1987). The ventral portion also projects to other visceral organs (e.g.,
Brown, 1990).
Based on neuroanatomical studies, it has been demonstrated that
visceromotor functions regulated by the ventral part of NA provide the
parasympathetic support for the somatomotor projections from NA and
trigeminal and facial nerves. Neuroanatomical studies suggest that, unlike the
DMNX, which receives primary sensory input through the NTS, the NA has the
trigeminal nerve as an important source of sensory input. Moreover, the rostral
region of the NA communicates with the facial nucleus. This coupling of the NA
with facial and trigeminal nuclei provides additional evidence of the
coordination of the visceromotor regulation through the NA with somatomotor
functions such as swallowing (Brown, 1974), sucking (Humphrey, 1970), and,
perhaps, facial expressions. Thus, the organization of the mammalian brainstem
has evolved to have a ventral vagal complex, consisting of NA and the nuclei of
the trigeminal and facial nerves, that coexists with the dorsal vagal complex,
consisting of the DMNX and NTS, that regulates vegetative processes and is
observed in reptiles.
To foster motor movement, visceromotor (i.e., autonomic) processes are
associated with somatomotor activities. In the periphery, this is done primarily
by the sympathetic chain; in special cases, such as those related to reproduction
and elimination, the sacral branch of the parasympathetic nervous system

contributes. However, in the rostral part of mammalian anatomy (i.e., the head),
the somatic muscles that regulate facial expression, mastication, vocalization,
swallowing, and sucking are matched with general visceral efferents, projecting
from the ventral portion of NA, that exert potent influences on the heart and the
bronchi. These motor fibers effectively slow heart rate and increase respiratory
resistance to conserve oxygen exchange. Neuroanatomical studies performed on
human embryos and fetuses suggest that these visceromotor neurons may have
migrated from the DMNX (Brown, 1990).
As observed through both embryological research and phylogenetic
comparisons, in mammals the primitive gill arches evolve into muscles and
nerves controlling the face, bones of the mouth, jaw, pharynx, larynx, soft palate,
esophagus, and trachea. The nerves innervating these muscles uniquely arise not
from the anterior horns of the spinal cord but from the source nuclei of five
cranial nerves (trigeminal, facial, glossopharyngeal, vagus, and accessory).
Because of their uniqueness, these motor systems are known as special visceral
efferents. And, because of their voluntary aspects, these pathways have been
excluded from traditional concepts of the autonomic nervous system. Facial
expressions characteristic of mammals, such as sucking, swallowing, and
vocalizations, reflect the unique mammalian adaptation of special visceral
efferent control of the visceral muscles evolving from the branchial arches.
However, similar to the synergistic relationship between the sympathetic
nervous system and skeletal muscles of the extremities, there is a synergistic
relationship between the traditional general visceral efferents of the vagus and
the somatic muscles controlled by these cranial nerves. Thus, increased outflow
of these somatic muscles produce specific visceral shifts. For example, chewing
will produce salivation in the absence of food, and head rotation, by means of
accessory special visceral efferents, will impact on cardiovascular action along
the vagus.
Phylogenetic development of the central nervous system has progressed in
mammals to produce a brain with a large neocortex (e.g., MacLean, 1990). The
neocortex is very vulnerable to shifts in oxygen. Evolutionary pressures have
resulted in autonomic strategies that optimize the availability of oxygen to the
cortex. However, these uniquely mammalian strategies coexist with the ancestral
reptilian strategies. Thus, premise 2 is consistent with MacLean’s view that the
advanced mammalian brain contains its phylogenetic heritage.
Premise 2: Neurogenic bradycardia associated with orienting is a
phylogenetic vestigial relic of the reptilian brain and is mediated by the DMNX.

Although phylogenetic development has modified several brain structures,
the evolved brain of advanced mammals maintains several structures and
systems that are virtually identical to those observed in primitive reptiles. These
primitive 
structures 
have 
extensive 
interconnections 
and 
functional
dependencies, although each is capable of specific independent functions. Thus,
in mammals, the DMNX still maintains its reptilian functions of facilitating
digestion and slowing heart rate. Mammals utilize an additional brainstem
structure, the NA, to supply general visceral vagal efferents that provide the
prominent control of the heart and the bronchi. The cells of origin of these fibers
efficiently communicate with limbic and other higher centers and allow for the
conscious and voluntary selection of novelty. In contrast, the DMNX is more
directly regulated by hypothalamic communication, often triggered by survival-
oriented stimuli (Hopkins, 1987; Leslie et al., 1992). Thus, as stated in premise
3, the regulation of vagal efferents by NA mechanisms contributes to the
mammalian ability to detect novelty, actively engage with the environment, and
socially communicate.
Premise 3: Withdrawal of cardiac vagal tone through NA mechanisms is a
mammalian adaptation to select novelty in the environment while coping with
the need to maintain metabolic output and continuous social communication.
To summarize the reptilian-mammalian evolutionary evidence, phylogenetic
development of the neural regulation of the heart provides insights into an
apparent contradiction or paradox in vagal control of the heart. In most reptiles,
the neuroanatomy demonstrates (a) a lack of anatomically distinguishable
boundaries between the DMNX and NA, and (b) cardiac vagal efferent pathways
originating only in the DMNX. In mammals, the neuroanatomy demonstrates (a)
a distinct separation of the DMNX and NA; (b) cardiac vagal efferent pathways
originating primarily, but not exclusively, in the NA; (c) direct neural
connections between the central nucleus of the amygdala and NA; and (d) a
clustering of medullary neurons in the NA capable of regulating the somatic
muscles related to vocalizations, facial expression, and coordinating breathing
with sucking and swallowing.
Smart and Vegetative Vagi
The polyvagal theory proposes that the evolutionary shift resulting in both an
NA that is distinct from the DMNX and the evolutionary development of special
visceral efferents changed the role of the vagus. The general visceral efferent

pathways from the DMNX vagus are part of a passive reflexive motor system
associated with vegetative function and, thus, a vegetative vagus. The special
visceral efferent pathways from NA create an active voluntary motor system
associated with the conscious functions of attention, motion, emotion, and
communication, and, thus, a smart vagus.
The polyvagal theory requires a reconceptualization of the vagal system and
the construct of vagal tone. The theory focuses on the cytoarchitecture of the
medullary source nuclei of the cranial nerves. The theory takes an evolutionary
approach and investigates, through embryology and phylogenetic comparisons,
the common origins of the special visceral efferents and focuses on the shared
medullary structures for the cell bodies of these fibers. The theory acknowledges
that the vagal system is complex and should be organized not in terms of bundles
of fibers leaving the medulla but rather in terms of the common source nuclei of
several of these pathways. Functionally, the common source nuclei provide a
center to coordinate and regulate the complex interactions among various end
organs and are related to optimizing cardiopulmonary function.
Mammals, with their oxygen-hungry metabolic systems, require a special
medullary center to coordinate cardiopulmonary functions with behaviors of
ingestion (e.g., mastication, salivation, sucking, and swallowing), oral or
esophageal expulsion (vomiting), vocalizations (e.g., cries and speech), emotions
(e.g., facial expressions), and attention (e.g., rotation of the head). The NA plays
this role and serves as the cells of origin of the smart vagus. The potent link
between the NA and cardiopulmonary function observed in mammals is not
observed in reptiles. In reptiles, which do not have nerves to regulate facial
expression, the NA does not play a major role in visceromotor regulation.
Medullary Contributions to a Common Cardiopulmonary
Oscillator
The NA is a continuum of interconnected subdivisions, beginning rostrally at the
level of the facial nucleus and extending caudally to the spinal medullary
junction. As illustrated in Figure 2.5, the rat NA has several subdivisions. The
subdivisions are the compact (NAC), semicompact (NASC), loose (NAI), and
external (NAEX) formations (Bieger & Hopkins, 1987). The dorsal division
consists of the NAC, NASC, and NAI. The dorsal division is the source of
special visceral efferents innervating the soft palate, pharynx, larynx, and
esophagus. The ventral division consists of the NAex and is the source of

general visceral efferents innervating the thoracic viscera, primarily the bronchi
and the sinoatrial node. Vagal fibers originating in the NAex and terminating in
both the bronchi (Haselton et al., 1992) and the sinoatrial node (Spyer & Jordan,
1987) have a respiratory rhythm, thus suggesting that RSA may reflect a
common respiratory rhythm originating in or at least incorporating the NA.
After investigating the neuroanatomical centers associated with laryngeal,
pulmonary, and cardiac function, Richter and Spyer (1990) arrived at a
convergent conclusion that NA was a contributor to a common respiratory
rhythm. They also speculated that mammals, with their great need for oxygen,
have a medullary center to regulate cardiopulmonary processes. They proposed
that a common cardiorespiratory oscillator evolved to foster coordination
between cardiac and respiratory processes. In their model, the respiratory rhythm
is dependent on the interaction between two groups of neurons, one in the NTS
and the other in the NA. Accordingly, the “common” oscillator producing
respiratory frequencies is a manifestation of a neural network comprised of
interneurons between areas containing the motoneurons regulating respiratory,
laryngeal, and cardiac functions. The cardiorespiratory oscillator does not
involve the DMNX. To support their hypotheses, Richter and Spyer (1990)
reported cross-correlational studies of single units. Thus, the NA is part of the
cardiorespiratory oscillator network, and the period of the oscillations in heart
rate (the period of RSA) provides a valid index of the output frequency of the
cardiopulmonary oscillator.
FIGURE 2.5. Topographic organization of the nucleus ambiguus (NA) in the rat (Bieger & Hopkins, 1987).
Other researchers have emphasized the importance of additional brain
structures as contributors to the regulation, if not the generation, of a
cardiopulmonary rhythm. For example, Harper and associates demonstrated that
“respiratory rhythms” can be observed in several nuclei in the brainstem,
midbrain, and forebrain. Harper’s group, by employing cross-correlation
techniques, reported units firing on a breath-by-breath basis in periaqueductal
gray (Ni, Zhang, & Harper, 1990), central nucleus of the amygdala (Frysinger,

Zhang, & Harper, 1988), hippocampus (Frysinger & Harper, 1989), and the
anterior cingulate (Frysinger & Harper, 1986). In addition, they reported that
stimulation of the amygdala can influence the respiratory cycle (Harper,
Frysinger, Trelease, & Marks, 1984).
The covariation of the bronchi with heart rate oscillations (e.g., RSA),
mediated by the NA, may have a functional influence on the oxygenation of
blood. As stated earlier, the primary objective of the phylogenetic derivatives of
the primitive gill arches is to maintain oxygenation. Thus, one might speculate
that oscillations in vagal tone to the bronchi and the heart might influence
oxygenation. Perhaps coherent rhythmic shifts between bronchial tone and heart
rate, with a fixed-phase lag, maximize oxygen diffusion. To answer this
question, research would need to confirm a relationship between oxygen
saturation and RSA, independent of the average heart rate and respiration rate.
Currently, only anecdotal data exist that demonstrate that clinical conditions in
which oxygen saturation is low tend to be conditions in which RSA also is
depressed. Support for this hypothesis is obtained from research demonstrating
that vagotomy disrupts the oxygen consumption-oxygen delivery relationship
(Scherlel, Brourman, Kling, Schmall, Tobias, & Myerowitz, 1994).
Measurement of NA Status: Quantification of RSA
For psychophysiologists, interest is primarily in the behaviors and psychological
processes associated with special visceral efferents. Most research has been
directed toward processes that require the ability to monitor and mediate
complex behaviors, such as attention, motion, emotion, and communication;
these processes are neurophysiologically dependent on the special visceral
efferents of the NA and facial and trigeminal nerves. Yet many of us measure
only general visceral efferents from both the parasympathetic and sympathetic
branches, although we are interested in the special visceral efferents that regulate
vocalizations and facial expression. We are not at a total loss, because there is
interneuronal communication between the dorsal and ventral segments of the
NA. Thus, by the nature of the NA having general visceral efferents that regulate
heart and bronchi, it is possible to monitor continuously the vagal output or
tonus of the smart vagus. This leads to the fourth premise of the polyvagal
theory.
Premise 4: The ability of NA to regulate special and general visceral
efferents may be monitored by the amplitude of RSA.

The vagal fibers originating in the NAex have a characteristic respiratory
frequency that reflects a waxing and waning of influence. For example, the vagal
fibers from the NA that have an inhibitory action on the sinoatrial node also wax
and wane in inhibitory influence at the respiratory rhythm and produce RSA.
Thus, it is possible to monitor continuously the general status of the NA by
evaluating RSA. Similarly, NA fibers to the bronchi that elevate lung resistance
also wax and wane in their inhibitory influence (Haselton et al., 1992).
RSA is a measure of the general visceral efferents of the NA and thus is an
index of the smart vagus. RSA is not a global measure of vagal tone or even a
measure of “total” vagal control of the heart as previously proposed (Fouad,
Tarazi, Ferrario, Fighaly, & Alicandro, 1984; Katona & Jih, 1975; Porges,
1992). There are other vagal and nonvagal influences on the heart that contribute
to both heart rate level and rhythm. For example, there are DMNX projections
and monosynaptic cholinergic pathways within the heart, sympathetic pathways,
and intrinsic factors. However, the primary, if not sole, source of respiratory
rhythms on the sinoatrial node is due to projections from the NA.
To evaluate NA regulation of the sinoatrial node, the parameters of RSA
must be accurately extracted. We have approached this problem by evaluating
the period and amplitude of RSA, independent of slower oscillations and trends,
with a moving polynomial approach (Porges & Bohrer, 1990). In our research,
we have obtained correlations between respiration rate and period of RSA
approaching 1.0. These findings support the notion of a common
cardiorespiratory oscillator as described by Richter and Spyer (1990). RSA, with
its amplitude representing visceromotor tone and its period representing the
common cardiorespiratory drive frequency, is the functional consequence of the
output of vagal fibers originating in NA and terminating on the sinoatrial node.
Thus, to emphasize the relationship between RSA and the vagal tone from the
NA to the heart, a better designation for the vagal tone index (Porges, 1986)
would be VNA.
Quantification of RSA requires only an accurate determination of the
amplitude and period of these oscillations. Additional experimental constraints
to regulate breathing rates might confound the visceral-medullary feedback
system, which determines central respiratory rhythms. For example, because
paced breathing requires an awareness of breathing parameters, cortical
influences on brainstem structures might modulate the gain of the feedback and
influence the amplitude of RSA, and paced breathing may shift respiratory
parameters, such as rate, amplitude, inspiration-expiration ratio, interbreath

pause, and resistance, from brainstem setpoints. Data illustrating that paced
breathing may influence RSA (Sargunaraj, Lehrer, Carr, Hochron, & Porges,
1994) have been reported.
Various manipulations or conditions that depress special visceral efferents,
such as inhalant anesthesia, have profound influences on RSA (Donchin et al.,
1985). Recovery of function of special visceral efferents is paralleled by a
recovery of RSA. In neurology, diagnosis is often based on the evaluation of the
special visceral efferents. In our research, we noted that RSA amplitude before
neurosurgery was an effective diagnostic of neurological recovery following
neurosurgery (Donchin, Constantini, Szold, Byrne, & Porges, 1992). Additional
neurological data demonstrate consistent depression of RSA in individuals who
are diagnosed as brain dead (Mera, Wityk, & Porges, 1995).
High-risk preterm neonates have problems coordinating breathing, sucking,
and swallowing (i.e., processes regulated by the NA). These infants have low
levels of RSA (Porges, 1992). Many of these infants have severe bradycardia.
The bradycardia is often paralleled by apnea, and a drop in available oxygen
may be assumed to reflect neurogenic vagal regulation by the DMNX. This
response, in dealing with decreased resources, is adaptive for reptiles but
potentially lethal for humans. This also is observed during fetal distress, when
there is severe hypoxia associated with a loss of RSA and a pronounced
neurogenic bradycardia.
Vagal Competition and Autonomic Dysfunction
The concept of competition between sympathetic and parasympathetic inputs is
well known. For example, Levy (1984; Vanhoutte & Levy, 1979) has clearly
documented the ability of vagal efferents to inhibit sympathetic influences.
Similarly, Berntson et al. (1991) modeled the interactions between sympathetic
and parasympathetic efferents to the heart. However, there may be a different
type of competition in which the two vagal branches are conveying contradictory
information to the target organs. As both vagal pathways are capable of
regulating heart rate, there may be competition on the sinoatrial node. Due to the
rate of acetylcholine degradation on the nodal tissue (Dexter, Levy, & Rudy,
1989), the continuous stimulation of the sinoatrial node by NA pathways may
functionally protect the heart from massive neurogenic bradycardia mediated by
the DMNX. Thus, the observations of massive pathophysiological bradycardia in
hypoxic fetuses and neonates, who have very low amplitude RSA, may reflect

the loss of NA protection on the sinoatrial node. Similarly, sudden death
following exercise might reflect a similar process associated with the depression
of NA input to foster metabolic activity and a surge of DMNX input in response
to decreased oxygen resources.
The vagal competition hypothesis may be generalized and tested to explain
other autonomic diseases such as asthma. The vagal competition hypothesis
proposes that all target organs with smooth and cardiac muscle have dual
innervation from both the DMNX and the NA. This has been documented in
animal preparations for heart, lungs, esophagus, and abdominal viscera including
pancreas, liver, and stomach (Brown, 1990). However, as with the heart, the two
vagal inputs may innervate in a contradictory manner. Just as a DMNX surge
coupled with low RSA may result in sudden death, bronchial asthma may be
produced by a similar mechanism. In the case of asthma, NA efferent control of
bronchi results in the bronchi exhibiting a rhythmic waxing and waning with
breathing. This continuous stimulation of the bronchi by NA pathways may
functionally protect the bronchi from pathophysiological DMNX influences. It is
possible that without NA influences, the bronchi become vulnerable to vagal
surges from the DMNX. This would be an adaptive response for a primitive
brainstem attempting to conserve oxygen but would be lethal for the oxygen-
hungry mammal. The asthma attack, similar to lethal neurogenic bradycardia,
may be a product of a primitive vagovagal reflex. In this type of reflex, not only
do the motor fibers originate, but the afferent fibers terminate, in DMNX. There
is an anatomical basis for a monosynaptic vagovagal reflex. There are reports
that dendritic processes from DMNX neurons extend into the boundaries of the
NTS. Thus, vagal afferent fibers may communicate directly with DMNX
neurons (Neuheuber & Sandoz, 1986). Because afferents terminate in DMNX,
the name motor nucleus is not accurate, and dorsal nucleus of the vagus nerve
has been suggested instead (Nara, Goto, & Hamano, 1991). In most vagal
reflexes involving the bronchi, the afferents terminate in the NTS and influence
the NA to provide a fail-safe feedback system.
Based on the polyvagal theory, the assumption of vagal competition
promotes the following testable hypotheses.
Nucleus ambiguus (vagal) protection hypothesis. Vagal projections
originating in the NA and terminating in visceral organs provide tonic influences
that promote health, growth, and restoration.
Nucleus ambiguus (vagal) withdrawal hypothesis. Removal of the NA vagal
brake for short periods of time promotes metabolic output to foster locomotion.

Removal of these influences for long periods places the organ at risk.
Emotion
The polyvagal theory provides a set of predictions regarding the relation
between autonomic responses and emotion. Darwin (1872) carefully described
facial expressions as the primary defining characteristics of emotion. The special
visceral efferents, associated with the facial nerve, control movements of facial
expression. Reptiles cannot modulate facial expression. The facial nerve in
mammals not only regulates facial muscles but also interacts with the NA and
the vagal system. Thus, it is logical that emotional expression, which requires
somatic muscles controlled by special visceral efferents, is coupled to the
visceromotor regulation of cardiopulmonary function by NA vagal efferents. In
addition, special visceral efferents originating in NA regulate the larynx and
control intonation. Thus, the following premise is stated.
Premise 5: Emotion, defined by shifts in the regulation of facial expressions
and vocalizations, will produce changes in RSA and bronchomotor tone
mediated by the NA.
As a construct, emotion is heterogeneous. Therefore, correlations between
specific emotions and physiological states may be a function of the type of
emotion. Even Darwin (1872) distinguished between primary or neurally based
emotions and social or culturally based emotions. Darwin (1872) suggested that
certain emotions have as their substrate an innate neural basis and, because these
emotions are neurally based, they are universally expressed and understood
across cultures. These primary emotions include anger, fear, panic, sadness,
surprise, interest, happiness (ecstasy), and disgust (Ross, Homan, & Buck,
1994). Because the prevalent hypotheses suggest a strong physiological basis for
primary emotions, we will focus on relating primary emotions to the polyvagal
theory.
There are two important aspects linking the polyvagal theory to the study of
emotion: first, there is a parallel between cortical asymmetry and autonomic
asymmetry; second, the branchial arches have evolved into the structures that
mammals use to express emotion (i.e., facial muscles and larynx).
The literature documents the relationship between right brain function and
primary emotions (Heilman, Bowers, & Valenstein, 1985). The medullary
source nuclei and efferent pathways of the vagus also are lateralized with a right
bias. The right NA by means of the right cardiac vagus provides the primary

chronotropic output to the heart. The special visceral efferents, which provide
the behaviors that are used to define emotion (facial expression and vocalization)
also have a right bias and are linked neuroanatomically to the general visceral
efferents, originating in the NA, that regulate the bronchi and heart, organs that
are assumed to be sensitive to emotion and stress. It is difficult to predict the
influence of this right bias on actual facial expressions. Because the face is
controlled by upper motor neurons that are crossed and lower motor neurons that
are uncrossed (Rinn, 1984), facial expression may not be systematically
lateralized. In fact, research on facial asymmetry and emotion has not been
consistent. There have been reports of facial expressions not being lateralized,
being lateralized on the left, and being lateralized on the right (e.g., Hager &
Ekman, 1985).
The functional dominance of the right side of the brain in regulating
autonomic function and emotion may have implications for the specialization of
motor and language dominance on the left side of the brain. The right-sided
responsibilities of regulating homeostasis and modulating physiological state in
response to both internal (i.e., visceral) and external (i.e., environmental)
feedback may contribute to the development of motor and language functions on
the left side of the brain.
A partitioning of central control of voluntary processes, independent of
emotional-homeostatic processes, would enable the individual to express
complex voluntary levels of communication and movement, from the left side of
the brain, and more intense emotional-homeostatic processes, from the right side
of the brain. If these processes are lateralized, they might have a degree of
autonomous regulation. This would enable simultaneous activation of global
functions associated with emotional-homeostatic processes and language-
voluntary movement processes.
Given the strong theoretical relationships between lateralized autonomic and
hemispheric function and between the neurons that control RSA and those that
control facial expression and vocal intonation (see Figure 2.5), research should
be directed at evaluating the relationship between RSA and the primary
emotions. Recall that the source nucleus of the facial nerve is the border of the
NA and afferents from the trigeminal nerve provide a primary sensory input to
the NA. Thus, the ventral vagal complex, consisting of the NA and the nuclei of
the trigeminal and facial nerves, is clearly related to the expression and
experience of emotion.
Based on the polyvagal theory, one would expect shifts in affective state to

parallel RSA. For example, the elicitation of a negative primary emotion would
result in a systematic withdrawal of vagal tone along NA to promote fight-or-
flight behaviors. In contrast, a shift to a more pleasant affective state would be
associated with an increase in RSA. A study by Bazhenova and colleagues
(2001), in emphasizing the dynamics of RSA change during shifting affective
states, supports this speculation. Manipulation of the affective state resulted in
RSA deceases when an infant shifted to a more negative state. Moreover, when
the infant shifted to a more positive affective state, RSA increased above the
affectively neutral base level.
The polyvagal theory does not neglect the important role of the DMNX in
the emotional experience. For example, the DMNX is critical in the regulation of
digestive polypeptides and gastric motility (Uvnas-Moberg, 1989), dimensions
of physiological activity that parallel emotive experiences and stress. Consistent
with the polyvagal theory, which emphasizes the importance of NA and the
ventral vagal complex in overt emotional expressiveness and regulation, the
theory would acknowledge the importance of less conscious survival-oriented
processes that are mediated by the dorsal vagal complex, which consists of the
NTS and the DMNX. A complementary theory has been proposed by Uvnas-
Moberg (1987, 1994). The Uvnas-Moberg theory emphasizes the role of the
DMNX in the regulation of gastrointestinal hormones and during emotional
states including stress, hunger, and satiety.
SUMMARY AND CONCLUSION
The following seven points summarize the polyvagal theory.
1. The vagal system does not represent a unitary dimension. The vagal
system includes general visceral efferent fibers regulating smooth and cardiac
muscle and special visceral efferent fibers regulating the somatic muscles of the
larynx, pharynx, and esophagus. These somatic muscles control vocalization,
sucking, and swallowing and interface these processes with breathing. The vagal
system also is linked neuroanatomically to the source nuclei that control facial
expression, mastication, and head turning.
2. There are two vagal motor systems. One vagal system is the vegetative
vagus, which originates in the dorsal motor nucleus and is associated with
passive reflexive regulation of visceral functions. The other vagal system is the
smart vagus, which originates in the NA and is associated with the active

processes of attention, motion, emotion, and communication. The two systems
are neuroanatomically distinct, have different ontogenetic and phylogenetic
origins, and employ different adaptive strategies.
3. In mammals, the concept that vagal tone represents a single or summed
system may have limited physiological or heuristic value. For example, in
mammals, high tone from the dorsal motor nucleus vagal system may be lethal,
whereas high tone from the NA vagal system may be beneficial. Based on the
proposed polyvagal theory, an accurate measure of the NA system is critical to
the evaluation of psychophysiological relationships.
4. The functional output of the NA vagus on the heart may be monitored by
RSA. NA is part of a common neuronal network producing a cardiorespiratory
rhythm. Thus, the output from the branch of the vagus originating in NA and
terminating on the sinoatrial node of the heart conveys a frequency common to
both respiratory and cardiac systems. In contrast, the output from the dorsal
motor nucleus does not convey a respiratory rhythm.
5. The magnitude of neurogenic bradycardia is mediated by the dorsal motor
nucleus. Rapid heart rate changes, such as conditioned anticipatory heart rate
deceleration and decelerations associated with orienting, are neurogenic
bradycardia. Additional neurogenic bradycardia are reflexes such as optovagal
and chemovagal. In the absence of NA influences to the sinoatrial node, local
conditions such as hypoxia may greatly potentiate the vagal effect.
6. There is a common cardiopulmonary oscillator. The common respiratory
rhythm observed in heart rate and breathing is produced by a network of
interneurons located in the NTS and NA, which communicate with the motor
neurons that control respiratory, laryngeal, and cardiac function.
7. Primary emotions are related to autonomic function. Because the primary
emotions are often related to survival, they must be integrated into
cardiopulmonary regulation. Moreover, primary emotions have a right-
hemisphere bias, ipsilateral with the regulatory bias of the medullary structures
controlling visceral function.
Based on the polyvagal theory, additional hypotheses may now be tested by
evaluating the relationship between RSA (the measure of NA vagal tone, VNA)
and processes and states dependent on the coordination of cardiopulmonary
processes with the special visceral efferents of the cranial nerves. This, of
course, includes all processes associated with vocalizations, feeding, breathing,
and facial expression.
In developing the polyvagal theory, the most striking insights came from the

phylogenetic approach. Not only does a phylogenetic approach explain the vagal
paradox in terms of the medullary source nuclei of the dorsal motor nucleus and
NA, but it also highlights the importance of oxygen needs in the evolving
nervous system. As the nervous system gets more complex, there are greater
demands for oxygen. Oxygen needs may have provided a major environmental
pressure leading to the evolution of the adaptive and sophisticated autonomic
nervous system found in mammals. Thus, constructs such as orienting, attention,
emotion, and stress are by-products of the evolutionary pressure to optimize
oxygen resources.
APPENDIX A: TITLE OF THE CHAPTER
The title was selected to emphasize the concept that evolutionary processes have
sculpted the neural regulation of autonomic function. Evolution has provided
obvious divergences in behavior and appearance and has had an impact on the
autonomic strategies related to the detection of novelty in the environment.
The aim of this chapter was neither a theory of orienting nor an attempt to
distinguish between the autonomic components of orienting or defensive
reflexes, but rather the neurogenic regulation of cardiac responses by two vagal
responses systems. A primitive system inherited from reptiles produced a rapid
neurogenic bradycardia that reduced the activity of our cardiopulmonary system
to conserve oxygen. This is the strategy of sit-and-wait feeders common in
reptiles. In contrast, the evolution of the energy-demanding mammal required
two autonomic behavioral shifts: mammals needed to (a) obtain great amounts of
food and (b) protect their nervous systems from oxygen loss. These two
objectives are linked. In the evolution of mammals, success in obtaining food
resources was dependent on the ability to detect threat. Thus, mobilization and
attention became two important behavioral dimensions. Unlike reptiles, which
orient in response to novelty and attack or return to a quiescent state or lumber
off, mammals orient and then attend. Following this phase of attention, a
mammal may rapidly depart or approach (attack) within the context of the
classic fight-or-flight response. With the increasing complexity of behavior,
there is a parallel increase in complexity in the organization and function of the
autonomic nervous system.
The title was also intended to emphasize the concept that evolution has
placed mammals in a defensive world. The survival systems of reptiles and other
nonmammalian vertebrates can be organized into orienting and defensive

dimensions. Mammals, to survive in this defensive and reactive world, had to
circumvent these potentially lethal reactions of other species. The evolution of
the mammalian nervous system enables mammals to escape danger rapidly and
to use neural resources for the complex information processes required to detect
subtleties in the environment. Moreover, evolution promoted additional motor
systems related to communication. Motor systems developed to communicate
conditions related to survival with facial expressions and vocalizations
associated with primary emotions. The evolutionary modifications had to coexist
with the oxygen-hungry metabolic system, and, by increasing the complexity of
motor behaviors, there was an additional increase in oxygen needs. Thus, there is
a link between the special visceral efferent actions regulating the communicative
processes of emotion (and later, language) with the general visceral efferent
actions regulating cardiopulmonary function. The ability to detect subtleties in
the environment coupled with the ability to communicate threat or comfort
through facial expressions and vocalizations contributed to within-species social
behavior, parenting, and pair bonding. These complex functions evolved while
the demanding oxygen needs of mammals were programmed into the
background of nervous system function by the autonomic nervous system.
APPENDIX B: PERSONAL RETROSPECTIVE
In discussing any theoretical perspective, it is important to place the ideas and
speculations in the context of earlier research conducted by the investigator. My
early research focused on the use of heart rate measures as indicators of
attention. While conducting research for my master’s thesis (Porges & Raskin,
1969), I noted that attention-demanding tasks produced heart rate response
patterns with two prominent characteristics. First, heart rate exhibited a rapid
transitory directional change in response to task onset and stimulus changes.
Second, when subjects became involved in the task and focused their attention
on the task demands, heart rate variability was reduced. I was intrigued with
these observations and speculated on the possible physiological mechanisms.
This evolved into a two-component theory of attention in which the components
were labeled phasic or orienting and tonic or attention responses (Porges, 1972).
These findings stimulated me to investigate neural mechanisms of heart rate
regulation and to develop the vagal tone index (V) of RSA, which I believed
would help provide insight into the mechanisms mediating the more tonic
sustained attention response.

The preceding sections of this chapter provide the basis for the polyvagal
theory and enable an interpretation of the two heart rate components associated
with attention. The first component, associated with orienting and neurogenic
bradycardia, is determined reflexively by the vegetative vagus, originating in the
dorsal motor nucleus. The second component, associated with voluntary
engagement with the environment and depression of RSA, is determined by the
smart vagus, originating in the NA. Thus, after years of studying heart rate
patterns, a speculative two-component psychophysiological model of attention is
evolving into the neuroanatomically and neurophysiologically based polyvagal
theory.

CHAPTER 3
The Polyvagal Theory: New Insights Into
Adaptive Reactions of the Autonomic Nervous
System
HISTORICAL PERSPECTIVES ON THE AUTONOMIC
NERVOUS SYSTEM
Central nervous system regulation of visceral organs is the focus of several
historic publications that have shaped the texture of physiological inquiry. For
example, in 1872 Darwin acknowledged the dynamic neural relationship
between the heart and the brain:
when the heart is affected it reacts on the brain; and the state of the brain
again reacts through the pneumo-gastric [vagus] nerve on the heart; so
that under any excitement there will be much mutual action and reaction
between these, the two most important organs of the body. (p. 69)
Although Darwin acknowledged the bidirectional communication between
the viscera and the brain, subsequent formal description of the autonomic
nervous system (e.g., Langley, 1921) minimized the importance of central
regulatory structures and afferents. Following Langley, medical and
physiological research tended to focus on the peripheral motor nerves of the
autonomic nervous system, with a conceptual emphasis on the paired
antagonism between sympathetic and parasympathetic efferent pathways on the
target visceral organs. This focus minimized interest in both afferent pathways
and the brainstem areas that regulate specific efferent pathways.
The early conceptualization of the vagus focused on an undifferentiated
efferent pathway that was assumed to modulate “tone” concurrently to several

target organs. Thus, brainstem areas regulating the supradiaphragmatic (e.g.,
myelinated vagal pathways originating in the nucleus ambiguus and terminating
primarily above the diaphragm) were not functionally distinguished from those
regulating the subdiaphragmatic (e.g., unmyelinated vagal pathways originating
in the dorsal motor nucleus of the vagus and terminating primarily below the
diaphragm). Without this distinction, research and theory focused on the paired
antagonism between the parasympathetic and sympathetic innervation to target
organs. The consequence of an emphasis on paired antagonism was an
acceptance in physiology and medicine of global constructs such as autonomic
balance, sympathetic tone, and vagal tone.
More than 50 years ago, Hess (1954) proposed that the autonomic nervous
system was not solely vegetative and automatic but was instead an integrated
system with both peripheral and central neurons. By emphasizing the central
mechanisms that mediate the dynamic regulation of peripheral organs, Hess
anticipated the need for technologies to continuously monitor peripheral and
central neural circuits involved in the regulation of visceral function.
THE VAGAL PARADOX
In 1992, I proposed that an estimate of vagal tone, derived from measuring
respiratory sinus arrhythmia (RSA), could be used in clinical medicine as an
index of stress vulnerability (see chapter 4). Rather than using the descriptive
measures of heart rate variability (i.e., beat-to-beat variability) frequently used in
obstetrics and pediatrics, the article emphasized that RSA has a neural origin and
represents the tonic functional outflow from the vagus to the heart (i.e., cardiac
vagal tone). Thus, it was proposed that RSA would provide a more sensitive
index of health status than a more global measure of beat-to-beat heart rate
variability reflecting undetermined neural and non-neural mechanisms. The
article presented a quantitative approach that applied time-series analyses to
extract the amplitude of RSA as a more accurate index of vagal activity. The
article provided data demonstrating that healthy full-term infants had RSA of
significantly greater amplitude than did preterm infants. This idea of using heart
rate patterns to index vagal activity was not new, having been reported as early
as 1910 by Hering. Moreover, contemporary studies have reliably reported that
vagal blockade via atropine depresses RSA in mammals (Porges, 1986, 2007a).
In response to this article (Porges, 1992), I received a letter from a

neonatologist who wrote that, as a medical student, he learned that vagal tone
could be lethal. He argued that perhaps too much of a good thing (i.e., vagal
tone) could be bad. He was referring, of course, to the clinical risk of neurogenic
bradycardia. Bradycardia, when observed during delivery, may be an indicator
of fetal distress. Similarly, bradycardia and apnea are important indicators of risk
for the newborn.
My colleagues and I (Reed, Ohel, David, & Porges, 1999) further
investigated this perplexing observation by studying the human fetus during
delivery. We observed that fetal bradycardia occurred only when RSA was
depressed (i.e., a respiratory rhythm in fetal heart rate is observable even in the
absence of the large chest wall movements associated with breathing that occur
postpartum). This raised the question of how vagal mechanisms could mediate
both RSA and bradycardia, as one is protective and the other is potentially lethal.
This inconsistency became the “vagal paradox” and served as the motivation
behind the polyvagal theory.
With regard to the mechanisms mediating bradycardia and heart rate
variability, there is an obvious inconsistency between data and physiological
assumptions. Physiological models assume vagal regulation of both chronotropic
control of the heart (i.e., heart rate) and the amplitude of RSA (Jordan, Khalid,
Schneiderman, & Spyer, 1982; Katona & Jih, 1975). For example, it has been
reliably reported that vagal cardioinhibitory fibers to the heart have consistent
functional properties characterized by bradycardia to neural stimulation and a
respiratory rhythm (Jordan et al., 1982). However, although there are situations
in which both measures covary (e.g., during exercise and cholinergic blockade),
there are other situations in which the measures appear to reflect independent
sources of neural control (e.g., bradycardic episodes associated with hypoxia,
vasovagal syncope, and fetal distress). In contrast to these observable
phenomena, researchers continue to argue for a covariation between these two
parameters. This inconsistency, based on an assumption of a single central vagal
source, is what I have labeled the vagal paradox.
THE POLYVAGAL THEORY: THREE PHYLOGENETIC
RESPONSE SYSTEMS
Investigation of the phylogeny of the vertebrate autonomic nervous system
provides an answer to the vagal paradox. Research in comparative neuroanatomy
and neurophysiology has identified two branches of the vagus, with each branch

supporting different adaptive functions and behavioral strategies. The vagal
output to the heart from one branch is manifested in RSA, and the output from
the other branch is manifested in bradycardia and possibly the slower rhythms in
heart rate variability. Although the slower rhythms have been assumed to have a
sympathetic influence, they are blocked by atropine (Porges, 2007a).
The polyvagal theory (see chapters 2, 10, 11, and 12; Porges, 2001a, 2007a)
articulates how each of three phylogenetic stages in the development of the
vertebrate autonomic nervous system is associated with a distinct autonomic
subsystem that is retained and expressed in mammals. These autonomic
subsystems are phylogenetically ordered and behaviorally linked to social
communication (e.g., facial expression, vocalization, listening), mobilization
(e.g., fight-or-flight behaviors), and immobilization (e.g., feigning death,
vasovagal syncope, and behavioral shutdown).
The social communication system (see description below of the social
engagement system) involves the myelinated vagus, which serves to foster calm
behavioral states by inhibiting sympathetic influences to the heart and
dampening the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal (HPA) axis (Bueno et al., 1989).
The mobilization system is dependent on the functioning of the sympathetic
nervous system. The most phylogenetically primitive component, the
immobilization system, is dependent on the unmyelinated vagus, which is shared
with most vertebrates. With increased neural complexity resulting from
phylogenetic development, the organism’s behavioral and affective repertoire is
enriched. The three circuits can be conceptualized as dynamic, providing
adaptive responses to safe, dangerous, and life-threatening events and contexts.
Only mammals have a myelinated vagus. Unlike the unmyelinated vagus,
originating in the dorsal motor nucleus of the vagus with pre-and postganglionic
muscarinic receptors, the mammalian myelinated vagus originates in the nucleus
ambiguus and has preganglionic nicotinic receptors and postganglionic
muscarinic receptors. The unmyelinated vagus is shared with other vertebrates,
including reptiles, amphibians, teleosts, and elasmobranchs.
We are investigating the possibility of extracting different features of the
heart rate pattern to dynamically monitor the two vagal systems. Preliminary
studies in our laboratory support this possibility. In these studies we have
blocked the nicotinic preganglionic receptors with hexamethonium and the
muscarinic receptors with atropine. The data were collected from the prairie vole
(Grippo, Lamb, Carter, & Porges, 2007), which has a very high ambient vagal
tone. These preliminary data demonstrated that, in several animals, nicotinic

blockade selectively removes RSA without dampening the amplitude of the
lower frequencies in heart rate variability. In contrast, blocking the muscarinic
receptors with atropine removes both the low and respiratory frequencies.
CONSISTENCY WITH JACKSONIAN
DISSOLUTION
The three circuits are organized and respond to challenges in a phylogenetically
determined hierarchy consistent with the Jacksonian principle of dissolution.
Jackson (1958) proposed that in the brain, higher (i.e., phylogenetically newer)
neural circuits inhibit lower (i.e., phylogenetically older) neural circuits and
“when the higher are suddenly rendered functionless, the lower rise in activity.”
Although Jackson proposed dissolution to explain changes in brain function due
to damage and illness, the polyvagal theory proposes a similar phylogenetically
ordered hierarchical model to describe the sequence of autonomic response
strategies to challenges.
Functionally, when the environment is perceived as safe, two important
features are expressed. First, bodily state is regulated in an efficient manner to
promote growth and restoration (e.g., visceral homeostasis). This is done through
an increase in the influence of mammalian myelinated vagal motor pathways on
the cardiac pacemaker that slows the heart, inhibits the fight-or-flight
mechanisms of the sympathetic nervous system, dampens the stress response
system of the HPA axis (e.g., cortisol), and reduces inflammation by modulating
immune reactions (e.g., cytokines). Second, through the process of evolution, the
brainstem nuclei that regulate the myelinated vagus became integrated with the
nuclei that regulate the muscles of the face and head. This link results in the
bidirectional coupling between spontaneous social engagement behaviors and
bodily states. Specifically, an integrated social engagement system emerged in
mammals when the neural regulation of visceral states that promote growth and
restoration (via the myelinated vagus) was linked neuroanatomically and
neurophysiologically with the neural regulation of the muscles controlling eye
gaze, facial expression, listening, and prosody (Figure 3.1; see Porges, 2007a,
for review).
The human nervous system, similar to that of other mammals, evolved not
solely to survive in safe environments but also to promote survival in dangerous

and life-threatening contexts. To accomplish this adaptive flexibility, the human
nervous system retained two more primitive neural circuits to regulate defensive
strategies (i.e., fight-or-flight and death-feigning behaviors). It is important to
note that social behavior, social communication, and visceral homeostasis are
incompatible with the neurophysiological states and behaviors promoted by the
two neural circuits that support defense strategies. Thus, via evolution, the
human nervous system retains three neural circuits, which are in a
phylogenetically organized hierarchy. In this hierarchy of adaptive responses,
the newest circuit is used first; if that circuit fails to provide safety, the older
circuits are recruited sequentially.
FIGURE 3.1. The social engagement system. Social communication is determined by the cortical regulation
of medullary nuclei via corticobulbar pathways. The social engagement system consists of a somatomotor
component (special visceral efferent pathways that regulate the muscles of the head and face; solid blocks)
and a visceromotor component (the myelinated vagus that regulates the heart and bronchi; dashed blocks).
Solid blocks indicate the somatomotor component. Dashed blocks indicate the visceromotor component.
Reprinted from Porges (2007a), with permission from Elsevier.
Investigation of the phylogeny of regulation of the vertebrate heart (Morris
& Nilsson, 1994; Taylor, Jordan, & Coote, 1999; see also chapters 2 and 10) has
led to extraction of four principles that provide a basis for testing of hypotheses
relating specific neural mechanisms to social engagement, fight-or-flight, and
death-feigning behaviors:

• There is a phylogenetic shift in the regulation of the heart from endocrine
communication to unmyelinated nerves and finally to myelinated nerves.
• There is a development of opposing neural mechanisms of excitation and
inhibition to provide rapid regulation of graded metabolic output.
• A face–heart connection evolved as source nuclei of vagal pathways shifted
ventrally from the older dorsal motor nucleus to the nucleus ambiguus.
This resulted in an anatomical and neurophysiological linkage between
neural regulation of the heart via the myelinated vagus and the special
visceral efferent pathways that regulate the striated muscles of the face and
head, forming an integrated social engagement system (Figure 3.1; for
more details, see Porges, 2007a, and chapter 12).
• With increased cortical development, the cortex exhibits greater control
over the brainstem via direct (e.g., corticobulbar) and indirect (e.g.,
corticoreticular) neural pathways originating in motor cortex and
terminating in the source nuclei of the myelinated motor nerves emerging
from the brainstem (e.g., specific neural pathways embedded within cranial
nerves V, VII, IX, X, and XI), controlling visceromotor structures (i.e.,
heart, bronchi) as well as somatomotor structures (muscles of the face and
head).
NEUROCEPTION: CONTEXTUAL CUEING OF ADAPTIVE,
MALADAPTIVE PHYSIOLOGICAL STATES
To effectively switch from defensive to social engagement strategies, the
mammalian nervous system needs to perform two important adaptive tasks: (1)
assess risk, and (2) if the environment is perceived as safe, inhibit the more
primitive limbic structures that control fight, flight, or freeze behaviors.
Any stimulus that has the potential for increasing an organism’s experience
of safety has the potential of recruiting the evolutionarily more advanced neural
circuits that support the prosocial behaviors of the social engagement system.
The nervous system, through the processing of sensory information from the
environment and from the viscera, continuously evaluates risk. Since the neural
evaluation of risk does not require conscious awareness and may involve
subcortical limbic structures (Morris, Ohman, & Dolan, 1999), the term
neuroception (see chapter 1) was introduced to emphasize a neural process,
distinct from perception, that is capable of distinguishing environmental (and

visceral) features that are safe, dangerous, or life-threatening. In safe
environments, autonomic state is adaptively regulated to dampen sympathetic
activation and to protect the oxygen-dependent central nervous system,
especially the cortex, from the metabolically conservative reactions of the dorsal
vagal complex. However, how does the nervous system know when the
environment is safe, dangerous, or life-threatening, and which neural
mechanisms evaluate this risk?
Environmental Components of Neuroception
Neuroception represents a neural process that enables humans and other
mammals to engage in social behaviors by distinguishing safe from dangerous
contexts. Neuroception is proposed as a plausible mechanism mediating both the
expression and the disruption of positive social behavior, emotion regulation,
and visceral homeostasis (see chapter 1; Porges, 2007a). Neuroception might be
triggered by feature detectors involving areas of temporal cortex that
communicate with the central nucleus of the amygdala and the periaqueductal
gray, since limbic reactivity is modulated by temporal cortex responses to the
intention of voices, faces, and hand movements. Thus, the neuroception of
familiar individuals and individuals with appropriately prosodic voices and
warm, expressive faces translates into a social interaction promoting a sense of
safety.
In most individuals (i.e., those without a psychiatric disorder or
neuropathology), 
the 
nervous 
system 
evaluates 
risk 
and 
matches
neurophysiological state with the actual risk of the environment. When the
environment is appraised as being safe, the defensive limbic structures are
inhibited, enabling social engagement and calm visceral states to emerge. In
contrast, some individuals experience a mismatch and the nervous system
appraises the environment as being dangerous even when it is safe. This
mismatch results in physiological states that support fight, flight, or freeze
behaviors, but not social engagement behaviors. According to the theory, social
communication can be expressed efficiently through the social engagement
system only when these defensive circuits are inhibited.
Other Contributors to Neuroception
The features of risk in the environment do not solely drive neuroception.

Afferent feedback from the viscera provides a major mediator of the
accessibility of prosocial circuits associated with social engagement behaviors.
For example, the polyvagal theory predicts that states of mobilization would
compromise our ability to detect positive social cues. Functionally, visceral
states color our perception of objects and others. Thus, the same features of one
person engaging another may result in a range of outcomes, depending on the
physiological state of the target individual. If the person being engaged is in a
state in which the social engagement system is easily accessible, the reciprocal
prosocial interactions are likely to occur. However, if the individual is in a state
of mobilization, the same engaging response might be responded to with the
asocial features of withdrawal or aggression. In such a state, it might be very
difficult to dampen the mobilization circuit and enable the social engagement
system to come back on line.
The insula may be involved in the mediation of neuroception, since it has
been proposed as a brain structure involved in conveying the diffuse feedback
from the viscera into cognitive awareness. Functional imaging experiments have
demonstrated that the insula plays an important role in the experience of pain
and the experience of several emotions, including anger, fear, disgust, happiness,
and sadness. Critchley (2005) proposes that internal body states are represented
in the insula and contribute to states of subjective feeling, and he has
demonstrated that activity in the insula correlates with interoceptive accuracy.
SUMMARY
The polyvagal theory proposes that the evolution of the mammalian autonomic
nervous system provides the neurophysiological substrates for adaptive
behavioral strategies. It further proposes that physiological state limits the range
of behavior and psychological experience. The theory links the evolution of the
autonomic nervous system to affective experience, emotional expression, facial
gestures, vocal communication, and contingent social behavior. In this way, the
theory provides a plausible explanation for the reported covariation between
atypical autonomic regulation (e.g., reduced vagal and increased sympathetic
influences to the heart) and psychiatric and behavioral disorders that involve
difficulties in regulating appropriate social, emotional, and communication
behaviors.
The polyvagal theory provides several insights into the adaptive nature of

physiological state. First, the theory emphasizes that physiological states support
different classes of behavior. For example, a physiological state characterized by
a vagal withdrawal would support the mobilization behaviors of fight and flight.
In contrast, a physiological state characterized by increased vagal influence on
the heart (via myelinated vagal pathways originating in the nucleus ambiguus)
would support spontaneous social engagement behaviors. Second, the theory
emphasizes the formation of an integrated social engagement system through
functional and structural links between neural control of the striated muscles of
the face and the smooth muscles of the viscera. Third, the polyvagal theory
proposes a mechanism—neuroception—to trigger or to inhibit defense
strategies.

PART II
BIOBEHAVIORAL
REGULATION DURING
EARLY DEVELOPMENT

CHAPTER 4
Vagal Tone: A Physiological Marker of Stress
Vulnerability
Routine medical procedures are often stressful and produce periods of
physiologic and behavioral instability. However, given the same treatment, all
children do not respond alike. Some children exhibit prolonged periods of
instability, while other children are virtually insensitive to the treatment.
Although clinicians are concerned with the potential vulnerability associated
with stressful events, a standard approach does not exist to address both the
measurement of stress and the indexing of stress vulnerability.
Research on stress has often focused on the description of events that are
considered stressful (e.g., life stress scales) and not on the functional impact of
these events on physiology. In contrast, in pediatrics, stress is assumed to be a
physiologic construct that is observed when behavior becomes disorganized and
homeostatic processes are disrupted. In clinical settings this is often labeled
physiologic instability.
Although we are aware that there are individual differences in vulnerability
to the same medical procedures, current definitions of stress emphasize either the
treatment or the response to treatment and not the neurophysiologic status prior
to treatment. However, it is this neurophysiologic state that may index the stress
vulnerability of the child.
This chapter proposes a method to assess on an individual basis both the
stress response and the vulnerability to stress. This method monitors the neural
control of the heart via the vagus (i.e., vagal tone) as an index of homeostasis.
The method permits the assessment of the effects of disrupting homeostatic
processes (i.e., stress) and the vulnerability of homeostasis to disruption by
various clinical treatments (i.e., stress vulnerability).

STRESS: A STATE OF AUTONOMIC NERVOUS SYSTEM
COMPROMISE
The autonomic nervous system (ANS) regulates homeostatic function. The ANS
is composed of two subsystems, the parasympathetic (PNS) and sympathetic
nervous systems (SNS). The PNS and SNS represent neural systems that
originate in the brainstem and contribute to the regulation of a variety of target
organs, including the eyes, lacrimal glands, salivary glands, sweat glands, blood
vessels, heart, larynx, trachea, bronchi, lungs, stomach, adrenal, kidney,
pancreas, intestine, bladder, and external genitalia. In general, the PNS promotes
functions associated with a growth and restorative system. In contrast, the SNS
promotes increased metabolic output to deal with challenges from outside the
body.
In general, when a visceral organ is innervated by both the SNS and PNS, the
effects are antagonistic. For example, SNS neurons dilate the pupil, accelerate
the heart, inhibit intestinal movements, and contract the vesical and rectal
sphincters. The PNS neurons constrict the pupil, slow the heart, potentiate
peristaltic movement, and relax the vesical and rectal sphincters.
The PNS deals primarily with anabolic activities concerned with the
restoration and conservation of bodily energy and the resting of vital organs.
This view was clearly stated by Cannon (1929a):
A glance at these various functions of the cranial division reveals at once
that they serve for bodily conservation; by narrowing the pupil they
shield the retina from excessive light; by slowing the heart rate they give
the cardiac muscle longer periods for rest and invigoration; and by
providing for the flow of saliva and gastric juice, and by supplying the
necessary muscular tone or the contraction of the alimentary canal, they
prove fundamentally essential to the processes of proper digestion and
absorption by which energy-yielding material is taken into the body and
stored. To the cranial division belongs the great service of building up
reserves and fortifying the body against time of need and stress. (pp. 31–
32)
Stimulation of the SNS prepares the individual for the intense muscular
action required to protect and defend in response to external challenges. The
SNS quickly mobilizes the existing reserves of the body. The eyes dilate, the rate
and force of the heart contractility increase, blood vessels constrict, and blood

pressure increases. Blood is drained from the intestinal reservoir to foster
availability and transport of oxygenated blood to the skeletal muscles, lungs,
heart, and brain. Peristalsis and alimentary secretion are inhibited, and sphincter
contractions block urinary and rectal outlets.
The SNS and PNS are reciprocally innervated, and their responses are
coordinated to provide the appropriate internal state to meet shifts in both
internal and external demands. The PNS is modulated primarily by internal
changes in the viscera. The SNS is primarily activated by exteroceptive impulses
via somatic afferent fibers in response to changes in the external environment.
The PNS facilitates digestion and conserves energy by slowing heart rate. In
the absence of external challenges (e.g., ambient temperature shifts, noise, pain,
pyrogenic agents, etc.), the PNS optimizes the function of the internal viscera. In
contrast, by increasing metabolic output to deal directly with external challenges,
the SNS attempts to optimize the organism’s relationship with the environment,
Thus, increases or decreases in ambient temperature, noise, pain, and pyrogenic
agents will produce attenuated PNS tone and increased SNS activity. Consistent
with this functional description of the ANS, Gellhorn (1967) labeled the PNS as
a trophotropic system and the SNS as an ergotropic system.
Early investigators defined the ANS as purely visceral motor (Langley,
1921). This limited definition did not acknowledge the contribution of visceral
afferents. The afferent fibers accompany most visceral efferent fibers and form
the afferent limb for visceral reflexes. The contemporary view of the ANS is that
it is a complex system containing both peripheral efferent and afferent fibers as
well as central neural structures, Thus, as Hess (1954) stated, the function of the
ANS reflects more a visceral nervous system than a vegetative or automatic
nervous system. It is because the ANS is an integrated system with both
peripheral and central neurons that measurement of peripheral visceral activity
provides a window to the brain structures that regulate visceral function and
state.
The ANS responds to both internal and external stimuli. Although the ANS
is often viewed as a motor system controlling visceral organs, most autonomic
neurons are afferent. In the maintenance of bodily functions and in the reaction
to stressful situations, ANS afferents are crucial. Afferent feedback from visceral
organs often regulates PNS tone and has little impact on SNS tone. For example,
distension of the stomach or stimulation of baroreceptors will result in reflexive
increases in PNS tone. Afferent feedback from sensory organs produces a
different response profile. Autonomic responses to external stimuli, including

nociception or attention, produce a decrease in PNS tone. There is a
complementary increase in SNS tone only if the stimulus is of high intensity and
prolonged duration or is associated with conditions of nociception or intense
stimulation. In response to metabolic demands, the two branches of the ANS
often function synergistically to maximize cardiovascular output. For example,
during exercise, there is a progressive decrease in PNS tone and a parallel
increase in SNS tone. There are unique situations in which the autonomic
response is characterized by either dual activation or dual inhibition. For
example, in human adults, sexual arousal is characterized by a dual excitation.
The ANS is not merely a response system, quiescently awaiting challenges
from the external environment. Rather, the ANS is continuously servicing the
visceral afferents in an attempt to maintain homeostasis and promote physiologic
stability. This regulatory process is primarily mediated by the PNS.
Unfortunately, there are disease states that compromise the regulatory function.
Some disease states (e.g., hypertension) are characterized by a depression of
PNS tone with a compensatory SNS excitation. Other disease states (e.g.,
diabetes) are characterized by a depression of the PNS tone without eliciting a
reciprocal SNS excitation, while other disease states may be characterized by
dual inhibition.
The ANS is involved in the physiologic expression of stress. Shifts in ANS
activity that disrupt homeostatic processes seem to characterize the common
theme associated with physiologically based definitions of stress. More specific
investigation of the literature suggests that the PNS, virtually independent of the
SNS, regulates homeostatic processes and would thus be most sensitive to stress.
STRESS AND HOMEOSTASIS: NEW DEFINITIONS
There have been many definitions of stress. Because most definitions are
structured in terms of the causal influences (i.e., stimulus or context) and not in
terms of the variables commonly measured in a clinical setting, the definitions
tend to be limited in their use in the medical environment. Often the definitions
are circular because stress is defined both in terms of the context (e.g., medical
treatment) and the response (e.g., behavioral and physiologic responses). For
example, is the medical treatment stressing because it elicits an increase in blood
pressure and heart rate? Or do increases in blood pressure and heart rate reflect
stress independent of the specific medical treatment? Or do the physiologic
responses reflect stress because the clinician assumes that there is stress

associated with the medical treatment? The definition is further confounded
because we assume that there are individual differences in responsiveness or
vulnerability to the stressful event. Thus, the stressful treatment might not elicit a
stress response in one patient while a nonstressful treatment might elicit a stress
response in another patient.
Current definitions of stress are not very useful in the clinical setting. Even if
stress were operationally defined by labeling the stressing stimulus as the
stressor and the behavioral and physiologic response to the stressor as stress, at
least two problems would remain: (1) the definitions of stress and stressor would
be circular, and (2) there would be situations in which individual differences and
state might mediate the degree of responsivity (i.e., stress) of a patient to
constant medical treatments (i.e., stressor). For example, the same treatment that
may physiologically compromise one patient may not produce a discernible
behavioral or physiologic response in another patient or even in the same patient
a second time. Alternatively, the same treatment that did not produce a response
during the first administration may result in a massive physiologic compromise
during subsequent administrations. Thus, stress must not be conceptualized
simply in terms of the stressor and observed response but also in terms of the
physiologic state of vulnerability of the patient at the time of treatment.
New definitions of stress and stress vulnerability can be derived and
operationally defined based on the function of the ANS. Physiologically based
measures can be objectively assessed within clinical settings with online
monitoring of stress and stress vulnerability. In developing this approach, two
essential areas must be discussed: (1) the rationale for evaluating specific
autonomic variables as indices of stress, and (2) the measurement technology
necessary to measure the autonomic indices of stress online in a clinical setting.
AN ANS DEFINITION OF STRESS: A RATIONALE
The ANS deals both with servicing the needs of the internal viscera and with
responding to external challenges. The central nervous system mediates the
distribution of resources to deal with internal and external demands. Perceptions
and assumed threats to survival, independent of the actual physical
characteristics of the stimulation, may promote a massive withdrawal of PNS
tone and a reciprocal excitation of SNS tone. The trade-off between internal and
external needs may be used in developing definitions of stress and homeostasis.
Based on this model, stress and homeostasis are interdependent. Homeostasis

reflects the regulation of the internal viscera, and stress reflects the subjugation
of internal needs in response to external needs. Thus, measurement of PNS tone
may provide the indexing variable for defining stress and stress vulnerability.
The concept of homeostasis is not new. Walter Cannon (1929b) coined the
term and stated that “the coordinated physiological reactions which maintain
most of the steady states in the body are so complex, and so peculiar to the living
organism, that it has been suggested that a specific designation for these states be
employed—homeostasis” (p. 400). Cannon’s views are dependent on the earlier
work of Claude Bernard. Bernard’s construct of “le milieu interieur” included
physiologic mechanisms responsible for the maintenance of the constancy of the
internal environment. As Bernard’s work evolved, he emphasized the dynamic
and oscillatory nature of the nervous system in maintaining the “internal milieu”
within a limited range (Bernard, 1878–79).
Homeostasis as a construct was never meant to reflect a static state. Rather it
defined the dynamic feedback and regulation processes necessary for the living
organism to maintain internal states within a functional range. Over time the
concept has lost much of its rich meaning and has often been interpreted to
represent a static internal level. Clinically, stasis or lack of endogenous
variability in neurally mediated peripheral systems, such as gastric motility and
heart rate, is a sign of severe physiologic compromise.
In the proposed model, the PNS fosters visceral needs (i.e., homeostasis) and
the SNS responds to external challenges. Thus, status of the PNS state parallels
homeostasis. Alternatively, withdrawal of PNS tone in response to a challenge
may define stress, and PNS tone prior to the challenge may represent
physiologic or stress vulnerability. With this physiologic model, SNS state is not
the defining characteristic of stress or stress vulnerability; stress responses and
stress vulnerability may be indexed in the absence of major shifts in SNS tone. It
is important to note that in many situations with healthy children, the transitory
withdrawal of PNS tone will be paralleled by an increased expression of SNS
tone. In contrast, severely compromised children may not exhibit SNS reactivity
and SNS tone might be low. Moreover, these children would have low PNS tone,
virtually no PNS reactivity, and would be clinically assessed as being
chronically stressed or exhibiting physiologic instability.
This view suggests that homeostasis may be defined as the autonomic state
that fosters visceral needs in the absence of external challenge. This state would
be defined by a high degree of PNS tone. Stress may be defined as the
autonomic state that reflects a disruption of homeostasis. This state would be

defined by the withdrawal of PNS tone. Thus, the degree of stress can be
quantified on a physiologic level. Moreover, the chronic autonomic state before
a clinical event would index the patient’s stress vulnerability; individuals
exhibiting problems of homeostasis will have the greatest stress vulnerability.
THE ASSESSMENT OF STRESS: VAGAL TONE
MONITORING
Given the foregoing justification, it is necessary to identify and quantify an
index of PNS activity. The most readily indexed measure of PNS activity is
derived from the heart rate pattern. The amplitude of respiratory sinus
arrhythmia (RSA) provides a validated and easily obtainable index of PNS tone
via the cardiac vagus (Porges, 1986). In the following sections this will be
described as an index of cardiac vagal tone. With modern technology it is
possible to monitor online the changing influence of the vagus on the heart and
to estimate shifts in general vagal tone (Porges, 1985).
Physiologic and behavioral processes are dependent on neural feedback.
Information is received at the periphery and transmitted to the central nervous
system, and appropriate physiologic reflexes or overt behaviors are emitted.
Feedback loops typical of many homeostatic processes produce a rhythmic
pattern characterized by phasic increases and decreases in neural efferent output
to organs such as the heart. In many physiologic systems, efficient neural control
is manifested as rhythmic physiologic variability, and within normal parameters
the greater the amplitude of oscillation, the healthier the individual. Thus, the
amplitude of rhythmic physiologic processes may index the status of the
individual’s nervous system and capacity to respond. In other words, the greater
the amplitude of organized rhythmic physiologic variability, the greater the
response potential or possible range of behavior. Individuals with attenuated
physiologic variability would then exhibit a lack of physiologic and behavioral
flexibility in response to environmental demands. This is observed in very ill
infants. Thus, in terms of stress reactions, one would expect these individuals to
lack the self-regulatory capacity to adjust rapidly to stressful stimuli.
Research in areas of cardiology, gerontology, physical therapy, and
diabetology demonstrate that general PNS deficits are reflected in cardiac vagal
tone. Moreover, stimulation of other PNS afferents results in reflexive increases
in cardiac vagal tone (Cottingham, Porges, & Lyon, 1988; DiPietro & Porges,
1991). Since cardiac vagal tone reflects the general PNS input to the viscera, it

may be used to monitor stress and index individual differences in stress
vulnerability.
As a noninvasive measure of cardiac vagal tone, we have standardized a
method to quantify the amplitude of RSA (Porges, 1986). RSA indexes the
nervous system modulation of heart rate activity via the vagus. RSA reflects
rhythmic vagal efferent influences on the cardiac pacemaker modulated by
respiratory processes in the medulla. Heart rate patterns, like behavioral
processes, are dependent on the status of the nervous system and the quality of
neural feedback. Stress results in a disorganization of the rhythmic structure of
both behavior and autonomic state. Thus, measures of cardiac vagal tone, such
as the amplitude of RSA, provide an important window into the central control
of autonomic processes and by inference into the central processes necessary for
organized behavior.
Cardiac vagal tone is reflected in the amplitude of a heart rate rhythm
associated with frequency of spontaneous breathing. This rhythmic process has
been observed and studied for more than 100 years. Speculations regarding the
neural mechanisms were reported as early as 1910, when a relation between
RSA and vagal tone was proposed by Hering (1910). Hering clearly stated that
“it is known with breathing that a demonstrable lowering of heart rate . . . is
indicative of the function of the vagi.” Derivations of this method with paced
breathing techniques are currently used to diagnose peripheral neuropathy in
diabetic patients. Contemporary research has provided empirical evidence that
the amplitude of RSA accurately maps the efferent influence of the vagus nerve
on the heart. Based on electrophysiologic studies of vagal efferents, it has been
proposed that central respiratory drive gates the source nuclei of the vagal
cardioinhibitory fibers (Jordan, Khalid, Schneiderman, & Spyer, 1982).
If cardiac vagal tone is a sensitive index of the functional status of the
nervous system, then we would predict that individuals with greater vagal tone
would exhibit a greater range of competent behaviors. We would also expect that
conditions that compromise the central nervous system (e.g., medical
complications, anesthesia, and illness) would result in an attenuation of vagal
tone.
In building a model that relates cardiac vagal tone to stress, we first describe
a global metaphor characteristic of homeostatic processes and then more specific
pathways related to the vagus. Heart rate in a healthy human is not steady. The
pattern of heart rate reflects the continuous feedback between the central nervous
system and the peripheral autonomic receptors. The primary source of heart rate

variability is mediated by phasic increases and decreases in neural efferent
output via the vagus to the heart (Porges, McCabe, & Yongue, 1982). Under
most conditions, like other measures of homeostatic control, the greater range of
the phasic increases and decreases, the “healthier” the individual. For example,
with high-risk neonates, there is an attenuation of the range of homeostatic
function. Paralleling this process is a reduction in cardiac vagal tone (Fox &
Porges 1985; Porges 1988).
Heart rate variability is a marker of the efficiency of neural feedback
mechanisms and may index health status or the individual’s capacity to organize
physiologic resources to respond appropriately. Thus, the better the “organized”
physiologic variability, the greater the range of behavior. Organized variability is
due to dynamic feedback and thus is characterized by rhythmic deviations from a
constant level. An optimum feedback system allows large deviations from the
mean with negative feedback occurring at constant intervals. Neural regulation
of the heart in healthy individuals is similar to the optimal feedback system
already described. In the neural control of the heart, the vagus serves as the
primary negative feedback mechanism. Thus, states of attenuated heart rate
variability would have attenuated vagal influences on the heart. Returning to our
metaphor, states characterized by attenuated vagal influences should be
paralleled by reduced behavioral flexibility in response to environmental
demands.
STRESS VULNERABILITY IN THE NEONATE: AN
EXAMPLE OF VAGAL TONE MONITORING
Figure 4.1 illustrates 2 minutes of the heart rate pattern and the amplitude of
RSA for two sleeping neonates. The top panel illustrates the pattern of a high-
risk preterm neonate monitored at approximately term. The bottom panel
illustrates the pattern of a healthy term neonate monitored within 36 hours of
delivery. The top line on each panel illustrates the continuous heart rate over the
2 minutes. The bottom line on each panel represents the amplitude of RSA
calculated for each sequential 10 seconds within the 2 minutes. Clarification of
the vagal tone concept may be obtained by observing the differences between the
top and bottom panel. Notice that even during sleep, heart rate is not constant.
Although the heart rate levels are similar for the two neonates, the healthy term
neonate has much greater beat-to-beat variability relative to the high-risk
preterm. Close inspection of the two beat-to-beat patterns identifies a striking

difference in the rapid changes in heart rate that occur every 1 to 3 seconds.
These oscillations are associated with respiration and reflect cardiac vagal tone.
Cardiac vagal tone is indexed by the amplitude of these rapid oscillations (i.e.,
RSA) and is reported in natural logarithm units.

FIGURE 4.1. Beat-to-beat heart rate and respiratory sinus arrhythmia (RSA). Top panel illustrates data from
a high-risk preterm neonate monitored at approximately term. Bottom panel illustrates data from a healthy
normal full-term neonate monitored within 36 hours of delivery. Data were collected during sleep. In both

panels, the top line illustrates the beat-to-beat heart rate and the bottom line illustrates RSA calculated for
sequential 10-second segments. RSA values are in natural logarithm units per millisecond squared.
FIGURE 4.2. Distribution of respiratory sinus arrhythmia (RSA) for normal full-term neonates and neonates
in the NICU. RSA values are in natural logarithm units per millisecond squared.
Figure 4.2 illustrates the frequency distributions of the amplitude of RSA for
both high-risk and normal full-term neonates. The subject samples were 125 full-
term neonates and 112 neonatal intensive care unit (NICU) residents. The full-
term neonates were all residents of a full-term normal nursery and were tested
during the second day following delivery. RSA values for the premature NICU
neonates were derived during the first recording made with the neonates not
using the ventilator and breathing room air. RSA was assessed during sleep
when the NICU neonates were between 35 and 37 weeks corrected gestational
age.
From the data in Figure 4.2, it is obvious that high-risk neonates, as a group,
have significantly lower vagal tone than do full-term neonates (F[1,
235] = 226.3, p < .0001). Since respiration frequency might influence the
quantification of RSA, respiration was monitored on a subset of 47 full-term and
62 NICU neonates. Respiration was significantly faster for the NICU neonates
(F[1, 107] = 23.5, p < .0001). However, even when this significant influence was
removed with analysis of covariance, there was still a highly significant
difference between the two groups (F[1, 107] = 82.2, p < .0001). The group

classification (full-term vs. NICU) accounted for 53.1% of the variance in the
statistical model. When the influence of respiration was removed, group
classification accounted for 43.7%.
Research in our laboratory suggests only subtle maturational increases and
great stability of these estimates under standard sampling conditions during
residency within the NICU. For example, a sample of 16 preterm neonates was
tested during sleep on 5 separate days starting at least 1 day following delivery.
Although there was a significant relationship between severity of clinical
condition and RSA (i.e., healthier neonates had higher amplitude RSA), the
average correlation among the RSA values approached 0.9.
This example illustrates how monitoring of vagal tone in the NICU by
quantifying RSA may provide a sensitive index of stress vulnerability. Data from
our laboratory and the laboratories of others demonstrate that the more
compromised NICU residents have lower cardiac vagal tone. Consistent with the
model of stress and stress vulnerability, the NICU neonates have limited PNS
tone to regulate their internal state and are simultaneously confronted with
demands from the environment, including the necessity to thermoregulate and to
deal with sensory stimuli including medical procedures assumed to be painful.
The vagal system is responsive to the changing needs of the organism. Often
the vagal system will react by selectively increasing or decreasing its influence
on the periphery. This might be observed as a withdrawal of vagal tone to
increase heart rate to support metabolic demands or an increase in vagal tone to
regulate digestive polypeptides and gastric motility. The adaptive success of the
infant is not based merely on the tonic level of the ANS but on the ability of the
ANS to respond appropriately to environmental and interval challenges. For
example, during painful medical manipulations, such as circumcision, cardiac
vagal tone is suppressed (Porter, Porges, & Marshall, 1988). In contrast, during
gavage feeding of premature neonates, cardiac vagal tone is increased (DiPietro
& Porges, 1991). If infants exhibited a vagal tone increase during gavage feeding
and a depression of vagal tone below pregavage levels following feeding, they
were discharged approximately 2 weeks earlier than were infants who did not
exhibit this response. These effects were independent of birth weight, gestational
age at birth, and other clinical factors. Although pregavage vagal tone was not
related to the response pattern or discharge, it did predict weight gain
trajectories. Thus, vagal reactivity provides another dimension related to clinical
risk.
Measures of vagal tone provide an important window to the central

modulation of autonomic function. Measures of vagal tone during sleep or
nonchallenging conditions provide an index of normal homeostatic feedback,
while measures during sensory or cognitive challenges provide an indication of
adaptive functioning. Thus, low levels of vagal tone are associated with high-
risk populations, while atypical vagal responsivity even in infants with normal
basal levels of vagal tone seems to identify a subset of infants who have
behavioral and regulatory problems (DeGangi, DiPietro, Greenspan, & Porges,
1991; DiPietro & Porges, 1991).
VAGAL TONE SHIFTS DURING STRESS: THE COST OF
DOING BUSINESS
The ANS has many physiologic responsibilities. It must regulate the blood
pressure to ensure that enough blood reaches the brain. It also monitors the blood
gases. If there are shifts in oxygen and carbon dioxide, changes in
cardiopulmonary parameters are immediately implemented by the direct neural
modulation of the heart, vasomotor tone, and lungs. While these
cardiopulmonary processes are being regulated, the ANS is also controlling
digestion and metabolism. The actions of the ANS are related to life support:
ergotropic (i.e., work) and trophotropic (i.e., growth) functions (Gellhorn, 1967).
The vagal system is critical to the regulation of both ergotropic and
trophotropic process. Increases in vagal tone not only result in increases in
metabolic output but modulate the digestive polypeptides and gastric motility
(Uvnas-Mober, 1989). The vagus is also critical in the facilitation of
trophotropic process. The vagus can have direct inhibitory influences on
sympathetic excitation of the myocardium (Levy, 1977). Moreover, the limbic
system, assumed by psychophysiologists to modulate autonomic arousal solely
through sympathetic excitation, has direct inhibitory influences on the cells of
origin of the vagus (Schwaber, Kapp, & Higgins, 1980). The brainstem regions
controlling the vagal efferents act to express greater vagal tone, thus maintaining
trophotropic states, or to allow withdrawal of vagal tone to facilitate the
immediate mobilization of the organism.
Research with other species demonstrates that cardiac vagal tone increases
during development (Larson & Porges, 1982). Paralleling this increase in vagal
tone are increases in self-regulatory and exploratory behaviors. In research with
infants high cardiac vagal tone is associated with better visual recognition
memory (Linnemeyer & Porges, 1986; Richards, 1985). An overview chapter

summarizes the research on cardiac vagal tone and affect (Porges, 1990).
DiPietro and Porges (1991) also evaluated in preterm neonates the
relationship between cardiac vagal tone and behavioral reactivity to gavage
feeding. In this study, individual differences in cardiac vagal tone were
significantly correlated with behavioral reactivity to the gavage method of
feeding, Similarly, Huffman et al. (1998) observed that 3-month-old infants with
high cardiac vagal tone habituated more rapidly to novel visual stimuli and
exhibited more sustained attention than did infants with low cardiac vagal tone.
Drugs that depress vagal tone also seem to have a degrading effect on
sustained attention, For example, in a study evaluating the effects of atropine
sulfate on sensorimotor performance, we reported not only dose-dependent
depression of vagal tone but also dose-dependent decrements in performance
(Dellinger, Taylor, & Porges, 1987). We also have conducted research on the
effects of inhalant anesthesia on the parallel between alertness and cardiac vagal
tone. Inhalant anesthesia depressed cardiac vagal tone, and as the patients
regained consciousness, there was a parallel increase in cardiac vagal tone
(Donchin, Feld, & Porges, 1985).
With the ability to monitor cardiac vagal tone by quantifying the amplitude
of RSA, we have been able to obtain a more accurate assessment of vagal
mechanisms and the relationship between vagal tone and autonomic reactivity.
Studies using the vagal tone index support the hypothesis that vagal tone may
index stress and stress vulnerability. Porter et al. (1988) demonstrated, in a
sample of normal newborns, massive withdrawal of cardiac vagal tone during
circumcision. Moreover, individual differences in cardiac vagal tone were
correlated with heart rate reactivity to circumcision. Neonates with higher
cardiac vagal tone exhibited not only larger heart rate accelerations but also
lower fundamental cry frequencies during surgical procedures. Porter and Porges
(1988) also demonstrated in premature infants that individual differences in
cardiac vagal tone were related to heart rate responses during lumbar puncture
procedures.
CONCLUSION
There is a physiologic basis for defining stress and stress vulnerability. The
concepts of stress and homeostasis are interdependent and manifested in the
activity of the PNS. In contrast to traditional models of stress, the PNS is

proposed as the modulator of stress vulnerability and reactivity. The model
proposed suggests that accurate monitoring of PNS state will provide a window
allowing the assessment of stress.
A physiologic justification is presented for the use of PNS, rather than or in
addition to SNS, activity in the description of both stress vulnerability and stress
reactivity. The quantification of cardiac vagal tone from spontaneous heart rate
oscillations is described as a method for assessing the changing PNS state. The
quantification of cardiac vagal tone provides a standard instrument with
statistical parameters that are comparable between patients and throughout the
life span. The method is not dependent on stages of motor or cognitive
development and thus is practical for use even with neonates. This noninvasive
method will allow the assessment of the stressful impact of various clinical
treatments on the young infant and permit the identification of individuals with
vulnerabilities to stress.
In conclusion, the usefulness of contemporary definitions of stress is limited,
in part by circularity and in part by a tendency within stress research to focus
narrowly on the contribution of the SNS. Cardiac vagal tone, measured by
quantifying the amplitude of RSA, is proposed as novel index of stress
vulnerability and reactivity with applications in all branches of medicine, and
with particular value in pediatrics.

CHAPTER 5
The Infant’s Sixth Sense: Awareness and
Regulation of Bodily Processes
Life is a sensory experience. During every moment of our lives, we experience
the world through our varied sensory systems. Sensory experiences drive our
behavior and contribute to the organization of our thoughts and emotions.
Immediately after birth, the infant is bombarded with a variety of new sensory
stimuli. These provide important information about the characteristics and
potential demands of the baby’s new environment. The infant must immediately
detect, discriminate, and adapt to this information. Successful adaptation to the
rapidly changing environment and the ability to cope with changing demands
depend on the infant’s ability to detect and interpret sensory information. Thus,
when we study infant behavioral patterns, vocalizations, and physiological
reactivity, we attempt to understand how the young infant uses sensory systems
to detect information from the environment and to integrate this information into
motor, affective, and cognitive schema to successfully interact and adapt to a
changing environment.
We have learned that humans have five primary sense modalities: smell,
vision, hearing, taste, and touch. We know that even a newborn can respond to
these sensory modalities. These responses are obvious to the parent and clinician
(although only a few decades ago, scientists were unaware of the sensory
capacities of young infants). However, this traditional method of categorizing
sensory information does not account for the vast amount of sensory information
being conveyed to the brain from the numerous sensors located inside our body.
Even current clinical models of infant regulation (e.g., Ayres, 1972; Greenspan,
1991) that emphasize the importance of sensory processing in the emotional and
cognitive development of the infant, and individual differences among infants in

the ease with which they detect and interpret sensory information, focus
primarily on three sense modalities that describe the external environment—that
is, touch, vision, and hearing. These models do not deal with internal sensations
that provide information about the physiological regulation.
Although neurophysiologists and neuroanatomists describe sensory systems
that regulate our internal organs, this research has had little influence on either
our common language or the clinical terminology we use to describe bodily
processes. At present, there are only a few easily understood descriptors that
characterize internal senses and states—for example, pain, nausea, and arousal.
Yet in spite of this linguistic handicap, our experiences provide us with an
awareness of bodily sensations and an appreciation of how these sensations can
contribute to mood state and psychological feelings.
Missing from our language and our science is the ability to describe internal
states. In our day-to-day interactions we choose vague terms, such as “feelings,”
to describe the psychological consequences of bodily changes. Behavioral
scientists often attempt to objectify these terms by operationalizing concepts
such as state, mood, and emotion with verbal reports and elaborate coding
systems. Clinical practitioners infer these feelings and use terms descriptive of
emotional tone. However, whether we are talking about feelings, emotions,
states, or moods, we are always attempting to describe the internal states that are
continuously being monitored and regulated by the nervous system.
The goal of this chapter is to introduce an additional sense modality that
monitors bodily processes. A variety of terms may be used to describe this
sensory system. Classic physiology describes this sensory system as
interoception. Interoception is a global concept which includes both our
conscious feelings of and unconscious monitoring of bodily processes,
Interoception, like other sensory systems, has four components:
1. Sensors located in various internal organs to “sense” internal conditions;
2. Sensory pathways that convey information to the brain regarding the
internal conditions;
3. Brain structures to interpret sensory information and organize systems to
respond to the changing internal conditions; and
4. Motor pathways that communicate from the brain back to the internal
organs that contain the sensors to change directly the state of the internal
organ. Brain structures evaluate interoceptive information, categorize it,
associate it with other sensory information, and store the associations in

memory.
INTEROCEPTION IS THE SIXTH PRIMARY SENSE
The five classic senses already described are categorized based on the sensors
located on the external surface of the body, or exteroceptors. However, we are
aware that the external senses (e.g., vision, audition, sound, touch, smell, and
taste) are not the sole source of stimulation directing the infant’s behavior,
thoughts, and emotions. The ability to sense internal states and bodily processes
—through interoceptors located on the heart, stomach, liver, and other organs
inside the body cavity—constitutes a sixth sense that is crucial to the infant’s
survival.
This sixth sense represents a functional awareness, with both conscious and
unconscious dimensions, of what is happening inside the body. For example, on
a conscious level, digestive processes may provide sensory information that the
infant interprets as hunger when the stomach is empty, or as pain when the
stomach is severely distended due to gas. The cardiovascular and respiratory
systems also provide conscious feedback. Alertness changes as a function of
shifts in both blood pressure associated with posture (when, for example, a baby
brightens when picked up and held upright against a parent’s shoulder) and
blood gas concentrations of carbon dioxide and oxygen. On an unconscious
level, internal organs have sensors which send continuous information to brain
structures. This unconscious awareness fosters stability (i.e., homeostasis) in
internal physiology by rapidly adjusting to support specific motor behaviors and
psychological processes.
Although bodily sensations are paramount to the infant’s successful survival,
developmental specialists are currently more concerned with the infant’s
capacity to sense external stimuli. For example, clinical assessment tools, such
as neurological and neuropsychological examinations, focus only on the
processing of external stimulation. Similarly, our current childrearing and
intervention strategies are not at all geared to helping young children sense their
internal physiological states. We do not provide infants and young children with
descriptive or symbolic tools to represent internal states, nor are caregivers
taught to perceive specific behavioral or physiological indicators of gradations in
the infant’s bodily sensations. This remains the case even though we know that
the status of bodily functions (such as digestion) and infants’ reactions to

difficulties in these processes (such as colic) are derived via important sensory
systems. Moreover, the sensory information from continuously monitoring
bodily functions can influence the infant’s ability to perform specific behaviors,
perceive external stimuli, and organize information into mental representation of
cognitions and emotions.
EVALUATING SENSORY PROCESSING
For the five classic sensory modalities, we can evaluate the competence of the
child to process sensory information by direct observation of behavior and
through verbal reports. We can observe adaptive and dysfunctional strategies.
We 
can 
identify 
problems 
by 
observing 
hyporesponsiveness 
and
hyperresponsiveness in response to specific sensory challenges. We can evaluate
developmental patterns in the child’s ability to integrate sensory information. In
addition, we can evaluate intervention procedures delivered by professionals
such as speech and hearing specialists, ophthalmologists, nurses, occupational
therapists, physical therapists, psychologists, psychiatrists, and pediatricians.
In contrast, interoceptive competence has not been systematized. Other than
estimates of pain severity, there are no methods to quantify perception of bodily
processes or to test unconscious interoceptive feedback. There are no scales to
identify developmental landmarks.
But whether or not we know how to describe or measure them, sensations
from inside the body are a strong influence on the infant’s behavior in the world.
From birth, the infant’s need of sleep, food, water, and warmth are monitored via
internal sensors. This information drives much of the infant’s behavior. The
infant’s behavior then provides cues to the caregiver. In other words, stimulation
of specific sensors inside the body of the young infant results in behavioral
responses that prompt the caregiver to interact with the infant, to comfort, and to
reduce the cause of these bodily sensations. For example, feeding the infant
reduces hunger, burping relieves flatulence after feeding, and sucking may
stimulate digestion and reduce constipation.
INTEROCEPTION: THE INFRASTRUCTURE OF HIGHER
ORDER BEHAVIOR
Interoception is dependent on a complex feedback system that starts with sensors

located in various body organs and ends with the higher order social interaction
with the caregiver. Faulty sensors or a dysfunction in any component of the
sensory system (i.e., sensor, sensory pathway to the brain, motor pathway from
the brain, or areas in the brain that interpret the sensory information and control
the motor output to the organ) may not only contribute to physiological problems
but also negatively impact on the psychological and interactive experiences of
the infant. Thus, the quality of interoceptive processes may contribute to
individual differences in information processing (e.g., cognitive processes),
emotional expressiveness, and social behavior.
I have conceptualized the dependency of complex behaviors on successful
bodily processing in a hierarchical model with four levels (see Porges, 1983).
Each level requires successful functioning on the preceding level of
organization. Although the model includes complex social behaviors, the
substrate of the model depends on the organizational competence of the nervous
system.
• Level I is characteristic of homeostatic processes of physiological systems
regulating the internal organs. Homeostatic regulation requires the
bidirectional interoceptive process of monitoring and regulating the
internal organ via sensory and motor pathways between the brain and the
internal organ.
• Level II processes require cortical, conscious, and often motivated
influences on the brainstem regulation of homeostasis.
• Level III processes are observable behaviors that can be evaluated by the
quantity, quality, and appropriateness of motor behavior.
• Level IV reflects the coordination of behavior, emotional tone, and bodily
state to successfully negotiate social interactions.
This model assumes that complex behavior, including social interactions,
depends on physiology and how appropriately the nervous system regulates
bodily processes. In this model, interoception becomes the foundation of
physical, psychological, and social development. Interoception serves as the
neurophysiological substrate of the higher processes, included in Level III and
Level IV, that have been elaborated by many other researchers, practitioners, and
theorists of child development.
LEVEL I PROCESSES: PHYSIOLOGICAL HOMEOSTASIS

V
OC SS S:
S O OG C
O
OS
S S
Underlying the vague concept of “feelings” is a physiological process that
depends on interoception. By explaining and measuring the functional regulation
of physiological processes dependent on interoceptive mechanisms, we can
identify functional vulnerabilities in the infant’s ability to regulate on the most
basic level. If the infant is insensitive to his or her own bodily calls for care,
nurturance, and protection, how will the infant appropriately function and
respond to social needs?
Level I processes provide the physiological mechanisms for state regulation,
including emotional regulation and expression. They also provide the
infrastructure for the child’s successful interaction with the challenging social
demands of the world.
In the proposed hierarchical model, Level I processes represent the
successful regulation of internal bodily process via neural feedback systems. To
maintain homeostasis, interoceptors originating in the body cavity (e.g., gastric,
hepatic, enteric, cardiac, vascular, and pulmonary systems) transmit information
via nerves to brainstem structures. The brainstem structures interpret the sensory
information and regulate the internal physiological organs. They do this by
stimulating nerves that either directly control internal organs (e.g., increase or
decrease heart rate, constrict or dilate blood vessels, inhibit or facilitate
peristaltic activity, etc.) or indirectly manipulate the organs by releasing specific
hormones or peptides (e.g., adrenalin, insulin, oxytocin, vasopressin, gastrin,
somatostatin, etc.).
Level I is associated with the organization and neural feedback mechanisms
that characterize the maintenance of homeostasis. These homeostatic processes
can shut down when either internal conditions or external challenges require
maximum output of energy. For example, fever, severe thermo-stress, extreme
emotional distress, and aerobic exercise can reflexively inhibit Level I feedback
systems. States associated with severe illness (e.g., physiological compromise
and instability) are also characterized by a down-regulation of the neural control
of bodily processes. Alternatively, up-regulation may occur when the
interoceptors are directly stimulated (e.g., the filling of the stomach with food)
or when other sensory modalities reflexively influence bodily processes. For
example, the smell of appetizing food initiates signals from the nose to the
brainstem structures that in turn stimulate glands in the mouth and stomach to
produce digestive secretions even before the food enters the mouth.
LEVEL II PROCESSES: COST OF DOING BUSINESS

LEVEL II PROCESSES: COST OF DOING BUSINESS
The autonomic nervous system is the division of the nervous system that senses
the condition of internal organs and regulates their activity. The autonomic
nervous system deals with: (1) servicing the needs of the organs inside the body,
and (2) responding to external challenges. We can define adaptive behavioral
strategies and homeostasis in terms of the child’s ability to trade off between
internal and external needs. Based on this model, homeostasis and response
strategies to environmental demands are interdependent. Homeostasis reflects
the regulation of the physiological conditions within the body. Response
strategies reflect the stage when internal needs become less important than
external needs—when the baby (fed, burped, and changed) is ready and eager to
interact with the world of people and things.
The autonomic nervous system has two branches, the sympathetic and the
parasympathetic. In general, the parasympathetic branch promotes functions
associated with growth and restoration. In contrast, the sympathetic branch
promotes increased output of energy to deal with challenges from outside the
body. When there are no environmental demands, the autonomic nervous system
services the needs of internal organs to enhance growth and restoration.
However, in response to environmental demands, homeostatic processes are
compromised and the autonomic nervous system supports increased output of
energy, by down-regulating parasympathetic function and often stimulating
sympathetic function to deal with these external challenges.
The central nervous system mediates the distribution of resources to deal
with internal and external demands. Perceptions and assumed threats to survival
(independent of the actual physical characteristics of the stimulation) may
promote a massive withdrawal of parasympathetic tone and a reciprocal
excitation of sympathetic tone. This trade-off between internal and external
needs is monitored and regulated by the central nervous system.
Level II represents the integration of interoceptive systems with other
sensory modalities and psychological processes. Unlike the reflexive integration
described in Level I, Level II involves higher brain processes. Level II processes
include voluntary approaches to the source of stimulation or an awareness of the
need to problem solve and engage in information processing. To foster the
contact with the stimulus or to process information, the internal bodily state is
changed. Level II is characterized by the appropriate adjustment (i.e., gradations
in inhibition) of homeostatic processes during states of attention, the processing
of information, and social behavior.

When other senses—for example, hearing, sight, or touch—are stimulated,
the autonomic responses are a secondary process. Under these conditions, after
the baby detects sensory information, his or her brain structures regulate
autonomic organs to facilitate the processing of the sensory information. These
physiological states may support the baby’s ability simply to pay attention to the
sensory stimulus, or, by increasing metabolic output, the physiological state may
support the child’s physical movement toward or away from the stimulus.
Sensory information from the external environment triggers changes in
internal regulation that are maintained via accurate interoception. Without
accurate interoception, the down-regulation of internal physiological processes
may compromise survival—for example, by inhibiting digestion or by disturbing
electrolyte or blood gas levels. Defects in interoception may also be at the base
of regulatory disorders (Greenspan, 1991). Regulatory disorders reflect a broad
spectrum of dysfunction in young children and include difficulties in bodily
processes such as eating and sleeping, difficulties in processing sensory and
affective information, and difficulties in state regulation.
PHYSIOLOGICAL AND BEHAVIORAL HOMEOSTASIS:
PARALLEL CONCEPTS
As a construct, physiological homeostasis is consistent with the behavioral
homeostasis observed by Greenspan (1991). Greenspan has described a
developmental period from birth to 3 months during which the infant masters
homeostatic processes. In this model, homeostasis requires the appropriate
regulation of sleep and behavioral states as well as the ability to incorporate
appropriate visual, auditory, and tactile stimulation. Thus, children defined as
having regulatory disorders have difficulties in sleep, feeding, and sensory
integration.
Greenspan’s model, however, focuses on the external sensory modalities—
hearing, sight, and touch. I am suggesting that physiological homeostasis (Level
I) and the regulation of physiological homeostasis to support sensory processing
of environmental stimuli (Level II) are necessary substrates for the behavioral
homeostasis. In other words, the regulatory disorders defined by Greenspan may
have a physiological substrate (Porges & Greenspan, 1991). Empirical research
provides support for this hypothesis (e.g., DeGangi, DiPietro, Greenspan, &
Porges, 1991; Porges, Doussard-Roosevelt, Portales, & Suess, 1994). We are
demonstrating that physiological measures of homeostasis are related to

behavioral problems in infants. Our findings suggest the possibility that
clinicians will be able to use physiological measures that reflect interoceptive
competence diagnostically to identify Level I and Level II vulnerabilities in
infants and young children.
ASSESSMENT OF LEVEL I AND LEVEL II PROCESSES
In general, homeostatic processes are regulated by the parasympathetic nervous
system via the vagus nerve, a large nerve with several branches enabling
bidirectional communication between brain structures and internal organs. The
vagus, with its sensory and motor pathways, is the primary component of the
interoceptive system. The vagus and its branches account for approximately 80%
of the parasympathetic nervous system. Approximately 80% of the vagal fibers
are sensory and thus directly service interoceptors within the body cavity. Thus,
measurement of vagal activity provides information on interoception in
maintaining homeostasis (i.e., Level I processes) and the regulation of
homeostasis to support environmental challenges (i.e., Level II processes).
It is possible to monitor vagal activity by quantifying specific rhythmic
changes in heart rate (see Porges, 1992). Level I processes may be evaluated by
measuring vagal control of the heart during rest or sleep; this provides a measure
of the infant’s interoceptive capacities to maintain homeostatic control. Level II
processes may be evaluated by measuring the change in vagal control of the
heart during environmental challenges; this provides a measure of the infant’s
capacity to down-regulate the vagal system to deal with environmental demands.
Our research program provides data supporting the hypothesis that the ability
to sense and regulate internal physiological state is at the base of competencies
in higher order behavioral, psychological, and social processes. Currently, we
are developing laboratory procedures to profile the infant’s capacity to regulate
internal physiological systems during a variety of sensory processing demands.
Our long-term goal is to provide a standardized clinical instrument to evaluate
interoception. 
This 
instrument 
would 
complement 
neurological,
neuropsychological, and other sensory evaluations. The assessment would index
interoceptive processes through the measurement of vagal influences on the
heart by quantifying rhythmic changes in the beat-to-beat heart rate pattern (i.e.,
respiratory sinus arrhythmia as a measure of cardiac vagal tone). The instrument
will have the capacity to evaluate two dimensions of interoception:

1. The capacity to monitor and maintain homeostasis in the absence of
environmental challenges (i.e., Level I processes); and
2. The capacity to alter homeostasis to support behaviors required by
environmental challenges (i.e., Level II processes).
The ability to measure interoception, the sixth sense, opens a new window to
the infant’s sensory experiences. This window allows us to observe and to
understand the internal feelings of the infant and how these internal states
change during illness, mental processing, and social behavior.

CHAPTER 6
Physiological Regulation in High-Risk Infants:
A Model for Assessment and Potential
Intervention
Birth is the greatest challenge to human survival. When an infant is born, the
supportive environment of the womb is gone. Parturition functionally disrupts
the fetus’s dependency on maternal physiology and expels the fetus from this
secure environment. Thus, birth marks a transition as the management of
autonomic regulation shifts from the maternal placental-fetal system to the
newborn. In this demanding environment, the newborn must have skills to
regulate autonomic processes (e.g., breathe, feed, digest, thermoregulate, etc.)
and to communicate autonomic state needs to caregivers (e.g., cry). Within
minutes of birth, these skills are challenged. Difficulties in expressing
physiological competence are life-threatening. Even with healthy full-term
newborns, there is great concern by health care professionals and parents about
an infant’s physiological regulation competency in negotiating this complex
transition. Postpartum adaptation is more difficult for the high-risk infants who
experience a variety of risk factors, including prematurity and delivery
complications. These high-risk infants, often limited by a less mature or a
damaged nervous system, are compromised in performing these self-regulatory
tasks.
The study of the high-risk neonate provides a real-life laboratory to evaluate
the unique contribution of autonomic regulation to development. Research can
evaluate the relation between specific physiological vulnerabilities and
subsequent develop mental problems in behavioral organization, social behavior,
and cognitive function.

A model of neural regulation of autonomic processes that focuses on the
high-risk neonate might address two research questions. First, is it possible to
assess the relative risk that an individual newborn faces following the birth
process; and second, how do we help the high-risk newborn negotiate the
transition from a physiological dependency on maternal systems to the
physiological self-regulation required in the extrauterine world?
Successful adaptation of the newborn to the extrauterine environment
requires a dynamic and complex repertoire of responses. These responses occur
on several levels. Although self-regulatory physiological strategies require
complex neurophysiological systems, involving feedback between the brain and
peripheral physiology, several systems may be monitored by careful visual
surveillance of the newborn. For example, the Apgar scale (Apgar, 1953)
codifies the status of physiological self-regulation via a standard observational
scale. Similarly, neurological examinations during the newborn period assess
neural function through the systematic elicitation of observable reflexes.
In the day-to-day care of the high-risk infant, clinical management attempts
to compensate for the immature or compromised nervous system and its limited
abilities to regulate physiological homeostasis. For example, radiant heaters use
the neonate’s core temperature in a feedback loop to compensate for an inability
to thermoregulate; ventilators are used to ensure sufficient oxygen when the
respiratory system is either too premature or depressed; orogastric or nasogastric
(i.e., tube) feeding is used to compensate for the neonate’s inability to actively
suck and to coordinate sucking, swallowing, and breathing.
The attentiveness of staff in the neonatal intensive care unit (NICU)
emphasizes the importance of observable physiological systems, such as body
movements, breathing, thermoregulation, and sucking to detect shifts in clinical
status. Thus, although technology has contributed to the evaluation of
physiological self-regulation through specialized biomedical monitoring
equipment (e.g., computerized oxygen saturation, blood pressure, temperature,
and heart rate monitors), the primary clinical indicators of autonomic regulation
that promote homeostasis are still obtained through clinical observations.
Before the infant can master complex behavioral interactions with the
environment, the infant must competently regulate autonomic processes. A goal
of mammalian development is to become independent of the caregiver. There are
several constraints on the development of self-regulatory skills, including the
status of neurons, neurophysiological systems, motor behavior control, and the
availability and contingency of socioenvironmental stimulation. Although

assessments of self-regulatory skills usually focus on global levels of motor and
social behavior, these abilities are dependent on physiological systems. In turn,
physiological systems are dependent on a neuronal substrate, which provides the
boundary conditions. If there is damage to neural tissue, the ability to regulate
both motor and visceral processes is limited. Neurons can be damaged by
hypoxia, fever, trauma, and other insults, such as drugs. Although neurons
cannot be measured noninvasively in the infant, the functional output of
populations of interconnecting neurons produce physiological responses such as
sucking, breathing, and heart rate, which are easily monitored.
SELF-REGULATION AND THE NERVOUS SYSTEM
Implicit in the evaluation of clinical status in the newborn is the assumption that
the assessment reflects the quality of nervous system function. Although many
assessments do not require detailed physiological monitoring, the systems
observed (e.g., regularity of respiration, body movements, sucking responses,
coloration of skin, etc.) provide insight into the competence of the nervous
system and its ability to orchestrate complex self-regulatory physiological
processes. Thus, underlying most assessment strategies is the assumption that the
nervous system provides the management skills necessary to regulate internal
physiological systems and plays a pivotal role in determining the newborn’s
success in navigating through the changing environment.
Self-regulation characterizes physiological systems. Weiner (1948) proposed
a model of nervous system self-regulation to explain homeostasis. According to
Weiner, homeostasis is an emergent property of a system that, via bidirectional
communication, monitors and regulates the status of an organ to maintain an
output level within a specific functional range. As illustrated in Figure 6.1, the
system would include a central regulator that would determine the motor output
to an organ after interpreting the information from the sensor (e.g., afferent
feedback) that monitors the status of the organ.
To maintain physiological homeostasis, sensory pathways originating in
peripheral organs (e.g., chemoreceptors and baroreceptors in the carotid sinus)
convey information regarding physiological status, and motor pathways (e.g.,
vagal and sympathetic pathways to the heart) change the output of peripheral
organs. The sensory pathways from visceral organs originate in the periphery
and usually terminate in the brainstem; however, many of the motor pathways
originate in the brainstem and terminate in the periphery.

Physiological systems could be described as being composed of sensors that
input information about the external (outside the body) and internal (within the
body) environments, motor systems that control behavioral and visceral activity,
and an integrative mechanism that evaluates the input from the sensors and
determines the specifics of the motor output.
FIGURE 6.1. Schematic representation of bidirectional communication between central regulator and
peripheral organ characteristic of physiological homeostasis.
The study of normal psychological and behavioral development emphasizes
the importance of the external environment. For example, individual differences
in development are often associated with socioeconomic status, family function,
nutrition, and stress factors. In contrast, partially because psychopathology can
be observed in “healthy” environments, the study of psychopathological
development emphasizes the importance of the internal environment (e.g., the
brain and neural regulation of physiological systems). For example, pathological
development is often associated with problems in brain development and
dysfunctional physiological systems. This interest in organismic variation
promotes research questions evaluating mechanisms through which feedback
from visceral organs contributes to the organization and development of
emotional, cognitive, and behavioral processes.
Self-Regulation: A Negative Feedback System

Physiological systems regulating visceral state (e.g., heart rate, temperature,
blood pressure) are self-regulatory. Self-regulatory systems adjust output to the
changing input through a process known as feedback. When the feedback
opposes the state of the system, it is known as negative feedback. When the
feedback augments the state of the system, it is known as positive feedback. The
room thermostat provides a functional metaphor for a negative feedback system.
The room thermostat contributes to the temperature regulation by evaluating
sensors to determine when the room temperature deviates from a predetermined
range (i.e., homeostasis). If the room temperature drifts outside this range, the
thermostat will trigger “motor” mechanisms to heat or cool the room to obtain a
temperature within the previously defined “homeostatic” range.
The regulation of blood pressure represents a physiological feedback system
with an objective to maintain levels within healthy limits. Because brain function
requires a continuous supply of oxygenated blood, any drop in blood pressure is
critical to survival and requires a rapid and appropriate physiological adjustment.
In the healthy individual, drops in blood pressure are instantaneously detected by
baroreceptors in the blood vessels. The baroreceptors send information to the
brainstem, and the brainstem sends a motor command to the heart to increase
heart rate rapidly. As soon as blood pressure returns to normal limits, neural
feedback slows heart rate. However, there are individuals who have defective
feedback. For example, in the elderly or individuals using specific medications,
the blood pressure feedback system may be depressed. For these individuals,
when the blood pressure drops because of a posture shift, they may experience
severe dizziness or even syncope. This experience is common in the elderly and
frequently contributes to falls and severe injuries.
In contrast to the negative feedback systems, which characterize self-
regulatory processes, there are also positive feedback systems. A malfunctioning
room thermostat providing positive feedback would continue to augment the
temperature until the system ceased functioning due to extreme heat or extreme
cold. Thus, prolonged positive feedback is destructive to systems. For example,
rage, severe anger, or panic might be viewed as a behavioral consequence of
physiological positive feedback that promotes increased metabolic output.
Consistent with the feedback model, the physiological cost of prolonged periods
of positive feedback might compromise the health of the individual.
The characteristics of physiological feedback may change as a function of
physiological, emotional, cognitive, or behavioral demands. For example, during
periods requiring massive metabolic output, such as exercise, the feedback

system must be vigilant and efficient to support the changing oxygen needs of
the cardiovascular system. During less motorically demanding conditions, such
as periods of drowsiness and sleep, the pattern of neural feedback may change
and go through periods of dissociation. Additionally, it is possible that the ability
to express emotional sensitivity or behavioral contingency might be related to
the “gain” or “amplification” of the feedback from the viscera. Therapeutic
drugs, such as clonidine, used for panic disorders, may alter the neural feedback
system by dampening the impact of the afferent feedback from visceral organs.
Thus, the study of abnormal development and psychopathology may prompt
attention to the study of the development of normal feedback systems and the
relation between physiological systems and emotional, cognitive, and behavioral
development (see Cicchetti, 1993).
Homeostasis: Signs and Signals of Competent Neural Self-
Regulation
For the newborn, maintaining physiological homeostasis is crucial for survival.
Homeostasis is not a passive process in which physiological systems remain
constant. Rather, homeostasis is an active, neurally modulated process in which
physiological systems vary within viable ranges.
The quality of homeostasis may be assessed with measures that are related to
clinical status. When the output of a system is above the functional level, output
is decreased until the level drops into the functional range. The output level
progressively decreases through the functional range. When the output drops
below the functional level, the output is progressively increased to reach and
pass through the functional range. This process of waxing and waning of output
reflects the negative feedback property of our nervous system. Thus, healthy
physiological systems have a characteristic rhythm that provides an important
observable window of the status of the nervous system. For example, respiration,
blood pressure, heart rate, and temperature exhibit rhythms that provide
important clinical information.
The rhythms provide indicators of the quality of feedback characterizing the
system as it attempts to maintain homeostasis. The physiological rhythms
produced 
by 
central-autonomic 
feedback 
loops 
have 
two 
dynamic
characteristics: (a) a period of time of constant reflecting the temporal latency of
the system to adjust or respond, and (b) a magnitude dimension reflecting the
degree to which the system can deviate from a specific state. Both dimensions

are modulated by higher brain structures and limited by neurochemical
processes. Thus, by the nature of brain-autonomic regulation, autonomic
response systems are time series, characterized by oscillations, with a period
determined by the duration of the feedback loop, and an amplitude determined
by central regulatory control.
Measures of heart rate oscillations, such as respiratory sinus arrhythmia
(RSA), which are often used to assess cardiac vagal tone, dynamically reflect the
bidirectional communication between the peripheral cardiovascular system and
the brain. Under specific demand situations requiring shifts in metabolic output
(e.g., stressor survival-motivated responses, attention or social engagement,
activity, fever, disease) the characteristics of the feedback, magnitude, valence,
and period may change. Thus, the interest in monitoring cardiac vagal tone
during demand situations, and as a marker of physiological self-regulation, is
justified.
There are times when the nervous system is compromised and the neural
feedback regulating cardiopulmonary and thermoregulatory processes is
deficient. The occurrence of apnea and bradycardia signal dysfunction in the
neural regulation of cardiopulmonary function. Similarly, difficulties in
maintaining body temperature when ambient temperatures are changing reflect
difficulties in thermoregulation.
The care of the high-risk infant often requires interventions to regulate
physiological processes that are no longer under appropriate neural control (i.e.,
efficient negative feedback). Following apnea and bradycardia, interventions
such as physical movement of the infant, serve as potent stimuli to reengage
neural regulation of cardiopulmonary processes. When an infant has difficulty
thermoregulating, rather than relying on neural feedback to vascular and cardiac
processes, technology may use feedback from sensors that monitor body
temperature to regulate ambient temperature. The common use in the NICU of
heating units controlled by the newborn’s body temperature is a functional
example of a negative feedback system that compensates for defective self-
thermoregulation.
The well-managed diabetic provides another example of external
manipulation of a deficient internal feedback system. The diabetic has a
defective feedback system that does not adequately regulate blood sugar through
the endogenous release of insulin. To compensate for this problem, the diabetic
must supplement the endogenous feedback system. To provide afferent
feedback, blood is sampled and the amount of sugar in the blood is assessed. The

individual’s brain and associated cognitions interpret the afferent feedback and
determine the appropriate amount of insulin required to regulate blood sugar
within a functional level. To complete the feedback loop, motor systems are
recruited to administer the insulin.
The human nervous system functions as a collection of several interacting
self-regulatory negative feedback systems, each with a specific role. Sensors or
receptors are located on the surface of the body to assess environmental changes
and within the body to assess internal conditions. Motor systems control body
movements and visceral organs. The feedback from internal sensors is
interpreted by brainstem structures that contribute to the regulation of autonomic
state (e.g., nucleus tractus solitarius, dorsal motor nucleus of the vagus, nucleus
ambiguus). The nervous system provides the infrastructure for all levels of self-
regulation. Self-regulatory processes characterize various domains ranging from
the overt behavioral strategies of the infant demanding caregiver attention to
subtle physiological shifts related to changes in thermoregulation, digestion, or
cardiopulmonary function.
Self-Regulation of Physiological Systems: Primary Survival
Agenda
In the proposed model, the effectiveness of an assessment is dependent on its
sensitivity to measure the status of the nervous system. The success of an
intervention is dependent on the functional enhancement of the nervous system.
Although developmental follow-up studies of high-risk infants focus on the
complex regulation of motor, social, and cognitive behaviors, survival of the
high-risk infant in the NICU is based on successful regulation of the
physiological systems that support growth and restorative processes. Initially,
this regulation may involve extraneural feedback provided by external
monitoring of critical care variables (e.g., temperature, heart rate, respiration,
oxygen saturation). Then, based on the monitored condition, clinical
interventions 
(e.g., 
ventilation, 
ambient 
temperature, 
medication) 
are
administered to aid physiological regulation. If these interventions were
successful, the clinical course would reflect a shift from a dependence on
extraneural regulation to neural self-regulation. Thus, assessment should be
directed at evaluating the nervous system structures and functions that promote
physiological states fostering growth and restorative processes. Moreover, when
methods are developed to accurately monitor these systems, interventions could

be developed that specifically enhance neural feedback and improve the function
of these systems.
The Vagal System: An Indicator of Survival-Related Self-
Regulation
The proposed model for assessment and intervention focuses on the vagal
system, a physiological system uniquely important for the survival of the high-
risk infant. The vagal system contributes to the regulation and coordination of
survival processes, including breathing, sucking, swallowing, heart rate, and
vocalization. Dysfunction in these processes places the infant at survival risk and
produces clinical indicators of risk, such as apnea, bradycardia, difficulties in
sucking and swallowing, and weak, high-pitched cries.
Although the clinical indicators just listed appear to reflect divergent
processes, they share an important neuroanatomical and neurophysiological
substrate. The following four points highlight our knowledge and understanding
of this substrate and justify why knowledge of this system may contribute to the
development of psychophysiological assessment and clinical intervention
strategies (a detailed and documented review of the physiological substrate of
this system is described in chapter 2).
First, from a neuroanatomical level, sucking, swallowing, vocalizations,
heart rate, and bronchial constriction are regulated by a common brainstem area.
The regulation of these processes is dependent on motor fibers emerging from a
medullary nucleus known as the nucleus ambiguus. These myelinated motor
fibers originate in the nucleus ambiguus and travel through the tenth cranial
nerve, the vagus.
Second, the vagus contributes sensory and additional motor fibers to the self-
regulation of physiological systems. The vagus contains sensory fibers that
provide feedback and motor fibers originating in the dorsal motor nucleus of the
vagus. Sensory fibers compose approximately 80% of vagal fibers. The vagal
sensory fibers originate in several visceral organs (e.g., heart, lungs, stomach,
pancreas, liver, intestines) and terminate in a brainstem area known as the
nucleus tractus solitarius. The vagal motor fibers originating in the dorsal motor
nucleus of the vagus, unlike the myelinated motor fibers originating in the
nucleus ambiguus, are unmyelinated and provide the primary motor control of
the digestive system. However, the dorsal motor nucleus also projects to the
bronchi and heart.

Third, nucleus tractus solitarius integrates sensory information from visceral
organs and communicates, via interneurons, with the primary source nuclei of
the vagus (i.e., nucleus ambiguus and dorsal motor nucleus). As illustrated in
Figure 6.2, this feedback system regulates digestive and cardiopulmonary
processes to foster growth and restoration. The afferent and efferent pathways
conveying the bidirectional communication between the peripheral organs and
the brainstem travel through the vagus. Note that the model describes potential
feedback modulation (changing the magnitude or direction of the feedback) by
other brain structures.
Fourth, neurophysiological research suggests that respiration rate is
determined by a brainstem system that also outputs the respiratory rhythm to the
heart and the bronchi. This neurophysiological drive to breathe is, in part,
dependent on the emergent properties of interneuronal communication between
the nucleus ambiguus and the nucleus tractus solitarius. According to Richter
and Spyer (1990), the interneuronal communication between the nucleus
ambiguus and the nucleus tractus solitarius is the source of a rhythmic generator
producing a cardiopulmonary rhythm that results in oscillations in bronchial
constriction and heart rate at a frequency similar to spontaneous breathing. The
rhythmic concordance among these processes may functionally enhance
diffusion of oxygen, and coordinate breathing and heart rate with other processes
dependent on nucleus ambiguus motor fibers, such as sucking, swallowing, and
vocalization.
The foregoing overview of the vagal system emphasizes the importance of
vagal fibers in self-regulatory processes. The neuroanatomical descriptions and
neurophysiological information regarding vagal function have been organized in
the polyvagal theory (see chapter 2). The polyvagal theory provides a theoretical
basis for specific clinical assessments and interventions in the NICU. Based on
the polyvagal theory, interventions may be developed that will not jeopardize the
clinical status of the vulnerable infant. In contrast, the polyvagal theory also
explains how stimulation of specific sensory systems may elicit life-threatening
vagal reflexes. For example, oral-esophageal stimulation, commonly occurring
during suction or during the insertion of the orogastric tube for gavage feeding,
may elicit potent bradycardia.

FIGURE 6.2. Feedback model of vagal regulation of autonomic state. Model illustrates the brainstem
mechanisms that regulate vagal control of cardiopulmonary and digestive processes.
Polyvagal Theory
The polyvagal theory emphasizes the functional difference between vagal fibers
originating in two areas of the brainstem: the nucleus ambiguus and the dorsal
motor nucleus of the vagus. The two types of pathways have different
embryological origins, promote different response strategies, and provide the
neurophysiological justification for new definitions and explanations of stress,
distress, and distress vulnerability. The polyvagal theory explains the stress and
distress experienced by the high-risk infant within the context of the evolution of
the mammalian autonomic nervous system. Because of the evolutionary
pressures associated with obtaining and maintaining oxygen resources and
transporting oxygenated blood to the brain, a neomammalian vagal system
developed from fibers originating in or migrating to the nucleus ambiguus. The
neomammalian vagal system provides the neural control of the muscles that
evolved from the primitive gill arches. The gill arches throughout evolution have
been associated with the extraction of oxygen from the environment.
Somatomotor pathways from the neomammalian vagal system innervate the

larynx, pharynx, and esophagus and coordinate vocalizations, breathing, and
sucking. Additionally, visceromotor pathways from this vagal system regulate
bronchial constriction and heart rate. Thus, this system is still involved in
obtaining oxygen from the environment, diffusing oxygen in the blood, and
maintaining cerebral blood flow by regulating blood pressure. The evolutionarily
older reptilian vagal system involves fibers originating in the dorsal motor
nucleus.
The polyvagal theory emphasizes that the two vagal systems (neomammalian
and reptilian) respond differently to a stressor. For healthy mammals, the initial
response is mediated by the neomammalian vagus and is characterized by a rapid
withdrawal of vagal tone. This functionally removes the potent vagal brake from
the heart and facilitates an instantaneous increase in metabolic output (i.e.,
increased heart rate) to mobilize energy resources for the classic flight-or-fight
response. Removal of the vagal brake increases strength and speed to deal with
stress and to aid in obtaining oxygen resources. However, withdrawal of the
vagal brake functionally degrades (i.e., reduces control in) the motor systems
involving the nucleus ambiguus. Thus, stress would not only be associated with
faster heart rate, but also with higher pitch vocalizations (e.g., cries) and
difficulties in coordinating sucking, swallowing, and breathing. This, of course,
is commonly observed in physiologically stressed or compromised infants.
The Removal of the Vagal Brake Is the Neomammalian Vagal
Response to Stress
According to this model, stress characterized by removal of the vagal brake is
not necessarily detrimental to the survival of the individual. Removing the vagal
brake occurs often as an adaptive response to increase metabolic output to
mobilize and react to survival-related demands. For example, the vagal brake
will be removed during exercise, pain, attention, and even during the appetitive
phases of eating. Successful postpartum adaptation is related to the infant’s skill
and neurophysiological capacity to regulate the vagal brake to differentially
engage and disengage with the environment. Therefore, the high-risk infant who
exhibits a systematic regulation of the vagal brake to environmental demands
should have more positive social and cognitive outcomes (e.g., Doussard-
Roosevelt, McClenny, & Porges, 2001; Doussard-Roosevelt, Porges, Scanlon,
Alemi, & Scanlon, 1997; Hofheimer, Wood, Porges, Pearson, & Lawson, 1995).
Removal of the vagal brake places the mammalian nervous system in a

vulnerable state because: (a) it compromises homeostatic functions, including
those associated with blood pressure regulation, thermoregulation, food intake,
and digestion; and (b) it places the nervous system at risk for reptilian vagal
reactions. When the neomammalian vagus is in control, the heart and bronchi are
protected from the reptilian vagus, and blood is appropriately oxygenated and
transported to the brain. In the healthy infant, transitory behavioral states such as
crying are characterized by a disengagement and self-soothing as a
reengagement of the vagal brake. Infants with greater neomammalian vagal tone
tend to be more reactive to the environment (DeGangi, DiPietro, Greenspan, &
Porges, 1991; Porges, Doussard-Roosevelt, Portales, & Suess, 1994; Porter,
Porges, & Marshall, 1988; Stifter & Fox, 1990) and more able to self soothe and
calm (Fox, 1989; Huffman et al., 1998). Moreover high-risk newborns with
greater neomammalian vagal tone have fewer risk factors (see chapter 4; Porges,
1995) and have more optimal cognitive outcomes (Fox & Porges, 1985).
In contrast to the self-regulatory characteristics of the neomammalian vagus
and the function of the vagal brake in staging responses as a function of
environmental demands, the reptilian vagus responds with massive increases in
vagal tone that slow the heart and constrict the bronchi. By reducing metabolic
output, the reptilian vagus contributes to the conservation of available oxygen
and promotes adaptive responses such as submerging and diving in aquatic
environments or behaviorally freezing (i.e., feigning death) in terrestrial
environments. Unfortunately, these response strategies, which are adaptive for
reptiles, are potentially fatal for mammals. In mammals, this maladaptive
strategy is observed in clinical settings as potentially lethal bradycardia and
apnea. Based on the polyvagal theory, it has been proposed (see chapter 2) that
fetal distress and sudden death, including sudden infant death syndrome, due to
their neurogenic origins, are potential examples of the noxious impact of the
reptilian vagal surge.
In a clinical setting, it may be possible to evaluate the status of the
neomammalian vagus to indicate stress and distress vulnerability. Vagal fibers to
the heart from the nucleus ambiguus produce a respiratory rhythm (i.e., RSA).
By applying time-series statistics to the beat-to-beat heart rate pattern (Porges,
1985; Porges & Bohrer, 1990), it is possible to extract a measure of RSA that
accurately represents vagal influences from the nucleus ambiguus.
In the absence of nucleus ambiguus stimulation to the heart, the heart is
vulnerable to surges in vagal tone from the dorsal motor nucleus that produce
bradycardia. Data from my laboratory support this conclusion. We have

observed that bradycardia in the fetus and newborn occur during periods of
depressed RSA, the measure of vagal tone from the nucleus ambiguus (Reed,
Ohel, David, & Porges, 1999). Moreover, the observed meconium in the
amniotic fluid of fetuses who have suffered from hypoxia (i.e., fetal distress)
provides additional support for this model, because vagal stimulation via the
dorsal motor nucleus of the vagus to the lower digestive track produces
meconium (Behrman & Vaughan, 1987). Thus, during fetal distress, when we
know RSA is depressed, the fetus exhibits a dorsal motor nucleus vagal surge as
evidenced by the expression of massive bradycardia and meconium.
In support of these conclusions, neuroanatomical research suggests that
sudden infant death syndrome may be related to a delayed maturation of the
myelinated fibers of the vagus (Becker, Zhang, & Pereyra, 1993). The
neomammalian vagal motor fibers are myelinated, as are many of the vagal
sensory fibers. Hypoxia or other neurophysiological insults that may impede
vagal myelination or contribute to demyelination would result in defects in the
negative feedback system regulating the neomammalian vagus. The engagement
and disengagement of the vagal brake would be unreliable. Defects in this
system are critical to survival, because the nucleus ambiguus is involved in the
generation of respiratory rhythms and the coordination of sucking, swallowing,
and breathing. Thus, evaluation of nucleus ambiguus function may map into a
continuum of deficits in self-regulation processes.
Hierarchical Model of Self-Regulation
Self-regulation processes observed in mammals may be organized into a
hierarchical model with four levels (Porges, 1983). The hierarchical model
emphasizes the dependence of higher order behavioral systems on more primary
physiological systems. The model assumes that behaviors such as the organized
motor activity associated with feeding, or the appropriate emotional regulation
during social interaction, are dependent on a more primary physiological
substrate related to the systematic regulation of autonomic state. The model has
four levels and is hierarchical because each level requires successful functioning
on the preceding level of organization (see Table 6.1).
Level I is characteristic of homeostatic processes of physiological systems
regulating the internal organs. Homeostatic regulation requires bidirectional
processes of monitoring and regulating the internal organ via sensory and motor
pathways between the brain and the internal organs. Level II processes require

cortical, conscious, and often motivated influences on the brainstem regulation
of homeostasis. Level III processes are observable behaviors that can be
evaluated by the quantity, quality, and appropriateness of motor behavior. Level
IV reflects the coordination of behavior, emotional tone, and bodily state to
successfully coordinate social interactions.
TABLE 6.1. Hierarchical Model of Self-Regulation
Level I:
Neurophysiological processes characterized by bidirecti
communication between the brainstem and peripheral organ
maintain physiological homeostasis.
Level II:
Physiological processes reflecting the input of higher ner
system influences on the brainstem regulation of homeost
These processes are associated with modulating metab
output and energy resources to support adaptive response
environmental demands.
Level III:
Measurable and often observable motor processes, inclu
body movements and facial expressions. These processes ca
evaluated in terms of quantity, quality, and appropriateness.
Level IV:
Processes that reflect the coordination of motor beha
emotional tone, and bodily state to successfully negotiate s
interactions. Unlike those of Level III, these processes
contingent with prioritized cues and feedback from the exte
environment.
Unique to this model is the assumption that complex behaviors, including
social interactions, depend on physiology and how appropriately the nervous
system regulates autonomic state. Thus, the regulation of autonomic state, via
bidirectional communication between the brain and visceral organs, becomes the
linchpin of physical, psychological, and social development. This chapter
elaborates only on Level I and Level II processes, because these processes
provide a developmentally antecedent substrate of emotional, cognitive, and
behavioral regulation and must be mastered by all infants to ensure survival and
successful adaptation in the postpartum environment.
Level I Processes: Physiological Homeostasis

Level I processes represent the successful regulation of internal bodily processes
via neural negative feedback systems composed of interoceptors or sensory
receptors monitoring internal bodily state and their respective neural pathways.
To maintain homeostasis, interoceptors originating in the body cavity (e.g.,
gastric, hepatic, enteric, cardiac, vascular, and pulmonary systems) transmit
information via neural pathways to brainstem structures. The brainstem
structures interpret the sensory information and regulate the visceral state by
triggering motor pathways that either directly manipulate various organs via
neural pathways (e.g., increase or decrease heart rate, constrict or dilate blood
vessels, inhibit or facilitate peristaltic activity) or trigger the release of specific
hormones or peptides (e.g., adrenalin, insulin, oxytocin, vasopressin, gastrin,
somatostatin). Level I is associated with the organization and neural feedback
mechanisms that characterize the maintenance of homeostasis.
Level II Processes: Cost of Doing Business
The autonomic nervous system deals both with servicing the needs of the
internal viscera and with responding to external challenges. Competence in the
ability to trade off between internal and external needs may be used in
developing definitions of adaptive behavioral strategies and homeostasis. Based
on this model, response strategies to environmental demands and homeostasis
are interdependent. When there are no environmental demands, the autonomic
nervous system services the needs of the internal viscera (e.g., internal organs
such as the heart, lungs, and gut) to enhance growth and restoration. However, in
response to environmental demands, homeostatic processes are compromised
and the autonomic nervous system supports increased metabolic output by
down-regulating “growth and restoration” functions to deal with these external
challenges. The central nervous system mediates the distribution of resources to
deal with internal and external demands. This trade-off between internal and
external needs is monitored and regulated by the central nervous system.
Survival Tasks of the High-Risk Newborn: In the NICU and Post-
NICU
Survival in the NICU is dependent on achievement of Level I and Level II self-
regulatory processes. Competence in regulating these processes enables the
newborn to maintain and regulate homeostatic processes, such as temperature,

breathing, feeding, blood pressure, and sleeping. All other systems, including
neurophysiological systems associated with cortical function, sensory
integration, and motor control of observable behavior are dependent on
successful regulation of these more primary homeostatic functions. A similar
argument can be made regarding the importance of brainstem control systems
(e.g., nucleus ambiguus, nucleus tractus solitarius, dorsal motor nucleus of the
vagus) as an infrastructure for emotional regulation, social behavior, and
cognitive development. Thus, clinical care of the high-risk newborn should
include assessments to evaluate and intervention strategies to foster development
of nucleus ambiguus function.
Discharge from the NICU is directly related to competent self-regulation of
Level I and Level II processes. In contrast, survival post-NICU is dependent on
processes attributed to Level III and Level IV. Successful adaptation post-NICU
not only requires competent Level I and Level II processes but is dependent on
the Level III and Level IV processes that require the regulation of motor
behavior, emotional expression, cognitive processes, and social interactions.
The concept that early difficulties in self-regulation lead to problems in
emotional and social development evolves from the clinical and theoretical work
of Greenspan (1992). Greenspan has described a sequence of developmental
milestones that may be equated with the hierarchical levels presented here.
Although his work focuses on Level IV processes, he acknowledges the
importance of more primary physiological systems related to sensory feedback
and motor control. Greenspan has proposed that difficulties in these primary
neurophysiologically dependent systems contribute to problems in impulse
control, attention, concentration, creative thinking, affect integration, and social
interactions. The current detailed descriptions of Level I and Level II processes
and their dependence on the nucleus ambiguus provide a neurophysiological
model that complements these clinical observations.
Global Assessment Strategy
With the view that nucleus ambiguus function is critical to the survival risk of
the newborn and our knowledge of how to monitor this function via RSA, we
have the tools for a global neurophysiological assessment. A noninvasive
assessment strategy might use a baseline or sleep measure of RSA to assess a
Level I process and a feeding test to challenge the system to evaluate a Level II
process. In older children, the autonomic substrate (i.e., Level I and Level II)

might be evaluated during baseline and tasks associated with higher order
processes. Baseline measures followed by tasks requiring Level III and Level IV
processes, such as manipulating motor (e.g., activity level), cognitive (e.g.,
attentional), or social demands might be used to evaluate the child’s autonomic
tone (i.e., Level I) and ability to regulate autonomic state (i.e., Level II) to
support higher level processes.
Level I Assessments
To assess Level I, we have measured RSA during periods of minimal
environmental demand (e.g., sleep or quiet states) in the neonatal nursery.
Research with this assessment procedure has reliably distinguished between
high-risk and full-term newborns (Porges, 1992) and between risk groups of
preterm newborns matched for gestational age (see chapter 4). Consistent with
the hierarchical model, research has demonstrated that the RSA measure of vagal
function in the NICU is related to cognitive outcome at 3 years of age
(Doussard-Roosevelt et al., 1997). Similarly, preterm newborns with greater
amplitude RSA exhibited more social behavior and attention in the NICU
(Hofheimer et al., 1995).
Level II Assessments
To assess Level II, we have measured changes in RSA during periods of well-
defined environmental demands (e.g., feeding) in the neonatal nursery. Three
studies have been conducted to evaluate the effect of a feeding challenge on the
pattern of RSA. In one study, an apparatus provided water or sucrose in solution
when a newborn sucked (Porges & Lipsitt, 1993). In response to increased
sweetness, the heart rate increased, the amplitude of RSA decreased (lower
nucleus ambiguus vagal tone), and the sucking frequency increased. In a second
study, RSA was evaluated during bottle feeding in a sample of NICU newborns
(Portales et al., 1997). During the bottle feeding, RSA was depressed and heart
rate increased. Following feeding, the levels returned to prefeeding baseline
levels. A third study (Suess et al., 2000) illustrated a relationship between RSA
recovery following feeding and degree of prematurity. In addition, outcome
studies using the feeding challenge with older infants are currently being
conducted in my laboratory. These studies will determine if infants who have a
history of excessive crying and difficulties in regulating behavioral state also

have difficulties in regulating the vagal control of the heart mediated by the
nucleus ambiguus. In these studies, the pattern of vagal reactivity, monitored by
RSA, to the feeding challenge and recovery following feeding are used as Level
II assessment indices. These assessments will be evaluated to determine whether
they are related to clinical risk factors and developmental outcome.
General Intervention Strategy
Measurement of RSA provides the capability to assess individual differences in
neural regulation of homeostatic function in terms of nucleus ambiguus control.
It is now possible to answer two questions: (a) whether individual differences in
neural regulation are related to intervention effectiveness, and (b) whether
interventions are beneficial or detrimental to survival-related physiological
regulation. Thus, our knowledge regarding neurophysiological function may be
useful in designing intervention strategies to promote increased nucleus
ambiguus function.
Beneficial intervention strategies would stimulate specific visceral sensors to
increase the function of the neomammalian vagus. The intervention would
stimulate motor outflow and enhance the regulation and coordination of heart
rate, respiration, vocalization, sucking, and swallowing. Positive developmental
outcomes (e.g., weight gain, improved state regulation, longer periods of
alertness, improved neurological development) would be the product of the
improved regulation and coordination.
In contrast, detrimental intervention strategies would stimulate sensors that
would increase the function of the reptilian vagus. Under conditions during
which the dorsal motor nucleus vagus becomes dominant, the intervention might
result in bradycardia, apnea, and digestive problems and produce compromised
outcomes.
The sensory components of the trigeminal nerve (cranial nerve V) and the
facial nerve (cranial nerve VII) provide the primary sensory input to the nucleus
ambiguus. Therefore, interventions that provide sucking opportunities, oral
stimulation, and facial movement would provide regulation challenges to the
nucleus ambiguus vagal system and may be beneficial. In contrast, interventions
that may trigger dorsal motor activity may be potentially dangerous. For
example, shifting the posture of an infant will elicit baroreceptor responses
including a heart rate change mediated via the vagus to regulate blood pressure.
In the low-risk infant, this intervention exercises a negative feedback system that

maintains cerebral blood pressure and contributes to the regulation of behavioral
state. The system includes motor control of the cardiovascular system from the
dorsal motor nucleus and the nucleus ambiguus. In the high-risk infant, with
depressed nucleus ambiguus function, posture shifts may result in a massive
bradycardia and loss of consciousness similar to the vasovagal syncopes
observed in older adults with low nucleus ambiguus vagal tone (i.e., low-
amplitude RSA).
Similarly, abdominal massage or pelvic manipulations may be detrimental to
the high-risk infant. These interventions, similar to the posture shifts, may
stimulate sensory pathways that activate both nucleus ambiguus and dorsal
motor nucleus. Thus, in the presence of low nucleus ambiguus tone (a
characteristic of the high-risk infant), these interventions also might elicit
massive bradycardia and loss of consciousness.
Caution: It is extremely important to emphasize that many high-risk infants
are in a compromised physiological state, defined by low nucleus ambiguus
vagal tone. Interventions applied to these infants such as abdominal pressure
during massage, baroreceptor stimulation by posture shifts, or lower esophageal
stimulation during either suction or orogastric feeding might trigger massive
dorsal motor nucleus reflexes and, in turn, bradycardia, apnea, and even loss of
consciousness.
CONCLUSION
Although the methods described have focused on the high-risk infant during the
neonatal period, the model may be generalized to study older children and even
adults with behavioral and psychological problems. Associated with various
psychological and psychiatric disorders are symptoms related to difficulties in
state regulation. For example, hyperactivity or forms of attentional problems are
associated with an inability to regulate the physiological substrate to support
appropriate attentive and social behaviors. Similarly, individuals with
inappropriate expressions of panic, terror, or rage, with their defining massive
physiological responses, provide examples of an inability to self-regulate
physiological state to self-soothe or to be contingent with social gestures being
expressed by others to help calm them.
In support of the foregoing generalizations, several studies have monitored
RSA and investigated Level I and Level II processes in clinical populations.

Level I assessments have been used to determine whether individual differences
in tonic state of the vagal system measured via RSA (e.g., assessed during sleep
or quiescent periods) are related to clinical risk factors. Level I methodology
also has been used in specific experimental manipulations to evaluate potential
mechanisms that may mediate psychopathology, such as panic disorders, or to
evaluate the autonomic impact of the pharmacological treatments commonly
used for psychiatric disorders. Level II assessments, involving the quantification
of the pattern of vagal tone regulation in response to a clearly defined challenge,
also have been used in clinical research.
Examples of Level I Assessments
In an attempt to understand the mechanisms of how the nervous system regulates
autonomic state during panic, George et al. (1989) evaluated RSA during
hyperventilation and sodium lactate infusion, manipulations known to elicit
panic. They reported that both manipulations produced a massive decrease in
RSA. Based on the assessment model, these data reflect a severe deficit in Level
I processes. Thus, consistent with the clinical observations of elicited panic and
severe anxiety, the assessment would predict that self-regulatory physiological
and behavioral functions would be compromised.
Other research has attempted to evaluate how psychotropic medication
influences Level I processes. Based on the assessment model, the degree that
medication depresses RSA would affect behavioral and psychological outcome.
For example, it would be predicted that if medication depressed RSA it would
compromise higher level processes, and behavior would not improve.
Alternatively, it would be predicted that if medication increased or did not
decrease RSA, the psychotropic effect on behavior would be optimized.
McLeod, Hoehn-Saric, Porges, and Zimmerli (1992) demonstrated that the
effectiveness of imipramine on general anxiety disorders (i.e., measured by the
Hamilton scale), was directly related to the influence imipramine had on RSA. If
imipramine, due to its known anticholinergic effects, reduced RSA, then
imipramine did not have beneficial effects. In contrast, if the patient did not
exhibit depressed RSA in response to imipramine, behavioral outcome was
optimized. Thus, if medication disrupted Level I processes, the higher level
processes also were compromised.
The focus of this chapter has been on clinical applications of the proposed
psychophysiological assessment model. There have been several investigations

that demonstrate the utility of Level I assessments in clinical settings. As
discussed in chapter 4, high-risk neonates have significantly lower amplitude
RSA. Moreover, individual differences in RSA from another another high-risk
sample have been related to clinical condition and predict cognitive outcome
(Doussard-Roosevelt et al., 1997, 2001). Consistent with these findings,
Donchin, Constantini, Byrne, and Porges (1992) reported that in adults
preneurosurgical levels of RSA predicted clinical course (i.e., neurological and
cognitive outcomes).
Examples of Level II Assessments
Level II assessments have been designed to evaluate the individual’s ability to
regulate the component of the vagal tone system originating in the nucleus
ambiguus. Level II assessments assume that the regulation of vagal pathways
originating in the nucleus ambiguus is mediated by higher central mechanisms
that influence brainstem feedback to promote either immediate mobilization of
energy resources or calming. Level II assessments are important in dealing with
populations that appear to exhibit normal Level I activity. For example, we have
reported that independent of resting levels of RSA, children who do not
systematically depress RSA during attention-demanding tasks are more likely to
have behavioral regulation problems (DeGangi et al., 1991). In a second sample
we observed that this inability to regulate RSA at 9 months of age predicted
behavioral problems at 3 years (see chapter 7). Consistent with the hierarchical
model, both studies demonstrate that measures of RSA regulation are predictive,
when baseline RSA, an indicator of Level I processes, does not predict outcome.
Other research has evaluated the acute and tonic influences of alcohol and
narcotics on the ability to regulate vagal reflexes. For example, Hickey, Suess,
Newlin, Spurgeon, and Porges (1995) demonstrated that children exposed to
opiates in utero, characterized by attentional problems, also exhibited difficulties
in regulating vagal tone during sustained attention.
Research with Level II processes has been conducted to investigate the
parallel between autonomic state regulation and affective regulation in infants.
To evaluate individual differences in the dynamic covariation of affect tone and
RSA, Bazhenova, Plonskaia, and Porges (2001) challenged Level II processes by
eliciting various affective states. The Bazhenova et al. study demonstrated that
infants who exhibited a systematic parallel between shifts in affect tone and RSA
exhibited more optimum social behavior and state regulation.

Research in my laboratory with newborn infants has focused on evaluating
the feeding challenge as a Level II assessment. Preliminary research with
feeding challenges demonstrates individual differences in RSA regulation while
bottle feeding (Portales et al., 1997), sucking (Porges & Lipsitt, 1993), or during
orogastric feeding (DiPietro & Porges, 1991). We have developed a standardized
Level II assessment for infants that evaluates nucleus ambiguus vagal tone (i.e.,
RSA) regulation during feeding. The assessment procedure evaluates Level I
processes from a baseline recording of RSA during a calm state and Level II
processes from the RSA response to the feeding challenge. We are also testing
the generality of the assessment model to evaluate RSA regulation (Level II
processes) in older children in a variety of challenges related to sustained
attention, emotion regulation, and social interactions.
SUMMARY
The methods for assessment and intervention described in this chapter focus on a
specific physiological system originating in the nucleus ambiguus. The nucleus
ambiguus is a brainstem nucleus that coordinates sucking, swallowing,
vocalizing, and breathing via vagal pathways. Moreover, vagal pathways from
nucleus ambiguus provide the primary neural control of heart rate. Thus, nucleus
ambiguus regulation of the heart is the neurophysiological substrate for all
behaviors requiring a regulation of metabolic output to engage, disengage, and
reengage dimensions of the environment. By monitoring a rhythmic heart rate
pattern (i.e., RSA) mediated by the nucleus ambiguus, it is possible to assess
shifts in the competence of neural regulation in the infant, child, or adult. The
methodology for assessing nucleus ambiguus function is available and can be
generalized to older children and adults by devising tasks that require the
individual to regulate nucleus ambiguus output to mobilize and cope with
transitory environmental demands. Therefore, this technology may be used to
noninvasively monitor nucleus ambiguus function in high-risk infants or other
clinical populations, to assess relative risk, and to evaluate the effectiveness of
specific interventions. Although this chapter has emphasized assessment, there is
a great need to develop appropriate interventions. Research needs to be directed
at designing age-specific interventions that will efficiently enhance the neural
feedback critical to the function and regulation of the vagal system.

CHAPTER 7
Infant Regulation of the Vagal “Brake” Predicts
Child Behavior Problems: A Psychobiological
Model of Social Behavior
Cardiac vagal tone is a construct that describes the functional relationship
between the brainstem and the heart. Research in several domains has related
cardiac vagal tone to a variety of clinical and behavioral dimensions. For
example, cardiac vagal tone is related to clinical risk factors in infants (chapter
4), to outcomes in neurosurgical patients (Donchin, Constantini, Szold, Byrne, &
Porges, 1992), to depth of anesthesia (Donchin, Feld, & Porges, 1985) to
individual differences in temperament (Porges & Doussard-Roosevelt, 1997;
Porges, Doussard-Roosevelt, Portales, & Suess, 1994). Most studies have
evaluated cardiac vagal tone during steady-state conditions, while few studies
have investigated dynamic changes in cardiac vagal tone and how these changes
relate to social behavior and emotional regulation (see chapter 9; DeGangi,
DiPietro, Greenspan, & Porges, 1991) in children. This chapter proposes that the
development of appropriate social behavior is dependent on the ability to
regulate cardiac vagal tone. The model presents two contrasting roles of the
vagus. In one role, the vagus supports homeostatic functions, while in the other,
the vagus serves as a mediator of motor responses to environmental challenges.
Although cardiac vagal tone is relatively stable under steady-state conditions
such as quiet baseline (Fracasso, Porges, Lamb, & Rosenberg, 1994; Izard et al.,
1991; Porges et al., 1994), it is sensitive to environmental demands and
stimulation (e.g., DiPietro & Porges, 1991; Hofheimer, Wood, Porges, Pearson,
& Lawson, 1995; Porges & Lipsitt, 1993; Porter, Porges, & Marshall, 1988).
Rapid changes in cardiac vagal tone often parallel shifts in the cardiac output

required to match metabolic demands (i.e., withdrawal of vagal tone promotes
increased heart rate and cardiac output). For example, the increased sucking rate
observed during feeding requires a shift in metabolic resources to support
ingestive behavior. This shift is observed as parallel increases in heart rate,
decreases in cardiac vagal tone, and increases in sucking rate (Porges & Lipsitt,
1993). Similarly, cardiac vagal tone is withdrawn, increasing cardiac output, to
support behavioral mobilization during painful situations such as circumcision
(Porter et al., 1988).
FUNCTIONAL ROLES OF VAGAL TONE
Vagal tone has two roles. First, during states of low environmental demand (e.g.,
sleep or quiet states), vagal tone fosters physiological homeostasis to promote
growth and restoration. Second, during states characterized by environmental
challenges, the vagus acts as a brake to rapidly regulate cardiac output and thus
metabolic output. The “vagal brake” functionally keeps the heart rate slow by
increasing vagal output to the heart and actively inhibiting sympathetic
influences (Levy, 1984; Vanhoutte & Levy, 1979). Releasing the vagal brake
reduces vagal inhibition on the cardiac pacemaker (sinoatrial node), and heart
rate increases due to the intrinsic rate of the pacemaker, mechanical reflexes, and
sympathetic influences. The vagal brake is not an all-or-none construct. Rather,
the vagal brake represents the graded inhibition of the cardiac pacemaker by
vagal efferent fibers. Because heart rate is not totally determined by the graded
impact of the vagal brake, changes in cardiac vagal tone are not always highly
correlated with changes in heart rate. During environmental interactions,
metabolic output must be rapidly regulated to foster the behavioral and
psychological processes required to engage and disengage with the environment.
This chapter focuses on the latter role of vagal tone, mediating behavioral
responses to environmental challenges and empirically evaluates the vagal brake
hypothesis. The relation between infant regulation of the vagal brake and later
social developmental outcomes requiring engagement and disengagement is
examined.
THE AUTONOMIC NERVOUS SYSTEM: A VISCERAL
FEEDBACK SYSTEM

The mammalian brainstem, via the autonomic nervous system, regulates
homeostatic processes to foster growth and restoration. This role has been well
documented by the functional neuroanatomy of the autonomic nervous system in
which visceromotor neurons communicate between the brainstem and visceral
organs. Weiner (1948), in proposing the concept of a feedback system, used the
autonomic nervous system as his example. According to Weiner, homeostasis is
an emergent property of a system that via bidirectional communication monitors
and regulates the status of an organ to maintain an output level within a specific
functional range. Consistent with Weiner’s model, the autonomic nervous
system includes a central regulator (brainstem source nuclei) that determines
motor output (parasympathetic or sympathetic nerves) to a visceral organ (heart,
lung, stomach) after interpreting the information from the sensor that monitors
the status of the organ (afferent feedback). To maintain physiological
homeostasis, sensory pathways originating in peripheral organs (chemoreceptors
and baroreceptors in the carotid sinus) convey information regarding
physiological status, while motor pathways (vagal and sympathetic pathways to
the heart) change the output of peripheral organs. The sensory pathways from
visceral organs originate in the periphery and usually terminate in the brainstem,
whereas many of the motor pathways originate in the brainstem and terminate in
the periphery.
The cardiac branch of the vagus, although a component of the autonomic
nervous system, may be defined as a feedback system. The cardiac vagal system
contains the requisite components of afferent and efferent pathways, brainstem
source nuclei, and a visceral target, the heart.
EXTEROCEPTIVE AND INTEROCEPTIVE FEEDBACK:
COMPETING DEMANDS ON THE VAGAL SYSTEM
The nervous system receives sensory feedback from receptors that sense
conditions within the body (i.e., interoceptors) to support homeostasis and from
receptors that sense conditions outside the body (i.e., exteroceptors) to deal with
environmental challenges. Cardiac vagal output is related to both. In general,
cardiac vagal tone is increased to support homeostatic functions, and cardiac
vagal tone is decreased to increase cardiac output to support specific motor
behaviors in response to environmental challenge.
The conceptual link between the autonomic nervous system and homeostasis
has contributed to a limited definition of the autonomic nervous system as a

sluggish “vegetative” system with the primary responsibility of maintaining
homeostasis. However, components of the autonomic nervous system, such as
the vagal system, play a dynamic role in fostering behavioral and psychological
interactions with the environment. The vagal system rapidly regulates metabolic
output (Rowell, 1993) to foster motor and psychological processes associated
with appropriate engagement and disengagement with the environment. To
interact with the environment, the priorities of the visceral feedback system
change from optimizing visceral state to foster growth and restoration (i.e.,
homeostasis) to optimizing metabolic output to support the motor behavior
required by external challenges. This shift in priorities, from internal visceral
feedback to external environmental feedback, has survival consequences. For
example, in dealing with the external environment, the organism may effectively
respond to environmental demands related to threat, work, communication, and
social behavior. However, in serving these environmentally driven priorities,
physiological homeostasis may be compromised. When up-regulating metabolic
output to serve environmental needs (e.g., fight-or-flight behaviors) the organism
must down-regulate visceral needs, thereby disrupting homeostasis.
The vagal system deals both with servicing the needs of the internal viscera
and with responding to external challenges. Competence in the ability to trade
off between internal and external needs may be used in developing definitions of
adaptive behavioral strategies and homeostasis. Based on this model, response
strategies to environmental demands and homeostasis are interdependent. When
there are no environmental demands, the vagal system services the needs of the
internal viscera (e.g., heart, lungs, stomach, intestines) to enhance growth and
restoration. However, in response to environmental demands, homeostatic
processes are compromised, and the vagal system supports increased metabolic
output by down-regulating growth and restoration functions to deal with these
external challenges. The central nervous system mediates the distribution of
resources to deal with internal and external demands. The trade-off between
internal and external needs is monitored and regulated by the central nervous
system and can be monitored via the dynamic regulation of the heart by the
vagus. This dynamic regulation provides a graded inhibition of the vagal brake
with a resultant shift in cardiac output.
THE POLYVAGAL THEORY

The polyvagal theory (see chapter 2) introduces and provides the theoretical
justification for studying the vagal brake. The theory proposes that the successful
adaptation of mammals is dependent on systematic and reliable withdrawal and
reengagement of the vagal brake as a mechanism to rapidly regulate metabolic
output in response to environmental demands. The theory, based on comparative
neuroanatomy and embryology, proposes that mammals have two vagal systems,
a neomammalian system and a more vegetative “reptilian” system, controlled by
different medullary nuclei. The mammalian vagal system is controlled by the
nucleus ambiguus, and the more vegetative reptilian system is controlled by the
dorsal motor nucleus.
The two systems have different response strategies. The nucleus ambiguus
(mammalian) vagal system is myelinated and provides a rapid adjustment of
metabolic output by regulating heart rate via the sinoatrial node. Usually this is
observed as rapid vagal withdrawal and concomitant heart rate acceleration. In
contrast, the dorsal motor nucleus (reptilian) vagal system is unmyelinated and
appears to have little impact on cardiac output in most conditions. However,
under compromising conditions of low oxygen availability, it is hypothesized
that the reptilian system fosters resource conservation by stimulating massive
bradycardia and apnea. Thus, several lethal phenomena such as cardiac arrest,
massive bradycardia producing sudden death, and exercise-induced syncope
appear to be the vestigial remnants of a physiological response with adaptive
consequences for reptiles but with lethal consequences for mammals.
Because the nucleus ambiguus is an integral component of the medullary
system generating the respiratory rhythm (Richter & Spyer, 1990), the output of
the vagal fibers terminating on the heart are characterized by a respiratory
rhythm of increasing and decreasing tone (Porges, 1995). The functional
consequence of this rhythmic modulation of nucleus ambiguus vagal tone to the
sinoatrial node is to produce the respiratory oscillations in the heart rate pattern
known as respiratory sinus arrhythmia (RSA). Thus, the quantification of the
amplitude of RSA provides an index of the dynamically changing status of the
vagal brake.
VAGAL BRAKE AND THE DEVELOPMENT OF SOCIAL
BEHAVIOR
The current study focuses on the nucleus ambiguus vagal system and evaluates
the hypothesis that appropriate withdrawal of the vagal brake during infancy is a

marker variable for developmental outcome. Specifically, it is proposed that
appropriate regulation of the vagal brake during infancy reflects an ability to
selectively engage and disengage with the environment. The vagal brake
provides the mechanism for the infant to contingently interact with objects and
people. Thus, the vagal brake provides a neurophysiological mechanism that
may promote the development of appropriate social behavior. In the current
study, 9-month-old infants were evaluated for cardiac vagal tone regulation
during the administration of the Bayley Scales of Mental Development (i.e.,
whether the vagal brake was withdrawn during the test). Administration of the
Bayley Scales places a complex set of demands on the infant. The infant must
engage and disengage with each changing stimulus within the context of a social
interaction with the experimenter. Social behavior problems were assessed at 3
years of age with the Child Behavior Checklist for Ages 2–3 (Achenbach, 1988).
METHOD
Subjects
Twenty-four (12 male, 12 female) subjects were tested initially during infancy
(7–9 months). All subjects were evaluated for behavioral problems at 36 months.
Subjects were recruited from the metropolitan Washington, DC, area via
advertisements in local doctors’ offices and newspapers inviting mothers of 7-to
9-month-olds to participate in the research project. Separate advertisements
elicited mothers with difficult infants and mothers with nondifficult infants to
ensure a broad range of infant behavior. All infants were born full-term with no
major medical complications. Mothers ranged in age from 20 to 39 years (M =
32) and had an average of 16 years of education (range = 10–21 years).
Procedures
At the 9-month assessment, the physiological monitoring and developmental
testing procedures were explained and informed consent obtained from the
mother. Development was evaluated with the Bayley Scales of Infant
Development (Bayley, 1969). Electrocardiogram (ECG) was recorded during a
3-minute baseline in which the infant sat quietly on the mother’s lap and during
the first 7 minutes of the Bayley administration, during which the infant was

presented with a variety of attention-demanding tasks. Mothers completed the
Infant Characteristics Questionnaire (Bates, 1984) and the Fussy Baby
Questionnaire (Greenspan, Porges, Portales, & Walker, 1987) at the 9-month
assessment. 
The 
difficultness 
subscale 
of 
the 
Infant 
Characteristics
Questionnaire was included as a predictive variable in the data analyses. This
subscale was chosen based on its stability (Bates, 1980) as well as its theoretical
linkage to cardiac vagal tone (DeGangi et al., 1991). In addition, information
from the two infant questionnaires as well as the Infant Behavior Record of the
Bayley Scales was used to classify infants as Regulatory Disordered or non–
Regulatory Disordered according to the diagnostic criteria established by the
National Center for Clinical Infant Programs (Zero to Three, 1994).
When the child was 3 years of age, the mother completed the Child Behavior
Checklist for Ages 2–3 (CBCL/2–3; Achenbach, 1988). The CBCL/2–3 is a
parent rating scale consisting of 99 items describing behavioral/emotional
problems.
Quantification of Behavior Problems Data
Scores were derived from the CBCL/2-3 (Achenbach, 1988) for total problems
and for the six narrow-band syndrome scales (social withdrawal, depressed,
sleep problems, somatic problems, aggressive, and destructive). The narrow-
band syndrome scales have been derived via factor analysis and the scale scores
standardized to determine cutoffs associated with clinical psychopathology
(McConaughy & Achenbach, 1988).
Quantification of Heart Rate Data
The ECG was monitored via three AgCl electrodes placed on the infant’s chest.
The output of the ECG amplifier was stored on a Vetter C-4 FM tape recorder
(A. K. Vetter, Rebersberg, PA). The ECG data were quantified offline by
replaying the tapes into a Vagal Tone Monitor (Delta-Biometrics, Bethesda,
MD). The Vagal Tone Monitor detected the peak of the R-wave to the nearest
millisecond and timed sequential heart periods. The sequential heart periods
were stored in a file on a PC. The amplitude of RSA,was calculated offline. The
amplitude of RSA provides an accurate description of medullary influences on
the heart via the nucleus ambiguus branch of the vagus nerve (see chapter 2;
Porges, 1995).

MXedit software (Delta-Biometrics) was used to visually display the heart
period data, to edit outliers, and to quantify the heart period and RSA. MXedit
incorporates the Porges (1985) method of calculating the amplitude of RSA.
This method contains a detrending algorithm to remove from the heart rate
pattern the variance associated with the complex changing level and oscillations
slower than RSA. The detrending algorithm requires heart period values
measured to the nearest millisecond and includes the resampling of the heart
period data every 250 ms, a moving polynomial filter (third-order 21-point) and
a band-pass filter (0.24–1.04 Hz). The analysis represents the variance of the
residual series output from the detrending algorithm and is reported in units of
ln(ms)2. In this study each heart rate parameter (i.e., heart period and RSA) was
calculated for sequential 30-sec. epochs within each condition. The mean of the
within-condition epochs was used in the data analyses.
Design
To evaluate individual differences in the disengagement of the vagal brake
during the Bayley test, RSA and heart period reactivity were assessed by
calculating difference scores in which the values derived during the Bayley tests
were subtracted from the baseline condition values. Change scores were positive
when levels during the Bayley tests were lower than the baseline. More positive
difference scores reflected greater decreases in RSA and heart period. To test the
hypothesis that the functioning of the vagal brake during infancy is related to
behavior problems during childhood, correlational analyses were conducted to
assess the relation of the outcome measures from the CBCL/2–3 years of age
with the RSA and heart period reactivity scores. It was hypothesized that
subjects who exhibited larger decreases in RSA during the Bayley test, relative
to the baseline condition, would have fewer behavioral problems at 3 years of
age. Negative correlations between the change in RSA and behavioral problems
(i.e., fewer problems associated with greater depression of RSA) would support
this hypothesis.
RESULTS
Physiological Response Patterns

Gender × condition repeated measures analyses of variance evaluated whether or
not gender differences existed in either the baseline levels or the pattern of
change in heart period and vagal tone across conditions. Gender was not related
to level or pattern of reactivity. There was a significant condition effect for heart
period. Mean heart period significantly increased (i.e., heart rate slowed) from
baseline (445 ms) to Bayley test (463 ms), F(1,22) = 10.1, p < .01. Mean levels
in RSA did not differ between the conditions, F(1,22) = 0.6, p > .1. Inspection of
the individual differences indicated that most subjects increased their heart
period (n = 19) during the test. However, the RSA response was more
heterogeneous with 13 subjects decreasing and 11 subjects increasing levels
during the test.
The magnitude and direction of the heart period and RSA responses were
related to baseline levels. As illustrated in Figure 7.1, higher amplitude RSA
during baseline was associated with larger decreases (i.e., more positive change
scores) in RSA and heart period during the Bayley test, r(22) = .42, p < .05 and
r(22) = .48, p < .05, respectively. Similarly, longer baseline heart periods,
although not correlated with changes in RSA, were correlated with greater
decreases in heart period during the Bayley test, r(22) = .60, p < .01. The
magnitude of individual differences in the two change scores was also
correlated. Subjects who expressed a greater decrease in RSA also responded
with a greater decrease in heart period, r(22) = .49, p < .05.
FIGURE 7.1. Scatterplots relating baseline RSA to RSA changes (a) and to heart period changes (b). Change
scores represent values during the baseline minus values during the Bayley test. Positive change scores
reflect decreases from baseline to Bayley condition.

THE VAGAL BRAKE AND OUTCOME BEHAVIORS AT 3
YEARS OF AGE
To evaluate the relationship between the vagal brake and outcome behaviors at 3
years of age, correlational analyses were conducted. Analyses examined the
relation between 9-month heart period and RSA values (baseline and change
scores) and 3-year behavior problems coded on the CBCL/2–3 (total problems
and six narrow-band syndrome scores). As listed in Table 7.1, there were
consistent relationships between the decrease in RSA during the Bayley test (i.e.,
magnitude of the change score) and behavior problems at 3 years. Greater
decreases in RSA (i.e., the appropriate regulation of the vagal brake during
attending demanding tasks) were associated with fewer total behavior problems,
r(22) = –.50, p < .05. Further, greater decreases in RSA were associated with
more optimal outcomes on the three narrow-band syndrome scales associated
with social behavior (i.e., social withdrawal, depressed, and aggressive
behavior). Greater decreases in RSA were correlated with fewer social
withdrawal problems, r(22) = –.42, p < .05, fewer depressed behaviors, r(22) =
–.45, p < .05, and fewer aggressive behaviors, r(22) = –.53, p < .01. Inspection
of the univariate correlations indicates that heart period and changes in heart
period were not related to any of the outcome behaviors. Baseline levels of RSA
were related to the depressed, sleep problems, and destructive scales. Infants
who had lower amplitude RSA had more problems on the depressed, r(22) =
–.43, p < .05, sleep problems, r(22) = –.57, p < .01, and destructive, r(22) = –.39,
p = .06, scales. Gender was not related to outcome, nor did gender influence the
correlations between the change in RSA and the outcome measures.
TABLE 7.1. Correlations Between 9-Month Physiological Variables
and 3-Year Behavioral Outcome Variables

For comparison purposes, correlations of the outcome measures with 9-
month Bayley Mental Development Index and Infant Characteristics
Questionnaire difficultness scores are presented in Table 7.2. The Bayley score
was associated with somatic problems, r(22) = –.44, p < .05, and sleep problems,
r(22) = –.47, p < .05, while the difficultness score was not predictive of later
behavior.
TABLE 7.2. Correlations Between 9-Month Behavioral Variables and
3-Year Behavioral Outcome Variables
MULTIPLE REGRESSION MODELS
Multiple stepwise forward-regression models were tested with the four
physiological variables (baseline RSA, RSA change score, baseline heart period,
heart period change score) and the two behavioral variables (Bayley Mental

Development Index, Infant Characteristics Questionnaire difficultness score)
entered into each predictive model. Alpha-to-enter and alpha-to-remove levels
were set at .10. For the total behavior problem score, only RSA change scores
were a significant predictor of outcome. Once RSA change was entered into the
model, no additional variable (i.e., baseline RSA, baseline heart period, change
in heart period, Bayley Mental Development Index, difficultness) significantly
contributed to the model. This was also true for the social withdrawal, depressed,
and aggressive narrow-band syndrome scores.
The models for the other three narrow-band syndrome scales were not
consistent. For the destructive syndrome score, there was no significant
predictor. The Bayley Mental Development Index score was the only predictor
of the somatic syndrome score. And the sleep problems score was best predicted
by a model which included baseline RSA and the difficultness score, F(2,2l) =
7.41, p < .01.
DISCUSSION
Infant Vagal Tone and Child Behavior Problems
The best predictor of behavioral problems on CBCL/2–3 at 3 years of age was
the infant’s ability to decrease cardiac vagal tone during the Bayley test. The
infants who expressed the greatest decrease in RSA had the fewest behavioral
problems. Thus, the ability to regulate the vagal brake in the hypothesized
direction was a significant predictor of positive developmental outcome.
Decreases in RSA were associated with the global measure of total behavior
problems and also with three of the narrow-band syndrome scales (i.e., social
withdrawal, depressed, aggressive). Inspection of the items on these three scales
suggests that the scales are uniquely sensitive to social behavior. The social
withdrawal scale focuses on difficulties in the initiation and engagement of
social interactions. The depressed scale focuses on affect regulation during
social interactions. The aggressive scale focuses on aggressive and
uncooperative social interactions. The intercorrelations among the narrow-band
scales confirm that the three scales are significantly correlated and that
aggressive and depressed are the only scales correlated with social withdrawal.
In contrast, the three scales that were not related to 9-month regulation of the
vagal brake appear to include items more sensitive to visceral regulation, state

regulation, and/or awareness of the environment (i.e., sleep problems, somatic
problems, destructive behavior). These observations foster the speculation that
the vagal brake may be uniquely related to the successful performance of
behaviors associated with social interactions, while baseline vagal tone may be
more sensitive to endogenous homeostatic function.
The linkage between specific narrow-band syndrome scales and the two
measures of vagal tone reflects the two postulated roles of vagal tone described
above. The first role is maximized during states characterized by low
environmental demand, when vagal tone fosters physiological homeostasis to
promote growth and restoration. Thus, higher levels of baseline vagal tone
should be, and are in this study, significantly related to fewer sleep problems
(i.e., lower scores on the sleep problems scale) and tend to be related to fewer
somatic problems (i.e., lower scores on the somatic problems scale) and a greater
awareness of and reactivity to the environment (i.e., lower scores on the
destructive scale).
Research on clinical populations supports the speculation that low baseline
vagal tone is related to illness and health risk (e.g., see chapter 4; Donchin et al.,
1992). In addition, research also supports the speculation that subjects who have
higher vagal tone are more reactive and aware of the environment (e.g., see
chapter 9; Porges, 1991). The second role of vagal tone is maximized during
states characterized by environmental challenges, such as social interactions,
when the vagus acts as a brake to regulate cardiac output. Thus, greater
reductions in vagal tone during tasks that require social interaction and/or
focused attention to an external stimulus should be, and are in this study, related
to fewer social behavioral problems (i.e., lower scores on the social withdrawal
and aggressive scales) and more positive and appropriate affective responsivity
to people (i.e., lower scores on depressed scale).
The behavior of the infants at 9 months was not related to the CBCL/2–3
rating at 3 years. Ratings at 9 months on the difficultness scale of the Infant
Characteristics Questionnaire were not correlated with the CBCL/2–3 scores.
Additionally, based on the Zero to Three diagnostic manual, the 9-month
behaviors were coded to determine whether any of the children would be
assessed as regulatory disordered. Four infants fit the clinical criteria of severe
regulatory disorders. These infants did not exhibit any unique deficits in either
measure of vagal tone, nor did they exhibit severe behavioral problems at 3 years
of age. In fact, a rank order of the CBCL/2–3 scores indicates one regulatory
disordered child in each of the four quartiles. Additionally, none of the four

regulatory disordered infants exhibited a CBCL/2–3 score above the clinical
cutoff. Thus, the infant measures of behavioral difficulties were not correlated
with the vagal tone measures, nor were they predictive of child behavior
problems.
VAGAL TONE AND THE REGULATION OF THE VAGAL
BRAKE: TWO TIERS OF A MULTILEVEL NEGATIVE-
FEEDBACK SYSTEM
The dual functions of vagal tone may be conceptualized within a two-tiered
neural feedback system, The first tier coincides with the vagal contribution to
visceral homeostasis. Driven by visceral afferents, the first tier represents a basic
negative feedback system (see Weiner, 1948). As illustrated in Figure 7.2, the
basic negative feedback system includes a central regulator that determines the
motor output to an organ after interpreting the information from the sensory
input that monitors the status of the organ.
FIGURE 7.2. Schematic representation of a basic negative feedback model.
The first tier of the vagal regulation model is a slight modification of the
basic negative feedback model. As illustrated in Figure 7.3, the general flow is
the same as Figure 7.2, although the specific cranial nerve, brainstem nuclei, and
target organ are identified. On the first tier, the central regulator consists of two
nuclei in the brainstem, the nucleus ambiguus and the nucleus tractus solitarius,

and their interneuronal connections. The vagus nerve contributes both the motor
and sensory pathways between the central regulator (brainstem) and the visceral
organ (heart). The vagal efferents to the heart originate in the nucleus ambiguus
(NA) and the vagal afferents from the heart terminate in the nucleus tractus
solitarius (NTS).
As illustrated in Figure 7.3, the vagus provides a bidirectional connection
between the brainstem and the heart. The two-way vagal communication
between the brainstem and the heart enables the brainstem to monitor and to
regulate heart rate and cardiac output. Within this negative feedback model, the
efferent vagal pathways contribute to homeostasis by providing negative
feedback following the brainstem’s interpretation of cardiac state from the
afferent vagal pathways. Two-way communication between the brainstem and
the heart has long been acknowledged. Darwin (1872) describes the bidirectional
communication and attributes this information to Claude Bernard. The
interneuronal communication between the brainstem source nuclei of both the
efferent and afferent vagal pathways regulating the heart is the topic of current
electrophysiological and neuroanatomical research (Richter & Spyer, 1990).
FIGURE 7.3. Schematic representation of a negative feedback model for vagal control of the heart.
The second tier of the vagal regulation system requires vagal tone changes
which modulate cardiac output to match metabolic needs determined by
environmental challenges. The second tier is characterized by the cortical
inhibition of the brainstem structures controlling vagal output to the heart. The

second tier regulates metabolic output by inhibiting vagal tone, which increases
heart rate and cardiac output, to foster metabolically demanding motor
behaviors. To increase metabolic output, the cortical structures actively inhibit
the vagal support of homeostatic functions. To decrease metabolic output, the
cortical structures disinhibit the brainstem structures regulating vagal output;
vagal output is increased to support homeostatic functions and cardiac output is
decreased. Gradations in cortical inhibition of vagal activity enable a fine-tuning
of the rapid changes in cardiac output required to foster specific behaviors
associated with environmental interactions. This dependency of Tier 2 functions
(behavioral interactions with the environment) on Tier 1 functions (homeostasis)
requires bidirectional neuronal communication between cortical and brainstem
structures. As illustrated in Figure 7.4, this is modeled as a dynamic interaction
between cortical and brainstem structures to monitor and regulate visceral tone
and metabolic output. The functional interaction between the two tiers provides a
neurophysiological mechanism which is capable of either increasing cardiac
output to support fight-or-flight behaviors or decreasing cardiac output to calm
and self-soothe.
As illustrated in Figure 7.4, the second tier also includes the basic
components of a negative feedback system: the monitoring of environmental
stimulation via sense receptors (i.e., exteroceptors), the interpretation of the
sensory information by brain structures (i.e., cortex), and the selective output of
specific observable behaviors. The objective of the second tier is to maximize
goal-directed (i.e., motivated) behaviors that, in general, minimize unpleasant or
life-threatening experiences and follow the law of effect (Thorndike, 1911). For
example, via appropriate negative feedback, positive sensory experiences (e.g.,
pleasure) will promote engagement with the environment, and negative sensory
experiences (e.g., pain) will result in a disengagement with the environment. In
understanding or evaluating social behavior, the second tier choreographs the
quality and temporal dynamics of approach-withdrawal sequences. The second
tier regulates when and with whom or with what an individual behaviorally
engages and disengages.
The two-tiered model is hierarchical with priority given to the demands of
the second tier. However, without the first tier functioning adequately and
regulating homeostasis to maximize life-support processes such as digestion,
oxygenation, thermoregulation, and perfusion, there would be no “energy”
resources available for second-tier functions. As a metaphor, the measurement of
vagal tone level during a steady state as an index of Tier 1 regulation represents

“potential energy.” Similarly, the change in vagal tone from a steady-state
baseline to a metabolically challenging state as an index of Tier 2 would
represent “kinetic energy.”
FIGURE 7.4. Schematic representation of a two-tiered negative feedback model. The two-tiered model
provides a theoretical framework to explain the operations of the vagal brake in response to environmental
challenges (e.g., social interactions). Note the bidirectional communication between cortical and brainstem
structures.
The data illustrated in Figure 7.1 support this metaphor relating baseline
vagal tone to vagal reactivity. Infants with greater baseline vagal tone (an index
of Tier 1 function) exhibited greater decreases in cardiac vagal tone and heart
period during the Bayley test. These findings are consistent with other studies
that have reported a relationship between individual differences in baseline
cardiac vagal tone and the magnitude of heart period and vagal tone reactivity
(DeGangi et al., 1991; Porges & Lipsitt, 1993; Porter & Porges, 1988).
Behavior is metabolically costly. For example, behaviors such as fight-or-
flight responses often require massive and instantaneous increases in metabolic
output. To successfully accomplish tasks of engagement and disengagement with
the environment, the nervous system must divert energy resources from visceral
homeostasis (e.g., smooth muscle) to observable behaviors (e.g., striate muscle)
that deal directly with the environment. The regulation of the vagal brake

provides an index of this shift in resources. By instantaneously releasing the
vagal brake, cardiac output increases to support the metabolic demands required
by the behavior. Thus, the priority of the two-tiered system subjugates the
homeostatic needs in favor of the immediate environmental demands.
CONSTRUCTS OF VAGAL TONE AND THE VAGAL BRAKE
The construct of vagal tone, a Tier 1 process, represents the magnitude of vagal
efferent output on the heart. Within Tier 1, optimal homeostatic function, at least
in terms of the heart, would be associated with greater vagal tone, reflecting
greater negative feedback. There is an abundance of data supporting the notion
that greater vagal tone is associated with more optimal physiological state. Low
heart rate variability or low cardiac vagal tone has been identified as a risk factor
in infants (see chapter 4), in neurosurgery patients (Donchin et al., 1992), and in
individuals with cardiovascular risk (Bigger, Fleiss, & Rolnitsky, 1993). The
data from this study not only are convergent with these findings, but demonstrate
that low levels of cardiac vagal tone during infancy are related to visceral and
behavioral state regulation in childhood.
The construct of the vagal brake described within the second tier represents
the systematic decrease and increase in vagal efferent output to the heart. In our
research, the decrease in cardiac vagal tone reflects a reduction in the vagal
inhibitory effect on heart rate. Release of the vagal brake increases heart rate and
cardiac output. There have been reliable reports of decreases in indices of
cardiac vagal tone (i.e., measures of heart rate variability) in response to
environmental demands (e.g., Allen & Crowell, 1989; Mulder & Mulder, 1987;
Porges, 1972).
Social behavior requires the second-tier system. Social interactions require a
shift in metabolic resources to foster the appropriate behaviors. Thus, the
infant’s ability to release the vagal brake during a social-attention task might
reflect a physiological strategy that would promote social development and
fewer subsequent behavioral problems. The data from this study confirm this
speculation. Infants who exhibited a greater decrease in cardiac vagal tone (i.e.,
greater release of the vagal brake) during the social-attention task exhibited
fewer social behavior problems in childhood.
SUMMARY

The nucleus ambiguus vagal system deals both with servicing the needs of the
internal viscera and with responding to external challenges. Competence in the
ability to trade off between homeostatic (internal) and environmental (external)
needs is required for successful development. This chapter introduces the vagal
brake as a metaphor to describe regulation of visceral tone in response to
environmental challenges. Although there is an extensive literature evaluating
baseline vagal tone, the relation between dynamically changing vagal tone and
behavioral reactivity has been theoretically vague. This chapter, by introducing a
two-tiered neural feedback model, provides the first theoretical model to explain
the relation between vagal tone during steady states and vagal reactivity (i.e., the
vagal brake) in response to environmental challenges.
Co-authors for this chapter were J. A. Doussard-Roosevelt, A. L. Portales, and S.
I. Greenspan.

CHAPTER 8
The Early Development of the Autonomic
Nervous System Provides a Neural Platform for
Social Behavior
During the last trimester and continuing through the first year postpartum, the
autonomic nervous system is rapidly changing. These changes ensure that the
infant can breathe, obtain food, and maintain body temperature. Coupled with
the development of these abilities to obtain basic biological needs is a
progressive change in the infant’s ability to regulate physiological and
behavioral state through interactions with another person (e.g., mother). We
propose that the developmental changes in the neural pathways that regulate
autonomic state provide a neural platform to support the expanding abilities of
the infant to engage objects and people in a dynamically changing environment.
Thus, the emerging behavioral repertoire and social-interactive needs of the
rapidly developing young infant should be studied within the context of the
maturational changes in the autonomic nervous system.
In contrast to the hypothesized dependence of social behavior on the
autonomic nervous system, the autonomic nervous system has played a limited
role within predominant theories in developmental psychology. Similarly, given
the critical role that the autonomic nervous system plays in the infant’s survival
during the transition from prenatal to postnatal environments, it is surprising that
an understanding of the central mechanisms mediating the autonomic nervous
system has been tangential to pediatric medicine. In general, measures of
autonomic activity have been conceptualized as a correlate of motivated or
adaptive behaviors within psychology and as indices of health risk in medicine.
We propose, from a biobehavioral perspective, that the maturational shifts in

neural regulation of the autonomic nervous system provide a developing
resource, which, in part, mediate much of the dynamic interaction that the infant
has with both objects and others. Within this perspective, we identify sequential,
developmental, neurophysiological processes, which provide the biological basis
to explain how and why individual and developmental differences in vagal
control of the heart are related to social behavior and, when relevant, clinical
outcome.
DEPENDENCE ON OTHERS: PARALLELS WITH
MATURATION OF THE AUTONOMIC NERVOUS SYSTEM
At birth, mammalian infants are incapable of caring for themselves. The
newborn is vulnerable and dependent on the mother, or a concerned caregiver, to
survive. Support from others is required to obtain basic biological needs, such as
food, warmth, and protection. This dependence on other decreases as the infant
develops. This decrease in dependence is paralleled by changes in neural
regulation of the autonomic nervous system. During development, as higher
brain circuits begin to regulate the brainstem nuclei, which control the
autonomic nervous system, the infant becomes more independent and is
increasingly capable of initiating social interactions with others to regulate
physiological state. As these self-regulatory skills develop, the dependence on
the caregiver to elicit ingestive-vagal reflexes (i.e., feeding) as a primary strategy
of regulation decreases. Behaviorally, the infant appears to be more socially
skilled and better able to spend time alone. This is observed as the infant’s
ability to both rapidly calm after disruptive challenges and to remain calm for
longer periods, even in the absence of others.
Developmentally, as skills of state regulation improve, the central nervous
system expands to promote enhanced cognition and greater control over
peripheral motor systems. These global systems (autonomic, cognitive, and
motor) mature in combination and enable the maturing infant to become more
independent and explorative in a complex environment.
Similar to most mammals and distinct from our phylogenetically related
reptilian ancestors, humans maintain a need for social interactions throughout
their life spans. Social separation and isolation for humans, regardless of age,
leads to profound disruption in the ability to regulate physiological state and
compromises both physical and mental health. This disruption may impact all
aspects of development and may be expressed as delays in motor development,

growth, and cognition, as well as global health vulnerabilities and atypical social
and emotional behaviors. Studies reliably report that various degrees of social
abandonment can have disastrous effects on child development. Studies of the
Romanian orphans illustrate that caregiving, defined solely by the physical
features of food, warmth, and protection without consistent and predictable
social engagement opportunities, is insufficient for typical development. For
example, in a 3-year follow-up study of Romanian orphans, who had been
adopted after living at least 8 months in orphanages, Chisholm (1998) found that
the orphans had significantly more behavior problems, insecure attachment, and
lower IQ scores than nonadopted or early adopted children. Adoptive parents of
these orphans also reported significantly more parenting stress. More recent
anatomical studies have revealed that early social and emotional deprivation in
many Romanian orphans may lead to functional and structural changes in brain
regions, including orbital frontal gyrus, infralimbic prefrontal cortex, medial
temporal structures (i.e., amygdala and head of hippocampus), and left uncinate
fasciculus (Chugani et al., 2001; Eluvanthingal et al., 2006). Impairment in
functions of these brain regions could certainly contribute to lower verbal skills,
diminished attention and concentration abilities, impaired impulsivity, conduct
problems, and depression frequently reported in these children.
Unlike reptiles and other phylogenetically more ancient vertebrates, birth for
mammals is not a transition into independence but an extension of the period of
dependence that begins in utero. For humans, maturation does not lead to a total
independence from others, but leads to an ability to function independently of
other people for short periods. Moreover, humans, as they become more
independent of their caregivers, search for appropriate others (e.g., friends,
partners, etc.) with whom they may form dyads capable of symbiotic regulation.
In fact, individuals, who prefer to use interactions with objects instead of people
to regulate physiological state, often receive psychiatric diagnoses (e.g., autism
spectrum disorders, borderline personality disorder).
EVOLUTION OF THE AUTONOMIC NERVOUS SYSTEM
PREPARES THE HUMAN INFANT FOR SOCIAL BEHAVIOR
It is necessary to understand the phylogenetic origins of mammalian autonomic
nervous systems to understand how autonomic state is linked to social behavior.
This conceptualization has been described as the polyvagal theory (see chapters
2, 11, and 12; Porges, 2001a, 2007a). The theory was derived from the

identification of the two motor branches of the vagus nerve, the Xth cranial
nerve, which provides both motor and sensory pathways between brainstem
structures and visceral organs. The theory emphasizes not only the phylogenetic
shifts in neuroanatomy of the vertebrate autonomic nervous system but also
proposes specific, adaptive behaviors that co-occur with these transitions.
As evolutionary forces molded the human nervous system, new structures
were added and older structures were modified to allow greater dynamic range
and finer control of physiological state and to facilitate emergence of new,
adaptive social behaviors. The polyvagal theory, by incorporating an
evolutionary approach, provides a strategy to investigate developmental shifts in
social behavior from a phylogenetic perspective. The theory provides insights
into how developmental shifts in neural regulation of the autonomic nervous
system are related to the changing repertoire of adaptive behaviors that,
depending on context, either limit or expand expression of social behavior. The
theory emphasizes unique features in neural regulation of the autonomic nervous
system that distinguish mammals from reptiles and explains how these features
serve as a biobehavioral platform for the emergence of face-to-face social
behaviors. In addition, the theory provides insights into the biobehavioral
mechanisms that are rapidly developing in utero and in the young infant. As the
neural mechanisms facilitating self-regulation improve during normal
development, the infant’s dependence on others to regulate physiological state
decreases. This allows social communication to expand beyond the cueing of
basic physical survival needs (i.e., warmth, safety, food) and into the realm of
prosocial engagements.
The polyvagal theory articulates how each of three phylogenetic stages in the
development of the vertebrate autonomic nervous system is associated with a
distinct autonomic subsystem that is retained and expressed in mammals. These
autonomic subsystems are phylogenetically ordered and behaviorally linked to
social communication (e.g., facial expression, vocalization, listening),
mobilization (e.g., fight-or-flight behaviors, tantrums, or behavioral meltdowns),
and immobilization (e.g., feigning death, vasovagal syncope, and behavioral and
physiological shutdown). The product of this phylogeny is a mammalian nervous
system with three identifiable circuits that regulate adaptive behaviors and
physiological reactions to challenges.
In this phylogenetically organized hierarchy, the newest circuit associated
with social communication is used first. If that circuit fails to provide safety,
then the older survival-oriented circuits are recruited sequentially. From a

developmental perspective, the oldest circuits develop first, and the newest
circuit develops last, leaving it the most vulnerable to neural insult and the most
sensitive to postpartum experience. The newest circuit becomes only partially
available during the last trimester and is expressed at term as the brainstem
reflexes that enable the coordination of sucking, swallowing, and breathing. By 6
months postpartum, these brainstem reflexes, which become coordinated with
cortical processes, provide a biobehavioral pathway through which reciprocal
social engagement behavior can calm and soothe physiological state in both
participants of a social dyad (e.g., mother–infant interactions).
DEVELOPMENT OF THE VAGAL BRAKE:
CONSEQUENCES FOR POSTPARTUM ADAPTATION AND
SOCIAL BEHAVIOR
The mammalian nervous system did not develop solely to survive in dangerous
and life-threatening contexts but also to promote social interactions and social
bonds in safe environments. To accomplish this adaptive flexibility, a new
neural strategy requiring safe environments emerged, while the more primitive
neural circuits to regulate defensive strategies were retained. To accommodate
both fight-or-flight and social engagement behaviors, the new mammalian vagus
evolved to enable rapid, adaptive shifts in autonomic state. The mammalian
myelinated vagus functions as an active vagal brake (see chapter 7) in which
inhibition and recovery of the vagal tone to the heart can rapidly mobilize or
calm an individual. Tonic vagal influences to the sinoatrial node (i.e., the
primary cardiac pacemaker) produce a resting heart rate that is substantially
lower than the intrinsic rate of the pacemaker alone. When vagal tone, through
myelinated vagal pathways, to the pacemaker is high, the vagus acts as a
restraint, or brake, limiting the rate at which the heart can beat and functionally
calming the individual. When vagal tone to the pacemaker is low, there is little
or no inhibition of the pacemaker, and the heart rate increases. The vagal brake
construct may be used to describe functional modulation of heart rate by
myelinated vagal efferent pathways.
The state of the vagal brake can be quantified as the amplitude of a periodic
component in the beat-to-beat heart rate pattern known as respiratory sinus
arrhythmia (RSA). RSA is a naturally occurring rhythm in the heart rate pattern
that oscillates at approximately the frequency of spontaneous breathing. RSA
represents only a portion of beat-to-beat heart rate variability. By quantifying

RSA and the relation between RSA and heart rate during various challenges, it is
possible to measure the dynamic regulation of the myelinated vagal brake to
study the responses of infants and young children to people and to objects (e.g.,
Bazhenova, Plonskaia, & Porges, 2001).
The human infant is not born with a completely functioning myelinated
vagal system. The mammalian vagus is only partially myelinated at birth and
continues to develop during the first few months postpartum. Morphological
studies demonstrate a rapid developmental increase in the total number of
myelinated vagal fibers from 24 weeks through adolescence with the greatest
increases observed from approximately 30–32 weeks of gestational age to
approximately 6 months postpartum (see Sachis, Armstrong, Becker, & Bryan,
1982). More recent neuroanatomical research suggests that the increase in
myelinated fibers may be occurring in the absence of an increase in
unmyelinated vagal fibers, since the increase in the number of myelinated vagal
fibers is paralleled by a decrease in the ratio of unmyelinated to myelinated
vagal fibers (Pereyra, Zhang, Schmidt, & Becker, 1992). A relative increase in
myelinated vagal fibers would functionally improve visceral regulation and
enable the infant to express better behavioral regulation, which would support
spontaneous social engagement behaviors. Based on these studies, preterm
infants born before approximately 30 weeks gestational age are likely
compromised due to lack of an appropriately functioning mammalian vagus, or
vagal brake. Without a functioning mammalian vagus, the preterm has a limited
ability to regulate visceral state and is dependent solely on the sympathetic
nervous system and on the phylogenetically older unmyelinated vagus to meet
physiological needs. This compromised profile of autonomic regulation
obligates the preterm infant to rely on the sympathetic nervous system to
increase heart rate in response to distress, in order to support tantrums and
mobilization behaviors. Preterm infants are also more vulnerable to clinically
dangerous hypotensive states and lowered oxygen saturation caused by episodes
of bradycardia and apnea (i.e., massive slowing of the heart and cessation of
breathing), which may be triggered by ingestive behaviors (e.g., sucking and
swallowing) through activity in the more primitive unmyelinated vagus that has
already developed.
RSA in the preterm infant follows a maturational trajectory that parallels the
reported changes in both number and ratio of myelinated vagal fibers. During the
preterm period there is a monotonic increase in RSA from 32 to 37 weeks
gestational age (Doussard-Roosevelt, Porges, Scanlon, Alemi, & Scanlon, 1997).

Opportunities for skin-to-skin contact (i.e., kangaroo care) between mother and
preterm (Feldman & Eidelman, 2003) enhance the development of RSA.
Paralleling the enhanced vagal regulation, these authors also reported more rapid
improvement in state organization and a more mature neurodevelopmental
profile. However, the enhanced development of RSA was only relative to
preterm controls not receiving skin-to-skin contact and was still substantially
lower than reports of RSA in typically delivered full-terms (see chapter 4).
In longitudinal studies evaluating heart rate and RSA in term infants during
the first year postpartum, heart rate reliably slows with age, although RSA
changes are less obvious (i.e., Fracasso, Porges, Lamb, & Rosenberg, 1994;
Izard et al., 1991). In these studies the effects of development on RSA appear to
be maximized during the first 6 months postpartum and taper during the 6–12-
month period. Although these developmental trends have been reported and
replicated, closer inspection of the data indicates that individual differences in
RSA during the first year postpartum are even greater than the developmental
shifts.
Based on parallel literatures that describe developmental features in both
RSA and the neuroanatomy of the vagus nerve, we may make two inferences:
(1) RSA during early infancy reflects the functional outflow of the myelinated
vagus, and (2) efficient RSA reactivity and recovery are dependent on both the
number of myelinated vagal fibers and the ratio of myelinated to unmyelinated
vagal fibers. The literature on young infants supports these assumptions by
demonstrating increases in RSA during the last trimester through the first few
months postpartum. The second assumption has primarily been tested during
feeding when ingestive-vagal reflexes are recruited, although additional research
will need to examine reactivity during social challenges during the first few
months postpartum (e.g., Bazhenova et al., 2001; Moore & Calkins, 2004;
Weinberg & Tronick, 1996).
FEEDING: CHALLENGING AND EXERCISING THE VAGAL
BRAKE THROUGH AN INGESTIVE-VAGAL REFLEX
To ingest food properly and efficiently, the newborn must have the neural
resources to implement the complex sequence of sucking, swallowing, and
breathing. This sequence requires the coordination of the striated muscles of the
face, head, and neck with the myelinated vagal regulation of the bronchi and the
heart. Unlike the striated muscles of the limbs, striated muscles of the face, head,

and neck are regulated by pathways traveling from the brainstem through several
cranial nerves. These pathways are known as special visceral efferent pathways,
although anatomically, their targets are not considered visceral. These pathways
are often called branchiomeric, since they regulate the structures that
embryologically emerged from the pharyngeal (branchial or ancient gill) arches.
As the infant matures, the special visceral efferent pathways are recruited by
corticobulbar pathways and expressed through social engagement behaviors.
Autonomic support for these muscles is provided by the myelinated vagus,
which can be dynamically monitored by quantifying RSA. This face–heart
connection provides the necessary elements for an integrated social engagement
system (see later discussion).
Since the structures involved in the neural regulation and coordination of the
striated muscles involved in sucking, swallowing, vocalizing, and breathing are
all linked to the myelinated vagus, the functioning of these behaviors, and the
link between these behaviors and RSA, may provide an early indicator of the
functional status of a system that will later be involved in social engagement
behaviors.
The status of the face–heart connection can be evaluated by measuring RSA
changes during the ingestive behavior of sucking, which requires coordination of
the striated muscles of the face with visceral changes in heart rate and breathing.
Porges and Lipsitt (1993) monitored the integration of sucking behaviors with
heart rate and RSA as infants sucked to obtain sucrose. In response to sucrose,
reductions in RSA and corresponding increases in heart rate paralleled increased
sucking frequency. When the availability of sucrose was terminated, RSA and
heart rate returned to presucrose levels. Moreover, individual differences in
baseline RSA were correlated with the magnitude of heart rate reactivity to the
gustatory stimulation. These findings illustrate that in the healthy neonate, there
is a coordinated ingestive response in which the vagal brake is systematically
removed to support the increased metabolic demands of sucking.
Because ingestive-vagal responses can be systematically elicited, a feeding
challenge paradigm provides an opportunity in newborns and preterm infants to
evaluate the status of coordinated physiological-behavioral sequences that
require vagal regulation and control of the striated muscles of the face, head, and
neck. Similar to the full-term infants described in the Porges and Lipsitt study,
clinically stable low-birthweight preterm infants (near the time of discharge) also
decreased RSA and increased heart rate during feeding (Portales et al., 1997).
When feeding was terminated, heart rate and RSA returned to prefeeding levels.

In a second study, with more clinically compromised infants (Suess et al., 2000),
RSA and heart rate were monitored before, during, and after oral or gastric tube
bolus feedings in preterm infants at approximately 33–34 weeks postmenstrual
age. The preterm neonates were categorized into two groups based on gestational
age at birth. The earlier-born group had gestational ages less than 30 weeks, and
the later-born group had gestational ages greater than 30 weeks. Consistent with
the foregoing studies, RSA decreased in both groups during feeding. However,
postfeeding RSA increased toward prefeed levels (i.e., recovered) only in later-
born infants. The results confirmed the assumption that the higher risk group,
independent of corrected gestational age, experienced compromised vagal
regulation during the feeding paradigm.
The primary characteristics of the feeding response are a withdrawal of vagal
control of the heart to increase metabolic activity necessary to ingest food and a
postfeeding recovery of vagal tone to foster a calm state and support digestion.
Thus, during metabolically demanding ingestive behaviors such as sucking,
there is a reduction of myelinated cardiac vagal tone to allow greater
mobilization of energy resources. Following these ingestive behaviors, there is a
recovery of vagal function to support digestion and calm the infant.
The studies described here indicate that term infants and stable older preterm
infants modulate the vagal brake during feeding. This ingestive-vagal reflex
might be mediated solely at the brainstem level and might not be sensitive to the
increasing number and efficiency of corticobulbar pathways connecting the
cortex with the source nucleus of the myelinated vagus, the nucleus ambiguus
(NA), which arise during maturation. From an evolutionary perspective, the
adaptive consequence of these higher order neuroanatomical changes would
enable the older infant to use social cues to regulate the vagal brake. It is
possible that through neuroception (see chapter 1), the loving caregiver’s facial
features and vocal prosody trigger temporal corticolimbic pathways that dampen
defensive reactions and recruit the vagal brake to calm. In contrast, the facial and
vocal features of a stranger might inhibit the vagal brake to allow mobilizing,
protesting, and defensive behaviors.
THE SOCIAL ENGAGEMENT SYSTEM
A face–heart connection evolved in mammals as source nuclei of vagal
pathways shifted ventrally from the phylogenetically older dorsal motor nucleus

(e.g., unmyelinated vagal pathways) to the NA (e.g., myelinated vagal
pathways). This resulted in an anatomical and neurophysiological linkage
between neural regulation of the heart via the myelinated vagus and the special
visceral efferent pathways that regulate the striated muscles of the face, head,
and neck. Together, this linkage, between brainstem motor systems responsible
for cardiovascular functions and those necessary for regulating the face, head,
and neck, forms an integrated social engagement system.
With increased cortical development, the cortex exhibits greater control over
the brainstem via direct (e.g., corticobulbar) and indirect (e.g., corticoreticular)
neural pathways originating in the motor cortex and terminating in the source
nuclei of the myelinated motor fibers emerging from the brainstem (e.g., specific
neural pathways embedded within cranial nerves V, VII, IX, X, and XI). These
cranial nerves then extend from their source nuclei to control visceromotor
structures (i.e., heart, bronchi) as well as branchiomotor structures (muscles of
the face, head, and neck).
Specifically, the social engagement system includes the regulation of the
eyelids through the orbicularis oculi (e.g., social gaze and gesture), muscles of
facial expression (e.g., emotional expression), middle ear muscles (e.g.,
extracting human voice from background sounds), muscles of mastication (e.g.,
ingestion, sucking), laryngeal and pharyngeal muscles (e.g., vocalizing,
swallowing, breathing), and muscles of head turning and tilting (e.g., social
gesture and orientation). Collectively, these muscles act as filters for social
stimuli (i.e., observing others’ facial expressions and detecting prosody in
human voice), and they allow the expression of motor behaviors necessary for
engagement with the social environment.
Based on the polyvagal theory (see chapter 2), the development of the
mammalian myelinated vagus is critical in the development of the face–heart
connection, which links social behavior and autonomic regulation. Thus, with
more optimal vagal regulation, features of more adaptive social behavior
emerge. Without a functioning myelinated vagus, social behavior would be
compromised, and more primitive defensive strategies, such as fight-or-flight
mobilization and tantrums (mediated by the sympathetic nervous system) and
shutdown behaviors (mediated by the unmyelinated vagal system) would be
more frequently expressed. Clinically, the status of vagal myelination becomes
critical for the newborn and the young infant as they attempt to engage and
disengage the caregiver and to explore social reciprocity as a mechanism to
regulate physiology and behavior.

MODEL: AUTONOMIC STATE PROVIDES A NEURAL
PLATFORM FOR SOCIAL BEHAVIOR
The unique features of the autonomic nervous system that support mammalian
social behavior start to develop during the last trimester of fetal life. Specifically,
myelination of vagal efferent fibers from the NA to the sinoatrial node (i.e.,
cardiac pacemaker) begins during the last trimester. This process continues
during the first few months postpartum and can be monitored by quantifying the
amplitude of RSA. Regulation of the myelinated vagus (i.e., vagal brake)
provides a mechanism to rapidly increase metabolic output by releasing the
brake on the heart’s pacemaker (i.e., sinoatrial node). The release of the vagal
brake results in an instantaneous increase in heart rate. Subsequently, when the
metabolic demands decrease, inhibitory vagal influence on the heart is
reinstated, and heart rate instantaneously decreases. The regulation of the vagal
brake influences important developmental processes related to survival,
including (1) improved reactivity and recovery of the ingestive-vagal reflexes
involved during feeding, (2) expanded capacity to self-regulate and calm, and (3)
improved abilities to both spontaneously engage others and to be soothed by
others. This developmental time line is illustrated in Figure 8.1.
Prematurity, illness, or neglect may dampen the developmental trajectory of
the vagal circuit. Atypical maturation of this circuit may be reflected in
myelination of the vagus, interneuronal connections in the brainstem that form
the face–heart connection, and/or corticobulbar regulation of the brainstem
circuits regulating both vagal activity and the striated muscles of the face, head,
and neck. The consequences of these delays or disruptions in typical neural
maturation would be expressed as lower levels of RSA, less efficient reactivity
and recovery of the vagal brake, difficulties in behavioral state regulation, poor
affective tone, and diminished abilities for reciprocal social engagement
behaviors.

FIGURE 8.1. Developmental timeline relating myelination of the vagus to social behavior.
The myelinated vagus is not the sole mediator of autonomic state, in general,
or heart rate, specifically. Heart rate is influenced by intrinsic cardiac
mechanisms, surrounding thoracic anatomy, the sympathetic nervous system,
and the unmyelinated vagus originating in the dorsal nucleus of the vagus. The
development of the sympathetic nervous system and the unmyelinated vagal
circuit has not been extensively studied in the human fetus and has been
assumed to be functioning at term. Within our phylogenetic perspective, we
assume that these circuits are functioning at the start of the last trimester.
Shortly, we support this assumption with a brief review of the limited literature
focusing on studies of the embryological development of the central regulators
and peripheral pathways directly influencing heart rate or the contractility of the
heart. Although only the development of efferent (motor) fibers is discussed,
afferent (sensory) pathways play a vital role in both autonomic function and in
providing sufficient input to trigger normal neural development.
The development of the autonomic nervous system in the human fetus
mirrors the broader phylogenetic progression already described. The
phylogenetically oldest vertebrate autonomic system, which relies on
unmyelinated efferent vagal fibers originating from the dorsal motor nucleus of
the vagus (DMNX), is also, embryologically, the earliest system to develop in
utero. An immature, undifferentiated DMNX first appears in the brainstem at 9
weeks gestation (Cheng, Zhou, Qu, Ashwell, & Paxinos, 2004; Nara, Goto, &
Hamano, 1991). Magnocellular subdivisions become visible by 13 weeks, and
clear demarcation of DMNX subnuclei, including the lateral cardiomotor
subnucleus, occurs by 23 weeks. At 28 weeks, all magnocellular subnuclei are
considered essentially mature (Cheng et al., 2004). Some, however, including

Nara et al. (1991), believe that there may be some postnatal changes in the
DMNX, such as increased nuclear columnar length and volume. Even if present,
however, these postnatal changes are not considered to have much functional
significance or physiological consequence in the neonate.
The other major component of the parasympathetic, cardioinhibitory ANS is
the newest, myelinated vagal system, which originates in the NA. This system,
as predicted by the polyvagal theory, develops last in the fetus and continues
functional development well into the first postnatal year. Mature neurons appear
in the rostral NA by 8 or 9 weeks gestation and fill the nucleus by 12.5 weeks
(Brown, 1990). Unlike mature neurons in the lateral subnucleus of the DMNX,
however, axons of these mature neurons have not yet reached cardiac tissue to
exert cardioinhibitory effects. The functional significance of vagal fibers from
the NA depends heavily on myelination, which does not begin until 23 weeks
gestation, when nearly mature axon diameter is achieved (Wozniak & O’Rahilly,
1981). Myelination of NA vagal fibers increases linearly from 24 to 40 weeks
gestation and, again, continues actively during the first year postpartum (Pereyra
et al., 1992; Sachis et al., 1982).
Development of the sympathetic, cardioexcitatory ANS is less well described
in the literature. Phylogenetically, this largely catecholaminergic system appears
before the mammalian NA vagal system and after the older DMNX vagus.
According to the polyvagal theory, then, this system should begin development
in the human fetus sometime between the two parasympathetic systems.
Anatomically, sympathetic innervation of cardiac tissue is complex and difficult
to isolate. Postganglionic cardiomotor nuclei lie mostly within the cardiothoracic
and middle cervical ganglia, which lie caudal to the sympathetic superior
cervical ganglion. Functionally, sympathetic influence on the heart is also
varied. Unlike the two vagal circuits, which exert mostly chronotropic effects
(slowing heart rate), sympathetic activity leads to both chronotropic (increasing
heart rate) by innervating pacemaker tissue and inotropic (increasing cardiac
contractility) by innervating ventricular myocardium. Investigations using fetal
heart rate monitoring to infer sympathetic activity provide potential insight into
the development of this system. Using continuous 24-hour fetal heart rate
monitoring in 28 healthy women, who were 16–28 weeks pregnant, Kintraia,
Zarnadze, Kintraia, and Kashakashvili (2005) reported that fetal locomotor
activity increased between 16 and 20 weeks gestation. At this stage, increases in
activity are accompanied by corresponding increases in heart rate, which returns
to normal during “quiet” fetal periods. Since the vagal brake is not functional

during this period of fetal development, these increases in heart rate are most
likely due to activity in the sympathetic nervous system. Furthermore, the
authors interpret an absence of such a coordinated heart rate increase with
increased locomotion by 24 weeks gestation as “developmental retardation.”
Measurement of RSA can map the development of the myelinated vagus and
also enable dynamic monitoring of vagal reactivity and recovery elicited during
feeding to quantify the status of ingestive-vagal reflexes. The literature
documents that both amplitude of RSA and pattern of RSA responses during
feeding are sensitive indices of risk in preterm and term infants. Ingestive-vagal
reflexes elicited during feeding provide an opportunity early in development to
evaluate a neural circuit that later will be involved in social engagement
behaviors. Eliciting these reflexes provide an opportunity to exercise the neural
circuits coordinating both the striated muscles of the face and neck and the vagal
brake. As the infant develops, the brainstem structures involved in ingestive-
vagal reflexes are increasingly recruited by higher brain structures, which
regulate the facial and vocal features involved in reciprocal social interactions.
Thus, when brainstem ingestive-vagal reflexes are functional, the first year
postpartum is characterized by an increase in the efficiency with which
corticobulbar pathways recruit and regulate these same brainstem nuclei for the
purpose of social engagement. If, during early infancy, ingestive-vagal reflexes
are not efficiently working, then there will be difficulties in coordinating
sucking, swallowing, and breathing. Problems in regulating these survival-
related processes may provide a sensitive prognostic index leading to difficulties
not only in social behavior but also in the development of cognitive and
language skills that are dependent on appropriate behavioral and physiological
state regulation.
Changes in RSA represent a dynamic adjustment of the inhibitory action of
the vagus (vagal brake) on the heart. Functionally, the removal of the vagal
brake provides a physiological state that promotes vigilance as an intermediary
and precautionary psychological process to monitor risk in the environment. The
outcome of this assessment includes the induction of different physiological
states, either in which social behaviors can proceed, or in which defensive fight-
or-flight strategies associated with increased sympathetic excitation are
necessary. If defensive behaviors are not necessary to maintain or to negotiate
safety, then the rapid vagal regulatory mechanisms that dampen autonomic state
are reinstated, allowing the individual to calm and self-soothe. Further support
for this interpretation can be seen in the infant data in which suppression of RSA

is correlated with maternal reports of longer attention spans and being more
easily soothed (Huffman et al., 1998). For example, Huffman et al. (1998) found
that 12-week-old infants with higher baseline RSA expressed fewer negative
behaviors and were less disrupted by experimental procedures than age-matched
infants with lower baseline RSA. Moreover, consistent with the vagal brake
concept, the infants who decreased RSA during the laboratory assessment were
rated on maternal report temperament scales as having longer attention spans
and being more easily soothed.
The regulation of behavioral state is a critical determinant of the range of
social behaviors an individual can express. The underlying mechanisms
mediating behavioral state are tightly linked to the autonomic nervous system.
Investigation of the early maturational changes in vagal regulation of autonomic
state unmasks several of the behavioral features that infants exhibit. For
example, greater suppression of RSA during challenging situations is related to
better state regulation, greater self-soothing, more attentional control, and greater
capacity for social engagement (see chapter 7; Calkins, Graziano, & Keane,
2007; DeGangi, DiPietro, Porges, & Greenspan, 1991; Huffman et al., 1998;
Stifter & Corey, 2001).
The ability to regulate state follows a developmental trajectory during the
early part of life. As the neural circuits involved in state regulation become more
available to the developing child, there are parallel opportunities for social
engagement behaviors and the development of strong social bonds. Without the
dynamic, efficient myelinated vagus, it is difficult to regulate behavioral state
and to use the features of the social engagement system (i.e., facial expression,
vocal prosody), which at birth are involved in feeding behaviors (i.e., ingestive-
vagal reflexes). Developmental limitations in the vagal system, expressed as low
level of RSA and difficulties in regulating RSA, may lower thresholds to
negative or ambiguous environmental cues with resultant hyperreactivity and
severe limitations in the ability to self-soothe and calm.
Social behavior and the capacity to manage challenge are dependent on the
neural regulation of physiological state. The neural circuits involved in the
regulation of physiological state are modified during gestation and continue
during postnatal life. If these circuits are easily available and efficiently
functioning, then the laws of learning and the impact of experience can shape
behavior. However, if these circuits are not available, either as a function of
phase of development or during periods of increased environmental risk, then
state regulation is compromised, social skills are not easily learned, and social

bonds become difficult to establish. During most of the life span, the vagal brake
and the other features of the social engagement system are readily available and
provide opportunities for social learning to occur. Without the efficient vagal
brake turning off defensive systems and blunting their disruptive manifestations
(e.g., fight-or-flight behaviors), prosocial behavior is limited, and opportunities
for social learning and social bonding are minimized.
Co-author for this chapter was S. A. Furman.

PART III
SOCIAL COMMUNICATION
AND RELATIONSHIPS

CHAPTER 9
Vagal Tone and the Physiological Regulation of
Emotion
Because emotions are psychological processes, the experience and regulation
of emotion should be functionally dependent on the state of the nervous system.
If a major source of emotion variation is dependent on the nervous system, how
would this be evaluated? The goal of this chapter is to address this problem by
introducing vagal tone as a measurable organismic variable that contributes to
individual and developmental differences in the expression and regulation of
emotion.
We propose that understanding the mechanisms determining individual and
developmental differences in emotion expression and regulation might provide a
rationale for identifying subjects who differentially express the ability to regulate
emotion. Thus, there is the possibility that individual differences in the nervous
system might mediate the expression and regulation of emotion. Most research
on the autonomic correlates of emotion has focuses on sympathetic activation
(e.g., galvanic skin response); here, we attempt to demonstrate that individual
differences in parasympathetic tone are related to the regulation of emotion by
focusing on a construct called vagal tone, which reflects the vagal control of the
heart.
PHYSIOLOGY AND EMOTION: THE AUTONOMIC
NERVOUS SYSTEM
The autonomic nervous system (ANS) regulates homeostatic function and is
composed of two subsystems, the parasympathetic (PNS) and the sympathetic
(SNS) nervous systems. The PNS and SNS represent neural systems that

originate in the brainstem and contribute to the regulation of a variety of target
organs, including the eyes; lacrimal, salivary, and sweat glands; blood vessels;
heart; larynx, trachea, bronchi, and lungs; stomach; adrenal glands; kidneys;
pancreas; intestines; bladder; and external genitalia. In general, the PNS
promotes functions associated with growth and restorative processes. In contrast,
the SNS promotes increased metabolic output to deal with challenges from
outside the body. However, there are states that require dual excitation (e.g.,
sexual arousal). Conceptualizations of the ANS by Berntson, Cacioppo, and
Quigley (1991a) provide insight into the complex dynamic relation between SNS
and PNS processes.
In general, when a visceral organ is innervated by both the SNS and the PNS,
the effects are antagonistic. For example, SNS neurons dilate the pupils,
accelerate the heart, inhibit intestinal movements, and contract the vesical and
rectal sphincters. The PNS neurons constrict the pupils, slow the heart, potentiate
peristaltic movement, and relax vesical and rectal sphincters. The PNS deals
primarily with anabolic activities concerned with the restoration and
conservation of bodily energy and the resting of vital organs. In contrast,
stimulation of the SNS prepares the individual for the intense muscular action
required to protect and defend in response to external challenges. The SNS
quickly mobilizes the existing reserves of the body.
Darwin provides insight into the potential importance of PNS processes in
the regulation of emotions. Although Darwin defined emotions as facial
expressions, he acknowledged the dynamic relation between parasympathetic
structures and central nervous system activity that accompanied the spontaneous
expression of emotions. Darwin speculated that there were specific neural
pathways that provided the necessary communication between the brain states
and the specific pattern of autonomic activity (e.g., heart rate) associated with
emotions. In Darwin’s formulation, when emotion states occur, the beating of
the heart changes instantly, the changes in cardiac activity influences brain
activity, and the brainstem structures stimulate the heart via the cranial nerves
(i.e., vagus). Although Darwin did not elucidate the neurophysiological
mechanisms that translate the initial emotion expression to the heart, this
formulation provides us with three important points. First, by emphasizing the
afferent feedback from the heart to the brain, Darwin anticipated the views of
William James linking autonomic feedback to the experience of emotion.
Second, he acknowledged the afferent capacity of the vagus to transmit sensory
information from visceral organs independent of the spinal cord and the

sympathetics. Third, Darwin’s insight regarding the regulatory role of the
pneumogastric nerve (renamed the vagus at the end of the 19th century) in the
expression of emotions anticipates the major theme of this chapter.
Contemporary models of emotion and emotion regulation (i.e., Ekman,
Levenson, & Friesen, 1983; Schachter & Singer, 1962), as did their historical
antecedents, have focused on the sympathetic nervous system and ignored the
vagal system, the primary component of the PNS. Thus, although Darwin
speculated about the bidirectional communication between the brain and the
heart via the vagus more than 100 years ago, the importance of vagal afferents
and efferents in the expression, experience, and regulation of emotion has not
been addressed.
VAGAL TONE: BACKGROUND AND DEFINITION
The vagus is the Xth cranial nerve. It originates in the brainstem and projects,
independently of the spinal cord, to many organs in the body cavity, including
the heart and the digestive system. The vagus is not a single neural pathway but
rather a complex bidirectional system with myelinated branches linking the
brainstem and various target organs. These neural pathways allow direct and
rapid communication between brain structures and specific organs. Because the
vagus contains both efferent (i.e., motor) and afferent (i.e., sensory) fibers, it
promotes dynamic feedback between brain control centers and the target organs
to regulate homeostasis.
The peripheral autonomic nervous system is asymmetrical. The peripheral
target organs of the autonomic nervous system are clearly lateralized; for
example, the heart is oriented to the left, the stomach is tilted, one lung is larger,
and one kidney is higher. The neural wiring of the autonomic nervous system
requires asymmetry, and the central regulation via the vagus is lateralized.
Although asymmetry of cortical function is well known and has been theorized
to contribute to emotion regulation (see Fox, 1994), asymmetrical regulation of
autonomic function has been ignored.
The vagus is bilateral, with a left and a right branch. Each branch has two
source nuclei, with fibers originating either in the dorsal motor nucleus or in the
nucleus ambiguus. Traditional texts in neuroanatomy and neurophysiology (e.g.,
Truex & Carpenter, 1969; Williams, 1989) have focused on the dorsal motor
nucleus of the vagus and neglected both the asymmetry in the vagal pathways
and the important functions of the pathways originating from source nuclei in the

nucleus ambiguus.
The dorsal motor nucleus is lateralized. Pathways from the left and right
dorsal motor nucleus to the stomach have different regulatory functions. The left
dorsal motor nucleus innervates the cardiac and body portions of the stomach
that promote primarily secretion of gastric fluids (Kalia, 1981; Loewy & Spyer,
1990). The right dorsal motor nucleus innervates the lower portion of the
stomach that controls the pyloric sphincter regulating the emptying into the
duodenum (Fox & Powley, 1985; Pagani, Norman, & Gillis, 1988).
The nucleus ambiguus is also lateralized. While the right nucleus ambiguus
provides the primary vagal input to the sinoatrial (SA) node to regulate atrial rate
(Hopkins, 1987) and determine heart rate, the left nucleus ambiguus provides the
primary vagal input to the atrioventricular (AV) node to regulate ventricular rate
(Thompson, Felsten, Yavorsky, & Natelson, 1987). Given the ipsilateral control
of efferent pathways regulating the nucleus ambiguus, characteristics of right-
side brain damage are associated with defective right nucleus ambiguus
regulation. In this manner, the observed deficits in prosody (e.g., Ross, 1981)
and in heart rate changes during attention-demanding tasks (Yokoyama,
Jennings, Ackles, Hood, & Boller, 1987) associated with right-side brain damage
implicate the right nucleus ambiguus in the regulation of vocal intonation and
attention. Asymmetrical nucleus ambiguus regulation is less clear in other
organs, such as the soft palate, the pharynx, and the esophagus.
Functionally, the dorsal motor nucleus is involved with the vegetative
functions of digestion and respiration. In contrast, the nucleus ambiguus is more
involved with processes associated with motion, emotion, and communication.
For example, rapid mobilization of the body may be achieved by regulating heart
rate via removal of vagal input to the SA node. Vocal intonation, mediated by
vagal connections to the larynx, is intimately related to the processes of emotion
and communication. Facial expressions, critical to the expression of emotion and
the signaling of information, are related to vagal function. In cats, vagal afferent
fibers have direct influences on facial motoneurons (Tanaka & Asahara, 1981).
Thus, the vagus originating from the dorsal motor nucleus might be labeled the
vegetative vagus, in contrast to the emotive or smart vagus originating from the
nucleus ambiguus. Table 9.1 provides a list of target organs associated with each
branch of the vagus.
Sympathetic innervation of the heart is also asymmetrical (Randall & Rohse,
1956). Moreover, lateralized sympathetic input to the heart has been
hypothesized to relate to emotion state (Lane & Schwartz, 1987). As with vagal

control of the heart and larynx, research has demonstrated that damage to the
right hemisphere has greater sympathetic consequences than does left
hemisphere damage (Hachinski, Oppenheimer, Wilson, Guiraudon, & Cechetto,
1992).
The central control of the vagus is ipsilateral. Thus, the right vagus originates
in either the right dorsal motor nucleus or the right nucleus ambiguus. As noted,
the right nucleus ambiguus contains the primary source for the branch of the
right vagus that provides input to the SA node. Thus, output from the nucleus
ambiguus can be monitored by measuring changes in vagal control of the SA
node. The SA node is the primary pacemaker of the heart. Vagal stimulation of
the SA node delays the onset of the heartbeat (i.e., slows heart rate), and vagal
withdrawal (i.e., a delay or blocking of the neural transmission) shortens the
time between heartbeats (i.e., speeds heart rate). Most rapid heart rate changes
(i.e., chronotropic mechanisms) are mediated by the vagus. When metabolic
demands increase, such as during exercise or fight-or-flight demands, the
sympathetic nervous system influences heart rate. Thus, the study of vagal
control of the heart might provide an important window on the rapid autonomic
changes associated with gradations of emotion state.
TABLE 9.1. Target Organs Associated With the Dorsal Motor Nucleus
and the Nucleus Ambiguus
Dorsal Motor NucleusNucleus Ambiguus
Trachea
Heart
Lungs
Soft palate
Stomach
Pharynx
Intestines
Larynx
Pancreas
Esophagus
Colon
Bronchi
VAGAL TONE: POTENTIAL LINK WITH EMOTION
An easily accessible method for evaluating the vagal control of the SA node (i.e.,
cardiac vagal tone) is to quantify respiratory sinus arrhythmia (RSA). RSA is
characterized by a rhythmic increase and decrease in heart rate synchronous with
breathing. The heart rate increase is associated with phases of inspiration, when

respiratory mechanisms in the brainstem attenuate the vagal efferent action on
the heart. The heart rate decrease is associated with phases of expiration, when
the vagal efferent influence to the heart is reinstated.
Changes in RSA amplitude in response to sensory, cognitive, and visceral
challenges represents a “central command” to regulate vagal efferents
originating in the right nucleus ambiguus and terminating in the heart, soft
palate, pharynx, larynx, bronchi, and esophagus. These changes in nucleus
ambiguus regulation of peripheral autonomic activity support the expression of
motion, emotion, and communication by regulating metabolic output (i.e., shifts
in heart rate) and organs involved in the production of vocalizations (see chapter
13).
When there are no challenging environmental demands, the autonomic
nervous system, through the vagus, services the needs of the internal viscera to
enhance growth and restoration. However, in response to environmental
demands, homeostatic processes are compromised, and the autonomic nervous
system supports increased metabolic output to deal with these external
challenges by vagal withdrawal and sympathetic excitation. By mediating the
distribution of resources, the central nervous system regulates the strength and
latency of autonomic responses to deal with internal and external demands.
Perceptions and assumed threats to survival, independent of the actual physical
characteristics of the stimulation, may promote a massive withdrawal of
parasympathetic tone and a reciprocal excitation of sympathetic tone. These
changes promote fight-or-flight behaviors. Less intense environmental demands,
often associated with emotion expressions, might be characterized by less
withdrawal of parasympathetic tone independent of or in concert with slight
increases in sympathetic tone. This trade-off between internal and external needs
is monitored and regulated by the central nervous system.
Vagal tone measured via RSA has been documented to be related to affect,
attention, and metabolic demands (see later discussion). Although the vagus is
bilateral, the right branch originating in the nucleus ambiguus is the primary
determinant of RSA. This laterality in the vagus is not a developmental or an
individual difference. Rather, the laterality is dependent on the neurophysiology
and the neuroanatomy of the mammalian nervous system. In the mammalian
nervous system, the right side of the brainstem provides the primary central
regulation of homeostasis and physiological reactivity. Thus, right-brainstem
structures initiate peripheral physiological states via shifts in vagal tone to
facilitate the processes of attention, the expression of emotion, and the initiation

of shifts in metabolic output.
THE RIGHT HEMISPHERE: THE REGULATION OF
EMOTION
Right hemisphere function, evaluated via electroencephalography (EEG) or
disrupted by localized damage, is related to the same cluster of behaviors that
has been linked to the vagal tone measure. Research demonstrates that the right
hemisphere is implicated in both the expression and the interpretation of
emotions (e.g., Bear, 1983; Heilman, Bowers, & Valenstein, 1985; Pimental &
Kingsbury, 1989; Tucker, 1981) and in the regulation of attention (e.g., Heilman
& Van Den Abell, 1980; Mesulam, 1981; Pimental & Kingsbury, 1989; Voeller,
1986). Research has also linked right hemisphere deficits with aprosody or lack
of emotion expression in speech (e.g., Ross, 1981; Ross & Mesulam, 1979;
Zurif, 1974) and attenuated autonomic reactivity (e.g., Heilman, Schwartz, &
Watson, 1978). Several investigators have argued that the right hemisphere
provided the primary control of emotion (for detailed reviews, see Molfese &
Segalowitz, 1988; Pimental & Kingsbury, 1989; Silberman & Weingartner,
1986).
EEG research has been used to provide support for laterality theories of
emotion. Fox and colleagues (e.g., Dawson, 1994; Fox, 1994; Fox & Davidson,
1984) present a model of emotion expression in which positive (e.g., interest)
emotions are associated with the left hemisphere and negative emotions (e.g.,
disgust or distress) with the right. Asymmetry of hemispheric control of negative
and positive affect has also been posited by Tucker (1981). Other laterality
theories focus primarily on the role of the right hemisphere in the regulation of
negative emotions and fight-or-flight behaviors (for a review, see Silberman &
Weingartner, 1986). The data strongly support the relation between right
hemisphere EEG activity and the expression of negative emotions in infants,
children, and adults; however, research demonstrating the relation between left
hemisphere EEG activity and the expression of positive emotions is less
conclusive.
In children, right hemisphere dysfunction has been associated with
attentional, social, and emotional problems. Voeller (1986) reported data on 16
children with unilateral right hemisphere lesion or dysfunction as assessed by
neuropsychological exam and/or CAT scan. Fifteen of these children were
extremely distractible and inattentive, meeting the DSM-III criteria for attention

deficit disorder; moreover, eight were also hyperactive. Eight children were shy
and withdrawn, sharing some of the behavioral characteristics of the inhibited
child described by Kagan (1994), and nine expressed atypical emotion
expression (i.e., prosody, facial expression, and gesture). Most of these children
made little eye contact with others, and virtually all had poor relationship with
peers.
In their survey of studies with both normal and lesions subjects, Silberman
and Weingartner (1986) suggested that the right hemisphere is superior for
recognizing emotional aspects of stimuli. They propose that right hemisphere
dominance for emotion regulation reflects a nervous system organization that
gives priority to avoidance or defensive mechanisms that have a high survival
value. By inference, these avoidance and defensive mechanisms require massive
and immediate shifts in autonomic function.
THE RIGHT HEMISPHERE: AUTONOMIC REGULATION
AND REACTIVITY
The right side of the brain also plays a special role in the regulation of emotion.
Data supporting laterality theories of emotion have been based on studies of
electrophysiological recordings from the scalp (e.g., Fox, 1994) and
neuropsychological studies of dysfunction in individuals with brain damage
(e.g., Silberman & Weingartner, 1986). We propose a convergent approach by
emphasizing the right brain’s regulation of peripheral autonomic activity.
Asymmetry in the control of the autonomic nervous system has been
documented in the previous sections. Because peripheral organs are not
symmetrical in shape or placement, it is not surprising that the neural control of
the autonomic nervous system is lateralized. For example, the heart is displaced
to the left, with the right vagus going to the SA node and the left vagus going to
the AV node. Other organs with dual vagal innervation are often tilted (e.g., the
stomach and intestines), are located higher on one side (e.g., the kidneys), or are
larger on one side (e.g., the lungs).
Emphasis on the asymmetry of autonomic organs has implications for the
evolution of central regulatory systems and cortical development. In mammals,
the peripheral autonomic organs and brainstem structures are similar across
species. Asymmetrical neural control of autonomic processes is characteristic of
mammals. However, the process of encephalization differs among mammalian
species, with man possessing a uniquely large cerebral cortex. Because the

neural control of the vagus is ipsilateral (e.g., the left vagus originates in the left
side of the brainstem), the right hemisphere—including the right cortical and
subcortical structures—would promote the efficient regulation of autonomic
function via the source nuclei in the brainstem. For example, neuroanatomical
and electrophysiological studies demonstrate the important regulatory function
of the right central nucleus of the amygdala in regulating the right nucleus
ambiguus.
We propose that the functional dominance of the right side of the brain in
regulating autonomic function has implications for specialization of motor and
language dominance on the left side of the brain. The right-side responsibilities
of regulating homeostasis and modulating physiological state in response to both
internal (i.e., visceral) and external (i.e., environmental) feedback potentially
enabled the control of other functions to evolve on the left side of the brain. With
greater encephalization, which is characteristic of more cognitive mammalian
species such as man, lateralized specialization is more observable.
A sharing of central control of voluntary and emotion-homeostatic processes
would enable the individual to express complex voluntary levels of
communication and movement via the left side of the brain and more intense
emotion-homeostatic processes via the right side of the brain. If these processes
are lateralized, they might have a degree of autonomous regulation. Of course,
the central nervous system is complex and has, in many instances, both
ipsilateral and contralateral communications. This provides a small percentage of
individuals with central control of both language and dominant hand motor
movement on the right instead of the left side of the brain. However, owing to
the asymmetry of the peripheral autonomic organs and the medullary control of
the autonomic nervous system, the right side of the brain is always dominant in
the regulation of autonomic function and, thus, emotion.
Data from stimulation studies using left and right visual fields (e.g.,
Hugdahl, Franzon, Andersson, & Walldebo, 1983; Weisz, Szilagyi, Lang, &
Adam, 1992) indicate that activation of the right cortex results in larger and
more reliable autonomic responses. Additionally, studies of brain-damaged
individuals have shown that right hemisphere damage or dysfunction is
associated with a severe deficit in the facial, vocal, and autonomic components
of the expression of emotions (Pimental & Kingsbury, 1989; Silberman &
Weingartner, 1986). Similar asymmetry of the sympathetic nervous system has
been reported, with the right stellate ganglion having greater cardiovascular
control than the left stellate ganglion (Yanowitz, Preston, & Abildskov, 1966).

However, no research has focused on the assessment of cardiac vagal tone in
subjects with right hemisphere disorders. Since cardiac vagal tone is
neurophysiologically linked to the right hemisphere regulation of autonomic
activity, it might index the individual’s functional capacity to regulate autonomic
function and to express emotion.
THE VAGAL CIRCUIT OF EMOTION REGULATION: A
MODEL
The right vagus and, thus, cardiac vagal tone are associated with processes
involving the expression and regulation of motion, emotion, and communication.
These processes enable individuals to approach and/or withdraw from objects
and events in their environment. The regulation of attention, a major substrate
for appropriate social behaviors, is included among these processes. Thus, the
approach/withdrawal dimension includes movement in psychological as well as
physical space. Vagal regulation of the heart modulates metabolic output to
physically approach or withdraw; vagal modulation of vocal intonations
provides clues indicating whether an individual is safe or dangerous to approach;
feedback from our own facial muscles to the vagus and the ability to pay
attention to social cues, including another person’s facial muscles and verbal
commands, allow us to negotiate appropriate approach or withdrawal behaviors.
Consistent with Schneirla (1959), who proposed that all behaviors could be
described in terms of approach and withdrawal actions, the dimensions of
approach and withdrawal play a central role in our model of the vagal regulation
of emotion. Schneirla assumed that stimulus intensities modulated autonomic
function to produce sympathetic dominance during high intensities and
parasympathetic dominance during low intensities. However, according to our
model of emotion regulation, sympathetic modulation is not always necessary,
and the vagal system can promote approach or withdrawal behaviors via the
right nucleus ambiguus control of heart rate and the intonation of vocalizations.
The vagal circuit of emotion regulation is schematized in Figure 9.1. The
circuit focuses on right hemisphere regulation of emotion states via vagal
projections from the nucleus ambiguus to the larynx and the SA node of the
heart. The vagal control of the right side of the larynx produces changes in vocal
intonation associated with the expression of emotions. The vagal control of the
SA node produces a cardiovascular state associated with specific emotions and
facilitating attention or fight-or-flight behaviors.

Emotion process may originate on a cortical level or may be initiated and/or
regulated by afferent feedback from visceral organs. For example, if the emotion
were triggered by a psychological process (e.g., perception of a specific
stimulus), the following stages may occur: (1) cortical areas stimulate the
amygdala; (2) the central nucleus of the amygdala stimulates the nucleus
ambiguus; and (3) the right vagus regulates heart rate and vocal intonation by
communicating with the SA node and the right side of the larynx. Regulation of
the emotion response also may follow a specific path: (1) sensory information
regarding the status of visceral organs stimulates vagal afferents, lateralized
vagal afferents stimulate the nucleus tractus solitarius in the brainstem, and
projections from the nucleus tractus solitarius stimulate the cortex, amygdala,
and/or nucleus ambiguus to regulate the emotion expression; or (2) the emotion
state could be initiated by the visceral afferent (e.g., stomach pains) and trigger
the cortical, subcortical, brainstem, and autonomic responses associated with
emotion.

FIGURE 9.1 Schematization of the vagal circuit of emotion regulation.
Interference with transmission on any level of the circuit may result in
affective disorders, including emotion regulation problems or severe mood
states. Dysfunction in the circuit could be caused by brain damage, neural
transmission problems due to drugs, or learned dysfunction. The learning model
is based on the demonstrations that classical conditioning and other associative
learning paradigms that modify autonomic function are dependent on cortical-
autonomic and amygdaloid-autonomic pathways. Thus, autonomic afferents to
or from the nucleus ambiguus may be amplified, attenuated, or blocked via

neuropathy, drugs, or associative learning to produce different affective states.
The vagal circuit of emotion regulation that we propose makes several
important advances in the conceptualization of the physiology of emotion and
emotion regulation. It introduces the importance of the vagal system in the
physiology of emotion and emphasizes the bidirectional (i.e., afferent feedback)
physiological characteristics of the vagus. Furthermore, the vagal circuit is
neuroanatomically dependent on right medullary control of autonomic function
via the nucleus ambiguus, has a noninvasive window of measurement via the
quantification of RSA, explains individual differences due both to defects in
neurophysiology and to associative learning, and is consistent with brain damage
research. Finally, by emphasizing afferent feedback and communications among
various levels of the nervous system, the vagal circuit of emotion regulation
provides an explanation for the effectiveness of specific interventions (e.g., non-
nutritive sucking, massage, eating, exercise, yoga, and cognitive strategies) in
the regulation of emotions.
VAGAL REGULATION AND EMOTION
Interest in vagal tone as a regulatory mechanism in the expression of individual
differences in autonomic function is not new. Eppinger and Hess introduced the
concept of vagal tone as an individual difference construct in their monograph
Die Vagotonie (1910). They described a form of autonomic dysfunction for
which there was no known anatomical basis: “It is often unsatisfactory for the
physician . . . to find that he must be content to make a diagnosis of ‘Neurosis’.
The symptomatology and the impossibility of establishing any anatomical basis
for the disease always remain the most conspicuous points in formulating the
diagnosis of a neurosis of an internal organ” (p. 1). The objective of their
monograph was to identify a physiological substrate that could explain this
anomaly and thus provide the mechanisms for a variety of clinically observed
neuroses.
Although Eppinger and Hess were interested in clinical medicine, their case
studies described a problem in the regulation of autonomic function that might
be intimately related to the regulation of emotion. Their observations are
relevant to our interest in the regulation and expression of emotion for four
important reasons: first, they alerted us to the importance of the vagal system in
mediating physiological and psychological responses; second, they related

individual differences in physiology (i.e., vagal tone) to individual differences in
behavior (i.e., neuroses); third, they recognized the pharmacological sensitivity
of the vagal system to cholinergic agents; and fourth, they brought to the
attention of the medical community the commonality of the vagal innervation of
various peripheral organs.
In our model of vagal regulation, we adopt a stimulus-organism-response
approach. The expression and regulation of emotions are the responses, which
are dually determined by the stimulus and the organism. It is not just the stimuli
that elicit a response; rather, the response is determined by a complex system of
behavioral-physiological responses that involve perception of the stimulus,
afferent feedback, and the regulation of approach-withdrawal behaviors via the
vagal system. Because of the link between the right vagus and the processes of
motion, emotion, and communication, individuals with low vagal tone and/or
poor vagal regulation would be expected to exhibit difficulties in regulating
emotion state, in appropriately attending to social cues and gestures, and in
expressing contingent and appropriate emotions. Thus, the possibility exists that
the vagal system may provide a physiological metaphor for the regulation of
emotion states. Individual differences in vagal tone may index organismic
factors related to the competency of the individual to react physiologically and to
self-regulate.
VAGAL TONE RESEARCH
In testing our model of vagal regulation, we have been assessing empirically
whether individuals with low vagal tone and/or difficulties in regulating vagal
tone have problems with the expression and/or regulation of motion, emotion,
and communication. The potential to move, express emotion, and communicate
enables an individual to maneuver along a continuum of approach–withdrawal
with the environment. Several behaviors are critical to this function, including
behavioral reactivity, facial expressivity, and emotion regulation.
If vagal tone mediates the expression and regulation of emotion,
developmental shifts in vagal tone might contribute to the observed
developmental shifts in affective expression. Research has demonstrated that
vagal control of the autonomic nervous system increases developmentally as the
nervous system matures. We have reported a relation between gestational age
and vagal tone in premature neonates (Porges, 1983) and a monotonic increase

in vagal tone from birth through the first 18 days postpartum in rats (Larson &
Porges, 1982). In the rat pups, these changes were paralleled by increased
organization of behavior, including enhanced state regulation, exploration, and
attention. Current longitudinal research with human infants has demonstrated
that vagal tone increases monotonically from 3 to 13 months (Izard et al., 1991).
To evaluate whether vagal tone as a construct has properties that may be
useful in explaining the expression of emotion and the regulation of affective
state, the following sections review research on the relation between vagal tone
and variables in the domains of reactivity, the expression of emotion, and self-
regulation.
Reactivity
Here we provide theoretical justification and empirical support for the
hypothesis that individual differences in vagal tone are related to heart rate and
behavioral reactivity in young infants. The core proposition is that vagal tone
indexes a dimension of central nervous system organization that disposes an
individual to be hypo-or hyperreactive. Thus, subjects with higher levels of
vagal tone should have more organized (i.e., consistent) autonomic responses
with shorter latency and greater magnitude autonomic responses.
Before 1970, heart rate responses were defined as rapid increases and
decreases to discrete stimuli. These response patterns were interpreted as an
autonomic correlate of an orienting response (see Graham & Clifton, 1966).
Research was not directed at the physiological mechanisms that may mediate
individual differences in autonomic reactivity. Observed variations in heart rate
response characteristics were assumed to be dependent on both the physical
parameters of the stimulus and the subject’s previous history with the stimulus.
Individual differences that could not be attributed to these two sources were
treated as experimental (i.e., measurement) error.
In the early 1970s, our research demonstrated that individual differences in
spontaneous base-level heart rate variability were related to heart rate reactivity.
These studies stimulated our interest in the vagal mechanisms mediating heart
rate variability and in the development of methods to quantify vagal influences
on the heart. The first studies (Porges, 1972, 1973) demonstrated, in a sample of
college students, that individual differences in heart rate variability assessed
during baseline conditions were related to heart rate responses and reaction time
performance. These studies were followed by experiments with newborn infants

that demonstrated a relation between baseline heart rate variability and the
magnitude of heart rate responses to simple visual and auditory stimuli.
Newborn infants with higher baseline heart rate variability reacted with larger
heart rate responses to the onset and offset of auditory stimuli (Porges, Arnold,
& Forbes, 1973) and with shorter latency responses to the onset of an increase in
illumination (Porges, Stamps, & Walter, 1974). When the illumination was
decreased, only the high heart rate variability subjects responded. Consistent
with these findings, only the neonates with higher heart rate variability exhibited
a conditioned heart rate response (Stamps & Porges, 1975).
Reports from other studies measuring RSA are consistent with the theme that
vagal tone is an index of reactivity. Porter, Porges, and Marshall (1988)
demonstrated in a sample of normal newborns that individual differences in RSA
were correlated with heart rate reactivity to circumcision. Neonates with higher
amplitude RSA exhibited not only larger heart rate accelerations but also lower
fundamental cry frequencies in response to the surgical procedures, the latter
having been hypothesized to be associated with greater vagal influences (see
Lester & Zeskind, 1982). Consistent with these findings, Porter and Porges
(1988) demonstrated in premature infants that individual differences in RSA
tone are related to the heart rate response during lumbar punctures.
Behavioral reactivity and irritability in response to environmental stimuli
assessed with the Neonatal Behavioral Assessment Scale (Brazelton, 1984) are
also associated with vagal tone. In a sample of full-term healthy neonates,
DiPietro, Larson, and Porges (1987) found that neonates who were breast-fed
had higher amplitude RSA, were more reactive, and required more effort to test.
DiPietro and Porges (1991) evaluated the relation between RSA and behavioral
reactivity to gavage with a sample of preterm neonates. Gavage is a commonly
used method to feed premature infants by passing food through a tube inserted
into the stomach via the nasal or oral passages. Individual differences in RSA
were significantly correlated with behavioral reactivity to the gavage method of
feeding.
Similar relations between RSA and reactivity have been reported for older
infants. Linnemeyer and Porges (1986) found that 6-month-old infants with
higher amplitude RSA were more likely to look longer at novel stimuli, and only
those with high-amplitude RSA exhibited significant heart rate reactivity to the
visual stimuli. Richards (1985, 1987) reported convergent findings that infants
with higher amplitude RSA were less distractible and had larger decelerative
heart rate responses to visual stimuli. Huffman et al. (1998) observed that high-

amplitude RSA at 3 months of age habituated to novel visual stimuli more
rapidly than those with low-amplitude RSA; the former were more likely to
suppress RSA during attention-demanding tasks and received a better attention
score than the latter.
In summary, vagal tone mediates the behavioral and emotional response of
the organism, and the RSA, as an index of vagal tone, provides a measure of
behavioral and emotional reactivity. Neonates, infants, children, and adults with
higher amplitude RSA exhibit appropriate autonomic reactivity and, in turn,
appropriate behavioral, autonomic, and emotional responses to stimulation.
Expression of Emotion
Few studies have investigated individual differences in vagal tone as a mediating
variable indexing individual differences in facial expressivity. There are two
important reasons for posing this research question. First, both autonomic and
facial responses have been theoretically associated with the expression of
emotions. Second, measurement of RSA may provide an index of the neural
organization necessary for facial expressions—a hypothesis suggested by the
nature of the neurophysiological mechanisms that mediate facial expressions and
autonomic reactions. Facial expressions and autonomic reactions associated with
emotion states are controlled by brainstem structures that are in close proximity
(i.e., the source nuclei of the facial nerve and the vagus). Quite often the facial
nerve is included as the part of the “vagus complex.” Therefore, if expressivity is
assumed to be an individual difference determined by the neural tone of the
facial nerve, measurement of the neural tone of the vagus might be related to the
expressivity of the infant. Thus, vagal tone, monitored during a nonstressed
period, might index a neural propensity to produce facial expressions.
Support for this hypothesis comes from studies that have related resting
levels of heart rate variability to expressivity. Field, Woodson, Greenberg, and
Cohen (1982) reported that newborn infants exhibiting greater resting heart rate
variability were more expressive, and Fox and Gelles (1984) found that 3-
month-old infants with higher resting heart rate variability displayed a longer
duration of interest expressions. Consistent with these findings, Stifter, Fox, and
Porges (1989) evaluated the relation between RSA and expressivity in 5-month-
old infants and found that infants with higher amplitude RSA displayed more
interest, more joy, and more look-away behaviors toward the stranger.

Self-Regulation
Self-regulation is a difficult process to operationalize. Behaviors as diverse as
sustained attention, facial expressions, and latency to soothe can be interpreted
as regulatory. Several studies have demonstrated the relation between measures
of cardiac vagal tone and attention (for a review, see chapter 4). In general,
higher vagal tone and proper suppression of vagal tone during an attention-
demanding task are related to better performance. More important for the
discussion of vagal tone and emotion self-regulation, indices of cardiac vagal
tone (e.g., RSA) have also been shown to be related to the ability to self-soothe.
In both full-term and premature newborns, the ability to self-soothe is
inversely related to vagal tone as measured by the amplitude of RSA. The higher
vagal tone neonates are more irritable and exhibit greater difficulty in self-
soothing. However, a subsequent increasing capacity to self-soothe is clearly
seen in the high vagal tone neonates. One might speculate that the high vagal
tone neonate’s reactivity elicits more caregiving from the mother and that, once
such an infant becomes physiologically stable, the capacity for self-soothing is
consequently enhanced. Thus, the self-regulatory demands might be different for
the neonate and for the older infant, and vagal tone might index this propensity
to self-regulate under changing developmental demands. Support for this
hypothesis comes from a study of 3-month-old infants that found significant
relations between amplitude of RSA and soothability (Huffman et al., 1998);
high base-level amplitude RSA was correlated with a low soothing score (i.e.,
little soothing was required) and a high Rothbart soothability score (i.e., distress
was easily reduced).
The studies just summarized support the hypothesis that base-level vagal
tone measured by the amplitude of RSA is an important determinant of self-
regulatory autonomic and behavioral responses. Unfortunately, the relation is
more complex, and there are infants with high vagal tone who do not suppress
vagal tone under regulatory demands and who show poor emotion regulation
(DeGangi, DiPietro, Greenspan, & Porges, 1991; Doussard-Roosevelt, Walker,
Portales, Greenspan, & Porges, 1990). According to Greenspan (1991), infants
older than 6 months of age who exhibit fussiness, irritability, poor self-calming,
intolerance to change, and/or a hyperalert state of arousal are best described as
being regulatory disordered.
Preliminary data suggest two important points about infants with regulatory
disorders. First, these infants tend to have high vagal tone. Second, these infants
tend to exhibit a deficit in the ability to suppress vagal tone during attention-

demanding situations. Assessed at 9 months of age, this inability to suppress
vagal tone predicts behavior problems at 3 years (see chapter 7) and at 54
months (Dale et al., in press). It appears that these “fussy babies” are
hyperreactive not only to environmental stimuli but also to visceral feedback.
The relation between higher vagal tone and greater reactivity is supported, but
the relation between vagal tone and the ability to self-regulate, assessed via
behavior and the suppression of vagal tone during tasks, is not consistent with
that observed with normal infants.
CONCLUSIONS
What does vagal tone convey about an individual’s ability to regulate and
express emotion? To answer this question, we have proposed a model that
integrates information regarding lateral brain function with the regulation of the
peripheral autonomic nervous system. The model is based on the following
observations.
1. The peripheral autonomic nervous system is asymmetrical.
2. The medullary regulation of the autonomic nervous system is also
asymmetrical, with structures on the right side exhibiting greater control
of physiological responses associated with emotion.
3. The right nucleus ambiguus is a source nucleus of the right vagus, which
provides control of the larynx and SA node of the heart and controls vocal
intonation and cardiac vagal tone.
4. The right central nucleus of the amygdala has direct influences on the right
nucleus ambiguus to promote the laryngeal and cardiovascular responses
associated with emotion (e.g., increased pitch of vocalization and
increased heart rate).
5. Stimuli that are processed primarily by the right hemisphere produce
greater cardiovascular responses than stimuli processed by the left
hemisphere.
6. Damage to the right hemisphere blunts facial expression, vocal intonation,
and autonomic reactivity.
Although each of these points has been documented, only recently has an
experiment tested the proposed model linking vagal tone to right hemispheric

regulation of emotion (Dufey, Hrtado, Fernandez, Manes, & Ibanez, in press).
Since RSA is a sensitive measure of the input to the SA node from the right
nucleus ambiguus, it provides a noninvasive measure of right hemisphere
capacity to process emotion stimuli and to regulate emotional responses. To test
this model adequately, it will be necessary to conduct experiments to evaluate
measures of vagal tone and vagal reactivity of individuals with known right
hemisphere disorders and evaluate covariations between individual differences
in vagal tone and vagal reactivity and the expression and interpretation of
emotions in non–brain-damaged subjects.
Providing evidence in support of this model, previous studies have addressed
the relation between RSA and three dimensions related to the expression and
regulation of emotion: reactivity, expressivity, and self-regulation. The literature
and our ongoing research permit the following generalizations.
First, independent of developmental stage, RSA as an index of cardiac vagal
tone is highly correlated with autonomic reactivity; individuals with higher
amplitude RSA consistently exhibit larger and more reliable autonomic
responses. Second, the relation between RSA and emotion expressivity appears
to be dependent on development. A preliminary study has demonstrated that
higher amplitude RSA was associated with greater facial expressivity in 5-
month-old infants but failed to establish any such relation in 10-month-old
infants. These data suggest that there is a developmental shift in the
neurophysiological control of fa-cial expressivity: as infants become older, facial
expressivity may become more dependent on higher brain control and less
related to individual differences in brainstem function, manifest in the tonic
outflow of cranial nerves (see chapter 8).
Third, independent of developmental stage, RSA is correlated with self-
regulation. Individuals with high-amplitude RSA consistently suppress RSA or
heart rate variability to enhance the intake of information from the environment.
Fourth, there is a subset of individuals who have high vagal tone and who do not
suppress RSA or heart rate variability during information processing. These
individuals appear to have a regulatory disorder that is displayed on both
behavioral and physiological levels; regulatory disordered infants are often
labeled as fussy because of their continuous crying and disorganized behaviors,
and they have difficulty self-soothing and maintaining a calm state (Dale et al.,
in press).
Finally, as the infant matures, the range of expressivity increases, the self-
regulation of emotion is enhanced, and vagal tone increases; in the course of

normal development, the increased myelination and regulation of autonomic
function associated with enhanced vagal tone parallels the range and control of
emotion states (see chapter 8). Thus, on both developmental and individual
difference levels, vagal tone is clearly related to the processes of reactivity,
expressivity, and self-regulation.
We introduce vagal tone as a physiological construct that is useful in
explaining individual and developmental differences in the expression and
regulation of emotion. As an organizing construct, vagal tone is useful in
integrating central, autonomic, and psychological components of emotion. Vagal
tone, as measured by RSA, may index individual differences in the homeostatic
capacity of the autonomic nervous system to foster rapid expression and
attenuation of sympathetic reactions. This function is dependent on neural
regulation of the reciprocal relation between the antagonistic branches of the
autonomic nervous system.
During emotion states, normal homeostatic function is perturbed to express
emotions. Initially, sympathetic activity is expressed owing primarily to the
withdrawal of the antagonistic vagal tone. Even without discrete sympathetic
excitation, the vagal withdrawal will enhance the expression of sympathetic
activity when the two systems have antagonistic influences on specific organs.
The vagal withdrawal triggers the autonomic correlates of emotions.
If the emotion state is prolonged, the physiological state will be maintained
by activation of sympathetic and endocrine systems. Excessive sympathetic
activity reflects a deviation from normal homeostatic autonomic function, which
then elicits vagal activity to self-regulate and return the autonomic state to
homeostasis. In individuals with high vagal tone and appropriate vagal
regulation capacities, the autonomic nervous system has the capacity to react
(i.e., appropriate reactivity and expressivity) and to return rapidly to homeostasis
(i.e., self-regulation and self-soothing).
The relation among the right hemisphere, the right vagus, and the processes
involved in the expression and regulation of motion, emotion, and
communication makes apparent the relevance of examining RSA in studies of
emotion regulation. RSA and RSA regulation in the context of the vagal circuit
of emotion regulation that we proposed may provide the physiological measures
of the individual’s ability to regulate motion, emotion, and communication.
SUMMARY

On the basis of current knowledge of neuroanatomy and our previous research
with cardiac vagal tone, we have proposed the vagal circuit of emotion
regulation. The vagal circuit of emotion regulation incorporates lateral brain
function with the regulation of the peripheral autonomic nervous system in the
expression of emotion. The vagus and the vagal circuit do not function
independently of other neurophysiological and neuroendocrine systems.
Research on brain activity (see Dawson, 1994; Fox, 1994) and research on
adrenocortical activity (see Stansbury & Gunnar, 1994) demonstrate that cortisol
levels are related to emotion states and to individual differences similar to those
that we have investigated.
The vagal circuit emphasizes not only the vagus but also the lateralization of
specific brain structures in emotion regulation. The emphasis of the vagal circuit
on right-brainstem structures stimulates several testable hypotheses regarding the
function of specific structures in the right brain in emotion regulation. These
speculations are consistent with other reports (see Dawson, 1994; Fox, 1994)
describing asymmetrical EEG activity during expressed emotions. Moreover, the
vagal circuit does not exist independently of the brain structures and peptides
systems regulating cortisol (see Stansbury & Gunnar, 1994). Areas in the
brainstem (see chapters 12 and 19) regulating vagal activity are also sensitive to
the peptides that regulate cortisol (e.g., oxytocin, vasopressin, and corticotropin-
releasing hormone).
In this chapter, we have provided information regarding the relation between
vagal tone and emotion regulation. A review of research indicates that baseline
levels of RSA and RSA reactivity are associated with behavioral measures of
reactivity, the expression of emotion, and self-regulation skills. Thus, we
propose that cardiac vagal tone (i.e., RSA) can serve as an index of emotion
regulation.
Historically, the vagus and other components of the parasympathetic nervous
system have not been incorporated in theories of emotion. Recent developments
in methodology have enabled us to define and accurately quantify cardiac vagal
tone. Theories relating the parasympathetic nervous system to the expression and
regulation of emotion are now being tested in several laboratories.
Co-authors for this chapter were J. A. Doussard-Roosevelt and A. K. Maiti.

CHAPTER 10
Emotion: An Evolutionary By-Product of the
Neural Regulation of the Autonomic Nervous
System
A new theory, the polyvagal theory of emotion, is presented which links the
evolution of the autonomic nervous system to affective experience, emotional
expression, vocal communication, and contingent social behavior. The polyvagal
theory is derived from the well-documented phylogenetic shift in the neural
regulation of the autonomic nervous system that expands the capacity of the
organism to control metabolic output. The theory emphasizes the phylogenetic
dependence of the structure and function of the vagus, the primary nerve of the
parasympathetic nervous system. Three phylogenetic stages of neural
development are described. The first stage is characterized by a primitive
unmyelinated vegetative vagal system that fosters digestion and responds to
novelty or threat by reducing cardiac output to protect metabolic resources.
Behaviorally, this first stage is associated with immobilization behaviors. The
second stage is characterized by a spinal sympathetic nervous system that can
increase metabolic output and inhibit the primitive vagal system’s influence on
the gut to foster mobilization behaviors necessary for “fight or flight.” The third
stage, which is unique to mammals, is characterized by a myelinated vagal
system that can rapidly regulate cardiac output to foster engagement and
disengagement with the environment. The myelinated vagus originates in a
brainstem area that evolved from the primitive gill arches and in mammals
controls facial expression, sucking, swallowing, breathing, and vocalization. It is
hypothesized that the mammalian vagal system fosters early mother–infant
interactions and serves as the substrate for the development of complex social

behaviors. In addition, the mammalian vagal system has an inhibitory effect on
sympathetic pathways to the heart and thus promotes calm behavior and
prosocial behavior.
The polyvagal theory of emotion proposes that the evolution of the
autonomic nervous system provides the organizing principle to interpret the
adaptive significance of affective processes. The theory proposes that the
evolution of the mammalian autonomic nervous system, specifically the
brainstem regulatory centers of the vagus and other related cranial nerves,
provides substrates for emotional experiences and affective processes that are
necessary for social behavior in mammals. In this context, the evolution of the
nervous system limits or expands the ability to express emotions, which in turn
may determine proximity, social contact, and the quality of communication. The
polyvagal construct has been previously introduced (see chapter 2) to document
the neurophysiological and neuroanatomical distinction between the two vagal
branches and to propose their unique relation with behavioral strategies. This
chapter elaborates on the polyvagal construct and proposes that affective
strategies are derivative of the evolutionary process that produced the polyvagal
regulation.
There is a consensus that affect is expressed in facial muscles and in organs
regulated by the autonomic nervous system. However, with the exception of
work by Cannon (1927, 1928), which focused on the sympathetic-adrenal system
as the physiological substrate of emotion, the presumed neural regulation of
affective state has not been investigated. Even contemporary researchers
investigating affective signatures in the autonomic nervous system (Ax, 1953;
Ekman, Levenson, & Friesen, 1983; Levenson, Ekman, & Friesen, 1990;
Schachter, 1957) have tacitly accepted Cannon’s assumption that emotions
reflect responses of the sympathetic nervous system.
Unlike the architectural dictum that form (i.e., structure) follows function,
the function of the nervous system is derivative of structure. The flexibility or
variability of autonomic nervous system function is totally dependent on the
structure. By mapping the phylogenetic development of the structures regulating
autonomic function, it is possible to observe the dependence of autonomic
reactivity on the evolution of the underlying structure of the nervous system. The
phylogenetic approach highlights a shift in brainstem and cranial nerve
morphology and function from an oxygen-sensitive system (i.e., the primitive
gill arches) to a system that regulates facial muscles, cardiac output, and the
vocal apparatus for affective communication.

CANNON’S BLUNDER
Cannon emphasized the idea that emotions were expressions of sympathetic-
adrenal excitation. In limiting emotional experiences solely to the mobilization
responses associated with sympathetic-adrenal activity, Cannon denied the
importance of visceral feelings and neglected the contribution of the
parasympathetic nervous system. Cannon’s views were not compatible with
earlier statements on the importance of visceral feedback and the
parasympathetic nervous system. For example, in The Expression of Emotions in
Man and Animals, Darwin (1872) acknowledged the importance of the
bidirectional neural communication between the heart and the brain via the
“pneumogastric” nerve. This, the Xth cranial nerve, is now called the vagus
nerve and is the major component of the parasympathetic nervous system.
For Darwin, emotional state represented a covariation between facial
expression and autonomic tone. However, he did not elucidate the specific
neurophysiological mechanisms. Our current knowledge of the neuroanatomy,
embryology, and phylogeny of the nervous system was not available to Darwin.
At that time, it was not known that vagal fibers originated in several medullary
nuclei, that branches of the vagus exerted control over the periphery through
different feedback systems, and that the function of the branches of the vagus
followed a phylogenetic principle. However, Darwin’s statement is important,
because it emphasizes afferent feedback from the heart to the brain, independent
of the spinal cord and the sympathetic nervous system, as well as the regulatory
role of the vagus in the expression of emotions.
The autonomic nervous system is related to visceral state regulation and the
regulation of behaviors associated with mobilization or immobilization. For
example, sympathetic excitation is clearly linked to mobilization. In vertebrates,
the sympathetic nervous system is characterized by a trunk or column of ganglia
paralleling the segmentation of the spinal cord. Skeletal motor pathways to the
limbs are paralleled by sympathetic fibers to facilitate the metabolically
demanding behaviors related to fight or flight. In fact, from Cannon’s
perspective and to many who followed, the sympathetic nervous system, due to
its mobilizing capacity, was the component of the autonomic nervous system
associated with emotion. This, however, neglected the autonomic components of
affective experiences that were metabolically conservative, including processes
such as signaling via facial expressions and vocalizations or specific
immobilization responses.

AUTONOMIC DETERMINANTS OF
EMOTION
Over the past 100 years we have learned much about the autonomic nervous
system, its evolutionary origins, and how it relates to emotion. Initially, we can
distinguish among three components of the autonomic nervous system (visceral
afferents, sympathetic nervous system, and parasympathetic nervous system) and
speculate how each might be related to affective experiences. First, the visceral
afferents may be assumed to play a major role in determining “feelings.” These
mechanisms, which provide us with knowledge of hunger, also may convey a
sense of nausea during emotional distress. We frequently hear subjective reports
of individuals feeling “sick to their stomach” during periods of severe emotional
strain associated with profound negative experiences. Similarly, negative states
have been associated with reports of breathlessness or feelings that the heart has
stopped. Second, the sympathetic nervous system and adrenal activity are
associated with mobilization. Activation of the sympathetic nervous system is
usually linked to increased skeletal movement of the major limbs. Thus,
consistent with Cannon, the sympathetic nervous system provides the metabolic
resources required for fight-or-flight behaviors. The sympathetic nervous system
enhances mobilization by increasing cardiac output and decreasing the metabolic
demands of the digestive tract by actively inhibiting gastric motility. Third, as
proposed by Darwin and Bernard, the parasympathetic nervous system and
specifically the vagus are related to emotional state. Few researchers have
investigated the link between parasympathetic activity and affective state.
However, over the last decade my laboratory has focused on this issue. We
documented that cardiac vagal tone, a component of parasympathetic control, is
related to affect and affect regulation (see chapter 9; Porges, 1991; Porges &
Doussard-Roosevelt, 1997). We presented theoretical models explaining the
importance of vagal regulation in the development of appropriate social behavior
(see chapter 7). The parasympathetic nervous system is generally associated with
fostering growth and restoration (Porges, 1992, 1995). Moreover, knowledge of
the polyvagal system allows an appreciation of the importance of the brainstem
origin of the specific vagal fibers in the determination of affective and
behavioral response strategies (see chapter 7; Porges, Doussard-Roosevelt,
Portales, & Suess, 1994).
Researchers and clinicians have had difficulties in the organization or

categorization of intensive affective states that appear to have totally different
etiologies or behavioral expressions. For example, intense feelings of terror
might result in total immobilization or freezing. By contrast, intense feelings of
anger or anxiety might be associated with massive mobilization activity. This
problem exists, in part, because of a bias toward explanations of affective states
defined in terms of either overt behavior such as facial expression (i.e.,
following Darwin) or sympathetic activity (i.e., following Cannon). The
emphasis on sympathetic activity is based on three historical factors. First,
theories regarding emotions have minimized or totally neglected the
parasympathetic nervous system. Second, Cannon’s focus on the sympathetic
efferents and mobilization responses associated with fight or flight as the sole
domain of autonomic reactivity during emotional states has not been challenged.
Third, the database of autonomic correlates of affect, collected to identify
autonomic “signatures” of specific affective states, is dominated by measures
assumed to be related to sympathetic function (Ax, 1953; Ekman et al., 1983;
Levenson et al., 1990; Schachter, 1957).
EVOLUTION OF THE AUTONOMIC NERVOUS SYSTEM:
EMERGENT STRUCTURES FOR THE EXPRESSION OF
EMOTIONS IN MAN AND ANIMALS
Although there is an acceptance that the autonomic nervous system and the face
play a role in emotional expression, there is great uncertainty regarding the
autonomic “signature” of specific or discrete emotions. Most researchers
evaluating autonomic responses during affective experiences assumed, as
Cannon did, that the sympathetic nervous system was the determinant of
emotion or at least the primary physiological covariate of emotion. This, of
course, neglects the potential role of the parasympathetic nervous system and its
neurophysiological affinity to facial structures, including facial muscles, eye
movements, pupil dilation, salivation, swallowing, vocalizing, hearing, and
breathing. By investigating the evolution of the autonomic nervous system, we
may gain insight into the interface between autonomic function and facial
expression. In the following sections, the phylogenetic development of the
autonomic nervous system will be used as an organizing principle to categorize
affective experiences.
The polyvagal theory of emotion is derived from investigations of the
evolution of the autonomic nervous system. The theory includes several rules

and assumptions.
1. Emotion depends on the communication between the autonomic nervous
system and the brain; visceral afferents convey information on
physiological state to the brain and are critical to the sensory or
psychological experience of emotion, and cranial nerves and the
sympathetic nervous system are outputs from the brain that provide
somatomotor and visceromotor control of the expression of emotion.
2. Evolution has modified the structures of the autonomic nervous system.
3. Emotional experience and expression are functional derivatives of
structural changes in the autonomic nervous system due to evolutionary
processes.
4. The mammalian autonomic nervous system retains vestiges of
phylogenetically older autonomic nervous systems.
5. The phylogenetic “level” of the autonomic nervous system determines
affective states and the range of social behavior.
6. In mammals, the autonomic nervous system response strategy to challenge
follows a phylogenetic hierarchy, starting with the newest structures and,
when all else fails, reverting to the most primitive structural system.
This chapter focuses on the phylogenetic shift in the neural regulation of the
vertebrate heart. The heart has been selected because, in response to
environmental challenge, cardiac output must be regulated to mobilize for fight-
or-flight behaviors or to immobilize for death-feigning or hiding behaviors. To
regulate cardiac output, several efferent structures have evolved. These
structures represent two opposing systems: (1) a sympathetic-catecholamine
system including chromaffin tissue and spinal sympathetics; and (2) a vagal
system (a component of the parasympathetic nervous system) with branches
originating in medullary source nuclei (i.e., dorsal motor nucleus of the vagus
and nucleus ambiguus). In addition, vertebrates have chromaffin tissue
containing high concentrations of catecholamines. Chromaffin tissue is defined
as having morphological and histochemical properties similar to those of the
adrenal medulla. Classes of vertebrates that do not have an adrenal medulla have
relatively more chromaffin tissue, which regulates circulating catecholamines.
Table 10.1 lists the regulatory structures that influence the heart in
vertebrates (Morris & Nilsson, 1994; Santer, 1994; Taylor, 1992). Two
phylogenetic principles can be extracted from Table 10.1. First, there is a

phylogenetic pattern in the regulation of the heart from endocrine
communication, to unmyelinated nerves, and finally to myelinated nerves.
Second, there is a development of opposing neural mechanisms of excitation and
inhibition to provide rapid regulation of graded metabolic output.
TABLE 10.1. Method of Cardiac Control as a Function of Vertebrate
Phylogeny
In the most primitive fish, the cyclostomes, the neural control of the heart is
very primitive. Some cyclostomes such as the myxinoids (hagfish) use
circulating catecholamines from chromaffin tissue to provide the sole excitatory
influences on the heart. Other cyclostomes such as the lampetroids (lampreys)
have a cardiac vagus. However, in contrast to all other vertebrates that have a
cardioinhibitory vagus that acts via postganglionic muscarinic cholinoceptors,
the cyclostome vagal innervation is excitatory and acts via nicotinic
cholinoceptors. One striking feature of the cyclostome heart is the location of
chromaffin tissue within the heart that stores large quantities of epinephrine and
norepinephrine. As in other vertebrates, the circulating catecholamines produced
by the chromaffin tissue stimulate beta-adrenergic receptors in the heart. Thus,
the cyclostomes appear to have only excitatory mechanisms to regulate the heart.
The elasmobranchs (cartilaginous fish) are the first vertebrates to have a
cardioinhibitory vagus. The vagus in these fish is inhibitory and the
cholinoceptors on the heart are muscarinic as they are in other vertebrates. The
cardioinhibitory vagus is functional in the elasmobranchs as a response to
hypoxia. In conditions of hypoxia, metabolic output is adjusted by reducing
heart rate. This modification of neural regulation may provide a mechanism to
enable the elasmobranchs to increase their territorial range, by providing a neural

mechanism that adjusts metabolic output to deal with changes in water
temperature and oxygen availability. However, unlike more evolutionarily
advanced fish or tetrapods, elasmobranchs do not have direct sympathetic input
to the heart. Instead, cardiac acceleration and increases in contractility are
mediated via beta-adrenergic receptors stimulated by circulating catecholamines
released from chromaffin tissue. Thus, because activation of metabolic output is
driven by circulating catecholamines and not by direct neural innervation, once
the excitatory system is triggered, the ability to self-soothe or calm is limited.
In vertebrates with sympathetic and vagal neural innervation, vagal
influences to the sinoatrial node inhibit or dampen the sympathetic influence and
promote rapid decreases in metabolic output (Vanhoutte & Levy, 1979) that
enable almost instantaneous shifts in behavioral state. As a whole, the teleosts
may be considered phylogenetically the first class of vertebrates with both
sympathetic and parasympathetic neural control of the heart, with innervation
similar to that found in tetrapods. This enables rapid transitory changes in
metabolic output, permitting changes from mobilization to immobilization.
These are observed as “darting” and “freezing” behaviors. Amphibians, similar
to the teleosts, have dual innervation of the heart via systems with direct neural
components from the spinal cord via the sympathetic chain, producing increases
in heart rate and contractility, and direct neural pathways from the brainstem via
the vagus, producing cardioinhibitory actions.
True adrenal glands, in which a distinct medulla is formed of chromaffin
tissue, are only present in birds, reptiles, and mammals (Santer, 1994). Neural
regulation by the spinal sympathetics of the adrenal medulla provides a neural
mechanism for rapid and controlled release of epinephrine and norepinephrine to
stimulate cardiovascular function. In teleosts, chromaffin tissue is primarily
related to parts of the cardiovascular system, but chromaffin tissue is also
associated with the kidney. However, in amphibians, chromaffin tissue is
primarily associated with the kidney, and substantial aggregations of chromaffin
cells are located along the sympathetic chain ganglia. Thus, we can observe a
phylogenetic shift in the location of chromaffin tissue and the concurrent
evolution of a distinct adrenal medulla near the kidney.
In mammals, the morphology of the vagus changes (see chapter 2). Unlike
that of all other vertebrates with cardioinhibitory vagi, the mammalian vagus
contains two branches. One branch originates in the dorsal motor nucleus of the
vagus and provides primary neural regulation of subdiaphragmatic organs, such
as the digestive tract. However, at the level of the heart, the dorsal motor nucleus

of the vagus does not play a major role in normal dynamic regulation of cardiac
output. Rather, during embryological development in mammals, cells from the
dorsal motor nucleus of the vagus migrate ventrally and laterally to the nucleus
ambiguus (Schwaber, 1986) where they form the cell bodies for visceromotor
myelinated axons that provide potent inhibition of the sinoatrial node, the
pacemaker for the heart.
By transitory down-regulation of the cardioinhibitory vagal tone to the heart
(i.e., removal of the vagal brake), mammals are capable of rapid increases in
cardiac output without activating the sympathetic-adrenal system. By engaging
this system rather than the sympathetic-adrenal system, mammals have the
opportunity to rapidly increase metabolic output for immediate mobilization.
Under prolonged challenge, the sympathetic system also may be activated.
However, by rapidly reengaging the vagal system, mammals can inhibit
sympathetic input on the heart (Vanhoutte & Levy, 1979) and rapidly decrease
metabolic output to self-soothe and calm.
PHYLOGENETIC DEVELOPMENT OF THE AUTONOMIC
NERVOUS SYSTEM: AN ORGANIZING PRINCIPLE FOR
HUMAN EMOTION
Inspection of Table 10.1, which summarizes the primary regulatory structures of
the heart in vertebrates, provides a basis for speculation on the behavioral
repertoire of various classes of vertebrates. These speculations support the
premise that the phylogenetic development of the autonomic nervous system
provides an organizing principle for affective experiences and determines the
limits on social behavior and, therefore, the possibility of affiliation.
Phylogenetic development generally results in increased neural control of the
heart via mechanisms that can rapidly increase or decrease metabolic output.
This phylogenetic course results in greater central nervous system regulation of
behavior, especially behaviors to engage and disengage with environmental
challenges.
To further focus on the impact of phylogenetic development of the neural
regulation of the autonomic nervous system, we can observe five
phylogenetically dependent response systems: (1) a chemical excitatory system
via the catecholamine-rich chromaffin tissue to increase cardiac output and to
support mobilization; (2) an inhibitory vagal system via the dorsal motor nucleus
of the vagus to reduce cardiac output when metabolic resources are scarce and to

support immobilization in response to danger; (3) a spinal sympathetic nervous
system to provide neural excitation to promote rapid mobilization for behaviors
associated with fight or flight; (4) a neurally regulated adrenal medulla system to
provide more direct control over the release of circulating catecholamines to
support mobilization for the prolonged metabolic requirements of fight-or-flight
behaviors; and (5) the specialization of the mammalian vagal system into a
“tonic” inhibitory system that allows graded withdrawal of the vagal brake,
which can promote transitory mobilization and the expression of sympathetic
tone without requiring sympathetic or adrenal activation. With this new vagal
system, transitory incursions into the environment can be initiated without the
severe biological price of either metabolic shutdown, via primitive vagal
inhibition, or metabolic excitation, via sympathetic-adrenal activation.
The five phylogenetically dependent response systems are associated with
three neuroanatomical constructs related to affective experience and expression:
(1) dorsal vagal complex (DVC), (2) sympathetic nervous system (SNS), and (3)
ventral vagal complex (VVC). Each of these three neural constructs is linked to a
specific emotion subsystem observable in humans. Each emotion subsystem is
manifested via differentiated motor output from the central nervous system to
perform specific adaptive functions: to immobilize and to conserve metabolic
resources, to mobilize in order to obtain metabolic resources, or to signal with
minimal energy expense. The constituent responses associated with each
subsystem are listed in Table 10.2.
TABLE 10.2. Physiological Functions Associated With Each Subsystem
of the Autonomic Nervous System

THE DORSAL VAGAL COMPLEX: A VESTIGIAL
IMMOBILIZATION SYSTEM
The DVC is primarily associated with digestive, taste, and hypoxic responses in
mammals. It includes the nucleus tractus solitarius (NTS) and the interneuronal
communication between the NTS and the dorsal motor nucleus of the vagus
(DMX). The efferents for the DVC originate in the DMX, and primary vagal
afferents terminate in the NTS. The DVC provides primary neural control of
subdiaphragmatic visceral organs. It provides low tonic influences on the heart
and bronchi. This low tonic influence is the vestige from the reptilian vagal
control of the heart and lung. In contrast to reptiles, mammals have a great
demand for oxygen and are vulnerable to any depletion in oxygen resources. The
metabolic demand for mammals is approximately five times greater than that for
reptiles of equivalent body weight (Else & Hulbert, 1981). Thus, reptilian
dependence on this system provides a shutdown of metabolic activity to
conserve resources during diving or death feigning. The DVC provides
inhibitory input to the sinoatrial node of the heart via unmyelinated fibers and
thus is less tightly controlled than the myelinated fibers from the VVC. Hypoxia
or perceived loss of oxygen resources appears to be the main stimulus that
triggers the DVC. Once triggered, severe bradycardia and apnea are observed,
often in the presence of defecation. This response strategy is observed in the
hypoxic human fetus. Although adaptive for the reptile, hypoxic triggering of
this system may be lethal for mammals. In addition, it is important to note that
the DVC has beneficial functions in humans. Under most normal conditions, the
DVC maintains tone to the gut and promotes digestive processes. However, if
up-regulated, the DVC contributes to pathophysiological conditions, including
the formation of ulcers via excess gastric secretion and colitis. Research supports
the importance of the unmyelinated vagal fibers in bradycardia (Daly, 1991) and
suggests the possibility that massive bradycardia may be determined by the
unmyelinated vagal fibers associated with the DVC recruiting myelinated vagal
fibers to maximize the final vagal surge on the heart (Jones, Wang, & Jordan,
1995).
THE SYMPATHETIC NERVOUS SYSTEM: ADAPTIVE
MOBILIZATION SYSTEM FOR FIGHT-OR-FLIGHT
BEHAVIORS

The SNS is primarily a system of mobilization. It prepares the body for
emergency by increasing cardiac output, stimulating sweat glands to protect and
lubricate the skin, and inhibiting the metabolically costly gastrointestinal tract.
The evolution of the sympathetic nervous system follows the segmentation of
the spinal cord, with cell bodies of the preganglionic sympathetic motor neurons
located in the lateral horn of the spinal cord. The sympathetic nervous system
has long been associated with emotion. The label “sympathetic” reflects the
historical identity of this system as a nervous system “with feelings” and
contrasts it with the parasympathetic nervous system, a label that reflects a
nervous system that “guards against feelings.”
THE VENTRAL VAGAL COMPLEX: THE MAMMALIAN
SIGNALING SYSTEM FOR MOTION, EMOTION, AND
COMMUNICATION
The primary efferent fibers of the VVC originate in the nucleus ambiguus. The
primary afferent fibers of the VVC terminate in the source nuclei of the facial
and trigeminal nerves. The VVC has primary control of supradiaphragmatic
visceral organs including the larynx, pharynx, bronchi, esophagus, and heart.
Motor pathways from the VVC to visceromotor organs (e.g., heart and bronchi)
and somatomotor structures (e.g., larynx, pharynx, and esophagus) are
myelinated to provide tight control and speed in responding. In mammals,
visceromotor fibers to the heart express high levels of tonic control and are
capable of rapid shifts in cardioinhibitory tone to provide dynamic changes in
metabolic output to match environmental challenges. This rapid regulation
characterizes the qualities of the mammalian vagal brake that enable rapid
engagement and disengagement in the environment without mobilizing the SNS.
A major characteristic of the VVC is that the neural fibers regulating
somatomotor structures are derived from the branchial or primitive gill arches
that evolved to form cranial nerves V, VII, IX, X, and XI. Somatomotor fibers
originating in these cranial nerves control the branchiomeric muscles including
facial muscles, muscles of mastication, neck muscles, larynx, pharynx,
esophagus, and middle ear muscles. Visceromotor efferent fibers control salivary
and lacrimal glands as well as the heart and bronchi. The primary afferents to the
VVC come from facial and oral afferents traveling through the facial and
trigeminal nerves and the visceral afferents, terminating in the NTS. The VVC is
involved in the control and coordination of sucking, swallowing, and vocalizing

with breathing.
EVOLUTION AND DISSOLUTION: HIERARCHICAL
RESPONSE STRATEGY
The evolution of the autonomic nervous system provides substrates for the
emergence of three emotion systems. This phylogenetic adjustment of the
autonomic nervous system represents an exaptation (see Crews, 1997) of
structures to express emotions that initially evolved in primitive vertebrates to
extract oxygen from water, to oxygenate and transport blood, and to adjust
metabolic output to match resources. The polyvagal theory of emotion is based
on a phylogenetic model. The polyvagal theory of emotion proposes a
hierarchical response strategy to challenge, with the most recent modifications
employed first and the most primitive last. This phylogenetic strategy can be
observed in our day-to-day interactions. Our social behavior follows a strategy
that focuses initially on communication via facial expressions and vocalizations.
The strategy has low metabolic demand and, if appropriately interpreted, results
in contingent social interactions via verbal–facial mechanisms. Often, hand
gestures and head movements contribute to increase the mammalian repertoire of
communication-related behavior. An important characteristic of these prosocial
behaviors is their low metabolic demand and the rapid contingent “switching” of
transitory engagement to transitory disengagement strategies (i.e., speaking then
switching to listening).
This phylogenetically based hierarchical response strategy is consistent with
the concept of dissolution proposed by Jackson (1958) to explain diseases of the
nervous system. Jackson proposed that “the higher nervous arrangements inhibit
(or control) the lower, and thus, when the higher are suddenly rendered
functionless, the lower rise in activity.” This is observed in the polyvagal theory
of emotion, not in terms of disease but in terms of response strategies to
differential challenges to survival. The VVC with its mechanisms of “signaling”
and “communication” provides the initial response to the environment. The
VVC inhibits, at the level of the heart, the strong mobilization responses of the
SNS. Withdrawal of VVC, consistent with Jackson’s model, results in a
“disinhibition” of the sympathetic control of the heart. Similarly, withdrawal of
sympathetic tone results in a “disinhibition” of the DVC control of the
gastrointestinal tract and a vulnerability of the bronchi and heart. There are
several clinical consequences to unopposed DVC control, including defecation,

due to relaxation of the sphincter muscles and increased motility of the digestive
tract; apnea, due to constriction of the bronchi; and bradycardia, due to
stimulation of the sinoatrial node. Thus, when all else fails, the nervous system
elects a metabolically conservative course that is adaptive for primitive
vertebrates but lethal to mammals. Consistent with the Jacksonian principle of
dissolution, specific psychopathologies defined by affective dysfunction may be
associated with autonomic correlates consistent with the three phylogenetic
levels of autonomic regulation. The three levels do not function in an all-or-none
fashion; rather, they exhibit gradations of control determined by both visceral
feedback and higher brain structures.
UNVEILING DARWIN
Contemporary research and theory on emotion owes much to Darwin and his
volume, The Expression of Emotions in Man and Animals (1872). Through
careful and astute observations of facial expressions, Darwin insightfully
interpreted emotional expressions within an evolutionary model of adaptation
and natural selection. However, Darwin’s knowledge of neurophysiology and
neuroanatomy was limited. In contrast to Darwin’s creative insights into the
adaptive function of facial expression, his understanding of underlying
physiological mechanisms and the linkage between facial muscles and emotion
was synthetic and derivative. He repeatedly referenced the 1844 edition of
Anatomy and Philosophy of Expressions, written by Sir Charles Bell, for
physiological explanations of facial expression. As further support for the
importance of facial muscles in emotional expressions, Darwin incorporated the
work of Duchenne in his text. Duchenne conducted experiments by electrically
stimulating the face of humans. Electrical stimulation of selected facial muscles
provided expressions that were readily perceived as different emotional states.
In contrast to the polyvagal theory of emotion, which uses evolution of the
autonomic nervous system as the primary organizing principle for the expression
and experience of affect, Darwin’s writings did not emphasize the importance of
the nervous system as a structure involved in the evolution of emotion. Rather,
he focused on affect as a functional system that responded to the determinants of
evolution to produce the facial and vocal expressions of human emotion. Darwin
neglected the importance of treating the nervous system as a structure that is
vulnerable to the pressures of evolution. A choice between investigating affect as

a functional behavioral system or investigating the structural determinants of
affect (i.e., nervous system) was clearly made by researchers who followed
Darwin. This research tradition followed the observational approach of
organizing 
facial 
expression 
into 
affective 
categories. 
Although 
the
physiological correlates of affect and facial expression were investigated
(Ekman et al., 1983; Levenson et al., 1990; Stifter, Fox, & Porges, 1989). these
investigations were made on a psychophysiological or correlative level and did
not emphasize specific neural regulatory processes.
Consistent with the observational approach, Tomkins (1962, 1963)
developed a theory of affect that emphasized the importance of the face not only
as a structure of communication but also as a structure of self-feedback.
Following Tomkins (1962, 1963), Ekman (1978) and Izard (1979) developed
detailed coding systems for facial affect and have used these methods to study
individual differences, developmental shifts, and the cross-cultural consistency
of human facial expression,
Several contemporary theories of emotion have focused on facial expressions
in a manner similar to that initially presented by Darwin. Rather than
incorporating knowledge of neural regulation of the face or the evolution of
neural regulation of autonomic function, researchers and theorists have
attempted to organize information in terms of the functional significance of
sequences or patterns of facial expressions. This difficult task, modeled on
Darwin, 
often 
becomes 
bogged 
down 
in 
semantics, 
philosophical
inconsistencies, and circularity. Darwin in his descriptions of emotions
speculated and provided hypothetical examples of natural selection contributing
to the uniqueness of species-specific affective response patterns. However, the
terms selected to characterize specific emotions often vary from culture to
culture. Tomkins and later Ekman and Izard promoted the description of
affective experiences in terms of the specific facial muscles or groups of muscles
involved in the facial expression. However, they then used subjective reports to
label these facial expressions.
We may “unveil” Darwin by investigating the neural regulation that
underlies facial expression. Facial expressions are controlled by cranial nerves.
Motor pathways from the trigeminal nerve (V) control the muscles of
mastication with branches to the temporalis, masseter, medial, and lateral
pterygoid muscles. Motor pathways from the facial nerve (VII) control the
muscles of facial expression, including zygomaticus, frontalis, orbicularis oculi,
elevators, orbicularis oris, depressors, and platysma. The nucleus ambiguus

serves as the source of cell bodies for motor pathways traveling through several
cranial nerves, including the glossopharyngeal (IX), vagus (X), and accessory
nerves (XI). Pathways from the glossopharyngeal nerve regulate pharyngeal
muscles. Pathways from the vagus regulate the muscles of the pharynx and
larynx, and pathways of the accessory nerve control the neck muscles, allowing
rotation and tilting of the head. These cranial nerves are derivative from
primitive gill arches (Gibbins, 1994; Langley, 1921) and may be collectively
described as the ventral vagal complex. Thus, the evolutionary origins (i.e.,
primitive gill arches) of the somatomotor pathways traveling through these
cranial nerves provide us with an organizing principle to understand affective
expressions. In addition to the described neural regulation of somatomotor
structures, these branchiomeric (i.e., derived from the primitive arches) cranial
nerves also regulate the visceromotor processes associated with salivation,
tearing, breathing, and heart rate.
Other cranial nerves contribute to the expression of emotions. The
hypoglossal nerve (XII) innervates the muscles of the tongue. The trochlear (IV),
abducens (VI), and oculomotor (III) nerves innervate muscles to provide
movements of the eyes and eyelids. Thus, the facial expressions observed by
Darwin, detailed by Tomkins, and coded by Ekman and Izard are a direct
reflection of the regulation of the face by the cranial nerves.
VOODOO OR VAGUS DEATH? THE TEST OF THE
POLYVAGAL THEORY
The polyvagal theory of emotion provides a theoretical framework to interpret
the phenomenon of voodoo or fright death described by Cannon (1957) and
Richter (1957). Cannon believed that extreme emotional stress, regardless of the
specific behavioral manifestation, could be explained in terms of degree of
sympathetic-adrenal excitation. In 1942, Cannon described a phenomenon
known as voodoo death. Voodoo death was assumed to be directly attributable to
emotional stress. Being wed to a sympathicoadrenal model of emotional
experience (as just described), Cannon assumed that voodoo death would be the
consequence of the state of shock produced by the continuous outpouring of
epinephrine via excitation of the sympathetic nervous system. According to the
Cannon model, the victim would be expected to breathe very rapidly and have a
rapid pulse. The heart would beat fast and gradually lead to a state of constant
contraction and, ultimately, to death in systole. Because his speculations were

not empirically based, he offered the following challenge to test his model of
voodoo death: “If in the future, however, any observer has opportunity to see an
instance of ‘voodoo death,’ it is to be hoped that he will conduct the simpler tests
before the victim’s last gasp.”
Richter responded to Cannon’s challenge with an animal model. Rats were
prestressed and placed in a closed turbulent water tank, and the latency to
drowning was recorded. Most domestic laboratory rats lasted for several hours,
whereas unexpectedly all of the wild rats died within 15 minutes. In fact, several
wild rats dove to the bottom and, without coming to the surface, died. To test
Cannon’s hypothesis that stress-induced sudden death was sympathetic, Richter
monitored heart rate and determined whether the heart was in systole or diastole
after death. He assumed, on the basis of Cannon’s speculations, that tachycardia
would precede death and that at death the heart would be in a state of systole,
reflecting the potent effects of sympathetic excitation on the pacemaker and the
myocardium. However, Richter’s data contradicted the Cannon model. Heart
rate slowed prior to death, and at death the heart was engorged with blood,
reflecting a state of diastole. Richter interpreted the data as demonstrating that
the rats died a “vagus” death, the result of overstimulation of the
parasympathetic system rather than the sympathicoadrenal system. However,
Richter provided no physiological explanation except the speculation that the
lethal vagal effect was related to a psychological state of “hopelessness.”
The immediate and reliable death of the wild rats in Richter’s experiment
may represent a more global immobilization strategy. Sudden prolonged
immobility or feigned death is an adaptive response exhibited by many
mammalian species. Hofer (1970) demonstrated that several rodent species,
when threatened, exhibited prolonged immobility accompanied by very slow
heart rate. For some of the rodents, heart rate during immobility was less than
50% of the basal rate. During prolonged immobility, respiration became so
shallow that it was difficult to observe, although the rate greatly accelerated.
Although physiologically similar, Hofer distinguished between prolonged
immobility and feigned death. The onset of feigned death was sudden with an
apparent motor collapse during active struggling. Similar to Richter, Hofer
interpreted this fear-induced slowing of heart rate as a vagal phenomenon. In
support of this interpretation, he noted that of the four species that exhibited
prolonged immobility, 71% of the subjects had cardiac arrhythmias of vagal
origin; in contrast, in the two species that did not exhibit immobility behaviors,
only 17% exhibited cardiac arrhythmias of vagal origin.

The polyvagal theory of emotion places Richter’s and Hofer’s observations
in perspective. Following the Jacksonian principle of dissolution, the rodents
would exhibit the following sequence of response strategies: (1) removal of
VVC tone, (2) increase in sympathetic tone, and (3) a surge in DVC tone. The
more docile domestic rats in Richter’s experiment apparently progressed from
removal of VVC tone, to increased sympathetic tone, and then death from
exhaustion. However, the profile of the wild rats was different. Being totally
unaccustomed to enclosure, handling, and also having their vibrissae cut, a
mobilization strategy driven by increased sympathetic tone was not functional.
Instead, these rats reverted to their most primitive system to conserve metabolic
resources via DVC. This strategy promoted an immobilization response
characterized by reduced motor activity, apnea, and bradycardia. Unfortunately,
this mode of responding, although adaptive for reptiles, is lethal for mammals.
Similarly, the onset of feigned death, as described by Hofer, illustrates the
sudden and rapid transition from an unsuccessful strategy of struggling requiring
massive sympathetic activation to the metabolically conservative immobilized
state mimicking death associated with the DVC.
These data suggest that the vagus contributes to severe emotional states and
may be related to emotional states of “immobilization” such as extreme terror.
Application of the polyvagal approach enables the dissection of vagal processes
into three strategic programs: (1) when tone of the VVC is high, the ability to
communicate via facial expressions, vocalizations, and gestures exists; (2) when
tone of the VVC is low, the sympathetic nervous system is unopposed and easily
expressed to support mobilization such as fight-or-flight behaviors; and (3) when
tone from DVC is high, immobilization and potentially life-threatening
bradycardia, apnea, and cardiac arrhythmias occur.
CONCLUSION
Three important scientific propositions provide the basis for this theory. First,
Darwin provided the concept of evolution and the processes that contribute to
phylogenetic variation. Second, Jackson provided the concept of dissolution as a
viable explanation for diseases of brain function. And, third, MacLean (1990)
provided the concept that the human brain retains structures associated with
phylogenetically more primitive organisms.
The polyvagal theory of emotion focuses on the evolution of the neural and

neurochemical regulation of structures involved in the expression and experience
of emotion as a theme to organize emotional experience and to understand the
role of emotion in social behavior. Over 100 years ago Jackson, intrigued with
Darwin’s model of evolution, elaborated on how evolution in reverse, termed
“dissolution,” might be related to disease. According to Jackson, higher nervous
system structures inhibit or control lower structures or systems and “thus, when
the higher are suddenly rendered functionless, the lower rise in activity.” The
polyvagal theory of emotion follows this Jacksonian principle.

CHAPTER 11
Love: An Emergent Property of the Mammalian
Autonomic Nervous System
There is no fear in love; but perfect love casteth out fear. —1 John 4:18
Love has had a variety of expressions. Foremost in our culture is the love
between individuals of different genders. The products of this love are observed
in terms of children, of cooperative and shared responsibilities to survive, of the
transmitting of culture, and of pleasure and ecstasy. Although we assume that
love is a unique human emotion, several neurobiological processes involved in
the experience and expression of love are shared with other mammals. The
phylogenetic origins of these processes reflect their antecedent adaptive
function. In mammals, these processes have evolved into an integrated
neurobehavioral system, which promotes proximity, reproduction, and physical
safety. Central to the neural mediation of these processes is the autonomic
nervous system. The focus of this chapter is to describe how the autonomic
nervous system is involved in the processes associated with feelings of love and
behaviors linked to reproduction. The chapter proposes a hypothetical model,
which speculates that the phylogenetic changes in the autonomic nervous system
are related to the emergence of two components of love: an appetitive phase
associated with courting and seductive behaviors and a consummatory phase
associate with passionate sexual behaviors and the establishment of enduring
pair-bonds. According to this model, courting and seduction are dependent on
phylogenetically newer structures. For example, the cortex, via corticobulbar
pathways, regulates facial expressions and vocalizations to express availability
to a prospective mate. In contrast, passionate visceral feelings are dependent on
phylogenetically older structures, such as the hypothalamus and medulla, which

involve phylogenetically more recent neuropeptides (oxytocin and vasopressin).
EVOLUTION AND DISSOLUTION: A HIERARCHICAL
RESPONSE STRATEGY DURING MATE SELECTION
The evolution of the autonomic nervous system provides substrates for the
emergence of the three emotion subsystems described above. Although
reminiscent of the triune brain proposed by MacLean (1990), the polyvagal
theory emphasizes that even the phylogenetically more primitive structures have
changed in structure and function. This phylogenetic adjustment of the
autonomic nervous system represents an exaptation (i.e. a shift in the function)
of structures to express emotions. The ancient gill arches that characterize
primitive vertebrates evolved into structures that convey emotional state via
facial expressions, gestures and vocal communication.
The polyvagal theory emphasizes the phylogenetic changes in the autonomic
nervous system. Specifically, as mammals evolved, the vagal regulation of the
viscera was maintained by two vagal pathways. The second vagal circuit has
myelinated efferent pathways and originates in the nucleus ambiguus, a nucleus
ventral to the dorsal motor nucleus of the vagus. The ventral vagal circuit is
described as the ventral vagal complex (VVC). The dorsal vagal circuit is shared
with most other vertebrates and is described as the dorsal vagal complex (DVC).
These two vagal circuits in concert with the sympathetic nervous system (SNS)
form a hierarchical system regulating visceral organs. The polyvagal theory
proposes a hierarchical response strategy to environmental challenges, with the
most recent modifications employed first (i.e., VVC) and the most primitive
(i.e., DVC) last. However, the response strategy is not all-or-none and may
include transitional blends between the boundaries of the three emotion
subsystems. These transitional blends may be determined by both visceral
feedback and higher brain structures (including vasopressinergic and
oxytocinergic pathways that communicate between the hypothalamus and the
medullary source nuclei of the vagus). Thus, the neurophysiological substrate of
specific states and behaviors may incorporate activation of more than one
emotion subsystem. For example, sexual arousal, with features of facial and
vocal expressiveness in concert with facial flush, sweating and tachycardia, may
reflect a blend defined by the activation of the VVC and the SNS.
The proposed hierarchical response strategy provides a model for the
exploration of human social behavior. This phylogenetic strategy can be

observed in human mating strategies. Our mating behavior is usually initiated by
communication via facial expressions and vocalizations, a strategy with low
metabolic cost. If appropriately used, communication will determine availability,
induce proximity and promote reproductive behavior. Or, the strategy will
determine unavailability, induce social distance, and promote a search for
another prospective mate. An important feature of this mate selection strategy is
that it limits vulnerability and risk by allowing participants to rapidly switch
between engagement and disengagement behaviors (i.e., speaking then switching
to listening; moving toward then rapidly retreating).
This phylogenetically based hierarchical response strategy is consistent with
the concept of dissolution proposed by John Hughlings Jackson (1958) to
explain diseases of the nervous system. Jackson proposed that “the higher
nervous arrangements inhibit (or control) the lower, and thus, when the higher
are suddenly rendered functionless, the lower rise in activity.” The polyvagal
theory (see chapter 10) proposed dissolution, not in response to disease or brain
trauma, but as a response strategy to differential challenges. The VVC with its
mechanisms for signaling and communication provides the initial response to the
environment. The VVC inhibits, at the level of the heart, the strong mobilization
responses of the SNS. Withdrawal of the VVC, consistent with Jacksonian
principles, results in a disinhibition of the sympathetic control of the heart.
Similarly, withdrawal of sympathetic tone results in a disinhibition of the DVC
control of the gastrointestinal tract and a vulnerability of the bronchi and heart.
There are several clinical consequences to unopposed DVC control including
defecation, due to a relaxation of the sphincter muscles and increased motility of
the digestive tract; apnea, due to constriction of the bronchi; and bradycardia,
due to stimulation of the sinoatrial node. Thus, when all else fails, the nervous
system elects a metabolically conservative course that is adaptive for primitive
vertebrates, but may be lethal for mammals. Consistent with the Jacksonian
principle of dissolution, specific psychopathologies defined by affective
dysfunction may be associated with autonomic correlates consistent with the
three phylogenetic levels of autonomic regulation.
THE SOCIAL ENGAGEMENT SYSTEM: AN EMERGENT
PROPERTY OF THE VENTRAL VAGAL COMPLEX
Phylogenetically, the VVC is the most recent neurophysiological affect system.
The VVC is composed of a somatomotor component consisting of the special

visceral efferents and a visceromotor component consisting of the myelinated
vagal pathways from the nucleus ambiguus to the sinoatrial node of the heart and
the bronchi. As illustrated in Figure 11.1, the special visceral efferents and the
vagal brake collectively constitute an emergent social engagement system. The
somatomotor components of the VVC contribute to the regulation of behaviors
involved in exploration of the social environment (e.g., looking, listening,
ingesting) and behaviors involved in acknowledging social contact (e.g., facial
expressions, head gestures, and vocalizations). More specifically, the
somatomotor components of the VVC are involved in head turning (via cranial
nerve XI), vocalizations (IX, X), facial expression (VII, V), the filtering of low
frequency sounds via the middle ear muscles to extract human voice from
backgrounds sounds (VII) and mastication (V). The visceromotor components of
the VVC contribute to the rapid modulation of vagal (X) control of the heart and
the bronchi (X), which provides metabolic resources to engage and disengage in
a social setting.
Three important features define the social engagement system. First, the
efferent pathways that regulate the social engagement system originate in
medullary structures (i.e., nucleus of cranial nerve V, nucleus of cranial nerve
VII, nucleus ambiguus). Second, corticobulbar pathways, which originate in
frontal cortex (i.e., upper motor neurons), enable the possibility of efficient
cortical regulation of these medullary source nuclei (i.e., lower motor neurons).
Third, on the medullary level, the structures that regulate the efferent regulation
of social communication behaviors neuroanatomically communicate with
structures that regulate ingestion (e.g., sucking, swallowing, salivation) and
cardiac output. Thus, modulation of the vagal brake may either promote calming
and self-soothing states (i.e., attenuate the influence of the sympathetic influence
on the heart) or support mobilization (i.e., potentiate the sympathetic influence
on the heart).

FIGURE 11.1. The social engagement system: social communication is determined by the cortical regulation
of medullary nuclei via corticobulbar pathways. The social engagement system consists of a somatomotor
component (special visceral efferent pathways that regulate the muscles of head) and a visceromotor
component (the vagal brake that regulates the heart and bronchi).
Mammals have a unique vagal system that includes myelinated fibers that
regulate heart rate. The mammalian vagus functions as an active vagal brake (see
chapter 7) in which rapid inhibition and disinhibition of the vagal tone to the
heart can change cardiac output to promote immediate engagement and
disengagement with objects and individuals. Thus, the autonomic components,
coincident with social interactions, may be mediated by changes in vagal tone to
the heart, rather than the assumed changes in sympathetic arousal. Consistent
with the polyvagal theory, difficulties in regulating the vagal brake may result in
the phylogenetically older systems (i.e., neural regulation of the adrenal and the
SNS) being recruited to regulate metabolic output to deal with environmental
challenges. Consistent with the polyvagal theory, during states of mobilization,
characterized by classic “fight–flight” behaviors and sympathetic excitation,
both the vagal brake and the behavioral components of the social engagement
system are not easily accessible.
The functional impact of the mammalian vagus on the heart produces a heart

rate pattern known as respiratory sinus arrhythmia (RSA). RSA is the rhythmic
increase and decrease in heart rate observed at the frequency of spontaneous
breathing. Because the brainstem nuclei that regulate the mammalian vagus are
neuroanatomically and neurophysiologically linked to the brainstem source
nuclei of the special visceral efferents that regulate facial expression, monitoring
dynamic changes in RSA and heart rate (i.e., the vagal brake) provides an
efficient and noninvasive method of assessing the status of the social
engagement system.
COURTING AND SEDUCTION: SPECIALIZED FUNCTIONS
OF THE SOCIAL ENGAGEMENT SYSTEM
Seduction and courting behaviors convey an invitation to reduce physical and
psychological distance. Primates express this invitation via cortical regulation of
the brainstem source nuclei of the VVC that control facial expressions, head
movements, and vocalizations. Mammalian social behaviors appear to be an
emergent property of the cortical regulation of the VVC and the peripheral
structures identified in Figure 11.1. Courting and other behaviors of social
engagement require direct cortical modulation of the medullary source nuclei of
the VVC. This cortical regulation of the brainstem inhibits protective and
defensive response strategies that are dependent on subcortical structures (e.g.,
amygdala, hypothalamus). However, courting and other expressions of social
behavior are not independent of neurophysiological state. When the brainstem is
under subcortical control, such as in states associated with fight-or-flight
behaviors, cardiac output is increased by activation of the SNS to support the
mobilization behaviors necessary to avoid or to respond to potential conflict.
During these states, cortical modulation of the visceromotor control of the heart
(i.e., the vagal brake) would substantially reduce cardiac output and compromise
the effectiveness of the adaptive fight-or-flight behaviors. Thus, cortical
regulation of the VVC requires the setting to be perceived as safe. The
perception of safety, or at least the lack of fight-or-flight responses, would
provide a neurophysiological state in which cortical regulation of medullary
nuclei could promote proximity and increase the probability of reproductive
behaviors.

Love and the Polyvagal Theory
Based on the polyvagal theory, one would expect a neurobehavioral model of
love to contain three phases, one representing each of the three emotion
subsystems already described in chapter 10. The first two phases are easily
identified. The first phase would be associated with the social engagement
system, which would systematically signal and engage a prospective mate, and
the regulation of vagal brake, which would modulate the metabolic resources
necessary to carry out the behaviors. The first system would function only
during periods of perceived safety. The second phase would be associated with
mobilization and would provide the energy, via sympathetic excitation, to defend
and to facilitate proximity for reproductive behaviors when separated. However,
a third phase associated with immobilization is more difficult to conceptualize
within the polyvagal theory. Although sexual behaviors often incorporate a state
of immobilization, immobilization during coitus is not consistent with the state
of fear predicted by the polyvagal theory. In addition, the initial description of
the polyvagal theory made no statement regarding experiences of pleasure and
ecstasy 
associated 
with 
sexual 
behavior. 
Therefore, 
to 
provide 
a
neurophysiological explanation of love, the configuration of the polyvagal
theory requires modification.
Love Without Fear: Hypothalamic Regulation of the DVC
The third emotional subsystem of the polyvagal theory assumes that
immobilization is adaptive only in response to danger. A state of fear would be
inconsistent with the acknowledged behavioral states associated with seduction
and passion. However, for many mammals, behavioral immobilization of the
female is required for intromission. This active inhibition of motor activity
optimally occurs in humans, not in a state of terror or fear but in a state defined
by safety and trust of the mate. If trust and safety do not characterize the period
of copulation, intercourse may be painful and produce tissue damage.
Alternatively, if a faulty sense of safety is perceived, both male and female may
be vulnerable to predation.
How do mammals immobilize without fear? And what are the physiological
mechanisms underlying the mating rituals that allow behavioral immobilization
without the physiological consequences of fear-induced shutdown responses?

Although the polyvagal theory has emphasized the potentially lethal
shutdown behaviors associated with massive surges from the dorsal motor
nucleus of the vagus, the DVC is involved in other functions. The DVC, with
motor fibers originating in the dorsal motor nucleus of the vagus and afferent
fibers terminating in the nucleus of the solitary tract and area postrema, has been
assumed to be involved primarily in homeostatic functions (Leslie, 1985). The
DVC promotes anabolic activities related to the restoration and conservation of
bodily energy and the resting of vital organs. The DVC regulates digestion by
modulating digestive polypeptides and gastric motility (Rogers & Hermann,
1992). In addition, Uvnas-Moberg (1989, 1994) has proposed a parallel between
DVC regulation of gastrointestinal hormones and the regulation of visceral states
including stress, hunger, and satiety. Without external challenges, the DVC
optimizes the function of the internal viscera. In contrast, by increasing
metabolic output to deal directly with external challenges, the SNS attempts to
optimize the organism’s relationship with the environment. Thus, increases in
ambient temperature, noise, pain, and pyrogenic agents produce not only
increased sympathetic activity but an active inhibition of DVC actions on the gut
(Uvnas-Moberg, 1987).

Paraventricular Nucleus and the DVC
The paraventricular nucleus of the hypothalamus is an important regulator of the
DVC. Neural communication between the paraventricular nucleus and the DVC
is involved in responses that are not only homeostatic but protective and
defensive (e.g., nausea and vomiting, conditioned taste aversion, behavioral
defense) (Lawes, 1990). Communication between the paraventricular nucleus
and the DVC changes with experience and thus may exhibit a type of learning or
memory. Associations may be established rapidly between environmental
features or experiences and visceromotor responses. Perhaps, as in conditioned
taste aversion, this memory is expressed as a learned association between a
specific environmental feature and nausea. Once the association is made,
subsequent exposure to the environmental feature may result in immediate
nausea and defensive avoidance behaviors. These speculations regarding the
changing communication between the paraventricular nucleus and the DVC with
experience are consistent with general theories of aversion learning (Garcia,
Lasiter, Bermudez-Rattoni, & Deems, 1985).
The paraventricular nucleus regulation of the DVC evolved in
phylogenetically older vertebrates in which escape and avoidance behaviors
contributed to the maintenance of visceral homeostasis (Lawes, 1990). Because
the early vertebrates lacked an elaborate nervous system to control their viscera,
behavior was a primary mechanism for the maintenance of homeostasis (e.g.,
moving to regulate thermoregulatory and oxygen requirements). As the nervous
system evolved, an autonomic nervous system and neuroendocrine mechanisms
emerged and displaced the need to use behavior to regulate internal state. The
neural and neuroendocrine regulation of internal state allowed behavioral
processes to be directed toward environmental challenges. However, the brain
structures, specifically the paraventricular nucleus, that governed the
homeostatically driven behaviors in the phylogenetically older species, evolved
into the structures responsible for regulating internal homeostatic functions in
the phylogenetically newer species (Leslie, Reynolds, & Lawes, 1992).
The role of the paraventricular nucleus in the regulation of the DVC in
modern vertebrates retains phylogenetically older functions and continues to
respond to threatening situations by contributing to visceral and endocrine
responses. However, this phylogenetic organization results in vulnerabilities,
because perceived challenges to survival, whether or not truly life-threatening,

may elicit visceral and endocrine reactions that compromise normal
physiological function.
The phylogenetic emphasis of the polyvagal theory emphasizes that defense
and avoidance behaviors have a vagal component manifested through the DVC.
For example, a physiological shutdown mediated by the DVC would support
avoidance behaviors such as death feigning or freezing. However, the evolution
of hypothalamic regulation of the DVC provides response alternatives.
Specifically, in mammals, the paraventricular nucleus produces two
neuropeptides, oxytocin and vasopressin, that differentially communicate with
the sensory and motor portions of the DVC. Using the push-pull perfusion
technique, Landgraf et al. (1990) demonstrated that both oxytocin and
vasopressin are released in the DVC. Binding sites for vasopressin are prevalent
in the sensory component, but are not represented in the motor component (Fuxe
et al., 1994). In contrast, oxytocin appears to provide a primary pathway from
the paraventricular nucleus to the dorsal motor nucleus of the vagus with
oxytocin injections into the DVC mimicking the vagal responses normally
observed immediately following feeding (Rogers & Hermann, 1992). Direct
pathways from the nucleus of the solitary tract to the paraventricular nucleus
provide a potential source of feedback for hypothalamic influences on
visceromotor functions (Sawchenko & Swanson, 1982). The communication
between the DVC and the paraventricular nucleus appears to modulate specific
visceromotor reflexes involving cardiovascular (Nissen, Cunningham, &
Renaud, 1993) and gastrointestinal systems (Bray, 1985).

Oxytocin and Vasopressin
Oxytocin and vasopressin are synthesized primarily in the paraventricular and
supraoptic nuclei of the hypothalamus and released centrally via parvocellular
neurons and systemically via magnocellular neurons (Swanson & Sawchenko,
1977). The central and systemic effects of these neuropeptides are different.
Central release of oxytocin regulates the output of the dorsal motor nucleus of
the vagus, usually maintaining output within levels optimal to support
homeostasis. Peripheral release of oxytocin is related to milk ejection, uterine
contractions, and ejaculation (Arletti, Benelli, & Bertolini, 1992; Wakerley,
Clarke, & Summerlee, 1994). Central release of vasopressin appears to modulate
afferent feedback from the viscera and to shift set points, independent of
sensitivity, for vagal reflexes such as the baroreceptor reflex (Michelini, 1994).
The raising of the baroreceptor set point would, by increasing cardiac output,
potentiate fight-or-flight behaviors and allow sympathetic excitation of the heart
to be unopposed by homeostatic vagal reflexes. Thus, central levels of oxytocin
have been assumed to be associated with vagal processes and central levels of
vasopressin have been assumed to be associated with sympathetic processes
(Uvnas-Moberg, 1997).
Because the peripheral influences of oxytocin and vasopressin function
through feedback, primarily via the sensory component of the DVC, the effects
are less clear and may be level-dependent. For example, it is possible that
peripheral vasopressin, by stimulating vagal afferents, may trigger massive vagal
responses via the dorsal motor nucleus of the vagus. In support of this
speculation, it is known that in humans, peripheral vasopressin, and not
oxytocin, is related to the nausea experienced during motion sickness (Koch,
Summy-Long, Bingaman, Sperry, & Stern, 1990). In addition, systemic
vasopressin may induce a baroreceptor-mediated withdrawal of sympathetic
tone, which is observed in increases in baroreceptor-elicited bradycardia and a
fall in plasma concentration of norepinephrine (Buwalda, Koolhaas, & Bohus,
1992; Michelini, 1994).
Under certain conditions, such as during periods of perceived safety, small
increases in peripheral vasopressin might trigger parvocellular release of both
oxytocin and vasopressin. Potentially, this could occur via stimulation of either
peripheral vagal afferents or vasopressinergic receptors in the area postrema.
This stimulation would initiate communication between the paraventricular

nucleus and both the sensory and motor nuclei of the DVC. The simultaneous
central release of oxytocin and vasopressin would activate both vagal and
sympathetic activity. This unique physiological state might characterize sexual
arousal and would support intimate behaviors. Since vestibular stimulation
elicits systemic vasopressin release (Koch et al., 1990), the perception of motion
or environments that move might elicit visceral states vulnerable for intimacy.
This could explain the selection of porch swings, trains, boats, planes, water
beds, or even roller-coasters as preferred arenas for eliciting and experiencing
passionate love.
Oxytocin may be part of a complex response profile related to the perception
of the environment as safe. Consistent with this view, Uvnas-Moberg (1997) and
Carter and Altemus (1997) propose that oxytocin promotes states resistant to
stress (i.e., antistress). In contrast, vasopressin may be part of a complex
response profile related to the perception that the environment is challenging or
dangerous. In fact, central vasopressin could potentiate mobilization responses
via sympathetic excitation, while high levels of systemic vasopressin may
potentiate a physiological shutdown associated with fear (e.g., bradycardia) via
feedback to the dorsal motor nucleus and inhibition of sympathetic outflow
(Ferguson & Lowes, 1994). In addition, lesions of vagal afferents, which
functionally block the visceral input to the sensory component of the DVC (areas
sensitive to vasopressin), attenuate or abolish specific conditioned taste
aversions (Andrews & Lawes, 1992).
Based on the polyvagal theory, the mammalian or smart vagus, with
myelinated motor fibers originating in the nucleus ambiguus, provides a system
for voluntary engagement with the environment with special features associated
with the prosocial behaviors of communication. Paralleling this evolutionary
shift in the vagus is a mammalian modification of the hypothalamic regulation of
the DVC via both oxytocin and vasopressin. The advent of specific receptors for
oxytocin and vasopressin increases the range of adaptive functions involving the
DVC. In mammals, the dorsal motor nucleus of the vagus, the motor component
of the DVC, is sensitive to oxytocin and insensitive to vasopressin. In contrast,
the sensory components of the DVC, the nucleus of the solitary tract and area
postrema, are most sensitive to vasopressin. Although the nucleus of the solitary
tract has receptors for oxytocin (Landgraf et al. 1990), the area postrema may
not be directly influenced by oxytocin (Carpenter, 1990). The differential
sensitivity of specific components of the DVC to these two neuropeptides (the
differential effects of central and systemic release on visceral function and a

potential level dependency) results in a wider range of response options and the
co-opting of the primitive vagal system to support avoidance (death feigning,
vomiting), engagement (e.g., nursing, feeding) and copulation.
Conditioned Love: Physiological Mechanisms Involved in the
Learning and Memory of Intimacy
Classical conditioning provides a potential neurophysiological process to
associate gastrointestinal responses with specific sensory events. Classical
conditioning may incorporate oxytocinergic and vasopressinergic pathways
connecting the paraventricular nucleus with the dorsal motor vagal complex.
Garcia et al. (1985), in presenting a general theory of aversion learning,
speculated that two specialized coping systems evolved in mammals. The first
coping system includes behaviors to protect oneself from predatory attack. This
system employs instrumental mobilization behaviors, including active approach
and avoidance behaviors. The second coping system deals with protecting the
gut from toxic foods and includes the hedonic appraisal of visceral stimulation
during eating and copulation. The second system produces rapidly conditioned
and 
difficult-to-extinguish 
gustatory–visceral 
associations. 
Garcia 
and
colleagues speculated that to approach a receptive mate is a product of the first
system and to find a sexually satisfying mate more desirable is a product of the
second system. This distinction between approach behaviors and conditioned
visceral feelings is convergent with the proposed neurobiological theory of love,
which distinguishes between seduction and conditioned or passionate love.
Consistent with the hypothesis that a conditioned association between
positive visceral feelings and the mate are a product of copulation, Carter and
colleagues (Carter, Devries, & Getz, 1995; Carter et al., 1997) have shown that
sexual interactions, probably mediated through oxytocin and/or vasopressin, can
facilitate pair-bonding. Oxytocin has been associated with positive states, such
as physical proximity, touching, prosocial behavior, and the ingestion of food
(Carter et al., 1997; Uvnas-Moberg, 1997). Oxytocin also has been implicated in
the cephalic phase of digestion. The cephalic phase, the initial digestive phase, is
stimulated by psychological factors such as sight, smell, taste, or associations
with food before food enters the stomach. The cephalic phase is characterized by
increased gastric secretion and reduced gastric motility, providing a receptive
environment for the passage of food and allowing the gastric secretions to more
efficiently aid in digestion of food in the stomach (Rogers & Hermann, 1992).

Oxytocin and vasopressin are related to other learned responses. For
example, intracerebroventricular injection of oxytocin attenuates passive
avoidance (Kovacs & Telegdy, 1982), whereas vasopressin enhances passive
avoidance (De Wied, 1971). Although these findings may be paradigm-
dependent, there is consistent evidence that central levels of both neuropeptides
are involved in learning social cues and in the development of partner
preferences (Carter, 1998; Engelmann, Wotjak, Neumann, Ludwig, & Landgraf,
1996). In addition, it is well known that the oxytocin released during milk
ejection can be conditioned (Wakerley et al., 1994). Likewise, it is plausible that
the oxytocin released during coitus could be conditioned and associated with
specific social cues. Thus, engagements between pair-bonded mates would
trigger a release of oxytocin, which might decrease the latency for subsequent
sexual encounters.
Communication Between the Paraventricular Nucleus and the
DVC: A Mammalian System for Love and Fear
The neural and neuropeptide communication between the paraventricular
nucleus and the DVC, with its involvement in both emotional and learned
associations, may provide the physiological mechanism that enables mammals to
respond reliably to both fear-related and safety-related environmental cues.
Thus, this communication, through the partitioned roles of two related peptides,
vasopressin and oxytocin, may promote several classes of behavior. First, the
oxytocinergic pathways from the paraventricular nucleus to the dorsal motor
nucleus of the vagus appear to co-opt the ancient immobilization fear system that
characterizes reptiles. By blunting the shutdown fear response mediated by the
dorsal motor nucleus of the vagus, oxytocin modulates vagal function to promote
homeostasis and shifts the function of the visceral organs to support progenitive
behavior and experiences of passion. Second, in the absence of central oxytocin
communication with the dorsal motor nucleus of the vagus, increases in systemic
vasopressin would facilitate a fear-induced avoidance, consistent with
phylogenetic origins, as a shutdown response system. Third, central vasopressin
would facilitate mobilization via sympathetic excitation. Fourth, small increases
in systemic vasopressin may trigger a coexcitation of central oxytocin and
vasopressin coincident with the peripheral coexcitation of vagal and sympathetic
activity characteristic of sexual arousal.
Consistent with the literature on visceral (i.e., vagal) conditioning and pair-

bonding (Carter et al., 1997), the oxytocinergic communication between the
paraventricular nucleus and the dorsal motor nucleus of the vagus, may provide
a neurophysiological mechanism to explain how specific progenitive behaviors
including proximity with a mate would be linked with positive visceral feelings.
The conditioning process would be facilitated by both systemic vasopressin,
which could trigger sexual arousal, and central oxytocin, which could modulate
vagal responses. The conditioning process may provide a plausible mechanism
to explain other classes of behavior including parent–child bonding, friendships,
and the visceral reactions to the loss of a loved one either through death or
violation of vows of love. For example, grief and unrequited love, often
characterized by potent unpleasant visceral responses, may be mediated by
increases in systemic vasopressin, which can trigger vagal responses (e.g.,
nausea and syncope), which are no longer protected or modulated within the
homeostatic range by oxytocin. Vasopressin and oxytocin may work in concert
in other behavioral states. For example, during sexual or nursing behaviors,
peripheral oxytocin release may enable the visceral organs to be responsive and
pliable, while central oxytocin and/or vasopressin release may result in a
modulation or an attenuation of painful tactile stimulation, such as that reported
following electrical stimulation of the solitary tract (Ren, Randich, & Gebhart,
1990; Uvnas-Moberg, 1998).
Additional neuroanatomical structures may be involved in the establishment
of intimacy. The amygdala appears to play a major role in the retention of fear-
related or aversive associations (Davis, 1992; LaBar & LeDoux, 1996; LeDoux,
Iwata, Cicchetti, & Reis, 1988). For example, lesions of the central nucleus of
the amygdala attenuate the conditioned bradycardia, independent of the
conditioned corneoretinal potential (Gentile, Jarrell, Teich, McCabe, &
Schneiderman, 1986) or the magnitude of the heart rate orienting response
(Kapp, Frysinger, Gallagher, & Haselton, 1979). This research demonstrates a
role for the amygdala in the retention of negative affective states. However, the
role of the amygdala in the retention of positive affective states with prosocial
consequences, such as a hypothesized conditioned love, has not been
investigated.
Immobilization Without Fear: The Importance of Perceived
Safety
By incorporating the influence of the neuropeptides oxytocin and vasopressin on

the DVC, the polyvagal theory can be used to explain two classes of
immobilization behaviors: one associated with fear and the other with passion.
Mammals require a perception of safety to digest food efficiently, to sleep, and
to reproduce. During perceived threat or fear, these processes are inhibited. The
paraventricular regulation of the DVC provides a plausible mechanism for a
central switching circuit that determines whether specific DVC processes are
fostered or inhibited. Thus, the neuropeptide modulation of the DVC may
contribute to two important processes: first, the determination of whether
immobilization is due to fear or security; second, a specific conditioned
association with each behavioral state. Similar to other conditioned vagal
responses (e.g., taste aversion), the learned associations with either fear or
security may be easily established and very difficult to extinguish.
The oxytocinergic pathways from the paraventricular nucleus to the dorsal
motor nucleus of the vagus modulate the neural stimulation of organs of fear,
digestion, and elimination to foster reproduction, feelings of safety, visceral
sensations of pleasure and ecstasy and the conditioning of visceral associations
with the mate. In contrast, the vasopressinergic pathways from the
paraventricular nucleus to the nucleus of the solitary tract and area postrema may
inhibit processes associated with digestion, elimination, and reproduction,
thereby facilitating fight-or-flight (mobilization) behaviors. Other neural
pathways from the hypothalamus to the DVC may promote either primitive
avoidance behaviors (such as freezing and death feigning) or the more
phylogenetically advanced flight-or-fight behaviors associated with the SNS. In
addition, pathways from the amygdala may modulate the communication
between the hypothalamus and the DVC (Lawes, 1990) and contribute to
specific fear-associated behaviors (LeDoux et al., 1988; Rosen, Hamerman,
Sitcoske, Glowa, & Schulkin, 1996).
Mammalian neuropeptides modulate autonomic functions during love-related
behaviors. The polyvagal theory emphasizes the phylogenetically more recent
vagal pathways that originate in the nucleus ambiguus. The nucleus ambiguus
vagal pathways are involved in the voluntary behaviors required for social
engagement, including the general category of seduction. However, the visceral
experience of ecstasy, diffuse visceral pleasure, and analgesia are related to the
phylogenetically older DVC. The DVC, according to the polyvagal theory is
associated with an immobilization fear system. However, the mammalian
neuropeptide oxytocin, which is released from the paraventricular nucleus of the
hypothalamus, provides a neurophysiological mechanism to co-opt the function

of the DVC. Oxytocin may modify the function of the DVC from an
immobilization fear system to an immobilization passion or love system.
Oxytocin, although stimulating vagal activity (e.g., DVC), appears to limit vagal
activity to a functional range that protects the organism from experiencing
massive vagal surges that would shut down physiological homeostasis.
Seduction or Rape?
The autonomic nervous system is involved in several aspects of human mating
behavior. First, as discussed, the autonomic nervous system can support
seduction (behaviors of engagement). The mammalian or smart vagus with its
somatomotor regulation of facial expressions and vocalizations provides the
neural regulatory structures for this phase of social engagement. Second, by an
inhibition of the vagal system and an excitation of the SNS, cardiac output can
be increased to support behavioral mobilization including active withdrawal
from unwelcomed engagements, fighting behavior to protect the mate, and
approach behaviors to reduce distance from the mate. Third, the phylogenetically
older DVC (visceral or vegetative vagus) contributes to behavioral
immobilization by initiating a primitive shutdown of physiological systems. This
form of immobilization is usually in response to fear when there is no option to
mobilize. Fourth, by co-opting the DVC, the neuropeptides from the
paraventricular nucleus can promote sexual arousal, immobilization without fear,
copulatory behavior, positive visceral experiences, and conditioned associations
with the mating partner.
A physiological shutdown response profile may characterize the female
during rape, an unwelcomed and physiologically dangerous event. This
physiological shutdown, due to a massive surge from the dorsal motor nucleus of
the vagus, may be associated with or conditioned to specific events or
individuals. This classically conditioned response may require only a single trial
to be learned and may exhibit great resistance to extinction. For example,
following the rape, sexual encounters, even with a desired partner, may elicit a
vagal syncope. Or the raped woman may become anxious about sexual
encounters and physiologically mobilized via sympathetic excitation to escape.
An important aspect of the immobilization phase is that it may follow the well-
documented laws of conditioning visceral responses mediated by the DVC (e.g.,
nausea and vomiting) used to explain conditioned taste aversion (Garcia et al.,
1985). A similar response profile may characterize individuals who fear death

and believe that they are unable to escape, such as the description of
hopelessness (Richter, 1957) and perhaps, clinical disorders such as post-
traumatic stress disorder.
Seduction provides a prosocial vehicle for mate selection. Appropriate mate
selection, in turn, changes the visceral and psychological experiences associated
with female immobilization from fear to passion, which is required for
intromission. Seduction allows intimacy to occur without trauma. When the
female perceives the male as providing security, an immobilization love system
is initiated. This immobilized love system is physiologically and psychologically
incompatible with the immobilized fear system. Although both immobilization
response patterns share common physiological substrates, the response profiles
are different. The immobilized fear system results in a physiological shutdown
and a functional inhibition of social behavior and sexual receptivity and
responsivity of the genitalia. The immobilization fear system, when initiated,
attempts to turn off behavior and consciousness by lowering heart rate and blood
pressure, which may produce syncope. In contrast, the immobilization love
system heightens sexual arousal in response to genital stimulation, lubricates
genital tissue, maintains blood pressure, and raises pain thresholds. The
immobilization love system co-opts the paraventricular communication with the
DVC and modifies immobilization from a fear-related psychologically
dissociative and physiologically compromised state to a love-related
psychologically ecstatic and reproductively available state.
By co-opting the communication between the paraventricular nucleus and
the DVC, an immobilized love circuit fosters reproductive behaviors.
Reproductive behaviors occurring during states of immobilized love promote
enduring associations between the mate and the ecstatic experiences. The
development of these associations appears to follow the laws of visceral
conditioning, since they are easy to establish and result in relatively permanent
bonds (Carter et al., 1997). Love may be a classically conditioned response with
enduring resistance to extinction. Perhaps species differences in monogamy
(Carter et al., 1995; Dewsbury, 1987) might be related to differences in the
capacity to recruit the paraventricular control over the DVC in prosocial
associative learning paradigms. If this is true, the selective nature of the
seduction phase and the fight-or-flight behaviors of the mobilization phase may
become a functional barrier to this associative vulnerability. Thus, when we are
careful about whom we allow ourselves and our children to be physically close
to and to have sexual activities with, we are respecting our vulnerability to the

conditioning that characterizes passionate love.
How does our nervous system organize these unique and important
behaviors? As illustrated in Figure 11.1, the social engagement system and the
vagal brake provide neurobiologically based constructs to describe mechanisms
of seduction. Modulation of the social engagement system enables symbolic
approach behaviors (e.g., facial expressions, head tilt, and vocalizations), and
modulation of the vagal brake provides metabolic support for the behavioral
mobilization necessary to engage a prospective mate physically. However, if
there is a mismatch between the expectations of the prospective mating partners,
mobilization may occur to ensure an increase in physical distance. This
mobilization response requires sympathetic excitation and a withdrawal of the
vagal brake (the smart vagus). If physical escape is not available, the vegetative
vagus (DVC) may become activated to provide a primitive avoidance strategy
characterized by a physiological shutdown and a possible loss of consciousness
due to compromised homeostatic regulation (e.g., decreased blood pressure).
Successful mating and bonding are the product of a different sequence. In
this sequence, seduction is successful and proximity between the prospective
mating partners is reduced. Mobilization is restricted to the physical activities
associated with the preparation to copulate and copulation. Finally, to ease
intromission for the female and the postcoitus recovery for the male, an
immobilization system is stimulated. This immobilization system is confined to
situations of perceived security. Because states of immobilization for mammals
are periods of vulnerability, this type of immobilization occurs only in a safe
environment with mutual trust as a defining feature. Thus, an important feature
of the love experience is not mediated by physical attractiveness, but is driven by
trust and security.
As illustrated in Figure 11.2, hypothalamic–DVC regulation is flexible.
Higher 
brain 
structures 
determine 
whether 
the 
hypothalamic–DVC
communication results in an immobilized fear response or an immobilized love
response. The amygdala may play a major role in determining which
hypothalamic–DVC circuit is recruited. If Pavlovian conditioning provides a
plausible metaphor for the enduring nature of a conditioned love (Garcia et al.,
1985), then the amygdala may be involved in maintaining these learned
associations.
The proposed model attempts to integrate the role of neuropeptides (i.e.,
oxytocin and vasopressin) with the autonomic nervous system. As illustrated in
Figure 11.2, the perceptual mechanisms of higher brain structures determine if a

situation is dangerous or safe. During perceived fear, there are two options. The
organism may mobilize and express fight-or-flight behaviors. Or, if the first
option is not available, the organism may immobilize. Immobilization results in
a behavioral shutdown, death feigning, and a loss of consciousness. The effect of
vasopressin released centrally via the parvocellular neurons, communicating
between the hypothalamus and the sensory portion of the DVC (nucleus of
solitary tract and area postrema), inhibits feedback from the viscera and
promotes sympathetic activation and increased mobilization. However,
vasopressin released systemically via the magnocellular neurons originating in
the hypothalamus stimulates visceral afferents and promotes feedback to the
DVC, which may result in the massive vagal surge associated with physiological
shutdown.
FIGURE 11.2. Neural and neuropeptide regulation of the dorsal motor nucleus of the vagus: fear or love?
Higher brain structures including the amygdala and cortex influence hypothalamic–dorsal vagal complex
(DVC) communication. The DVC includes sensory nuclei in the nucleus of the solitary tract (NTS) and area
postrema (AP) and motor nuclei in the dorsal motor nucleus of the vagus (DMX). During perceived danger,
when mobilization is adaptive, central vasopressinergic pathways (AVP) communicate between the
hypothalamus and both NTS and AP to change the set-point of vagal reflexes to facilitate sympathetic
excitation. Immobilized fear occurs when fight-or-flight behaviors are not an option. Immobilized fear is
fostered by vagal surges from DMX to visceral organs, which are potentiated by systemic AVP. Systemic
AVP triggers increased DMX output by stimulating visceral afferents via NTS and AP. During perceived
safety, oxytocin (OXT) is released centrally and systemically to foster an immobilized love response

pattern. Central OXT limits DMX output to a functional range protecting homeostasis and systemic OXT
stimulates visceral organs. Small increases in systemic AVP might, either via vagal afferents or direct
stimulation of vasopressinergic receptors in AP, trigger central AVP and OXT and promote sexual arousal.
In contrast, perceived security changes the immobilization system, which
originally evolved to cope with fear, to a system that promotes reproduction and
provides heightened sensory experiences that are psychologically reinforcing.
Perceived security enables the hypothalamic release of oxytocin centrally to
modulate the vagal discharge that can stimulate the viscera and systemically to
foster reproduction and heightened sensory feedback. Enhanced sensory
feedback provides a positive visceral state that acts as a reinforcer to enhance the
conditioned association between the mate and reproductive availability. In
addition, sensory feedback acts as a modulator of pain (Komisaruk & Whipple,
1995), which allows areas of the body to experience sensations that would have
been perceived as painful in other situations. The positive visceral feelings lead
to experiences of pleasure, ecstasy, and the less well-defined emotional states
that we associate with love. Thus, via the influence of oxytocin on the autonomic
nervous system, organs of fear and vigilance become organs of pleasure,
nurturance, and reproduction. Oxytocin, a hormone unique to mammals, co-opts
ancient structures changing a fear-induced shutdown system in to a receptive and
ecstatic reproductive system. In addition, as stated, there is the possibility that
low levels of peripheral vasopressin, perhaps elicited by gentle vestibular
stimulation in an environment perceived as safe (e.g., the porch swing or a
sailboat) triggers central release of oxytocin.
Of course, the violation of trust changes the context, and a mate that once
conveyed a sense of safety would now convey cues of danger. Thus, violation of
trust might result in mobilized fight-or-flight behaviors, or the shutdown
behavior associated with immobilized fear. In addition, unrequited love or the
loss of a loved one might result in syncope or visceral feelings associated with
nausea, characteristic of vagal activation due to systemic vasopressin release,
without the protective or modulated influence of oxytocin.
The Monogamy Switch and the Biological Prenuptial
Love, as an emotional and motivational process, may have evolved to maximize
the adaptive benefits associated with reproduction and safety. However, to
achieve these benefits, individuals need to negotiate the relative costs of coping
with two potent risks: (1) the vulnerability to predation; and (2) the vulnerability

of the nervous system to develop enduring social bonds following the mating
sequence. The first risk is obvious. The environment is competitive and often
hostile. To survive, coalitions must be developed. Prominent among these
coalitions is the social bond between mating partners. The second risk
acknowledges that our nervous system may be stimulated to form enduring
social bonds with an inappropriate mate. The articulation of the second risk is
new to science. Rather, the second risk has been the focus of gender-specific
myths and cultural expectations regarding chastity, promiscuity, and marriage. In
contemporary culture, monogamy is the focal point around which seduction and
sexual encounters are expected to revolve. However, not all sexual and love
experiences lead to monogamous relationships. Although the partitioning of the
love experience into two sequential components (seduction and a conditioned or
enduring passionate love) assumes a monogamous end point, many individuals
may focus on seduction and opt for relationships that are not monogamous.
Conditioned love with its enduring social bond might require a prerequisite
neurophysiological state that might be conceptualized as a monogamy switch.
Once a decision is made to become monogamous with a selected mate, the
individual may immobilize without fear and the nervous system becomes
vulnerable to conditioned love. Alternatively, to protect oneself from
monogamy, the monogamy switch may be disabled by mobilization strategies,
even during sexual encounters. Mobilization strategies engage SNS mechanisms,
which are inhibitory of the conditioning processes associated with DVC
mechanisms. For example, promiscuous sexual activity need not lead to
enduring bonds, if the sexual activity were physically active and both sexual
partners limited periods of immobilization. This strategy would limit oxytocin
release, while experiencing the activation of sexual arousal. Illicit affairs fit this
model, especially if the sexual activity is brief, intense, and under the threat of
discovery.
The risks or vulnerabilities to states of conditioned love have been described
in gender-specific myths, which promote female chastity and female
vulnerability to first love in contrast to male promiscuity. Underlying these
myths may be an implicit understanding of the monogamy switch, a
neurophysiological mechanism that promotes pair-bonding or conditioned love.
For example, female immobilization without fear might heighten a vulnerability
to a conditioned or learned love. Thus, the male, who conquers the female’s
fears and gives her a sense of safety and security, not only is allowed to copulate
with her, but in return she may be permanently bonded to him. Possibly, this

gender bias might have evolved because copulatory behavior in mammals
requires only the female to immobilize, but to immobilize outside the realm of
fear. In contrast, the male tends to be more mobilized in the sexual act; only
following ejaculation does the male become immobilized and at physical risk
from the environment. It is this mobilization that may protect the male from a
conditioned love. Perhaps, if the male, following copulation, remained
immobilized or slept in the presence of the female, he would be as vulnerable as
the female to conditioned love. Cultural and self-imposed prohibitions of
spending the night together, even following sex, might reflect an implicit
biological awareness of this phenomenon.
The potential gender differences in conditioned love vulnerability may result
in an unstated but assumed biological prenuptial. The biological prenuptial
reflects the interactive negotiations between prospective mating partners in
which the male requests exclusive copulatory rights of the female’s reproductive
organs and the female requests that the male ensure her security and safety needs
before activating the monogamy switch. Violation of the biological prenuptial
occurs when the male physically abuses the female or when the female copulates
with another male. The valence of these two violations appears to be gender
specific. In support of this hypothesis, Buss, Larsen, Westen, and Semmelroth
(1992) reported that men are more distressed by their mate’s sexual infidelity,
while women are more distressed by their mate’s emotional infidelity. Violations
of the biological prenuptial are destructive to the love bond and result in a lack
of trust and security for both genders. This gender-biased prenuptial is so rooted
in our history that it finds its way into our marriage vows and religious tenants,
which have been used to support monogamy.
CONCLUSION
The evolution of the neural and hormonal regulation of the autonomic nervous
system provides a framework to interpret mammalian love as an adaptive
process that facilitates reproduction in a rapidly changing and challenging
environment. The development of love and intimacy consists of several
sequential processes with adaptive functions that promote safety and progenitive
behavior. Love, as a neurophysiological construct, not only promotes
reproduction but also provides a pair-bond to promote safety in the challenging
environment. Within this adaptive context, love may have evolved functionally

as a temporal shortcut to bypass the slow, often tedious, and potentially
unsuccessful processes of communication and social engagement to foster
physical proximity and to promote intimacy and reproductive behaviors.

CHAPTER 12
Social Engagement and Attachment: A
Phylogenetic Perspective
As the scientific knowledge of neuroanatomy and neurophysiology expands,
there is a growing interest in the role neural processes play in the development of
normal social behavior and in the expression of the atypical social behaviors that
may provide the roots of mental illness in children. Recent advances in
neuroscience have enabled researchers to study nervous system function and
structure in the intact living individual. Now neuronal function can be studied,
and the structural hypotheses derived from animal models and postmortem
histology can be challenged and explained. These new methods of assaying
neural structure and function, coupled with the breakthroughs in molecular
genetics, are providing new tools and models, which can be integrated with
existing strategies that effectively monitor dynamic neural function by time
sampling neuroendocrine and autonomic parameters.
DEFINING SOCIAL BEHAVIOR: THE GREAT
CONCEPTUAL DIVIDE
An objective of this chapter is to build bridges among researchers who study the
development of social behavior with both animal models and clinical
populations. As a preliminary premise, it is assumed that both cohorts share the
same objective of generating knowledge related to the mechanisms of normal
and atypical social behavior that could be translated into clinical practice. The
contrasts between the research strategies and methods of the two cohorts may
force a reevaluation of this assumption.
Animal models often emphasize the role of a specific neural system,

neurotransmitter, neuropeptide, hormone, or brain structure as a regulator of
social behavior. In contrast, clinical research often focuses on studying aberrant
psychological processes in clinical populations. When neurophysiological
systems are studied with clinical populations, the research designs focus on
establishing correlations with the disorders and, in general, preclude the
possibility of distinguishing whether the physiological correlates are causes or
effects of the disorder.
Although the two research strategies often use similar terms, the terms may
reflect different domains of social behavior. Animal models tend to focus on the
establishment of pair-bonds and generate paradigms to evaluate the strength of
these bonds. In contrast, research with children, investigating normal and
atypical social behavior, tends to focus on the behaviors that reduce social and
physical distance between individuals. For example, the terminology associated
with measuring and defining social behavior differs when contrasting the
compromised social engagement strategies expressed by an institutionalized
child with the ability to establish pair-bonds by a vole.
A final perplexing part of the conceptual divide relates to the translation of
neuroscience principles and research findings into clinical practice. The clinician
is the third limb of this triad. Paradoxically, although the link between social
behavior and mental illness in children emerged directly from clinical
observations, the features and dimensions of social behavior studied in both
animal models and in laboratory studies of normal and atypical children often
deviates from the features that clinicians use to define the pathology. Clinical
researchers who conduct studies of social behavior are interested in either how
outlier behaviors overlap with features of clinical diagnoses or how behavioral,
psychological, and physiological parameters differentiate the clinical population
from normal subjects. Often the parameters of interest or, at least, those that
distinguish the clinical group from normal subjects focus on processes that do
not have an obvious relation to the behaviors observed in clinical settings or
used to define the pathology (e.g., cortisol).
Most research in psychopathology accepts the validity of clinical assessment
and diagnostic systems (e.g., DSM-IV) as inclusion criteria and then attempts to
demonstrate that deficits in psychological processes and/or atypical
neurophysiological response patterns underlie the disorder. The research on
processes and mechanisms, whether obtained from clinical populations or by
studying animal models assumed to express behaviors similar to the clinical
populations, does not easily enter the clinical realm and inform clinical

assessment. Similarly, other than global diagnoses and quantitative information
from standardized assessment instruments, little information from clinical
observations regarding the specific features of behavior that have triggered the
clinician’s concern easily enters the research environment. Thus, the construct of
social behavior is treated differently by researchers testing animal models,
researchers studying normal social behavior, researchers studying the
psychological and neurophysiological mechanisms and processes underlying a
clinical diagnosis, and clinicians who diagnose and treat social behavior
problems in children. Missing in this mix of metaphors, worldviews, paradigms,
and diagnostic models is a shared agenda to translate research findings into
practice (i.e., assessment and treatment) and to use clinical information to inform
the theoretical models being tested.
SOCIAL BEHAVIOR AND ATTACHMENT
Several researchers who study the development of social behavior in children
have focused on the construct of attachment. Several of these researchers
conduct studies derived from the observations of Bowlby (1982) and the
paradigm building research of Ainsworth et al. (1972) Much of the current
research on human attachment is based on the Ainsworth typology, which
applies a paradigm assessing infant responses to separation. Clinicians and
researchers in developmental psychopathology assume that the Ainsworth
classification system and recent derivatives (Cassidy & Shaver, 1999) will
provide insights into the psychological mechanisms of specific disorders. In fact,
diagnostic categories now include disorders such as reactive attachment disorder
(RAD).
The traditional attachment schema derived from the Bowlby theory
constitutes only a small part of social behavior. Moreover, traditional attachment
theory by focusing on mother–infant relations does not include other putative
attachment behaviors that are observed in the enduring bonds between peers,
siblings, and mates. Missing from the traditional attachment theories is an
articulation of the mechanisms mediating engagement between the individuals
bonding or forming attachments.
SOCIAL ENGAGEMENT: THE PREAMBLE OF A SOCIAL
BOND

To develop a social bond, individuals have to be in close proximity. This is true
for the models focusing on both mother–infant attachment and the strong bonds
associated with social monogamy. Both models test the strength and features of
the relationship through separation paradigms. There are, of course, major
differences between the contexts in which mother–infant attachment and the
social bonds of reproductive partners are established and tested. One specific
difference is the contrast in mobility between the mother–infant and reproductive
partner dyads. In the mother–infant dyad there is an imbalance, with the infant
having limited abilities to move toward or away from the mother. However, in
the reproductive partner dyad, there is a balance between the behavioral
repertoires of the two adults.
Although proximity is critical to the establishment of social bonds, proximity
is totally caused by the ability to navigate across physical distance via voluntary
behavior. If social bonds were dependent on voluntary motor behaviors, then the
newborn infant would be greatly disadvantaged because the neural regulation of
the spinal motor pathways are immature at birth and take several years to fully
develop. However, in mammals not all muscles are driven by corticospinal
pathways. Unlike the striated muscles of trunk and limbs, corticobulbar
pathways regulate the striated muscles of the face and head. The corticobulbar
pathways are sufficiently developed at birth to be available to the full-term infant
to signal caregiver (e.g., vocalizations, grimace) and to engage the social (e.g.,
gaze, smile) and nutrient (e.g., sucking) aspects of the world. These motor
pathways originate in the brainstem and regulate muscles through the branches
of five cranial nerves (V, VII, IX, X, XI). Thus, the neural regulation of muscles
that provide important elements of social cueing are available to facilitate the
social interaction with the caregiver and function collectively as an integrated
social engagement system (Porges, 2001a).
The muscles of the face and head influence both the expression and
receptivity of social cues and can effectively reduce or increase social distance.
Behaviorally this is observed as facial expressions, eye gaze, vocalizations, and
head orientation. Neural regulation of these muscles can reduce social distance
by making eye contact, expressing prosody in voice, displaying contingent facial
expressions, and modulating the middle ear muscles to improve the extraction of
human voice from background sounds. Alternatively, by reducing the muscle
tone to these muscles, the eyelids droop, prosody is lost, positive and contingent
facial expressions are diminished, the ability to extract human voice from
background sounds is compromised, and the awareness of the social engagement

behaviors of others may be lost. Thus, the neural regulation of the striated
muscles of the face and head function both as an active social engagement
system that reduces psychological distance and as a filter that can influence the
perception of the engagement behaviors of others.
Special visceral efferent pathways mediate the neural regulation of the
striated muscles of the face and head. Special visceral pathways emerge from
three nuclei in the brainstem (nucleus of the trigeminal nerve, nucleus of the
facial nerve, and nucleus ambiguus) and provide motor pathways that are
contained within five cranial nerves (i.e., trigeminal, facial, hypoglossal, vagus,
accessory). These pathways regulate structures that evolved from the ancient gill
arches. From both clinical and research perspectives, the striated muscles of the
face and head provide potent information regarding the behavioral dimensions
used to express as well as to evaluate the strength of attachment or the stress to
the social bond. For example, facial expressivity and prosody of vocalizations
have been used as clinical indicators as well as quantifiable responses of
separation distress (Newman, 1988).
THE SOCIAL ENGAGEMENT SYSTEM: PHYLOGENIC
ORIGINS OF BEHAVIORAL AND AUTONOMIC
COMPONENTS
The phylogenic origin of the behaviors associated with the social engagement
system is intertwined with the phylogeny of the autonomic nervous system. As
the striated muscles, via special visceral efferent pathways, evolved into a
behavioral system that regulated social engagement behaviors, there was a
profound shift in neural regulation of the autonomic nervous system.
Phylogenetically, these changes in both somatomotor and visceromotor
regulation are observed in the transition from reptiles to mammals. As the
muscles of the face and head evolved into an ingestion (i.e., nursing) and social
engagement system, a new component of the autonomic nervous system (i.e., a
myelinated vagus) evolved that was regulated by a brainstem nucleus, which was
also involved in the regulation of the striated muscles of the face and head (i.e.,
nucleus ambiguus). This convergence of neural mechanisms resulted in an
integrated social engagement system with a synergism between behavioral and
visceral features of social engagement. Thus, activation of the somatomotor
component would trigger visceral changes that would support social
engagement, while modulation of visceral state would either promote or impede

social engagement behaviors. For example, stimulation of visceral states that
would promote mobilization (i.e., fight-or-flight behaviors) would impede the
ability to express social engagement behaviors, whereas increased activity
through the myelinated vagus would promote the social engagement behaviors
associated with a calm visceral state.
We can infer the specific neural mechanisms related to the effectiveness that
feeding and rocking have on promoting calm behavioral and visceral states.
Specifically, both the ingestive behaviors associated with feeding and the
passive rocking of an infant promote calmness by influencing the myelinated
vagus. Feeding activates the muscles of mastication via trigeminal efferent
pathways, which, in turn, provide afferent feedback input to the nucleus
ambiguus (i.e., the source nucleus of the myelinated vagus). Rocking provides
an efficient and direct influence on the vagus by stimulating vagal afferent
pathways via the baroreceptors. Moreover, activation of the social engagement
system dampens the neural circuits including the limbic structures that support
fight, flight, or freeze behaviors.
POLYVAGAL THEORY: THREE NEURAL CIRCUITS
REGULATING REACTIVITY
Evolutionary forces have molded both human physiology and behavior. Via
evolutionary processes, the mammalian nervous system has emerged with
specific neural and behavioral features that react to challenge to maintain
visceral homeostasis. These reactions change physiological state and, in
mammals, limit sensory awareness, motor behaviors, and cognitive activity. To
survive, mammals must determine friend from foe, evaluate whether the
environment is safe, and communicate with their social unit. These survival-
related behaviors are associated with specific neurobehavioral states that limit
the extent to which a mammal can be physically approached and whether the
mammal can communicate or establish new coalitions.
Through stages of phylogeny, mammals and especially primates have
evolved a functional neural organization that regulates visceral state to support
social behavior. The polyvagal theory (see chapters 2, 10, 11; Porges, 2001a)
emphasizes the phylogenetic origins of brain structures that regulate social and
defensive behaviors, domains compromised in individuals with autism and
several psychiatric disorders. The polyvagal theory proposes that the evolution
of the mammalian autonomic nervous system provides the neurophysiological

substrates for the emotional experiences and affective processes that are major
components of social behavior. The theory proposes that physiological state
limits the range of behavior and psychological experience. In this context, the
evolution of the nervous system determines the range of emotional expression,
quality of communication, and the ability to regulate bodily and behavioral state.
The polyvagal theory links the evolution of the autonomic nervous system to
affective 
experience, 
emotional 
expression, 
facial 
gestures, 
vocal
communication, and contingent social behavior. Thus, the theory provides a
plausible explanation of several social, emotional, and communication behaviors
and disorders.
The Social Engagement System
The polyvagal theory provides an explicit neurobiological model of how
difficulties in spontaneous social behavior are linked to both facial expressivity
and the regulation of visceral state, and, alternatively, how social behavior may
serve as a regulator of physiological activity. The theory proposes a possible
mechanism to explain how these difficulties might form a core domain of several
psychiatric profiles. Relevant to this focus on psychiatric disorders are the
specific deficits associated with several diagnoses in both the somatomotor (e.g.,
poor gaze, low facial affect, lack of prosody, difficulties in mastication) and
visceromotor (difficulties in autonomic regulation resulting in cardiopulmonary
and digestive problems) of the social engagement system. For example,
clinicians and researchers have documented these deficits in individuals with
autistic spectrum disorders. Deficits in the social engagement system would
compromise spontaneous social behavior and social awareness and affect
expressivity, prosody, and language development. In contrast, interventions that
improve the neural regulation of the social engagement system hypothetically
would enhance spontaneous social behavior, state and affect regulation, reduce
stereotypical behaviors, and improve language skills.
Embryologically, components of several cranial nerves known as special
visceral efferent pathways develop together to form the neural substrate of a
social engagement system (see chapter 11). This system, as illustrated in Figure
3.1, p. 56, provides the neural structures involved in social and emotional
behaviors. The social engagement system has a control component in the cortex
(i.e., upper motor neurons) that regulates brainstem nuclei (i.e., lower motor
neurons) to control eyelid opening (e.g., looking), facial muscles (e.g., emotional

expression), middle ear muscles (e.g., extracting human voice from background
noise), muscles of mastication (e.g., ingestion), laryngeal and pharyngeal
muscles (e.g., vocalization and language), and head-turning muscles (e.g., social
gesture and orientation). Collectively, these muscles function as filters that limit
social stimuli (e.g., observing facial features and listening to human voice) and
determinants of engagement with the social environment. The neural control of
these muscles determines social experiences. In addition, the source nuclei (i.e.,
lower motor neurons) of these nerves, which are located in the brainstem,
communicate directly with an inhibitory neural system that slows heart rate,
lowers blood pressure, and actively reduces arousal to promote calm states
consistent with the metabolic demands of growth and restoration of our
neurophysiological systems. Direct corticobulbar pathways reflect the influence
of frontal areas of the cortex (i.e., upper motor neurons) on the regulation of this
system. Moreover, afferent feedback through the vagus to medullary areas (e.g.,
nucleus of the solitary tract) influences forebrain areas that are assumed to be
involved in several psychiatric disorders. In addition, the anatomical structures
involved in the social engagement system have neurophysiological interactions
with the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal (HPA) axis, the neuropeptides of
oxytocin and vasopressin, and the immune system (Porges, 2001a).
The study of comparative anatomy, evolutionary biology, and embryology
may provide important hints regarding the functional relation between the neural
control of facial muscles and emergent psychological experiences and behavior.
The nerves that control the muscles of the face and head share several common
features. Pathways from five cranial nerves control the muscles of the face and
head. Collectively, these pathways are labeled as special visceral efferent.
Special visceral efferent nerves innervate striated muscles, which regulate the
structures derived during embryology from the ancient gill arches (Truex &
Carpenter, 1969). The special visceral efferent pathways regulate the muscles of
mastication (e.g., ingestion), muscles of the middle ear (e.g., listening to human
voice), muscles of the face (e.g., emotional expression), muscles of larynx and
pharynx (e.g., prosody and intonation), and muscles controlling head tilt and
turning (e.g., gesture). In fact, a neural pathway involved in the regulation of the
eyelids also tenses the stapedius muscle in the middle ear, which facilitates
hearing human voice. Thus, the neural mechanisms for making eye contact are
shared with those needed to listen to human voice. As a cluster, the difficulties in
gaze, extraction of human voice, facial expression, head gesture, and prosody are
common features of individuals with autism.

Disorders of the Social Engagement System: Maladaptive or
Adaptive Behavioral Strategies?
Individuals with several psychiatric and behavioral disorders have difficulties in
establishing and maintaining relations. Several clinical diagnostic categories
include features associated with difficulties both in expressing social behavior
and in reading social cues (i.e., social awareness). These features are observed in
individuals with a variety of primary psychiatric diagnoses including autism,
social anxiety, post-traumatic stress disorder, and RAD.
Although a compromised social engagement system results in “maladaptive”
social behavior, do these asocial behavioral strategies have “adaptive” features?
The phylogeny of the vertebrate autonomic nervous system serves as a guide
(i.e., polyvagal theory) to understand these adaptive features. Phylogenetically,
the vertebrate autonomic nervous system follows three general stages of
development. Each stage supports a different category of behavior with only the
phylogenetically most recent innovation (i.e., myelinated vagus) supporting
social engagement behaviors. Because the neural regulation of the myelinated
vagus is integrated into the social engagement system, when the social
engagement system is compromised the effects are both behavioral and
autonomic. The resultant changes in autonomic state support a range of adaptive
defensive behaviors. Specifically, the compromised social engagement system is
associated, neurophysiologically, with a change in autonomic regulation
characterized by a reduction in the influence of the myelinated vagus (i.e.,
ventral vagal complex including nucleus ambiguus) on the heart. The removal of
the regulatory influence of the ventral vagal complex on the heart potentiates the
expression of the two phylogenetically older neural systems (i.e., sympathetic
nervous system, dorsal vagal complex including dorsal nucleus of the vagus).
These two older neural systems foster mobilization behaviors of fight or flight
via the sympathetic nervous system or immobilization behaviors of death
feigning, freezing, and behavioral shutdown via the dorsal vagal complex.
Neuroception: A Nervous System Evaluation of Risk
Regardless of the model of attachment or its dependence on cognitive, affective,
behavioral, or biological constructs, the critical features that determine the
valence of the interaction are related to perceived safety. Thus, the perception of
safety is the turning point in the development of relationships for most

mammals. The perception of safety determines whether the behavior will be
prosocial (i.e., social engagement) or defensive. If the context and the other
individual are perceived as safe, then the candidates for the social bond may
inhibit the adaptive primitive neurobiological reactions of defense to allow the
expression 
of 
social 
engagement. 
However, 
how 
are 
the 
adaptive
neurobiological systems for defense functionally subdued to insure that
attachment and the formation of social bonds will be the products of appropriate
social engagement?
Before a social bond can occur, both individuals have to perceive each other
as safe. What mediates the individual’s ability to engage? Why would an infant
look and coo at a caregiver, but avert gaze and cry as a stranger approached?
Why would a gentle embrace be experienced as pleasurable when expressed by a
lover and be experienced as assault when expressed by a stranger? Mammals
have adaptive neurobehavioral systems for both defensive and social
engagement behaviors. However, what enables engagement behaviors to occur,
while disenabling the mechanisms of defense? The polyvagal theory with its
focus on the phylogeny of the vertebrate autonomic nervous system provides a
perspective to identify and to understand the plausible mechanisms that enable
mammals to functionally switch between positive social engagement and
defensive behavioral strategies. To effectively switch from defensive to social
engagement strategies, the mammalian nervous system needs to perform two
important processes: (1) assess risk, and (2) if the environment is perceived as
safe, inhibit the more primitive limbic structures that control fight, flight, or
freeze behaviors.
The nervous system, through the processing of sensory information from the
environment, continuously evaluates risk. Because the neural evaluation of risk
does not require conscious awareness, the term neuroception (see chapter 1) is
introduced to emphasize the neural circuits that function as a safety-threat
detection system capable of distinguishing among situations that are safe,
dangerous, or life-threatening. Because of the phylogenetic heritage of
mammals, neuroception can operate without cognitive awareness via relatively
primitive mechanisms that are dependent on subcortical structures (e.g., limbic).
As a product of evolution, new neural systems evolved in mammals that
involved cortical regulation of subcortical structures and, in many instances, co-
opted the defense functions of the primitive structures to support other functions
including those related to reproductive behavior and pair bonding (see chapter
11).

Based on the relative risk of the environment, both social engagement and
defense behaviors may be interpreted as either adaptive or maladaptive. For
example, the inhibition of defense systems by the social engagement system
would be adaptive and appropriate only in a safe environment. From a clinical
perspective, it would be the inability to inhibit defense systems in safe
environments (e.g., anxiety disorders, RAD) or the inability to activate defense
systems in risk environments (e.g., Williams syndrome) that might contribute to
the defining features of psychopathology. Thus, an invalid neuroception of
safety or danger might contribute to maladaptive physiological reactivity and the
expression of the defensive behaviors associated with specific psychiatric
disorders.
There is a common feature between the invalid neuroception that identifies
risk when no risk is there and McEwen’s concept of “allostatic load” (McEwen
& Wingfield, 2003). The physiological reaction to a valid risk, although
metabolically costly, is adaptive. Thus, the increased metabolic activity
necessary to support the mobilization behaviors of fight or flight are adaptive in
the short term, but costly to the organism if maintained. The duration of the
response is an important feature that distinguishes between adaptive and
maladaptive reactions. The complex mammalian nervous system evolved with a
great dependence on oxygen and, unlike the reptile, can survive only for short
periods without oxygen. Thus, breath holding for mammals is adaptive only for
short periods. In contrast, apnea is adaptive for reptiles, who because of their
limited needs for oxygen can inhibit breathing for long periods, whereas apnea is
potentially lethal for mammals (Porges et al., 2003). Similarly, temporal
features, in part, determine the construct of allostatic load. McEwen describes
chronic stress or allostatic state as a physiological response that, although having
adaptive functions in the short term, can be damaging if used for long periods
when it is no longer needed (i.e., invalid neuroception). This cost of adaptation
or “maladaptation” McEwen refers to as allostatic load.
Safety Trumps Fear
In safe environments, autonomic state is adaptively regulated to dampen
sympathetic activation and to protect the oxygen-dependent central nervous
system from the metabolically conservative reactions of the dorsal vagal
complex. However, how does the nervous system know when the environment is
safe, dangerous, or life-threatening and what neural mechanisms evaluate risk in

the environment?
New technologies, such as functional magnetic resonance imaging, have
identified specific neural structures that are involved in detecting risk. The
temporal lobe is of particular interest in expanding the construct of neuroception
and in identifying neural mechanisms that modulate the expression of adaptive
defensive behaviors and autonomic states. Functional imaging techniques
document that areas of the temporal cortex, fusiform gyrus (FG), and superior
temporal sulcus (STS) are involved in detecting features such as movements,
vocalizations, and faces, which contribute to an individual being perceived as
safe or trustworthy (Adolphs, 2002; Winston, Strange, O’Doherty, & Dolan,
2002). Slight changes in these stimuli can pose threat or signal endearment.
Connectivity between these areas of the temporal cortex and the amygdala
suggests a top-down control in the processing of facial features that could
actively inhibit activity of the structures involved in the expression of defensive
strategies (Pessoa, McKenna, Gutierrez, & Ungerleider, 2002).
Neuroanatomical and neurophysiological research with animals provides
additional information regarding the modulation and inhibition of defensive
behaviors via well-defined connections between the amygdala and the
periaqueductal gray (PAG). The PAG is a heterogenous midbrain structure that
consists of gray matter surrounding the cerebral aqueduct that connects the third
and fourth ventricles. Studies have identified areas of the PAG that are organized
to regulate flight, fight, or freeze behaviors and the autonomic states that support
these behaviors (Keay & Bandler, 2001). Stimulating rostrally within the lateral
and dorsolateral PAG produces confrontational defensive behaviors (i.e., fight),
while stimulating caudally within the lateral PAG and dorsolateral PAG
produces escape behaviors (i.e., flight). Autonomic shifts such as increases in
heart rate and blood pressure parallel these behaviors. In contrast, stimulation in
the region of the PAG ventrolateral to the aqueduct (vlPAG) evokes a passive
reaction of immobility, a decrease in blood pressure, and a slowing of heart rate.
Interestingly, excitation of the vlPAG evokes an opioid-mediated analgesia that
might adaptively raise pain thresholds. In addition, there is evidence of a
functional connection between the central nucleus of the amygdala and the
vlPAG that modulates both antinociception and immobilization (Leite-Panissi,
Coimbra, & Menescal-De-Oliveira, 2003). Consistent with the polyvagal theory,
the vlPAG communicates with dorsal vagal complex, whereas the lPAG and
dlPAG communicate with the sympathetic nervous system.
In the absence of threat, inhibitory projections from the FG and STS to the

amygdala would be available to actively inhibit the limbic defense systems. This
inhibition would provide an opportunity for social behavior to occur. Thus, the
appearance of a friend or mate would subdue the limbic activation with the
biobehavioral consequences of allowing proximity, physical contact, and other
social engagement behaviors. In contrast, during situations in which the
appraisal of risk is high, the amygdala and various areas of the PAG are
activated. The amygdala and PAG only share connections through the central
nucleus (Rizvi, Ennis, Behbehani, & Shipley, 1991).
The detection of safety subdues the adaptive defensive systems dependent on
limbic structures. Thus, providing a plausible model of how a neural detection of
environmental risk (i.e., neuroception) would modulate behavior and
physiological state to support adaptive behaviors in response to safe, dangerous,
and life-threatening environments. Conceptually, the process of detecting safety
is inclusive of the detection of risk. Thus, the neural circuits that mediate the
more primitive defense systems have through the processes of evolution been
co-opted to support the social behavior necessary for mammalian survival. These
behaviors include social engagement and the behaviors associated with social
bonding (e.g., reproductive behaviors and nursing).
Co-opting the Immobilization Defense System for Reproductive
Behaviors, Nursing, and the Formation of Social Bonds
Immobilization as a defense system is phylogenetically old and is associated
with reduced metabolic demands and increased pain threshold. In reptiles,
because of their limited need for oxygen, immobilization is a very effective
defense strategy. In contrast, because mammals have a great need for oxygen,
the inhibition of movement coupled with a shift in autonomic state to support the
immobilization behavior (i.e., apnea and bradycardia) can be lethal (Hofer, 1970;
Richter, 1957). However, several aspects of mammalian social behavior require
immobilization, but immobilization without fear. Immobilization without fear is
accomplished by co-opting the structures that regulate immobilization and pain
thresholds to serve a broad range of social needs, including reproduction,
nursing, and pair-bonding. By focusing on the area of the PAG that coordinates
freezing behavior, we can see how a primitive immobilization defense system
has been modified through evolution to serve the intimate social needs of
mammals. In addition, when we study the vlPAG we find that it is rich in
receptors for oxytocin, a neuropeptide associated with parturition, nursing, and

the establishment of pair-bonds (Carter, 1998; Insel & Young, 2001).
Overlapping with the area of the PAG that organizes immobility (i.e.,
vlPAG) are areas that when stimulated produce lordosis and kyphosis. The
lordosis reflex is a hormone-dependent behavior displayed by female rodents
and other mammalian species during mating. In most mammals, lordosis
involves the female immobilizing in a crouching posture with her hind end
available to the male for copulation. Neural tracing studies have demonstrated
that the vlPAG is part of the neural circuit involved in regulating lordosis
(Daniels, Miselis, & Flanagan, 1999). Kyphosis is an upright crouching posture
that is accompanied by inhibition of limb movements. This posture is stimulated
by nipple attachment and provides an opportunity for the dam to feed
simultaneously a large litter. When dams initiate a nursing bout, behavioral state
shifts immediately from high activity to immobility (Stern, 1997). When the
caudal portion of the vlPAG is lesioned, there are important consequences: (1)
kyphotic nursing decreases, (2) litter weight gains decrease, and (3) the lesioned
rats are more aggressive and more frequently attack strange males (Lonstein &
Stern, 1998).
Test of the Model
The processes of attachment and the formation of social bonds require
appropriate social engagement strategies. In the preceding sections, elements of
a preliminary model that links social engagement to attachment and the
formation of social bonds are presented. The model is expanded from the
polyvagal theory and emphasizes the following points: (1) there are well-defined
neural circuits to support social engagement behaviors and the defensive
strategies of fight, flight, or freeze; (2) without being dependent on conscious
awareness, the nervous system evaluates risk in the environment and regulates
the expression of adaptive behavior to match the neuroception of a safe,
dangerous, or life-threatening environment; (3) social engagement behaviors and
the benefits of the physiological states associated with social support require a
neuroception of safety; (4) social behaviors associated with nursing,
reproduction, and the formation of strong pair bonds require immobilization
without fear; and (5) immobilization without fear is mediated by a co-opting of
the neural circuit regulating defensive freezing behaviors through the
involvement of oxytocin, a neuropeptide involved in the formation of social
bonds (Carter & Keverne, 2002; Winslow & Insel, 2002).

Figures 12.1, 12.2, and 12.3 illustrate the role that neuroception plays in
determining the neural circuits recruited to regulate social engagement and fight,
flight, or freeze behaviors. Each figure illustrates a different environment context
(i.e., safe, dangerous, life threat). Figure 12.1 illustrates the assumed neural
circuits involved in promoting social engagement behaviors in a safe context.
The detection of safe or trustworthy features derived from face, voice, and
movement activate a neural circuit that projects from the temporal cortex (i.e.,
FG, STS) to the central nucleus of the amygdala to inhibit defensive limbic
functions (see Figures 12.2 and 12.3). This circuit disenables the limbic defense
systems that organize and regulate fight, flight, or freeze behaviors and enables
the corticobulbar pathways that regulate the social engagement behaviors (see
Figure 3.1, p. 56). Figure 12.2 illustrates the neural circuits involved in a
response to a neuroception of danger. In response to danger, the limbic defense
circuits function to adaptively protect the individual. The specificity of the
defense strategy, whether confrontational or avoidant (i.e., fight or flight), is
regulated by the PAG. To support these mobilization behaviors, the sympathetic
nervous system is activated and dominates autonomic state. Figure 12.3
illustrates the neural circuits involved in response to life threat. In response to
life threat, the mammalian nervous system promotes immobilization or freezing
behavior. Freezing, as a defense strategy, is coordinated by the PAG. To inhibit
metabolic activity during immobilization, autonomic state is under the control of
the dorsal vagal complex. As proposed by the polyvagal theory, the autonomic
reactions during each adaptive behavioral strategy is hierarchically organized
after the phylogeny of both the changes in the vertebrate autonomic nervous
system and changes in the behavioral repertoire from immobilization to
mobilization to social engagement.

FIGURE 12.1. Neural structures and pathways involved in a neuroception of safety.
The ability to evaluate whether the environment is safe or if a person is
trustworthy is difficult for individuals with a variety of psychiatric diagnoses.
Current research suggests that the areas in the temporal cortex (i.e., FG, STS),
which are assumed to inhibit limbic defense reactions, are not activated in
clinical populations that have difficulties with social engagement behaviors (e.g.,
autism, schizophrenia). Moreover, individuals with other psychiatric disorders,
such as anxiety disorders and depression, which have as diagnostic features
compromised social behavior, have difficulties in regulating visceral state (e.g.,
less vagal regulation of the heart) and supporting social engagement behaviors
(e.g., reduced facial expressiveness and motor control of the striated muscles of
the face and head). Thus, from a theoretical perspective, a potential root of
several psychiatric disorders might be linked to an inability to detect safety in
the environment and trustworthiness from interactions and, thus, the inability to
express appropriate social engagement behaviors.

FIGURE 12.2. Neural structures and pathways involved in a neuroception of danger.
The study of attachment disorders such as RAD provides an intriguing test of
the critical role of neuroception in mediating appropriate attachment and social
behavior. RAD is described in both the DSM-IV (American Psychiatric
Association, 1994) and the ICD-10 (World Health Organization, 1992)
psychiatric diagnostic manuals. RAD comprises two clinical patterns (i.e.,
inhibited and uninhibited subtypes). The inhibited subtype is characterized by an
emotionally withdrawn, unresponsive pattern in which there is an absence of
attachment 
behaviors. 
The 
disinhibited 
subtype 
is 
characterized 
by
indiscriminate attachment, which often is directed at strangers. These patterns
have been described in institutionalized and maltreated children (Zeanah, 2000).
From a neuroception perspective, in both subtypes, the evaluation of the risk in
the environment is not accurate.

FIGURE 12.3. Neural structures and pathways involved in a neuroception of life threat.
Recent research on the outcomes of children raised in institutions in
Romania has stimulated interest in RAD and in developing intervention
strategies to remediate these devastating disturbances in social development. If
an accurate neuroception of the environment is necessary for normal social
behavior, then what features in the environment might potentiate normal social
development? A recent study of Romanian toddlers (Smyke, Dumitrescu, &
Zeanah, 2002) provides insight into the process. In this study, indices of RAD
were evaluated in children as a function of the number of different caregivers.
Two groups of institutionalized children were evaluated and contrasted with
children who were never institutionalized. One group consisted of the standard
institution unit in which 20 different caregivers worked rotating shifts with
approximately 3 caregivers for 30 children on each shift. A second group
consisted of a pilot unit in which the number of children were reduced to
approximately 10, and the pool of caregivers was reduced to 4. If neuroception
of safety is necessary to promote appropriate social behavior, then familiarity of
caregiver would be critical. By having familiar caregivers, the child’s detection
of the caregiver’s face, voice, and movements (the features that define a safe and
trustworthy person) should trigger the inhibitory pathways to disenable the
limbic defense system and foster the behaviors expressed by the social

engagement system. In support of this model, the study demonstrated a
monotonic relation between the number of different caregivers that a child had
contact with and the indices of RAD. On all measures, the standard unit children
were more likely to have higher indices of RAD, and on some measures the pilot
group did not differ from the children who were never institutionalized. Thus,
once we understand the contextual and social features that inhibit the neural
circuits that mediate defensive behavioral strategies, we can optimize the
developmental consequences of the neural circuits that promotes social
engagement behaviors.

CHAPTER 13
The Polyvagal Hypothesis: Common
Mechanisms Mediating Autonomic Regulation,
Vocalizations, and Listening
Vocalizations are an intricate component of the complex biobehavioral
repertoire of mammals. Since vocalizations are involved in coordinating
behaviors for mammals that are both prosocial and survival-oriented, the
predominance of research on mammalian vocalizations has focused on
describing the adaptive functions of specific vocal features. In contrast, there is a
paucity of research investigating the neurophysiological linkage between
autonomic regulation and both the production of vocalizations and the
processing of acoustic information. This chapter applies hypotheses and
principles derived from the polyvagal theory (see chapter 2; Porges, 2001a,
2007a) to interpret mammalian vocalizations. The theory emphasizes the parallel
phylogenetic shift in both the neural regulation of the autonomic nervous system
and the evolutionary emergence of an integrated social engagement system that
includes features optimizing conspecific vocal communication. The chapter
presents the polyvagal hypothesis as a new way to interpret the adaptive
functions of mammalian vocalizations. The chapter emphasizes neural
mechanisms involved in social communication, including the reciprocal
relationship between production and reception of vocalizations.
THE POLYVAGAL THEORY: THREE PHYLOGENETIC
RESPONSE SYSTEMS
The polyvagal theory (see chapter 2; Porges, 2001a, 2007a) links parallel

phylogenetic changes in the neural regulation of the autonomic nervous system
with adaptive behaviors. The theory emphasizes the phylogenetic shift in the
features of the vagus, the primary parasympathetic cranial nerve involved in
regulating visceral state. The theory is named polyvagal, since only in mammals
does the vagus contain two distinct efferent pathways. In addition to an
unmyelinated pathway originating in the dorsal motor nucleus of the vagus
shared with other vertebrates (i.e., reptilians, amphibians, teleosts, and
elasmobrachs), mammals have a myelinated pathway originating in the nucleus
ambiguus, and this circuit communicates in the brainstem with source nuclei
regulating the striated muscles of the face and head that are involved in several
of the features of social communication (e.g., facial expression, vocalizations,
listening).
The polyvagal theory provides a physiological basis to link uniquely
mammalian anatomical and physiological circuits involved in visceral state
regulation to both the expressive and receptive domains of social
communication. The development of these features reflects the phylogenetic
distinction between reptiles and mammals, and includes a cluster of behaviors
dependent on the function of structures that phylogenetically emerged with
mammals. These changes include detached middle ear bones, the advent of a
diaphragm, and a myelinated vagal system regulating supradiaphragmatic organs
that is distinct from an unmyelinated vagal system regulating subdiaphragmatic
organs. The classic definition of mammals focuses on the observation of
mammary glands and hair. However, the fossil record, since it cannot be
explored through these features, relies on the identification of detached middle
ear bones as the defining feature of mammals. Coincident with the separation of
the middle ear bones, other phylogenetic transitions resulted in brainstem areas
regulating the vagus becoming intertwined with the areas regulating the striated
muscles of the face and head. The result of this transition was a dynamic social
engagement system with social communication features (e.g., facial expression,
head movements, vocalizations, and listening) interacting with visceral state
regulation.
The polyvagal theory articulates how each of three phylogenetic stages of the
development of the vertebrate autonomic nervous system is associated with a
distinct autonomic subsystem that is retained and expressed in mammals. These
autonomic subsystems are phylogenetically ordered and behaviorally linked to
social communication (e.g., facial expression, vocalization, listening),
mobilization (e.g., fight-or-flight behaviors), and immobilization (e.g., feigning

death, vasovagal syncope, and behavioral suppression). Social communication
(i.e., social engagement system, see later discussion) involves the myelinated
vagus, which serves to foster calm behavioral states by inhibiting the
sympathetic influences to the heart and dampening the hypothalamic–pituitary
axis (HPA) (e.g., Bueno et al., 1989). The mobilization system is dependent on
the functioning of the sympathetic nervous system. The most phylogenetically
primitive component, the immobilization system, is dependent on the
unmyelinated vagus, which is shared with most vertebrates. With increased
neural complexity due to phylogenetic development, the organism’s behavioral
and affective repertoire is enriched. The three circuits can be conceptualized as
dynamically adjusting to provide adaptive responses to safe, dangerous, and life-
threatening events and contexts.
Unlike reptiles, the mammalian nervous system did not evolve solely to
survive in dangerous and life-threatening contexts, but it evolved to promote
social interactions and social bonds in safe environments. To accomplish this
adaptive flexibility, the mammalian nervous system evolved a new neural
strategy for safe environments, while retaining two more primitive neural
circuits to regulate defensive strategies (i.e., fight-or-flight and death-feigning
behaviors). It is important to note that social behavior, social communication,
and visceral homeostasis are incompatible with the neurophysiological states and
behaviors promoted by the two neural circuits that support defense strategies.
Thus, via evolution, the mammalian nervous system retains three neural circuits,
which are in a phylogenetically organized hierarchy. In this hierarchy of
adaptive responses, the newest circuit associated with social communication is
used first, and if that circuit fails to provide safety, the older survival-oriented
circuits are recruited sequentially.
By investigating the phylogeny of the regulation of the vertebrate heart (see
chapters 2 and 10; Morris & Nilsson, 1994; Taylor, Jordan, & Coote, 1999), four
principles can be extracted that provide a basis for speculation regarding
emergent behaviors and social communication. These principles lead to testable
hypotheses relating the specific neural mechanisms supporting social
engagement, fight-or-flight, and death-feigning behaviors.
1. There is a phylogenetic shift in the regulation of the heart from endocrine
communication, to unmyelinated nerves, and finally to myelinated nerves.
2. There is a development of opposing neural mechanisms of excitation and
inhibition to provide rapid regulation of graded metabolic output.

3. A face–heart connection evolved as the brainstem source nuclei of vagal
pathways shifted ventrally from the older dorsal motor nucleus to the
nucleus ambiguus. This resulted in an anatomical and neurophysiological
linkage between the neural regulation of the heart via the myelinated
vagus and the special visceral efferent pathways that regulate the striated
muscles of the face and head, forming an integrated social engagement
system (see Figure 3.1, p. 56) (for more details see chapter 12; Porges,
2001a, 2007a).
4. With increased cortical development, the cortex exhibits greater control
over the brainstem via direct (e.g., corticobulbar) and indirect (e.g.,
corticoreticular) neural pathways originating in motor cortex and
terminating in the source nuclei of the myelinated motor nerves emerging
from the brainstem (e.g., specific neural pathways embedded within
cranial nerves V, VII, IX, X, and XI), controlling visceromotor structures
(i.e., heart, bronchi) and somatomotor structures (muscles of the face and
head).
THE SOCIAL ENGAGEMENT SYSTEM
The study of comparative anatomy, evolutionary biology, and embryology
provide important hints regarding the functional relationship between the neural
control of the striated muscles of the face and head and emergent behaviors,
including facial expressions, head movements and vocalizations. The nerves that
control the muscles of the face and head share several common features.
Pathways from five cranial nerves control the muscles of the face and head.
Collectively, these pathways are labeled as special visceral efferent. Special
visceral efferent nerves innervate striated muscles, which regulate the structures
derived during embryology from the ancient gill arches (Truex & Carpenter,
1969). The special visceral efferent pathways regulate the muscles of
mastication (e.g., ingestion), muscles of the middle ear (e.g., listening to
conspecific vocalizations), muscles of the face (e.g., emotional expression),
muscles of the larynx and pharynx (e.g., prosody and intonation), and muscles
controlling head tilt and turning (e.g., gesture). In fact, the neural pathway that
enables the eyelids to be closed in a graded manner (i.e., winking) in humans is
also involved in tensing the stapedius muscle in the middle ear to facilitate

hearing the human voice (Djupesland, 1976).
The source nuclei of the circuits regulating the striated muscles of the face
and head interact in the brainstem with the source nucleus of the myelinated
vagus, forming an integrated social engagement system. This system (as
illustrated in Figure 3.1, p. 56) provides the neural structures involved in social
and emotional behaviors. The social engagement system has a control
component in the cortex (i.e., upper motor neurons) that regulates brainstem
nuclei (i.e., lower motor neurons) to control eyelid opening (e.g., looking), facial
muscles (e.g., emotional expression), middle ear muscles (e.g., extracting
vocalizations from background noise), muscles of mastication (e.g., ingestion),
laryngeal and pharyngeal muscles (e.g., vocalization), and head-turning muscles
(e.g., social gesture and orientation). Collectively, these muscles function as
filters that limit social stimuli (e.g., observing facial features and listening to
vocalizations) and determine engagement with the social environment. The
neural control of these muscles determines social experiences by changing facial
features (especially in humans and other primates), modulating laryngeal and
pharyngeal muscles to regulate intonation of vocalizations, and coordinating
both facial and vocal motor tone with respiratory actions (see also Smotherman,
Schwartz, & Metzner, 2010). In addition, the frequency of breathing is encoded
into the phrasing of vocalizations and may convey urgency by expressing short
phrases associated with short exhalations (i.e., rapid breathing) or convey
calmness by expressing long phrases associated with long exhalations (i.e., slow
breathing).
The source nuclei (i.e., lower motor neurons) of the special visceral efferent
pathways are located in the brainstem and communicate with the source nuclei
of the mammalian myelinated vagus, which functions as a neural pathway
inhibiting visceral functions (e.g., slowing heart rate, lowering blood pressure,
etc.) to actively reduce arousal to promote calm states consistent with the
metabolic demands of growth and restoration. Direct corticobulbar pathways
reflect the influence of frontal areas of the cortex (i.e., upper motor neurons) on
the regulation of this system. Moreover, afferent feedback, through the sensory
vagus to medullary areas (e.g., nucleus of the solitary tract) influences forebrain
areas and regulates states of arousal and alertness. In addition, the anatomical
structures involved in the social engagement system have neurophysiological
interactions with the HPA, the neuropeptides of oxytocin and vasopressin, and
the immune system (for overview, see Porges, 2001a).

PHYLOGENY OF THE MIDDLE EAR
As vertebrates evolved from reptiles to mammals, the structures at the end of the
mandible (i.e., jaw bone) that define components in the middle ear became
detached (Luo, 2007; Luo, Crompton, & Sun, 2001; Rowe, 1996; Wang, Hu,
Meng, & Li, 2001) and formed the small bones (auditory ossicles) of the middle
ear. For humans and other mammals, sound in the environment impinges on the
eardrum and is transduced from the eardrum to the inner ear via the ossicles in
the middle ear. Bárány (1938) argued that the main purpose of the ossicular
chain in land mammals was to reduce the effect of low-frequency sounds via
bone conduction. In addition to the filtering imposed by bone separation, further
attenuation can be achieved when the stapedius muscle (stabilizing stapes and
innervated via a branch of the facial nerve) and the tensor tympani muscle
(innervated via a branch of the trigeminal nerve) are contracted. Tension reduces
the compliance of the ossicular chain and dampens the amplitude of the low-
frequency acoustic stimulation from the environment reaching the inner ear. This
process is similar to tightening the skin on a kettledrum. When the skin is
tightened, the pitch of the drum is higher. When the ossicular chain is tightened,
similar to the stretched skin, the movement of the eardrum is reduced and only
higher frequencies bouncing against the eardrum are transmitted to the inner ear
and to the auditory processing areas of the brain. The impact of these muscles on
the perceived acoustic environment is to markedly attenuate low-frequency
sounds, which facilitates the extraction of sounds in a higher frequency band
associated with human voice and other mammalian vocalizations.
The detachment of the middle ear bones from the mandible was paralleled by
two phylogenetic shifts: (1) the jawbone no longer restricted the cranium to
expand and fostered the cortical development that characterizes modern
mammals (Rowe, 1996); and (2) the mammalian middle ear enabled low-
amplitude relatively high-frequency airborne sounds (i.e., sounds in the
frequency of vocalizations) to be heard, even when the acoustic environment
was dominated by low-frequency sounds.
The evolution of the mammalian middle ear enabled mammals to
communicate in a frequency band that could not be detected by reptiles that, due
to a dependence on bone conduction, were able to hear predominantly lower
frequencies. This ability to hear low-amplitude, high-frequency airborne sounds
in an acoustic environment dominated by loud low-frequency sounds is
accomplished when the middle ear muscles are tensed to create rigidity along the

ossicular chain. This mechanism unmasks the high-frequency sounds associated
with mammalian vocalizations from background sounds. Without stiffening the
ossicular chain, mammals would lose this advantage, and the soft airborne
sounds of vocalizations would be easily lost in the acoustic background (see
Borg & Counter, 1989). In fact, individuals who can voluntarily contract middle
ear muscles exhibit an attenuation of approximately 30 dB at frequencies below
500 Hz, while there is no or minimal attenuation at frequencies above 1,000 Hz
(see Kryter, 1985).
The earliest mammals were small, and vocal communication outside the
acoustic range of their predominant predators (i.e., reptiles) was crucial to
survival. The physics of the middle ear resulted in a specific range of frequencies
requiring a lower sound pressure level to be detected. In small mammals, this
frequency band was noticeably higher than the frequency band that large
reptiles, due to a dependency on bone conduction, could easily detect. However,
as mammals evolved, selective pressure resulted in larger mammals surviving.
The size of the middle ear’s structures increased with increased body size and
the resonant frequency of the middle ear became lower. Thus, with large
mammals (e.g., elephants and whales) the frequencies enhanced by middle ear
structures foster infrasound communication with wavelengths that can travel
over long distances and overlap with the lower frequencies that reptiles detect
via bone conduction.
IMPACT OF MIDDLE EAR STRUCTURES ON SENSITIVITY
TO CONSPECIFIC VOCALIZATIONS
The perception of sound is not equal at all frequencies. We hear sounds at low
frequencies as if they were softer than their actual physical energy. In contrast,
humans are relatively accurate in estimating the acoustic energy of frequencies
associated with voice. This phenomenon initially reported as the Fletcher–
Munson equal loudness contours (Fletcher & Munson, 1933), illustrated how
human perception attenuated the “loudness” of low-frequency sounds. As
measurement technologies improved, researchers refined the perceived loudness
contours, and sound meters were modified to include a scale known as dB(A),
which adjusted for the perceived differences in loudness as a function of
frequency (i.e., the acoustic energy of lower frequencies had to be greatly
increased to be perceived at the equivalent loudness of higher frequencies). This
contrasts to sound pressure level, which describes the physical energy of the

signal and does not apply any perceptually based weighting to the frequencies
that constitute the acoustic stimulation.
The perceptual process of detecting conspecific vocalizations in background
noise, illustrates the antimasking function of the middle ear muscles (attenuating
the sounds at low frequencies). In addition to the antimasking function of the
middle ear muscles, the middle ear structures act as a natural amplifier and
contribute to the advantage in detecting conspecific vocalizations. Amplification
occurs when the acoustic energy of vocalizations is characterized by a frequency
band that overlaps with the resonance frequencies of the middle ear structures.
Thus, due to the selective active antimasking by the middle ear muscles and the
passive amplification by the middle ear structures, there are species-specific
equal loudness contours. As a general rule, conspecific vocalizations occupy this
frequency band of perceptual advantage.
Dammeijer, Dijk, Chenault, Manni, and Mameren (2007) evaluated the
effect of noise exposure on the stapedius muscle in the rat. Their data suggest
that even in the absence of loud noise the stapedius is active, with contraction
observed at sound pressure levels much lower than those needed to elicit the
acoustic reflex threshold (Pilz, Ostwald, Kreiter, & Schnitzler, 1997). In
addition, the data were consistent with the assumed purpose of the stapedius in
unmasking high-frequency signals by attenuating low-frequency, low-level
constant noise in everyday life (Pang & Guinan, 1997). The middle ear muscles
are composed primarily of relatively small fast-twitch fibers (deJong, Kingma,
Wirtz, Berge, & Marres, 1988). Since the muscles are characterized, at least in
the rat, by relatively high anaerobic, glycolytic, and aerobic oxidative enzyme
activity, there is a natural resistance to fatigue. In addition, the numerous motor
end plates, in combination with the numerous axon bundles, are indicative of
small motor units and support the assumption that the middle ear muscles are
able to perform finely graded contractions. In our laboratory, we are
demonstrating a similar intensity-tuned function of the middle ear muscles in
humans.
The antimasking role of the middle ear muscles in auditory processing is
especially relevant when considering the impact of low-frequency background
sounds on cochlear mechanisms. Standing waves from pure tone stimuli occupy
larger regions of the basilar membrane as the intensity increases, reducing the
sensitivity of cochlear filtering for intense stimuli. This process is observed in
the flattening of the equal loudness profile. Thus, by attenuating low-frequency
sound waves, even below the level of the acoustic reflex threshold, the graded

contractions of the middle ear muscles would improve the frequency sensitivity
and selectivity mediated by the outer hair cells in the frequency band of
mammalian vocalizations.
The physics of the middle ear structures impose other filter characteristics.
Although the stiffening of the ossicular chain functions as a high-pass filter by
contracting the middle ear muscles and dampening the influence of low-
frequency sounds on the inner ear, the physical characteristics of the ossicular
chain also influence the acoustic energy reaching the inner ear. Ossicle inertia
determines the highest frequencies that can pass through the middle ear (Hemilä
et al., 1995). The high-frequency limit is inversely proportional to the ossicular
mass. Although, in general, larger mammals have greater ossicular mass, there
are instances of larger mammals being able to detect higher frequencies due to
adaptive shifts in ossicle mass to facilitate the detection of sounds associated
with predator, prey, and cohort. For example, cats have excellent sensitivity at
very high frequencies and may benefit from hearing high-frequency sounds
produced by small rodents (Forsman & Malmquist, 1988; Rosenzweig & Amon,
1955).
THE FREQUENCY BAND OF PERCEPTUAL ADVANTAGE
In very small mammals, the middle ear and inner ear structures can convey
acoustic information in a range well above the audible sounds that humans can
reliably detect. The upper frequency limit for audible sounds in humans is
approximately 20,000 Hz. Thus, 20,000 Hz is often used to delineate audible
from ultrasound in the acoustic spectrum. However, the terminology is
misleading, since acoustic stimuli characterized as ultrasonic are within the
“audible” range of several mammalian species.
When audiograms of mammals are plotted on a logarithmic x-axis (for
review see Fay, 1988), the lowest threshold is observed in a band of frequencies
functionally defined by the high pass of the middle ear muscles and the low-pass
features of the combined effect of olivary–cochlear mechanisms and the inertia
of the ossicular chain. This frequency band of perceptual advantage (i.e., lower
thresholds to hear) is specific to each mammalian species with the smaller
mammals, in general, having an advantage to hear higher frequencies. However,
since low-frequency sounds dominate most acoustic environments, this
frequency band of perceptual advantage is optimized only when lower
frequencies do not overwhelm the acoustic apparatus. Thus, the importance of

contracting the middle ear muscles is to reduce acoustic energy in the lower
frequencies. In general, it is within this frequency band of perceptual advantage
that mammalian species produce most of their relevant conspecific vocalizations.
For example, with the human, although the generally accepted frequencies for
human hearing are between 20 and 20,000 Hz, the human frequency band of
perceptual advantage includes a band of frequencies from approximately 500 Hz
to about 4,000 Hz. Within these frequencies, the second and third formant in
both male and female human speech always occur, and in many cases so does
the first formant. This select band, which conveys the information of human
voice, is functionally amplified by the antimasking mechanisms of the middle
ear muscles that dampen low-frequency activity and olivary–cochlear
mechanisms that dampen high-frequency activity. Similar mechanisms in the rat
provide a frequency band of perceptual advantage from approximately 5 kHz to
50 kHz (see Bjork, Nevalainen, Hakumaki, & Voipio, 1999).
Auditory information can be weighted within this frequency band to improve
the extraction of human speech. Two such methods are known as the “index of
articulation” (Kryter, 1962) and the more recent “speech intelligibility index”
(American National Standards Institute, 1997). These indices emphasize the
relative importance of specific frequencies in conveying speech-related
information embedded in human vocalizations. In the normal ear, acoustic
energy within the primary frequencies of these indices is not attenuated, as it
passes through the middle ear structures to the inner ear. The frequency band
defining the index of articulation is similar to the frequency band that composers
have historically selected to express melodies. It is also the frequency band that
mothers have used to calm their infants by singing lullabies. Modulation of the
acoustic energy within the frequencies of human voice that characterize music,
similar to vocal prosody, will recruit and modulate the neural regulation of the
middle ear muscles, functionally calm the behavioral and physiological state by
increasing vagal regulation of the heart, and promote more spontaneous social
engagement behaviors. Vocal music duplicates the effect of vocal prosody and
triggers neural mechanisms that regulate the entire social engagement system
with the resultant changes in facial affect and autonomic state. Basically, we
start to look and feel better when we listen to melodies.
The auditory system is capable of compressing the range of acoustic stimuli.
Much of this compression occurs at the periphery. For example, stapedius
muscle contraction reduces sound transmission at low frequencies. Zwislocki
(2002), stated that: “placement of stimulus compression in the auditory

periphery must have been an important evolutionary adaptation through which
the remaining system can operate within a biologically more easily achievable
range” (p. 14601). As Zwislocki suggests, by compressing the energy of loud
low-frequency sounds, the inner ear and higher brain structures can process the
higher frequency content of the acoustic signal in the range of vocalizations.
From an engineering point of view, placing a mechanism to compress the
nonlinearity at the periphery of a system reduces the dynamic range required of
the remaining parts of the system. This compression mechanism would function
as an automatic gain control to filter the acoustic energy at frequencies lower
than the vocalizations and would allow higher brain structures to extract
meaning and syntax by processing the acoustic energy in this narrower
frequency range.
Although humans and other mammals can vocalize outside the frequency
band of perceptual advantage, the within-species social communication is
usually characterized by frequency modulated vocalizations within this
frequency band. In contrast, danger and pain signals may be shrill cries (i.e.,
high pitch with diminished frequency modulation) at the upper edge of this
frequency band. In addition, aggressive signaling may push vocalizations to
lower frequencies outside this band (e.g., the roar of a lion). This preference to
vocalize in a social context within the frequencies most easily detected by
conspecifics has clear adaptive features, but it also creates challenges. In
particular, the frequencies of these vocalizations are dependent on the processing
of airborne acoustic energy and are above the frequencies easily conveyed
through bone conduction. The higher frequencies of airborne mammalian
vocalizations (audible and ultrasound) are characterized by very short
wavelengths that dissipate rapidly with distance from the source. In contrast, low
frequencies have long wavelengths that travel over long distances.
The short wavelength of mammalian vocalizations evolved with convergent
mechanisms to aid in adaptive social engagement behaviors (see Porges, 2007a).
For many mammals, including humans, facial expressivity and behavioral
gestures (e.g., use of the hands by primates) are coordinated with the shifts in
prosody (intonation) to reduce ambiguity of the acoustic message (Corballis,
2003). Thus, the signals of distress and danger often require concordant facial
cues and hand gestures (see also Eberl, 2010). Areas in the temporal cortex are
sensitive to this cross-modal binding of auditory–visual inputs during
vocalizations. Congruent speech-related visual input activates supra-additive
multisensory neurons in the superior temporal cortex. In contrast, reduced

activation in these areas has been reported during tasks requiring the integration
of auditory and visual language inputs in schizophrenics, a disorder frequently
associated with auditory hallucinations (Surguladze et al., 2001). Functionally,
the simultaneous observation of facial and head movements, while listening to
human vocalizations, improves speech intelligibility (e.g., McGurk &
MacDonald, 1976; Munhall, Jones, Callan, Kuratate, & Vatikiotis-Bateson,
2004) and has been reported to increase the ability to extract speech from
background sounds by approximately 10–20 dB (Chen & Rao, 1998; Sumby &
Polack, 1954).
One of the consequences of depending on high frequencies for social
communication is that infants cannot stray far from the protection of their
mother. In many small mammalian species (e.g., rats, mice) the predominance of
ultrasound vocalizations by infants further restricts the distance that the
caregiver can move from the litter. In rats, the frequencies used to communicate
change developmentally. As rat pups develop and express exploratory behaviors,
vocalizations shift from infantile ultrasound to adult type communication, which
may also include audible sounds (Takahashi, 1992). As the rat pups mature,
well-organized mobilization behaviors support exploration, and the pups extend
the distance they explore from the mother. Paralleling this shift toward adult
vocalizations are increases in the neural regulation of the larynx and pharynx,
structures involved in the production and articulation of vocalizations, with a
parallel increase in the neural regulation of the heart via the myelinated vagus
(Larson & Porges, 1982).
ADAPTIVE COST FOR ACTIVE LISTENING TO
VOCALIZATIONS
There may be a cost for actively dampening the sensitivity to low-frequency
sounds and engaging the neural mechanisms involved in listening to the
frequency band of perceptual advantage. Listening to the frequency band of
perceptual advantage requires the neural implementation of an active filter that
reduces the acoustic information at low frequencies that can reach the brain.
Since the sounds associated with predators, especially the movements of larger
animals, are characterized by low-frequency sounds, engaging in this active
“listening” process has maladaptive consequences by reducing the ability to
detect predators. Thus, the advantage of listening to conspecific vocalization also
comes at a cost. In the “wild” the potential cost of social communication is

reduction of predator detection. The adaptive consequence of this vulnerability is
to restrict or to limit listening to vocalizations within the frequency band of
perceptual advantage (an important component of social engagement and social
communication) primarily in safe environments such as nests and burrows.
THE SOCIAL ENGAGEMENT SYSTEM AND THE
POLYVAGAL “VOCALIZATION” HYPOTHESIS
As proposed by the polyvagal theory, the functioning and development of the
striated muscles of the face and head involved in listening and in production of
vocalizations parallel the maturation of the myelinated vagus (see Larson &
Porges, 1982). This developmental covergence, among several neural circuits
that constitute an integrated functional social engagement system (see Figure
3.1, p. 56), results in facilitating several adaptive behaviors, including: (1) an
improved ability to regulate physiological state via myelinated vagal pathways
(i.e., vagal brake) to both self-soothe and maintain calm states, as well as to
mobilize by withdrawing the vagal brake to explore, forage, and defend; (2)
increased neural regulation of the larynx and pharynx to promote conspecific
vocalizations in the frequency band of perceptual advantage for the species to
selectively signal peers and caregivers with a vocal mechanism that produces
vocalizations 
with 
the 
highest 
adaptive 
value; 
and 
(3) 
improved
thermoregulatory activity that reduces the need for the caregiver, as the
autonomic nervous system matures.
The polyvagal theory emphasizes a phylogenetic parallel in the changing
neural regulation of the autonomic nervous system and the neural regulation of
the striated muscles of the face and head. This point is relevant to the study of
mammalian vocalizations, since the striated muscles of the face and head are
involved in both the detection of vocalizations (during listening) and in the
production of these sounds through the coordination of the laryngeal and
pharyngeal muscles with respiratory mechanisms.
The convergent phylogenetic changes in the neural regulation of the
structures involved in the production and detection of mammalian vocalizations
leads to the polyvagal hypothesis. Specifically, only mammals have a diaphragm
to coordinate vocalizations with respiratory effort and volume. Consistent with
the dependence on the mammalian diaphragm is the uniquely mammalian
distinction between the two branches of the vagus: one dealing with
supradiaphragmatic organs and the other dealing with subdiaphragmatic organs.

The neural regulation of the subdiaphragmatic vagus is involved in abdominal
breathing, while the neural regulation of supradiaphragmatic vagus is
coordinated with the laryngeal and pharyngeal muscles that shape the acoustic
features and provide facial expressions consistent with prosodic features of
vocalizations. Moreover, slow exhalation, the respiratory process associated with
expressive social vocalizations, enhances the impact of the myelinated vagus on
the heart, promoting calm states.
The polyvagal hypothesis proposes that acoustic characteristics of
vocalization not only serve to communicate to conspecifics relevant features in
the environment, but also reflect the physiological state of the producer of the
vocalizations. Mammals, but not reptiles or other phylogenetic antecedents to
mammals, have a myelinated vagus, a diaphragm, detached middle ears, and
neural circuits in the brainstem linking and coordinating the regulation of the
myelinated vagus with the regulation of the striated muscles of the face and
head. Specifically, engagement of this circuit conveys and expresses states of
calmness and safety and would be associated with greater vagal influences to the
heart and lungs to promote calmer physiological states, increased neural tone to
the middle ear muscles to optimize listening in the frequency band of perceptual
advantage, and increased neural tone to the laryngeal and pharyngeal muscles to
shift the acoustic energy of vocalizations to lower frequencies and increased
frequency modulation within the band of perceptual advantage. In contrast,
retraction of this circuit conveys and expresses states of danger and distress, and
would be associated with faster heart rate and breathing and higher pitched
vocalizations. Thus, in humans the features of vocal prosody are expressed
during social interactions and reduced during both mental and physical illness.
Similarly, the vocalizations of small mammals may have a parallel to human
prosody. Rats, while playing or experiencing more positive affective states,
modulate their ultrasonic vocalizations across a range of frequencies within the
rat’s band of perceptual advantage, while vocalizations communicating negative
states such as danger are characterized by vocalizations at a relatively constant
frequency through a different neural mechanism (e.g., Brudzynski, 2007).
Consistent with the polyvagal hypothesis, medically compromised human
infants have a high-pitched cry with little frequency modulation that is
articulated in short bursts (Lester & Zeskin, 1982; Porter, Porges, & Marshall,
1988). Intonations of infant cries are regulated by neural tone, via source nuclei
in the nucleus ambiguus, to the laryngeal muscles and the heart. In the
physiologically stressed infant, decreased neural tone theoretically reduces the

inhibitory effect on the heart and bronchi and the contraction of laryngeal
muscles, thus producing dramatic increases in both heart rate and respiration rate
and the fundamental frequency of the cry.
Porter and colleagues (1988) reported a convergence between withdrawal of
cardiac vagal tone (i.e., measured by respiratory sinus arrhythmia and mediated
via the myelinated vagal pathways originating in the nucleus ambiguus) and the
shift in fundamental frequency of newborn pain cries in response to
circumcision. Cardiac vagal tone was significantly reduced during the severe
stress of circumcision, and these reductions were paralleled by significant
increases in the pitch of the infants’ cries. These results document the important
role that the social engagement system has in signaling and responding to
“stress” and pain, and provide a demonstration that the vocalizations convey
information regarding visceral and emotional state.
SUMMARY
The polyvagal theory emphasizes the phylogenetic shifts in the neural regulation
of the autonomic nervous system and how this evolutionary shift in neural
regulation converged with the regulation of the middle ear muscles to facilitate
mammalian vocal communication. The theory emphasizes the different neural
circuits that support defensive behaviors (i.e., fight-or-flight and freeze) and
social interactions. According to the theory, during defensive states, when the
middle ear muscles are not contracted, acoustic stimuli are prioritized by
intensity and during safe social engagement states, acoustic stimuli are
prioritized by pitch. During safe states, hearing of the frequencies associated
with conspecific vocalizations is selectively being amplified, while other
frequencies are attenuated. During the defensive states, the loud, low-frequency
sounds signaling a predator could be more easily detected, and the soft, higher
frequencies of conspecific vocalizations are lost in background sounds. During
social engagement behaviors, an integrated social engagement system regulates a
shift in autonomic state to dampen sympathetic activity and to increase
parasympathetic tone, while simultaneously increasing the neural tone to the
striated muscles of the face and head (i.e., facial expressions, increased
“emotional” cueing of the eyes associated with increased eye contact, increased
prosody, and enhanced listening by contracting the middle ear muscles). During
social interactions, the stiffening of the ossicular chain actively changes the

transfer function of the middle ear, and functionally dampens low-frequency
sounds and improves the ability to extract conspecific vocalizations. However,
the selectivity to listen to conspecific vocalizations comes at a cost, and the
detection of lower acoustic frequencies generated by predators becomes more
difficult. Thus, the identification and construction of safe contexts (e.g., burrows,
nests, or houses) plays an important role in enabling the social engagement
system to promote prosocial behavior.
Co-author for this chapter was G. F. Lewis.

PART IV
THERAPEUTIC AND
CLINICAL PERSPECTIVES

CHAPTER 14
The Vagus: A Mediator of Behavioral and
Physiological Features Associated With Autism
The vagus nerve, as a system, provides a rich organizing principle to
investigate several of the behavioral, psychological, and physiologic features
associated with a diagnosis of autism. The vagus is not only a cranial nerve
meandering through the periphery, but also an important bidirectional conduit
carrying specialized motor and sensory signals that are part of a larger integrated
feedback system that includes brain structures involved in the regulation of
visceral state and affect. The premise of this chapter is that several features of
autism become more understandable if a more integrated model of the nervous
system is applied in which the vagus is a critical component.
THE VAGUS AND AFFECT REGULATION
The relation between affect and vagal afferent activity is not a recent idea.
Darwin (1872) noted in The Expression of Emotions in Man and Animals the
importance of the bidirectional neural communication between the heart and the
brain via the “pneumogastric” nerve, now known as the vagus nerve.
Current research emphasizes the importance of the vagal afferents in the
regulation of visceral state, mood, and affect. Studies have demonstrated that
stimulation of vagal afferents regulate brain structures involved in epilepsy
(Boon et al., 2001), depression (George et al., 2000), and even repetitive self-
destructive behaviors often associated with autism (Murphy, Wheless, &
Schmoll, 2000).
POLYVAGAL THEORY THREE NEURAL CIRCUITS

POLYVAGAL THEORY: THREE NEURAL CIRCUITS
REGULATING REACTIVITY
Through stages of phylogeny, mammals, and especially primates, have evolved a
functional neural organization that regulates visceral state to support social
behavior. The polyvagal theory (see chapters 2, 10, and 11; Porges, 2001a)
emphasizes the phylogenetic origins of brain structures that regulate social and
defensive behaviors, domains compromised in individuals with autism. The
polyvagal theory proposes that the evolution of the mammalian autonomic
nervous system provides the neurophysiologic substrates for the emotional
experiences and affective processes that are major components of social
behavior. The theory proposes that physiologic state limits the range of behavior
and psychological experience. In this context, the evolution of the nervous
system determines the range of emotional expression, quality of communication,
and the ability to regulate bodily and behavioral state. The polyvagal theory
links the evolution of the autonomic nervous system to affective experience,
emotional expression, facial gestures, vocal communication, and contingent
social behavior. Thus, the theory provides a plausible explanation of several
social, emotional, and communication behaviors and disorders associated with
autism.
The polyvagal construct was introduced to emphasize and document the
neurophysiologic and neuroanatomical distinction between two branches of the
vagus and to propose that each vagal branch is associated with a different
adaptive behavioral strategy. The theory proposes that the different branches are
related to unique, adaptive behavioral strategies and articulates three
phylogenetic stages of the development of the mammalian autonomic nervous
system. These stages reflect the emergence of three distinct subsystems, which
are phylogenetically ordered and behaviorally linked to social communication
(e.g., facial expression, vocalization, listening), mobilization (e.g., fight-or-flight
behaviors), and immobilization (e.g., feigning death, vasovagal syncope, and
behavioral shutdown). The mobilization system is dependent on the functioning
of the sympathetic nervous system. The most phylogenetically primitive
component, the immobilization system, is dependent on the unmyelinated or
“vegetative” vagus, which is shared with most vertebrates. With increased neural
complexity due to phylogenetic development, the organism’s behavioral and
affective repertoire is enriched (see Table 14.1).
The theory emphasizes the functional aspect of neural control of both the
striated muscles of the face and the smooth muscles of the viscera, because their

functions rely on common brainstem structures. It does not make any
assumptions regarding structural damage to either the vagal systems or the brain
structures that regulate brainstem structures associated with the vagal systems.
Thus, although the compromised brainstem features described by Rodier and
colleagues (1996) are consistent with the predictions of the polyvagal theory, the
theory emphasizes functional deficits and does not necessarily assume structural
damage.
By investigating the phylogeny of the regulation of the vertebrate heart
(Morris & Nilsson, 1994), three principles can be extracted. First, there is a
phylogenetic shift in the regulation of the heart from endocrine communication,
to unmyelinated nerves, and finally to myelinated nerves. Second, there is a
development of opposing neural mechanisms of excitation and inhibition to
provide rapid regulation of graded metabolic output. Third, with increased
cortical development, the cortex exhibits greater control over the brainstem via
direct (e.g., corticobulbar) and indirect (e.g., corticoreticular) neural pathways
originating in the motor cortex and terminating in the source nuclei of the
myelinated motor nerves emerging from the brainstem (e.g., specific neural
pathways embedded within cranial nerves V, VII, IX, X, and XI), controlling
visceromotor structures (i.e., heart, bronchi, thymus) and somatomotor structures
(muscles of the face and head).
TABLE 14.1. The Three Phylogenetic Stages of the Neural Control of
the Heart Proposed by the Polyvagal Theory
These phylogenetic principles provide a basis for speculations regarding the
behavioral and physiologic responses associated with autism. With this new
vagal system, transitory incursions into the environment or withdrawals from a
potential predator can be initiated without the severe biologic cost associated

with sympathetic-adrenal activation. Paralleling this change in neural control of
the heart is an enhanced neural control of the face, larynx, and pharynx that
enables complex facial gestures and vocalizations associated with social
communication. This phylogenetic course results in greater central nervous
system regulation of physiologic state that supports behaviors needed to engage
and disengage with environmental challenges.
THE VAGAL BRAKE
Due to the tonic vagal influences to the sinoatrial node (i.e., the heart’s
pacemaker), resting heart rate is substantially lower than the intrinsic rate of the
pacemaker. When the vagal tone to the pacemaker is high, the vagus acts as a
brake on the rate at which the heart is beating (see chapter 7). When vagal tone
to the pacemaker is low, there is little or no inhibition of the pacemaker. Thus,
neurophysiologically, the vagal brake provides a mechanism to rapidly switch
between physiologic states that either support social communication or
mobilization. Functionally, the vagal brake, by modulating visceral state, enables
the individual to rapidly engage and disengage with objects and other individuals
and to promote self-soothing behaviors and calm behavioral states. These
behaviors are obviously compromised in autism. Is it possible that autism is
associated with a deficit in the vagal brake and an inability to switch between
neurobiologic states that foster either defensive or social behaviors?
The polyvagal theory provides an explicit neurobiologic model of how
difficulties in spontaneous social behavior are linked to both facial expressivity
and the regulation of visceral state. The theory proposes a possible mechanism to
explain how these difficulties might form a core domain of several psychiatric
profiles. Relevant to autism are the specific deficits in both the somatomotor
(e.g., poor gaze, low facial affect, lack of prosody, difficulties in mastication)
and visceromotor (e.g., difficulties in autonomic regulation resulting in
cardiopulmonary and digestive problems) areas of the social engagement system.
Deficits in the social engagement system compromise spontaneous social
behavior, social awareness, affect expressivity, prosody, and language
development. In contrast, interventions that improve the neural regulation of the
social engagement system hypothetically should enhance spontaneous social
behavior and state and affect regulation, reduce stereotypical behaviors, and
improve language skills.

During the development of the human embryo, components of several
cranial nerves, known as special visceral efferent pathways, develop together to
form the neural substrate of a social engagement system (see chapter 11). This
system, as illustrated in Figure 3.1, p. 56, provides the neural structures involved
in social and emotional behaviors. The social engagement system has a control
component in the cortex (i.e., upper motor neurons) that regulates brainstem
nuclei (i.e., lower motor neurons) to control eyelid opening (e.g., looking), facial
muscles (e.g., emotional expression), middle ear muscles (e.g., extracting the
human voice from background noise), muscles of mastication (e.g., ingestion),
laryngeal and pharyngeal muscles (e.g., vocalization and language), and head-
turning muscles (e.g., social gesture, orientation). Collectively, these muscles
function as filters that limit social stimuli (e.g., observing facial features,
listening to the human voice) and determinants of engagement with the social
environment. The neural control of these muscles determines social experiences.
In addition, the source nuclei (i.e., lower motor neurons) of these nerves, which
are located in the brainstem, communicate directly with an inhibitory neural
system that slows heart rate, lowers blood pressure, and actively reduces arousal
to promote calm states consistent with the metabolic demands of growth and
restoration of human neurophysiologic systems.
Direct corticobulbar pathways reflect the influence of frontal areas of the
cortex (i.e., upper motor neurons) on the regulation of this system. Moreover,
afferent feedback through the vagus to medullary areas (e.g., the nucleus of the
solitary tract, which is the source nucleus of the afferent vagus) influences
forebrain areas that are assumed to be involved in several psychiatric disorders.
In addition, the anatomical structures involved in the social engagement system
have neurophysiologic interactions with the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal
(HPA) axis, the neuropeptides of oxytocin and vasopressin, and the immune
system (Porges, 2001a). As a cluster, the difficulties with gaze, extraction of the
human voice, facial expression, head gesture, prosody, and state regulation are
common features of individuals with autism. For example, the neural pathway
that raises the eyelids also tenses the stapedius muscle in the middle ear, which
facilitates hearing the human voice (Borg & Counter, 1989). Thus, the neural
mechanisms for making eye contact are shared with those needed to listen to the
human voice.
Studies have demonstrated that the neural regulation of middle ear muscles, a
necessary mechanism to extract human voice from loud low-frequency
background noise, is defective in individuals with language delays, learning

disabilities, and autistic spectrum disorders (Smith et al., 1988; Thomas et al.,
1985). Middle ear infection (i.e., otitis media) may result in a total inability to
elicit the “reflexive” contraction of the stapedius muscles (Yagi & Nakatani,
1987). Disorders that influence the neural function of the facial nerve (i.e., Bell’s
palsy) not only influence the stapedius reflex (Ardic, Topaloglu, Oncel, Ardic, &
Uguz, 1997) but also affect the patient’s ability to discriminate speech (Wormald
et al., 1995). Thus, the observed difficulties that many autistic individuals have
in extracting the human voice from background sounds may be dependent on the
same neural system that is involved in facial expression.
PREDICTIONS BASED ON POLYVAGAL
THEORY
Observations of the behaviors and physiologic response of autistic individuals
suggest that they have great difficulties in recruiting the neural circuit that
regulates the social engagement system. It appears that autism is associated with
autonomic states that remove the individual from direct social contact by
supporting the adaptive defensive strategies of mobilization (i.e., fight-or-flight
behaviors) or immobilization (i.e., shutdown). Behaviorally, the retraction of the
neural regulation of the social engagement system is expressed as limited use
and regulation of the muscles of the face and head. The functional consequences
limit facial expressions and head gestures, compromise the ability to extract the
human voice from background sounds, and reduce prosody.
Neurophysiologically, because the vagus is integrated into several feedback
systems involving both peripheral and central structures, depression or
dysregulation of the vagus might be manifested on several levels. First, it may
compromise the regulation of visceral organs, such as the gut, heart, and
pancreas. Second, because the vagus is involved in the modulation of pain and
the regulation of cytokines and the HPA axis, there may be regulational
disorders in those systems. Third, because the brainstem areas regulating the
myelinated vagal system provide both output and input to feedback systems
involving other brain structures, the vagal system may provide a portal to assess
and stimulate higher neural processes. Although there is a limited scientific
literature evaluating the role of the vagus in autism, the plausibility of these
predictions are reviewed in this chapter and discussed within the context of the

current literature, which includes studies with other clinical populations and
animal preparations.
VAGAL REGULATION OF HEART RATE AND HEART
RATE VARIABILITY
Because vagal efferent pathways to the heart are cardioinhibitory, changes in
vagal tone can influence the metrics used to monitor heart rate and heart rate
variability. In general, greater cardiac vagal tone produces slower heart rate and
regulates the transitory changes in heart rate in response to stimulation. The
myelinated vagal efferents that synapse on the sinoatrial node have a respiratory
rhythm. This rhythmic increase and decrease in cardioinhibitory activity through
the vagus produces a cardiac rate rhythm known as respiratory sinus arrhythmia
(RSA). The greater the cardioinhibitory influence through the vagus, the greater
the rhythmic increases and decreases in this heart rate pattern. Thus, the
amplitude of RSA provides a sensitive index of the influence of the myelinated
vagus has on the heart. The rapid changes in heart rate in response to specific
stimuli are primarily under vagal control. The characteristic heart rate pattern to
stimulus changes—an immediate deceleration followed by either a continued
deceleration or an acceleration—is primarily due to dynamic increases or
decreases in cardioinhibitory activity through the myelinated vagus. The
literature suggests that autism is associated with reliable differences in the
amplitude of RSA and the transitory heart rate response pattern to various
stimuli and task demands.
An early publication by Hutt, Rorresst, and Richer (1975) reported that
normal children suppressed RSA more than autistic children did. Similarly,
Althaus et al. (1999) found that children with a pervasive developmental
disorder not otherwise specified (PDD-NOS) did not suppress RSA. Consistent
with these findings, an early study of children diagnosed with schizophrenia
(Piggott et al., 1973) identified significant differences in respiration and in the
covariation between respiration and heart rate. The schizophrenic children had
significantly faster and more shallow breathing patterns, a pattern consistent
with reduced vagal efferent activity.
Other studies report that autistic children have dampened transitory heart rate
responses to a variety of stimulation. Zahn, Rumsey, and Van Kammen (1987)
reported unusually small deceleratory heart rate responses to auditory
stimulation. Palkovitz and Wiesenfeld (1980) reported dampened heart rate

responses to socially relevant speech, nonsense phrases, and a 500 Hz tone.
Corona et al. (1998) reported that the heart rate of children with autism did not
change across conditions.
VAGAL NERVE STIMULATION
Although not currently being used to treat autism, vagal nerve stimulation has
been effective in treating epilepsy and depression. Vagal nerve stimulation is
based on the assumption that stimulation of vagal afferents has a direct effect on
the regulation of higher brain structures. The source nucleus of the vagal
afferents is the nucleus of the solitary tract. This medullary nucleus plays an
important role in the regulation of behavioral state, respiration, and blood
pressure, and in conveying information to higher brain structures. The nucleus of
the solitary tract relays the incoming sensory information via three primary
pathways: (1) feedback to regulate the periphery, (2) direct projections to the
reticular formation in the medulla, and (3) ascending projections to the forebrain,
primarily through the parabrachial nucleus and the locus ceruleus. The
parabrachial nucleus and the locus ceruleus send direct connections to all levels
of the forebrain (e.g., hypothalamus, amygdala, the thalamic regions that control
the insula and orbitofrontal and prefrontal cortices), areas that have been
implicated in neuropsychiatric disorders. Thus, vagal afferent stimulation has
direct input to both the lower motor neurons in the brainstem and the upper
motor neurons in the cortex that regulate the social engagement system. Recent
reviews provide a detailed description of the neurophysiologic basis for the
intervention (George et al., 2000) and provide an explanation of the neural
mechanisms involved in treating depression with vagal nerve stimulation
(Marangell et al., 2002). Missing from these explanations is an acknowledgment
of the communication between vagal afferents and the source nuclei of the
nerves that regulate striated muscles of the face and head (i.e., special visceral
efferent pathways), which collectively form the motor part of the social
engagement system. It is this interaction that is emphasized in the polyvagal
theory (Porges, 2001a).
Extrapolating from the vagal nerve stimulation model, one might speculate
that other forms of vagal stimulation might have beneficial effects. Behaviorally,
one of the most potent strategies for vagal stimulation is to stimulate the
peripheral baroreceptors that regulate blood pressure. Rocking and swinging, in

which the position of the head is changed relative to the position of the heart,
will stimulate the baroreceptors and engage this feedback loop. This suggests
that the frequently observed rocking and swinging behaviors in autistic
individuals may reflect a naturally occurring biobehavioral strategy to stimulate
and to regulate a vagal system that is not efficiently functioning.
One publication reported that vagal nerve stimulation reduced autistic-like
behaviors (Murphy et al., 2000). In this study, vagal stimulation was
administered to six patients with hypothalamic hamartoma, a congenital brain
malformation that is associated with medically refractory epilepsy and injurious
autistic behavior. Four of the six patients had autistic behaviors that included
poor communication, ritualisms, compulsions, no social skills, and injury to self
and others. The authors report that during vagal nerve stimulation, all four
showed impressive improvements in behavior. In one subject, the behavioral
improvements were immediately reversed when the vagal nerve stimulation was
temporarily discontinued without worsening of seizure frequency.
VAGAL REGULATION OF THE GUT
Due to the high prevalence of gastrointestinal symptoms in individuals with
autism (Horvath & Perman, 2002; Wakefield et al., 2002), there has been an
interest in a possible link between gut and brain as a determinant of autism. This
interest was stimulated by reports from parents who indicated that the
administration of intravenous secretin reduced autistic symptoms. However,
there has been no evidence for the efficacy of secretin when it was administered
in a randomized, placebo-controlled, double-blind clinical trial (Owley et al.,
2001).
Current research suggests that the prevalence of gastrointestinal symptoms
represents an unsolved problem in autism. However, if we conceptualize the
problem from a “vagal” perspective, we can identify the vagus as a primary
regulator of the gut, with vagal afferents providing important information to
brain structures. Support for this argument comes from animal studies in which
it has been demonstrated that the vagus is involved in the regulation of secretin
(Li, Chang, & Chey, 1998; Lu & Owyang, 1995). Thus given the compromised
behavioral components of the social engagement system, it is not surprising to
find that the vagal regulation of gastrointestinal processes is also compromised
in autistic individuals.

Additional information regarding the role that vagal afferents from the gut
have in modulating sensory experiences comes from research on eating
disorders. Research suggests that vagal afferents are involved not only in
regulating satiety via vagovagal reflexes but also in regulating nociceptive
sensations via solitary-spinal pathways. Faris et al. (2000) and Raymond, Eckert,
et al. (1999) have proposed that vagal afferent activation by binge eating and
vomiting also activates the descending pain inhibitory pathway, resulting in an
elevated pain threshold. Similarly they have reported elevated pain thresholds in
anorexia nervosa subjects (Raymond, Faris, et al., 1999). Their research has led
to administering ondansetron as an intervention for bulimia nervosa (Faris et al.,
2000). Ondansetron is marketed for the prevention of vagally mediated emesis
caused by cancer chemotherapeutic agents.
THE VAGUS AND THE IMMUNE SYSTEM
The subdiaphragmatic vagal afferents may be conceptualized as providing a
targeted signal to the central structures that regulate immune function. Other
researchers have linked the vagal efferent pathways to immune function. Bulloch
and Pomerantz (1984) described motor pathways via the vagus to the thymus.
The link between the vagal regulation of immune function and the polyvagal
theory is not clear. However, it might be plausible to speculate that the neural
mediation of the myelinated vagus may, via direct influence on thymus and
direct inhibition of the sympathetic nervous system, trigger a physiologic state
that would promote immune function. Likewise, mobilization strategies,
resulting in a withdrawal of vagal tone to the heart, increased sympathetic tone,
and the release of cortisol, have been associated with suppressed immune
function. More relevant to the expression of psychiatric disturbances is the
finding that the afferent vagus mediates behavioral depression, but not fever, in
response to peripheral immune signals following abdominal inflammation
(Konsman et al., 2000). Consistent with this model, it has been reported that
autism spectrum disorder patients with developmental regression express
excessive innate immune responses (Jyonouchi, Sun, & Le, 2001).
VAGAL REGULATION OF THE HPA AXIS
The vagus is involved in the regulation of the HPA axis. Vagal afferents exhibit
an inhibitory influence on HPA axis and reduce cortisol secretion (e.g., Bueno et
al., 1989; Miao et al., 1997). Studies (Cacioppo et al., 1995; Gunnar et al., 1995)

have demonstrated a covariation between increases in cortisol and decreases in
cardiac vagal tone (i.e., the amplitude of RSA). Thus, there appears to be a
coordinated response that functions to promote metabolic activity and
mobilization behaviors by withdrawing the vagal tone through the myelinated
vagus and increasing both sympathetic activity and activation of the HPA axis.
Several studies have reported that the regulation of the HPA axis is
dysfunctional in autistic children. Poorly developing autistic children were more
likely to have an abnormal diurnal rhythm and an abnormal response on the
dexamethasone suppression test than less severe cases (Hoshino et al., 1987).
The results suggest that the negative feedback mechanism of the HPA axis may
be disturbed in autistic children, especially in poorly developing individuals.
Similarly, Jensen, Realmuto, and Garfinkel (1985) reported that most of the
autistic patients studied failed to suppress cortisol with the dexamethasone test.
Consistent with these reports, Jansen et al. (2000) reported the PDD-NOS
children had a diminished cortisol response to physical stress.
THE VAGAL SYSTEM AS AN ORGANIZING PRINCIPLE
In this chapter, I have illustrated how the vagus is involved in the expression of
several disparate symptoms associated with autism. Consistent with the
polyvagal theory, the symptom clusters are associated with components of the
vagal system. First, there are the behavioral characteristics linked to the neural
regulation of the striated muscles of the face via special visceral efferent
pathways (i.e., the somatomotor component of the social engagement system).
Second, autism is associated with dysfunctional regulation of target organs (e.g.,
heart, gut) regulated by vagal efferent pathways (i.e., the visceromotor
component of the social engagement system). Third, the vagal afferents exert a
powerful regulatory influence on several systems—including visceral and tactile
pain thresholds, the HPA axis, and the immune system—that are dysfunctional
in autism. Fourth, the nucleus of the solitary tract (the source nucleus of the
afferent vagus) influences areas of the forebrain that have been speculated to be
compromised in autism.

CHAPTER 15
Borderline Personality Disorder and Emotion
Regulation
The concept of a “borderline personality disorder” dates back to the early
1800s, when clinicians were unsure of the diagnosis of patients who displayed a
combination of neurotic and psychotic symptoms. Since clinicians viewed these
patients as being on the “border” between neurotic and psychotic, the borderline
personality disorder (BPD) evolved as a diagnostic category and was listed as an
Axis II diagnosis in 1980, with the publication of DSM-III (Hodges, 2003). The
current DSM-IV-TR emphasizes that patients with BPD express symptoms that
include affective instability, intense and tumultuous relationships, difficulty
controlling anger, impulsivity, suicidal tendencies, and self-mutilation
(American Psychiatric Association [APA], 2000; Rothschild, Haslam, Cleland,
& Zimmerman, 2003). This cluster of symptoms indicates that BPD is associated
with difficulty in regulating emotions, behavioral states, and relationships. BPD
is a severe mental disorder that is more prevalent in women and is believed to
impact approximately 2% of the population (APA, 2000; Hodges, 2003; Swartz,
Blazer, George, & Winfield, 1990; Torgersen, Kringlen, & Cramer, 2001) and
approximately 20% of the hospitalized psychiatric patients (Zanarini &
Grankenbrug, 2001).
Because BPD is associated with problems in regulating emotions and
responding appropriately to daily life events, BPD has been linked to a wide
variety of poor outcomes including job-related problems (Zweig-Frank & Paris,
2002), dysfunction in developing strong personal relationships (Daley, Burge, &
Hammen, 2000), social maladjustment, and reduced academic achievement
(Bagge et al., 2004). Due to the breadth and severity of these frequently
observed problems, BPD has been difficult to treat effectively (Hoffman,

Buteau, Hooley, Fruzzetti, & Bruce, 2003).
The high correlation reported between BPD and past sexual abuse and family
dysfunction (Weaver & Clum, 1993) has led to the developmental hypothesis
that BPD may develop as a result of traumatic experiences early in life. Other
adverse events, such as abandonment or fear of abandonment and lack of a
secure emotional attachment with a caregiver, often accompany BPD (Benjamin,
1996; Gunderson, 1996). Furthermore, BPD is highly comorbid with other mood
and anxiety disorders (Hodges, 2003; Skodol, Gunderson, et al., 2002; Weaver
& Clum, 1993).
Despite the prevalence and severity of BPD, few studies have investigated
the underlying neurological and physiological mechanisms of the disorder (e.g.,
Schmahl et al., 2004). Coccaro and Kavoussi (1991) suggested that an improved
understanding of the neurological and physiological mechanisms mediating the
clinical symptoms of BPD might lead to the development of more effective
treatments. During the past decade, research has begun to identify specific
neurobiological features that differentiate between BPD and controls. These
features might provide clues to the mechanisms mediating the difficulties in
emotion regulation experienced by individuals diagnosed with BPD.
Since impulse control is a characteristic deficit associated with BPD,
dysfunction of the prefrontal cortex has been hypothesized to be a mediator of
BPD. This speculation is based on observations of increased impulsivity
following brain damage in prefrontal areas (Blair & Cipolott, 2000). Consistent
with this hypothesis, individuals with BPD perform poorer on a go/no-go task, a
test of impulse control assumed to evaluate prefrontal function (Völlm et al.,
2004). In addition, volumetric studies applying imaging techniques have found
smaller frontal lobes in BPD participants (Lyoo, Han, & Cho, 1998).
Imaging has also identified in individuals with BPD anomalies in limbic
structures implicated in emotion regulation, such as smaller hippocampal and
amygdala volumes (Tebartz van Elst et al., 2003). Volumetric reductions,
especially in the hippocampus, are thought to be caused by the excessive stress
that BPD patients experience (Schmahl, Vermetten, Elzinga, & Bremner, 2003).
Because the hippocampus and the amygdala are involved in the processing of
and responding to emotional stimuli (Anderson & Phelps, 2000; Nolte, 1993), a
consequence of volumetric reductions might be related to the difficulties in
emotion regulation that BPD individuals experience.
Other neurophysiological systems mediating processes such as emotion
regulation, impulsivity, and aggressive behavior have been studied.

Abnormalities in serotonin, a neurotransmitter linked to aggression, impulsivity,
and suicidal behavior (Coccaro, 1989) have been reported in individuals
diagnosed with BPD (Hansenne et al., 2002; New & Siever, 2002; Paris et al.,
2004; Skodol, Siever, et al., 2002). BPD may be associated with a
hyperresponsiveness of the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal (HPA) system (Rinne
et al., 2002), a system implicated in stress responses, anxiety, and emotional
reactivity. These findings provide limited evidence that a dysfunction in systems
involved in controlling reactivity and emotion accompanies BPD.
Because several features of BPD are related to difficulties in regulating
behavioral state and emotional reactivity, measurement of the autonomic
nervous system might provide a portal into understanding the neural mechanisms
of this disorder. Thus, it might be hypothesized that: (a) the sympathetic
component of the autonomic nervous system, which supports fight-or-flight
behaviors, would be hyperaroused; and (b) the parasympathetic component,
which supports calm visceral states and social engagement behaviors, would be
depressed. Previous research (for detailed review, see Herpertz, Kunert,
Schwenger, & Sass, 1999; Schmahl et al., 2004) contrasted physiological
responses regulated by the sympathetic nervous system in individuals with BPD
and controls. Herpertz et al. (1999) monitored heart rate, skin conductance, and
startle responses in a paradigm varying the emotional valence (pleasant, neutral,
and unpleasant) and intensity of visual stimuli. Schmahl et al. (2004) measured
heart rate, skin conductance, and blood pressure in response to reminders of
personal experiences of severe stress (i.e., abandonment, trauma). Neither study
found evidence of sympathetic hyperarousal associated with a diagnosis of BPD.
However, both studies did not monitor the parasympathetic component of the
autonomic nervous system or expose BPD participants to dynamically changing
emotional stimuli (e.g., film clips).
The phylogenetic model of the autonomic nervous system described in the
polyvagal theory (see chapters 2, 10, and 12; Porges, 2001a), provides an
innovative theoretical framework to study the potential involvement of the
parasympathetic nervous system in BPD. The theory focuses on the role that
autonomic state plays in mediating both prosocial and defensive behaviors. The
theory emphasizes an integrated social engagement system that regulates the
muscles of the face and head involved in social engagement behaviors (e.g.,
gaze, expression, prosody, and gesture) and a component of the parasympathetic
nervous system, the myelinated vagal pathways to the heart that calm visceral
state and dampen sympathetic and HPA activity. The polyvagal theory

emphasizes how neural circuits involved in the regulation of autonomic state
evolved to support various adaptive biobehavioral responses to challenges. The
theory proposes that autonomic reactions to challenges follow a phylogenetically
ordered hierarchy with three distinct adaptive biobehavioral strategies. Each
biobehavioral strategy reflects a specialized neurophysiological substrate that
evolved to maximize adaptive strategies in safe, dangerous, or life-threatening
contexts. Within this model the nervous system, through a process of
“neuroception,” is continuously evaluating risk and safety in the environment.
Neuroception is not a conscious process; rather, it occurs via unconscious
subcortical systems that functionally trigger one of these three adaptive neural
circuits. Therefore, based on the polyvagal theory, difficulties in emotional
regulation that are associated with a diagnosis of BPD could be interpreted as a
behavioral expression of a physiological state that has evolved to support
defensive strategies in dangerous and life-threatening situations. According to
the polyvagal theory, the myelinated vagus, which phylogenetically evolved
with mammals, is critical for two rea-sons: to inhibit defensive limbic circuits,
and to establish social bonds (see chapter 12).
Phylogenetically, as mammals expressed special visceral efferent pathways
to regulate the striated muscles of the face and head (e.g., facial expressions,
head gesture), there was a parallel shift in the neural regulation of the heart from
an unmyelinated to a myelinated vagus. This new myelinated (i.e., mammalian)
vagus actively inhibits the sympathetic nervous system’s influence on the heart
and dampens HPA axis activity (Porges, 2001a). The mammalian vagus
functions as an active vagal brake (see chapter 7) to maintain calm states in
social contexts. However, when risk is detected, the vagal brake can be rapidly
withdrawn to support defensive mobilization behaviors. Thus, BPD might be
associated with difficulties in regulating the vagal brake in social settings.
The mammalian heart is characterized by a relatively strong vagal influence,
via the myelinated pathways, on the heart’s pacemaker (i.e., sinoatrial node).
Functionally, the impact of the vagal brake produces a baseline or resting heart
rate substantially lower than the intrinsic rate of the pacemaker. When the vagal
brake is removed, heart rate can approximate the intrinsic rate of the pacemaker
without recruiting sympathetic influences. When cardiac vagal tone via the
myelinated vagus is high, the vagus acts as a restraint or brake limiting the rate
the heart is beating. When vagal tone to the pacemaker is low, there is little or no
inhibition of the pacemaker. Thus, the vagal brake may be used as a construct to
describe the functional modulation of heart rate by the myelinated vagal efferent

pathways.
The vagal brake provides a neural mechanism to change visceral states by
slowing or speeding heart rate. Neurophysiologically, the influence of the vagal
brake is reduced or removed to support the metabolic requirements for
mobilization (e.g., fight-or-flight behaviors) and maintained or increased to
support social engagement behaviors. The amplitude of respiratory sinus
arrhythmia (RSA) indexes the state of the vagal brake. RSA is a natural rhythm
in the heart rate pattern at approximately the frequency of spontaneous
breathing. The amplitude of RSA provides a sensitive index of the impact that
the myelinated vagus has on the heart (see chapter 2). By quantifying RSA
during various challenges, it is possible to measure the dynamic regulation of the
vagal brake.
It was hypothesized that the BPD participants, unlike typically behaving
individuals, will have difficulties maintaining the vagal brake in social contexts.
Thus, in response to social stimuli, BPD participants should rapidly shift from a
calm state (i.e., high-amplitude RSA) to a state of agitation (i.e., low-amplitude
RSA). To test this hypothesis, we contrasted the regulation of the vagal brake by
measuring the amplitude of RSA in participants with BPD and controls during
the presentation of film clips assumed to reflect emotional content. In addition,
the experiment, by requiring an interaction between the participant and the
experimenter, provides a secondary context related to social interactions.
METHOD
Participants
Participants (all female) consisted of 9 borderline personality disorder (BPD)
patients and 11 controls between the ages of 18 and 45. Only females were
recruited, since females represent the majority of individuals diagnosed with
BPD and to remove gender as a possible source of variance in the
neurophysiological regulation of autonomic state. The groups were equivalent in
education level and age. BPD participants were referred to the study by
clinicians in the Washington, DC, area. The BPD participants were identified
and screened to eliminate comorbid diagnoses by National Institute of Mental
Health clinical researchers at St. Elizabeth’s Hospital (Washington, DC). The
control group consisted of volunteers who were recruited from lists maintained

by the National Institutes of Health. Both groups were free of drug and alcohol
abuse and were not current users of prescription or illicit drugs. The diagnosis of
BPD, based on DSM-IV criteria (APA, 1994), was confirmed by the Structured
Clinical Interview for DSM-III-R (Spitzer, Williams, Gibbon, & First, 1990,
1992) and the Diagnostic Interview for Borderlines (Gunderson, Kolb, & Austin,
1981). The BPD participants were tested at St. Elizabeth’s Hospital. The BPD
participants, while participating in the study, were off medication and as a
precautionary procedure were in residence at the hospital. Controls were free of
psychiatric or neurological disorders. The control participants were not in
residence at the hospital and were tested either at the hospital or at the
Developmental Assessment Laboratory (University of Maryland, College Park)
in similar testing environments.
Procedure
Following informed consent, participants were seated in a quiet room facing a
television screen. To monitor electrocardiography (ECG), from which the heart
period and RSA were derived, three disposable Ag–AgCl electrodes were placed
on the participant’s chest, connected to an ECG amplifier, and output to a Vagal
Tone Monitor-II (Delta-Biometrics). After the initial baseline period,
participants were instructed to watch three 10-min film clips. Each film clip was
followed by questions specific to the film clip just viewed. Physiological data
were collected during each of the four 10-min segments (i.e., baseline, film clip
1, film clip 2, film clip 3). To facilitate the measurement of a stable indicator of
autonomic state in response to the specific emotional content of each film clip
and to allow for a transition in physiological state due to the onset of each film
clip, the last 5 minutes of data within each of the four conditions were analyzed.
The experiment lasted approximately 1 hour. Heart period and RSA were
collected for the baseline and film clip conditions. Participants were instructed to
minimize their movements during the experiment. The experimenter remained in
the room with the participant during the experimental procedures, since BPD is
associated with an inability to tolerate being alone (see Gunderson, 1996). While
in the experimental room, the experimenter ran the equipment and asked
questions about each film clip.
Film clips 1 and 3 were selected to elicit a strong emotional response. Film
clip 1 was a conflict scene with the mother in Frances, and film clip 3 was a
conflict scene with the father in The Great Santini. In contrast to these two

conflict scenes, film clip 2 was selected to be a neutral scene from A Handful of
Dust. Participants rated the film clips on a Likert scale ranging from 0 (not
arousing) to 10 (extremely arousing). Participants’ ratings confirmed the
assumed emotional content of each film sequence. The first conflict scene had a
mean rating of 7.25 and the second conflict scene had a mean rating of 9.15. In
contrast, the neutral scene had a mean rating of 1.75. The conflict scenes were
rated as significantly more arousing than the neutral scene (p < .001). There
were no significant differences in ratings between groups.
Data Quantification
The Vagal Tone Monitor detected the peak of the R-wave with 1-msec accuracy,
timed sequential heart periods to the nearest ms (Riniolo & Porges, 1997), and
stored the heart periods in files for offline analyses of RSA and heart period. The
data files of sequential heart periods (i.e., R–R intervals in msec) were input into
MXedit (version 2.21) software (Delta-Biometrics) in order to edit outlier data
produced by movement and digitizing error. Editing consisted of integer addition
or division of sequential values.
RSA estimates were calculated using the following procedures (Porges,
1985): (a) the heart period time series were converted to time-based data by
resampling at successive 500-msec intervals; (b) a 21-point moving cubic
polynomial filter was stepped through the time-sampled series to produce a
smoothed template series; (c) the template series was subtracted from the
original series to produce a residual time series; (d) the residual time series was
processed by a digital bandpass filter with 25 coefficients to extract the variance
in the frequency band of 0.12–0.40 Hz (i.e., the frequency of spontaneous
breathing for adults); and (e) the bandpassed variance was transformed to its
natural logarithm and used to quantify RSA. Data from our laboratory (Denver,
Reed, & Porges, 2007) demonstrate that this methodology accurately captures
the heart rate variability associated with spontaneous breathing. Denver et al.
(2007) report a correlation of 0.99 between the frequency observed in the heart
rate and respiration spectra. Moreover, the amplitude of the heart rate periodicity
derived from spectral analysis was correlated 0.99 with the values derived from
the MXedit analysis. These procedures result in a sensitive, noninvasive marker
of the influence of the myelinated vagal fibers on the heart (see chapter 2;
Porges, 2001a).

Analyses
Group (Borderline, Control) by Condition (Baseline, Film 1, Film 2, Film 3)
analyses of variance (ANOVA) were used to identify statistical effects for RSA
and heart period. Data from one participant during the baseline condition were
lost due to technical error. Data from this participant were analyzed during the
experimental conditions. Heart period was calculated as the time interval in msec
between successive R-waves of the ECG. The metric for the current analyses
represents the average R–R interval in msec for each condition. To evaluate the
vagal contribution to heart period changes during each of the film clips,
correlations between the changes from baseline in heart period and RSA were
calculated. High correlations would illustrate that the changes in both variables
were mediated by a common mechanism (i.e., vagal regulation of the heart). If
the heart period change is totally dependent on vagal regulation, the correlation
with RSA should approach 1.0. In contrast, low correlations would suggest that
heart period is not tightly regulated by the vagus and would be mediated by other
mechanisms.
RESULTS
Across all conditions there was a significant group effect for RSA, F(1,77) =
7.16, p < .05. The control group had significantly higher RSA than the BPD
group. This main effect was functionally determined by the group trajectories
during the experiment and statistically represented in the group × condition
interaction, F(3,51) = 3.62, p < .05. As illustrated in Figure 15.1a, the trajectory
of RSA during the experimental session differed between the groups. The values
for RSA were similar for the two groups during baseline. However, over the
course of the experiment, the control participants exhibited an increase in RSA,
and the BPD participants exhibited a decrease in RSA. These distinct patterns
reflect different neural strategies. The BPD participants exhibited a vagal
withdrawal, which would support the increased metabolic demands of fight-or-
flight behaviors. The control participants exhibited an increase in vagal
influences to heart, which would support social engagement behaviors. As
illustrated in Figure 15.1b, there was a significant group × condition interaction
for heart period, F(3,51) = 6.49, p < .05. The heart period response pattern
during the experiment confirms the observed group specific shifts in cardiac
vagal tone. The BPD group progressively exhibited shorter heart periods (i.e.,

faster heart rate), while the control group exhibited longer heart periods (i.e.,
slower heart rate). Simple effects tests (see Table 15.1) confirm that at the end of
the experiment, group differences were pronounced for both variables.
Consistent with the RSA data, across conditions there was a group effect for
heart period, F(1,77) = 14.2, p < .05.
The vagal contribution to heart period changes during the experiment was
estimated by correlating the change from baseline in heart period with change
from baseline in RSA. Correlations were calculated within each group to
evaluate whether the observed heart period change from baseline to a specific
film clip were under vagal control. As illustrated in Figure 15.2, the relations
between changes in RSA and heart period are significantly correlated only for
the control group. Thus, the changes in heart period are strongly linked to an
increase in the vagal control of the heart, but only in the control group. In the
BPD group, although there is a consistent vagal withdrawal, the changes in RSA
are not sufficient to account for the changes in heart period. These findings
demonstrate that BPD participants have poor vagal regulation and the changes in
heart period may be due, in addition, to other influences such as sympathetic
activation.

FIGURE 15.1. Means (± SE) for respiratory sinus arrhythmia in ln msec2 units (a) and heart period in msec
(b) across test conditions.
TABLE 15.1. Simple Effects for ANOVA

DISCUSSION
Previous investigations of the autonomic nervous system of BPD participants
focused on indices of the sympathetic nervous system. These studies did not
identify differences between BPD and controls (Herpertz et al., 1999; Schmahl
et al., 2004). In contrast, by focusing on the parasympathetic limb of the
autonomic nervous system, the current study provides the first report of unique
characteristics of autonomic regulation associated with a diagnosis of BPD.
Based on the limited literature studying the psychophysiology of post-
traumatic stress disorder (e.g., Sahar, Shalev, & Porges, 2001), we assumed that
BPD patients and controls would have similar levels of RSA during baseline.
This assumption was confirmed. By challenging the participants with film clips
of both high (clips 1 and 3) and low (clip 2) emotional content, the experiment
was designed to elicit a withdrawal of the vagal brake (i.e., lower RSA and
shorter heart period) in both groups during high-emotion stimuli with an
expectation that the vagal brake would be reinstated (i.e., increases in RSA and
heart period) during the low-emotion stimulus. However, we anticipated that the
BPD participants, due to their sensitivity to affective stimuli and difficulty in
state regulation, would exhibit an exaggerated withdrawal of the vagal brake
(i.e., lower RSA and shorter heart period). Interestingly, we found that neither
group exhibited a film clip–related response. Instead as illustrated in Figure
15.1a and b, the control group exhibited a trajectory of increasing vagal
influences on the heart across the entire duration of the experiment, while the
BPD group exhibited decreasing vagal influences on the heart.
At the start of the experiment, vagal influences on the heart were similar in

both groups. However, as the experiment progressed, there was an intriguing
divergence between the groups. The polyvagal theory provides two insights into
the adaptive nature of the physiological state for each group as the experiment
progressed. First, the polyvagal theory emphasizes that the physiological state
that characterizes each group at the end of the experiment supports different
classes of behavior. For the BPD group, the physiological state, characterized by
a vagal withdrawal, would support the mobilization behaviors of fight or flight.
In contrast, for the control group, the physiological state, characterized by
increased vagal influence on the heart, would support spontaneous social
engagement behaviors. Interestingly, embedded in the diagnosis of BPD are
features related to compromised social engagement behaviors, including a
hyperreactivity or emotional dysregulation during social interactions. Thus,
although the experimental conditions provided the same context and task
demands for all participants, the BPD group reacted with a visceral state to
promote defensive behaviors, while the control group reacted with a visceral
state to promote increased spontaneous social engagement behaviors. Second,
the polyvagal theory (see chapter 1) proposes a mechanism (i.e., neuroception)
that triggers defense strategies. Based on the clinical features of BPD, social
interactions with a stranger (i.e., the experimenter) might provide a social
stimulus that would trigger the nervous system and elicit a physiological state
supporting fight-or-flight behaviors. However, the film clips in this experiment,
with their depictions of social interactions, might have contributed to the need to
mobilize. It would be interesting to see whether in the absence of a person in the
experimental room, the physiological states of the two groups would still diverge
during the film clips. Perhaps the physiological states of both groups would have
been more similar and more stable throughout the experiment in the absence of
the experimenter. Under these conditions, the BPD participants might not detect
risk and elicit a defensive strategy and the control participants would not detect
the cues from the experimenter to trigger spontaneous social engagement
behaviors.

FIGURE 15.2. Correlations of change from baseline in heart period and change from baseline in RSA from
film clips 1, 2, and 3; *p < .05.
The correlations between RSA and heart period provide additional support
for the hypothesis that in individuals without psychiatric disturbances, there is a
strong link between vagal regulation and the control of heart period. In previous
research, we have reported that this covariation is compromised in other

psychiatric disorders that have difficulties in regulating behavior (Sahar et al.,
2001; Umhau et al., 2002). The lack of correlation between RSA and heart
period for the BPD group is consistent with these studies.
It is possible that the neuroception of the environment provides an invalid
indicator of risk for individuals with BPD. Thus, rather than being calm in the
presence of another “nonthreatening” human, the autonomic nervous system is
regulated to a state that supports fight or flight and not a state that would support
spontaneous social engagement. If invalid neuroception related to social stimuli
accurately describes individuals with BPD, it may partially explain why BPD
patients have a variety of poor outcomes, especially related to social
relationships and emotional instability in real-world situations.
This study has provided the first documented evidence of autonomic nervous
system differences between controls and individuals diagnosed with BPD. Thus,
it offers a theoretical framework to explain the emotional reactivity that is linked
to BPD. The study, however, has several limitations, including small sample
size, isolated experimental manipulation, and no measures of test–retest
reliability. However, this investigation into the autonomic response profile of
BPD patients may lead to additional research to confirm our hypotheses relating
autonomic state and neuroception in a variety of other social challenges. Thus,
monitoring RSA during social challenges may provide a measurable index of
neuroception in BPD and provide a method to delineate the features in the social
environment that would trigger autonomic states that support and promote
defensive behaviors.
Co-authors for this chapter were M. A. Austin and T. C. Riniolo.

CHAPTER 16
Abuse History Is Related to Autonomic
Regulation
Many individuals experience abuse, either in childhood or adulthood, and
those who experience childhood abuse are more likely to experience adult abuse
(e.g., Desai, Arias, Thompson, & Basile, 2002). Women are extremely
vulnerable to victimization (Bremner & Vermetten, 2001), and the abuse is also
more likely to occur by those closest to the victim. As in child abuse, the various
types of adult abuse (e.g., domestic violence, sexual abuse, and emotional abuse)
may occur in combination. Given the great overlap, it is difficult to investigate
the effects of a particular type of child or adult abuse. Research suggests that
history of childhood sexual abuse, an experience which occurs in about 16% of
women, is the most common cause of post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) in
women (Bremner & Vermetten, 2001).
It is important to note that women may experience abuse, including sexual
abuse, without the severe debilitating features of PTSD. These women may
present with symptoms that may or may not be consistent with other psychiatric
diagnoses. Victims of abuse may develop mood disorders (e.g., Zavaschi et al.,
2006), including depression (e.g., Schuck & Widom, 2001). The depressive
symptoms may be related to self-esteem issues common in victims of abuse
(e.g., Arata, Langhinrichsen-Rohling, Bowers, & O’Farrill Swails, 2005).
Victims of abuse may also employ maladaptive coping mechanisms, which may
be related to paying inordinate attention to internal stimuli and distorting
environmental cues (Rothschild, 2000). These maladaptive coping strategies
may initially be functional but, in the long term, result in detrimental
consequences such as substance abuse, eating disorders, and suicide (Doyle,
2001).

Little is known about the effects of abuse on the victim’s bodily responses to
stressful events. Studies investigating the influence of abuse on the autonomic
nervous system have generally focused on participants with chronic PTSD. The
results of these studies have been inconsistent (Buckley & Kaloupek, 2001). For
example, reported differences in baseline heart rate might not reflect a reliable
difference in autonomic state but may be influenced by other psychologically
related factors, including the laboratory setting, the experimental paradigm, and
the psychological state (e.g., anticipatory anxiety) in which the participant was
tested (Prims, Kaloupek, & Keane, 1995). In addition, supporting the idea that
PTSD is associated with a sympathetic overdrive (Blanchard, 1990) studies have
reported heightened physiological reactivity to stimuli related to traumatic
events (e.g., Elsesser, Sartoy, & Tackenberg, 2004). Thus, assessment of
cardiovascular regulation variables during both baseline and following a stressor
may provide useful information in determining whether trauma history impacts
on the physiological response strategies available to react and to calm in normal
nonthreatening situations.
Even if the abuse does not result in PTSD, it may impact on day-to-day
experiences and influence the development of social relationships. A history of
abuse may “tune” the nervous system to be cautious and prepared for defensive
fight-or-flight behaviors, even when real danger does not exist. Since the
metabolic demands of exercise require a physiological adjustment that mimics
physiological states associated with flight-or-fight behaviors, it is possible that
abuse history may influence the neural circuits involved in calming following
exercise. By monitoring heart rate patterns in response to mild exercise, it may
be possible to evaluate an individual’s ability to self-regulate and to promote a
calm state following exercise.
The quantification of respiratory sinus arrhythmia (RSA) provides an
opportunity to dynamically monitor the changing vagal regulation of the heart
(see chapter 2) during recovery from exercise. Vagal regulation of the heart is
associated with self-regulated behaviors. Optimally, during challenges
demanding mobilization there is a rapid withdrawal of the vagal inhibition on the
heart to raise heart rate to support the increased metabolic demands, and
immediately following exercise there is a recovery of vagal tone to foster calm
states. This rapid regulation of the vagus in support of social engagement
behaviors has been labeled the vagal brake (see chapter 7).
Deficits in vagal regulation are present in perpetrators of violent abuse
(Umhau et al., 2002) and are related to a variety of psychiatric disorders such as

PTSD (Sack, Hopper, & Lamprecht, 2004; Sahar, Shalev, & Porges, 2001),
generalized anxiety disorder (McLeod, Hoehn-Saric, Porges, Kowalski, & Clark,
2000), and depression (Rottenberg, Solomon, Gross, & Gotlib, 2005). There is
an extensive literature demonstrating that vagal regulation of the heart, both in
terms of level of cardiac vagal tone and the efficient regulation of the vagal
brake, is related to processes such as emotional reactivity, social engagement,
and reactions to stress.
Victims of abuse have state regulation difficulties with a bias toward
behavioral states that are self-protective. This potential vulnerability to be
defensive may result in difficulties in feeling safe with others and in developing
trusting social relationships. A self-awareness of difficulties in regulating state,
especially staying calm in the presence of others, may lead individuals to seek
alternative strategies, such as yoga. Yoga exercises may help reduce symptoms
of depression and anxiety, increase a sense of self-efficacy (Lee, Mancuso, &
Charlson, 2004), and improve regulation of the autonomic nervous system
(Sovik, 2000). Thus, individuals, who practice yoga, may be exercising their
autonomic nervous system in an attempt to normalize an abuse-related damage
to their ability to self-regulate.
Practitioners of yoga classes served as a forum to recruit participants for the
current study. We hypothesized that women with a history of abuse, but without
a diagnosis of PTSD, would exhibit greater physiological coping difficulties
characterized by lower RSA and less RSA recovery following mild exercise.
Additionally, we hypothesized that abuse history would be related to a greater
use of dysfunctional coping strategies, increased mood disturbances, and lower
self-concept.
METHOD
The analyses are based on 49 female participants, who were recruited from a
local yoga studio. Forty-five participants described themselves as Caucasian, one
as Hispanic, and three as multiracial. The majority (69.4%) were in a committed
relationship, and approximately half (46%) reported having children. Most
(96%) had college and graduate education. These participants were between 17
and 66 years of age. No participant reported PTSD, although diagnoses of
depression (n = 7) and anxiety disorders (n = 4) were present.
Heart rate data were collected while the participant sat quietly for 5 minutes

prior to and for 5 minutes following riding a stationary bike at her own pace for
1 mile.
RESULTS
Reported Abuse History
Reported abuse history is displayed in Table 16.1. Twenty-two participants did
not report a history of abuse, 27 participants reported child abuse and/or adult
abuse. Chi-square analysis indicated a significantly higher incidence of a mental
health diagnosis in the abuse group, χ2(1, N = 49) = 6.23, p < .05. Specifically, 9
of the 11 participants who reported a current mental health diagnosis also
reported a history of abuse. Frequency of yoga practice was not related to the
physiological response pattern or abuse history.
TABLE 16.1. Reported History of Abuse: Number and Percent
Impact of Abuse History on Autonomic Regulation and
Psychological Well-Being
To examine the potential impact of abuse history on autonomic state regulation,
repeated measures analyses of variance were used to evaluate the pattern from
pre-to post exercise for both RSA and heart rate. For these analyses, the
participants were separated into two groups according to abuse history. A no-
abuse-history group consisted of 22 participants and an abuse-history group
consisted of 27 participants.
Heart rate was sensitive to the exercise challenge, but not related to abuse
history. Heart rate significantly increased post exercise, regardless of abuse
history, F(1, 47) = 76.17, p < .001. In contrast to the heart rate analyses, RSA
was related to abuse history. Since age was significantly correlated with the pre-
exercise level of RSA, r(49) = − .53, p < .001, an analysis of covariance was

conducted to remove the influence of age on RSA level and RSA reactivity.
When age was covaried, abuse history influenced level of RSA, F(1, 46) = 4.63,
p < .05, and interacted with the reactivity to exercise, F(1, 46) = 4.06, p = .05.
As illustrated in Figure 16.1 participants who reported abuse history had lower
RSA and following exercise RSA did not recovery to pre-exercise levels.
In addition, abuse history was related to dysfunctional coping, F(1, 47) =
4.67, p < .05, and total self-concept, F(1, 47) = 9.24, p < .01. Women with an
abuse history reported using more dysfunctional coping strategies. Women with
an abuse history also reported having significantly lower self-concept.
To determine whether recency of abuse influenced the response profiles,
participants were partitioned into three groups: no abuse (n = 22), child abuse
only (n = 9), and adult abuse with or without child abuse (n = 18). Analyses with
age being covaried indicated that pre-exercise level of RSA was significantly
related to abuse group with the group reporting adult abuse having the lowest
RSA, F(2, 45) = 3.33, p = .05. Moreover, the group experiencing adult abuse not
only had lower levels of RSA but also exhibited the least recovery.
A cumulative abuse index was generated by assigning a 0 to the no-abuse
group (n = 22), a 1 to the child-abuse-only group (n = 9), a 2 to the adult-only
group (n = 6), and a 3 to those reporting child and adult abuse (n = 12). Although
the categorization is only via self-report, the higher the self-reported index of
abuse, the greater the decrease in RSA, but not heart rate, following exercise,
r(49) = .34, p < .05. This relationship remained when partial correlations
removed the influence of baseline RSA on the change scores, r(49) = .41, p <
.01. Thus the two indices of autonomic regulation, baseline RSA and RSA
reactivity, were independently related to abuse history.

FIGURE 16.1. RSA reactivity to exercise as a function of abuse history.
DISCUSSION
The current study investigated the potential impact of abuse history in women
without a diagnosis of PTSD. Although more than half of the participants
reported abuse either in childhood or adulthood, no participant reported a
diagnosis of PTSD. This high percentage of reported abuse is larger than would
be expected based on normative data (e.g., Administration on Children Youth
and Families Children’s Bureau, 2006). Several of the women reporting a history
of abuse were experienced practitioners in yoga. It is possible that the yoga
training might have helped improve their ability to self-regulate, to dampen
physiological reactivity, and to feel more comfortable in their bodies.
We hypothesized that a history of abuse would “tune” the autonomic nervous
system to facilitate defensive mobilization strategies of fight-or-flight behaviors
and would compromise physiological recovery following mild exercise (i.e., low
RSA and poor RSA recovery). This hypothesis was supported. Women who
experienced abuse had lower RSA prior to mild exercise and poorer RSA
recovery following mild exercise. These findings suggest that women with an
abuse history are less able to recruit the calming influence of the vagal “brake”
after exercise. Although these findings are consistent with the findings of Sack et

al. (2004), who observed decreased RSA in response to traumatic reminders, our
findings are unique since our experimental manipulation was not related to
trauma or abuse.
The human autonomic nervous system evolved to rapidly and efficiently
shift between physiological states that facilitate either social engagement or
mobilization. The myelinated vagus provides a mechanism to rapidly adjust
physiological state to behavioral demands. This vagal circuit is uniquely
mammalian and evolved to dampen defensive systems. The myelinated vagal
circuit allows us (and other mammals) selectively to down-regulate defensive
systems when engaged by “safe” individuals and to remove this “brake” to
promote the necessary fight-or-flight behaviors when engaged by “dangerous”
individuals. Functionally, the vagal input to the heart results in the base-level
heart rate being substantially lower than the intrinsic rhythm of the heart’s
pacemaker. When vagal influences are reduced to the pacemaker, the heart
immediately beats faster. Thus, it appears that abuse history, even in individuals
who appear to be functioning well, may lower the tonic influence of the vagal
brake and limit the ability of the myelinated vagal circuit to rapidly recover and
to support a calm physiological state.
The relationship between abuse history and an inability to rapidly engage
neural regulation of the vagus to support calm physiological states is consistent
with clinical impressions that abused individuals are more likely to exhibit
asocial reactions such as fight-or-flight behaviors in response to stress, and to
have difficulties shifting from a mobilized state to a state of calmness. These
findings are consistent with research indicating that poor vagal modulation may
be related to psychological dysfunction, including greater social anxiety (Movius
& Allen, 2005) and poorer recovery from depression for depressed individuals
(Rottenberg et al., 2005).
The impact of abuse history on mood disturbances and self-concept was also
investigated. Women who participate in yoga may self-select due to a self-
awareness of their difficulties in regulating state, especially staying calm in the
presence of others, and may use yoga as a coping skill to regulate state.
Consistent with these predictions, individuals with an abuse history had lower
self-concept. Moreover, when considering total abuse, there appeared to be a
graded relation between cumulative abuse experiences and both self-concept and
mood disturbances. These findings are consistent with research suggesting that
victims of abuse may also develop self-esteem issues (e.g., Arata et al., 2005)
and mood disorders (e.g., Zavaschi et al., 2006) including depression (e.g.,

Schuck & Widom, 2001).
The findings that abuse history is related to autonomic regulation are
consistent with the polyvagal theory (see chapter 2; Porges, 2001a, 2007a). The
theory focuses on the adaptive functions of autonomic reactivity and describes
how each of three phylogenetic stages in the development of the vertebrate
autonomic nervous system is associated with a distinct autonomic subsystem that
is retained and expressed in humans.
Abuse experiences challenge adaptive survival mechanisms. According to
the polyvagal theory, the adaptive consequence is to react to features in the
environment conservatively, by becoming hypervigilant and more sensitive to
predators. Hypothetically, abuse experiences would “retune” the autonomic
nervous system. Functionally, abuse history would dampen the ability to express
socially “trusting” behaviors and facilitate more vigilant states to prepare for
fight-or-flight behaviors. By measuring RSA in this study, an index of the
functioning of the vagal brake was dynamically evaluated. Since the vagal brake
supports trusting interactions and social engagement behaviors, it was
hypothesized that abuse history would compromise the efficiency of this circuit.
The data support the hypothesis and demonstrate that the individuals with abuse
history who were tested in the current study had depressed cardiac vagal tone
and a compromised ability to recruit and reinstate the vagal brake to self-soothe
following the transitory physiological state disruption due to mild exercise.
Thus, what appears to be a maladaptive inability to re-engage the vagal brake
may have emerged from an adaptive response to potential abusive threats by
promoting hypervigilance for danger and facilitating an immediate execution of
fight-or-flight behaviors.
It has been speculated that PTSD may be a consequence of triggering the
unmyelinated vagus as a primitive defense system, often in inescapable contexts,
when mobilization defensive strategies cannot be employed (see Porges, 2007a).
In this state, a lower brainstem system, more frequently employed by reptiles, is
regulating peripheral physiology. This system reduces oxygenated blood flow to
the brain and leads to fainting and experiences of dissociation. It is possible that
a lower threshold to mobilize and a hypervigilance for danger might have
potential survival consequences in this situation. Thus, from an adaptive
perspective, the lower threshold to mobilize would protect the individual from
recruiting this primitive shutdown circuit.
In the current study, we did not evaluate individuals with PTSD. However, it
is possible that individuals with a history of PTSD, may react to the exercise

challenge similar to our individuals with an abuse history. Thus, it is possible
that individuals with a history of PTSD may have a lower threshold to remove
the vagal brake and to employ fight-or-flight defensive strategies.
The study provides a plausible explanation of the mechanisms mediating
fight-or-flight reactions clinically observed in clients with histories of abuse. It
underscores the importance of demystifying personal experiences and
understanding that the consequences of abuse are multidimensional and
impacting both psychological and physiological domains. Trauma not only may
retune perceptions of others, making it more difficult to feel safe with others, but
also may retune the neural circuits by lowering the threshold to react
defensively. These changes affect are ability to socially engage, which may lead
to dysfunctional coping strategies, lower self-concept, and greater mood
disturbance symptoms.
Therefore, assessments and interventions may need to incorporate a
multidimensional conceptualization of trauma and abuse in which a retuning of
autonomic regulation is a key feature. Within this model, treatments might apply
clinical strategies that would enable the client to move from a fight-or-flight
state to a physiological state associated with safety and social engagement (e.g.,
Ogden, Minton, & Pain, 2006). If treatments are unable to shift the client to a
calmer physiological state, then access to the psychological mechanisms and
processes that have been the bases of psychotherapy may not be efficiently
available (see chapter 3).
Co-authors for this chapter were L. P. Dale, L. E. Carroll, G. Galen, J. A. Hayes,
and K. W. Webb.

CHAPTER 17
Music Therapy, Trauma, and the Polyvagal
Theory
Music is a documented feature of civilizations. Cultures have incorporated
music into the educational process, religious and tribal rituals, and patriotic
expressions. Vocal music, through both lyrics and melody, has been used both as
a contemporary vehicle and an archival mechanism to transmit important
cultural, moral, spiritual, and historical events and values. Music has been used
to calm, to enable feelings of safety, to build a sense of community, and to
reduce the social distance between people.
Music is an important component of the human experience. Music is
intertwined with emotion, affect regulation, interpersonal social behavior, and
other psychological processes related to personal responses to environmental,
interpersonal, and intrapersonal challenges. Types of music have been uniquely
associated with distinct feelings, experiences, and social interactions. These
psychological processes shape our sense of self, contribute to our abilities to
form relationships, and determine whether we feel safe in various contexts or
with specific people. Although these processes can be objectively observed and
subjectively described, they represent a complex interplay between our
psychological experience and our physiology.
This chapter provides a novel insight into the traditions of music as a therapy
aiding physical and mental health. More than listening to music, singing, or
playing a musical instrument, music therapy involves the dynamic interactions
among three features: (1) therapist, (2) client, and (3) music. In the following
pages, the polyvagal theory is used to present a plausible model to explain how
and why music therapy is helpful in supporting physical health and in enhancing
function during compromised states associated with mental and physical illness,

including the consequences of trauma. The polyvagal theory provides a strategy
to understand the mechanisms and processes that enable music and music
therapy to improve social engagement behaviors and to facilitate the regulation
of bodily and behavioral states. The theory further provides insights that bridge
music therapy to the nervous system and to health outcomes, and is used to
deconstruct music therapy into two components: (1) the interpersonal
relationship between therapist and client, and (2) the acoustic features of music
used in the therapeutic setting as it pertains to clinical treatment.
THE POLYVAGAL THEORY
Our nervous system functions as a sentry by continuously evaluating risk in the
environment. Through neural surveillance mechanisms (i.e., neuroception), our
brain identifies features of risk or safety (see chapter 1). Many of the features of
risk and safety are not learned, but are hard-wired into our nervous system and
reflect adaptive strategies associated with our phylogenetic history. The way we
react to the specific acoustic frequency bands that constitute music is determined
by the same neural circuits that we use to evaluate risk in our environment. For
example, low-frequency sounds elicit a sense of danger associated with an
approaching predator. In “Peter and the Wolf,” Prokofiev exploits this biological
feature by conveying impending and predictable danger with the low-frequency
sounds of the kettledrums.
Due to our phylogenetic history, the rumble of low-frequency sounds shifts
our attention from social interactions to potential dangers in the environment.
This reaction is shared with other vertebrates, including reptiles and amphibians.
In contrast, high-pitched screams from another mammal (not just our children,
but also our dogs and cats) elicit a sense of urgent concern or empathy as a
response to the perceived pain or injury of a targeted other. In humans, high-
frequency screams shift our attention from the social group or object of focus to
the specific individual who is screaming. Music in the frequency band of human
voice, however, elicits visceral and emotional states that are associated with
neither impending doom nor a sense of urgency. As such, music in the frequency
band of human voice is often used melodically in compositions to convey the
functional and metaphorical “voice” of the composer. Thus, the orchestral
instruments, which duplicate the human vocal range (e.g., violins, flutes,
clarinets, trumpets, oboes, and French horns), are used to express the composer’s

emotional narrative.
Specific acoustic frequency bands in the environment elicit a variety of
emotional experiences that are paralleled by adaptive physiological states. Each
of these physiological states is functionally an adaptive state that influences
affect regulation, social engagement behaviors, and our ability to communicate.
We experience these states with feelings of safety, danger, or ultimate demise
(i.e., life threat). Physiological state is an implicit component of the subjective
experience of listening to or producing music. Music not only changes our
emotive state but also elicits changes in our physiology that parallel the feelings
of anxiety, fear, panic, and pain. For example, while listening to certain
melodies, we relax, slow our heart rate, and smile. However, while listening to
other music we may start to imagine danger and visualize marching off to war or
protecting our loved ones. The feelings of danger will change our facial
expression and increase our heart rate.
As Oliver Sacks (2007) discussed in Musicophilia, music appears to be part
of the human experience, yet no brain area or circuit has been identified to
explain or represent music. From a polyvagal perspective, this question is
viewed differently. Rather than seeking specificity in the neural regulation
required to process and to express music, this perspective points to the
convergence and similarity between the neural mechanisms required to process
music and the neural mechanisms required to process features of social
engagement behaviors and risk in the environment. Furthermore, this
convergence between physiological state and music-related emotional
experience is neurophysiologically determined and explained by the polyvagal
theory (see chapters 2, 10, 11, and 12; Porges, 2001a, 2007a). As this discussion
progresses, the polyvagal theory (see chapter 2) is used as an organizing
principle to explain how music, especially music expressed via music therapy,
can recruit the neural mechanisms that integrate facial muscles and visceral state,
and consequently promote restorative affective states and prosocial behavior.
In order to illustrate this link fully, it is important to briefly review the
origins of the polyvagal theory. The polyvagal theory emerged from the study of
the evolution of the vertebrate autonomic nervous system (ANS), and is based
on the functions of the ANS that automatically regulate several major organs,
including the heart, the lungs, and the gut. Circuits in the brain dynamically
regulate the ANS. This regulation is bidirectional; the brain and its neural
sentries continuously monitor body state, and body state dynamically influences
brain function. Moreover, the neural regulation of the ANS is linked to the

neural regulation of the muscles of the face and head, which signal to others our
emotional state. These muscles of the face and head are involved both in actively
listening to (i.e., the modulation of our middle ear muscles) and in producing of
music whether by singing (i.e., the modulation of the laryngeal and pharyngeal
muscles) or by playing a wind instrument (i.e., the modulation of the facial and
oral muscles supporting an embouchure). Polyvagal theory assumes that many of
our social behaviors and vulnerabilities to emotional disorders are “hard-wired”
into our nervous system. Based on this theory, it is possible to understand
various aspects of mental health, including trauma responses, and to develop
treatment techniques that can help individuals communicate better and relate
better to others.
This theoretical perspective is particularly important in understanding the
mechanisms underlying music therapy, which require both the processing of
acoustic stimuli and face-to-face social interactions within the therapeutic
setting. Thus, the polyvagal theory provides insights into the beneficial effects of
music therapy, since it provides an understanding of the neural control of
structures involved in the two features of music therapy: (1) social interactions
between the client and the therapist, and (2) listening and expressing music. The
neural mechanisms recruited by these features of music therapy are described in
further detail later in this chapter.
The Biobehavioral Quest for Safety, Survival, and a Painless
Death
The polyvagal theory proposes that the evolution of the mammalian ANS
provides the neurophysiological substrates for affective processes and stress
responses. The theory proposes that physiological state limits the range of
adaptive behaviors and psychological experiences. Thus, the evolution of the
nervous system determines the range of emotional expression, quality of
communication, and the ability to regulate body and behavioral state, including
the expression and recovery of stress-related responses. Relevant to adaptive
social and emotional behaviors, these phylogenetic principles illustrate the
emergence of a brain-face-heart circuit and provide a basis not only for
investigating the relation between several features of mental health and
autonomic regulation, but also for deconstructing how music and music therapy
can support mental and physical health.
The investigation of human phylogenetic history identifies changes in neural

regulation that occurred as vertebrates evolved from jawless fish to humans and
other mammals. Phylogenetic development resulted in humans having an
increased neural control of the heart via a myelinated vagal system. The
evolution of the myelinated vagus was paralleled by an enhanced neural control
of the face, larynx, and pharynx. This integrated face–heart system enabled
complex facial gestures and vocalizations associated with social communication
to influence physiological states. The face–heart system can cue others of safety
and danger via facial expressions or vocalization, while promoting transitory
mobilization by increasing heart rate. Removing the myelinated vagal inhibition
from the heart physiologically supports this biobehavioral process of
mobilization. These mechanisms provide us with an understanding of how a
warm smile simultaneously reflects a calm state and triggers calmness and a
sense of safety and benevolence in the observer. In contrast, an angry face
reflects a mobilized state and triggers a matching defensive state in the observer.
Vocalizations, in addition to facial expression, can reflect and trigger bodily
states. Similar to the relationship between smiling and calmness just described,
the melodic patterns of vocalizations, which are not typically shrill or booming,
provide convergent cues to the observer that indicate a relative sense of safety.
However, the lower pitch associated with a booming voice will often startle
and/or frighten the observer, while the high pitch of a shrill voice will generally
evoke anxiety and fear.
THE SOCIAL ENGAGEMENT SYSTEM
The social engagement system regulates facial muscles, including the sphincter
muscles around the eyes that promote social gaze and emotional expressivity;
middle ear muscles that enable human voice to be extracted from background
sounds; muscles of mastication that are involved in ingestion; laryngeal and
pharyngeal muscles that are used in sucking, swallowing, vocalizing, and
breathing; and muscles of head that enhance social gesture and orientation, such
as turning and tilting. Collectively, these muscles act as filters of social stimuli
and determinants of engagement with the social environment. It is interesting to
note that the neural pathways regulating the orbicularis oculi, a sphincter muscle
around the eye involved in expressive displays, also are involved in the dynamic
regulation of the stapedius muscle in the middle ear (Djupesland, 1976). Thus,
the neural mechanisms for emotional cueing via eye contact are shared with

those needed to listen to human voice.
As a cluster, difficulties in behaviors associated with the social engagement
system (e.g., avoidant gaze, nonresponsiveness to human voice, reduced facial
affect and diminished vocal prosody, and atypical or lack of head gesture) are
common features of individuals with autism, post-traumatic stress disorder, and
other psychiatric disorders. This information leads the astute clinician to infer
difficulties in both social engagement behaviors and physiological state
regulation from facial expressions and vocal prosody. Several psychiatric
disorders have deficits in both the somatomotor (e.g., poor gaze, low facial
affect, lack of prosody, difficulties in mastication) and visceromotor (difficulties
in autonomic regulation including cardiopulmonary and digestive problems)
components of the social engagement system. Deficits in the social engagement
system compromise spontaneous social behavior, social awareness, affect
expressivity, prosody, and language development.
Human responses to trauma are devastating and compromise subsequent
social behavior and emotion regulation. Understanding the mechanisms
underlying the mammalian hard-wired response to life threat may demystify
these debilitating consequences. From this neurophysiological perspective, a
variety of clinical features, including severely compromised social behavior and
difficulties in emotion regulation, are predictable. An understanding of the
mechanisms mediating these atypical behaviors in response to trauma is helpful
to the client, the family, and the therapist in developing supportive and
restorative contexts and treatments.
Functionally, our nervous system is continuously evaluating risk in the
environment through an unconscious process of neuroception (see chapter 1).
Specific features in the environment trigger physiological states associated with
feelings of safety, danger, or ultimate demise. The human nervous system
evolved efficiently to shift between conditions of safety and danger. We easily
adjust and calm following situations requiring fight-or-flight maneuvers. We use
social interactions with attuned and contingent facial expressions, intonation of
our voice (i.e., prosody), and gaze to calm and be calmed. However, in contrast
to challenges of danger, reactions to life threat are not easily remediated.
Attempts to socially engage a traumatized individual, rather than calming, may
result in defensive strategies of rage and anger. Life threat triggers a very ancient
neural circuit that severely limits social engagement behaviors and may distort
neuroception, resulting in a false detection of risk. Thus, treatment of trauma
requires a new model distinct from the traditional psychotherapeutic strategies of

face-to-face dialog in order to trigger the calm states associated with the social
engagement system. Music and music therapy strategies may provide an
alternate portal to the social engagement system and avoid the initial face-to-face
interactions that may be misinterpreted as threat by a traumatized individual.
HOW MUSIC AND PROSODIC VOCALIZATIONS TRIGGER
THE SOCIAL ENGAGEMENT SYSTEM
As vertebrates evolved from reptiles to mammals, the structures at the end of the
mandible (i.e., jaw bone) that define the middle ear bones became detached
(Luo, Crompton, & Sun, 2001; Rowe, 1996; Wang, Hu, Meng, & Li, 2001). For
humans and other mammals, sound in the environment impinges on the eardrum
and is transduced from the eardrum to the inner ear via the small bones in the
middle ear known as ossicles. When the stapedius (regulated by a branch of the
facial nerve) and the tensor tympani (regulated by a branch of the trigeminal
nerve) muscles are innervated, the ossicular chain becomes more rigid and
dampens the amplitude of the low-frequency acoustic stimulation from the
environment reaching the inner ear. This process is similar to tightening the skin
on a kettledrum. When the skin is tightened, the pitch of the drum is higher.
When the ossicular chain is tightened, similar to the stretched skin, only higher
frequencies bouncing against the eardrum are transmitted to the inner ear and to
the auditory processing areas of the brain. This functional relation is described
and illustrated in a Scientific American article by Borg and Counter (1989).
The evolution of the human middle ear enabled low-amplitude, relatively
high-frequency airborne sounds matching the frequency of the human voice to
be heard, even when the acoustic environment was dominated by low-frequency
sounds, such as sounds made by large predators. Detached middle ear bones
were a phylogenetic innovation that enabled mammals to communicate in a
frequency band that could not be detected by reptiles. Reptiles have difficulties
in hearing higher frequencies, since their hearing is dependent on bone
conduction.
Studies have demonstrated that this critical neural regulation of middle ear
muscles, a necessary mechanism to extract the soft sounds of human voice from
the loud sounds of low-frequency background noise, is defective in individuals
with language delays, learning disabilities, and autistic spectrum disorders
(Thomas, McMurry, & Pillsbury, 1985). Additionally, middle ear infection (i.e.,
otitis media) may result in a total inability to elicit the reflexive contraction of

the stapedius muscles (Yagi & Nakatani, 1987). Disorders that influence the
neural function of the facial nerve (i.e., Bell’s palsy) not only influence the
stapedius reflex (Ardic, Topaloglu, Oncel, Ardic, & Uguz, 1997), but may also
affect the patient’s ability to discriminate speech (Wormald, Rogers, &
Gatehouse, 1995). The observed difficulties that individuals with a variety of
physical and mental disorders have in extracting human voice from background
sounds may be dependent on the same neural system that regulates facial
expression. Thus, deficits in the social engagement system would compromise
the expression of emotion, as well as social awareness and language
development.
MUSIC THERAPY, TRAUMA, AND THE SOCIAL
ENGAGEMENT SYSTEM
The frequency content of melodies in most musical compositions duplicates the
frequency band of human voice. Functionally, acoustic properties of melodies,
typically encompassing middle C and the two octaves above middle C, easily
pass through the middle ear structures regardless of the neural tone to the middle
ear muscles. Once the frequencies pass through the middle ear, they trigger a
neural feedback mechanism to tense the ossicle chain. Vocal music duplicates
the effect of vocal prosody and triggers neural mechanisms that regulate the
entire social engagement system with the resultant changes in facial affect and
autonomic state. Basically, we start to look and feel better when we listen to
melodies. Thus, while social engagement is a common goal in music therapy
practice, incorporating the polyvagal theory provides a plausible scientific
justification for how music therapy may provide opportunities to exercise the
social engagement system.
Consistent with the parallel between music and social communication, the
same frequency band that characterizes melodies defines, in human voice, the
frequency band in which all information (i.e., verbal content) is communicated.
When this frequency band is weighted to enhance the understanding of voice, it
is known as the “index of articulation” (Kryter, 1962) and more recently as the
“speech intelligibility index” (American National Standards Institute, 1997).
These indices emphasize the relative importance of specific frequencies in
conveying the information embedded in human speech. In the normal ear,
acoustic energy within the primary frequencies of these indices is not attenuated
as it passes through the middle ear structures to the inner ear. The frequency

band defining the index of articulation is similar to the frequency band that
composers have historically selected to express melodies. It is also the frequency
band that mothers have used to calm their infants by singing lullabies.
Trauma can turn off the social engagement system. Attempts to engage a
person with a trauma history, rather that eliciting spontaneous social behavior,
may trigger defensive and aggressive behaviors. From a clinical perspective,
traumatized individuals often present features of gaze aversion and flat facial
affect. If we were to monitor the physiological state of these individuals, we
would observe an ANS that is poised to fight or flee (i.e., high heart rate and low
vagal regulation of the heart). The traumatic experience functionally retunes
neuroception to conservatively detect risk when there is no risk. Most
therapeutic strategies attempt to engage with direct face-to-face eye contact.
Working with traumatized individuals creates a great challenge to therapists,
since the normal social engagement behaviors of the therapist may trigger fear
and reactive defensive strategies. Music therapy provides a special portal to
reengage the social engagement system that does not require an initial face-to-
face interaction. Music can be used to stimulate the social engagement system
without requiring face-to-face reciprocity. Since melodic music contains
acoustic properties similar to vocal prosody, music may be used to recruit the
social engagement system by challenging and modulating the neural regulation
of the middle ear muscles. If the social engagement system is effectively
recruited, positive facial expressions will emerge, eye gaze will spontaneously
be directed at the therapist, and the traumatized individual will shift to a more
calm and positive physiological state.
CONCLUSION
Based on the polyvagal theory, elements of music therapy can be deconstructed
into biobehavioral processes that stimulate the social engagement system. When
the social engagement system is stimulated, the client responds both
behaviorally and physiologically. First, the observable features of social
engagement become more spontaneous and contingent as the face and voice
become more expressive. Second, there is a change in physiological state
regulation that is expressed through increased behavioral regulation and
calmness. The improved state regulation is mediated by the myelinated vagus,
which directly promotes health, growth, and restoration. However for some

clients, especially those who have been traumatized, face-to-face interactions can
be threatening and may not elicit a neuroception of safety. In these
circumstances, the social engagement system can potentially be activated
through vocal prosody or music while minimizing direct face-to-face
interactions.
From a polyvagal perspective, music therapy can be deconstructed into two
integrated processes. As illustrated in Figure 17.1, the therapeutic environment
often invites face-to-face interaction between the therapist and the client. This
face-to-face interaction, if effective, will trigger the client’s neuroception of
safety. Second, the frequency band associated with melodies functionally
duplicates the frequency band conveying information in the human voice. The
human nervous system evolved to be very selective of these frequencies. Music,
especially vocal music, produces melodies by modulating these frequencies.
This process engages and exercises the neural regulation of the social
engagement system with the positive effects of improved socioemotional
behaviors and enhanced physiological state. Interestingly, the phrasing of music
is also an important component of this process. The phrasing of music,
especially when singing or playing a wind instrument, results in short inhalations
and extended durations of exhalations. Physiologically, breathing “gates” the
influence of the myelinated vagus on the heart. Functionally, when we inhale,
the influence of the vagus is attenuated and heart rate increases. In contrast,
when we exhale, the influence of the vagus is increased and heart rate decreases.
This simple mechanical change in breathing increases the calming impact and
health benefits of the myelinated vagus on our body. Thus, music therapy by
engaging and exercising the social engagement system may promote positive
outcomes improving several features related to quality of life.
FIGURE 17.1. Deconstructing music therapy: A polyvagal perspective.

PART V
SOCIAL BEHAVIOR AND
HEALTH

CHAPTER 18
Reciprocal Influences Between Body and Brain
in the Perception and Expression of Affect
Emotions, 
affect 
regulation, 
and 
interpersonal 
social 
behavior 
are
psychological processes that describe basic human experiences in response to
events, environmental challenges, and people. These processes shape our sense
of self, contribute to our abilities to form relationships, and determine whether
we feel safe in various contexts or with specific people. Although these
processes can be objectively observed and subjectively described, they represent
a complex interplay between our psychological experience and our physiological
regulation. These psychological–physiological interactions are dependent on the
dynamic bidirectional communication between peripheral organs and the central
nervous system connecting the brain with these organs. For example, the neural
circuits, providing a bidirectional communication between the brain and heart,
can trigger either a rapid increase in heart rate to support protective fight-or-
flight behaviors or a rapid decrease in heart rate to support social interactions.
Peripheral physiological reactions can be initiated by the brain detecting features
of danger in the environment, and alternatively, changes in peripheral
physiological state can influence the brain and alter our perceptions of the world.
Thus, affect and interpersonal social behavior are more accurately described as
biobehavioral than psychological processes, since our physiological state can
profoundly influence the quality of these psychological processes and our
feelings can, in turn, determine dynamic changes in our physiology.
Our nervous system functions as a sentry by continuously evaluating risk in
the environment. Through neural surveillance mechanisms (i.e., neuroception),
our brain identifies features of risk or safety. Many of the features of risk and
safety are not learned, but are hard-wired into our nervous system and reflect

adaptive strategies associated with our phylogenetic history. For example, low-
frequency sounds elicit in mammals a sense of danger associated with an
approaching predator. This reaction is shared with other vertebrates, including
reptiles and amphibians. Due to our phylogenetic history, the rumble of low-
frequency sounds shifts our attention from social interactions to potential
dangers in the environment. In contrast, high-pitched screams from another
mammal (not just our children, but also our dogs and cats) elicit a sense of
urgent concern or empathy for another who may be feeling pain or being injured.
With humans, high-frequency screams shift our attention to the specific
individual who is screaming. Through exposure and associative learning, we can
link these features with other events. Specific features in the environment recruit
physiological states differentially associated with feelings of safety, danger, or
ultimate demise (i.e., life threat). Each of these states is characterized by a
specific set of capacities for affect regulation and social engagement and
communication (see chapter 12).
Current research in affective neuroscience focuses on brain structures and
neural circuits related to specific motivational and emotional processes (e.g.,
Panksepp, 1998). These important discoveries emphasize cortical and subcortical
structures in the emergence of the complex affective repertoire of humans and
their contribution to social relationships (e.g., Schore, 1994, 2003; Siegel, 2007).
However, underlying these contributions are details of an important and often
overlooked neurobiological substrate, the neural circuits mediating the reciprocal
communication between body states and brainstem structures, which impact on
the availability of these affective circuits. These underlying circuits not only
promote feelings (e.g., Damasio, 1999), but also form a bidirectional circuit
(e.g., Darwin, 1872) that enables mental and psychological processes to
influence body state and body state to color and, at times, to distort our
perception of the world. Thus, the study of affective processes, especially in
their prosocial and healing roles, requires an understanding of the neural circuits
both between higher brain structures and the brainstem and between the
brainstem and the visceral organs (e.g., the heart) mediated through the
autonomic nervous system. All affective or emotional states are dependent on
lower brain regulation of the visceral state and the important visceral, tactile, and
nociceptive cues that travel to the brain from the periphery. Moreover, there are
distinct visceral regulatory states that foster different domains of behavior. These
states do not preclude the important bidirectional information from higher brain
structures.

This chapter emphasizes the neural regulation of observable facial
movements and concurrent subjective visceral experiences that characterize the
expressions, feelings, and perceptions of emotion and affective state. The
chapter uses the polyvagal theory (see chapters 2, 10, 11, and 12; Porges, 2001a,
2007a) as an organizing principle to explain the role of visceral state in the
accessibility of prosocial emotions and restorative affective states. The polyvagal
theory is an attempt to reorganize our conceptualization of the autonomic
nervous system with a focus on the specific neural circuits involved in regulating
visceral organs for specific adaptive functions related to affect, emotions, and
social communication behaviors.
The polyvagal theory interprets social interactions and emotion as
biobehavioral processes. Thus, the theory is particularly important for
psychotherapists, who focus on the social interaction within the therapeutic
setting and forgo pharmacological interventions. By treating the social
interaction as a biobehavioral process, it is possible to conceptualize a
therapeutic treatment that relies not on pharmacological manipulations but on the
profound positive impact of social interactions and interpersonal behaviors on
the neural regulation of body state and behavior. By exploring these bidirectional
biobehavioral processes, psychotherapeutic treatments may change the neural
regulation of physiological state, which in turn will support further benefits from
interpersonal interactions.
EMOTION, MOTION, AND VISCERAL STATE: FEATURES
OF MENTAL HEALTH
Regardless of the operational, and often arbitrary, distinction between emotion
and affect or between emotional expressions and feelings, the measurement of
physiological state (e.g., autonomic, endocrine, and muscle activity) needs to be
embraced in affective neuroscience, particularly if there is to be a functional
dialogue with experiential clinicians. In most cases physiological state has been
conceptualized as a correlate or a consequence of higher brain structures (e.g.,
cortex) presumed to be driving emotion and affect. However, it would be naive
not to explore the connections and potential bidirectional influences between
peripheral physiological state and the brain circuits related to affective
processes.
Physiological state is an implicit component of the subjective experiences
associated with specific psychological constructs such as anxiety, fear, panic,

and pain. The convergence between physiological state and emotional
experience is neurophysiologically determined, since the metabolic requirements
necessary to modulate the muscles of the face and body require supporting
changes in autonomic state. All emotional and affective states require specific
physiological shifts to facilitate their expression and to reach their implicit goals
(e.g., fight, flight, freeze, proximity, etc.).
Through the study of phylogenetic shifts in the vertebrate autonomic nervous
system, it is possible to link the different expressive features of emotion in
humans with the phylogenetic transitions in visceral regulation observed in
vertebrates. Physiological monitoring provides an important portal to monitor
these reactions, since some affective responses are often not observable in overt
behavior. For example, the convergence between the neural mechanism
mediating autonomic state and facial expressions phylogenetically occurs in the
transition from reptiles to mammals (see chapter 2; Porges, 2007a).
There is a rich history of research linking the neural regulation of face and
viscera (e.g., heart) with brain circuits. Gellhorn (1964) elaborated on how
proprioceptive discharges from facial muscles influence brain function and
promote changes in visceral state. Thus, providing an example of the
bidirectionality between peripheral and central structures and providing a
neurophysiological basis for the assumed relation between facial expression and
body feelings. Even earlier, Darwin (1872) acknowledged the important and
often neglected bidirectional relation between the brain and the heart.
Although Hess was awarded the Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine in
1949 for his work emphasizing the importance of the central regulation of
visceral state,* journals in contemporary affective neuroscience (e.g., Nature
Neuroscience) and psychiatry (e.g., Biological Psychiatry) express a disconnect
between subjective affective experience and visceral state regulation.
Contemporary affective neuroscience with the aids of both imaging techniques
and neurochemistry has focused on brain structures contributing to various
neural circuits involved in adaptive behaviors with apparent motivational
objectives.
Panksepp (1998) organizes affective experiences into seven neural-based
motivational systems that include seeking, rage, fear, lust, care, panic, and play.
However, missing from these functionally adaptive motivational circuits is the
role that neural regulation of visceral state plays in potentiating or dampening
these circuits. For example, if an individual is in a physiological state
characterized by vagal withdrawal and high sympathetic excitation, body

feelings of a fast pounding heartbeat are experienced and the threshold to react
aggressively is low. In contrast, when in a physiological state characterized by
an engaged myelinated vagus, sympathetic and hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal
axis reactivity are dampened. The physiological state is experienced as “calm.”
Intrusive stimuli that previously would have triggered aggressive behaviors
when the vagal activity is withdrawn will now result in a dampened reaction.
Accompanying this change in physiological state are options to further dampen
reactivity through social interactions.
Most proponents of affective neuroscience embrace a science of parallelism
that links either observable emotional expressions or subjective experiences with
a “neural” specificity that is concretized and assumed to be validated by imaging
studies that identify activation of brain areas or blockade studies interfering with
appropriate functioning of these circuits. Thus, to many neuroscientists, affect
resides solely in the brain and does not require inputs or outputs linking the body
to the brain. Missing from this research agenda and theoretical explanation is an
appreciation of the necessary contributions of both the sensory inputs from the
periphery influencing central circuits and the motor outputs in the periphery
driven by the central circuits. Focusing on the central circuits, without studying
the sensory and motor contributions from the periphery, is like studying the
behavior of a thermostat independent of information regarding both ambient
temperature and the capacities of the heating, ventilation, and air conditioning
components.
Hess in his Nobel speech articulates an awareness of the complex features of
a system. From his perspective, although the components of a feedback circuit
might be identified and studied independently, the functioning of independent
parts will not explain how the system, as a whole, functions dynamically during
moment-to-moment challenges. This limitation was, in part, dependent on the
methodologies 
available 
to 
study 
neurophysiology 
that 
required
pharmacological, surgical, or electrical manipulations to block or stimulate
“global” branches of the autonomic nervous system that either shared a specific
neurotransmitter (e.g., acetylcholine, epinephrine) or an easily identifiable nerve
(e.g., vagus) that could be cut or stimulated.
Within the field of mental health, there is a similar acceptance of a disease
model without a focus on the intervening feedback circuits that mediate the
features of the disorder. Within the medical discipline of psychiatry, anxiety and
depression are defined by clinical features and not by a measurable physiological
substrate. The prevalent strategies in mental health research that use

neurophysiological variables (e.g., imaging, autonomic measures) are not
directed at defining anxiety or depression, but use neurophysiological variables
as correlates of a clinical diagnosis.
The value of taking a different perspective can be illustrated with the
construct of anxiety. If anxiety were viewed as dependent on a shift in
autonomic state in which an individual’s physiological state is dominated by the
sympathetic nervous system, new clinical research strategies might emerge that
focus on characterizing how states of anxiety and a vulnerability to being
anxious would be potentiated or dampened by different autonomic states.
Treatments would then be developed either to (1) dampen sympathetic tone or
(2) enable the individual to move into environments or shift contexts that are less
likely to trigger the increased reactivity associated with higher sympathetic
excitation. Unfortunately, most researchers in psychiatry and psychology express
little interest in the mapping autonomic regulation as a “vulnerability” dimension
for various psychiatric disorders and behavioral problems, although visceral
features are often symptoms of the disorders they are treating.
Clinical disciplines rarely acknowledge the proximal functions of visceral
state. Clinicians seldom monitor the expression of vagal withdrawal or
sympathetic excitation in their patients. Such a shift in autonomic state would be
manifested in several physical and psychiatric symptoms including flat affect,
difficulties in auditory processing, hyperacusis, tachycardia, and constipation. In
addition, conventional models of mental disorders neglect the role of
neurophysiological mechanisms dynamically interacting with contextual cues in
the environment. In contrast, these disciplines have embraced distal constructs
related to the functions of receptors within the brain that lead almost reflexively
to drug treatment, while generally failing to recognize the important role of
visceral state and visceral afferent feedback on the global functioning of the
brain. This strategy is far from parsimonious and does not take into account
either the phylogeny of the mammalian nervous system or the intervening
neurophysiological and biobehavioral systems along a continuum from genes to
behavior. Rather, these disciplines have assumed that clusters of observable
behaviors or subjective experiences are linked parsimoniously and directly to
neurochemical levels in specific brain circuits. Thus, this strategy misses the
important potential of psychological and behavioral interventions (including
changes in environment) that would be therapeutic by directly influencing
physiological state without necessitating pharmacological treatments.
STATE REGULATION AND THE AUTONOMIC NERVOUS

STATE REGULATION AND THE AUTONOMIC NERVOUS
SYSTEM: A HISTORICAL PERSPECTIVE
Researchers for more than a century have measured autonomic variables (e.g.,
heart rate, palmar sweat gland activity) as indicators of emotional state related to
perceived stress (e.g., fear, mental effort, workload, and anxiety). Historically,
arousal theories (e.g., Berlyne, 1960; Darrow, 1943; Gray, 1971) provided
scientists who study brain–behavior relations with a model that assumed that
activation of peripheral physiological measures regulated by the sympathetic
branch of the autonomic nervous system were sensitive indicators of brain
“arousal” or “activation.” This view was based on a rudimentary understanding
of the autonomic nervous system in which changes in easily measured peripheral
organs (e.g., sweat glands, heart) were assumed to be accurate indicators of how
the brain was processing emotional stimuli. Usually, emotional states were
associated with fight-or-flight behaviors and the sympathetic-adrenal system
(e.g., increases in heart rate, sweat gland activity, and circulating
catecholamines) as initially described by Cannon (1929b). Based on Selye
(1936, 1956), emotional states were also associated with increased activity of the
HPA axis (e.g., increases in cortisol). From a psychological level, arousal
theories emphasized fight-or-flight behaviors and neglected or minimized the
importance of both prosocial affective states that facilitated social interaction
and also the defensive strategy of immobilization (e.g., fainting, death feigning).
An acceptance of a unitary arousal system is assumed in several research
domains, including investigations of sleep, deception, sexual behavior, and
anxiety. Moreover, it led to research on cortical “arousal” and the use of
electroencephalography, single photon emission computed tomography,
functional magnetic resonance imaging, and other imaging technologies that
accepted the arousal construct with little interest in the distinction between
activation of neural pathways that were excitatory or inhibitory. This resulted in
difficulties in establishing whether “activation” represents the turning on or the
turning off of a specific neural structure. From a physiological level, arousal
theories emphasize an assumed continuity between central cortical activation
and peripheral arousal marked by increases in the activity of the sympathetic
nervous system and the adrenal hormones. However, arousal theories have
neglected both the importance of the parasympathetic branch of the autonomic
nervous system and the bidirectional communication between brain structures
and visceral organs.
The continuity between brain and peripheral arousal created a research

environment that neglected several important factors, including an understanding
of the brain structures that regulate autonomic function; how these structures
evolved from the most primitive vertebrates to mammals; how the autonomic
nervous system interacts with the immune system, the hypothalamic-pituitary-
adrenal axis, and the neuropeptides oxytocin and vasopressin; and the
coevolution of stress and coping strategies with the increasing complexity of the
autonomic nervous system. Missing from this dialog is a discussion of the role of
the parasympathetic nervous system and especially the vagus (the Xth cranial
nerve) with its bidirectional portal between the brain and specific visceral organs
such as the heart.
THE POLYVAGAL THEORY: A PRIMER
The polyvagal theory (see chapter 2) emerged from the study of the evolution of
the vertebrate autonomic nervous system. The theory assumes that many of our
social behaviors and vulnerabilities to emotional disorders are “hard-wired” into
our nervous system. Based on the theory, it is possible to understand various
aspects of mental health and to develop treatment techniques that can help
people communicate better and relate better to others. The term “polyvagal”
combines “poly,” meaning “many,” and “vagal,” which refers to the important
nerve called the “vagus.” To understand the theory, we need to investigate
features of the vagus nerve, a primary component of the autonomic nervous
system. The vagus nerve exits the brainstem and has branches that regulate
several organs, including the heart. The theory proposes that there are two
branches of the vagus that are related to different behavioral strategies, one
related to social interactions in safe environments and the other related to
adaptive responses to life threat.
Historically, the autonomic nervous system has been broken into two
opposing components, one labeled sympathetic and the other parasympathetic.
This organizational model was used to describe the function of the autonomic
nervous system in the late 1800s and the early 1900s. In the 1920s this paired-
antagonism model was formalized (Langley, 1921). This model characterized
the function of the autonomic nervous system as a constant battle between the
sympathetic nervous system associated with fight-or-flight behaviors and the
parasympathetic nervous system associated with growth, health, and restoration.
Because most organs of the body, such as the heart, the lungs, and the gut, have
innervations from both sympathetic and parasympathetic components, the

paired-antagonism model evolved into “balance theories.” Balance theories
attempted to link “tonic” imbalances to both physical and mental health. For
example, a sympathetic dominance might be related to symptoms of anxiety,
hyperactivity, or impulsivity, while a parasympathetic dominance might be
related to symptoms of depression or lethargy. In addition to the tonic features of
autonomic state, the paired-antagonism model also was assumed to explain the
reactive features of the autonomic nervous system. This dependence on the
construct of “autonomic balance” is still prevalent in textbooks, although there
has been an intervening century in which neurophysiology has documented a
second vagal pathway involved in regulating autonomic function. Unfortunately,
this new knowledge of the second vagal pathway has not permeated the teaching
of physiology, which still is dominated by descriptions of the paired antagonism
between the sympathetic and parasympathetic components of the autonomic
nervous system.
The primary parasympathetic influence to peripheral organs is conveyed
through the vagus, a cranial nerve that exits the brain and innervates the
gastrointestinal tract, respiratory tract, heart, and abdominal viscera. The vagus
can be conceptualized as a tube or conduit containing several sensory and motor
fibers originating or terminating in different areas of the brainstem. For example,
the primary vagal motor pathways that regulate the lower gut originate in the
dorsal nucleus of the vagus, the primary vagal motor pathways that regulate the
heart and the lungs originate in the nucleus ambiguus, and the vagal pathways
sending sensory information from the gut terminate in the nucleus of the solitary
tract.
The polyvagal theory proposes that the autonomic nervous system reacts to
real-world challenges in a predictable hierarchical manner that parallels, in
reverse, the phylogenetic history of the autonomic nervous system in vertebrates.
In other words, if we study the evolutionary path of how the autonomic nervous
system unfolded in vertebrates (i.e., from ancient jawless fish to bony fish,
amphibians, reptiles, and mammals), we learn not only that there is an increase
in the growth and complexity of the cortex (the outer layer of the cerebrum), but
also that there is a change in composition and function of the autonomic nervous
system. In mammals, the autonomic nervous system functions as a hierarchical
system that parallels phylogenetic states in reverse and not as the balance
between sympathetic and parasympathetic components.
The phylogenetic changes in the autonomic nervous system (including
changes in neural pathways and brainstem areas regulating the peripheral

organs) determine how the autonomic nervous system reacts to challenges. In
humans and other mammals, the hierarchy is composed of three neural circuits
with the newer circuits having the capacity to override the older circuits. Under
most challenges in our environment, we initially react with our newest system
(i.e., myelinated vagus). If that circuit does not satisfy our biobehavioral quest
for safety, an older circuit spontaneously reacts (i.e., sympathetic nervous
system). Finally, if the former strategies are unsuccessful, as our last option we
reflexively trigger the oldest circuit (i.e., unmyelinated vagus). Functionally, in
humans the older vagal circuit is involved in adaptive reactions characterized by
immobilization and decrease in metabolic resources, while the newer vagal
circuit is involved in regulating calm states that promote both spontaneous social
engagement and health, growth, and restoration. Along the phylogenetic
hierarchy, between the two vagal circuits is the sympathetic nervous system that
supports fight-or-flight behaviors.
THE POLYVAGAL THEORY: A BIOBEHAVIORAL QUEST
FOR SAFETY
To survive, mammals must determine friend from foe, when an environment is
safe, and communicate to their social unit. These survival-related behaviors limit
the extent to which a mammal can be physically approached, whether
vocalizations will be understood, and whether coalitions can be established.
Moreover, these behavioral strategies, which are used to navigate through the
“stress of life,” form the bedrock on which social behaviors and higher cognitive
processes can be developed and expressed. Thus, learning and other expansive
mental processes must be structured, manipulated, and studied within the context
of how the environment fosters or ameliorates stress-related physiological states.
The polyvagal theory proposes that the evolution of the mammalian
autonomic nervous system provides the neurophysiological substrates for
affective processes and stress responses. The theory proposes that physiological
state limits the range of adaptive behaviors and psychological experiences. Thus,
the evolution of the nervous system determines the range of emotional
expression, quality of communication, and the ability to regulate body and
behavioral state, including the expression and recovery of stress-related
responses. Relevant to adaptive social and emotional behaviors, these
phylogenetic principles illustrate the emergence of a brain-face-heart circuit and
provide a basis for investigating the relation between several features of mental

health and autonomic regulation.
Via evolutionary processes, the mammalian nervous system has emerged
with specific features that react to challenge to maintain visceral homeostasis. In
general, the domains of homeostasis, which have been monitored, have focused
on the visceral systems involved in cardiovascular, digestive, reproductive, and
immune functions. For example, studies have evaluated how long it takes heart
rate to recover following a challenge to a prestress level. Adaptive coping
requires minimizing the magnitude and duration of this deviation, whether the
deviation is observed in raising heart rate, blood pressure, cortisol, or disrupting
digestion.
By investigating the phylogeny of the regulation of the vertebrate heart (e.g.,
Morris & Nilsson, 1994), three principles can be extracted. First, there is a
phylogenetic shift in the regulation of the heart from endocrine communication,
to unmyelinated nerves, and finally to myelinated nerves. Second, there is a
development of opposing neural mechanisms of excitation and inhibition to
provide rapid regulation of graded metabolic output. Third, with increased
cortical development, the cortex exhibits greater control over the brainstem via
direct (e.g., corticobulbar) and indirect (e.g., corticoreticular) neural pathways
originating in motor cortex and terminating in the source nuclei of the
myelinated motor nerves emerging from the brainstem (e.g., specific neural
pathways embedded within cranial nerves V, VII, IX, X, XI), controlling
visceromotor structures (i.e., heart, bronchi, thymus) and somatomotor structures
(muscles of the face and head) that results in a neural circuit that functions to
facilitate social behavior and to maintain calm behavioral states.
These phylogenetic principles illustrate the emergence of a brain-face-heart
circuit and provide a basis for investigating the relation between several features
of mental health and autonomic regulation. In general, phylogenetic
development results in increased neural control of the heart via the myelinated
mammalian vagal system that is paralleled by an increase in the neural
regulation of the facial muscles. This integrated system can “cue” others of
safety and danger, while promoting transitory mobilization and the expression of
sympathetic tone without requiring sympathetic or adrenal activation (i.e.,
raising heart rate by removing the myelinated vagal inhibition from the heart).
Functionally, this phylogenetic progression provides a system that can respond
rapidly (i.e., via myelinated pathways), selectively regulate the magnitude (i.e.,
via opposing inhibitory and excitatory circuits) and specificity of the features
(e.g., via regulating the linkage between autonomic reactivity with facial

muscles) of the reaction. With this new vagal system, transitory incursions into
the environment or withdrawals from a potential predator can be initiated
without the severe biological cost of the metabolic excitation associated with
sympathetic-adrenal activation. Paralleling this change in neural control of the
heart is an enhanced neural control of the face, larynx, and pharynx that enables
complex facial gestures and vocalizations associated with social communication.
This phylogenetic course results in greater central nervous system regulation of
behavior, especially behaviors needed to engage and to disengage rapidly with
environmental challenges. These phylogenetic shifts, which promote a greater
bidirectional communication between brain and viscera, provide opportunities
for mental processes, including voluntary behavior, to impact on body state.
Thus, a greater understanding of the circuit mediating these interactions might
lead to functional models of intervention that would both calm visceral state and
promote more prosocial interactions. Consistent with this trend, new research
and clinical programs are emerging. For example, Cleveland Clinic has created
the Bakken Heart-Brain Institute and hosts an annual Heart-Brain Institute
Summit to bring “together researchers, clinicians and others to stimulate greater
collaboration and understanding of the heart–brain link and to positively impact
research, education, and patient care.”
THREE PHYLOGENETICALLY DEFINED AUTONOMIC
CIRCUITS SUPPORT ADAPTIVE BEHAVIORS
The polyvagal theory (see chapters 2, 3, 10, 11, and 12; Porges, 2001a, 2007a)
emphasizes and documents the neurophysiological and neuroanatomical
distinction between the two branches of the vagus (i.e., Xth cranial nerve) and
proposes that each vagal branch is associated with a different adaptive
behavioral and physiological response strategy to stressful events. The theory
describes three phylogenetic stages of the development of the mammalian
autonomic nervous system. These stages reflect the emergence of three distinct
subsystems, which are phylogenetically ordered and behaviorally linked to social
engagement, mobilization, and immobilization. The phylogenetic orientation
focuses 
our 
interest 
on 
the 
parasympathetic 
neural 
structures 
and
neurobehavioral systems that we share with or have adapted from our
phylogenetic ancestry. With increased neural complexity, due to phylogenetic
development, the organism’s behavioral and affective repertoire is enriched.
The polyvagal theory emphasizes the phylogenetic origins of brain structures

that regulate social and defensive behaviors. For example, prosocial behaviors
cue others that the environment is safe. Safe environments signal the individual
to dispense with the hypervigilance required to detect danger and allows this
precautionary strategy to be replaced with social interactions that further calm
and lead to close proximity and physical contact. The prototypical prosocial
behaviors in mammals are related to nursing, reproduction, interactive play, and
being able to be calm in the presence of another. In contrast, defensive behaviors
could be categorized into two domains: one related to mobilization including
fight-or-flight behaviors and the other related to immobilization and death
feigning that might be associated with dissociative psychological states. Within
this dichotomy of defensive strategies, freezing behavior that requires increased
muscle tension in the absence of movement, such as stalking or vigilance
behaviors, is categorized within mobilization. In contrast, immobilization is
associated with a decrease in muscle tension and often with fainting and other
features of decreased metabolic activity. From a health perspective, the prosocial
behaviors trigger neurophysiological circuits that not only support affect
regulation and social interactions but also promote health, growth, and
restoration.
Relevant to adaptive social and emotional behaviors, the polyvagal theory
makes the following assumptions.
1. Evolution has modified the structures of the autonomic nervous system.
2. The mammalian autonomic nervous system retains vestiges of
phylogenetically older autonomic nervous systems.
3. Emotional regulation and social behavior are functional derivatives of
structural changes in the autonomic nervous system due to evolutionary
processes.
4. In mammals, the autonomic nervous system response strategy to challenge
follows a phylogenetic hierarchy, starting with the newest structures and,
when all else fails, reverting to the most primitive structural system.
5. The phylogenetic stage of the autonomic nervous system determines the
behavioral, physiological, and affective features of reactivity to people and
objects in the environment.
The phylogenetic orientation focuses our interest on the parasympathetic
neural structures and neurobehavioral systems that we share with or have
adapted from our phylogenetic ancestry. First, there are three response systems

proposed in the polyvagal theory: (1) cranial nerves to regulate the face and to
mediate calm autonomic and behavioral states, (2) sympathetic-adrenal system
to increase metabolic output, and (3) an inhibitory vagal system to decrease
metabolic output and promote immobilization and defecation. These three
response strategies are the products of distinct neurophysiological systems.
Second, these distinct neurophysiological systems represent a phylogenetically
dependent hierarchy with the use of cranial nerves to regulate facial expression
emerging in mammals (well developed in primates), the sympathetic-adrenal
system shared with other vertebrates including reptiles, and the inhibitory vagal
system shared with more primitive vertebrates, including amphibians, bony fish,
and cartilaginous fish (see chapters 10 and 11). The three systems represent
different phylogenetic stages of neural development. This phylogenetic
development starts with a primitive behavioral inhibition system, progresses to a
fight-or-flight system, and, in humans (and other primates), culminates in a
complex facial gesture and vocalization system. Thus, from a phylogenetic
perspective, the nervous system of vertebrates evolved to support a greater range
of behaviors and physiological states, including states that we often associate
with social engagement behaviors.
HOW THE “MAMMALIAN” AUTONOMIC NERVOUS
SYSTEM FOSTERS PROSOCIAL BEHAVIORS VIA A
VAGAL BRAKE
The mammalian vagus (i.e., myelinated efferent pathways) functions as an active
vagal brake (see chapter 7) in which rapid inhibition and disinhibition of vagal
tone to the heart can support behavioral mobilization or self-soothe and calm an
individual. When the vagal tone to the pacemaker is high, the vagus acts as a
restraint or brake limiting heart rate. When vagal tone to the pacemaker is low,
there is little or no inhibition of the pacemaker. Due to vagal influences to the
sinoatrial node (i.e., the heart’s pacemaker), resting heart rate is substantially
lower than the intrinsic rate of the pacemaker. Neurophysiologically the vagal
brake provides a mechanism to support the metabolic requirements for
mobilization and communication behaviors; functionally, the vagal brake, by
modulating visceral state, enables the individual to rapidly engage and disengage
with objects and other individuals and to promote self-soothing behaviors and
calm behavioral states. Thus, withdrawal of the vagal brake is associated with
adaptive states of mobilization and a reinstatement of the vagal brake with calm

behavioral recovery. In mammals, the primary vagal inhibitory pathways occur
through the myelinated vagus originating in the nucleus ambiguus.
By transitory down-regulation of the cardioinhibitory vagal tone to the heart
(i.e., removing the vagal brake), the mammal is capable of rapid increases in
cardiac output without activating the sympathetic-adrenal system. This enables
the ability to rapidly shift states from calm engagement to precautionary states of
vagal withdrawal that rapidly increase cardiac output to support movements. But
unlike the sympathetic-adrenal strategy, which is slow to initiate and slower to
dampen, re-engaging the vagal brake instantaneously down-regulates cardiac
output to produce a calm physiological state (Vanhoutte & Levy, 1979). By
withdrawing the vagal brake, rather than stimulating the sympathetic-adrenal
system, mammals have an opportunity to rapidly increase metabolic output for
immediate, but limited mobilization. If the duration and intensity of mobilization
is increased, the sympathetic nervous system is activated.
A withdrawal of the vagal brake will facilitate the recruitment of other neural
mechanisms (e.g., excitation of sympathetic or the unmyelinated vagal
pathways) and neural chemical mechanisms (e.g., stimulation of the
hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis) to regulate physiological state. Thus,
consistent with the polyvagal theory, if the vagal brake is not functioning or will
not serve the survival needs of the organism, then the phylogenetically “older”
systems (e.g., the sympathetic-adrenal system or unmyelinated vagus originating
in the dorsal motor nucleus of the vagus) will be recruited to regulate metabolic
output to deal with environmental challenges. For example, if the vagal brake is
not functioning, there is the potential for greater dependence on the sympathetic
excitation of the cardiovascular system. This dependence on sympathetic
excitation to regulate cardiac output may create health risks (e.g., hypertension)
and lead to difficulties in modulating behavioral state (i.e., rage, panic,
aggression). Consistent with assumptions of the polyvagal theory, the vagal
brake contributes to the modulation of cardiac output by decreasing or increasing
the inhibitory vagal control of the heart to influence rate and thereby adjust
metabolic resources to support either mobilization or social engagement
behaviors.
THE SOCIAL ENGAGEMENT SYSTEM
As mammals evolved from more primitive vertebrates, a new circuit emerged to

detect and to express signals of safety in the environment (e.g., to distinguish
and to emit facial expressions and intonation of vocalizations) and to rapidly
calm and turn off the defensive systems (i.e., via the myelinated vagus) to foster
proximity and social behavior. This recent neural circuit can be conceptualized
as a social engagement system. The Social Engagement System involves
pathways traveling through several cranial nerves (i.e., V, VII, IX, X, and XI)
that regulate the expression, detection, and subjective experiences of affect and
emotion. Neuroanatomically, this includes special visceral efferent pathways
regulating the striated muscles of the face and head (i.e., special visceral
efferent) and the myelinated vagal fibers regulating the heart and lungs (see
chapters 11 and 12; Porges, 2001a).
The social engagement system is an integrated system with both a
somatomotor component regulating the striated muscles of the face and a
visceromotor component regulating the heart via a myelinated vagus. The
system is capable of dampening activation of the sympathetic nervous system
and hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis activity. By calming the viscera and
regulating facial muscles, this system enables and promotes positive social
interactions in safe contexts.
The somatomotor component includes the neural structures involved in
social and emotional behaviors. Special visceral efferent nerves innervate
striated muscles, which regulate the structures derived during embryology from
the ancient gill arches (Truex & Carpenter, 1969). The social engagement
system has a control component in the cortex (i.e., upper motor neurons) that
regulates brainstem nuclei (i.e., lower motor neurons) to control eyelid opening
(e.g., looking), facial muscles (e.g., emotional expression), middle ear muscles
(e.g., extracting human voice from background noise), muscles of mastication
(e.g., ingestion), laryngeal and pharyngeal muscles (e.g., prosody of
vocalizations), and head-turning muscles (e.g., social gesture and orientation).
Collectively, these muscles function as neural gatekeepers detecting and
expressing features of safety (e.g., prosody, facial expression, head gestures, eye
gaze) that cue others of intention and control social engagement with the
environment.
The phylogenic origin of the behaviors associated with the social
engagement system is intertwined with the phylogeny of the autonomic nervous
system. As the muscles of the face and head emerged as social engagement
structures, a new component of the autonomic nervous system (i.e., a myelinated
vagus) evolved that was regulated by nucleus ambiguus, a medullary nucleus

ventral to the dorsal motor nucleus of the vagus. This convergence of neural
mechanisms produced an integrated social engagement system with synergistic
behavioral and visceral components as well as interactions among ingestion,
state regulation, and social engagement processes. As a cluster, difficulties in
gaze, extraction of human voice, facial expression, head gesture, and prosody are
common features of individuals with autism and other psychiatric disorders in
which the social engagement system is compromised. Thus, we infer from the
functioning of the face and the prosody of the voice, difficulties in both social
engagement behaviors and physiological state regulation.
There are interneuronal connections between the source nuclei (i.e., lower
motor neurons) of special visceral efferent pathways and the source nucleus of
the myelinated vagus. These neurophysiological circuits provide an inhibitory
pathway to slow heart rate and lower blood pressure, which, by actively reducing
autonomic arousal, promote the calm states necessary to express social
engagement behaviors and to support health, growth, and restoration. The
brainstem source nuclei of this system are influenced by higher brain structures
and by visceral afferents. Direct corticobulbar pathways reflect the influence of
frontal areas of the cortex (i.e., upper motor neurons) on the medullary source
nuclei of this system. Moreover, feedback through the afferent vagus (e.g.,
tractus solitarius) to medullary areas (e.g., nucleus of the solitary tract)
influences both the source nuclei of this system and the forebrain areas that are
assumed to be involved in several psychiatric disorders (e.g., Craig, 2005;
Thayer & Lane, 2000). In addition, the anatomical structures involved in the
social engagement system have neurophysiological interactions with the
hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis, the social neuropeptides (e.g., oxytocin and
vasopressin), and the immune system (see chapter 19; Carter, 1998; Porges
2001b).
Afferents from the target organs of the social engagement system, including
the muscles of the face and head, provide potent afferent input to the source
nuclei regulating both the visceral and somatic components of the social
engagement system. Thus, activation of the behavioral component (e.g.,
listening, ingesting, looking) could trigger visceral changes that would support
social engagement, while modulation of visceral state, depending on whether
there is an increase or decrease in the influence of the myelinated vagal efferents
on the sinoatrial node (i.e., increasing or decreasing the influence of the vagal
brake) would either promote or impede social engagement behaviors. For
example, stimulation of visceral states that would promote mobilization (i.e.,

fight-or-flight behaviors) would impede the ability to express social engagement
behaviors.
Relevant to psychiatric disorders are the specific deficits in both the
somatomotor (e.g., poor gaze, low facial affect, lack of prosody, difficulties in
mastication) and visceromotor (difficulties in autonomic regulation resulting in
cardiopulmonary and digestive problems) components of the social engagement
system. For example, clinicians and researchers have documented these deficits
in individuals with autism. Thus, deficits in the social engagement system would
compromise spontaneous social behavior, social awareness, affect expressivity,
prosody, and language development. In contrast, interventions that improve the
neural regulation of the social engagement system, hypothetically would
enhance spontaneous social behavior, state and affect regulation, reduce
stereotypical behaviors, and improve vocal communication (i.e., including
enhancing both prosody in expressive speech and the ability extract human voice
from background sounds). This is more than a plausible hypothesis. We not only
have demonstrated relations between vagal regulation of the heart and social
engagement behaviors, but have demonstrated in preliminary studies that is
possible to improve social engagement behaviors in autistic individuals by
engaging the neural regulation of the social engagement system (i.e., stimulating
the neural regulation of the middle ear muscles with exaggerated prosodic
acoustic stimulation), thus providing an empirical basis to understand the
interpersonal social features, such as prosody and facial expressivity, that
characterize individuals who effectively calm and sooth others.
DISORDERS OF THE SOCIAL ENGAGEMENT SYSTEM:
MALADAPTIVE OR ADAPTIVE BEHAVIORAL
STRATEGIES?
Several psychiatric and behavioral disorders are characterized as having
difficulties in establishing and maintaining relationships. Diagnostic features
often include features associated with difficulties both in expressing social
behavior and in reading social cues (i.e., social awareness). These features are
observed in a variety of psychiatric diagnoses, including autism, social anxiety,
and post-traumatic stress disorder. From a psychopathology orientation, these
clinical disorders have different etiologies and features. However, from a
“polyvagal” perspective, they share a core component. This core component is
characterized by a depressed social engagement system with the consequences of

poor affect regulation, poor affect recognition, and poor physiological state
regulation. Although a compromised social engagement system results in
“maladaptive” social behavior, do these asocial behavioral strategies have
“adaptive” features? The phylogeny of the vertebrate autonomic nervous system
serves as a guide to understand these adaptive features.
Through the lens of the polyvagal theory, the vertebrate autonomic nervous
system follows three general stages of phylogenetic development. In the
mammalian autonomic nervous system the structures and circuits representing
each of the stages remain, but have been co-opted for various adaptive functions.
The neural circuit associated with each stage supports a different category of
behavior with the phylogenetically most recent innovation (i.e., the myelinated
vagus) capable of supporting high levels of social engagement behavior. Since
the neural regulation of the “new” mammalian myelinated vagus (i.e., ventral
vagus) is integrated into the social engagement system, when the social
engagement system is compromised, the effects are both behavioral and
autonomic. The resultant changes in autonomic state compromise spontaneous
social engagement behaviors and minimize states of calmness, but support a
range of adaptive defensive behaviors. Specifically, the compromised social
engagement system (see Figure 3.1, p. 56) is associated, neurophysiologically,
with a change in autonomic regulation characterized by a reduction in the
influence of the myelinated vagus on the heart resulting in difficulties in
behavioral state regulation and with a loss of neural regulation to the muscles of
the face mediating the flat affective expression often observed in several clinical
disorders. The removal of the regulatory influence of the myelinated vagus on
the heart potentiates (i.e., disinhibits) the expression of the two phylogenetically
older neural systems (i.e., sympathetic nervous system, unmyelinated vagus).
These two older neural systems foster mobilization behaviors of fight or flight,
via the sympathetic nervous system, or immobilization behaviors of death
feigning, freezing, and behavioral shutdown via the unmyelinated vagus. Thus,
withdrawal of the myelinated vagal circuit provides access to the more primitive
adaptive defensive systems at a cost. If the removal is prolonged, there is an
increased risk for both physical (e.g., risk for cardiovascular disorders) and
mental (e.g., anxiety disorders, depression) illness as the protective antistress and
self-soothing features of the myelinated vagus and the associated prosocial
features of the social engagement system are lost.
NEUROCEPTION: CONTEXTUAL CUEING OF ADAPTIVE
AND MALADAPTIVE PHYSIOLOGICAL STATES

AND MALADAPTIVE PHYSIOLOGICAL STATES
To effectively switch from defensive to social engagement strategies, the
mammalian nervous system needs to perform two important adaptive tasks: (1)
assess risk, and (2) if the environment is perceived as safe, inhibit the more
primitive limbic structures that control fight, flight, or freeze behaviors. In other
words, any intervention that has the potential for increasing an organism’s
experience of safety has the potential of recruiting the evolutionarily more
advanced neural circuits that support the prosocial behaviors of the social
engagement system.
The nervous system, through the processing of sensory information from the
environment and from the viscera, continuously evaluates risk. Since the neural
evaluation of risk does not require conscious awareness and may involve
subcortical limbic structures (e.g., Morris, Ohman, & Dolan, 1999), the term
neuroception (see chapter 1) was introduced to emphasize a neural process,
distinct from perception, that is capable of distinguishing environmental (and
visceral) features that are safe, dangerous, or life-threatening. In safe
environments, autonomic state is adaptively regulated to dampen sympathetic
activation and to protect the oxygen-dependent central nervous system, and
especially the cortex, from the metabolically conservative reactions of the dorsal
vagal complex. However, how does the nervous system know when the
environment is safe, dangerous, or life-threatening and what neural mechanisms
evaluate this risk?
Neuroception might involve feature detectors involving the temporal cortex
(see later discussion), since the temporal cortex responds to familiar voice and
faces and hand movements and can influence limbic reactivity. Thus, the
neuroception of familiar individuals and individuals with appropriately prosodic
voices and warm expressive faces translates into a social interaction promoting a
sense of safety. In most individuals (i.e., without a psychiatric disorder or
neuropathology) 
the 
nervous 
system 
evaluates 
risk 
and 
matches
neurophysiological state with the actual risk of the environment. When the
environment is appraised as being safe, the defensive limbic structures are
inhibited enabling social engagement and calm visceral states to emerge. In
contrast, some individuals experience a mismatch and the nervous system
appraises the environment as being dangerous, even when it is safe. This
mismatch results in physiological states that support fight, flight, or freeze
behaviors, but not social engagement behaviors. According to the theory, social
communication can be expressed efficiently through the social engagement

system, only when these defensive circuits are inhibited. Neuroception
represents a neural process that enables humans to engage in social behaviors by
distinguishing safe from dangerous contexts. Neuroception is proposed as a
plausible mechanism mediating both the expression and the disruption of
positive social behavior, emotion regulation, and visceral homeostasis.
New technologies, such as functional magnetic resonance imaging, have
identified specific neural structures that are involved in detecting risk. The
temporal lobe is of particular interest in expanding the construct of neuroception
and in identifying neural mechanisms that, by detecting and evaluating risk,
modulate the expression of adaptive defensive behaviors and autonomic states.
Functional imaging techniques document the involvement of the temporal
cortex, fusiform gyrus, and superior temporal sulcus in the evaluation of
biological movement and intention including the detection of features such as
movements, vocalizations, and faces, which contribute to an individual being
perceived as safe or trustworthy (Adolphs, 2002; Winston, Strange, O’Doherty,
& Dolan, 2002). Slight changes in these stimuli can be appraised as posing threat
or alternatively signally endearment. Connectivity between these areas of the
temporal cortex and the amygdala suggests a top-down control in the processing
of facial features that could inhibit activity of the structures involved in the
expression of defensive strategies (Pessoa, McKenna, Gutierrez, & Ungerleider,
2002).
Based on the relative risk of the environment, both social engagement and
defense behaviors may be interpreted as either adaptive or maladaptive. For
example, the inhibition of defense systems by the social engagement system
would be adaptive and appropriate only in a safe environment. From a clinical
perspective it would be the inability to inhibit defense systems in safe
environments (e.g., anxiety disorders, post-traumatic stress disorder, reactive
attachment disorder) or the inability to activate defense systems in risk
environments (e.g., Williams syndrome, a genetic disorder with a behavioral
repertoire characterized by engaging without detecting or respecting the
emotional state of others) that might contribute to the defining features of
psychopathology. Thus, an invalid neuroception of safety or danger might
contribute to maladaptive physiological reactivity and the expression of the
defensive behaviors associated with specific psychiatric disorders that include in
their diagnostic criteria a social deficit (e.g., autism, social anxiety, Williams
syndrome) or fear (e.g., various phobias, obsessive-compulsive disorder)
(Leckman et al., 1997). However, in most individuals neuroception accurately

reflects risk, and there is a consistency between the cognitive awareness of risk
and the visceral response to risk.
The features of risk in the environment do not solely drive neuroception.
Afferent feedback from the viscera provides a major mediator of the
accessibility of prosocial circuits associated with social engagement behaviors.
For example, the polyvagal theory predicts that states of mobilization would
compromise our ability to detect positive social cues. Functionally, visceral
states color our perception of objects and others. Thus, the same features of a
person engaging another may result in range of outcomes, depending on the
physiological state of the target individual. If the person being engaged is in a
state in which the social engagement system is easily accessible, the reciprocal
prosocial interactions are likely to occur. However, if the individual is in a state
of mobilization, the same engaging response might be responded to with the
asocial features of withdrawal or aggression. In such a state, it might be very
difficult to dampen the mobilization circuit and enable the social engagement
system to come back online.
The insula may be involved in the mediation of neuroception, since it has
been proposed as a brain structure involved in conveying the diffuse feedback
from the viscera into cognitive awareness. Functional imaging experiments have
demonstrated that the insula has an important role in pain experience and the
experience of several emotions, including anger, fear, disgust, happiness, and
sadness. Critchley, Wiens, Rothstein, Ohman, and Dolan (2004) propose that
internal body states are represented in the insula and contribute to subjective
feeling states and have demonstrated that activity in the insula correlated with
interoceptive accuracy.
CO-OPTING THE IMMOBILIZATION DEFENSE SYSTEM
FOR REPRODUCTIVE BEHAVIORS, NURSING, AND THE
FORMATION OF SOCIAL BONDS
Immobilization as a defense system is phylogenetically old and is associated
with reduced metabolic demands and increased pain threshold. In reptiles, with a
larger tolerance for reductions in oxygen, immobilization is a very effective
defense strategy. In contrast, since mammals have a great need for oxygen, the
inhibition of movement coupled with a shift in autonomic state to support the
immobilization behavior (i.e., apnea and bradycardia) can be lethal (Hofer, 1970;
Richter, 1957) such that death feigning can lead to death. In humans, fainting or

dissociating in anticipation of death or painful injury reflects a less extreme form
of this response.
However, several aspects of mammalian social behavior require
immobilization, but do so in the absence of life threat. In these contexts an
immobilization without fear is required. Immobilization without fear is
accomplished by co-opting the structures that regulate immobilization in
response to life threat to serve a broad range of social needs, including
reproduction, nursing, and pair-bonding. The area of the periaqueductal gray that
coordinates immobility as a primitive defense system has been modified in
mammals to serve their intimate social needs. In addition, it has been reported
that the ventral lateral portion of the periaqueductal gray is rich in receptors for
oxytocin, a neuropeptide associated with parturition, nursing, and the
establishment of pair-bonds (Carter, 1998; Insel & Young 2001).
CO-OPTING THE MOBILIZATION DEFENSE SYSTEM FOR
PLAY
Often the playful “rough and tumble” behaviors observed in mammals are
interpreted as preliminary exercises to develop adaptive defensive and
aggressive behaviors. However, play is also inherently motivating and provides a
unique and positive experience (Panksepp, 1998). Play, at least rough and
tumble play, is characterized by mobilization. Thus, play shares with the
defensive fight-or-flight behaviors a neurophysiological substrate that
functionally increases metabolic output by increasing sympathetic excitation.
Concurrent with the sympathetic excitation is a withdrawal of the myelinated
vagal pathways that characterize the vagal brake. Just as the primitive
mechanisms mediating immobilization in response to life threat can be co-opted
to support loving and nutrient processes, so can mobilization mechanisms be
involved occur to facilitate both defensive flight-or-fight behaviors and
pleasurable “play.”
How is play distinguished from aggressive behavior? More important, are
there “neuroceptive” processes that either dampen or potentiate aggressive
retaliation? If we observe play, we can reliably observe cues lead to either
aggression or calming. Frequently play leads to acts that are painful and
potentially aggressive. For example, often a playmate is injured. This may occur
with various mammalian species. When dogs play, they may bite too hard and
elicit a painful cry in the playmate. When a human is playing with a dog, the dog

might accidentally hit in a vulnerable and tender place like the nose. When
humans play a sport such as basketball, an individual may be hit with an elbow
to the face. How are these situations diffused? What processes enable anger to be
contained and play to be resumed?
Access to the social engagement system can transform potential aggression
to play. The social engagement system cues others that the “intentionality” of the
behavior is benign. For example, a fight is likely to occur if the individual who
accidentally hits another in the face while playing basketball walks away without
diffusing the tension through a face-to-face expression of concern. Similarly,
play will not continue if dogs playing do not make face-to-face engagements
after an accidental, but hurtful bite. Consistent with the importance of the social
engagement system in the process of play, autism is associated with
noninteractive (i.e., parallel) play. Thus, access to the social engagement system
is critical in defining mobilization as play and not aggression. Team sports,
which are prevalent in our culture, involve mobilization strategies that require
face-to-face interactions to signal intentionality and share a common feature of
integrating the social engagement system with mobilization.
Jogging and other forms of exercise also result in a physiological state
similar to team sports or rough and tumble play. However, unlike exercise, a
“polyvagal” definition of play requires reciprocal interactions and a constant
awareness of the actions of others. Play is different than fight-or-flight
behaviors. Although fight-or-flight behaviors often require an awareness of
others, they do not require reciprocal interactions and an ability to restrain
mobilizations. Play recruits another circuit that enables aggressive and defensive
behaviors to be contained. The rapid recruitment of the social engagement
system results in an immediate face-to-face evaluation of whether there is
intentionality in the event that provoked the painful response. Areas of the
cortex, such as superior temporal sulcus, provide a plausible location for this
neuroceptive process. The superior temporal sulcus has been proposed to be an
area of the brain that evaluates biological movement and intentionality. Thus,
familiar voices, calming gestures, and appropriate facial expression can rapidly
diffuse a possible physical conflict. Even the dogs that whimpers after being hit
on the nose or bit on the leg while playing will rapidly make a face-to-face
engagement and wait for a gesture that will provide the reassurance that the
event was not intentional.
How does the social engagement system calm us down and keep us from
expressing inappropriate aggressive acts? First, there are inhibitory pathways

from the temporal cortex that dampen the limbic reactivity associated with
defensive behaviors. Second, as Gellhorn (1964) noted almost 50 years ago,
facial muscle activity influences the brain structures that regulate visceral state.
This is frequently observed in humans of all ages from the very young infants
who use sucking behaviors to calm to older individuals who use conversation,
listening, smiling, and ingesting to calm. Consistent with and in contrast to these
strategies of defusing conflict, walking away or turning the head away from the
conflict can trigger a violent reaction.
By investigating the unique physiological mechanisms involved in play, we
uncover the unique properties of reciprocal interactions that may define play and
distinguish it from exercise and other solitary behaviors. Play requires turn
taking in expressive motor movements and reciprocal receptive inhibition of
activity. This is also observed in talking and listening, in throwing and catching,
and in hiding and seeking. When there is mutual activity and contact, such as in
rough and tumble play, there are more opportunities for cues to be mistaken and
aggressive behaviors to unfold. However, if face-to-face engagement occurs
rapidly with the appropriate features of concern and empathy, then the
physiological state that was driven by the physical contact is evaluated for
intentionality and diffused with the appropriate cues exchanged between two
social engagement systems involved in the face-to-face exchange. Although play
may share some of the neural mechanisms involved in fight-or-flight behaviors,
unlike solitary exercise, play requires dynamic neural regulation of state to
ensure safe interactions. Thus, both sympathetic activation to increase metabolic
output to support motor activity and the vagal brake to restrain mobilization and
to support the function of the social engagement system are recruited to maintain
a mutual playful activity. Another adaptive process involves the coactivation of
sympathetic excitatory and vagal inhibitory processes. This process is associated
with sexual arousal, another vulnerable state that evolutionarily requires face-to-
face interactions to evaluate intentionality of physical contact to determine
whether the behaviors are caring or hurtful.
SUMMARY STATEMENTS
The polyvagal theory is an attempt to reorganize our conceptualization of the
autonomic nervous system with a focus on the specific neural circuits involved
in regulating visceral organs for specific adaptive functions, including the

domains of affect, emotions, and goal-directed behaviors. The theory identifies
specific variables that can be used to dynamically evaluate the changing neural
regulation of specific adaptive circuits. Implicit in the theoretical model are four
prominent features that impact directly on the development of testable
hypotheses: (1) the role specific brain structures and neural circuits have in
regulating autonomic state, (2) the justification of developing methods that can
distinguish and track the dynamic vagal output to target organs through the
myelinated vagus originating in the nucleus ambiguus and the unmyelinated
vagus originating in the dorsal motor nucleus, (3) the role visceral afferents and
sensory feature detectors have on the switching among the neural circuits
regulating autonomic state, and (4) the relation between the regulation of
visceral organs and the regulation of the striated muscles of the face and head
involved in social engagement behaviors including affect recognition and
emotional expression.
The polyvagal theory suggests that affective and emotional states are
dependent on lower brain regulation of the visceral state and the important
visceral, tactile, and nocioceptive cues that travel between the brain and the
periphery. Through the lens of the polyvagal theory, specific bodily states foster
different domains of behavior. Specifically, the neural regulation of five
physiological states has been described and each state has been linked with a
specific biologically based behavioral repertoire.
1. Social engagement: a state dependent on a well-defined social engagement
system. This system promotes positive social interactions, reduces
psychological distance, and promotes a sense of safety between people.
2. Mobilization—fight-or-flight: This state supports fight-or-flight behaviors
and requires an increase in metabolic output.
3. Play: a blend of the above. Play is a hybrid state requiring features from
both states of mobilization and social engagement.
4. Immobilization—life threat: This state is associated with life threat and is
characterized by a reduction of metabolic output and shutdown behaviors.
This primitive neural circuit works fine for reptiles but is potentially lethal
in mammals.
5. Immobilization without fear: This state is associated with prosocial and
positive states that require a reduction of movement without the massive
reduction of metabolic resources. This circuit recruits pathways from the
immobilization circuit and is used during nursing, childbirth, and

reproductive behaviors and digestive and restorative processes.
Functionally, these five states color our perception of objects and others.
Thus, the same features of a person engaging another may result in range of
outcomes, if the target individual is in a different physiological state. If the
person being engaged is in a state in which the social engagement system is
easily accessible, the reciprocal prosocial interactions are likely to occur. If the
individual is in a state of mobilization, the same engaging response might be
responded to with the asocial features of withdrawal or aggression. This
stimulus-organism-response (S-O-R) model is reminiscent of Woodworth
(1928), who postulated an S-O-R model with an active organism intervening
between stimulus and response. In the Woodworth model, processes internal to
the organism mediated the effects of stimuli on behavior. Within the polyvagal
theory, neuroception is an S-O-R model. Within this context, autonomic state is
an intervening process that contributes to the transformation from the external
physical stimulus to the complex internal cognitive-affective processes that
determine the quality of the interpersonal interaction.
The five states described provide a good fit with the underlying
physiological states required to successfully express the seven neural-based
systems described by Panksepp (1998). Moreover, the polyvagal perspective,
with its emphasis on phylogenetic shifts in visceral regulation, provides a unique
insight into the use of psychological constructs. For example, the polyvagal
theory will lead to three different visceral phenotypes for the emotion of fear.
One type is characterized by mobilization strategies consistent with the features
of fight-or-flight behaviors. A second type is characterized by immobilization
(e.g., death feigning), a biobehavioral state that, due to metabolic depression, can
potentially be lethal for a mammal. In humans this might be observed as
fainting, defecating, and/or dissociating. A third type is more cognitive and
involves a transitory depression of the social engagement system as a
precautionary response to evaluate intentionality behaviors. If behavior is
detected as dangerous, then the sympathetic nervous system is activated to
support the fight-or-flight mobilization behaviors. All three are “fear” responses,
but they have different behavioral topographies and different underlying
neurophysiological substrates. Thus, the understanding of affective experiences
and the strategy of organizing of these experiences into psychological constructs
such as “emotions” may be informed by understanding the covariation between
the specific phylogenetic shifts in the neural regulation of the viscera and the

adaptive nature of these various affective states in phylogenetically older
vertebrates
CONCLUDING COMMENTS
To optimize strategies studying the bridge between nervous system function and
both clinical disorders and affective experiences, affective neuroscience will
need to incorporate methodologies and to test hypotheses dependent on our
expanding knowledge of neurophysiology and the central structures involved in
both appraisal of context (i.e., neuroception) and neural regulation of visceral
state. These questions have motivated previous (e.g., Cannon, Darwin, James,
Gellhorn, Hess) and contemporary researchers (e.g., Critchley, 2005; Ekman,
Levenson, & Friesen, 1983; Thayer & Lane, 2000) attempting to bridge the gap
between visceral states and the subjective labels of affective experiences (i.e.,
emotions). To close this gap, new methodologies are necessary that are capable
of evaluating dynamic changes in and interactions among various physiological
(e.g., respiration, heart rate, blood pressure, vasomotor tone, and motor activity)
variables in a changing context. In response to these needs, the polyvagal theory
was developed.
The polyvagal theory provides a perspective to demystify features of clinical
disorders. The theory provides principles to organize previously assumed
disparate symptoms observed in several psychiatric disorders (i.e., a compromise
in the function of the social engagement system). Moreover, by explaining
features of disorders from an adaptive perspective, interventions may be
designed that trigger the neural circuits that will promote spontaneous social
engagement behaviors and dampen the expression of defensive strategies that
disrupt social interactions.
*In 1949 W. Hess was awarded the Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine
(http://nobelprize.org/ nobel_prizes/medicine/laureates/1949/hess-lecture.html).
His Nobel lecture was titled “The Central Control of Activity of Internal
Organs.” In his lecture, he acknowledged the importance of the prevailing model
of the autonomic nervous system, which emphasized the paired-antagonistic

innervations of the internal organs and the definition of sympathetic and
parasympathetic functions. However, he went well beyond this conceptualization
to emphasize the importance of central structures in the regulation of visceral
state by describing his studies that demonstrated the influence of the
hypothalamus on the autonomic nervous system. By emphasizing the central
mechanisms that mediate the dynamic regulation of peripheral organs, Hess
anticipated the need for methodologies and technologies to continuously monitor
the neural circuits involving both defined brain structures and peripheral nerves
in the regulation of visceral function and state and to move from the prevailing
conceptualization of the autonomic nervous system as a peripheral system.
Hess’s lecture (1) emphasized the importance of feedback circuits linking
peripheral organs to brain structures and the bidirectionality of these feedback
circuits, and (2) acknowledged that although much can be learned about neural
structures and functions via traditional experimental paradigms (e.g., neural
blockade, surgery, electrical stimulation), dynamic feedback circuits, that is, the
moment-to-moment dynamic shifts in the system, cannot be adequately studied
through these paradigms.

CHAPTER 19
Neurobiology and Evolution: Mechanisms,
Mediators, and Adaptive Consequences of
Caregiving
DEFINING FEATURES OF CAREGIVING
Caregiving includes providing food, protection, or other resources. However,
caregiving also may extend beyond these physical elements to include social
support to fulfill needs for affiliation and perceived safety. Most mammals,
including humans and rodents, are altricial at birth and caregiving is necessary to
compensate for the infant’s undeveloped motor and autonomic nervous systems.
Due to an immature corticospinal motor system, the infant is incapable of
independently obtaining food or protecting from a predator. Due to an immature
autonomic nervous system, the infant is incapable of independently
thermoregulating to maintain a necessary body temperature to survive. Thus, the
mature nervous system of the caregiver becomes intertwined with the
undeveloped nervous system of the infant to create a model of “symbiotic
regulation.” The caregiver becomes part of a complex feedback system
supporting the biological and behavioral needs of the infant. Within this model
of symbiotic regulation, the caregiver is not solely giving to the infant. The
behaviors of the infant also trigger specific physiological processes (e.g., neural
and endocrine feedback circuits) that help establish strong bonds, provide
emotional comfort for the caretaker, stimulate neural pathways, and support the
health of the caregiver.
Through the process of maturation, motor and autonomic systems change. As

the infant matures, there is a transition from a dependence on the caregiver for
the regulation of biobehavioral processes to a greater degree of self-regulation.
However, throughout the life span most mammals will continue to be dependent
on others to maintain optimal well-being and state regulation (Hrdy, 2008). In
some (but not all) mammalian species, caregiving is based on or induces
selective and reinforcing emotional social relationships and bonds (see chapter
11; Carter. 1998). When enduring bonds are present, devastating reactions to
separation or loss are to be expected (Bowlby, 1988).
Caregiving may or may not be reciprocal. However, reciprocity and the
spontaneous reversal of the roles of giving and receiving are positive features of
strong relationships and are the optimal features of symbiotic regulation.
Conversely, a lack of reciprocity often signals distressed and vulnerable
relationships. The inability of an individual to enter and to maintain reciprocal
social relations is a feature of several psychiatric disorders (Teicher et al., 2003).
When a mammalian mother initially interacts with her offspring, usually she
has just given birth and must provide milk to nurture the newborn. The onset of
maternal caregiving is normally closely associated with birth and lactation. The
physical events of birth and lactation provide endocrine windows of opportunity
for the establishment of strong social bonds. Thus, the hormones of birth and
lactation are plausible candidates to explain the beneficial effects of caregiving
(Carter, 1998; Numan, 2007).
THE EVOLUTION OF A CAREGIVING SYSTEM: THE
TRANSITION FROM “SELF-REGULATION” TO “OTHER
REGULATION”
Evolutionary theories attempting to explain between-and within-species
variation in social behavior tend to focus on ultimate causes and assumed
selection pressures. These theories are based on ancient historical events and are
limited to the fossil record. Thus, it is difficult to test evolutionary theories
within the context of the expressed behavior or physiology of contemporary
animals. However, a phylogenetic perspective that investigates the biological
and 
behavioral 
shifts 
from 
reptiles 
to 
mammals 
illustrates 
several
neurobiological features underlying sociality. For example, most behaviors
associated with caregiving and prosociality in humans are uniquely mammalian
and are not evident in reptiles. Differences among mammalian species,
individual variation, and developmental changes in social contact and caregiving

are common. Analyses of these variations provide experiments of nature, which
cast a new light on the neurobiology of sociality.
In part, the phylogenetic transition from reptiles to mammals appears to be a
shift from an organism capable of “self-regulation” to an organism that is
dependent at certain points in development on “other regulation.” It is within this
phylogenetic transition, in which regulation by “other” becomes adaptive, that
the neurobiology of sociality emerges. The defining features of the “other” in the
mammalian model of regulation often have survival consequences that may
involve various dimensions of support, including warmth, food, and protection.
For most mammals, and especially humans, a developmental increase in self-
regulation capacity parallels the development of specific features of the nervous
system. With physical maturation, neural pathways from the cortex to the
brainstem exhibit a greater efficiency in regulating the autonomic nervous
system and enable the maintenance of physiological homeostasis in both safe
and dangerous situations (Porges, 2001a). These maturational changes provide
greater abilities to self-regulate and to reduce dependence on others.
THE PHYLOGENY OF MAMMALIAN SOCIAL
ENGAGEMENT AND COMMUNICATION SYSTEMS
The mammalian autonomic nervous system retains three neural circuits, which
are expressed in a phylogenetically organized hierarchy (Table 19.1). In this
hierarchy of adaptive responses, the newest circuit, associated with social
communication, is used first. If the newest circuit fails to provide safety, older
survival-oriented circuits are recruited sequentially. It is important to note that
social behavior, social communication, and visceral homeostasis are largely
incompatible with neurophysiological states and behaviors that are regulated by
circuits that support the defense strategies of both flight or fight and
immobilization. Inhibition of systems, which are in general defensive or
protective, is necessary to initiate social engagement and to allow positive social
behaviors. Conversely, positive social behaviors may be inhibited during
prolonged periods of adversity. However, systems that support sociality also
may be protective against the costly or destructive effects of chronic fear or
stress (Porges, 2001a, 2007b).
TABLE 19.1. Polyvagal Theory: Phylogenetic Stages of Neural Control

THE POLYVAGAL THEORY
Often overlooked, but especially critical to social and emotional behavior, is the
autonomic nervous system (see chapter 2). The central nervous system cannot
function without the support of visceral organs supplying oxygen and energy.
The autonomic nervous system, via bidirectional pathways, regulates the viscera
and conveys information upward to the hypothalamus, amygdala, and neocortex.
Sensory information from the viscera contributes to what humans experience as
“emotion” or “emotional states.” These emotional states, in turn, are components
of a “motivational” system that stimulates social engagement and allows

sociality to be experienced as reinforcing. Often these emotional and
motivational states involve other brain systems, including those that rely on
dopamine and endogenous opioids.
Of 
particular 
importance 
to 
mammalian 
social 
behavior 
is 
the
parasympathetic component of the autonomic nervous system. The evolution of
this system in mammals permitted the emergence of complex social interactions
and social communication. Embedded in the brainstem and associated cranial
nerves are conserved and evolved elements that are essential for modern
mammalian physiology and behavior (see chapters 2, 11, and 12; Porges, 2001a,
2007b). The vagus (Xth cranial) nerve is of special relevance, because it
transmits and integrates complex bidirectional communication between the brain
and peripheral organs involved in cardiovascular, respiratory, digestive, and
immune functions. Critical to understanding mammalian sociality is knowledge
of the origins of the neuranatomical pathways of the social engagement system,
linking visceral state regulation and emotion to both the expressive and receptive
domains of social communication.
In mammals, but not reptiles, the vagus nerve has two distinct efferent
(motor) pathways with separate brainstem source nuclei (Table 19.1; see also
Figure 3.1, p. 56). In addition, approximately 80% of vagal fibers are afferent
pathways, transmitting sensory input from the viscera to the brainstem.
The evolution of the polyvagal system parallels the phylogenetic distinction
between reptiles and mammals and includes a cluster of behaviors dependent on
the function of structures that phylogenetically emerged first in mammals. These
changes include detached middle ear bones, the advent of a diaphragm, and the
myelinated vagal system regulating supradiaphragmatic organs. The latter vagal
system is distinct from the unmyelinated vagus, which primarily regulates
subdiaphragmatic organs. However, branches of both myelinated and
unmyelinated vagus do reach the heart, where they coordinate the need for
oxygen with the behavioral demands of a rapidly changing physical and social
environment.
The phylogeny of the mammalian nervous system offers important clues to
social behavior. In the transition from aquatic to terrestrial life, ancient gill
(branchial) arches were co-opted to form the face and head, resulting in the
modern versions of these structures, which included new or additional functions.
Changes also were necessary in the muscles and nerves associated with the
branchial arches. Taken together in modern mammals, including humans, these
systems permit social engagement and social communication, including sucking,

swallowing, facial expressions, and the production and receipt of airborne
vocalizations.
Brainstem structures that regulate the efferent (motor) branch of the vagus
have two source nuclei. The unmyelinated component of the vagus, which
permits slowing of heart rate, originates in the dorsal motor nucleus of the vagus
and provides the efferent component of the dorsal vagal complex. The
unmyelinated vagus is shared by mammals with other vertebrates (i.e., reptiles,
amphibians, teleosts, and elasmobrachs). The dorsal motor nucleus of the vagus
is the source nucleus for the unmyelinated vagus, which carries neural impulses
to and is capable of slowing heart rate. The more modern branch originates in
the nucleus ambiguus of the ventral vagal complex and is myelinated, allowing
rapid interaction between the brain and viscera. The myelinated vagus stabilizes
cardiovascular function and is responsible for respiratory sinus arrhythmia
(RSA), a rhythmic component of the heart rate pattern with a periodicity similar
to spontaneous breathing. RSA is an index of the dynamic influence of the
myelinated vagus on the heart. The ventral vagal complex also contains source
nuclei for other facial nerves as well as autonomic functions. When RSA is
withdrawn (reduced myelinated vagal tone), heart rate quickly accelerates. Thus,
emotional states and social communication can be coordinated with visceral
demands (see chapter 2).
Information from the myelinated vagus, measured by quantifying RSA, is
cardioprotective and directly implicated in cortical oxygenation. RSA, due to its
sensitivity to the influence of ventral vagal fibers on the heart is often used as an
index of health and resilience in humans. The comparatively modern processes
that supplied oxygen to the large primate cortex allowed the emergence of higher
levels of cognitive functions. Such processes may be at the core of the
uniqueness of human cognition. Furthermore, the myelinated vagus is associated
in the brainstem with cranial nerves that innervate the face and head (see chapter
3). Thus, the myelinated vagal functions are coordinated with the neural
regulation of the larynx and pharynx to coordinate sucking, swallowing, and
breathing with vocalizations. The muscles of the human face, especially of the
upper face involved in subtle emotional expressions, have projections from this
system, which may be particularly important in social communication (see
chapter 13).
THE NEUROANATOMY OF SOCIAL
COGNITION

COGNITION
The expanding mammalian cortex set the stage for human cognition, speech, and
more elaborate forms of caregiving beyond the maternal–infant interaction.
Several features of anatomy that emerged concurrently with the expanding
cortex 
provided 
the 
mechanisms 
necessary 
for 
mammalian 
social
communication.
The classic definition of Mammalia focuses on the occurrence of mammary
glands and hair. However, the fossil record relies on the identification of middle
ear bones detached from the jawbone as the defining feature of Mammalia. The
tiny middle ear bones form an ossicular chain that transmits sound vibrations
from the ear drum to the inner ear. As the middle ear muscles tense or relax the
middle ear structures change the frequency band that is transmitted to the inner
ear. In safe environments, when there is no risk and defensive systems are down
regulated, the ossicular chain is relatively tense. This state of stiffness in the
ossicular chain enables mammals to process sounds in a frequency range that is
higher than that available to reptiles. Thus, mammalian acoustic communication
usually occurs at frequencies that cannot be heard by reptiles. The anatomical
separation of the middle ear bones from the jawbone allows airborne auditory
communication (see chapter 13). Concurrently, phylogenetic transitions in
brainstem areas regulating the vagus are physically and functionally intertwined
with the brainstem areas regulating the striated muscles of the face and head.
The result of this transition is the emergence of a dynamic social engagement
system with social communication features (e.g., head movements, production of
vocalizations, and a selective ability to hear conspecific vocal communication).
In support of this new mammalian anatomy, a myelinated vagus emerged.
The myelinated vagus could inhibit the sympathetic nervous system and the
hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis. This feature of the autonomic nervous
system allowed mammals to inhibit mobilization and experience calm behavioral
states. In this context it was possible for animals to engage in high levels of
social interaction.
The phylogenetic transition from reptiles to mammals also resulted in a face–
heart connection in which the striated muscles of the face and head were
regulated in the same brainstem areas that evoked the calming influence of the
myelinated vagus. The striated muscles of the face and head are involved in
social cueing (e.g., facial expressions, vocalizations, listening, head gesture,
etc.). These systems serve as “trigger” stimuli to the feature detectors in the

nervous system that detect risk and safety in the environment (see discussion on
neuroception). However, the expanded mammalian cortex also demands high
levels of oxygen. Oxygenation of the cortex in mammals is accomplished in part
through the same adaptations of the autonomic nervous system that permit
elaborate forms of reciprocal sociality. These systems, including terrestrial lungs
and a four-chamber heart, which support the oxygenation of the neocortex are
also regulated in part by the myelinated branch of the vagus nerve.
This synergism of neural mechanisms in mammals allows for symbiotic
regulation of behavior and the elaboration of reciprocal caregiving. These same
systems provide setting conditions during which social behaviors can have a
significant impact on cognition and health. In the human nervous system specific
features of person-to-person interactions are innate triggers of adaptive
biobehavioral systems, which in turn can support health and healing. In the
absence of social interactions or under conditions of social adversity various
forms of maladaptive behaviors and illness may be expressed.
NEUROCEPTION AND THE SOCIAL MANAGEMENT OF
THREAT AND DANGER
The integrated functions of the myelinated vagus permit the expression of
positive emotions and social communication. However, the nervous system also
is constantly assessing risk in the environment through a process of
“neuroception” (see chapter 1), during which specific neural circuits are
triggered that may support defensive strategies of fight-or-flight or alternatively
shutdown.
The mammalian nervous system has retained two primitive defensive neural
circuits for either active or passive coping that can be called on in the presence
of threat or danger. The fight-or-flight system allows mobilization and active
coping. This system is supported by the sympathoadrenal systems, including the
release of catecholamines and glucocorticoids, which increase available energy.
However, active avoidance is not the only mechanism through which mammals
may deal with threat or danger. Under some conditions, such as inescapable
danger or other forms of extreme stress, mobilization strategies may be
inhibited. This alternate defensive strategy is characterized by passive coping
and immobility. Under more severe conditions many systems may be shut down,
including those dependent on the neocortex. In these circumstances animals may
show death-feigning and “helpless” behaviors.

The unmyelinated vagus tends to slow the heart, consistent with a reptilian
adaptive strategy of freezing and conserving energy in the face of danger.
However, mammals, with their large cortex, cannot maintain alertness without
relatively high concentrations of oxygen. Thus, a prolonged slowing of heart rate
could lead to unconsciousness and eventually death. Neurophysiological
mechanisms exist for protecting the heart and brain from shutting down. As
described shortly, the release of peptide hormones are among these neural
mechanisms.
SOCIAL ENGAGEMENT SYSTEM
Critical to human social behavior are pathways from the five cranial nerves that
control the muscles of the face and head. Collectively, these motor pathways are
labeled as special visceral efferents. The special visceral efferent pathways
regulate the muscles of mastication (e.g., ingestion), muscles of the middle ear
(e.g., listening to vocalizations), muscles of the face (e.g., emotional expression),
muscles of larynx and pharynx (e.g., vocal prosody and intonation), and muscles
controlling head tilt and turning (e.g., gesture). The source nuclei of the circuits
regulating the striated muscles of the face and head interact in the brainstem with
the source nucleus of the myelinated vagus (i.e., nucleus ambiguus); together
these form an integrated social engagement system. This system provides the
neural structures involved in the expression of social and emotional behaviors
and the feelings associated with these behaviors.
MAMMALIAN SOCIAL COMMUNICATION AND THE
EVOLUTION OF SOCIAL COGNITION
Positive forms of communication, usually including speech and other
vocalizations, are typically components of successful caregiving. Vocalizations
also convey information regarding physiological state. For example, infant cries
are indicators of health state and also can elicit caregiving. The coordinated
regulation of social communication and visceral systems helps explain the
relationship between positive social experiences and health.
Shared neural pathways underlie social communication and visceral
functions, such as the regulation of the cardiovascular, digestive, and immune
systems. For example, through the myelinated vagus, the brainstem regulates

vocal communication (i.e., pathways controlling breath and the muscles of the
larynx and pharynx) as well as heart rate. Thus, both heart rate, expressed in
RSA, and the acoustic features of vocalizations, expressed in prosody, are
parallel outputs of the integrated social engagement system.
A depressed social engagement system is characterized by low variability in
both heart rate (i.e., low-amplitude RSA through the myelinated vagus) and
vocal intonations (i.e., lack of prosody). Human voices that lack prosody fail to
attract or interest others and are perceived as reflecting an emotionally detached
or boring individual. In contrast, an optimally functioning social engagement
system will have features of high variability in both heart rate (i.e., high-
amplitude RSA) and vocal intonations (i.e., high prosody). Lack of prosody is a
risk factor similar to low amplitude RSA and both may be used as indications of
health risk.
Attention to features of acoustic vocalizations could provide insights into
vagal regulation of the heart. For example, the positive features of vocal prosody
in social interactions may be synchronized with RSA. The origins of these
coordinated functions are most readily appreciated in the context of the
evolution of neuroanatomical mechanisms for social engagement and social
communication.
Collectively, the muscles of the face and head function as filters that limit
social stimuli (e.g., observing facial features and listening to vocalizations) and
determinants of engagement with the social environment. The neural control of
these muscles determines social experiences by changing facial features
(especially in humans and other primates), modulating laryngeal and pharyngeal
muscles to regulate intonation of vocalizations (prosody), and coordinating both
facial and vocal motor tone with respiratory actions. In addition, the frequency
of breathing is encoded into the phrasing of vocalizations, which—independent
of the content of speech—may express meaning. For example, urgency may be
conveyed by short phrases associated with short exhalations (i.e., rapid
breathing), while calmness would be conveyed by long phrases associated with
long exhalations (i.e., slow breathing).
NEUROCHEMISTRY AND THE SOCIAL NERVOUS SYSTEM
Neuropeptides regulate sociality, emotion, and the autonomic nervous system.
Social behaviors are supported and coordinated by both endocrine and
autonomic processes (Grippo, Trahanas, Zimmerman, Porges, & Carter, 2009).

The complex networks of biochemical systems necessary for reproduction and
homeostasis also are implicated in social behavior. Given the energetic demands
of social interactions, it is not surprising that the same neurotransmitters that are
involved in social behavior also regulate the autonomic nervous system. Two
mammalian hormones/neuromodulators, oxytocin and vasopressin, have been
shown to be of particular importance to mammalian sociality. There is increasing
evidence that the functions of these same molecules, especially oxytocin, are
central to the causes and consequences of positive social behaviors, including
sensitivity to social cues in others and constructs such as trust and caregiving
(Heinrichs, von Dawans, & Domes, 2009).
Oxytocin and vasopressin are small neuropeptides that differ from each other
in only two of nine amino acids (Landgraf & Neumann, 2004). Oxytocin is
produced primarily in hypothalamic nuclei, including the supraoptic and
paraventricular nuclei. Vasopressin is synthesized in the supraoptic and
paraventricular nuclei as well as other brain regions implicated in the regulation
of emotional behaviors, as well as circadian rhythms. In addition, and especially
in males, vasopressin also is abundant in brain regions (e.g., amygdala, bed
nucleus of the stria terminalis, and lateral septum) of particular importance to
social and emotional regulation and self-defense (De Vries & Panzica, 2006).
Oxytocin and vasopressin are transported from the hypothalamus (i.e.,
supraoptic and paraventricular nuclei) to the mammalian posterior pituitary
where they are released into the bloodstream and act as hormones on peripheral
target tissues, such as the uterus or mammary tissue. Within the brain, these
same chemicals also serve as neuromodulators, affecting a broad range of neural
processes. Both oxytocin and vasopressin are capable of moving throughout the
central nervous system, probably by passive diffusion (Landgraf & Neumann,
2004). Receptors for these molecules are found in various brain areas implicated
in social behavior (Gimpl & Fahrenholz, 2001). In contrast to most biologically
active compounds, oxytocin has only one receptor. Vasopressin has at least three
distinct receptor subtypes with separable functions. However, the oxytocin
peptide also may affect the vasopressin receptors and vice versa.
The neuroanatomy of the oxytocin system allows a coordinated effect on
behavior, autonomic functions, and peripheral tissues. In some, but not all cases,
vasopressin and oxytocin have opposite functions, possibly because they are
capable of acting as antagonists to each other’s receptors, while in other cases
these peptides have similar effects. Dynamic interactions between oxytocin and
vasopressin may in turn regulate physiology and behavior, allowing shifts

between positive social behaviors and defensive states (Viviani & Stoop, 2008).
EVOLUTION OF OXYTOCIN AND
VASOPRESSIN
It is likely that the essential elements on which sociality are based arose from
physiological processes fundamental to the need to conserve water and minerals.
Among these are adaptations allowing the transition from aquatic to terrestrial
life, including internal fertilization and eventually pregnancy and placental
reproduction. Although vasopressin is also known as the “antidiuretic hormone,”
both oxytocin and vasopressin influence kidney function in adults to conserve
water and minerals. The capacity to maintain or reabsorb water was a critical
element in the evolution of terrestrial mammals. The capacity for internal
fertilization and the development of the placenta and lactation required a well-
developed water regulation system. This shift also provided a protective
environment for offspring before and after birth, and the emergence of
contemporary versions of the neocortex and cognition.
Genes for the synthesis of oxytocin and vasopressin are very ancient,
estimated to be over 700 million years old (Donaldson & Young, 2008). These
genes existed before the split between vertebrates and invertebrates. The original
molecular structure from which the peptides evolved is believed to be vasotocin.
Vasotocin differs from oxytocin and vasopressin by only one amino acid.
Vasotocin is found in mammalian fetuses, although its expression is reduced at
the time of birth.
The specific coding sequences that define oxytocin and vasopressin may
have evolved more than once, but the current form probably evolved around the
time that mammals first emerged. Oxytocin, through its functions in birth and
lactation, assists in maternal nurturing of a comparatively immature infant
(Brunton & Russell, 2008; Numan, 2007). The capacity of oxytocin to induce
uterine contractions may have allowed the expansion of the human skull and
cortex, and eventually cognition. These changes contribute to the elaboration of
human vocalizations into speech and other forms of social communication that
rely on cognitive function and cortical structures (Hrdy, 2008).
NEUROPEPTIDES INFLUENCE AUTONOMIC FUNCTIONS
THROUGH EFFECTS ON THE BRAINSTEM

THROUGH EFFECTS ON THE BRAINSTEM
The paraventricular nucleus of the hypothalamus (including cells that synthesize
oxytocin and vasopressin) is an important site of convergence for neural
communication coordinating endocrine and cardiovascular responses to various
forms of challenge (Michelini, Marcelo, Amico, & Morris, 2003). At the level of
the paraventricular nucleus, oxytocin may influence both the hypothalamic-
pituitary-adrenal axis and autonomic functions. The presence of oxytocin
receptors in the dorsal vagal complex has been verified by autoradiography in
rodents (Gimpl & Fahrenholz, 2001). The amygdala, with connections to cortex,
hypothalamus, and lower brainstem, integrates sensory, cognitive, and emotional
information. The central nucleus of the amygdala also contains oxytocin and
vasopressin as well as their receptors, and projections to and from the central
nucleus of the amygdala may be critical determinants of emotional reactivity.
Thus, the central nucleus of the amygdala is one site (among several) where
shifts from positive to negative emotions may be managed. Receptors for
oxytocin and vasopressin are found in the amygdala, providing an opportunity
for these peptides to integrate social and emotional functions.
Oxytocin and vasopressin also can influence emotions and behavior through
their effects on the autonomic nervous system. A growing literature implicates
oxytocin and vasopressin and their interactions with vagal circuits. For example,
there is evidence for interactions between oxytocin and vasopressin at the level
of the central nucleus of the amygdala, which has inputs to lower brainstem
nuclei controlling vagal circuits. These processes explain in part the capacity of
oxytocin to down-regulate activity in the amygdala (measured by functional
magnetic resonance imaging), especially under conditions of fear or emotional
dysregulation (Meyer-Lindenberg, 2008). Vasopressin plays a complex role in
behavior through effects on blood pressure and heart rate, as well as on the
sympathetic-adrenal axis and parasympathetic functions. Both the vasopressin
peptide and the vasopressin receptor (V1aR) have been identified in the central
nucleus of the amygdala, and implicated in the regulation of brainstem areas
including the myelinated vagus, with source nuclei in the ventral vagal complex,
where oxytocin-containing processes have been observed.
Receptors for both oxytocin and vasopressin are found in pathways
regulating the myelinated vagus. However, oxytocin receptors are particularly
abundant in the dorsal vagal complex, which regulates the unmyelinated vagus.
As described, the unmyelinated vagus can slow the heart and, as part of a
primitive defense system, could even trigger massive drops in blood pressure

and fainting. However, under normal conditions the myelinated vagal system
restrains the unmyelinated vagus, protecting this system from stopping the heart
(Porges, 2007b). Under extremely stressful conditions, such as birth, oxytocin
may act (on neural targets including the dorsal vagal complex) to protect the
autonomic nervous system from reverting to this more primitive vagal system,
which could lead to shutting down and reduced emotional, social, and cognitive
function. Evolutionary changes in functions of neuropeptides, including the
emergence of oxytocin and vasopressin as separate neuropeptides, facilitated the
mammalian birth process (Brunton & Russell, 2008), and, in turn, these peptides
fostered the reciprocal regulatory features of mammalian social behavior (Carter,
1998; Numan, 2007). A summary of the above model is illustrated in Figure
19.1.
FIGURE 19.1. The polyvagal theory: Hierarchal organization of neuroendocrine and autonomic processes
implicated in social behavior and the adaptive management of stressful experiences. Neuropeptides,
including oxytocin (OT), vasopressin (AVP), corticotropin-releasing factor (CRF), and endogenous opioids,
as well as neurotransmitters such as serotonin (5-HT) and norepinephrine (NE) influence behavior and
emotions through direct actions on the brain, as well as indirect effects on different components of the
autonomic nervous system, including the ventral vagal complex (VVC), the dorsal vagal complex (DVC),
and the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal (HPA) axis. Oxytocin, serotonin, and endogenous opioids acting in
the brainstem may be protective during or against shutting down and immobilization.
NEUROPEPTIDES AND THE MANAGEMENT OF

STRESSFUL EXPERIENCES
The hypothalamus, especially the paraventricular nucleus, is an important site of
convergence for neural communication relating stress, affect, and cardiovascular
regulation to social behavior. Thus, it is not surprising that oxytocin influences
the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis and autonomic function (Carter, 1998;
Viviani & Stoop, 2008). Oxytocin-deficient mice show disruptions in
sympathetic-vagal balance and are impaired in their ability to manage stress
(Michelini et al., 2003). In addition, oxytocin generally suppresses the activity of
the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis (Neumann, 2008).
Oxytocinergic projections from the paraventricular nucleus to key brainstem
regions are important in cardiovascular control. Oxytocin binding sites are found
in the dorsal vagal complex, and oxytocin increases the excitability of vagal
neurons (Viviani & Stoop, 2008). In addition, oxytocin receptors in the
brainstem have been shown to modulate baroreflex control of heart rate by
facilitating the bradycardic response to pressor challenges. Thus, under optimal
conditions, systems that rely on oxytocin may modulate and constrain
overarousal, which would allow optimal management of challenges and also be
permissive for social engagement and caregiving (Porges, 2007b).
Peripheral oxytocin administration is able to reduce heart rate and blood
pressure (Michelini et al., 2003). The protective effects of oxytocin or its
absence may be most readily observed in the face of adversity or a stressful
environment. For example, in highly social prairie voles (Carter, DeVries, &
Getz, 1995) exogenous oxytocin ameliorated isolation-induced changes in
behavior and heart rate (Grippo et al., 2009). This suggests that while
endogenous increases in oxytocin are not sufficient to ameliorate isolation-
induced changes in autonomic function, additional supplementation with
exogenous oxytocin may have measurable effects. It is important to note that
additional supplementation of oxytocin did not lower heart rate in prairie voles
that were not isolated. Thus, at least some of the beneficial actions of oxytocin
may only become apparent under conditions of stress and adversity.
Centrally released oxytocin can counter the defensive behavioral strategies
associated with stressful experiences. Oxytocin also may inhibit the central
effects of vasopressin and other adaptive peptides, such as corticotropin-
releasing factor, which plays a major role in the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal
axis (Neumann, 2008). Generally, but not always, the effects of endogenous
oxytocin are neuroprotective. We have found, in studies done with the prairie
vole, that intense stressors (such as restraint and exposure to a social intruder)

can release both oxytocin and vasopressin. Milder stressors, such as handling,
increase blood levels of vasopressin, but not usually oxytocin. Experiences, such
as exposure to an infant vole, also may transiently release oxytocin, especially in
reproductively naive males. Infant exposure concurrently blocks stress-induced
increases in adrenal steroids and has the capacity to facilitate subsequent pair-
bond formation (Carter, Grippo, Pournajafi-Nazarloo, Ruscio, & Porges, 2008).
These and other examples support the general hypothesis that oxytocin plays a
critical role in the management of stressful experiences, while also facilitating
social behavior.
Animal research suggests that oxytocin affects the immune system, acting
during development to “educate” the thymus. Oxytocin can also be a powerful
anti-inflammatory agent, with the capacity to reduce inflammatory processes
both in vivo and in vitro. For example, oxytocin can restore tissue following
exposure to burns, protect against sepsis, and reduce the response to pathogens.
At comparatively high levels endogenous oxytocin may promote wound healing,
even in humans (Gouin et al., 2010). These functions of oxytocin could provide
another set of mechanisms through which caregiving, under conditions that
allow the release of oxytocin, might protect and heal both those who give and
receive nurture.
SEX DIFFERENCES IN CAREGIVING AND STRESS
MANAGEMENT
Sex differences in either the capacity to nurture or be nurtured are frequently
observed and often debated. Women are more likely to give direct nurture,
sometimes through their role as a spouse or parent, or in a professional capacity,
such as nursing. In males, nurturance may be expressed through less direct
caregiving behaviors, such as defense or protection of the family or resources.
Culture and experience play an important role in the development,
expression, and maintenance of sex differences. However, it is also likely that
male and female differences in the capacity to nurture are based in part on
biology, which may in turn influence sexually dimorphic behavioral traits and
states (Carter, Boone, Pournajafi-Nazarloo, & Bales, 2009).
Gonadal steroid hormones and their receptors can affect sex differences,
especially in early development. In addition, sex differences in endogenous
neuropeptides, such as oxytocin and vasopressin, or their receptors could
influence sexually dimorphic social behaviors. For example, differential

exposure to estrogen across the life span might be expected to enhance the
availability of oxytocin. However, remarkably little research has actually
addressed these questions and, at least in blood, oxytocin often does not differ
between males and females. In addition, both the effects of estrogen and
oxytocin are context-dependent (Grippo et al., 2009). Thus, other systems,
including the hormones of the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal and gonadal axes,
and autonomic states associated with activation or mobilization may influence
the consequences of oxytocin of both endogenous and exogenous origins.
Vasopressin levels in blood also do not reliably differ between the sexes.
However, sex differences do exist in central vasopressin, especially in a neural
axis that includes the amygdala, bed nucleus of the stria terminalis, and lateral
septum (De Vries & Panzica, 2006). This system is important to determining
reactions to negative and positive stimuli, and may help explain select behavioral
features of various disorders including autism, which are highly sexually
dimorphic and also characterized by differences in social behavior and emotional
reactions to stressful experiences (Carter, 2007). The effects of vasopressin may
be dynamically influenced by oxytocin and vice versa (Viviani & Stroop, 2008).
Social experiences are likely to be major factors regulating both the synthesis
of oxytocin and vasopressin and their receptors. Thus, the social history of an
individual 
may 
be 
translated 
into 
an 
ontogenetic 
recalibration 
of
neuropeptidergic functions with potential consequences for both physiology and
behavior. Developmental exposure to exogenous oxytocin or vasopressin also
can have lifelong consequences (Carter et al., 2009). These developmental
influences interact with sex, because males and females often have differential
responses to exogenous peptides, and have the potential to modify behavioral
patterns across the life span. It seems likely that epigenetic changes in peptides
and their receptors are one of the mechanisms through which social experiences
are converted into long-lasting individual differences. Social behaviors,
including alloparenting, are especially sensitive to social and hormonal
experiences in early life. Thus, the fundamental components of caregiving may
have evolved with the capacity to be modified by an interaction between early
experience and hormones, such as oxytocin and vasopressin, that are capable of
regulating sociality and emotional reactivity in later life.
CLINICAL IMPLICATIONS OF POSITIVE SOCIAL
EXPERIENCES

Contemporary medicine, especially over the past century, has focused on
mechanisms of disease. Medical advances have been largely technical. The
natural mechanisms underlying health and healing remain remarkably poorly
understood. Sophisticated neural mechanisms, based on ancient bodily systems
that are unique to mammals, allow the human body to constantly monitor,
manage, and restore its own health. However, humans are highly social
creatures. Our capacity to heal ourselves is physically linked to our relationships
with other people. When social bonds are absent or disrupted by the loss of a
loved one, our health also is at risk.
In the context of caregiving, the quality of the person-to-person interactions
between a caretaker and those being cared for is critical for survival. Often this
involves contingent and “appropriate” gesture, facial expression, prosody,
proximity, and touch. In addition to specific clinical treatments, social support
and social engagement behaviors by friends and relatives may also be capable of
reversing illness and maintaining health (Harris, 2009). It is likely that oxytocin
is important to the positive consequences of social support, possibly through
effects on the autonomic nervous system and immune system. For example, it
has been shown in humans that immune responses to an endobacterial challenge
(lipopolysaccaride) can be significantly blocked by concurrent treatment with
oxytocin (Clodi et al., 2008).
Person-to-person interactions that trigger neural circuits promoting calm
physiological states can contribute to health, healing, and growth processes.
Alternatively, threatening interactions trigger defensive strategies associated
with physiological states supporting mobilization (e.g., flight-or-fight behaviors)
or immobilization (e.g., behavioral shutdown, syncope, death feigning). As
described, the nervous system is constantly assessing the environment as being
safe, dangerous, or life-threatening (see chapter 1). Through this process of
neuroception, neural circuits are triggered that will either support health and
healing or support defensive strategies of fight-or-flight or shutdown.
Neuroception involves brain structures, including the amygdala, that can be
modulated by neuropeptides including oxytocin and vasopressin. Under optimal
conditions, person-to-person interactions can be innate triggers within the human
nervous system for adaptive biobehavioral systems that support health and
healing. Both the giving and receiving of caregiving or love has the capacity to
protect, heal, and restore. The mechanisms underlying these processes are only
now becoming apparent.

SUMMARY
As we look at social behavior across the life span, we notice long periods in
which self-regulated behaviors, including spontaneous social engagement
behaviors, are readily expressed. In contrast, we note that this timeline is
anchored on both sides by a dependence on caregiver. This dependence on
caregiver is paralleled by limitations in the neural regulation of autonomic state
via the myelinated vagus. Whether the periods of caregiver dependence are
modulated by neuropeptides is a question for future research. Perhaps the
regulation of oxytocin during these periods may enable the infant or the elderly
to be less selective of caregiver and to be able to be soothed and comforted by a
variety of caregivers. As the neural control circuits develop and there are more
opportunities to engage socially, then perhaps oxytocin and vasopressin play a
more important role in modulating state to promote the establishment of strong
social bonds.
As a species, humans are highly social mammals, dependent on others for
survival and reproduction. Under optimal conditions, this dependency is both
symbiotic and reciprocal. The evolved neural, autonomic, and endocrine
underpinnings of sociality are shared with other species, permitting a cross-
species analysis of the processes responsible for sociality. Awareness of the
neurobiology of social engagement and social bonding also offers insights into
human concepts, such as social support and caregiving, which in turn can be
associated with good health and recovery from illness. These systems are
integrated throughout the body, including at the level of the brainstem, where
hormones, such as oxytocin and vasopressin, influence behavior, the autonomic
nervous system, and immune system. Projections to and from these ancient
systems are experienced by more modern brain structures, including the cortex,
as diffuse and sometimes powerful feelings or emotions. The same
neuroendocrine and autonomic systems that permit high levels of social behavior
and social bonds regulate the management of stressful experiences and the
capacity of the mammalian body to heal itself. However, the activities of
brainstem and autonomic systems are context-dependent. In a context of safety
or comparatively mild or acute stressors, the release of oxytocin can promote
health and restoration. In the context of chronic stress or fear, the actions of
these same adaptive systems might have consequences that appear detrimental or
destructive. Knowledge of the evolutionary origins and neurobiology of sociality
provides a contextual perspective for understanding both the causes and

consequences of mammalian caregiving behaviors.
Co-author for this chapter was C. S. Carter.

 
Epilogue
With increasing knowledge from the neurosciences and continuous feedback
from clinicians, the polyvagal theory continues to evolve. In the future, the
polyvagal theory (Porges, 2007a, 2007b) will expand into an integrated theory of
neurovisceral regulation that will incorporate the role specific brain structures
play in the neural regulation of the immune, endocrine, and autonomic systems.
This integration will enable a more succinct understanding of the influence of
both mental processes on bodily functions and health and bodily functions on
mental processes. On a neuroanatomical level the integration of these systems is
obvious and long overdue. Although these systems share common
neuroanatomical structures, research communities have independently emerged
with paradigms designed to maximize select response systems (i.e., immune,
endocrine, or autonomic) as if they were independent. By proposing an
expanded polyvagal theory, immune and endocrine responses will be interpreted
within a phylogenetic hierarchy, similar to the three circuits outlined in the
initial statement of the polyvagal theory (see chapter 2). Moreover, rather than
interpreting immune and endocrine responses as being stressful or injurious, the
responses will be interpreted within a phylogenetic framework and the adaptive
function of these responses emphasized. The expanded theory will provide a
better understanding of the bidirectional mind–body and brain–body responses
that would explain important processes, such as the body’s own ability to heal
and the relation between physical disease and mental health.
Clinicians, especially traumatologists, have found the polyvagal theory
useful in understanding mental health symptoms and in developing interventions
and treatment models respecting the client’s quest for safety. The theory also
leads to a better understanding of the strategies an individual uses to regulate
physiological state and feel safe. Within the realm of mental health, the
polyvagal theory has already directed clinicians to look at the core features
related to the social engagement system that are depressed in virtually all
psychiatric illnesses. In the future, clinicians will be trained to be more sensitive

to these features and will be skilled to attend to prosody of voice, facial
expressivity, gaze, and auditory hypersensitivities as both diagnostic and
prognostic indicators.
With an expanded polyvagal theory, easily monitored measures (e.g., heart
rate, facial muscle activity, acoustic features of vocalization) may provide
variables that reflect the same integrated systems involving endocrine and
immune regulation as well as the function of brain structures and compromises
due to white matter disease and other aspects of brain dysfunction. Moreover, in
the future it may be possible to monitor these variables with noncontact
technologies such as high-resolution infrared cameras. In our laboratory we are
moving to the next generation of technologies and are able to measure with
infrared cameras beat-to-beat heart rate and breathing. Our goal is to incorporate
these noncontact measures into a polyvagal monitor that could be used to
indicate when a client shifts from a physiological state that either supports
defensive strategies (i.e., fear-induced mobilization or immobilization behaviors)
or supports calm states associated with safety and social engagement. The
technology would be helpful in increasing the awareness of therapists to the
rapidly changing and often vulnerable physiological states of their clients.
The polyvagal theory, by centering its organizing constructs on current
knowledge of neuroanatomy and evolution of the vertebrate autonomic nervous
system, has led to a reinterpretation of autonomic reactions as a neural platform
on which specific behaviors and psychological processes may occur. Within this
model, many behaviors and psychological processes are neither learned nor
correlates of neurophysiological processes. Rather, the model emphasizes that
many behaviors and psychological processes are contingent emergent properties
of well-defined neurophysiological states. Thus, neurophysiological state is a
necessary but not sufficient condition for specific spontaneous behaviors and
psychological processes to occur, including the symbiotic neurobehavioral
regulation between two people that is often labeled as caring and loving (see
chapters 18 and 19). Given this model, new therapies for mental and physical
health would focus on manipulating neurophysiological state to provide an
appropriate platform for mental and physical health and social behavior.
The polyvagal theory challenges the scientist to think in terms of both
bidirectional and hierarchical neural feedback circuits involving the
communication between peripheral organs and various structures in the brain.
The theory challenges the clinician to interpret atypical behaviors and
physiological reactions as adaptive. With these organizing principles, the

polyvagal theory will be helpful in understanding the features that facilitate and
optimize human social behavior and health.

 
Credits

PART I: THEORETICAL PRINCIPLES
Chapter 1. Porges, S. W. (2004). Neuroception: A subconscious system for
detecting threat and safety. Zero to Three Journal, 24(5), 9–24. Copyright ©
2004 ZERO TO THREE. Reprinted by permission of Zero to Three.
Chapter 2. Porges, S. W. (1995). Orienting in a defensive world: Mammalian
modifications 
of 
our 
evolutionary 
heritage. 
A 
polyvagal 
theory.
Psychophysiology, 32, 301–318. Reprinted by permission of John Wiley and
Sons.
Chapter 3. Porges, S. W. (2009). The polyvagal theory: New insights into
adaptive reactions of the autonomic nervous system. Cleveland Clinic Journal of
Medicine, 76(Suppl 2), S86–S90. Reprinted with permission. Copyright © 2009
Cleveland Clinic Foundation. All rights reserved.
PART II: BIOBEHAVIORAL REGULATION DURING EARLY
DEVELOPMENT
Chapter 4. Porges, S. W. (1992). Vagal tone: A physiological marker of stress
vulnerability. Pediatrics, 90, 498–504. Reprinted by permission of the American
Academy of Pediatrics.
The preparation of this chapter and much of the research described have been
supported, in part, by grant HD 22628 from the National Institute of Child
Health and Human Development. The construct of cardiac vagal tone described
in this chapter has been measured with patented methods. These methods have
been developed with support from National Institutes of Health grants HD-
15968 and HD-05951 and National Institute of Mental Health grants MH-00054
and MH-18909 awarded to Dr. Porges. The methods have been incorporated in a
vagal tone monitor that can evaluate vagal tone in real time. (Details regarding
the vagal tone monitor can be obtained from Delta-Biometrics, Inc., 9411 Locust
Hill Road, Bethesda, MD 20814-3960.) Chapter 5. Porges, S. W. (1993). The
infant’s sixth sense: Awareness and regulation of bodily processes. Zero to
Three Journal, 14, 12–16. Copyright © 1993 ZERO TO THREE. Reprinted by
permission of Zero to Three.
Chapter 6. Porges, S. W. (1996). Physiological regulation in high-risk infants:

A model for assessment and potential intervention. Development and
Psychopathology, 8, 43–58. Reprinted by permission of Cambridge University
Press.
Chapter 7. Porges, S. W., Doussard-Roosevelt, J. A., Portales, A. L., &
Greenspan, S. I.. (1996). Infant regulation of the vagal “brake” predicts child
behavior 
problems: 
A 
psychobiological 
model 
of 
social 
behavior.
Developmental Psychobiology, 29, 697–712. Reprinted by permission of John
Wiley and Sons.
Chapter 8. Porges, S. W., & Furman, S. A. (2010). The early development of
the autonomic nervous system provides a neural platform for social behavior: A
polyvagal perspective. Infant and Child Development. [Article first published
online April 22, 2010.] Reprinted by permission of John Wiley and Sons.
The research described in this chapter was supported, in part, by NIH Grant R01
HD053570 from the National Institute of Child Health and Human Development
and NIH Grant T32 MH18882 from the American Psychological Association
Diversity Program in Neuroscience.

PART III: SOCIAL COMMUNICATION
AND RELATIONSHIPS
Chapter 9. Porges, S. W., Doussard-Roosevelt, J. A., & Maiti, A. K. (1994).
Vagal tone and the physiological regulation of emotion. In N. A. Fox (Ed.), The
development of emotion regulation: Behavioral and biological considerations,
Monographs of the Society for Research in Child Development, 59(2–3, Serial
No. 240), 167–186. Reprinted by permission of John Wiley and Sons.
Chapter 10. Porges, S. W. (1997). Emotion: An evolutionary by-product of the
neural regulation of the autonomic nervous system. Annals of the New York
Academy of Sciences, 807, 62–77. Reprinted by permission of John Wiley and
Sons.
Special thanks are extended to Sue Carter for encouraging me to formalize the
ideas presented in this chapter. In addition, I would like to thank Jane Doussard-
Roosevelt for commenting on earlier drafts and the students in my graduate
seminar who provided a forum for the discussion of the concepts described in
the polyvagal theory of emotion.
Chapter 11. Porges, S. W. (1998). Love: An emergent property of the
mammalian autonomic nervous system. Psychoneuroendocrinology, 23, 837–
861. Reprinted by permission of Elsevier.
The preparation of this chapter was supported in part by grant HD 22628 from
the National Institute of Child Health and Human Development and by grant
MCJ 240622 from the Maternal and Child Health Bureau. Special thanks are
extended to Sue Carter for encouraging me to formalize the ideas presented here.
In addition, I would like to thank Jack Clark, Jane Doussard-Roosevelt, Jaak
Panksepp, and Kerstin Uvnas-Moberg for commenting on earlier drafts.
Chapter 12. Porges, S. W. (2003). Social engagement and attachment: A
phylogenetic perspective. Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences, 1008,
31–47. Reprinted by permission of John Wiley and Sons.
This study was supported in part by a grant from the National Institutes of
Health (MH60625). Several of the ideas presented in this article are the product
of discussions with C. Sue Carter.

Chapter 13. Porges, S. W., & Lewis, G. F. (2010). The polyvagal hypothesis:
Common mechanisms mediating autonomic regulation, vocalizations, and
listening. In S. M. Brudzynsk (Ed.), Handbook of mammalian vocalizations: An
integrative neuroscience approach (pp. 255–264). Amsterdam: Academic Press.
Reprinted by permission of Academic Press.

PART IV: THERAPEUTIC AND CLINICAL
PERSPECTIVES
Chapter 14. Porges, S. W. The vagus: A mediator of behavioral and physiologic
features associated with autism. In M. L. Bauman & T. L. Kemper (Eds.), The
neurobiology of autism (2nd ed.), (pp. 65–78). © 1994, 2005 The Johns Hopkins
University Press. Reprinted with permission of The Johns Hopkins University
Press.
The preparation of this chapter was supported in part by grant MH60625 from
the National Institutes of Health. The author gratefully acknowledges the
assistance of George Nijmeh in the preparation of this manuscript.
Chapter 15. Austin, M. A., Riniolo, T. C., & Porges, S. W. (2007). Borderline
personality disorder and emotion regulation: Insights from the polyvagal theory.
Brain and Cognition, 65, 69–76. Reprinted by permission of Elsevier.
A special thanks to Katherine C. Johnson for her input with this chapter, and to
Janice Laben. The preparation of this manuscript was supported in part by a
grant from the National Institutes of Health (MH60625).
Chapter 16. Dale, L. P., Carroll, L. E., Galen, G., Hayes, J. A., Webb, K. W., &
Porges, S. W. (2009). Abuse history is related to autonomic regulation to mild
exercise and psychological wellbeing. Applied Psychophysiology and
Biofeedback, 34, 299–308. Reprinted by permission of Springer.
The authors wish to acknowledge the support of the administrators and
participants at the local yoga studio. We are also grateful to Amanda Bliss,
Allison M. Mattison, Lorinn M. Inserra, and Rebekah Jackson who helped with
data collection; Jordana Klein and James DiLoretto who helped with data
scoring; Rachel Schein who helped oversee the data scoring and entry; and Drs.
Keri Heilman and John Denver for help with the physiological data.
Chapter 17. Porges, S. W (2010). Music therapy and trauma: Insights from the
polyvagal theory. In K. Stewart (Ed.), Music therapy & trauma: Bridging theory
and clinical practice (pp. 3–15). New York: Satchnote Press. Reprinted by
permission of Satchnote Press.

PART V: SOCIAL BEHAVIOR AND
HEALTH
Chapter 18. Porges, S. (2009). Reciprocal influences between body and brain in
the perception and expression of affect: A polyvagal perspective. In D. Fosha, D.
Siegel, & M. Solomon (Eds.), The healing power of emotion: Affective
neuroscience, development, and clinical practice (pp. 27–54). New York:
Norton. Reprinted by permission of W. W. Norton & Company.
Chapter 19. Porges, S. W., & Carter, C. S. (in press). Neurobiology and
evolution: Mechanisms, mediators, and adaptive consequences of caregiving. In
S. Brown, R. Brown, & L. Penner (Eds.), Self interest and beyond: Toward a
new understanding of human caregiving. New York: Oxford University Press.
Reprinted by permission of Oxford University Press.

 
References
Achenbach, T. M. (1988). Child behavior checklist for ages 2–3. Burlington, VT:
University Associates in Psychiatry.
Administration on Children Youth and Families Children’s Bureau. (2006). Child
maltreatment. 
Retrieved 
from
http://www.acf.hhs.gov/programs/cb/pubs/cm06/index.htm April 15, 2008.
Adolphs, R. (2002). Trust in the brain. Nature Neuroscience, 5, 192–193.
Agostoni, E., Chinnock, I. E., DeBurgh Daly, M., & Murray, I. G. (1957).
Functional and histological studies of the vagus nerve and its branches to the
heart, lungs and abdominal viscera in the cat. Journal of Physiology, 135,
182–205.
Ainsworth, M., Blehar, M., Waters, E., et al. (1978). Patterns of attachment: A
psychological study of the strange situation. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Allen, M. T., & Crowell, M. D. (1989). Patterns of autonomic response during
laboratory stressors. Psychophysiology, 26, 603–614.
Althaus, M., Mulder, L. J. M., Mulder, G., et al. (1999). Cardiac adaptivity to
attention-demanding tasks in children with a pervasive developmental
disorder not otherwise specified (PDD-NOS). Biological Psychiatry, 46,799–
809.
American National Standards Institute. (1997). Methods for calculation of the
speech intelligibility index (ANSI Publication no. S3.5). New York:
Acoustical Society of America.
American Psychiatric Association. (1994). Diagnostic and statistical manual of
mental disorders (4th ed.). Washington, DC: Author.
American Psychiatric Association. (2000). Diagnostic and statistical manual of
mental disorders (4th ed., text revision). Washington, DC: Author.
Anderson, A. K., & Phelps, E. A. (2000). Expression without recognition:
Contributions of the human amygdala to emotional communication.
Psychological Science, 11, 106–111.
Andrews, P. L. R., & Lawes, I. N. C. (1992). A protective role for vagal
afferents: An hypothesis. In S. Ritter, R. C. Ritter, & C. D. Barnes, C. D.

(Eds.), Neuroanatomy and physiology of abdominal vagal afferents (pp. 280–
302). Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press.
Apgar, V. (1953). A proposal for a new method of evaluation of the newborn
infant. Current Researches in Anesthesia and Analgesia, 32, 260–268.
Arata, C. M., Langhinrichsen-Rohling, J., Bowers, D., & O’Farrill Swails, L.
(2005). Single versus multitype maltreatment: An examination of the long
term effects of child abuse. Journal of Aggression, Maltreatment & Trauma,
11, 29–52.
Ardic, F. N., Topaloglu, I., Oncel, S., Ardic, F., & Uguz, M. Z. (1997). Does the
stapes reflex remain the same after Bell’s palsy? American Journal of
Otology, 18, 761–765.
Arletti, R., Benelli, A., & Bertolini, A. (1992). Oxytocin involvement in male
and female sexual behavior. In C. A. Pedersen, J. D. Caldwell, G. F.
Jirikowski, & T. R. Insel (Eds.), Oxytocin in maternal, sexual, and social
behaviors. New York: Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences.
Ax, A. F. (1953). The physiological differentiation between fear and anger in
humans. Psychosomatic Medicine, 15, 433–442.
Ayres, A. J. (1972). Sensory integration and learning disorders. Los Angeles:
Western Psychological Services.
Bagge, C., Nickell, A., Stepp, S., Durrett, C., Jackson, K., & Trull, T. J. (2004).
Borderline personality disorder features predict negative outcomes 2 years
later. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 113, 279–288.
Bárány, E., 1938. A contribution to the physiology of bone conduction. Acta
Otolaryngology Supplement, 26, 1–233.
Barbas-Henry, H. A., & Lohman, A. H. M. (1984). The motor nuclei and primary
projections of the IXth, Xth, XIth, and XIIth cranial nerves in the monitor
lizard, Varanus exanthematicus. Journal of Comparative Neurology, 226,
565–579.
Bates, J. E. (1980). The concept of difficult temperament. Merrill-Palmer
Quarterly, 26, 299–319.
Bates, J. E. (1984). The infant characteristics questionnaire. Unpublished
manuscript, Indiana University.
Bayley, N. (1969). Bayley scales of infant development: Birth to two years. New
York: Psychological Corporation.
Bazhenova, O. V., Plonskaia, O., & Porges, S. W. (2001). Vagal reactivity and
affective adjustments in infants during interaction challenges. Child
Development, 72, 1314–1326.

Bear, D. M. (1983). Hemispheric specialization and the neurology of emotion.
Archives of Neurology, 40, 195–202.
Becker, L. E., Zhang, W., & Pereyra, P. M. (1993). Delayed maturation of the
vagus nerve in sudden infant death syndrome. Acta Neuropathologica, 86,
611–622.
Behrman, R. E., & Vaughan, V. C. (1987). Nelson textbook of pediatrics (13th
ed.). Philadelphia: Saunders.
Bennett, J. A., Ford, T. W, Kidd, C., & McWilliam, P. N. (1984). Characteristics
of cat dorsal motor vagal motoneurones with axons in the cardiac and
pulmonary branches. Journal of Physiology, 351, 27.
Benjamin, L. S. (1996). Interpersonal diagnosis and treatment of personality
disorders (2nd ed.). New York: Guilford Press.
Berlyne, D. E. (1960). Conflict, arousal, and curiosity. New York: McGraw-Hill.
Bernard, C. (1973). Lessons on the phenomena of life common to animals and
vegetables. Second lecture, The three forms of life. In L. Langley, Ed.,
Homeostasis; Origins of the concept (pp. 129–151). Stroudsburg, PA:
Dowden Hutchinson & Ross.
Berntson, G. G., Cacioppo, I. T., & Quigley, K. S. (1991). Autonomic
determinism: The modes of autonomic control, the doctrine of autonomic
space, and the laws of autonomic constraint. Psychological Review, 98, 459–
487.
Berntson, G. G., Cacioppo, J. T., & Quigley, K. S. (1993a). Cardiac
psychophysiology and autonomic space in humans: Empirical perspectives
and conceptual implications. Psychological Bulletin, 114, 296–322.
Berntson, G. G., Cacioppo, J. T., & Quigley, K. S. (1993b). Respiratory sinus
arrhythmia: 
Autonomic 
origins, 
physiological 
mechanisms, 
and
psychophysiological implications. Psychophysiology, 30, 183–196.
Berntson, G. G., Cacioppo, J. T., & Quigley, K. S. (1994). Autonomic cardiac
control. I. Estimation and validation from pharmacological blockades.
Psychophysiology, 31, 572–585.
Bieger, D., & Hopkins, D. A. (1987). Viscerotropic representation of the upper
alimentary tract in the medulla oblongata in the rat: The nucleus ambiguus.
Journal of Comparative Neurology, 262, 546–562.
Bigger, J. T., Jr., Fleiss, J. L., & Rolnitsky, L. M. (1993). The ability of several
short-term measures of RR variability to predict mortality after myocardial
infarction. Circulation, 88, 927–932.
Billman, G. E., & DuJardin, J.-P. (1990). Dynamic changes in cardiac vagal tone

as measured by time-series analysis. American Journal of Physiology, 258,
H896–H902.
Bjork, E., Nevalainen, T., Hakumaki, M., & Voipio, H.-M. (1999). R-weighting
provides better estimation for rat hearing sensitivity. Laboratory Animals, 34,
136–144.
Blair, R. J. R., & Cipolott, L. (2000). Impaired social response reversal. A case of
“acquired sociopathy.” Brain, 123, 1122–1141.
Blanchard, E. B. (1990). Elevated basal levels of cardiovascular responses in
Vietnam veterans with PTSD: A health problem in the making? Journal of
Anxiety Disorders, 4, 233–237.
Boon, P., Vonck, K., De Reuck, J., et al. (2001). Vagus nerve stimulation for
refractory epilepsy. Seizure, 10, 448–455.
Borg, E., & Counter, S. A. (1989). The middle-ear muscles. Scientific American,
261, 74–80.
Bowlby, J. (1973). Attachment and loss: Vol 2. Separation: Anxiety and anger.
New York: Basic Books.
Bowlby, J. (1982). Attachment and loss: Vol. 1. Attachment. New York: Basic
Books.
Bowlby, J . (1988.). A secure base: Parent-child attachment and healthy human
development. New York: Basic Books.
Bray, G. A. (1985). Autonomic and endocrine factors in the regulation of food
intake. Brain Research Bulletin, 9, 279–286.
Brazelton, T. B. (1984). Neonatal behavioral assessment scale (2nd ed.).
Philadelphia: Lippincott.
Bremner, J. D., & Vermetten, E. (2001). Stress and development: Behavioral and
biological consequences. Development and Psychopathology, 13, 473–489.
Brems, C., Johnson, M. E., Neal, D., & Freemon, M. (2004). Childhood abuse
history and substance use among men and women receiving detoxification
services. American Journal of Drug and Alcohol Abuse, 30, 799–821.
Brown, J. W. (1974). Prenatal development of the human chief sensory
trigeminal nucleus. Journal of Comparative Neurology, 156, 307–335.
Brown, J. W. (1990). Prenatal development of the human nucleus ambiguus
during the embryonic and early fetal periods. American Journal ofAnatomy,
189, 267–283.
Brudzynski, S. M. (2007). Ultrasonic calls of rats as indicator variables of
negative and positive states: acetylcholinedopamine interaction and acoustic
coding. Behavior and Brain Research, 182, 261–273.

Brunton, P. J., & Russell, J. A. (2008). The expectant brain: Adapting for
motherhood. Nature Review of Neuroscience, 9, 11–25.
Buckley, T. C., & Kaloupek, D. G. (2001). A meta analytic examination of basal
cardiovascular activity in posttraumatic stress disorder. Psychosomatic
Medicine, 63, 585–594.
Bueno, L., Gue, M., Fargeas, M. J., Alvinerie, M., Junien, J. L., & Fioramonti, J.
(1989). Vagally mediated inhibition of acoustic stress-induced cortisol release
by orally administered kappa-opioid substances in dogs. Endocrinology, 124,
1788–1793.
Bulloch, K., & Pomerantz, W. (1984). Autonomic nervous system innervation of
thymic-related lymphoid tissue in wildtype and nude mice. Journal of
Comparative Neurology, 228, 58-68.
Buss, D. M., Larsen, R. J., Westen, D., & Semmelroth, J. (1992). Sex differences
in jealousy: Evolution, physiology, and psychology. Psychological Science, 3,
251–255.
Buwalda, B., Koolhaas, J. M., & Bohus, B. (1992). Behavioral and cardiac
responses to mild stress in young and aged rats: Effects of amphetamine and
vasopressin. Physiology and Behavior, 51, 211–216.
Byrne, E. A., & Porges, S. W. (1993). Data-dependent filter characteristics of
peak-valley respiratory sinus arrhythmia estimation: A cautionary note.
Psychophysiology, 30, 397–404.
Cacioppo, J. T., Berntson, G. G., Binkley, P. E, Quigley, K. S., Uchino, B. N., &
Fieldstone, A. (1994). Autonomic cardiac control II. Noninvasive indices and
basal response as revealed by autonomic blockades. Psychophysiology, 31,
586–598.
Cacioppo, J. T., Malaarkey, W. B., Kiecolt-Glaser, J. K., et al. (1995).
Heterogeneity in neuroendocrine and immune responses to brief psychological
stressors as a function of autonomic cardiac activation. Psychosomatic
Medicine, 57, 154–164.
Calkins, S. D., Graziano, P. A., & Keane, S. P. (2007). Cardiac vagal regulation
differentiates among children at risk for behavior problems. Biological
Psychology, 74, 144–153.
Cannon, W. B. (1927). The James-Lange theory of emotions: A critical
examination and an alternative theory. American Journal of Psychology, 39,
106–124.
Cannon, W. B. (1928). The mechanism of emotional disturbance of bodily
functions. New England Journal of Medicine, 198, 877–884.

Cannon, W. B. (1929a). Bodily changes in pain, hunger, fear and rage. An
account of recent researches into the function of emotional excitement. New
York: Appleton.
Cannon, W. B. (1929b). Organization for physiological homeostasis. Physiology
Reviews, 9, 399–431.
Cannon, W. B. (1957). “Voodoo” death. Psychosomatic Medicine, 19, 182–190.
(Reprinted from American Anthropology, 44 [1942], 169–181.) Carpenter, D.
O. (1990). Neural mechanisms of emesis. Canadian Journal of Physiology
and Pharmacology, 68, 230–236.
Carter, C. S. (1998). Neuroendocrine perspectives on social attachment and love.
Psychoneuroendocrinology, 23, 779–818.
Carter, C. S. (2007). Sex differences in oxytocin and vasopressin: Implications
for autism spectrum disorders? Behavioural Brain Research, 176, 170–186.
Carter, C. S., & Altemus, M. (1997). Integrative functions of lactational
hormones in social behavior and stress management. Annals of the New York
Academy of Sciences, 807, 164–174.
Carter, C. S., Boone, E. M., Pournajafi-Nazarloo, H., & Bales, K. L. (2009). The
consequences of early experiences and exposure to oxytocin and vasopressin
are sexually-dimorphic. Developmental Neuroscience, 31, 332–341.
Carter, C. S., Devries, A. C., & Getz, L. L. (1995). Physiological substrates of
mammalian monogamy: The prairie vole model. Neuroscience Biobehavioral
Reviews, 19, 303–314.
Carter, C. S., DeVries, A. C., Taymans, S. E., Roberts, R. L., Williams, J. R., &
Getz, L. L. (1997). Peptides, steroids, and pair bonding. Annals of the New
York Academy of Sciences, 807, 260–272.
Carter, C. S., Grippo, A. J., Pournajafi-Nazarloo, H., Ruscio, M. G., & Porges, S.
W. (2008). Oxytocin, vasopressin and social behavior. Progress in Brain
Research, 170, 331–336.
Carter, C. S., & Keverne, E. B. (2002). The neurobiology of social affiliation and
pair bonding. In D. W. Pfaff et al. (Eds.), Hormones, brain, and behavior (pp.
299–337). San Diego: Academic Press.
Carver, C. S., Scheier, M. F., & Weintraub, J. K. (1989). Assessing coping
strategies: A theoretically based approach. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 56, 267–283.
Cassidy, J., & Shaver, P. R. (1999). Handbook of attachment: Theory, research,
and clinical application. New York: Guilford Press.
Chen, T., & Rao, R. R. (1998). Audio-visual integration in multi-modal

communication. Proceedings of the IEEE, 86 (5), 837–852.
Cheng, G., Zhou, X., Qu, J., Ashwell, K. W. S., & Paxinos, G. (2004). Central
vagal sensory and motor connection: Human embryonic and fetal
development. Autonomic Neuroscience: Basic and Clinical, 114, 83–96.
Chisholm, K. (1998). A three year follow-up of attachment and indiscriminate
friendliness in children adopted from Romanian orphanages. Child
Development, 69, 1092–1106.
Chugani, H. T., Behen, M. E., Muzik, O., Juhász, C., Nagy, F., & Chugani, D. C.
(2001). Brain functional activity following early deprivation: A study of
postinstitutionalized Romanian orphans. NeuroImage, 14, 1290–1301.
Cicchetti, D. (1993). Developmental psychopathology: Reactions, reflections,
projections. Developmental Review, 13, 471–502.
Cicchetti, D., & White, J. (1990). Emotion and developmental psychopathology.
In N. Stein, B. Leventhal, & T. Trabasso (Eds.), Psychological and biological
approaches to emotion (pp. 359–382). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Clodi, M., Vila, G., Geyeregger, R., Riedl, M., Stulnig, T. M., Struck, J., et al.
(2008). Oxytocin alleviates the neuroendocrine and cytokine response to
bacterial endotoxin in healthy men. American Journal of Physiology:
Endocrinology and Metabolism, 295, E686–391.
Cloitre, M., Stovall-McClough, C., Miranda, R., & Chemtob, C. (2004).
Therapeutic alliance, negative mood regulation, and treatment outcome in
child abuse-related posttraumatic stress disorder. Journal of Consulting and
Clinical Psychology, 72, 411– 416.
Cloitre, M., Stovall-McClough, C., Zorbas, P., & Charuvastra, A. (2008).
Attachment organization, emotional regulation, and expectations of support in
a clinical sample of women with childhood abuse histories. Journal of
Traumatic Stress, 21, 282–289.
Coccaro, E. F. (1989). Central serotonin in impulsive aggression. British Journal
of Psychiatry, 155, 52–62.
Coccaro, E. F., & Kavoussi, R. J. (1991). Biological and pharmacological aspects
of borderline personality disorder. Hospital and Community Psychiatry, 42,
1029.
Cooper, C., Katona, C., & Livingston, G. (2008). Validity and reliability of the
brief COPE in carers of people with dementia: The LASER AD study.
Journal of Nervous and Mental Health, 1, 838–843.
Corballis, M. (2003). From mouth to hand: Gesture, speech, and the evolution of
right-handedness. Behavior and Brain Science, 26, 199–260.

Corona, R., Dissanayake, C., Arbelle, S., et al. (1998). Is affect aversive to young
children with autism? Behavioral and cardiac responses to experimenter
distress. Child Development, 69, 1494–1502.
Cottingham, J. T., Porges S. W., & Lyon, T. (1988). Soft tissue mobilization
(Rolfing pelvic lift) and associated changes in parasympathetic tone in two
age groups. Physical Therapy, 68, 352–356.
Cournand, A. (1979). Claude Bernard’s contributions to cardiac physiology. In E.
D. Robin (Ed.), Claude Bernard and the internal environment (pp. 97–121).
New York: Marcel Dekker.
Craig, A. D. (2005). Forebrain emotional asymmetry: A neuroanatomical basis?
Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 9, 566–571.
Crews, D. (1997) Species diversity and the evolution of behavioral controlling
mechanisms. Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences, 807, 1–21.
Critchley, H. D. (2005). Neural mechanisms of autonomic, affective, and
cognitive integration. Journal of Comparative Neurology, 493, 154–166.
Critchley, H. D., Wiens, S., Rothstein, P., Ohman, A., & Dolan, R. J. (2004).
Neural systems supporting interoceptive awareness. Nature Neuroscience, 7,
189–195.
Dale, L. P., O’Hara, E. A., Schein, R,, Inserra, L., Keen, J., Porges, S. W. (in
press). Infant measures of behavioral and physiological state regulation
predict 54-month behavior problems. Journal of Infant Mental Health.
Daley, S. E., Burge, D., & Hammen, C. (2000). Borderline personality disorder
symptoms as predictors of four-year romantic relationship dysfunction in
young women: Addressing issues of specificity. Journal of Abnormal
Psychology, 109, 451–460.
Daly, M. deBurgh. (1991). Some reflex cardioinhibitory responses in the cat and
their modulation by central inspiratory neuronal activity. Journal of
Physiology, 422, 463–480.
Damasio, A. (1999). The feeling of what happens. New York: Harcourt, Brace.
Dammeijer, P., Dijk, P., Chenault, M., Manni, J., & Mameren, H. (2007).
Stapedius muscle fibre characterization in the noise exposed and auditory
deprived rat. Hearing Research, 233, 54–66.
Daniels, D., Miselis, R. R., & Flanagan-Cato, L. M. (1999). Central neuronal
circuit innervating the lordosis-producing muscles defined by transneuronal
transport of pseudorabies virus. Journal of Neuroscience, 19, 2823–2833.
Darrow, C. W. (1929). Differences in the physiological reactions to sensory and
ideational stimuli. Psychological Bulletin, 26, 185–201.

Darrow, C. W. (1943) Physiological and clinical tests of autonomic function and
autonomic balance. Physiological Reviews, 23, 1–36.
Darrow, C. W., Jost, H., Solomon, A. P., & Mergener, J. C. (1942). Autonomic
indicators of excitatory and homeostatic effects on the electroencephalogram.
Journal of Psychology, 14, 115–130.
Darwin, C. (1872). The expression of the emotions in man and animals. New
York: D. Appleton. (Reprint: Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1965.)
Davis, M. (1992) The role of the amygdala in conditioned fear. In J. P.
Aggleton (Ed.), The amygdala: Neurobiological aspects of emotion, memory,
and mental dysfunction (pp. 255–306). New York: Wiley.
Dawson, G. (1994). Frontal electroencephalographic correlates of individual
differences in emotion expression in infants: A brain systems perspective on
emotion. In N. A. Fox (Ed.), Emotion regulation: Behavioral and biological
considerations. Monograph of the Society for Research in Child
Development, 59(2–3): 135–151.
DeGangi, G. A., DiPietro, J. A., Greenspan, S. I., & Porges, S. W. (1991).
Psychophysiological characteristics of the regulatory disordered infant. Infant
Behavior and Development, 14, 37–50.
deJong, F., Kingma, H., Wirtz, P., Berge, H., & Marres, E. (1988). Indications of
a differentiated regulation of sound transmission by the middle ear muscles of
the rat. American Journal of Otology, 9, 70–75.
Dellinger, J. A., Taylor, H. L., & Porges, S. W. (1987). Atropine sulfate effects
on aviator performance and on respiratory-heart period interactions. Aviation
Space Environment Medicine, 58, 333–338.
De Meersman, R. E. (1993). Aging as a modulator of respiratory sinus
arrhythmia. Journal of Gerontology: Biological Sciences, 48, B74–B78.
Denver, J. W., Reed, S. F., & Porges. S. W. (2007). Methodological issues in the
quantification of respiratory sinus arrhythmia. Biological Psychology, 74(2)
286–294.
Desai, S., Arias, I., Thompson, M. P., & Basile, K. C. (2002). Childhood
victimization and subsequent adult revictimization assessed in a nationally
representative sample of women and men. Violence and Victims, 1, 639–653.
De Vries, G. J., & Panzica, G. C. (2006). Sexual differentiation of central
vasopressin and vasotocin systems in vertebrates: Different mechanisms,
similar endpoints. Neuroscience, 138, 947–955.
De Wied, D. (1971) Long-term effect of vasopressin on the maintenance of a
conditioned avoidance response in rats. Nature, 232, 58–60.

Dewsbury, D. A. (1987) The comparative psychology of monogamy. In D. W.
Leger & N. E. Lincoln (Eds.), Nebraska symposium on motivation (pp. 1–50).
Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press.
Dexter, E., Levy, M. N., & Rudy, Y. (1989). Mathematical model of the changes
in heart rate elicited by vagal stimulation. Circulation Research, 65, 1330–
1339.
DiPietro, J. A., Larson, S. K., & Porges, S. W. (1987). Behavioral and heart-rate
pattern differences between breast-fed and bottle-fed neonates. Developmental
Psychology, 23, 467–474.
DiPietro, J. A., & Porges, S. W. (1991). Vagal responsiveness to gavage feeding
as an index of preterm status. Pediatric Research, 29, 231–236.
Djupesland, 
G. 
(1976). 
Nonacoustic 
reflex 
measurement: 
Procedures,
interpretations and variables. In A. Feldman & L. Wilber (Eds.), Acoustic
impedance and admittance: The measurement of middle ear function (pp.
217–235). Baltimore, MD: Williams and Wilkins.
Donald, D. E., Samueloff, S. L., & Ferguson, D. (1967). Mechanisms of
tachycardia caused by atropine in conscious dogs. American Journal of
Physiology, 212, 901–910.
Donaldson, Z. R., & Young, L. J. (2008). Oxytocin, vasopressin and
neurogenetics of sociality. Science, 322, 900–904.
Donchin, Y., Constantini, S., Szold, A., Byrne, E. A., & Porges, S. W. (1992).
Cardiac vagal tone predicts outcome in neurosurgical patients. Critical Care
Medicine, 20, 941–949.
Donchin, Y., Feld, J. M., & Porges, S. W. (1985). Respiratory sinus arrhythmia
during recovery from isoflurane-nitrous oxide anesthesia. Anesthesia and
Analgesia, 64, 811–815.
Doussard-Roosevelt, J. A., McClenny, B. D., & Porges, S. W. (2001). Neonatal
cardiac vagal tone and school-age developmental outcome in very low birth
weight infants. Developmental Psychobiology, 38, 56–66.
Doussard-Roosevelt, J. A., Porges, S. W., Scanlon, J. W., Alemi, B., & Scanlon,
K. B. (1997). Vagal regulation of heart rate in the prediction of developmental
outcome for very low birth weight preterm infants. Child Development, 68,
173–186.
Doussard-Roosevelt, J. A., Walker, P. S., Portales, A. L., Greenspan, S. I., &
Porges, S. W. (1990). Vagal tone and the fussy infant: Atypical vagal
reactivity in the difficult infant [Abstract]. Infant Behavior and Development,
13, 352.

Doyle, C. (2001). Surviving and coping with emotional abuse in childhood.
Clinical Child Psychology and Psychiatry, 6, 387–402.
Dozier, M., Stovall, K. C., & Albus, K. E. (1999). Attachment and
psychopathology in adulthood. In J. Cassidy & P. R. Shaver (Eds.), Handbook
of attachment: Theory, research, and clinical applications (pp. 497–519).
New York: Guilford Press.
Drossman, D. A., Leserman, J., Nachman, G., Li, Z., Gluck, H., Toomey, T. C.,
& Mitchell, C. M. (1990). Sexual and physical abuse in women with
functional or organic gastrointestinal disorders. Annals of Internal Medicine,
113, 828–833.
Dufey, M., Hrtado, E., Fernandez, A. M., Manes, F., & Ibanez, A. (in press).
Social Neuroscience, 23, 1–15. [Epub ahead of print]
Duffy, E. (1957). The psychological significance of the concept of “arousal” or
“activation.” Psychological Review, 64, 265–275.
Eberl, E. M. (2010). Control of gestures and vocalizations in primates. In S. M.
Brudzynski (Ed.), Handbook of mammalian vocalization: An integrative
neuroscience approach (vol. 19). Amsterdam: Elsevier.
Ekman, P. (1978). Facial action coding system: A technique for the measurement
of facial movement. Palo Alto, CA: Consulting Psychologists Press.
Ekman, P., Levenson, R. W., & Friesen, W. V. (1983). Autonomic nervous
system activity distinguishes among emotions. Science, 221, 1208–1210.
Else, P. L., & Hulbert, A. J. (1981). Comparison of the “mammal machine” and
the “reptile machine”: Energy production. American Journal of Physiology,
240, R3–R9.
Elsesser, K., Sartoy, G., & Tackenberg, A. (2004). Attention, heart rate, and
startle response during exposure to trauma relevant pictures: A comparison of
recent trauma victims and patients with posttraumatic stress disorder. Journal
of Abnormal Psychology, 1, 289–301.
Eluvathingal, T. J., Chugani, H. T., Behen, M. E., Juhász, C., Muzik, O.,
Magbool, M., et al. (2006). Abnormal brain connectivity in children after
early severe socioemotional deprivation: A diffusion tensor imaging study.
Pediatrics, 117, 2093–2100.
Engelmann, M., Wotjak, C. T., Neumann, I., Ludwig, M., & Landgraf, R. (1996).
Behavioral consequences of intracerebral vasopressin and oxytocin: Focus on
learning and memory. Neuroscience Biobehavioral Review, 20, 341–358.
Eppinger, H., & Hess, L. (1917). Vagotonia: A clinical study in vegetative
neurology. Nervous and Mental Disease Monograph Series No. 20. New

York: The Nervous and Mental Disease Publishing Company.
Faris, P. L., Kim, S. W., Meller, W. H., et al. (2000). Effect of decreasing
afferent vagal activity with ondansetron on symptoms of bulimia nervosa: A
randomised, double-blind trial. Lancet, 355, 792–797.
Fay, R. R. (1988). Comparative psychoacoustics. Hearing Research, 34, 295–
306.
Feldman, R., & Eidelman, A. I. (2003). Skin-to-skin contact (kangaroo care)
accelerates autonomic and neurobehavioural maturation in preterm infants.
Developmental Medicine & Child Neurology, 45, 274–281.
Ferguson, A. V., & Lowes, V. L. (1994). Functional neural connections of the
area postrema. In I. R. A. Barraco (Ed.), Nucleus of the solitary tract (pp.
147–157). Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press.
Field, T., Woodson, R., Greenberg, R., & Cohen, D. (1982). Discrimination and
imitation of facial expressions by neonates. Science, 218, 179–181.
Finger, T. E., & Dunwiddie, T. V. (1992). Evoked responses from an in vitro
slice preparation of a primary gustatory nucleus: The vagal lobe of goldfish.
Brain Research, 580, 27–34.
Fitts, W. H., & Warren, W. L. (1996). Tennessee self concept scale (2nd ed.).
Los Angeles: Western Psychological Services.
Fletcher, H., & Munson, W. A. (1933). Loudness: Its definition, measurement,
and calculation. Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, 5, 82–108.
Ford, T. W., Bennett, J. A., Kidd, C., & McWilliam, P. N. (1990). Neurons in the
dorsal motor vagal nucleus of the cat with non-myelinated axons projecting to
the heart and lungs. Experimental Physiology, 75, 459–473.
Forsman, K. A., & Malmquist, M. G. (1988). Evidence for echolocation in the
common shrew, Sorex araneus. Journal of Zoology, 216, 655–662.
Fouad, E. M., Tarazi, R. C., Ferrario, C. M., Fighaly, S., & Alicandro, C. (1984).
Assessment of parasympathetic control of heart rate by a noninvasive method.
American Journal of Physiology, 246, H838–H842.
Fox, N. A. (1989). Psychophysiological correlates of emotional reactivity during
the first year of life. Developmental Psychology, 25, 364–372.
Fox, N. A. (1994) Dynamic cerebral processes underlying emotion regulation. In
N. A. Fox (Ed.), Emotion regulation: Behavioral and biological
considerations. Monograph of the Society for Research in Child
Development, 59, 152–166.
Fox, N. A., & Davidson, R. J. (1984). Hemispheric substrates of affect: A
developmental model. In N. A. Fox & R. J. Davidson (Eds.), The

psychobiology of affective development. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Fox, N. A., & Gelles, M. (1984). Face-to-face interaction in term and preterm
infants. Infant Mental Health Journal, 5, 192–205.
Fox, N. A., & Porges, S. W. (1985). The relationship between developmental
outcome and neonatal heart period patterns. Child Development, 56, 28–37.
Fracasso, M. P., Porges, S. W., Lamb, M. E., & Rosenberg, A. A. (1994).
Cardiac activity in infancy: Reliability and stability of individual differences.
Infant Behavior and Development, 17, 277–284.
Frysinger, R. C., & Harper, R. M. (1986). Cardiac and respiratory relationships
with neural discharge in the anterior cingulate cortex during sleep-waking
states. Experimental Neurology, 94, 247–263.
Frysinger, R. C., & Harper, R. M. (1989). Cardiac and respiratory correlations
with 
unit 
discharge 
in 
human 
amygdala 
and 
hippocampus.
Electroencephalography and Clinical Neurophysiology, 72, 463–470.
Frysinger, R. C., Zhang, J. X., & Harper, R. M. (1988). Cardiovascular and
respiratory relationships with neuronal discharge in the central nucleus of the
amygdala during sleep-waking states. Sleep, 11, 317–332.
Futa, K. T., Nash, C. L., Hansen, D. J., & Garbin, C. P. (2003). Adult survivors
of childhood abuse: An analysis of coping mechanisms used for stressful
childhood memories and current stressors. Journal of Family Violence, 18,
227–239.
Fuxe, K., Agnati, L. F., Covenas, R., Narvaez, J. A., Bunnemann, B., & Bjelke,
B. (1994). Volume transmission in transmitter peptide costoring neurons in
the medulla oblongata. In I. R. A. Barraco (Ed.), Nucleus of the solitary tract
(pp. 75–89). Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press.
Galen, G., Dale, L. P., Ruzansky, B., Inserra, L., Jackson, R., Wawrzyniak, K., et
al. (2007). The yoga experience scale: A measure of experience with and
benefits of yoga. Paper presented at the 21st Annual Connecticut
Psychological Association Convention, Windsor, CT.
Garcia, J., Lasiter, P. S., Bermudez-Rattoni, F., & Deems, D. A. (1985) A
general theory of aversion learning. Annals of the New York Academy of
Sciences, 443, 8–21.
Gellhorn, E. (1964). Motion and emotion: The role of proprioception in the
physiology and pathology of the emotions. Psychological Review, 71, 457–
472.
Gellhorn, E. (1967). Principles of autonomic-somatic integrations; Physiological
basis and psychological and clinical implications. Minneapolis: University of

Minnesota Press.
Gentile, C. G., Jarrell, T. W., Teich, A., McCabe, P. M., & Schneiderman, N.
(1986). The role of amygdaloid central nucleus in the retention of differential
Pavlovian conditioning of bradycardia in rabbits. Behavior and Brain
Research, 20, 263–273.
George, D. T., Nutt, D. J., Walker, W. V., Porges, S. W., Adinoff, B., &
Linnoila, M. (1989). Lactate and hyperventilation substantially attenuate vagal
tone in normal volunteers: A possible mechanism of panic provocation?
Archives of General Psychiatry, 46, 153–156.
George, M. S., Sackeim, H. A., Rush, A. J., et al. (2000). Vagus nerve
stimulation: A new tool for brain research therapy. Biological Psychiatry, 47,
287–295.
Gibbins, I. (1994). Comparative anatomy and evolution of the autonomic nervous
system. In S. Nilsson & S. Holmgren (Eds.), Comparative physiology and
evolution of the autonomic nervous system (pp. 1–68). Singapore: Harwood
Academic Publishers.
Gimpl, G., & Fahrenholz, F. (2001). The oxytocin receptor system: Structure,
function and regulation. Physiological Reviews, 81, 629–683.
Goldberger, J. J., Ahmed, M. W., Parker, M. A., & Kadish, A. H. (1994).
Dissociation of heart rate variability from parasympathetic tone. American
Journal of Physiology, 266, H2152–H2157.
Gonzalez Gonzalez, J., & de Vera Porcell, L. (1988). Spectral analysis of heart
rate variability of lizard, Gallotia galloti. American Journal of Physiology,
254, R242–R248.
Gouin, J. P., Carter, C. S., Pournajafi-Nazarloo, H., Glaser, R., Malarkey, W. B.
Loving, et al. (2010). Marital behavior, oxytocin, vasopressin and wound
healing. Psychoneuroendocrinology, 35, 1082–1090.
Graham, E. K., & Clifton, R. K. (1966). Heart-rate change as a component of the
orienting response. Psychological Bulletin, 65, 305–320.
Gray, J. A. (1971). The psychology of fear and stress. New York: McGraw-Hill.
Greenspan, S. I. (1992). Infancy and early childhood: The practice of clinical
assessment and intervention with emotional and developmental challenges.
Madison, CT: International Universities Press.
Greenspan, S. I., Portales, A. L., & Walker, P. S. (1987). Fussy baby
questionnaire. Unpublished assessment tool.
Gribben, B., Pickering, T. G., Sleight, P., & Peto, R. (1971). Effect of age and
high blood pressure on baroreflex sensitivity in man. Circulation Research,

29, 424–431.
Grippo, A. J., Lamb, D. G., Carter, C. S., & Porges, S. W. (2007). Cardiac
regulation in the socially monogamous prairie vole. Physiological Behavior,
90, 386–393.
Grippo, A. J., Trahanas, D. M., Zimmerman II, R. R., Porges, S. W., & Carter, C.
S. (2009). Oxytocin protects against isolation-induced autonomic dysfunction
and behavioral indices of depression. Psychoneuroendocrinology, 34, 1542–
1553.
Grossman, P., Karemaker, J., & Weiling, W. (1991). Prediction of tonic
parasympathetic cardiac control using respiratory sinus arrhythmia: The need
for respiratory control. Psychophysiology, 28, 201–216.
Grossman, P., & Kollai, M. (1993). Respiratory sinus arrhythmia, cardiac vagal
tone, 
and 
respiration: 
Within-and 
between-individual 
relations.
Psychophysiology, 30, 486–495.
Gunderson, J. G. (1996). The borderline patient’s intolerance of aloneness.
Insecure attachments and therapist availability. American Journal of
Psychiatry, 153, 752–758.
Gunderson, J. G., Kolb, J. E., & Austin, V. (1981). The diagnostic interview for
borderlines. American Journal of Psychiatry, 138, 896–903.
Gunnar, M. R., Porter, F. L., Wolf, C. M., et al. (1995). Neonatal stress
reactivity: Predictions to later emotional temperament. Child Development,
66, 1–13.
Hachinski, V. C., Oppenheimer, S. M., Wilson, J. X., Guiraudon, C., & Cechetto,
D. F. (1992). Asymmetry of sympathetic consequences of experimental
stroke. Archives of Neurology, 49, 697–702.
Hager, J. C., & Ekman, P. (1985). The asymmetry of facial actions is inconsistent
with models of hemispheric specialization. Psychophysiology, 22, 307–318.
Harper, R. M., Frysinger, R. C., Trelease, R. B., & Marks, J. D. (1984). State-
dependent alteration of respiratory cycle timing by stimulation of the central
nucleus of the amygdala. Brain Research, 306, 1–8.
Harris, J. C. (2009). Toward a restorative medicine—the science of care. Journal
of the American Medical Association, 301, 1710–1712.
Haselton, J. R., Solomon, I. C., Motekaitis, A. M., & Kaufman, M. P. (1992).
Bronchomotor vagal preganglionic cell bodies in the dog: An anatomic and
functional study. Journal of Applied Physiology, 73, 1122–1129.
Heilman, K. M., Bowers, D., & Valenstein, E. (1985). Emotional disorders
associated with neurological diseases. In K. M. Heilman & E. Valenstein

(Eds.), Clinical neuropsychology (pp. 377–402). New York: Oxford
University Press.
Heilman, K. M., Schwartz, H. D., & Watson, R. T. (1978). Hypoarousal in
patients with neglect syndrome and emotional indifference. Neurology, 28,
229–233.
Heilman, K. M., & Van Den Abell, R. (1980). Right hemisphere dominance for
attention: The mechanism underlying hemispheric asymmetries of inattention
(neglect). Neurology, 30, 327–330.
Heinrichs, M., von Dawans, B., & Domes, G. (2009). Oxytocin, vasopressin and
human social behavior. Frontiers in Neuroendocrinology, 30, 548–557.
Hemilä, S., Nummela, S., Reuter, T., 1995. What middle ear parameters tell
about impedance matching and high frequency hearing. Hearing Research,
85, 31–44.
Hering, H. E. (1910). A functional test of heart vagi in man. Menschen Munchen
Medizinische Wochenschrift, 57, 1931–1933.
Herpertz, S. C., Kunert, H. J., Schwenger, U. B., & Sass, H. (1999). Affective
responsiveness in borderline personality disorder: A psychophysiological
approach. American Journal of Psychiatry, 156, 1550–1556.
Hess, W. R. (1954). Diencephalon, autonomic and extrapyramidal functions.
New York: Grune & Stratton.
Hickey, J. E., Suess, P. W., Newlin, D. B., Spurgeon, L., & Porges, S. W. (1995).
Vagal tone regulation during sustained attention in boys exposed to opiates in
utero. Addictive Behaviors, 2, 43–59.
Hodges, S. (2003). Borderline personality disorder and posttraumatic stress
disorder: Time for integration? Journal of Counseling & Development, 81,
409–417.
Hofer, M. A. (1970) Cardiac respiratory function during sudden prolonged
immobility in wild rodents. Psychosomatic Medicine, 32, 633–647.
Hofer, M. (2006). Psychobiological roots of early attachment. Current Directions
in Psychological Science, 15, 84–88.
Hoffman, P. D., Buteau, E., Hooley, J. M., Fruzzetti, A. E., & Bruce, M. (2003).
Family members’ knowledge about borderline personality disorder:
Correspondence with their levels of depression, burden, distress, and
expressed emotion. Family Process, 42, 469–478.
Hofheimer, J. A., Wood, B. R., Porges, S. W., Pearson, E., & Lawson, E. E.
(1995). Respiratory sinus arrhythmia and social interaction patterns in preterm
newborns. Infant Behavior and Development, 18, 233–245.

Hopkins, D. A. (1987). The dorsal motor nucleus of the vagus nerve and the
nucleus ambiguus: Structure and connections. In R. Hainsworth, P. N.
Williams, & D. A. G. G. Many (Eds.), Cardiogenic reflexes: Report of an
international symposium (pp. 185–203). Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Horvath, K., & Perman, J. A. (2002). Autism and gastrointestinal symptoms.
Current Gastroenterology Reports, 4, 251–258.
Hoshino, Y., Yokolyama, F., Hashimoto, S., et al. (1987). The diurnal variation
and response to dexamethasone suppression test of saliva cortisol level in
autistic children. Japan Journal of Psychiatry and Neurology, 41 227–235.
Hrdy, S. B. (2008). Mothers and others: The evolutionary origins of mutual
understanding. Cambridge, MA: Belknap Press.
Huffman, L. C., Bryan, Y. E., del Carmen, R., Pedersen, F. A., Doussard-
Roosevelt, J. A., & Porges, S. W. (1998). Infant temperament and cardiac
vagal tone: Assessments at twelve weeks of age. Child Development, 69, 624–
635.
Hugdahl, K., Franzon, M., Andersson, B., & Walldebo, G. (1983). Heart-rate
responses (HRR) to lateralized visual stimuli. Pavlovian Journal of Biological
Science, 18, 186–198.
Humphrey, T. (1970). Function of the nervous system during prenatal life. In U.
Stave (Ed.), Physiology ofthe perinatal period (pp. 751–796). New York:
Appleton-Century-Crofts.
Hutt, C., Forrest, S. J., & Richer, J. (1975). Cardiac arrhythmia and behavior in
autistic children. Acta Psychiatric Scandinavia, 51, 361–372.
Insel, T. R., & Young, L. J. (2001). The neurobiology of attachment. Nature
Reviews Neuroscience, 2, 129–136.
Izard, C. E. (1979). The maximally discriminative facial movement coding system
(MAX). Newark: University of Delaware Instructional Resource Center.
Izard, C. E., Porges, S. W., Simons, R. F., Parisi, M., Haynes, O. M., & Cohen.
B. (1991). Infant cardiac activity: Developmental changes and relations with
attachment. Developmental Psychology, 27, 432–439.
Jackson, J. H. (1958). Evolution and dissolution of the nervous system. In J.
Taylor (Ed.), Selected writings of John Hughlings Jackson (pp. 45–118).
London: Stapes Press.
Jacob, J. S., & McDonald, H. S. (1976). Diving bradycardia in four species of
North American aquatic snakes. Comparative Biochemistry and Physiology,
53, 69–72.
Jansen, L. M. C., Gispen-de Wied, C. C., Van der Gaag, R. J., et al. (2000).

Unresponsiveness to psychosocial stress in a subgroup of autistic-like
children, 
multiple 
complex 
developmental 
disorder.
Psychoneuroendocrinology, 25, 753–764.
Jaycox, L. H., Foa, E. B., & Morral, A. R. (1998). Influence of emotional
engagement and habituation on exposure therapy for PTSD. Journal of
Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 66, 185–192.
Jennings, J. R., & McKnight, J. D. (1994). Inferring vagal tone from heart rate
variability. Psychosomatic Medicine, 56, 194–194.
Jensen, J. B., Realmuto, G. M., & Garfinkel, B. D. (1985). The dexamethasone
suppression test in infantile autism. Journal of the American Academy of
Child and Adolesccent Psychiatry, 24, 263–265.
Jerrell, T. W., Gentile, C. G., McCabe, P. M., & Schneiderman, N. (1986).
Sinoaortic denervation does not prevent differential Pavlovian conditioning of
bradycardia in rabbits. Brain Research, 100, 3–10.
Jones, J. F. K., Wang, X. Y., & Jordan, D. (1995) Heart rate responses to
selective stimulation of cardiac vagal C fibers in anesthetized cats, rats and
rabbits. Journal of Physiology, 489, 203–214.
Jordan, D., Khalid, M. E. M., Schneiderman, N., & Spyer, K. M. (1982). The
location and properties of preganglionic vagal cardiomotor neurones in the
rabbit. Pflügers Archive, 395, 244–250.
Jyonouchi, H., Sun, S., & Le, H. (2001). Proinflammatory and regulatory
cytokine production associated with innate and adaptive immune responses in
children with autism spectrum disorders and developmental regression.
Journal of Neuroimmunology, 120, 170–179.
Kagan, J. (1994) On the nature of emotion. In N. A. Fox (Ed.), Emotion
regulation: Behavioral and biological considerations. Monograph of the
Society for Research in Child Development, 59, 7–24.
Kalia, M. (1981). Brain stem localization of vagal preganglionic neurons.
Journal of the Autonomic Nervous System, 3, 451–481.
Kalia, M., & Mesulam, M.-M. (1980). Brain stem projections of sensory and
motor components of the vagus complex in the cat. II. Laryngeal,
tracheobronchial, pulmonary, cardiac, and gastrointestinal branches. Journal
of Comparative Neurology, 193, 467–508.
Kapp, B. S., Frysinger, R. C., Gallagher, M., & Haselton, J. R. (1979) Amygdala
central nucleus lesions: Effect on heart rate conditioning in the rabbit.
Physiology and Behavior, 23, 1109–1117.
Katona, P. G., & Jih, R. (1975). Respiratory sinus arrhythmia: A noninvasive

measure of parasympathetic cardiac control. Journal of Applied Physiology,
39, 801–805.
Keay, K. A., & Bandler, R. (2001). Parallel circuits mediating distinct emotional
coping reactions to different types of stress. Neuroscience and Biobehavioral
Reviews, 25, 669–678.
Kintraia, P. I., Zarnadze, M. G., Kintraia, N. P., & Kashakashvili, I. G. (2005).
Development of daily rhythmicity in heart rate and locomotor activity in the
human fetus. Journal of Circadian Rhythms, 3, 1–12.
Koch, K. L., Summy-Long, J., Bingaman, S., Sperry, N., & Stern, R. M. (1990)
Vasopressin and oxytocin responses to illusory self-motion and nausea in
man. Journal of Clinical Endocrinology and Metabolism, 71, 1269–1275.
Komisaruk, B. R., & Whipple, B. (1995) The suppression of pain by genital
stimulation in females. Annual Review of Sex Research, 6, 151–186.
Kovacs, G. L., & Telegdy, G. (1982) Role of oxytocin in memory and amnesia.
Pharmacology and Therapeutics, 18, 375–395.
Kryter, K. D. (1962). Methods for the calculation and use of the articulation
index. Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, 34, 1689–1697.
Kryter, K. D. (1985). The effects of noise on man. New York: Academic Press.
Kuypers, H. G. J. M. (1958). Corticobulbar connexions to the pons and lower
brainstem in man. An anatomical study. Brain, 81, 364–388.
Lacey, B. C., & Lacey, J. I. (1978). Two way communication between the heart
and the brain. American Psychologist, 33, 99–113.
Lacey, J. I. (1967). Somatic response patterning and stress: Some revisions of
activation theory. In M. H. Appley & R. Trumbull (Eds.), Psychological
stress: Issues in research (pp. 14–37). New York: Appleton-Century-Crofts.
Landgraf, R., Mallkinson, T., Horn, T., Veale, W. L., Lederis, K., & Pittman, Q.
J. (1990). Release of vasopressin and oxytocin by paraventricular stimulation
in rats. American Journal of Physiology, 258, 155–159.
Landgraf, R., & Neumann, I. D. (2004). Vasopressin and oxytocin release within
the brain: A dynamic concept of multiple and variable modes of neuropeptide
communication. Frontiers in Neuroendocrinology, 25, 150–176.
Lane, R., & Schwartz, G. (1987). Induction of lateralized sympathetic input to
the heart by the CNS during emotional arousal: A possible neurophysiologic
trigger of sudden cardiac death. Psychosomatic Medicine, 49, 274–284.
Langley, J. N. (1921). The autonomic nervous system. Cambridge: Heffer &
Sons.
Larson, S. K., & Porges, S. W. (1982). The ontogeny of heart period patterning

in the rat. Developmental Psychobiology, 15, 519–528.
Lawes, I. N. C. (1990). The origin of the vomiting response: A neuroanatomical
hypothesis. Canadian Journal of Physiology and Pharmacology, 68, 254–259.
LaBar, K. S., & LeDoux, J. E. (1996). Partial disruption of fear conditioning in
rats with unilateral amygdala damage: Correspondence with unilateral
temporal lobectomy in humans. Behavioral Neuroscience, 110, 991–997.
Leckman, J. F., Grice, D. E., Boardman, J., Zhang, H., Vitale, A., Bondi, C., et
al. (1997). Symptoms of obsessive-compulsive disorder. American Journal of
Psychiatry, 154, 911–917.
LeDoux, J. E., Iwata, J., Cicchetti, P., & Reis, D. J. (1988). Different projections
of the central amygdaloid nucleus mediate autonomic and behavioral
correlates of conditioned fear. Journal of Neuroscience, 8, 2517–2519.
Lee, S. W., Mancuso, C. A., & Charlson, M. E. (2004). Prospective study of new
participants in a community-based mind-body training program. Journal of
General Internal Medicine, 19, 760–765.
Leite-Panissi, C. R., Coimbra, N. C., & Menescal-de-Oliveira, L. (2003). The
cholinergic stimulation of the central amygdala modifying the tonic
immobility response and antinociception in guinea pigs depends on the
ventrolateral periaqueductal gray. Brain Research Bulletin, 60, 167–178.
Leslie, R. A. (1985). Neuroactive substances in the dorsal vagal complex of the
medulla oblongata: Nucleus of the tractus solitarius, area postrema, and dorsal
motor nucleus of the vagus. Neurochemistry International, 7, 191–211.
Leslie, R. A., Reynolds, D. J. M., & Lawes, I. N. C. (1992). Central connections
of the nuclei of the vagus nerve. In S. Ritter, R. C. Ritter, & C. D. Barnes
(Eds.), Neuroanatomy and physiology of abdominal vagal afferents (pp. 81–
98). Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press.
Lester, B. M., & Zeskind, P. S. (1982). A biobehavioral perspective on crying in
early infancy. In H. E. Fitzgerald, B. M. Lester, & M. W. Youngman (Eds.),
Theory and research in behavioral pediatrics (pp. 133–180). New York:
Plenum.
Levenson, R. W., Ekman, P., & Friesen, W. V. (1990). Voluntary facial action
generates 
emotion-specific 
autonomic 
nervous 
system 
activity.
Psychophysiology, 27, 363–384.
Levy, M. N. (1977). Parasympathetic control of the heart. In W. C. Randall (Ed.),
Neural regulation of the heart (pp. 95–129). New York: Oxford University
Press.
Levy, M. N. (1984). Cardiac sympathetic-parasympathetic interactions.

Federation Proceedings, 43, 2598–2602.
Li, P., Chang, T. M., & Chey, W. Y. (1998). Secretin inhibits gastric acid
secretion via a vagal afferent pathway in rats. American Journal of
Physiology, 275, G22–G28.
Lindsley, D. (1951). Emotion. In S. S. Stevens (Ed.), Handbook of experimental
psychology (pp. 473–516). New York: Wiley.
Linnemeyer, S. A., & Porges, S. W. (1986). Recognition memory and cardiac
vagal tone in 6-month-old infants. Infant Behavior, 9, 43–56.
Lonstein, J. S., & Stern, J. M. (1998). Site and behavioral specificity of
periaqueductal gray lesions on postpartum sexual, maternal, and aggressive
behaviors in rats. Brain Research, 804, 21–35.
Lu, Y., & Owyang, C. (1995). Secretin at physiological doses inhibits gastric
motility via a vagal afferent pathway. American Journal of Physiology, 268,
G1012–G1016.
Luo, Z. X. (2007). Transformation and diversification in early mammal
evolution. Nature, 450(7172), 1011–1019.
Luo, Z. X., Crompton, A. W., & Sun, A. L. (2001). A new mammaliaform from
the early Jurassic and evolution of mammalian characteristics. Science, 292,
1535–1540.
Lyoo, K., Han, M. H., & Cho, D. Y. (1998). A brain MRI study in subjects with
borderline personality disorder. Journal of Affective Disorders, 50, 235–243.
Machado, B. H., & Brody, M. J. (1988). Effect of nucleus ambiguus lesion on the
development of neurogenic hypertension. Hypertension, 11, 135–138.
MacLean, P. D. (1990). The triune brain in evolution. New York: Plenum Press.
Malik, M., & Camm, J. A. (1993). Components of heart rate variability—What
they really mean and what we really measure. American Journal of
Cardiology, 72, 821–822.
Malmo, 
R. 
B. 
(1959). 
Activation: 
A 
neurophysiological 
dimension.
Psychological Review, 66, 367–386.
Marangell, L. B., Rush, A. J., George, M. S., et al. (2002). Vagal nerve
stimulation (VNS) for major depressive episodes: One year outcomes.
Biological Psychiatry, 51, 280– 287.
McAllen, R. M., & Spyer, K. M. (1976). The location of cardiac vagal
preganglionic motoneurones in the medulla of the cat. Journal of Physiology,
258, 187–204.
McAllen, R. M., & Spyer, K. M. (1978). Two types of vagal preganglionic
motoneurones projecting to the heart and lungs. Journal of Physiology, 282,

353–364.
McCabe, P. M., Yongue, B. G., Porges, S. W., & Ackles, P. K. (1984). Changes
in heart period, heart period variability and a spectral analysis estimate of
respiratory sinus arrhythmia during aortic nerve stimulation in rabbits.
Psychophysiology, 21, 149–158.
McConaughy, S. H., & Achenbach, T. M. (1988). Practical guide for the child
behavior checklist and related materials. Burlington, VT: University of
Vermont Department of Psychiatry.
McDonald, H. S. (1974). Bradycardia during death-feigning of Heterodon
plalyrhinos Latreille (Serpentes). Journal of Herpetology, 8, 157–164.
McEwen, B. S., & Wingfield, J. C. (2003). The concept of allostasis in biology
and biomedicine. Hormones and Behavior, 43, 2–15.
McGurk, H., & MacDonald, J. (1976). Hearing lips and seeing voices. Nature,
264, 746–748.
McLeod, D. R., Hoehn-Saric, R., Porges, S. W., Kowalski, P. A., & Clark, C. M.
(2000). Therapeutic effects of imipramine are counteracted by its metabolite,
desipramine, in patients with generalized anxiety disorder. Journal of Clinical
Psychopharmacology, 20, 615–621.
McLeod, D. R., Hoehn-Saric, R., Porges, S. W., & Zimmerli, W. D. (1992).
Effects of alprazolam and imipramine on parasympathetic cardiac control in
patients with generalized anxiety disorder. Psychopharmacology, 107, 535–
540.
McNair, D. M., Lorr, M., & Droppleman, L. F. (1992). POMS manual: Profile of
mood states. San Diego: Edits/Education and Instructional Testing Service.
Mera, E., Wityk, R., & Porges, S. W. (1995, May). Abnormal heart variability in
brainstem injury. Paper presented at the American Academy of Neurology,
Seattle, WA.
Mesulam, M. M. (1981). A cortical network for directed attention and unilateral
neglect. Annals of Neurology, 10, 309–325.
Meyer-Lindenberg, A. (2008). Impact of prosocial neuropeptides on human brain
function. Progress in Brain Research, 170, 463–470.
Miao, F. J.-P., Janig, W., Green, P. G., et al. (1997). Inhibition of bradykinin-
induced plasma extravasation produced by noxious cutaneous and visceral
stimuli and it modulation by vagal activity. Journal of Neurophysiology, 78,
1285–1292.
Michelini, L. C. (1994) Vasopressin in the nucleus tractus solitarius: A
modulator of baroreceptor reflex control of heart rate. Brazilian Journal of

Medical and Biological Research, 27, 1017–1032.
Michelini, L. C., Marcelo, M. C., Amico, J., & Morris, M. (2003). Oxytocin
regulation of cardiovascular function: studies in oxytocin-deficient mice.
American Journal of Physiology: Heart and Circulatory Physiology, 284,
H2269–2276.
Mitchell, G. A. G., & Warwick, R. (1955). The dorsal vagal nucleus. Acta
Anatomica, 25, 371–395.
Molfese, D. L., & Segalowitz, S. J. (Eds.). (1988). Brain lateralization in
children: Developmental implications. New York: Guilford Press.
Moore, G. A., & Calkins, S. D. (2004). Infants’ vagal regulation in the still-face
paradigm is related to dyadic coordination of mother–infant interaction.
Developmental Psychology, 40, 1068–1080.
Morris, J. L., & Nilsson, S. (1994). The circulatory system. In S. Nilsson & S.
Holmgren (Eds.), Comparative physiology and evolution of the autonomic
nervous system (pp. 193–240). Chur, Switzerland: Harwood Academic
Publishers.
Morris, J. S., Ohman, A., & Dolan, R. J. (1999). A subcortical pathway to the
right amygdala mediating “unseen” fear. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences USA, 96, 1680–1685.
Movius, H. L., & Allen, J. J. B. (2005). Cardiac vagal tone, defensiveness, and
motivational style. Biological Psychology, 68, 147–162.
Mulder, L. J. M., & Mulder, G. (1987). Cardiovascular reactivity and mental
workload. In O. Rompelman & R. J. Kitney (Eds.), The beat-by-beat
investigation of cardiovascular function (pp. 216–253). Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Munhall, K. G., Jones, J. A., Callan, D. E., Kuratate, T., & Vatikiotis-Bateson, E.
(2004). Visual prosody and speech intelligibility: Head movment improves
auditory speech perception. Psychological Science, 15, 133–137.
Murphy, J. V., Wheless, J. W., & Schmoll, C. M. (2000). Left vagal nerve
stimulation in six patients with hypothalamic hamartomas. Pediatric
Neurology, 23, 167–168.
Nara, T., Goto, N., & Hamano, S. (1991). Development of the human dorsal
nucleus of vagus nerve: A morphometric study. Journal of the Autonomic
Nervous System, 33, 267–276.
Nelson, N. M. (1976). Respiration and circulation before birth. In C. A. Smith &
N. M. Nelson (Eds.), The physiology of the newborn infant (4th ed, pp. 15–
116). Philadelphia: Thomas.

Neuheuber, W. L., & Sandoz, P. A. (1986). Vagal primary afferent terminals in
the dorsal motor nucleus of the rat: Are they making monosynaptic contacts
on preganglionic efferent neurons? Neuroscience Letters, 69, 126–130.
Neumann, I. D. (2008). Brain oxytocin: A key regulator of emotional and social
behaviours in both females and males. Journal of Neuroendocrinology, 20,
858–865.
New, A. S., & Siever, L. J. (2002). Neurobiology and genetics and borderline
personality disorder. Psychiatric Annals, 32, 329–336.
Newman, J. D. (1988). The physiological control of mammalian vocalizations.
New York: Plenum Press.
Ni, H., Zhang, J. X., & Harper, R. M. (1990). Respiratory-related discharge of
periaqueductal gray neurons during sleep-waking states. Brain Research, 511,
319–325.
Nissen, R., Cunningham, J. T., & Renaud, L. P. (1993). Lateral hypothalamic
lesions alter baroreceptor-evoked inhibition of rat supraoptic vasopressin
neurones. Journal of Physiology (London), 470, 751–766.
Nolte, J. (1993). The human brain: An introduction to its functional anatomy (3rd
ed.). St. Louis, MO: Mosby-Year Book.
Numan, M. (2007). Motivational systems and the neural circuitry of maternal
behavior in the rat. Developmental Psychobiology, 49, 12–21.
Obrist, P. A. (1976). The cardiovascular behavioral interaction—As it appears
today. Psychophysiology, 13, 95–107.
Obrist, P. A. (1981). Cardiovascular psychophysiology. New York: Plenum
Press.
Ogden, P., Minton, K., & Pain, C. (2006). Trauma and the body: A sensorimotor
approach to psychotherapy. New York: Norton.
Owley, T., McMahon, W., Cook, E. H., et al. (2001). Multisite, double-blind,
placebo-controlled trial of porcine secretin in autism. Journal of the American
Academy of Child Psychiatry, 40, 1293–1299.
Pagani, F. D., Norman, W. P., & Gillis, R. A. (1988). Medullary parasympathetic
projections innervate specific sites in the feline stomach. Gastroenterology, 9,
277–288.
Palkovitz, R. J., Wiesenfeld, A. R. (1980). Differential autonomic responses of
autistic and normal children. Journal of Autism and Developmental Disorders,
10, 347–360.
Pang, X.D., Guinan, J.J., 1997. Effects of stapedius-muscle contractions on the
masking of auditory-nerve responses. Journal of the Acoustic Society of

America, 102, 3576–3586.
Panksepp J. (1998). Affective neuroscience. New York: Oxford University Press.
Panksepp, J. (2009). Brain emotional systems and qualities of mental life: From
animal models of affect to implications for psychotherapeutics. In D. Fosha,
D. J. Siegel, & M. F. Solomon (Eds.), The healing power of emotion: Affective
neuroscience, development, clinical pratice (pp. 1–26). New York: Norton.
Paris, J., Zweig-Frank, H., Ng, Y. K., Schwartz, G., Steiger, H., & Nair, N. P. V.
(2004). Neurobiological correlates of diagnosis and underlying traits in
patients with borderline personality disorder compared with normal controls.
Psychiatry Research, 121, 239–252.
Parmeggiani, P. L. (1985) Homeostatic regulation during sleep: Facts and
hypotheses. In D. H. McGinty et al. (Eds.), Brain mechanisms of sleep (pp.
385–397). New York: Raven Press.
Pereyra, P. M., Zhang, W., Schmidt, M., & Becker, L. E. (1992). Development of
myelinated and unmyelinated fibers of human vagus nerve during the first
year of life. Journal of Neurological Sciences, 110, 107–113.
Pessoa, L., McKenna, M., Gutierrez, E., & Ungerleider, L. G. (2002).
Neuroprocessing of emotional faces requires attention. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences USA, 99, 11458–11463.
Pianta, R., Egeland, B., & Adam, E. (1996). Adult attachment classification and
self-reported psychiatric symptomatology as assessed by the Minnesota
Multiphasic Personality Inventory-2. Journal of Consulting and Clinical
Psychology, 64, 273–281.
Pigott, L. R., Ax, A. F., Bamford, J. L., et al. (1973). Respiration sinus
arrhythmia in psychotic children. Psychophysiology, 10, 401–414.
Pimental, P. A., & Kingsbury, N. A. (1989). Neuropsychological aspects of right
brain injury. Austin: Pro-Ed.
Pilz, P. K., Ostwald, J., Kreiter, A., & Schnitzler, H. U. (1997). Effect of the
middle ear reflex on sound transmission to the inner ear of rat. Hearing
Research, 105, 171–182.
Porges, S. W. (1972). Heart rate variability and deceleration as indexes of
reaction time. Journal of Experimental Psychology, 92, 103–110.
Porges, S. W. (1973). Heart rate variability: An autonomic correlate of reaction
time performance. Bulletin of the Psychonomic Society, 1, 270–272.
Porges, S. W. (1983). Heart rate patterns in neonates: A potential diagnostic
window to the brain. In T. M. Field & A. M. Sostek (Eds.), Infants born at
risk: Physiological and perceptual responses (pp. 3–22). New York: Grune &

Stratton.
Porges, S. W. (1985). U.S. Patent No. 4,520,944: Method and apparatus for
evaluating rhythmic oscillations in aperiodic physiological response systems.
Porges, S. W. (1986). Respiratory sinus arrhythmia: Physiological basis,
quantitative methods, and clinical implications. In P. Grossman, K. Janssen, &
D. Vaitl (Eds.), Cardiorespiratory and cardiosomatic psychophysiology (pp.
101–115). New York: Plenum Press.
Porges, S. W. (1988). Neonatal vagal tone: Diagnostic and prognostic
implications. In P. N. Vietze & H. G. Vaughn (Eds.), Early identification of
infants with developmental disabilities (pp. 147–159). Philadelphia: Grune &
Stratton.
Porges, S. W. (1991). Vagal tone: An autonomic mediator of affect. In J. A.
Garber & K. A. Dodge (Eds.), The development of affect regulation and
dysregulation (pp. 111–128). New York: Cambridge University Press.
Porges, S. W. (1992). Autonomic regulation and attention. In B. A. Campbell, H.
Hayne, & R. Richardson (Eds.), Attention and information processing in
infants and adults (pp. 201–223). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Porges, S. W. (1995). Cardiac vagal tone: A physiological index of stress.
Neuroscience and Biobehavioral Reviews, 19, 225–233.
Porges, S. W. (2001a). The polyvagal theory: Phylogenetic substrates of a social
nervous system. International Journal of Psychophysiology, 42, 123–146.
Porges, S. W. (2001b). Is there a major stress system at the periphery other than
the adrenals? In D. M. Broom (Ed.), Dahlem workshop on coping with
challenge: Welfare in animals including humans (pp. 135–149). Berlin:
Dahlem University Press.
Porges, S. W. (2007a). A phylogenetic journey through the vague and ambiguous
Xth cranial nerve: A commentary on contemporary heart rate variability
research. Biological Psychology, 74, 301–307.
Porges, S. W. (2007b). The polyvagal perspective. Biological Psychology, 74,
116–143.
Porges, S. W., Arnold, W. R., & Forbes, E. J. (1973). Heart rate variability: An
index of attentional responsivity in human newborns. Developmental
Psychology, 8, 85–92.
Porges, S. W., & Bohrer, R. E. (1990). Analyses of periodic processes in
psychophysiological research. In J. T. Cacioppo & L. G. Tassinary (Eds.),
Principles of psychophysiology: Physical, social, and inferential elements (pp.
708–753). New York: Cambridge University Press.

Porges, S. W., & Doussard-Roosevelt, J. A. (1997). The psychophysiology of
temperament. In J. D. Noshpitz (Ed.), Handbook of child and adolescent
psychiatry (pp. 250–268). New York: Wiley.
Porges, S. W., Doussard-Roosevelt, J. A., Portales, A. L., & Suess, P. E. (1994).
Cardiac vagal tone: Stability and relation to difficultness in infants and three-
year-old children. Developmental Psychobiology, 17, 289–300.
Porges, S. W., Doussard-Roosevelt, J. A., Stifter, C. A., McClenny, B. D., &
Riniolo, T. C. (1999). Sleep state and vagal regulation of heart period patterns
in the human newborn: An extension of the polyvagal theory.
Psychophysiology, 36, 14–21.
Porges, S. W., & Greenspan, S. I. (1991). Regulatory disordered infants: A
common theme. In National Institutes of Drug Abuse workshop report on
Methodological Issues in Controlled Studies on Effects of Prenatal Exposure
to Drugs of Abuse, National Institution Drug Abuse Research Monograph,
114, 173–181.
Porges, S. W., & Lipsitt, L. P. (1993). Neonatal responsivity to gustatory
stimulation: 
The 
gustatory-vagal 
hypothesis. 
Infant 
Behavior 
and
Development, 16, 487–494.
Porges, S. W., & Maiti, A. K. (1992). The smart and vegetative vagi:
Implications for specialization and laterality of function [Abstract].
Psychophysiology, 2, S7.
Porges, S. W., McCabe, P. M., & Yongue, B. G. (1982). Respiratory-heart rate
interactions: Psychophysiological implications for pathophysiology and
behavior. In J. Cacioppo & R. Petty (Eds.), Perspectives in cardiovascular
psychophysiology (pp. 223–264). New York: Guilford Press.
Porges, S. W., & Raskin, D. C. (1969). Respiratory and heart rate components of
attention. Journal of Experimental Psychology, 81, 497–503.
Porges, S. W., Riniolo, T. C., McBride, T., et al. (2003). Heart rate and
respiration in reptiles: Contrasts between a sit-and-wait predator and an
intensive forager. Brain Cognition, 52, 88–96.
Porges, S. W., Stamps, L. E., & Walter, G. F. (1974). Heart rate variability and
newborn heart rate responses to illumination changes. Developmental
Psychology, 10, 507–513.
Portales, A. L., Porges, S. W., Doussard-Roosevelt, J. A., Abedin, M., Lopez, R.,
et al. (1997). Vagal regulation during bottle feeding in low-birthweight
neonates: Support for the gustatory-vagal hypothesis. Developmental
Psychobiology, 30, 225–233.

Porter, F. L., & Porges, S. W. (1988). Neonatal cardiac responses to lumbar
punctures [Abstract]. Infant Behavior, 11, 261.
Porter, F. L., Porges, S. W., & Marshall, R. E. (1988). Newborn pain cries and
vagal tone: Parallel changes in response to circumcision. Child Development,
59, 495–505.
Potter, E. K., & McCloskey, D. I. (1986). Effects of hypoxia on cardiac vagal
efferent activity and on the action of the vagus nerve at the heart in the dog.
Journal of the Autonomic Nervous System, 17, 325–329.
Prims, A., Kaloupek, D. G., & Keane, T. M. (1995). Psychophysiological
evidence for autonomic arousal and startle in traumatized adult populations. In
M. J. Friedman, D. S. Charney, & A.Y. Deutsh (Eds.), Neurobiological and
clinical consequences of stress: From normal adaptation to PTSD (pp. 291–
313). Philadelphia: Lippincott-Raven.
Pynoos, R. S., Frederick, C. J., Nader, K., Arroyo, W., Steinberg, A., Eth, S., et
al. (1987). Life threat and posttraumatic stress in schoool age children.
Archives of General Psychiatry, 44, 1057–1063.
Randall, W. C., & Rohse, W. G. (1956). The augmenter action of the sympathetic
cardiac nerves. Circulation Research, 4, 470–477.
Raymond, N. C., Eckert, E. D., Hamalainen, M., et al. (1999). A preliminary
report on pain thresholds in bulimia nervosa during a bulimic episode.
Comprehensive Psychiatry, 40, 229–233.
Raymond, N. C., Faris, P. L., Thuras, P. D., et al. (1999). Elevated pain threshold
in anorexia nervosa subjects. Biological Psychiatry, 45, 1389–1392.
Reed, S. F., Ohel, G., David, R., & Porges, S. W. (1999). A neural explanation of
fetal heart rate patterns: A test of the polyvagal theory. Developmental
Psychobiology, 35, 108–118.
Regal, P. J. (1978). Behavioral differences between reptiles and mammal: An
analysis of activity and mental capabilities. In N. Greenberg & P. D. MacLean
(Eds.), Behavior and neurology of lizards (pp. 183–202). Rockville, MD:
National Institute of Mental Health.
Ren, K., Randich, A., & Gebhart, G. F. (1990). Electrical stimulation of cervical
vagal afferents. I. Central relays for modulation of spinal nociceptive
transmission. Journal of Neurophysiology, 64, 1098–1114.
Richards, J. E. (1985). Respiratory sinus arrhythmia predicts heart rate and visual
responses 
during 
visual 
attention 
in 
14-and 
20-week-old 
infants.
Psychophysiology, 22, 101–109.
Richards, J. E. (1987). Infant visual sustained attention and respiratory sinus

arrhythmia. Child Development, 58, 488–496.
Richards, J. E., & Casey, B. L. (1991). Heart rate variability during attention
phases in young infants. Psychophysiology, 28, 43–53.
Richter, C. P. (1957). On the phenomenon of sudden death in animals and man.
Psychosomatic Medicine, 19, 191–198.
Richter, D. W., & Spyer, K. M. (1990). Cardiorespiratory control. In A. D.
Loewy & K. M. Spyer (Eds.), Central regulation of autonomic function (pp.
189–207). New York: Oxford University Press.
Riniolo, T., Doussard-Roosevelt, J., & Porges, S. W. (1994). The relation
between respiratory sinus arrhythmia and heart period during waking and
sleep [Abstract]. Psychophysiology, 31(Suppl.), S81.
Riniolo, T., & Porges, S. W. (1997). Inferential and descriptive influences on
measures of respiratory sinus arrhythmia: Sampling rate, R-wave trigger
accuracy, and variance estimates. Psychophysiology, 34, 613–621.
Rinn, W. E. (1984). The neurophysiology of facial expression: A review of the
neurological and psychological mechanisms for producing facial expressions.
Psychological Bulletin, 95, 52–77.
Rinne, T., de Kloet, E. R., Wouters, L., Goekoop, J. G., ReRijk, R. H., & van den
Brink, W. (2002). Hyperresponsiveness of hypothalamic pituitary adrenal axis
to combined dexamethasone/corticotrophin-releasing hormone challenge in
female borderline personality disorder subjects with a history of sustained
childhood abuse. Biological Psychiatry, 52, 1102–1112.
Rizvi, T. A., Ennis, M., Behbehani, M. M., & Shipley, M. T. (1991).
Connections between the central nucleus of the amygdala and the midbrain
periaqueductal gray: Topography and reciprocity. Journal of Comparative
Neurology, 303, 121–131.
Rodier, P. M., Ingram, J. L., Tisdale, B., et al. (1996). Embryological origin for
autism: Developmental anomalies of the cranial nerve motor nuclei. Journal
of Comparative Neurology, 370, 247–261.
Rogers, R. C., & Hermann, G. E. (1992). Central regulation of brainstem gastric
vago-vagal control circuits. In S. Ritter, R. C. Ritter, & C. D. Barnes (Eds.),
Neuroanatomy and physiology of abdominal vagal afferents (pp. 99–134).
Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press.
Rosen, J. B., Hamerman, E., Sitcoske, E., Glowa, J. R., & Schulkin, J. (1996).
Hyperexcitability: Exaggerated fear-potentiated startle produced by partial
amygdala kindling. Behavioral Neuroscience, 110, 43–50.
Rosenzweig, M. R., & Amon, A. H. (1955). Binaural interaction in the medulla

of the cat. Cellular and Molecular Life Science, 11, 498–500.
Ross, E. D. (1981). The aprosodias: Functional-anatomic organization of the
affect components of language in the right hemisphere. Archives of
Neurology, 38, 561–569.
Ross, E. D., Homan, R. W., & Buck, R. (1994). Differential hemispheric
lateralization 
of 
primary 
and 
social 
emotions. 
Neuropsychiatry,
Neuropsychology, and Behavioral Neurology, 7, 1–19.
Ross, E. D., & Mesulam, M. (1979). Dominant language functions of the right
hemisphere? Prosody and emotional gesturing. Archives of Neurology, 36,
144–148.
Rothschild, B. (2000). The body remembers: The psychophysiology of trauma
and trauma treatment. New York: Norton.
Rothschild, L., Haslam, N., Cleland, C., & Zimmerman, M. (2003). A taxometric
study of borderline personality disorder. Journal of Abnormal Psychology,
112, 657–666.
Rottenberg, J., Solomon, K., Gross, J. J., & Gotlib, I. H. (2005). Vagal
withdrawal to a sad film predicts subsequent recovery from depression.
Psychophysiology, 42, 277–281.
Rowe, T. (1996). Coevolution of the mammalian middle ear and neocortex.
Science, 273, 651–654.
Rowell, L. B. (1993). Central circulatory adjustments to dynamic exercise. In L.
B. Rowell (Ed.), Human cardiovascular control (pp. 162–203). New York:
Oxford University Press.
Sachis, P. N., Armstrong, D. L., Becker, L. E., & Bryan. A. C. (1982).
Myelination of the human vagus nerve from 24 weeks postconceptional age to
adolescence. Journal of Neuropathology and Experimental Neurology, 41,
466–472.
Sack, M., Hopper, J. W., & Lamprecht, F. (2004). Low respiratory sinus
arrhythmia and prolonged psychophysiological arousal in posttraumatic stress
disorder: Heart rate dynamics and individual differences in arousal regulation.
Biological Psychiatry, 55, 284–290.
Sacks, O. (2007). Musicophilia: Tales of music and the brain. New York:
Random House.
Sahar, T., Shalev, A. Y., & Porges, S. W. (2001). Vagal modulation of responses
to mental challenge in posttraumatic stress disorder. Biological Psychiatry, 49,
637 643.
Santer, R. M. (1994). Chromaffin systems. In S. Nilsson & S. Holmgren (Eds.),

Comparative physiology and evolution of the autonomic nervous System (pp.
97–117). Switzerland: Harwood Academic Publishers.
Sargunaraj, D., Lehrer, P. M., Carr, R. E., Hochron, S. M., & Porges, S. W.
(1994). 
The 
effects 
of 
paced 
resistance 
breathing 
[Abstract].
Psychophysiology, 31(Suppl.), S85.
Sargunaraj, D., Lehrer, P. M., Hochron, S. M., Rausch, L., Edelberg, R., &
Porges, S. W. (1996). Cardiac rhythm effects of .125 Hz paced breathing
through a resistive load: Implications for paced breathing therapy and the
polyvagal theory. Biofeedback and Self-Regulation, 21, 131–147.
Saul, J. P., Berger, R. D., Chen, H., & Cohen, R. J. (1989). Transfer function
analysis of autonomic regulation. II. Respiratory sinus arrhythmia. American
Journal of Physiology, 256, HI53–HI61.
Sawchenko, P. E., & Swanson, L. W. (1982). The organization of noradrenergic
pathways from the brainstem to the paraventricular and supraoptic nuclei in
the rat. Brain Research Reviews, 4, 275–325.
Schachter, J. (1957). Pain, fear, and anger in hypertensives and normotensives: A
psychophysiological study. Psychosomatic Medicine, 19, 17–29.
Schachter, S., & Singer, J. E. (1962). Cognitive, social, and physiological
determinants of emotional state. Psychological Review, 69, 379–399.
Scherlel, E. R., Brourman, J. D., Kling, S. M., Schmall, L. M., Tobias, T. A., &
Myerowitz, P. D. (1994). Vagal innervation influences the whole body oxygen
consumption-delivery relationship in the dog. Shock, 2, 127–132.
Schmahl, C. G., Elzinga, B. M., Ebner, U. W., Simms, T., Sanislow, C.,
Vermetten, E., et al. (2004). Psychophysiological reactivity to traumatic and
abandonment scripts in borderline personality and posttraumatic stress
disorders: A preliminary report. Psychiatry Research, 126, 33–42.
Schmahl, C. G., Vermetten, E., Elzinga, B. M., & Bremner, J. D. (2003).
Magnetic resonance imaging of hippocampal and amygdala volume in women
with childhood abuse and borderline personality disorder. Psychiatry
Research: Neuroimaging, 122, 193–198.
Schneiderman, N. (1974). The relationship between learned and unlearned
cardiovascular responses. In P. A. Obrist, A. H. Black, J. Brener, & L. V.
DiCara (Eds.), Cardiovascular psychophysiology: Current issues in response
mechanisms, biofeedback, and methodology (pp. 190–210). Chicago: Aldine.
Schneirla, T. C. (1959). An evolutionary and developmental theory of biphasic
processes underlying approach and withdrawal. In M. R. Jones (Ed.),
Nebraska symposium on motivation (vol. 7, pp. 1–42). Lincoln: University of

Nebraska Press.
Schore A. (1994). Affect regulation and the origin of the self: The neurobiology
of emotional development. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Schore A. (2003). Affect dysregulation and disorders of the self. New York:
Norton.
Schuck, A. M., & Widom, C. S. (2001). Childhood victimization and alcohol
symptoms in females: Causal inferences and hypothesized mediators? Child
Abuse and Neglect, 25, 1069–1092.
Schumm, J. A., Hobfoll, S. E., & Keough, N. J. (2004). Revictimization and
interpersonal resource loss predicts PTSD among women in substance-use
treatment. Journal of Traumatic Stress, 17, 173–181.
Schwaber, J. S. (1986). Neuroanatomical substrates of cardiovascular and
emotional-autonomic regulation. In A. Magro, W. Osswald, D. Reis, & P.
Vanhoutte (Eds.), Central and peripheral mechanisms of cardiovascular
regulation (pp. 353–384). New York: Plenum Press.
Schwaber, J. S., Kapp, B. S., & Higgins, G. (1980). The origin and the extent of
direct amygdala projections to the region of the dorsal motor nucleus of the
vagus and the nucleus of the solitary tract. Neurosci Letters, 20, 15–20.
Selye, H. (1936). A syndrome produced by diverse nocuous agents. Nature, 138,
32.
Selye, H. (1956). The stress of life. New York: McGraw-Hill.
Shaver, P. R., & Mikulincer, M. (2002). Attachment-related psychodynamics.
Attachment & Human Development, 4, 133–161.
Siegel, D. (2007). The mindful brain. New York: Norton.
Silberman, E. K., & Weingartner, H. (1986). Hemispheric lateralization of
functions related to emotion. Brain and Cognition, 5, 322–353.
Skodol, A. E., Gunderson, J. G., Pfohl, B., Widiger, T. A., Livesley, W. J., &
Siever, L. J. (2002). The borderline diagnosis I: Psychopathology,
cornorbidity, and personality structure. Biological Psychiatry, 51, 936–950.
Skodol, A. E., Siever, L. J., Livesley, W. J., Gunderson, J. G., Pfohl, B., &
Widiger, T. A. (2002). The borderline diagnosis II: Biology, genetics, and
clinical course. Biological Psychiatry, 51, 951–963.
Smith, D. E. P., Miller, S. D., Stewart, M., et al. (1988). Conductive hearing loss
in autistic, learning-disabled, and normal children. Journal of Autism and
Developmental Disorders, 18, 53–65.
Smotherman, M., Schwartz, C., & Metzner, W. (2010). Vocal–respiratory
interactions in the parabrachial nucleus. In S. M. Brudzynski (Ed.), Handbook

of mammalian vocalization: An integrative neuroscience approach (vol. 19,
pp. 383–392). Amsterdam: Elsevier.
Smyke, A. T., Dumitrescu, A., & Zeanah, C. H. (2002). Attachment disturbances
in young children. I: The continuum of caretaking casualty. Journal of the
American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, 41, 972–982.
Sokolov, E. N. (1963). Perception and the conditioned reflex. Oxford: Pergamon
Press.
Sostek, A. M., Glass, P., Molina, B. C., & Porges, S. W. (1984). Neonatal vagal
tone 
and 
subsequent 
sleep 
apnea 
in 
preterm 
infants 
[Abstract].
Psychophysiology, 21, 599.
Sovik, R. (2000). The science of breathing—The yogic view. Behavior
Modification, 27, 710–730.
Spitzer, R. L., Williams, J. B. W., Gibbon, M., & First, M. B. (1990). Structured
clinical interview for DSM-III-R. Washington, DC: American Psychiatric
Press.
Spitzer, R. L., Williams, J. B. W., Gibbon, M., & First, M. B. (1992). The
structured clinical interview for DSM-III-R (SCID) I: History, rationale, and
description. Archives of General Psychiatry, 49, 624–629.
Spyer, K. M., & Jordan, D. (1987). Electrophysiology of the nucleus ambiguus.
In R. Hainsworth, P. N. Williams, & D. A. G. G. Many (Eds.), Cardiogenic
reflexes: Report of an international symposium (pp. 237–249). Oxford:
Oxford University Press.
Stamps, L. E., & Porges, S. W. (1975). Heart rate conditioning in newborn
infants: Relationships among conditionality, heart rate variability, and sex.
Developmental Psychology, 11, 424–431.
Stansbury, K., & Gunnar, M. R. (1994). Adrenocortical activity and emotion
regulation. In N. A. Fox (Ed.), Emotion regulation: Behavioral and biological
considerations, Monograph of the Society for Research in Child
Development, 59, 108–134.
Stern, J. M. (1997). Offspring-induced nurturance: Animal-human parallels.
Developmental Psychobiology, 31, 19–37.
Stifter, C., & Corey, J. (2001). Vagal regulation and observed social behavior in
infancy. Social Development, 10, 189–201.
Stifter, C. A., & Fox, N. A. (1990). Infant reactivity: Physiologica1 correlates of
newborn and 5-month temperament. Developmental Psychology, 16, 582–588.
Stifter, C. A., Fox, N. A., & Porges, S. W. (1989). Facial expressivity and vagal
tone in five-and ten-month-old infants. Infant Behavior and Development, 12,

127–137.
Streeck-Fischer, A. & van der Kolk, B. (2000). Down will come baby, cradle and
all: Diagnostic and therapeutic implications of chronic trauma on child
development. Australian and New Zealand Journal of Psychiatry, 34, 903–
918.
Suess, P. E., Alpan, G., Dulkerian, S. J., Doussard-Roosevelt, J., Porges, S. W.,
& Gewolb, I. H. (2000). Respiratory sinus arrhythmia during feeding: A
measure of vagal regulation of metabolism, ingestion, and digestion in
preterm infants. Developmental Medicine and Child Neurology, 42, 353.
Sumby, W. H., & Pollack, I. (1954). Visual contribution to speech intelligibility
in noise. Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, 26, 212–215.
Surguladze, S. A., Calvert, G. A., Brammer, M. J., Campbell, R., Bullmore, E.
T., Giampietro, V., et al. (2001). Audio-visual speech perception in
schizophrenia: An fMRI study. Psychiatry Research, 106, 1–14.
Swanson, L. W., & Sawchenko, P. E. (1977). Hypothalamic integration:
Organization of the paraventricular and supraoptic nuclei. Annual Review of
Neuroscience, 6, 269–324.
Swartz, M., Blazer, D., George, L., & Winfield, I. (1990). Estimating the
prevalence of borderline personality disorder in the community. Journal of
Personality Disorders, 4, 257–272.
Takahashi, L. (1992). Ontogeny of behavioral inhibition induced by unfamiliar
adult male conspecifics in preweanling rats. Physiology & Behavior, 52, 493–
498.
Tanaka, T., & Asahara, T. (1981). Synaptic actions of vagal afferents on facial
motoneurons in the cat. Brain Research, 212, 188–193.
Taylor, E. W. (1992). Nervous control of the heart and cardiorespiratory
interactions. In W. S. Hoar, D. J. Randall, & A. P. Farrell (Eds.), Fish
physiology: The cardiovascular system (vol. 12, pp. 343–387). New York:
Academic Press.
Taylor, E. W., Jordan, D., & Coote, J. H. (1999). Central control of the
cardiovascular and respiratory systems and their interactions in vertebrates.
Physiological Reviews, 79, 855–916.
Tebartz van Elst, L., Hesslinger, B., Thiel, T., Geiger, E., Haegele, K., Lemieux,
L., et al. (2003). Frontolimbic brain abnormalities in patients with borderline
personality disorder: A volumetric magnetic resonance imaging study.
Biological Psychiatry, 54, 163–171.
Teicher, M. H., Andersen, S. L., Polcari, A., Anderson, C. M., Navalta, C. P. &

Kim, D. M. (2003). The neurobiological consequences of childhood
maltreatment. Neuroscience and Biobehavioral Reviews, 27, 33–44.
Teplin, L. A., Abram, K. M., McClelland, G. M., Dulcan, M. K., & Mericle, A.
A.(2002). Psychiatric disorders in youth in juvenile detention. Archives of
General Psychiatry, 59, 1133–1143.
Thayer, J. F., & Lane, R. D. (2000). A model of neurovisceral integration in
emotion regulation and dysregulation. Journal of Affective Disorders, 61,
201–216.
Thomas, W. G., McMurry, G., Pillsbury, H. C. (1985). Acoustic reflex
abnormalities in behaviorally disturbed and language delayed children.
Laryngoscope, 95, 811–817.
Thompson, M. E., Felsten, G., Yavorsky, J., & Natelson, B. H. (1987).
Differential effect of stimulation of nucleus ambiguus on atrial and ventricular
rates. American Journal of Physiology, 253, R150–R157.
Thorndike, E. L. (1911). Animal intelligence. New York: Macmillan.
Tomkins, S. S. (1962). Affect, imagery, consciousness. Vol. I: The positive
affects. New York: Springer.
Tomkins, S. S. (1963). Affect, imagery, consciousness. Vol. II: The negative
affects. New York: Springer.
Torgersen, S., Kringlen, E., & Cramer, V. (2001). The prevalence of personality
disorders in a community sample. Archives of General Psychiatry, 58, 590–
596.
Trevarthen, C. (1999–2000). Musicality and the intrinsic motive pulse. In
Rhythms, musical narrative, and the origins of human communication (pp.
155–215). Musicae Scientiae [special issue]. Liège: European Society for the
Cognitive Sciences of Music.
Truex, R. C., & Carpenter, M. B. (1969). Human neuroanatomy, 6th ed.
Baltimore, MD: Williams & Wilkins.
Tucker, D. M. (1981). Lateral brain function, emotion, and conceptualization.
Psychological Bulletin, 89, 19–46.
Umhau, J. C., George, D. T., Reed, S., Petrulis, S. G., Rawlings, R., & Porges, S.
W. (2002). Atypical autonomic regulation in perpetrators of violent domestic
abuse. Psychophysiology, 39, 117–123.
Uvnas-Moberg, K. (1987). Gastrointestinal hormones and pathophysiology of
functional 
gastrointestinal 
disorders. 
Scandinavian 
Journal 
of
Gastroenterology, 22(Suppl. 128), 138–146.
Uvnas-Moberg K. (1989). Gastrointestinal hormones in mother and infant. Acta

Paediatrica Scandinavica Suppl., 351, 88–93.
Uvnas-Moberg, K. (1994). Role of efferent and afferent vagal nerve activity
during reproduction: Integrating function of oxytocin on metabolism and
behaviour. Psychoneuroendocrinology, 19, 687–695.
Uvnas-Moberg, K. (1997). Physiological and endocrine effects of social contact.
In C. S. Carter, I. I. Lederhendler, & B. Kirkpatrick (Eds.), The integrative
neurobiology of affiliation (pp. 46–163). New York: Annals of the New York
Academy of Sciences.
Uvnas-Moberg, K. (1998). Oxytocin may mediate the benefits of positive social
interaction and emotions. Psychoneuroendocrinology, 23, 819–835.
van der Kolk, B. A. (1994). The body keeps the score. Harvard Review of
Psychiatry, 1(5), 253–265.
Vanhoutte, P. M., & Levy, M. N. (1979). Cholinergic inhibition of adrenergic
neurotransmission in the cardiovascular system. In C. M. Brooks, K. Koizumi,
& A. Sato (Eds.), Integrative junctions of the autonomic nervous system (pp.
159–176). Tokyo: University of Tokyo Press.
Viviani, D., & Stoop, R. (2008). Opposite effects of oxytocin and vasopressin on
the emotional expression of the fear response. Progress in Brain Research,
170, 207–218.
Voeller, K. (1986). Right-hemisphere deficit syndrome in children. American
Journal of Psychiatry, 143, 1004–1009.
Völlm, B., Richardson, P., Stirling, J., Elliott, R., Dolan, M., Chaudhry, I., et al.
(2004). Neurobiological substrates of antisocial and borderline personality
disorder: Preliminary results of a functional fMRI study. Criminal Behavior
and Mental Health, 14, 39–54.
Wakefield, A. J., Puleston, J. M., Montgomery, S. M., et al. (2001). Review
article: the concept of entero-colonic encephalopathy, autism and opioid
ligands. Alimentary Pharmacological Therapy, 16, 663–674.
Wakerley, J. B., Clarke, G., & Summerlee, A. J. S. (1994). Milk ejection and its
control. In E. Knobil & J. D. Neill (Eds.), The physiology of reproduction (pp.
1131–1177). New York: Raven Press.
Wang, Y., Hu, Y., Meng, J., & Li, C. (2001). An ossified Meckels cartilage in
two Cretaceous mammals and origin of the mammalian middle ear. Science,
294, 357–361.
Warwick, R., & Williams, P. L. (Eds.) (1975). Gray’s anatomy. Philadelphia:
Saunders.
Weaver, T. L., & Clum, G. A. (1993). Early family environments and traumatic

experiences associated with borderline personality disorder. Journal of
Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 61, 1068–1075.
Weiling, W., van Brederode, J. F. M., de Rijk, L. G., Borst, C., & Dunning, A. J.
(1982). Reflex control of heart rate in normal subjects in relation to age: A
data base for cardiac vagal neuropathy. Diabetologia, 22, 163–166.
Weinberg, M. K., & Tronick, E. Z. (1996). Infant affective reactions to the
resumption of maternal interaction after the still-face. Child Development, 67,
905–914.
Weiner, N. (1948). Cybernetics. New York: Wiley.
Weise, F., & Heydenreich, F. (1991). Age-related changes of heart rate power
spectra in a diabetic man during orthostasis. Diabetes Research and Clinical
Practice, 11, 23–32.
Weisz, J., Szilagyi, N., Lang, E., & Adam, G. (1992). The influence of
monocular viewing on heart period variability. International Journal of
Psychophysiology, 1, 2, 11– 18.
Widom, C. S., & Maxfield, M. G. (1996). A prospective examination of risk for
violence among abused and neglected children. Annals of the New York
Academy of Sciencees, 794, 224–237.
Williams, P. (1989). Gray’s anatomy (37th ed.). New York: Livingstone.
Winslow, J. T., & Insel, T.R. (2002). The social deficits of the oxytocin knockout
mouse. Neuropeptides, 36, 221–229.
Winston, J. S., Strange, B. A., O’Doherty, J., & Dolan, R. J. (2002). Automatic
and intentional brain responses during evaluation of trustworthiness of faces.
Nature Neuroscience, 5, 277–283.
Woodworth, R. S. (1928). Dynamic psychology. In C. Murchison (Ed.),
Psychologies of 1925. Worcester, MA: Clark University Press.
Woolley, D. C., McWilliam, P. N., Ford, T. W., & Clarke, R. W. (1987). The
effect of selective electrical stimulation on non-myelinated vagal fibres on
heart rate in the rabbit. Journal of the Autonomic Nervous System, 21, 215–
221.
World Health Organization. (1992). International statistical classification of
diseases and related health problems. Geneva: Author.
Wormald, P. J., Rogers, C., & Gatehouse, S. (1995). Speech discrimination in
patients with Bell’s palsy and a paralysed stapedius muscle. Clinical
Otolaryngology, 20, 59–62.
Wozniak, W., & O’Rahilly, R. (1981). Fine structure and myelination of the
human vagus nerve. Acta Anatomica, 109, 118–130.

Yagi, N., & Nakatani, H. (1987). Stapedial muscle electromyography in various
diseases. Archives of Otolarynogology Head and Neck Surgery, 113, 392–396.
Yanowitz, F., Preston, J., & Abildskov, J. (1966). Functional distribution of right
and left stellate innervation to the ventricles: Production of neurogenic
electrocardiographic changes by unilateral alterations of sympathetic tone.
Circulation Research, 18, 416–428.
Yokoyama, K., Jennings, R., Ackles, P., Hood, P., & Boller, F. (1987). Lack of
heart rate changes during an attention-demanding task after right hemisphere
lesions. Neurology, 37, 624–630.
Zanarini, M. C., & Grankenbrug, F. R. (2001). Treatment histories of borderline
inpatients. Comprehensive Psychiatry, 42, 144–150.
Zeanah, C. H. (2000). Disturbances of attachment in young children adopted
from institutions. Journal of Developmental and Behavioral Pediatrics, 21,
230–236.
Zero to Three: National Center for Clinical Infant Programs. (1994). Diagnostic
classification: 0–3. Diagnostic classification of mental health and
developmental disorders of infancy and early childhood. Arlington, VA: Zero
to Three Publications.
Zahn, T. P., Rumsey, J. M., & Van Kammen, D. P. (1987). Autonomic nervous
system activity in autistic, schizophrenic, and normal men: Effects of stimulus
significance. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 96, 135–144.
Zavaschi, V., Pires, D., Winkler, S., Carvalho, R. H., Rohde, L. A., & Eizirik, C.
L. (2006). Adult mood disorders and childhood psychological trauma. Revista
Brasileira de Psiquiatria, 28, 184–190.
Zurif, E. G. (1974). Auditory lateralization: Prosodic and syntactic factors. Brain
and Language, 1, 391–404.
Zweig-Frank, H., & Paris, J. (2002). Predictors of outcome in a 27-year follow-
up of patients with borderline personality disorder. Comprehensive
Psychiatry, 43, 103–107.
Zwislocki, J. J. (2002). Auditory system: Peripheral nonlinearity and central
additivity, as revealed in the human stapedius-muscle reflex. Proceedings of
the National Academy of Science USA, 99, 14601–14606.

 
Acknowledgments
The polyvagal theory described in this volume evolved from four decades of
research. The chapters provide a glimpse into the broad implications of the
theory and how the development and expansion of the theory involved many
collaborators. The ideas, conceptualized as the polyvagal theory, did not emerge
in an intellectual vacuum but were a product of discussions and debates with
colleagues and students. The theory is built on solid research and the extensive
body of literature on the neural regulation of the autonomic nervous system. The
polyvagal theory is not a doctrine but a work in progress. As we learn more, both
from our research program and from our colleagues, the theory is updated and
expanded. The chapters in this volume illustrate the changing features of the
theory as new knowledge is discovered and relevant clinical problems are used
to inform the theory.
During my scientific career, I have had the good fortune to meet and to
interact with several individuals who have provided important scientific and
intellectual guidance. Through these interactions, I became informed by clinical
material and learned comparative neurophysiology, evolutionary biology, and
time-series analyses. This exposure to perspectives from disparate areas of
science provided a rare opportunity to integrate ideas, facts, and methods that led
to the discovery of the bold organizing principles on which the polyvagal theory
is based.
Several people played important roles in helping me navigate through this
uncharted intellectual arena. Publishing this book provides an opportunity to
acknowledge their important contributions. First, I want to acknowledge Sue
Carter. For 40 years, Sue, as both my wife and intellectual partner, has supported
my intellectual curiosity. She has provided me with the confidence to venture
into unexplored scientific territories and to successfully find the voice to
articulate my scientific and humanitarian vision, both of which are embedded in
the theory.
During this process of discovery, there are specific individuals who have
functionally “tilted” my thinking and enabled me to expand my perspectives. As

a graduate student, David C. Raskin introduced me to the exciting world of
psychophysiology with its potential to understand physiological mediators of
behavior. Robert E. Bohrer tutored me in time-series statistics and provided me
with the confidence to explore my intuitive mathematics. Bob unselfishly
worked with me to translate my conceptualizations of the dynamic neural
regulation of the autonomic nervous system into the mathematically robust time-
series measures that are still the basic metrics used in my research. Stanley I.
Greenspan stimulated my interest in psychiatric disorders and provided me with
opportunities to deconstruct clinical features into the neurobiological constructs
that I study. Peter A. Levine introduced me to the world of trauma research and
somatic therapies. His insights into the somatic manifestations of trauma
stimulated my passion to understand the neurobiological mechanisms mediating
these debilitating effects. Ajit Maiti mentored me in neurophysiology and
neuroanatomy. Ajit provided an intellectual bridge between the ancient wisdom
of Eastern philosophy and modern Western science. Neil Schneiderman
challenged my conceptualization of autonomic measures as psychophysiological
indicators by encouraging me to investigate the neural mechanisms mediating
heart rate. Hiram E. Fitzgerald shifted my career trajectory toward
developmental questions and stimulated my intellectual curiosity to study the
autonomic nervous system in young infants. David Crews encouraged me to
seek an understanding of the adaptive function of physiological responses from a
phylogenetic perspective. Evgeny Sokolov provided a model as a mentor and
stimulated me to generate an integrative theory. These insightful and dedicated
scientists and clinicians have all been instrumental in framing the intellectual
strategies that I used to conceptualize the polyvagal theory. Understanding their
contributions unlocks the mystery of the breadth of the theory, which
encompasses methodology, mathematics, neuroscience, development, evolution,
psychology, and clinical disease. In addition, I want to thank Theo Kierdorf, who
encouraged me to integrate several of my papers into a volume on the polyvagal
theory. Theo translated and edited several of my papers to create a “polyvagal
reader,” which was published in German by Junfermann and served as the core
of the current volume. I also want to thank Allan Schore, who as editor
welcomed this volume into the Norton series on interpersonal neurobiology.

Copyright
Foreword reprinted with permission from Bessel van der Kolk.
Copyright © 2011 by Stephen W. Porges All rights reserved
Printed in the United States of America First Edition
For information about permission to reproduce selections from this book, write to Permissions, W. W.
Norton & Company, Inc., 500 Fifth Avenue, New York, NY 10110
For information about special discounts for bulk purchases, please contact W. W. Norton Special Sales at
specialsales@wwnorton.com or 800-233-4830
Manufacturing by Courier Westford Production manager: Leeann Graham
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data Porges, Stephen W.
The polyvagal theory : neurophysiological foundations of emotions, attachment, communication, and
self-regulation / Stephen W. Porges. — 1st ed.
    p. cm. — (The Norton Series on Interpersonal Neurobiology) (A Norton Professional Book) Includes
bibliographical references and index.
ISBN 978-0-393-70700-7 (hardcover)
ISBN 978-0-393-70906-3 (e-book)
1. Affective neuroscience. 2. Emotions—Physiological aspects. 3. Vagus nerve. 
I. Title.
QP401.P67 2011
 
612.8—dc22     2010044408
       
W. W. Norton & Company, Inc., 500 Fifth Avenue, New York, N.Y. 10110
www.wwnorton.com
W. W. Norton & Company Ltd., Castle House, 75/76 Wells Street, London W1T 3QT

