
THE ORIGINS OF VIOLENCE


The Origins of Violence
Religion, History and 
Genocide
John Docker
Pluto Press 

First published 2008 by Pluto Press
345 Archway Road, London N6 5AA
www.plutobooks.com
Copyright © John Docker 2008
The right of John Docker to be identified as the author of this work has been asserted by him
in accordance with the Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988.
British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library
ISBN 978 0 7453 2544 6 Hardback
ISBN 978 0 7453 2543 9 Paperback
Library of Congress Cataloging in Publication Data applied for
This book is printed on paper suitable for recycling and made from fully managed and
sustained forest sources. Logging, pulping and manufacturing processes are expected to
conform to the environmental standards of the country of origin.
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1
Designed and produced for Pluto Press by
Curran Publishing Services, Norwich
Printed and bound in the European Union by
CPI Antony Rowe Ltd, Chippenham and Eastbourne, England

This book is dedicated to Ned Curthoys


CONTENTS
Preface and acknowledgements
xi
Introduction
1
1. Genocide as ancient practice: chimpanzees, humans, 
agricultural society
13
Raphaël Lemkin
14
Jane Goodall
17
Jared Diamond
29
Galarrwuy Yunupingu
34
Hugh Brody
35
2. Genocide, and questioning of genocide, in the ancient 
Greek world: Herodotus and Thucydides
39
Historical writing
41
Herodotus
42
Thucydides
47
Genocide and the honour of nations
50
Athens invades Sicily
53
The challenge to Athens
55
Conclusion: speaking to the future
57
3. Genocide, trauma and world upside down in ancient 
Greek tragedy: Aeschylus and Euripides
61
Lemkin’s analytic method
62
Genocidal consciousness in Aeschylus’s 
Agamemnon
65
Perpetrator and victim consciousness in Euripides’
Hecabe: terror and trauma
69
[ vii ]

Andromache: the slave as the stranger who disturbs
75
War, genocide, and female and child suffering: 
The Women of Troy
82
Conclusion
85
4.
Utopia and dystopia: Plato and Cicero’s Republics
89
Plato
92
Cicero
98
Debating the virtues of empire, Rome, natural law
104
Conclusion: ‘The Dream of Scipio’
109
5. Victimology and genocide: the Bible’s Exodus, 
Virgil’s Aeneid
113
Victimology and genocidal violence: 
Exodus and the Aeneid
116
Exodus (and Joshua and Judges)
117
The Aeneid
129
Narrative and counter-narrative: the costs of 
conquest, colonization, empire
132
Women and men
135
Orientalism and European identity
138
Conclusion
139
6. Roman settler imperialism in Britain: narrative and 
counter-narrative in Tacitus’s Agricola and Germania
145
Affirmative narrative
148
Counter-narrative
152
Conclusion: a divided legacy
157
7. The honourable colonizer
161
Promoters and adventurers
162
Founding legends
169
International law, early modern English style
172
Biography and morality
174
The right to colonize
177
Honourable colonization in The Tempest
182
Conclusion
186
CONTENTS
[ viii ]

8. Was the Enlightenment the origin of the Holocaust?
189
Spinoza
195
Toland
200
Philosemitism and Islamophilia
205
Hume, Lyotard, Deleuze
208
Conclusion
213
Conclusion: Can there be an end to violence?
217
Notes
219
Index
249
CONTENTS
[ ix ]


[ xi ]
PREFACE AND 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
In 1917, Benedetto Croce’s ‘History and Chronicle’was published
during another time of world-shaking violence. In this witty and
memorable essay, so influential in the development of modern
historical writing, Croce remarks that ‘only an interest in the life
of the present can move one to investigate past fact’, for ‘past fact’
comes alive when it is ‘unified with an interest in the present’,
when it vibrates in the ‘soul of the historian’. Croce believes we
only become interested in a particular problem in the past when:
that problem is related to my being in the same way as the
history of a bit of business in which I am engaged, or of a
love affair in which I am indulging, or of a danger that
threatens me. I examine it with the same anxiety and am
troubled with the same sense of unhappiness until I have
succeeded in solving it.1
I cannot say that the problem that I seek to examine, the origins of
violence, is related to any bit of business or to a love affair. It is,
however, related to a ‘sense of danger that threatens me’, and
threatens, I dare to think, humanity in the new millennium: the
continuing omnipresence of violence in the world. I could
mention examples from early in the twenty-first century like
September 11, or the London bombings, or the Anglo-American
war in Iraq. I could also mention, in a longer-range sense that
acknowledges the continuing power in history of settler-
colonialism and genocide, the never-ending cruelty of Israel’s

oppression of the Palestinians. But doubtless there will be more
examples of appalling violence as the century proceeds.
Disarmingly, Croce talks of examining a problem with ‘anxi-
ety’ and ‘unhappiness’ until one has ‘succeeded in solving it’. I
don’t think one can succeed in solving any intellectual enquiry, so
anxiety and unhappiness must remain one’s permanent compan-
ions, especially with a topic such as this, so often involving harsh
judgement on what humanity has done, and continues to do, and
perhaps will always do. In the last several years, I must recognize,
my thinking and interests have indeed taken a melancholy turn.
Yet, and this is what Croce is elegantly gesturing towards, and is
something Ann Curthoys and I explored in our Is History Fiction?
(2005), there is also a palpable joy in intellectual work: in
research, in reading and interpreting texts, in spirited analysis, in
agreement and disagreement, in establishing the contours of an
argument, in arriving at what one hopes is a true interpretation.
My approach in this book reveals, I think, certain abiding
interests. In particular, I have long been dissatisfied with the way
a great deal of contemporary scholarship, in seeking explanations
for phenomena of group violence like colonization, conquest,
empire and genocide, won’t in my view go back far enough in
history. Explanations are looked for in the assumed essential
nature of the Enlightenment, or in the nineteenth-century age of
European empires. There tends, that is, to be a focus on modernity
as if it is an enclosed or self-sufficient epoch, as if it will furnish
the necessary insights into why such phenomena of group
violence exist or take the form they do or are so salient and perva-
sive. To the contrary, and I’m not sure if I can say why I am so
drawn, I always want to go back as far as I can or think is relevant.
As the reader will see, this has involved journeys into primatology,
evolution and world history: journeys that touch on the intersec-
tions of violence and gender, and speculation about the cata-
strophic impact on hunter-gatherer societies worldwide of
agricultural-commercial society, so relatively recent in its appear-
ance, yet always assuming it is humanity’s ideal form. A question
that shadows my thinking in this book is, what is the relationship
PREFACE AND ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
[ xii ]

between ancient and modern? Are there predispositions and
tendencies and possibilities that go back to primatology and that
continue in different ways and forms and interactions in all future
human history? And how can one contemplate such possible
enduring features of humanity without being determinist?
Another dissatisfaction I have long had with contemporary
scholarship, at least since my 1492: The Poetics of Diaspora
(2001), is its secularism, to which I prefer a ‘postsecular’
approach that recognizes how much religious narratives, for
good or ill, stimulate, inspire and shape human action. It puzzles
and astonishes me not a little to see scholars attempting to under-
stand and illuminate phenomena like colonization, conquest,
empire and genocide as if religion and mythology don’t matter,
as if they are mere epiphenomena, worth only a side-glance.
After my 1492: The Poetics of Diaspora, I became interested,
via analyses of Freud’s Moses and Monotheism, in the historical
issue of the differences between monotheism and polytheism.2 I
tended, I must confess, rather to idealize polytheism, for its
pluralizing of deities, its inclusion of female as well as male
principles of divinity, its internationalism and cosmopolitanism,
its translatability of gods and goddesses across mythologies.
Harshly, I saw, and still see, monotheism, and here I am influ-
enced by Jan Assmann’s Moses the Egyptian, as a religion that
works by reaction against other religions, or parts of its own reli-
gion, with which it disagrees. Monotheism’s historical mode of
existence tends therefore to be fractious and always potentially
violent, wishing or attempting to exclude, persecute, discipline,
erase the non-monotheistic world or adherents of monotheism it
opposes. Its history, in Europe and the West, is riven by endless
splits, between Old Testament and New, Catholicism, Protes-
tantism, and multiple Protestant groups and grouplets from Puri-
tans, Calvinists and Lutherans onwards, and such a fissiparous
mode shows no sign of lessening. In this book, however, I am
also critical of polytheism. My focus is on recognizing and
exploring commonalities between polytheism and monotheism
in terms of sanctioning intergroup violence.
PREFACE AND ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
[ xiii ]

This book is a work of literary, cultural and intellectual
history. I can’t see why any of these activities should be sufficient
unto themselves. Long ago, so long it’s a little unsettling to recall,
I began my intellectual life as a literary critic, before making many
expeditions into other disciplinary territories, while always hold-
ing on to the importance of textual analysis. My fealty here would
be to a certain ‘European’ tradition of interdisciplinary thinking in
the humanities, in figures like Mikhail Bakhtin, Walter Benjamin
and Hannah Arendt, and I try to do justice to, to continue, that
tradition here.
In the last several years I have been involved with genocide
studies, especially the innovative and imaginative ‘new genocide
studies’ that developed from the late 1990s onwards. The ‘new
genocide studies’ does not wish to be confined to a narrow or
exclusive definition of genocide. Rather it has renewed interest
in the thinking of the ‘founder’ of genocide studies, Raphaël
Lemkin, who created the term in 1944, and sought, in both his
published and unpublished writings, to make the concept very
wide-ranging so that it could include long-term processes like
colonization as well as catastrophic events or acts or episodes
(which can also be part of colonization). The ‘new genocide
studies’ seeks to be comparative, to explore relationships
between genocide and situations of settler colonialism in world
history, and to be open to new approaches and perspectives. I
would like to acknowledge my colleagues in genocide studies
for the stimulation and assistance they have provided, especially
Larissa Behrendt, Tony Barta, Ann Curthoys, Ben Kiernan,
Wendy Lower, Dirk Moses, Dan Stone and Jürgen Zimmerer. I
would also like to thank the Journal of Genocide Research for
publishing an earlier version of the chapter on the Enlightenment
and the Holocaust.3
In terms of evolutionary thinking I would like to acknowledge
reading and talking with Hilary Rose and Steven Rose.
I would also like to acknowledge those of us, like Hilary and
Steven, as well as Ned Curthoys, Ghassan Hage, Nur Masalha and
Ilan Pappé, who have critiqued Zionist Israel and work towards
PREFACE AND ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
[ xiv ]

averting the catastrophe that Israel is trying to bring upon the
Palestinians. Zionism and the modern state of Israel are part of the
long history of colonization, conquest and genocide I have tried to
illuminate in this book.
Much of this book explores genocide, and questioning of
genocide, in the ancient classical world, an interest that grew out
of the chapters on Herodotus and Thucydides in Ann Curthoys and
my Is History Fiction? I would particularly like to thank Ned
Curthoys and David Pritchard for suggesting that I reflect not only
on the works of history’s founders but also explore classical Greek
tragedy and texts of moral and political philosophy in the Greco-
Roman world. Such I have attempted in this book, and it has been
a delight to do so.
I would like to thank Mark Dorrian for enjoyable discussions
of what the Elizabethan English thought they were doing in
sixteenth-century Ireland.4
I would like to thank Shino Konishi for enjoyable discussions
of the notion of honourable colonization.
There are other scholars I would like to thank for discussion
of ideas and encouragement: Clare Brandabur, Gavin Edwards,
Julie Evans, Debjani Ganguly, Ann Genovese, Heather Goodall,
Ian Higgins, Barry Hindess, Peter Hulme, Daniel Joyce, Ben
Kelly, Frances Peters Little, Ida Nursoo, and Patrick Wolfe.
My thanks to the staff in the following libraries: ANU Library,
the American Jewish Historical Society, the New York Public
Library and the British Library.
My thanks to my colleagues in the Research School of
Humanities at ANU, and especially to the director of the
Humanities Research Centre, Debjani Ganguly.
While a visiting fellow at the Institute for Advanced Studies in
the Humanities at the University of Edinburgh in early 2008, I did
a final reading of the manuscript; I would especially like to thank
Susan Manning and Anthea Taylor for providing such a tranquil
and productive atmosphere for research and reflection.
My thanks to Pluto’s Roger van Zwanenberg for his encour-
agement throughout, including bracing discussions at an early
PREFACE AND ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
[ xv ]

stage of why I wished to go so far back in history; also to Robin
Derricourt for his encouragement.
Above all, I would like to thank Ned Curthoys: this book could
not have been written but for our long walks, coffee sessions,
emails and even mobile texting discussing ideas, as well as his
reading of manuscript chapters. Notions like supersessionism I
particularly owe to Ned.
Above all as well: Ann Curthoys.
PREFACE AND ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
[ xvi ]

INTRODUCTION
As an account of atrocities … this book of mine … should
be able … to furnish documentation for a quiet study of
certain aspects of the human mind.
(Primo Levi, If This is a Man)1
In this book I discuss violence and genocide, and questioning of
violence and genocide, as constitutive of the human condition
down the ages. My focus is not on violence between individuals,
but on intergroup violence. My aim is to evoke and explain such
intergroup violence in ways that include both physical violence
and the violence that inheres in language and culture, in ideas,
notions, concepts, narratives and images.
I
The arguments I present here follow from my involvement in the
last several years in the field of genocide studies, in particular my
explorations of the writings of the Polish-Jewish and then Ameri-
can jurist and historian Raphaël Lemkin (1900–1959), who in his
1944 book Axis Rule in Occupied Europe created the term ‘geno-
cide’. Lemkin argued that genocide is a recurring phenomenon in
the way human groups treat each other, just as homicide continu-
ally occurs in relations between individuals.2 For decades after the
Holocaust, it was felt that its horror would deter future genocides,
that genocide was now unthinkable. But in the latter part of the
twentieth century the genocides that occurred in Cambodia, the
former Yugoslavia and Rwanda, and the Israeli genocide of the
[ 1 ]

indigenous Palestinians that is continuing in Israel/Palestine in the
twenty-first century,3 have urgently re-opened our necessary
awareness of Lemkin’s insight into human history: genocide
between groups, as with homicide between individuals, has always
occurred and will probably keep occurring.
In this book I consider the sombre implications of Lemkin’s
reconceptualization of history: rather than violence being abnor-
mal, it is an intrinsic characteristic of human activity. The history
of humanity is the history of violence: war and genocide; conquest
and colonization and the creation of empires sanctioned by God or
the gods in both polytheism and monotheism; the fatal combina-
tion of democracy and empire; and revolution, massacre, torture,
mutilation, cruelty.
Lemkin invoked a close relationship in world history between
genocide and colonization. Here is the key passage in Axis Rule in
Occupied Europe:
Genocide has two phases: one, destruction of the national
pattern of the oppressed group; the other, the imposition
of the national pattern of the oppressor. This imposition,
in turn, may be made upon the oppressed population
which is allowed to remain, or upon the territory alone,
after removal of the population and the colonization of the
area by the oppressor’s own nationals.4
Lemkin’s definition has wide-ranging and explosive implications
for the history of humanity. I draw on it throughout The Origins of
Violence as a kind of guiding thread.
In retrospect, we can see Lemkin’s own historical conceptions
and legal thinking emerging from a 1930s and 1940s context
where émigré intellectuals were attempting to reprise and develop
traditions of cosmopolitanism and internationalism which they
saw being engulfed by Nazism, itself a culmination of nineteenth-
century European nationalism, imperialism and colonialism.
Figures like Walter Benjamin, Freud, Lemkin, Hannah Arendt,
Erich Auerbach, Albert Einstein and Leo Spitzer were concerned
THE ORIGINS OF VIOLENCE
[ 2 ]

that humanity should establish a duty of care to all the world’s
peoples and cultures.5 Central to Lemkin’s thought were notions
of world culture and the oneness of the world, valuing the variety
and diversity of human cultures.6 Lemkin believed that a loss of
any one society and culture through genocide is a loss to all
humanity. Such considerations will have a bearing on my
approach throughout this book.
Lemkin is important to my book in terms of method. While
researching his papers in the American Jewish Historical Society
in New York, in a folder concerned with a projected history of
genocide, Ann Curthoys and I came across, under the heading
‘Revised Outline for Genocide Cases’, a list Lemkin had drawn up
suggesting detailed categories by which to analyse historical
genocides. The history of genocide was to be explored in terms of
categories such as historical background; methods and techniques
of genocide, physical, biological and cultural; the attitudes of the
genocidists; propaganda, that is to say, rationalization of the
crime; responses of victim groups, active and passive; responses
of outside groups; and aftermath.7 In The Origins of Violence I
have deployed Lemkin’s list of categories, and detailed sub-cate-
gories, to help with the literary and cultural investigations by
which much of my book proceeds, for example, in analysing clas-
sical Greek tragedies concerned with the mythological stories of
the 
Trojan 
War, 
or, in the later chapter on the notion of the honourable colonizer,
Shakespeare’s The Tempest.
II
In terms of analysing the inner working of texts, whether literary
texts or works of historical writing or philosophy, I draw
throughout on Mikhail Bakhtin (1895–1975), roughly a contem-
porary of Lemkin’s in the twentieth century. My approach is not
author-centred, as much conventional intellectual history can be,
desiring to find in an author a definitive set of beliefs and values.
INTRODUCTION
[ 3 ]

An author-centred focus misses out on so much in literary,
cultural and intellectual history that is eccentric, wayward,
contradictory and multiple in meanings and values. The writings
of Bakhtin provide me with a rich repertoire of concepts, in
particular notions of the dialogic, polyphony and menippean, as
well as a dynamic evocation of genres and their interactions.
Such notions refer to how texts work not only in modernity, but
in the long cultural history descending from the ancient classical
world. In particular for my purposes, Bakhtin felt that the impor-
tance of the genre of the menippea in European and world liter-
ature, from antiquity to modernity, has not been sufficiently
appreciated.8
In his brilliant early book Problems of Dostoevky’s Poetics,
Bakhtin suggests that the menippea was and is a form of great
plasticity, protean, flexible and inclusive of other genres, a
carrier in literature of carnivalesque, wonderfully free in its
inventiveness and use of the fantastic. The menippea of antiq-
uity, says Bakhtin, could include the Socratic dialogue and the
symposium; indeed, he comments, the menippea was sometimes
formulated directed as a symposium. The menippea was
hospitable to kindred genres like the utopia. It features historical
and legendary figures. It is a philosophical genre where its bold
use of fantasy and adventure is devoted to the ‘testing of a philo-
sophical idea, a discourse, a truth, embodied in the image of a
wise man, the seeker of this truth’. The menippea deploys
fantasy to contemplate the world on the broadest possible scale.
It is a genre of ultimate questions. In order to provoke and test
an idea, the heroes of a menippea might wander through
unknown and fantastic lands, or might be placed in extraordinary
life situations. Characters ascend into heaven or descend into the
nether regions. Indeed, Bakthin writes, the menippea places
great importance on the nether world, leading, in later European
literature of the Renaissance and of the seventeenth and
eighteenth centuries, to the special genre of the ‘dialogues of the
dead’, in which people and ideas separated by space and time
collide with one another on a dialogic plane.9
THE ORIGINS OF VIOLENCE
[ 4 ]

I wish, then, to bring together into productive conversation the
fields of genocide studies on the one hand, and literary, cultural
and intellectual history on the other, and so bring new dimensions
to the historical study of genocide and violence. The two have so
far stood apart. Claude Rawson’s God, Gulliver, and Genocide:
Barbarism and the European Imagination, 1492–1945 (2001), for
example, is rich in subtle nuanced readings of a wide range of
texts and authors and a major contribution to the literature which
sees ‘1492’ as a key event in world history. Yet it does not engage
with contemporary genocide studies. It especially misses the body
of scholarship that relates, in the way suggested by Lemkin’s defi-
nition in Axis Rule in Occupied Europe, genocide to European
colonialism, a theme of his book.10 At the same time, genocide
scholars, such as those who publish in the Journal of Genocide
Research, are rarely literary or cultural critics.
I devote a substantial amount of The Origins of Violence to
analysis of texts in the ancient and classical worlds of the Middle
East and Mediterranean: the Bible’s Exodus, Joshua and Judges,
and works of Herodotus, Thucydides, Aeschylus, Euripides, Plato,
Cicero, Virgil and Tacitus. I am working in a tradition that looks
to biblical writings and classical texts to see how much they illu-
minate the history of violence; I think here of René Girard’s
Violence and the Sacred (1972) and Richard Waswo’s The Found-
ing Legend of Western Civilization: From Virgil to Vietnam (1997).
While I found that Girard focused too narrowly on sacrifice as a
kind of general explanation, a key to all mythologies, Waswo’s
book offers profound insights into Western history, and I must pay
tribute to it here as an influence on this book. Neither of these
books, however, uses the concept of genocide.
III
Throughout The Origins of Violence I deploy and develop a
number of notions, concepts and terms by which to explore group
violence. These concepts and terms include genocide, superses-
INTRODUCTION
[ 5 ]

sionism, victimology, chosen people, promised land, culture-
bringers and honourable colonization.
•
Genocide: a theory of intergroup violence; this is the frame
story for this book.
•
Supersessionism: one of the most destructive beliefs in world
history. It is the view that some peoples can be erased or
removed or superseded by other peoples and groups, who see
themselves as history’s true heirs.
•
Victimology: a belief and narrative that earlier bondage and
persecution and suffering justifies later violence, conquest and
destruction in other lands or islands and directed against peoples
who had no part in the original bondage and persecutions.
•
Chosen People: a belief held by a group which claims to be
blessed by God or the gods. The view of oneself as chosen is
always precarious, because chosenness may be claimed by
another group, looking to other gods. It may be felt that people
are only chosen for a while, that they may fall into divine
disfavour, and God or the gods may elect another people to be
sanctioned as chosen. In world history, there is constant compe-
tition amongst groups to be chosen and be known as chosen.11
In The Origins of Violence I explore the importance of the
notion of a chosen people in the biblical stories and in Cicero’s
Republic, Virgil’s Aeneid and Tacitus’ Agricola and Germania.
•
Promised land: a concept close to and usually entwined with
notions of a chosen people and victimology. In these influential
narratives, a people from elsewhere, perhaps having suffered
persecution and the agony of wandering and exile, are divinely
assisted by a father god, whether monotheistic or polytheistic, to
find final refuge by conquest and colonization in another land.
This ‘new’ land is promised to them by the father god, even if
already occupied and inhabited by indigenous or previous
peoples.
•
Culture bringers: this invaluable concept I have drawn directly
and gratefully from Waswo’s The Founding Legend of Western
Civilization. It refers to those who come from elsewhere as
colonizers and conquerors, who see themselves as culture-
bearers in possession of what they regard as superior knowl-
THE ORIGINS OF VIOLENCE
[ 6 ]

edge of agriculture, cities, law and religion. Such culture-
bringers regard their presence in a place as more worthy of the
support of God or the gods than indigenous peoples or people
already inhabiting a land or island, whom they subdue by
conquest and colonization, leading, in Lemkin’s terms, to
genocide. Yet culture-bringers always see themselves as
honourable colonizers, my next category.
•
Honourable colonization: in possession of a high moral
consciousness, honourable colonizers in effect reassure them-
selves of their own innocence in history. They are aware of the
dangers of colonization, especially in the initial stages, in
infringing the rights of the colonized and as a threat to their
own morality and standing. For this awareness, they are
always to be admired in history, whatever the actual long-term
consequences of colonization. Instead of colonization being a
catastrophe for those facing destruction, as evoked in
Herodotus and Thucydides, or in Greek tragedy concerned
with the ruining of Troy, or in aspects of Cicero’s Republic,
Virgil’s Aeneid and Tacitus’s Agricola, colonization becomes
a celebration of the complex, ambivalent, and even anguished
moral state of the colonizers.12
IV
The Origins of Violence begins at the beginning, contemplating
how much humanity is formed in its earliest stages by being a
primate in common with other primates, sharing an evolutionary
history, with predispositions to violence, including intergroup
violence. Such evolutionary predispositions may have been form-
ative of human history and might remain influential and salient.
Genocide is one such. By working through primatology in Jane
Goodall’s The Chimpanzees of Gombe, the ‘world history’ argu-
ments of Jared Diamond’s The Rise and Fall of the Third Chim-
panzee and Hugh Brody’s The Other Side of Eden, and the
questioning by the prominent Australian Indigenous leader Galar-
rwuy Yunupingu of who are the nomads, hunter-gatherer or agri-
INTRODUCTION
[ 7 ]

cultural peoples, we can say that genocide was widespread in the
movements and migrations of humans from the beginning. We see
it especially in the invasions, colonizings and expansion of agri-
cultural-commercial societies across the globe when they
appeared – relatively recently – in history. Indeed, as both
Diamond and Brody stress, the coming some 6,000 to 8,000 years
ago of agricultural-commercial societies massively increased
intergroup violence in world history, in the constant efforts of
these societies to expand, spread, conquer and supersede, efforts
particularly directed against hunter-gatherer societies.
I argue in this book that genocide was a common feature of
the ancient Mediterranean and near-Eastern world, the area of the
world where agricultural-commercial societies developed. It was,
perhaps, the genocides of the ancient Mediterranean world that set
the historical precedents for the later post-1492 history of Euro-
pean colonization. In classical times, I discuss the many examples
of genocide, both Persian and Greek, evoked by Herodotus’s The
Histories and Thucydides’ History of the Peloponnesian War, not
least in the Athenian destruction of Melos in 416–15 BCE. Yet in
both Herodotus and Thucydides there are stories and episodes –
often evoked with compassion and pathos – questioning violence
and genocide, bequeathing to the future a divided legacy about the
justice of conquest, colonization and empire. I explore this divided
legacy in both the classical Greek and Greco-Roman worlds, in
tragedy, moral and political philosophy, and historiography. I
consider plays concerned with the destruction of Troy by
Aeschylus and Euripides, the Republics of Plato and Cicero, epic
as in Virgil’s Aeneid, and biography and ethnography in Tacitus’
Agricola and Germania. I explore how the narratives of the bibli-
cal stories, in Exodus, Joshua and Judges, highlight the terrible
human costs of conquest and colonization.
V
I see the millennia-long questioning of conquest, colonization,
THE ORIGINS OF VIOLENCE
[ 8 ]

empire and genocide as part of the conceptualization and develop-
ment of international law, constituting a continuing challenge to
its troubled and sometimes frankly absurd history; a challenge
taken up in modernity with great daring by Lemkin and in contem-
porary world courts concerned with genocide and crimes against
humanity. As a jurist Lemkin, the prime mover in the 1948 UN
Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of
Genocide, felt that radically new kinds of international law were
necessary in order to restrain or prevent genocide. In this view,
previous international law was either inadequate in focusing too
much on individual rather than intergroup law, or actively facili-
tated and enabled intergroup violence. In notions of natural law
from Roman times onwards, in the law of nations in early modern
Europe and as a cumulative body of law in modernity, interna-
tional law has collaborated in conquest, colonization, empire and
genocide. Lemkin’s epochal challenge to inherited legal thinking
was influential in the latter part of the twentieth century and in the
twenty-first century in new avenues of international law
concerned with crimes against humanity, in the International
Criminal Court and the International Court of Justice.13
VI
This book also explores the ways that Thucydides’ History of the
Peloponnesian War stages an argument between rival views of
democracy and empire. One abiding view, held by the Athenians
themselves, is that democratic nation-states like Athens not only
have the right to possess an empire but achieve greatness, the
glory that will live through the ages, by the possession of
empire. Empire is to be regarded as selfless, as altruistically
spreading values beneficial for all those nations, states and
peoples it includes, and therefore the power and might of an
empire should not be opposed. In this imperial view, the doctrine
of might is right – the doctrine that features in the Athenian
destruction of Melos, which had wished to stay neutral in the
INTRODUCTION
[ 9 ]

war between Athens and Sparta – is acceptable and necessary in
an empire in its dealing with subject states or states it wishes to
subject. In the Melian Dialogue, Thucydides’ History dramatizes
an alternative position, prophetically suggested by the Melians
themselves, that the doctrine of might is right and the imperial
actions it gives authority to bestow lasting infamy on a society.
Thucydides’ History helps us think how much in democracies
– ancient and modern – hubris, with its thirst for power and glory
through war, is embodied in recurring figures like the statesman,
the demagogue, the parvenu and the adventurer, figures who take
to the political stage with relentless enthusiasm. The History deci-
sively explodes any myth that because a society (like ancient
Athens) is democratic, it cannot engage in destruction, genocide
and cruelty. Quite the contrary: democratic nation-states that
possess a colonizing empire or work through an imperium are
especially likely to perpetrate such acts.14
In a way that strikingly anticipates Hannah Arendt’s political
theory, Thucydides’ History, then, implies that imperial domina-
tion, and especially the quelling of resistance to imperial authority,
results in an ethical deterioration both towards subject peoples and
within the home society itself. Such ethical deterioration, as evoked
by Thucydides in antiquity and Arendt in modernity, is a motif of
this book. 15
VII
The Origins of Violence alludes to Darwin’s Origin of Species
and to Arendt’s works like On Violence and her famously titled
The Origins of Totalitarianism. Like Arendt, and perhaps unlike
Darwin, I am cautious of the implications of the term ‘origins’.
In her biography, Hannah Arendt: For Love of the World, Elisa-
beth Young-Bruehl reports that Arendt was never satisfied with
that title because she suspected the notion of ‘origin’ when it
implies a clear ground from which history coherently and
causally unfolds (a suspicion she shares with thinkers as varied
THE ORIGINS OF VIOLENCE
[ 10 ]

as Walter Benjamin, Foucault, Oakeshott and Derrida). Arendt,
like her friend Benjamin before her, preferred a notion where
origins are fluid and fractured.16 In these terms, I do not present
here a single inclusive chronology, since there are disparate
‘origins’ with different histories: genocide, agricultural-
commercial society, polytheism, monotheism, democracy and
empire, settler-colonialism. Also, with each of these themes,
there are in the chapters that follow constant conversations
between past and present.
In the sense of origins as fluid and fractured, I wish to write in
the spirit of ‘late style’ as Edward Said defines it in relation to
Freud’s Moses and Monotheism: a ‘willingness to let irreconcilable
elements … remain as they are: episodic, fragmentary, unfinished
(i.e. unpolished)’, an ‘intransigence’ and ‘unseemliness’. Said
elaborated on this theme in his posthumously published On Late
Style.17
Certainly, The Origins of Violence does not propose an origin
in ethnobiology or its successor evolutionary psychology.18
Zygmunt Bauman wrote in the preface to Modernity and the Holo-
caust that he hoped his book would contribute to self-awareness
and self-questioning. Such is the hope I entertain for my book. It
explores ‘moments’ in history in order urgently to bring to a clar-
ity of awareness how much disaster and catastrophe are ever-near.
Only in such intense clarity of awareness can alternatives to
violence be reprised and thought.
INTRODUCTION
[ 11 ]


1 GENOCIDE AS 
ANCIENT PRACTICE:
CHIMPANZEES,
HUMANS, 
AGRICULTURAL
SOCIETY
Since warfare involves conflict between groups of people,
rather than between individuals, it has, through genocide,
played a major role in group selection.
(Jane Goodall, The Chimpanzees of Gombe)1
Genocide has been part of our human and prehuman
heritage for millions of years.
(Jared Diamond, The Rise and Fall of the Third 
Chimpanzee)2
Plato himself suggested that human beings and animals
once lived a life in common, and even conversed on
philosophical questions.
(Paola Cavalieri, ‘The Animal Debate’)3
Differences between hunting and gathering and agriculture
are at the heart of history.
(Hugh Brody, The Other Side of Eden)4
[ 13 ]

In History, Memory and Mass Atrocity (2006), the Holocaust
historian Dan Stone argues against approaches that suggest the
mass murder of the Jews was carried out in a bureaucratic spirit
without passion or emotion, thus distinguishing its mass murder
from other mass killing, or that the Nazis were bestial and psycho-
pathic in a way that set them apart from those who inhabit modern,
rational, liberal, postwar societies. What is involved here, Stone
observes, is a false distinction between the modern and the 
pre-modern. Because of this false distinction, we have failed to
recognize, Stone contends, that the perpetrators, even in the use of
technology for industrial-like mass killing, acted primarily with
their hearts, in passion and emotion. In this failure to recognize
our common humanity, we have tried to ‘conceal from view the
unnerving similarity of the perpetrators to ourselves’.5
In this spirit, I explore here intergroup violence like genocide
in relation to the common history of humanity, a history shared in
its early stages between humans and other primates, and which
also includes the coming of agricultural societies and their impact
on hunter-gatherer communities worldwide.
RAPHAËL LEMKIN
I’ll begin with Raphaël Lemkin’s view of human history as the
history of genocide. Given how much genocide will feature in this
and other chapters, it is very important to emphasize that Lemkin’s
originating definition of genocide was very wide-ranging. I stress
this, because many later definitions of genocide, in the light of the
horror of the Holocaust as it was recognized in the 1960s and
1970s, narrow ‘genocide’ down to state-directed mass killing.
Lemkin conceived his definition, expressed most fully in the now
famous Chapter 9 of Axis Rule in Occupied Europe (1944), in the
midst of the Second World War, when he himself had had to flee
Poland in 1939 and during which most of his European family
died.6 Lemkin arrived as an exile in the United States in 1941, and
revealed remarkable energy and dedication in writing what
THE ORIGINS OF VIOLENCE
[ 14 ]

CHIMPANZEES, HUMANS, AGRICULTURAL SOCIETY
[ 15 ]
became Axis Rule in Occupied Europe and in agitating in 
fledgling UN committees to have the notion of genocide legally
recognized and proscribed; he was the prime mover in the discus-
sions that led to the 1948 UN Convention on the Prevention and
Punishment of the Crime of Genocide. The Convention, while it
represented a narrowing of Lemkin’s definition in Axis Rule in
Occupied Europe, was nevertheless still wide-ranging and was
certainly not confined to mass murder.
When Lemkin in Axis Rule in Occupied Europe proposed his
new concept of ‘genocide’, deriving the term from the Greek word
genos (tribe, race) and Latin cide (as in tyrannicide, homicide,
fratricide), he took great care to define genocide as composite and
manifold. Not only is genocide for Lemkin not confined to mass
killing – though it certainly includes mass killing – it is also not
necessarily directed by a state body or power. In Lemkin’s view,
genocide signifies a coordinated plan of different actions aiming
at the destruction of the essential foundations of life of a group.
Such actions involve considerations that are cultural, political,
social, legal, intellectual, spiritual, economic, biological, physio-
logical, religious, psychological and moral. Such actions involve
considerations of health, food and nourishment, of family life and
care of children, and of birth as well as death. Such actions involve
consideration of the honour and dignity of peoples, and the future
of humanity as a world community.7
In the 1940s and 1950s, Lemkin wrote many essays in manu-
script form, and kept research notes and cards for a book he was
writing on the history of genocide, a project that kept expanding,
taking in examples from antiquity to modernity, and sadly
remained unpublished when he died in 1959. When, with Ann
Curthoys, I read this archival material at the American Jewish
Historical Society in New York in December 2003,8 what I felt
particularly stood out were the many ways Lemkin was expanding
on his linking of genocide with colonization made in Chapter 9 of
Axis Rule in Occupied Europe. In the manuscript essays and notes
he deploys genocide as a framework by which to understand and
illuminate European colonizing around the world, including of the

Americas, by the Spanish from 1492 and later in North America
by the English, French and post-independence Americans. He is
highly critical of Columbus as an egregious genocidist (Lemkin’s
own term) who set the historical example for the future of Span-
ish colonization in the Americas, instituting slavery and
catastrophic loss of life. He develops a sophisticated methodology
that permits the possibility of multifaceted analyses of settler-
colonial histories in relation to genocide: in Lemkin’s formulations,
‘genocide’ as concept and method is certainly not, as it used often
to be considered, merely a blunt instrument. He carefully distin-
guishes between cultural change and cultural genocide, and
believes cultural genocide to be very important in the processes of
genocide. He points out that the relationship between oppressor
and victim in history is always unstable, and that in world history
there are many examples of genocidal victims transforming into
genocidists, the formerly persecuted into the persecutors of others.
He outlines recurring features in historical genocides: mass muti-
lations; deportations under harsh conditions often involving
forced marches; attacks on family life, with separation of males
and females and taking away of the opportunity of procreation;
removal and transfer of children; destruction of political leader-
ship; death from illness, hunger and disease through overcrowding
on reserves and in concentration camps.9
Lemkin’s views on humanity and violence were double-
edged, both pessimistic and optimistic. He did not regard human
history as a narrative of progress, since he saw genocide as
following humanity through history. Yet he also hoped that inter-
national law could restrain or prevent genocide. It may be worth
at this point reminding ourselves of the key clauses of the 1948
UN Convention definition, set out in Article II, which constitute
a narrower version of Lemkin’s definition:
In the present Convention, genocide means any of the
following acts committed with intent to destroy, in
whole or in part, a national, ethnical, racial or religious
group, as such:
THE ORIGINS OF VIOLENCE
[ 16 ]

CHIMPANZEES, HUMANS, AGRICULTURAL SOCIETY
[ 17 ]
Killing members of the group;
Causing serious bodily or mental harm to members of
the group;
Deliberately inflicting on the group conditions of life
calculated to bring about its physical destruction in
whole or in part;
Imposing measures intended to prevent births within
the group;
Forcibly transferring children of the group to another
group.10
Genocide, the concept unhappily conceived by Lemkin as neces-
sary to comprehend the wide sweep of human history and in the
hope of international agreement to prevent or at least punish its
occurrence, has proven increasingly influential as a perspective
and frame story for our species from its beginnings; a concept that
inspires thought at the limits of what humanity might be and
become.
JANE GOODALL
Lemkin’s insight into human history, that genocide between
groups, as with homicide between individuals, has always
occurred and will probably keep occurring, finds support in prima-
tology, with its interest in shared ancestors between humans and
other primates. I’ll focus on a celebrated text of primatology, Jane
Goodall’s The Chimpanzees of Gombe (1986), which at one point
mentions genocide, as I record in my opening epigraphs above,
though Goodall seems unaware of Lemkin’s definition. Goodall
doesn’t define what she means by genocide and is more interested
in the question of warfare and its relation to the activities and
thinking of both chimpanzees and humans. For many decades,
Goodall has been the worldwide ‘face’ of primate studies in
Africa, though her work has not escaped questioning and criti-
cism. In Primate Visions (1989), Donna Haraway sceptically

THE ORIGINS OF VIOLENCE
[ 18 ]
probes the complex interplay between gender, science and race,
and especially the curious prominence of Western white women
like Goodall and Dian Fossey in the conduct and shaping of
primate research in Africa amidst pressing contexts of imperialism
and colonialism, and, from the early 1960s, decolonization;
contexts where their writings have been marked by their own
histories and cultures and an overarching narrative of relating
primate behaviour to humanity conceived as ultimately Western.
Haraway is critical of Goodall’s claim, in the Introduction to The
Chimpanzees of Gombe, that the spirit of her research is similar to
that of Colombus discovering America, as if Colombus were to be
considered an innocent and disinterested figure in world history.
Here, Haraway suggests, Goodall appears to be naively disowning
any situating contexts of colonialism and decolonization.11
Haraway doesn’t, however, discuss in detail The Chimpanzees 
of Gombe as a text, which is what I will do here, especially the
chapter ‘Territoriality’. My perspective will be that of genocide
scholarship.
The Chimpanzees of Gombe is an engaging and beautifully
written study, not least because Goodall conversationally introduces
her own life story, research experience and uncertainties and spec-
ulations as vital to her analyses of chimpanzee behaviour. In her
Introduction, Goodall tells us how she came to be in Gombe in
Tanzania on the forested shores of Lake Tanganyika for 25 years
studying the chimpanzees of the Kasakela Valley. It had, she
confides, been a childhood dream of hers to study animals in Africa,
and she finally was enabled to do so by Louis Leakey, who found
funding for her expedition: ‘And so it was that in July 1960 (accom-
panied by my mother and an African cook) I set foot, for the first
time, on the sandy beach of Gombe on Lake Tanganyika.’ Goodall
says Leakey was interested in her research because he was particu-
larly curious about chimpanzees, our closest living relatives today
in biochemical terms, brain anatomy and uncanny similarities in
social behaviour. Leakey asked Goodall to consider, in a sustained
longitudinal examination, the evolutionary argument that since
‘man’ and chimpanzee once diverged from common stock,

CHIMPANZEES, HUMANS, AGRICULTURAL SOCIETY
[ 19 ]
behaviour patterns that exist in modern humans and modern
chimpanzees were probably present in that common ancestor, and
therefore in ‘early man’ as well. Leakey’s evolutionary argument
and vision, Goodall contends, has been ‘more than justified’, and
indeed Goodall believes that the argument can be taken a step
further, particularly if we are to understand the place of aggression
in both chimpanzees and humans.12
Leakey had anticipated, Goodall recalls, that her study might
last for ten years, but, given that chimpanzees may live for as
long as 50 years, even 25 years is, she feels, not long enough.
Because Goodall and her fellow field observers continued
beyond the initial decade of research, they could, she is able to
say, document many remarkable things about chimpanzees:
there may be enduring, affectionate bonds between family
members, sometimes lifelong; close kin will aid and support
each other; adult males cooperate in hunting, patrolling territo-
rial boundaries, and protecting their females and young. Above
all, Goodall believes, observation over many years revealed that
the chimpanzees have advanced cognitive abilities accompanied
by sophisticated social interactions, the development of cultural
traditions, and individuality. Yet sustained longitudinal study
also revealed disturbing aspects of chimpanzee behaviour in
terms of relations between groups, including the ‘violent aggres-
sion’ that broke out when the Kasakela community, the particu-
lar social group she is studying (who are habituated to human
presence), divided into two groups: ‘We discovered that in certain
circumstances the chimpanzees may kill and even cannibalize
individuals of their own kind’.13
Chapter 17, ‘Territoriality’, is devoted to the aggression and
violence that occurred when a group from the Kasakela commu-
nity split away and began to live in a different valley, raising issues
of desire for land and territory, genocide, warfare and violence
towards stranger females and, sometimes, their infants. Goodall
tells us the premise of this unsettling chapter: that a group is best
studied not in isolation but in its interactions with other groups.
She also regards certain facets of chimpanzee social organization

as relevant to what occurred when the Kasakela group divided,
with the remaining Kasakela community retaining a larger number
of warrior males, while the new Kahama community to the south,
now their neighbours, had fewer males. Unlike many primate
groups (such as the baboons of Gombe), chimpanzees do not
travel in stable groups nor do they follow predictable paths, so that
a lone male may suddenly encounter several males of a neigh-
bouring group, or a party of males may surprise a single female.
While male chimpanzees remain in their natal group, females may
transfer out, though young immigrant females may face violent
hostility from resident females. And females may also travel
relatively often in the overlap zones between communities, in a
situation where there are no well-defined boundaries. In general,
Goodall feels that observation has established that interactions
between males of neighbouring communities are typically hostile.
She also observes, and remains puzzled by, severe attacks on older
females, leaving them badly injured, to the point where they might
disappear and presumably die. Chimpanzees may even hunt a
stranger female. Female chimpanzees may also join in attacks on
stranger females and cause considerable injury.14
In the 1970s Goodall and her fellow field workers recorded
the assaults on and dispersal of the breakaway Kahama Valley
community by the Kasakela group, their relatives, with whom they
had had affectionate relationships. It was in 1972 that Goodall’s
observers recognized that a new community, the Kahama group,
had come into existence at Gombe, but it would only last for five
years. In 1974 the Kasakela males initiated a southward move-
ment of violent aggression that culminated in the complete
destruction of the Kahama community and annexation of the
Kahama community range. Goodall describes in detail the
‘consistently brutal and protracted’ attacks on members of the
Kahama group: the vicious attacks on Godi, then Dé (with the
female Gigi joining in the attack), Goliath (one of the attackers
being Jomeo, who had been friendly with Goliath in the past –
there is a photo of Goliath being groomed by Jomeo), Charlie and
finally Sniff, the only remaining Kahama male. The crippled older
THE ORIGINS OF VIOLENCE
[ 20 ]

Kahama female Madam Bee and her daughters Little Bee and
Honey Bee were subject during 1974–75 to a series of attacks by
the Kasakela males and also Gigi, though only the mother,
Goodall records, was hurt. In mid 1975 Madam Bee was fatally
attacked by Kasakela males, watched by four Kasakela females,
including Little Bee, who had by this time transferred into the
Kasakela group. Goodall is sure that two other Kahama females,
Mandy and Wanda, also suffered fatal attacks. In 1978 the
Kasakela community then began to sleep as well as feed in what
had been Kahama territory, though they themselves soon had to
retreat when the powerful Kalande community further to the south
of the Kahama Valley began to push northwards, the Kahama
group no longer being a buffer between the Kalande and Kasakela
groups.15
In a concluding discussion to this chapter, Goodall ponders
the meaning and possible purposes of such aggressive intergroup
violence in Gombe’s chimpanzees. Goodall is especially puzzled
by assaults on older stranger females, at times accompanied by the
death of their infants, including by being cannibalistically eaten or
partially eaten. Goodall reflects, however, that the aggression was
clearly directed at the mothers, not the infants, who are at other
times not harmed; infanticide, that is, was not the object of the
assaults. It is noteworthy, Goodall suggests, given chimpanzees’
characteristic aversion to strangers, that the victims were all
members of neighbouring communities, usually encountered in
overlap zones where the chimpanzees, aware that neighbouring
males might be nearby, are nervous. She also wonders if those
older females who are mothers travelling with daughters are
attacked as a way of weakening mother–daughter bonds, which
are very strong, so that the daughters can be recruited into the
community. Nevertheless, Goodall remains unsure of the
adequacy of these explanations: ‘For the present, this whole area
must remain speculative. More facts are badly needed.’16
Chimpanzee violence towards older stranger females may
recall aspects of the dreadful history, also problematic to
explain, of torture and killing of witches in European Christian
CHIMPANZEES, HUMANS, AGRICULTURAL SOCIETY
[ 21 ]

history, given blunt biblical warrant in Exodus xxii, 18: ‘Thou
shalt not suffer a witch to live.’ In an eerily resonant analysis,
Lyndal Roper writes in Witch Craze: Terror and Fantasy in
Baroque Germany (2004), her study of witches in sixteenth and
seventeenth-century southern Germany, that the ‘cruelty shown
to older women is one of the more disturbing aspects of early-
modern German culture’. Anyone could fall prey to Satan and
become a witch, and people were especially vulnerable to
Satan’s temptations while in a state of depression, despair,
melancholy, or excessive sadness and sorrow. It was, however,
predominantly older women who became known as witches, and
older women were in any case held to be prone to the attacks of
melancholy that might permit Satan to seduce them. Older
women who were menopausal or post-menopausal, and over the
age of 50, were consistently over-represented; most of these
women had been mothers, but now were no longer fertile. Hatred
of old women – often depicted as horrifyingly sexually rapa-
cious but unable to give birth to children and envying younger
women who could – was evident throughout German art, litera-
ture, medicine and popular culture. Often they were accused of
cannibalism. At witch trials, the bodies of accused old women
were subject to ‘vicious aggression’. Roper suggests that while
witches were not hunted everywhere in Europe, there was a
powerful cultural current of hatred of elderly women in early
modern societies, linked to deeply held fears and fantasies
concerning mothers and wombs: fears and fantasies that clus-
tered around death of babies and older women’s physical decay
and lack of fecundity; witches would confess (under sustained
interrogation and gruesome torture) to having sex with the Devil
and eating the flesh of dead babies.17
There was also, Roper tells us, a story that involved apes. The
witch craze, she points out, intersected with and was intensified by
the centuries-long history of anti-Semitism (including massacres,
expulsions and the myth of Jewish ritual murder of Christian chil-
dren). In one particular tale, a Jewish woman criminal is deported
to a desert island where she is captured by a tribe of apes and
THE ORIGINS OF VIOLENCE
[ 22 ]

forced to become the wife of one of them; she gives birth to
several children and lives on the island for some time in this state
of degradation, until rescued by Portuguese sailors on a passing
ship. When the ship arrives back at port, the woman is condemned
to be burnt as a sodomite.18 Here, it would appear, in the dehuman-
izing of the outcast Jewish woman, primatology meets early
modern European Christian fantasy. Goodall mentions a similar
phenomenon amongst chimpanzees, in relation to strangers. If
chimpanzees, adult and infant, are recognized as not belonging,
they may be attacked as if they are prey animals, as if no longer to
be considered as fellow chimpanzees, or, as she wryly puts it, they
are dechimpized.19
What notions of territory, Goodall asks, do chimpanzees
seem to work on? She notes that much of the literature on non-
human territorial behaviour, widespread in the animal kingdom,
is authored by ornithologists, where among many bird species
territory owners are a single male or a male–female pair.
Chimpanzee behaviour, however, differs in important ways from
territoriality based on bird behaviour, which is relatively peace-
ful and ritualized. For chimpanzees, it is often the size of the
patrol that determines an encounter, not the possession of terri-
tory. Furthermore, chimpanzees are (like hyenas and lions)
violently hostile towards neighbours to a degree that differs
from traditional territory owners of the animal kingdom. Chim-
panzees don’t simply chase trespassers away, they assault them,
leaving them perhaps to die; they may also mount aggressive
raids into the core area of a neighbouring group, and Goodall
and other primatologists have observed in their long-range stud-
ies, not only at Gombe but also Mahale, three major invasions,
during which adult males, and some females, were killed or
disappeared.20
In the chimpanzee, territoriality functions not only to repel
intruders from the home range, but sometimes to injure or elimi-
nate them; not only to defend the existing home range and its
resources, but to enlarge it opportunistically at the expense of
weaker neighbours; not only to protect the female resources of a
CHIMPANZEES, HUMANS, AGRICULTURAL SOCIETY
[ 23 ]

community, but to actively and aggressively recruit new sexual
partners from neighbouring social groups.21
Goodall poses a question highly relevant to the study of geno-
cide: do chimpanzees show intent to kill? Goodall first declares
that ‘we can tell nothing about the “intentions” of the aggressors’
in the case of the Kasakela group when they made victims of the
Kahama group. Nevertheless, she reports that the ‘observers, all
thoroughly experienced in chimpanzee behaviour, believed that
the aggressors were trying to kill their victims’. She asks the field
assistants why they think this is so, and they reply that the attacks
revealed patterns also evident during the killing of large prey, with
assaults continuing until the victims were incapacitated; such
patterns, they said, are not characteristic of intracommunity fight-
ing. Goodall summarizes these discussions: ‘the Kasakela males
were making determined attempts, through wounding and batter-
ing, to incapacitate the Kahama chimpanzees.’ She then adds that
if the Kasakela males had had ‘firearms and had been taught to use
them, I suspect they would have used them to kill’.22
Mention of firearms leads Goodall to another speculative
question: can such intergroup aggressive violence in chimpanzees
be seen as a precursor to warfare? War, she notes, is usually
defined as uniquely human behaviour, a universal characteristic of
human groups, involving organized armed conflict. Here she
introduces the term ‘genocide’: because war amongst humans has
involved genocidal destruction of certain groups and not others, it
became part of evolution, of ‘group selection’. Goodall also refers
to the speculative literature which postulates early forms of
warfare in hominids, sometimes referred to as dawn warriors, as
very important in developing valued human qualities, for example,
altruism, courage, intelligence and increasingly sophisticated
cooperation among group members, qualities which would have to
be matched by other groups if they wished to survive. Warfare
may even have been the principal evolutionary pressure that
created, according to such evolutionary thought, the huge gap
between the human brain and that of our closest living relatives,
the anthropoid apes.23
THE ORIGINS OF VIOLENCE
[ 24 ]

CHIMPANZEES, HUMANS, AGRICULTURAL SOCIETY
[ 25 ]
Goodall disagrees with, or at least wishes to complicate, the
notion of warfare as unique to humans. She points out that
destructive warfare amongst humans required ‘preadaptations’
that are also possessed by chimpanzees: not only an inherent fear
of, or aversion to, strangers, revealed in aggressive attacks on
them, but also group living, group territoriality, cooperative
hunting skills, weapon use and the intellectual ability to make
cooperative plans. Chimpanzees also, she continues, reveal other
‘inherent characteristics’ that would have been useful for the
‘dawn warriors in their primitive battles’; the young male chim-
panzee, for example, is ‘inherently disposed to find aggression
attractive’, even to the extent of risking approaching potentially
dangerous neighbours on his own. In similar terms, Goodall
feels, early human males may have been inherently disposed to
look forward to or enjoy aggression, a shared trait of humans and
chimpanzees that may have ‘provided a biological basis for the
cultural training of warriors’ as in the later glorifying of the
warrior or soldier, condemning cowardice, rewarding bravery
and battlefield skill, and the practising of so-called manly sports
in childhood.24
Again, chimpanzees develop a strong sense of group identity,
of differentiating between those who belong and those who don’t.
Goodall, however, is critical of the notion of ‘xenophobia’: ‘This
sense of group identity is far more sophisticated than mere xeno-
phobia.’ Xenophobia is too unsupple a concept, particularly if we
consider that the members of what became the Kahama commu-
nity had, before the division into two groups, enjoyed close and
friendly relations with those who would become their aggressors.
By seceding, Goodall reflects, they lost their right to be regarded
as group members, instead being treated as strangers. The
stranger, that is, is a shifting and uncertain category.25
Cannibalism and cruelty are further questions to consider.
Goodall points out that cannibalism, reported in humans from all
over the world and as existing far back in history, had until
recently been treated as a trait that distinguished humans from
other primates. Yet, she reports, her research has revealed that

amongst chimpanzees cannibalism of infants may accompany
intergroup conflict with neighbouring females. Again, Goodall
reminds us, it used to be thought that human destructiveness and
cruelty, especially the acts of great cruelty shown in warfare,
distinguished humans from other animals; in this view, only
humans were capable of cruelty because only humans had the
intellectual sophistication, in terms of understanding what pain
is and empathizing with the pain of the victim, to enjoy or be
indifferent to another’s pain. Such a distinction between humans
and other primates is doubtful, Goodall believes, because chim-
panzees do perform cruel acts and they are capable to some extent
of imputing desires and feelings to others and of feelings akin to
sympathy. Nevertheless, Goodall readily concedes, chimpanzees
are ‘intellectually incapable of creating the horrifying tortures
that human ingenuity has devised for the deliberate infliction of
suffering’.26
Goodall brings this chapter of The Chimpanzees of Gombe to
a close on a perturbed and pensive note. She observes that when
humanity’s remote ancestors acquired language, they could then
expand intergroup conflicts into the organized, armed conflict that
defines warfare. Nonetheless, she submits, the chimpanzee has
reached a stage where ‘he stands at the very threshold of human
achievement in destruction, cruelty and planned intergroup
conflict’; and given that the chimpanzee is close to learning
language, perhaps, she wonders, he is close as well to waging war
‘with the best of us’.27
For a genocide scholar, reading Goodall’s evocation of the
violence of the Gombe chimpanzees is very interesting. Her
analysis is consonant with Lemkin’s argument that genocide
signifies a coordinated plan of different actions aiming at the
destruction of the essential foundations of life of a group. The
Kasakela group, it would appear, conducted planned and coordi-
nated operations that aimed to destroy the foundations of life of
the Kahama group so that it could no longer function as a group.
In terms of Lemkin’s observations of recurring features of geno-
cide, there was mutilation of the victims, and an attack on
THE ORIGINS OF VIOLENCE
[ 26 ]

Kahama family life, taking away continuing opportunities of
procreation within the Kahama community. Lemkin also writes
that those who have been victims and persecuted may turn
around if given historical opportunity to be the genocidal victim-
izers and persecutors of others; from Goodall’s analysis, it is
clear that the Kahama group, if they had been stronger than the
Kasakela, might have genocidally attacked them.
There is another resonance with genocide theory, in terms of
perpetrator enjoyment of violence and being drawn to risk, even
extreme risk. Goodall observes that when the Kasakela males
attacked the Kahama male Sniff, they were in a ‘state of consid-
erable excitement’. In the attack on the Kahama male Goliath,
they became ‘incredibly excited’. Most adult male chimpanzees,
particularly young prime individuals, appear strongly motivated
to travel to peripheral areas, finding encounters with strangers
highly attractive, not least the ‘frenzied rush’ toward stranger
females. Chimpanzees, she notes, actually go out of their way to
create opportunities, by visiting peripheral areas (on average,
once every four days) in order to encounter intruders at close
range.28 In ‘Genocide as Transgression’, the essay I quoted from
earlier, Dan Stone proposes that modern genocides and
massacres, as in Cambodia and Rwanda, the Rape of Nanjing
and My Lai, share, in anthropological terms, a transgressive
violence: the enjoyment of violence, including killing and antic-
ipation of killing, and the theatre of violence itself. The perpe-
trators enjoy the acts of violence to a degree that can be called
orgiastic, and together, in the act of killing, the perpetrators form
temporary ecstatic communities, experiencing a heightened
sense of belonging to their own group in the act of performing
violence, which may also be erotically charged; a collective
effervescence in belonging, often involving as it were ordinary
people.29
Goodall’s evocation of the combination of contradictory
qualities of Gombe chimpanzee society and external relations,
frequently affectionate and caring within the circle of those who
belong to a group, violently aggressive towards those who are
CHIMPANZEES, HUMANS, AGRICULTURAL SOCIETY
[ 27 ]

perceived as not belonging, is intriguing and possibly illuminat-
ing in terms of a shared history between chimpanzees, ‘early
man’ and continuing human history. We can think immediately
here of Walter Benjamin’s familiar dictum suggesting the
permanent co-presence within human history of the civilized
and barbarous (‘There is no document of civilization which is
not at the same time a document of barbarism’), or the great
historian of the Middle East, Maxime Rodinson, reflecting that
all peoples ‘have been victims and executioners by turns, and all
peoples count among their number both victims and execution-
ers’.30 Dan Stone makes a similar observation, referring to
Georges Bataille’s contention that the same peoples can be alter-
nately barbarous and civilized in their attitudes and actions; so
called ordinary or normal people, says Stone, commit genocide
and massacres.31
In terms of long-running debates about biological determin-
ism in primate – including human – behaviour, I agree with the
sophisticated anti-determinism of Hilary Rose and Steven Rose
which allows a powerful space for plasticity of brain and mind, the
capacity not to be predetermined, the talent to be transformative,
to be able to change and reverse and invert, to be unpredictable.32
In these terms, while there may be shared characteristics between
chimpanzees and early humans, these may act in human history as
potentialities, as possibilities, rather than as inevitable or binding;
and they may not be carried through at all.
A final irony from the perspective of genocide studies: Jane
Goodall’s presence at what became the large Gombe research
station was initially enabled by British colonial control and
occupation in Africa; a colonialism not too dissimilar from that
of the Gombe chimpanzees, though on a vastly greater and
worldwide scale. It’s sobering to reflect that not that far away in
Africa, throughout the 1950s, British colonial officials had been
brutally repressing the Mau Mau independence movement and in
effect imprisoning the entire Kikuyu population, accompanied
by the torture, mutilation and death of many thousands of
Kenyan people.33
THE ORIGINS OF VIOLENCE
[ 28 ]

JARED DIAMOND
Lemkin’s insight into genocide as an enduring aspect of human
history finds support in ornithologist Jared Diamond’s The Rise
and Fall of the Third Chimpanzee (1991). Though Diamond like
Jane Goodall seems unaware of Lemkin’s definition, genocide
nevertheless features in his largely pessimistic narrative. He
devotes Chapter 16, ‘In Black and White’, to its persistence and
pervasiveness, not least in the colonial genocides of Aboriginal
peoples in Tasmania and Australia generally, and of Native
Americans in the United States. In an appendix to this chapter,
Diamond assembles some chilling quotes where various famous
Americans enthuse on the desirability of extermination of the
Native Americans: President George Washington, Benjamin
Franklin, President Thomas Jefferson, President John Quincy
Adams, President James Monroe, President Andrew Jackson,
Chief Justice John Marshall, President William Henry Harrison,
President Theodore Roosevelt, ending with a quote from General
Philip Sheridan: ‘The only good Indians I ever saw were dead.’34
This is a passionate chapter indeed.
While he considers there is no simple way of defining geno-
cide, Diamond nevertheless argues that ‘collective killing’ is its
‘essence’. He does not think that genocide is necessarily state-
directed, because such a formulation would entail that genocide
is a primarily modern phenomenon. Rather, Diamond argues that
genocide amongst human groups probably began millions of
years ago, when the human species was just another big
mammal. He believes that perhaps the commonest motive for
genocide in history occurs in disputes over lebensraum, when a
‘militarily stronger people attempt to occupy the land of a
weaker people, who resist’.35
Genocide, he also notes, is quite common among animal
groups, especially in social carnivorous species like lions,
wolves, hyenas and ants, taking the form of coordinated attacks
by members of one troop on members of a neighbouring troop.
Genocidal behaviour can also be observed in two of our closest
CHIMPANZEES, HUMANS, AGRICULTURAL SOCIETY
[ 29 ]

relatives, gorillas and common chimpanzees. Diamond reports
on Jane Goodall’s research, especially calling attention to what
I’ve highlighted in The Chimpanzees of Gombe, the episode
when one chimpanzee band exterminated another. Chimpanzees
share with humans, Diamond feels, a ‘xenophobia’ in relation to
other bands and groups.36 (We might, however, recall here
Goodall’s reservations about the concept of xenophobia in her
analysis of the Gombe chimpanzees.)37 What especially interests
Diamond in Goodall’s evocation of the chimpanzee genocide is
that the Gombe chimpanzees, lacking weapons, are, compared
with humans, largely inefficient in their killing, Diamond refer-
ring to how by contrast Australia’s settlers, heavily armed, ‘often
succeeded in eliminating a band of Aborigines in a single dawn
attack’. Diamond suggests that human group living probably
came about as a way of defending against other human groups.
In history, the main danger to human life comes from other
humans.38
In the chapter ‘Agriculture’s Two-Edged Sword’, Diamond
questions the conventional ‘progressivist’ view that situates
agriculture as a sacred milestone in humanity’s march towards
civilization. On the contrary, says Diamond, we should return a
mixed report card on the introduction of agricultural society into
history, with some gains and many losses for humanity. Agricul-
ture began to emerge only relatively recently, and it arose not
because of its evident civilizational superiority, but because of its
practical advantages in producing food. For most of human
history, humans were, in Diamond’s view quite sensibly, hunters
and gatherers, and they did not take to agriculture, from its origins
in the Near East around 8000 BCE, with any noticeable alacrity or
enthusiasm at all. Agriculture reached Greece around 6000 BCE
and Britain and Scandinavia some 2,500 years later. Even in the
nineteenth century, he is interested to observe, the Indians of Cali-
fornia preferred to hunt and gather, though they knew of agricul-
ture through trade with farming Indians in Arizona. Amongst
surviving hunter-gatherers, and contrary to the progressivist view,
the Kalahari Desert Bushmen have a great deal of leisure time,
THE ORIGINS OF VIOLENCE
[ 30 ]

sleep a lot and do not devote excessive time to obtaining food,
perhaps working only 12–19 hours per week. Extant hunter-gath-
erer groups are healthy, do not suffer from much disease, and
enjoy a diverse and nourishing diet.39 (Diamond could also have
mentioned the traditional life of Australian Aboriginal groups; we
might also think here of the 2006 film Ten Canoes set in the past
of Australia’s Arnhem Land.)
Indeed, archaeology, Diamond contends, is helping to
demolish the view that hunter-gatherers in the pre-agricultural past
were worse off in terms of diet and health, or inferior in art and
culture, than those who came to live in agricultural societies. Agri-
cultural society certainly did bring in increased food production
and practices of food storage, but it also introduced as well many
features that are the ‘curse’ of modern human existence, and
Diamond devotes much of the chapter to detailing what these are.
The staple high-carbohydrate crops like rice, potatoes and corn
produced by farmers are lower in protein, vitamins, minerals and
general nutrient value than the food enjoyed in the hunter-gatherer
diet. Because hunter-gatherers eat a wide range of edible plants,
they are not susceptible to starvation when a farming crop, as with
potatoes in Ireland in the 1840s, precipitately fails. Then there are
comparative height levels, indicative of health and nutrition. Pale-
opathologists, studying ancient skeletons from Greece and Turkey,
have concluded that the average height of hunter-gatherers in that
region towards the end of the Ice Age was something like an
impressive 5 foot 10 inches for men, and 5 foot 6 inches for
women. With the adoption of agriculture, however, the height of
people lessened dramatically, descending by 4000 BCE to only 5
foot 3 inches for men, 5 foot 1 inches for women. In classical
times, people’s height was rising again, but modern Greeks have
still to regain the height of their hunter-gatherer ancestors.40
The coming of agricultural society was, Diamond argues,
ruinous for human health. When paleopathologists studied
American Indian skeletons in the Illinois and Ohio River valleys,
they realized that the introduction of corn there, around 1000
CE, led to tooth cavities, tooth loss and abscesses; enamel
CHIMPANZEES, HUMANS, AGRICULTURAL SOCIETY
[ 31 ]

defects in children’s milk teeth suggested that the mothers were
severely undernourished; people now lived shorter lives and
suffered more from anaemia, and tuberculosis became estab-
lished as an epidemic disease; half of the population of these
valleys suffered from yaws or syphilis, and two-thirds from
osteoarthritis and other degenerative diseases. Malnutrition and
infectious diseases killed off almost a fifth of children between
the ages of one and four. Diamond tells us that in the transition
from hunter-gathering to farming elsewhere in the world,
evidence from studies of skeletons emerges of similar public
health disasters, which were also intensified by a major feature
of the coming of agriculture: people living together in crowded,
sedentary populations which can constantly reinfect each other.
Diseases like cholera and measles could not survive and persist
in small, scattered bands of hunters and gatherers who often
shifted camp. But such ‘crowd epidemics’ are coincident with
the rise of agriculture: ‘Tuberculosis, leprosy, and cholera had to
await the rise of farming, while smallpox, bubonic plague, and
measles appeared only in the past few thousand years with the
rise of cities.’41
Farming, and the storage of food which accompanies it, also
introduced, Diamond believes, more curses for humanity, break-
ing with the patterns of egalitarianism that generally characterize
hunter-gatherer societies. Who can appropriate stored food, who
can control it, led in farming societies to class divisions, often
between disease-ridden and malnourished masses and healthier
elites as in distinctions between commoners and royals. Sexual
inequality may have intensified with the advent of agriculture,
with women’s health drained by frequent pregnancies. By
contrast, ‘nomadic’ hunter-gatherers limited their number of chil-
dren by infanticide and other means, since a mother in such
communities has to carry her child until it is old enough to keep
up with the adults. The coming of farming permitted the presence
of full-time craftsmen and artists, yet, for all the great art and
architecture that has been achieved in the last few thousand years,
we should also recall, Diamond observes, the great paintings and
THE ORIGINS OF VIOLENCE
[ 32 ]

sculptures, if on a smaller scale, of the hunter-gatherers of Cro-
Magnon times and the work of Eskimos and Pacific Northwest
Indians in the present era. (Again, Diamond could have mentioned
the great art of Australian Indigenous people, past and present.)
Furthermore, the specialization afforded by agricultural societies
also introduced ‘standing armies of professional killers’. Agricul-
tural societies have brought humanity ‘starvation, warfare, and
tyranny’.42
Diamond concludes his reflections in this chapter by suggest-
ing that at the end of the Ice Age, the choice by some hunter-
gatherer groups, in no position to anticipate the ‘evils of farming’,
to adopt agriculture led to a new global force for destruction. Such
farming bands, now sedentary, outbred and then drove off the
bands that had chosen to remain hunter-gatherers, and were able
to do so because ‘ten malnourished farmers can still outfight one
healthy hunter’. Hunter-gatherers were forced out of all areas of
the world that farmers wanted, and persist now only in the Arctic,
deserts and some rainforests.43
In Guns, Germs and Steel (1997) Diamond developed in
greater detail many of the motifs and themes of The Rise and
Fall of the Third Chimpanzee. In his prologue, Diamond writes
on a personal note that living in Europe from 1958 to 1962,
‘among European friends whose lives had been brutally trauma-
tized by twentieth-century European history’, had made him
think hard about the chains of causes that operate in history. Also
in the prologue, Diamond repeatedly raises the question of
genocide as shaping, along with conquest and epidemics, the
interactions between disparate peoples that have constituted the
modern world. In Chapter 11, ‘Lethal Gift of Livestock’,
Diamond amplifies on the dubious benefits of agricultural soci-
ety in terms of health. Many germs that afflict modern humanity
were transferred from livestock to people living in crowded
conditions. Smallpox, flu, tuberculosis, malaria, plague, measles
and cholera are infectious human diseases that evolved from
diseases of animals. Furthermore, such diseases played a major
role in the colonization of the Americas that began with
CHIMPANZEES, HUMANS, AGRICULTURAL SOCIETY
[ 33 ]

Columbus’s voyage of 1492. The germs brought by the ‘murder-
ous Spanish conquistidores’ devastated the Native Americans,
for while Europeans had to some degree become habituated to
such germs, their introduction was new in the Americas and the
Native Americans had neither immunity nor genetic resistance,
leading to catastrophic population decline.44 Guns, Germs and
Steel is a work of anxious concern for the fate of humanity, from
its earliest history to the present.
Diamond’s observations of the dangers and deleterious aspects
of the coming of agricultural societies, in a continuum that stretches
from antiquity to the present, remain pertinent and disturbing. In
terms of agricultural society and animal–human transfer of germs in
the past, John M. Wilkins and Shaun Hill note in Food in the Ancient
World (2006) that recent studies of Minoan Crete of the late Minoan
III period (fourteenth century BCE) suggest the presence of infec-
tious diseases in the population, including ‘osteomyelitis, brucel-
losis (transferred to humans from infected cow’s milk), tuberculosis
... and nutritional diseases such as osteoporosis, scurvy, rickets and
iron-deficiency anaemia’.45 The danger of avian flu and other possi-
ble animal–human transfers in an overpopulated world – brought
directly on by the coming of agricultural society – continues to be
a frightening possibility.
GALARRWUY YUNUPINGU
In the latter 1990s, Ann Curthoys and I were fortunate to attend
a speech given by the central Australian Aboriginal leader,
Galarrwuy Yunupingu, to the National Press Club in Canberra
(on 13 February 1997). Yunupingu said he was continually
astonished by the way the European colonists of Aboriginal
lands always referred to themselves as the settlers while desig-
nating his people by contrast as nomads. Such a characterization,
he observed, was historically preposterous. The European
colonists and migrants, he pointed out, were the inveterate
wanderers on the face of the earth, they were the ones who had
THE ORIGINS OF VIOLENCE
[ 34 ]

travelled to distant places, across oceans and far from their own
homes, and now constantly roamed within the Australian conti-
nent. European politicians in the Northern Territory, where his
people lived, constantly boasted that they were the settlers and
belonged to the Territory. Yet, he noted with irony, those same
white politicians some years later could be observed living else-
where in Australia. Meanwhile the Aboriginal peoples, who stay
on their own lands as far as they are permitted by the colonizers
to do so, to look after their country and because they belong to
it, are always referred to as nomads!
We discussed Yunupingu’s speech many times afterwards, for
it changed much of our thinking about colonization, migration and
world history, in particular his highlighting of such pervasive colo-
nizer and migrant reverse narratives. Ann explored Yunupingu’s
insight in relation to the persistent ways settler colonists in
Australia always see themselves as victims and so incapable of
being the victimizers of others.46 In Is History Fiction? (2005) we
related Yunupingu’s thinking to Herodotus’s Histories in our
discussion of the hubris of colonizers from agricultural societies in
regarding themselves as the settlers wherever they restlessly roam,
concluding that it is the supposedly settled and urbanized peoples
who are the nomads of world history.47
HUGH BRODY
A number of years after hearing Galarrwuy Yunupingu’s question-
ing of a key Western mythology, I was fortunate to learn of Hugh
Brody’s The Other Side of Eden: Hunter-Gatherers, Farmers, and
the Shaping of the World (2000), and immediately recognized a
convergence in hunter-gatherer perceptions of world history
between Australian Aboriginal peoples and the peoples of the
Canadian Arctic.48 Indeed, what startled me was the similarity
between Galarrwuy Yunupingu’s thinking about who are the
settlers, who the nomads in Australian history, and Brody’s think-
ing concerning who are the nomads inspired by his experience of
CHIMPANZEES, HUMANS, AGRICULTURAL SOCIETY
[ 35 ]

living, as he evokes it, in breathtakingly beautiful snow and
icescapes alongside Arctic hunter-gatherer peoples:
a crucial difference between hunter-gatherers and farmers
is that one society is highly mobile, with a strong
tendency to both small- and large-scale nomadism,
whereas the other is highly settled, tending to stay firmly
in one particular area or territory. This difference is estab-
lished in stereotypes of ‘nomadic’ hunters and ‘settled’
farmers. However, the stereotype has it the wrong way
round. It is agricultural societies that tend to be on the
move; hunting peoples are far more firmly settled. This
fact is evident when we look at these two ways of being in
the world over a long time span.49
In this eloquent and passionate work, Brody shares Jared
Diamond’s questioning of history as a narrative of progress.50 He
calls on Diamond’s analysis of the fatal effects of the animal-to-
human diseases that are transferred in agricultural societies, and
emphasizes that the ‘microbes that came with the conquerors and
settlers to the Americas killed far more indigenous peoples than
did European weapons’. In some parts of North America, 75 per
cent of the indigenous population was wiped out by such intro-
duced illnesses: ‘In all areas, weakness and fear remained for
those who survived.’51
Brody shares an interest with Diamond in the shaping force of
genocide in history. When agricultural societies meet hunter-gath-
erer societies, a clear pattern emerges: ‘One kind of economy and
culture overwhelms another.’ Above all in this genocidal process,
the new settlers from Europe wanted for their own purposes the
land the hunter-gatherers occupied: ‘Any opposition to farming
had to be checked, made impossible. The enemies of settlement
had to be silenced or removed. This is the story of the United
States, Canada, Australia and much of southern Africa.’ Such
genocide by incoming settlers involves land primarily, but is also
associated with other kinds of dispossession and suppression of
THE ORIGINS OF VIOLENCE
[ 36 ]

hunter-gatherer peoples and their culture, for example the loss of
indigenous languages enforced by Canada’s residential schools.52
Like Diamond, Brody argues that a major force for genocide,
violence, destruction and cultural loss in world history is the
relentless movement of agricultural-pastoral societies, so recent in
their appearance, into the areas of the world where hunter-gatherer
groups had lived for many thousands of years.
Primates such as chimpanzees and humans have always prac-
tised intergroup violence including genocide, so that intergroup
violence and genocide remain permanent possibilities. In human
history, such violence and genocide were immensely and disas-
trously intensified with the coming of agricultural societies. Such
has been the world we have lived in for the past 6,000 years. Such,
I will now also argue, was certainly very much in evidence in the
ancient classical world.
CHIMPANZEES, HUMANS, AGRICULTURAL SOCIETY
[ 37 ]


2 GENOCIDE, AND 
QUESTIONING OF 
GENOCIDE, IN THE
ANCIENT GREEK
WORLD: HERODOTUS
AND THUCYDIDES
… the misery of war …
(Homer, The Iliad, Book Five)1
Your king is not a just man – for were he so, he had not
coveted a land which is not his own, nor brought slavery
on a people who never did him any wrong.
(Ethiopian king to the Persians, in Herodotus, The
Histories, 3.21)2
The reason why Athens has the greatest name in all the
world is because she … has spent more life and labour in
warfare than any other state, thus winning the greatest
power that has ever existed in history, such a power that
will be remembered for ever by posterity.
(Pericles in Thucydides, History of the Peloponnesian
War, 2.64)3
Massacres of whole peoples are not unprecedented. They
were the order of the day in antiquity, and the centuries of
[ 39 ]

THE ORIGINS OF VIOLENCE
[ 40 ]
colonization and imperialism provide plenty of examples
of more or less successful attempts of that sort.
(Hannah Arendt, Eichmann in Jerusalem)4
In this chapter, I investigate instances of intergroup violence
including genocide, and questioning of such violence, in the clas-
sical Greek world, as evoked in Herodotus and Thucydides, the
founding figures of Western historical writing. Both created their
great works The Histories and History of the Peloponnesian War
in fifth-century Greece BCE, when Athens went from a city-state
successfully resisting Persian invasion early in the century to the
powerful possessor of an empire as the century went on. In both
texts we can, I argue, discern allegorical ‘Gandhian’ moments of
profound questioning of the value of war, violence, conquest,
empire and colonization.
As in Chapter 1, my framework will be that of genocide stud-
ies. Because genocide was once thought to be a blunt instrument of
analysis, an aim of this and succeeding chapters is to show, espe-
cially when deploying Lemkin’s wide-ranging definition, how intri-
cate and multi-faceted it can be. This is especially so when we apply
the concept to the ancient world. Lemkin had planned to do so: one
of the contents lists for his unfinished book on the history of geno-
cide, held in the New York Public Library, includes a proposed
chapter on genocide in Ancient Greece.5 In this chapter I will also
be agreeing with Hannah Arendt’s comment in the epigraph that
genocide was ‘the order of the day in antiquity’. In particular, if a
city lost a siege which it had resisted, it was likely that the men of
fighting age would all be slain, while the women and children would
be taken separately into slavery, followed by colonization of the
defeated city by the victors. Genocide occurred in the ancient clas-
sical world during war, conquest, extensions of empire, colonization
and also civil war, the slaying of those perceived as political
enemies. In this last sense, while political genocide was excluded as
a consideration in the 1948 UN Genocide Convention, it was
certainly part of Lemkin’s original 1944 definition in Axis Rule in
Occupied Europe.

HERODOTUS AND THUCYDIDES
[ 41 ]
HISTORICAL WRITING
What, I think, is truly remarkable about Herodotus and Thucydides
is that they established history as cosmopolitan and international in
spirit. Their writings were engagingly anti-nationalist and anti-
ethnocentric. They could be extremely critical of Greek no less than
of other societies, and they certainly did not exempt democratic
Athens from harsh judgement.6
The proliferating stories of Herodotus’s The Histories, whose
frame story is the war between Persia and Greece early in the fifth
century and the subsequent gaining by Athens of a powerful and
resented empire of allied and subject states, work emblematically
as fables, parables, allegories of world history. Thucydides’
History of the Peloponnesian War is also cast in a literary form,
suggesting a tragic or at least highly problematic and fraught rela-
tionship between democracy and empire. Like Herodotus’s The
Histories, Thucydides’ History explored what might be recurring
or enduring or persisting features of history and humanity through
the ages.
In both Herodotus and Thucydides there is an interesting play
of perspectives concerning violence, including stories of protest at
and criticism of the intergroup violence and genocide involved in
war, colonizing and empire, as unworthy of what humanity should
be. Herodotus and Thucydides establish history as a mode of ethi-
cal reflection with which all future thinking about empire,
conquest and colonization in the European classical and neo-
classical tradition had to engage: no easy task, given the moral
weight of their reflections is opposed to empire and colonization.
In the second half of the twentieth century and in the twenty-
first, it is the anti-empire and anti-colonial spirit in Herodotus and
Thucydides, with its appeal to international humanitarian protec-
tion as laws all people should hold in common, that has resurged
strongly in critical thinking about empire and colonialism. The
same spirit is also evident in new forms of international law that
have seriously challenged older international law, which appeared
always to assist and enable colonization and empire.

THE ORIGINS OF VIOLENCE
[ 42 ]
It is in this light that Thucydides’ History in particular has
been invoked for its contemporary significance by a judge dealing
with cases of genocide in the Balkans. In the International
Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Serious
Violations of International Humanitarian Law Committed in the
Territory of the Former Yugoslavia since 1991 (1999), Judge
Shahabaddeen gave a separate opinion in which he directly quoted
from the History:
Some time ago, yet not far from where the events in this
case happened, a ‘breakdown of law and order’ occurred.
There ‘were savage and pitiless actions into which men
were carried not so much for the sake of gain as because
they were swept away into an internecine struggle by their
ungovernable passions’. The turmoil saw ‘the ordinary
conventions of civilized life thrown into confusion’.
Sadly, it seems, people took ‘it upon themselves to begin
the process of repealing those general laws of humanity
which are there to give a hope of salvation to all who are
in distress, instead of leaving those laws in existence,
remembering that there may come a time when they, too,
will be in danger and will need their protection’.
Justice the Hon. Mohammed Shahabaddeen, an eminent jurist
who has been a judge also of the International Court of Justice
(elected in 1987) and would later be a judge in the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (2005), reflected that the ‘general
laws of humanity’ that the ancient chronicler spoke of had taken
over 2,000 years to become binding norms applying worldwide
with legal force.7
HERODOTUS
In Herodotus’s remarkable array of stories, covering a vast geog-
raphy in the ancient world from the Black Sea and beyond to

HERODOTUS AND THUCYDIDES
[ 43 ]
Mesopotamia to Egypt to Africa to Greece and environs, amidst
evocations of unceasing war, colonization and attempted exten-
sions of empire, there are egregious examples of genocide and
population transfer or ethnic cleansing as a common practice,
eerily anticipatory of those blood-soaked centuries the twentieth
and now the twenty-first.8
Herodotus tells us about the practice of netting by the invad-
ing Persian naval forces on their way to war with Athens, a
practice that would now be described as ethnic cleansing. The
Persians attacked Ionian islands like Chios, Lesbos and Tenedos,
which were ‘reduced without difficulty’. Whenever they became
masters of an island, Herodotus says, the Persians ‘netted’ the
inhabitants: ‘Men join hands, so as to form a line across from the
north coast to the south, and then march through the island from
end to end and hunt out the inhabitants’ (6.31); an activity that
anticipates what British forces infamously tried to do to the
indigenous people on the island of Tasmania over two millennia
later.9 The Persian land forces also captured Ionian towns upon the
mainland, ‘not however netting the inhabitants, as it was not possi-
ble’. Here they ‘chose out all the best favoured boys and made
them eunuchs, while the most beautiful of the girls they tore from
their homes and sent them as presents to the king’, at the same
time ‘burning the cities themselves, with their temples’. The
Ionians were reduced to ‘slavery’ (6.32).
Herodotus relates many instances of colonization. These
could be examples not of invasion and displacement, but of
desperate or invited migration (1.94, 6.18–22). However, colo-
nization also, especially when part of a desired expansion of
empire, often involved injury or attempted injury to those peoples
already living in the area, and in recounting these situations
Herodotus’s sympathies lie with the colonized, not the colonizers;
those facing conquest, not the conquerors.
Early in The Histories there is a striking ethical confrontation
between the Persian King Cyrus and Tomyris Queen of the
Massagetae, a people living on a vast plain east of the Caspian Sea.
In an exchange of messages, Tomyris questions the imperative of

THE ORIGINS OF VIOLENCE
[ 44 ]
imperial expansion: ‘Be content’, Tomyris has a herald say to
Cyrus, ‘to rule in peace thy own kingdom, and bear to see us reign
over the countries that are ours to govern’, though she (rightly)
doubts that Cyrus will ‘choose to hearken to this counsel, since
there is nothing thou less desirest than peace and quietness’(1.206)
(recall Dan Stone’s thought that a constant possibility in human
violence is an anticipated joy in war and killing).10 As it turns out,
Cyrus should have listened to Tomyris’counsel. In the ensuing war,
after 29 years as king and regarding himself as invincible, he is
killed (1.206, 214). Tomyris has Cyrus’s body brought to her, and
mournfully intones to the dead king that while she has defeated him
in battle, yet he has ruined her life in the death of her son, who had
been captured by Cyrus and died by suicide in captivity. In this sad
and tragic speech, Tomyris highlights the hubris of male rulers in
history pursuing the misery of war, in wars of conquest that always
put nations and peoples under threat of loss of liberty and death of
loved ones (1.204–14; also 2.102).11
A similar ethical duel occurs between the Persians and
Ethiopians. King Cambyses, son of Cyrus, decides to attack
Ethiopia, first sending messengers to the Ethiopian king, offering
gifts, friendship and alliance. But the king realizes that they are spies
and that Cambyses is bent on conquest. He tells the messengers:
Your king is not a just man – for were he so, he had not
coveted a land which is not his own, nor brought slavery
on a people who never did him any wrong. Bear him this
bow, and say, – ‘The king of the Ethiops thus advises the
king of the Persians – when the Persians can pull a bow of
this strength thus easily, then let him come with an army
of superior strength against the long-lived Ethiopians – till
then, let him thank the gods that they have not put it into
the heart of the sons of the Ethiops to covet countries
which do not belong to them’ (3.21).
When Cambyses’ spies return and report the Ethiopian king’s
speech, Cambyses is so angered that he forthwith sets out on a

HERODOTUS AND THUCYDIDES
[ 45 ]
march against the Ethiopians without making any proper provi-
sions for his army or reflecting, Herodotus dryly comments, that
he was ‘about to wage war in the uttermost parts of the earth’.
Before he has gone but one-fifth of the distance, the army’s provi-
sions fail and the soldiers begin eating anything they can, includ-
ing the ‘sumpter beasts’ and then grass and herbs, until finally,
arriving at ‘bare sand’, they cast lots and slay one of their own for
food. Cambyses, hearing of ‘such cannibalism’, at last gives up
and retreats, having lost vast numbers of his men: ‘And so ended
the expedition against Ethiopia’ (3.25). In relation to this story, we
might think of the primatological observation of Jane Goodall in
The Chimpanzees of Gombe that human beings have through time
and all over the world practised cannibalism.12
Again and again, Herodotus evokes the destructiveness of
colonization. The Histories tells of a Greek colony in Libya and its
consequences for the Libyans. A man called Battus, born with a
stammer and lisp, goes to Delphi to consult the oracle about his
voice; the pythia, however, reports that Phoebus Apollo bids
Battus to ‘establish a city in Libya, abounding in fleeces’. In the
event, Battus and other Greeks go out to ‘colonize Libya’, though
at first the colony, established on an island off the Libyan coast,
fares poorly. Consulted again, the oracle tells Battus and his fellow
colonizers to settle on the Libyan mainland itself. The Libyans
induce them to leave the place where they first attempt to settle,
and lead them elsewhere, bypassing in the night ‘the most beauti-
ful district of that whole country’. The colonists establish the city
of Cyrêné, beside a spring, on pleasant and fertile land. After
many decades, and in the reign of a new king, it transpires that the
advice of the oracle ‘brought Greeks from every quarter into
Libya, to join the settlement’, for the ‘Cyrenaeans had offered to
all comers a share in their lands’. When this ‘great multitude’ of
Greeks came, the ‘Libyans of the neighbourhood found them-
selves stripped of large portions of their lands’, so they and their
king, ‘being robbed and insulted’, sent messengers to Egypt to
intervene on their behalf. This was an ill-fated entreaty, for subse-
quently the Egyptian army which came to support the Libyans was

THE ORIGINS OF VIOLENCE
[ 46 ]
‘routed with such slaughter that but a very few of them ever got
back home’ (4.154–159).
In a similar vein, Herodotus tells a story of the coming of the
Scythians into the land of Cimmeria. The Scythians had once
dwelt in Asia, but decided to move after warring, with ill success,
against the Massagetae. As they approached Cimmeria, ‘the
natives’, hearing how numerous are the Scythians, found them-
selves divided on what to do, some urging flight as otherwise they
would be destroyed, others urging that the people stay and fight
‘the invaders’ for their soil to the last. As it turned out, according
to this account, the two factions of the Cimmerians warred with
each other, with the side urging they stay and fight being slain; the
other Cimmerians then departed, and the Scythians, ‘on their
coming, took possession of a deserted land’ (4.11).
The Histories does not, however, create an ancient world that
is lawless, that operates only by invasion and conquest. Through-
out The Histories Herodotus notes many instances of accepted
international conventions concerning the protection and kind
treatment of strangers, travellers, messengers, ambassadors,
heralds, supplicants, refugees and exiles. Herodotus tells of King
Xerxes’ outrage at instances of cruel Athenian and Spartan treat-
ment of some Persian messengers that had occurred in King
Darius’s time: Xerxes declares, with ‘true greatness of soul’, that
such killing of heralds and messengers broke the ‘laws which all
men hold in common’. Herodotus himself suggests that such inter-
national law concerning kindly reception of strangers was divinely
sanctioned; breaking it would incur the wrath of the gods in the
form of various calamities, in which was manifest the ‘hand of
Heaven’ (7.133–137).
There are also in Herodotus ‘Gandhian’ allegorical moments
of non-violence, stories of societies that eschew war and
violence, stories that challenge the usual course of history. In
particular, Herodotus tells of a community beyond the Scythians,
the Argippaeans, who possess no warlike weapons, and are so
special and gentle a people that their neighbours look upon them
as sacred. When their neighbours fall out, the Argippaeans make

up the quarrel; and when a neighbour flies to them for refuge, he
is safe from all hurt (4.23).13 In this parable, sacredness is asso-
ciated with non-violence, rather than with war, conquest and
empire that are held by various peoples to be sanctified by the
gods or God. And sacredness is associated not with a bellicose
masculinity, but with its reverse.
In the frame story of The Histories, after the defeat of the
Persian fleet at Salamis, the Athenians, now the dominant Greek
naval power, set about forging an empire in the Ionian islands
and city-states east of Athens, which the Persians had formerly
controlled as part of their empire. Herodotus observes in the
victorious Athenians values that accompany the acquisition of
new subject states, especially visible in predatory commanders
like Themistocles, as he extracts, or attempts to extract, tribute
from Greek island peoples: rapacity, greed, arrogance and will-
ingness to betray one’s own (8.111–12). Here is a new historical
situation for democratic Athens, gaining and possessing an
empire, and almost immediately, as he notes in Themistocles,
there is a rapid deterioration in morality and ethics that bodes ill
for Athens’ future, let alone the future of its new subjects, as well
as presenting ominous problems for the other nations of the
Greek world that have to deal with Athens and its new imperial
status and self-image.14
As we shall now see, Thucydides takes up the frame story of
Athens and the ethical consequences of possessing an empire from
the point where Herodotus ceases his narrative.
THUCYDIDES
The misery of war, civil war, colonization and attempted exten-
sions of empire are features of The History of the Peloponnesian
War, with egregious examples of genocide and population transfer
or ethnic cleansing, examples so appalling in their implications
that Thucydides’ History has forever afterwards shadowed the
claims of democracies to be superior in history. Let’s reprise for a
HERODOTUS AND THUCYDIDES
[ 47 ]

THE ORIGINS OF VIOLENCE
[ 48 ]
moment the story of the near 30-years’ war, fought intermittently
from 431 to 404 BCE, between democratic Athens and its empire,
and monarchical Sparta and its league of oligarchic allies, as
Thucydides’ History constructs it for us; a war that Athens would
lose, along with its empire.
In Thucydides’ History, we witness the Athenian statesman
Pericles as foremost among those, Athenian or Spartan, who incite
the war to begin. A brilliant orator in the Sophist tradition, Pericles
in his speeches to the assemblies assures them that Athens will
quickly win the war, if it follows his strategy. The Athenians, he
recommends, should leave the countryside, their homes, farms and
temples in Attica, and come to reside in Athens and between the
Long Walls that lead down to the port of Piraeus, and in Piraeus;
because of their seamanship and experience as soldiers landing
from ships, they enjoy naval superiority (and can always import
food and supplies from Ionia to the east); they must not, however,
attempt to acquire any new territory, rather they should steadfastly
hold on to what they already possess. Pericles’ plans, however, are
almost immediately thrown off course. A devastating plague –
suggested by the History to be a divine judgement on Pericles and
Athens’ desire for war (2.54)15 – breaks out in the crowded condi-
tions that his strategy creates in Athens and between the Long Walls
and Piraeus, and in subsequent speeches Pericles has to tell assem-
blies of his fearful and resentful fellow citizens why they must
continue to fight this war. Athens, Pericles says, has become a great
city, perhaps the greatest city ever known, because of the warfare
practised by their forebears that established their empire. Whatever
the feelings of the peoples of the subject states, the empire is the
means of making Athens great, to be remembered for all time for its
civilized achievements: democracy, equality before the law,
advancement by merit, relaxed freedom and tolerance in private
life, laws protecting the oppressed, the beauty and good taste of
Athenian homes, an excellent education system and Athens as an
open city (2.35–42).
In his Funeral Oration held for those Athenian men first to die
in the war, Pericles says it is part of Athens’ greatness that it acts

in relation to others with a ‘free liberality’, doing kindness to
others out of friendship and not out of calculation: ‘We make
friends by doing good to others, not by receiving good from them.’
And, says Pericles, Athens is ‘unique’ in this: ‘When we do kind-
ness to others, we do not do [it] out of any calculations of profit or
loss.’ He feels no hesitation in declaring that ‘our city is an educa-
tion to Greece’. Athens’empire reveals mighty monuments left for
posterity: ‘Future ages will wonder at us, as the present age
wonders at us now.’ And part of the reason for the success of
Athens is ‘our adventurous spirit’, which has ‘forced an entry into
every sea and into every land’. Everywhere, Pericles declares, ‘we
have left behind us everlasting memorials of good done to our
friends or suffering inflicted on our enemies.’ Such disinterested
virtue, along with valour, adventurousness and ‘manliness’, have
made Athens ‘splendid’ (2.40–42).
Yet along with such altruism, Pericles’ speeches also reveal
the kind of nationalist and ethnocentric values and imperial
hauteur and arrogance that were increasingly alarming the other
Hellenic nations, including Athens’ own allies and subject states,
who more and more tried to revolt and break away. Pericles’ long-
term concern, it is evident, is with Athens itself, its survival and
continuance as an imperial power. In the stress of the plague, he
urges his fellow Athenians to recall their ‘superiority’ that accom-
panies Athens’ ‘imperial dignity’. Such superiority and imperial
dignity are dependent on their possession of empire, and they must
hold onto their empire even when they know that they have
incurred the ‘hatred’ of its subject peoples in administering it.
Pericles even admits that it may have been wrong to have taken the
empire in the first place, because it has become a ‘tyranny’; but, if
the Athenians wish to continue as a great society, they must not let
their empire go (2.62–3).
Here, for a fleeting and perhaps horrified moment, Pericles
concedes that Athens’ cultural treasures are dependent on tyranny
and hatred, radically putting into question his and Athens’ own
self-image of moral and ethical superiority. In effect, Pericles is
here anticipating Walter Benjamin’s observation, in his ‘Theses on
HERODOTUS AND THUCYDIDES
[ 49 ]

THE ORIGINS OF VIOLENCE
[ 50 ]
the Philosophy of History’, that one can only contemplate
‘cultural treasures’, the cultural treasures prized by the victors and
rulers in history, ‘with horror’.16
In these terms, Pericles admires in Athens what we would now
recognize in modernity – if we think of settler colonial states like
apartheid South Africa or Zionist Israel – as a herrenvolk or ethnic
democracy.17 There is an elite group who compose Athens’ partic-
ipatory citizens: the Athenian males, but not the subject peoples of
the empire. Thucydides’ History suggests that democracies, and
this is especially so when democracies seek to acquire empires,
will always be herrenvolk; they are never wholly inclusive,
citizenship is always restrictive or conditional, and the morality
that excludes will always undermine the high values proclaimed as
the sign of greatness of the democracy.
The kind of ethical deterioration that Hannah Arendt
perceived in late nineteenth and early twentieth-century European
imperialism18 is evident in Pericles’ disdain for non-Athenians, his
sense of Athenian superiority, his lack of moral concern for the
victims of Athens’ ‘tyranny’ and his acceptance of double stan-
dards – that it is morally unobjectionable in his view that Athens
be a democracy while the subject states of the empire are denied
their freedom and independence, since the only criterion that
fundamentally matters is what is good for Athens.
GENOCIDE AND THE HONOUR OF NATIONS
In the artistic design of the History of the Peloponnesian War, as
the war goes on the Athenians’ ethical deterioration, an increasing
heartlessness, a lack of sympathy and empathy with others subject
to Athens or those who should in their view be subject to Athens,
is chillingly evident. Such heartlessness is particularly prominent
in two scenes involving a near genocide and an actual genocide, as
evoked in the History: the Mytilinean Debate and the Melian
Dialogue.19 In the Mytilinean Debate, the demagogue Cleon
distinguishes himself by declaring to the assembly that to feel pity

and compassion for a conquered people like the Mytilineans, who
have tried to revolt, is against the interests of an imperial power
like Athens, which must accept that it is a tyranny and act accord-
ingly; for Cleon, the rights and wrongs of why Mytilene attempted
to revolt are irrelevant (3.37–40). Cleon recommends mass death
for the Mytilineans, though this is averted at the last moment,
Mytilene just escaping, as Thucydides’ History puts it, a
‘massacre’ (3.49).20
In the Melian Dialogue, presented in Book Five, the people of
the island of Melos, originally a colony of Sparta, wish to preserve
their long-standing independence and to stay neutral in the war
between Sparta and Athens. The island, however, is visited by an
Athenian force, sure of their superior military strength, whose
leaders tell the Melians, with brutal directness, that Melos has to
come within the Athenian empire; if the Melians refuse they and
their city will face devastation. The Athenians declare that they are
not interested in any considerations of justice, for example, that
the Melians have not joined Sparta in the war nor done any harm
to Athens. The Athenians insist that the only morality that is rele-
vant is not justice, but practical matters of self-interest, force and
power: ‘the strong do what they have the power to do and the weak
accept what they have to accept’ (5.89).
Athenians: It is for the good of our own empire that we are here
and … it is for the preservation of your city that we
shall say what we are going to say. We do not want any
trouble in bringing you into our empire, and we want
you to be spared for the good of yourselves and of
ourselves.
Melians:
And how could it be just as good for us to be the slaves
as for you to be the masters?
Athenians: You, by giving in, would save yourselves from disas-
ter; we, by not destroying you, would be able to profit
from you.
Melians:
So you would not agree to our being neutral, friends
instead of enemies, but allies of neither side?
HERODOTUS AND THUCYDIDES
[ 51 ]

THE ORIGINS OF VIOLENCE
[ 52 ]
Athenians: No, because it is not so much your hostility that injures
us; it is rather the case that, if we were on friendly
terms with you, our subjects would regard that as a
sign of weakness in us, whereas your hatred is
evidence of our power.
(5.91–95)
The Melians, after discussing the Athenian threat among them-
selves, then tell of their decision, that they ‘are not prepared to
give up in a short moment the liberty which our city has enjoyed
from its foundation’: ‘we invite you to allow us to be friends of
yours and enemies to neither side, to make a treaty which shall be
agreeable to both you and us, and so to leave our country’ (5.112).
The Athenians refuse, immediately commence hostilities, and
eventually (in 416 BCE) succeed in what they had threatened to do:
Siege operations were now carried on vigorously and, as
there was also some treachery from inside, the Melians
surrendered unconditionally to the Athenians, who put to
death all the men of military age whom they took, and
sold the women and children as slaves. Melos itself they
took over for themselves, sending out later a colony of
500 men.
(5.116)
If the Athenians had shown hesitation, and worried about being
cruel and engaging in mass slaughter in relation to the Mytilin-
eans, no such hesitation is revealed in the case of the Melians. The
description of the destruction of Melos fits exactly the concept of
genocide as defined by Lemkin, of an attack on a group followed
by reduction of its population and replacement of the original
population by colonization. In this process, enslavement was an
instrument of ethnic cleansing, as we would now call it, in the
ancient classical world.
The probing questions put to the Athenians by the Melians
anticipate a famous work of post Second World War moral

HERODOTUS AND THUCYDIDES
[ 53 ]
philosophy, Isaiah Berlin’s Historical Inevitability (1954),
where Berlin argues that in the past individuals could have
chosen to act otherwise than how they did; they could have
avoiding acting in the ways they did act.21 The Melians warn
the Athenians that they are making a choice that is concerned
only with short-term advantage, which they may regret in a
longer view. The Athenians, say the Melians, are being unwise;
they ‘should not destroy a principle that is to the general good
of all men – namely, that in the case of all who fall into danger
there should be such a thing as fair play and just dealing’: ‘this
is a principle which affects you as much as anybody, since your
own fall would be visited by the most terrible vengeance and
would be an example to the world’ (5.90). One day, the Melians
are suggesting, when the Athenians are themselves in danger of
being harmed or destroyed, they will not be able to appeal to a
general human principle of ‘fair play and just dealing’ for
protection. Their fall will be ‘an example to the world’ of the
consequences of ignoring international humanitarian law ‘that
is to the general good of all men’ and which could possibly
protect the Athenians themselves in their own inevitable time
of weakness and vulnerability. Few would come forward to
defend them, the Melians imply, because by their brutality the
Athenians have dishonoured themselves among the nations;
dishonoured themselves in history.
ATHENS INVADES SICILY
The Athenian destruction of Melos is only one amongst other
examples of genocide, of which there are many throughout the
History. Indeed, in his introductory remarks in Book One, Thucy-
dides reflects that extreme intergroup violence characterized the
Peloponnesian War as a whole. Such violence had begun much
earlier in the century when, the Persians having been defeated, the
Athenians conquered their former possessions, as in the siege of
Eion, where they made slaves of the inhabitants, and the island of

Scyros in the Aegean: ‘They enslaved the inhabitants and colo-
nized the island themselves’ (1.98). During the Peloponnesian
War, while total destruction of the Mytilineans was at the last
moment averted, the Athenians nevertheless ‘divided all the land’
into 3,000 holdings, 300 of which ‘were set apart for the gods,
while the remainder was distributed by lot to Athenian share-
holders, who were sent out to Lesbos’, the Mytilineans now
becoming ‘subjects’ of Athens (3.50).
In the History it is clear that the sympathies of Thucydides
as narrator are with those who dislike and protest at empire and
the subjugation of subject states that accompany it. A common
theme is that the Athenians, in taking over part of Persia’s
empire, had become like the very Persians the Greeks had
thought they were fortunate in expelling. Perhaps the most
powerful denunciation of such Athenian/Persian identity was
voiced by Hermocrates of Syracuse, during the ill-fated Athen-
ian invasion of Sicily; Thucydides refers to Hermocrates as ‘in
every way a remarkably intelligent man’ (6.72). Hermocrates
told the assembly that the Athenians are attempting ‘to take away
from us what is ours’:
The fact is that just as they won an empire in Hellas, so they
are trying to win another one here, and by exactly the same
methods. The alliance of Ionians and others racially
connected with Athens voluntarily accepted Athenian lead-
ership in the war to get their own back from Persia; but the
Athenians deprived them all of their independence, accusing
some of failure to fulfil their military obligations, some of
fighting among themselves, bringing forward, in fact, any
plausible excuse to fit each particular case. So, in making this
stand against Persia, Athens was not fighting for the freedom
of Hellas. … What Athens wanted was to substitute her own
empire for that of Persia.
(6.76)
In the event, the Syracusans’desire to maintain their independence
THE ORIGINS OF VIOLENCE
[ 54 ]

overwhelmed the Athenian hubris of wishing to extend their
empire to the west.
By the campaign’s end, the Athenian navy had been destroyed
and their military forces were facing complete humiliation, degra-
dation and slavery: ‘Indeed, they were like nothing so much as the
fleeing population of a city that has surrendered to its besiegers’
(7.75). Certainly they did not receive sympathy or leniency from
the Syracusans – whose lands had been attacked by Athens for no
other reason than to advance Athens’ imperial ambitions – who
had defeated them so utterly (7.85–87).
THE CHALLENGE TO ATHENS
Herodotean and Thucydidean anti-nationalist cosmopolitanism
was certainly a challenge to the image Athenians held of
themselves and by which they wished to be remembered, a self-
admiring image we’ve already witnessed in Pericles’ Funeral
Speech in Thucydides’ History.
In Theseus, Tragedy and the Athenian Empire (1997),
Sophie Mills suggests that Thucydides’ critical attitudes towards
war, conquest and empire were sharply at odds with the usual or
conventional view that most Athenians in the classical age would
have maintained of themselves and their city.22 In this idealized
self-image, Mills relates, Athens claimed Theseus as its guiding
mythological hero, to be honoured for triumphing over the
Minotaur in Crete, where he faced danger for the sake of others,
and freed Athens from King Minos’ control. Theseus’ heroic
prowess, Mills argues, was held to symbolize Athenian national
virtues, at home and abroad – Athens as the city of justice and
mercy, opposing all forms of tyranny, always altruistic, always a
civilizer and liberator, a benefactor to humanity. Just as Theseus
in his heroic exploits combined physical strength with intelli-
gence and moral wisdom, so did Athens in all its actions,
including its foreign policy. In this self-image, which became
part of its imperial ideology, Athenian military might was always
HERODOTUS AND THUCYDIDES
[ 55 ]

used in the generous service of civilized values; Athens was
loyal to its friends and selflessly intervened for the common
good on behalf of the weak and vulnerable. In this Periclean
view, as Mills says, Athens should be admired as the only truly
Greek city, an example to all the others; its duty was to educate
Greece in ideal Athenian values.23
Yet Mills also notes that the sanitized and domesticated
portrait of Theseus adopted by Athens in the sixth and fifth
centuries was not necessarily shared by non-Athenians, who could
readily think of stories descending from the eighth and seventh
centuries where Theseus can be observed as a far more ambivalent
figure. Certainly he conquers the Minotaur, but then, in a notori-
ous act of ingratitude and treachery, he abandons King Minos’
daughter Ariadne on the way back to Athens, Ariadne who has
helped him to escape the laybyrinth. In such stories, Mills reflects,
Theseus can also be considered a parricide, if indirectly, for on his
return he breaks his promise to his father Aegeus that he will
change the sails of his ship from black to white if he has
succeeded against the Minotaur, leading to his father’s suicide. In
other unfavourable stories, Theseus disastrously abducts Helen
and hides her in Aphidna in Attica, causing an invasion by the
Dioscuri (Helen’s brothers) to recover her, during which Theseus’
mother is captured; there was a tradition that Theseus was not
present to save his defenceless mother from suffering and humili-
ation. On another occasion, Theseus assists his friend Peirithous in
a failed attempt to abduct the queen of the underworld; in one
common story, the two abductors are tricked into sitting down and
then, as punishment for their hubris, are bound fast for eternity,
Theseus having to be rescued by Heracles. Increasingly in
Athenian retellings, however, Mills observes, Theseus was re-
made as a representative hero of Athens, portrayed as the humane
democratic king who stood firm against all forms of tyranny, his
apparent failings explained away. Mills suggests that for non-
Athenians Theseus was nonetheless exceedingly unlikely material
as a hero representing all that was to be revered in a city.24
In Thucydides’ History, the Melian Dialogue is dramatically
THE ORIGINS OF VIOLENCE
[ 56 ]

at odds with the Athenian self-idealization that Sophie Mills
evokes. The Melians suggested – and such I feel is the view of the
History as a whole – that the Athenians would be judged harshly
in history for their enthusiasm for war and their imperial morality,
or amorality.25 They would suffer an eternal loss of historical pres-
tige.26 And indeed the episode of the destruction of Melos, as
created by Thucydides in his remarkable dialogue, has become a
‘classic’ of genocide literature.27
CONCLUSION: SPEAKING TO THE FUTURE
When Judge Shahabaddeen in his separate opinion in 1999 on cases
of genocide in the Balkans in the former Yugoslavia fulsomely
praised Thucydides’ History, he was referring to the evocation in
Book Three of the terrible civil war in Corcyra in 427, between the
democratic and oligarchic parties, each side appealing either to
Athens or Sparta, part of a more general pattern of civil wars during
the Peloponnesian War as a whole. The leaders of these parties in
cities like Corcyra, Thucydides’ History comments, had rival
programmes which appeared admirable: ‘on one side political
equality for the masses, on the other the safe and sound government
of the aristocracy’. But such programmes became quickly confused
by love of power, greed and personal ambition, followed by ‘violent
fanaticism’ once the struggle had broken out, accompanied by the
destruction of any citizens who held moderate views (3.82) – a
remarkable anticipation of the civil war that broke out in Jerusalem
in the revolt against Rome that had begun in 66 CE, as evoked by
Josephus in The Jewish War.28
In the civil war in Corcyra, both sides were guilty of appalling
atrocities, including the killing of supplicants (with other suppli-
cants, seeing their companions being killed, choosing to commit
suicide, either by killing each other or hanging themselves from
trees). There were massacres of those considered enemies: ‘There
was death in every shape and form. And, as usually happens in
such situations, people went to every extreme and beyond it.’
HERODOTUS AND THUCYDIDES
[ 57 ]

Fathers killed sons; people were killed not for political reasons but
on grounds of personal hatred or else by their debtors because of
the money they owed; men were dragged from temples or
butchered inside ‘on the very altars’; some were walled up and
died in the temple of Dionysus (3.81). The civil war in Corcyra
presaged a general convulsion during the extreme stress of war
that would engulf the Hellenic world; in city after city there were
revolutions and revolutionary zeal, with seizing of power and
‘unheard-of atrocities in revenge’ (3.82).
As a result, there was a ‘general deterioration of character
throughout the Greek world’ (3.83). What was now threatened was
the universal ‘idea of justice’ (3.84). And, as would the Melians
speaking to the Athenians in the Melian Dialogue, Thucydides’
History here, as Judge Shahabaddeen sagely notes, urges the
necessity of international humanitarian law: in Thucydides’ words
‘those general laws of humanity which are there to give a hope of
salvation to all who are in distress’(3.84). It is surely clear from this
intervention that Thucydides supported the appeal to universal
justice by the Melians, and opposed the pitiless imperial actions of
the Athenians.
In the wake of the horror and destruction of the Second World
War, the newly established United Nations crafted a new body of
international law, in the UN Declaration of Human Rights and the
UN Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of
Genocide, both enacted in 1948 within a day of each other.29 New
courts were established, as in the International Court of Justice
and later in the twentieth century the International Criminal Court.
(The ICC was established by the Rome Statute of the International
Criminal Court on 17 July 1998; the Statute setting out the Court’s
jurisdiction, structure and functions entered into force on 1 July
2002.) International law now judged that territory could not be
won by conquest, ethnic cleansing was a crime against humanity,
and children should be protected.
It’s interesting to contemplate Thucydides’ History in terms of
Article II of the 1948 Genocide Convention, which regards as a
crime the forcible transfer of children of a group to another group
THE ORIGINS OF VIOLENCE
[ 58 ]

(Article II, clause 5). As the History evokes the war, children in the
ancient classical world along with women were routinely sold into
slavery after a siege lost by a city’s defenders. Children could also
be moved in and out of societies in situations of crisis. In Book
Five, after a battle between Sparta and its allies and democratic
Argos and its allies (including Athenians), the Spartans are victo-
rious. In the following winter they send to Argos proposals for a
settlement whereby Argos would become pro-Spartan, a settle-
ment which includes the giving back of children on all sides.
Sparta too would observe this injunction: ‘If the Spartans have any
children in their power, they shall give them back each to his own
city’ (5.73, 76–77).
Contemporary international law is, as Judge Shahabaddeen
observed, a reprise and fulfilment of the anti-colonial and anti-empire
conceptions and protests of Thucydides over 2,000 years before.
Thucydides famously wrote in his History (1.22) that he wished to
write not for his contemporaries but for future generations: truly he
did so!
HERODOTUS AND THUCYDIDES
[ 59 ]


3 GENOCIDE, TRAUMA
AND WORLD UPSIDE
DOWN IN ANCIENT
GREEK TRAGEDY:
AESCHYLUS AND
EURIPIDES
Do not with these soft attentions woman me,
Nor prostrate like a fawning Persian mouth at me
Your loud addresses.
(Agamemnon to Clytemnestra in Aeschylus’
Agamemnon)1
I implore you, do not tear my child from me, do not
Kill her. There is enough death. In her lies my joy,
In her I forget troubles, and find comfort for
All I have lost. She is my city now; my nurse,
My staff, my guide. The strong ought not to use their
strength
To do what is not right; when they are fortunate
They should not think Fortune will always favour them.
I once was fortunate, and now I am so no more;
One day has taken happiness, wealth, everything.
Then be my friend. Let awe, and pity, move your heart.
Go to the Achaean army; talk them round; tell them
What odium will fasten on you, if you kill
[ 61 ]

Women whom first you did not kill, but pitied, when
You dragged them from the altars.
(Hecabe to Odysseus in Euripides, Hecabe)2
If men, to settle each dispute,
Must needs compete in bloodshed, when
Shall violence vanish, hate be soothed,
Or men and cities live in peace?
(The Chorus in Euripides, Helen)3
In this chapter, I continue my investigations of intergroup violence
including genocide, and questioning of such violence, in the classi-
cal Greek world, this time as evoked in tragedy. My key texts are
Aeschylus’ Agamemnon and Euripides’ Hecabe, Andromache and
The Women of Troy, with some side glances at Euripides’ Helen. I
reflect on the consequences of genocide both for perpetrators like
Agamemnon and Odysseus, and for victims, especially conquered
women and their children consigned to slavery in faraway lands.4As
in the previous chapter in relation to historical writing, I argue that
in these powerful texts there are discernible allegorical ‘Gandhian’
moments of profound questioning of the value of war, violence and
vengeance. Orientalism, too, figures in these plays, as a spur to
violence; yet Orientalism is also profoundly questioned.
In this chapter, then, genocide studies meets classical Greek
drama, where plays about the mythological age perform as a theatre
of fundamental values, of interpretation and reinterpretation,
questioning and contestation, disaster and lament.
In general terms, I argue that these tragedies, along with
Herodotus and Thucydides’ histories, present a foundational
challenge to how we conceive Western cultural history.
LEMKIN’S ANALYTIC METHOD
I have referred before to Lemkin’s diagrammatic outline for
analysing cases of genocide. It’s time to look at the outline more
closely. I reproduce it here, as follows, including its spelling.5
THE ORIGINS OF VIOLENCE
[ 62 ]

Revised outline for genocide cases
1. Background – historical
2. Conditions leading to genocide – Fanaticism (religious, racial)
Irredentism (national aspirations)
Social or political crisis and change
Economic exploitation (e.g. slavery)
Colonial expansion or milit. conquest
accessability of victim group
evolution of genocidal values in genocidist group
(contempt for the alien, etc.)
factors weakening victim group
3. Methods and techniques of genocide 
Physical:
massacre and mutilation
deprivation of livelihood (starvation,
exposure, etc. – often by deportation)
slavery – exposure to death
Biological:
separation of families
sterilization
destruction of foetus
Cultural:
desecration and destruction of cultural symbols
(books, objects of art, religious relics, etc.)
loot
destruction of cultural leadership
destruction of cultural centers (cities,
churches, monasteries, schools, libraries)
prohibition of cultural activities or codes of behavior
forceful conversion
demoralization
4. The Genocidists – responsibility
intent
motivation
feelings of guilt
AESCHYLUS AND EURIPIDES
[ 63 ]

demoralization
attitude towards victim group
opposition to genocide within genocidist group
5. Propaganda – rationalization of crime
appeal to popular beliefs and intolerance; sowing discord
(divide and rule)
misrepresentation and deceit
intimidation
6. Responses of victim group 
active:
submission; polit. subordination
escape (suicide, hiding, etc.); assimilation
disguise; resistance
emigration (planned); demoralization
passive (emotional, mental)
terror
conceptions of genocidist and his crimes
7. Responses of outside groups – opposition to genocide
indifference to 
”
condonement of ”
collaboration in 
”
demoralization (exploitation of genocide situation)
Fear as potential victims
8. Aftermath – cultural losses
population changes
economic dislocations
material and moral deterioration
political consequences
social and cult. changes
This outline can be found in Folder 11, Box 8, Subseries 2 of the
Lemkin papers in the American Jewish Historical Society
Museum in New York. In the next folder, number 12, Lemkin puts
into practice and continuously deploys the categories of analysis
THE ORIGINS OF VIOLENCE
[ 64 ]

of the diagrammatic summary in his consideration of post-1492
America. In ‘Spanish Treatment of South American Indians Essay,
n.d.’, Lemkin, drawing in particular on the observations of Las
Casas, successively evokes ‘Methods of Genocide – Physical’,
which include massacre, slavery and deprivation of livelihood.
Family life was disregarded, bread made of root-meal was
often the only food; when the slaves fell sick, they were left to
die or at best sent home. The treatment of Indian women consti-
tuted an aspect of biological genocide, the ‘death of the race’.
Slave mothers, exhausted with hunger and fatigue, could not
nurse their babies. Children were not infrequently carried off by
the Spanish; some Indian women were not only violated indis-
criminately but also taken to ‘fill the Harems of the Spanish
colonists’. In terms of physical genocide, the population of the
islands fell catastrophically. There was also a ‘subtle kind of
cultural genocide’ committed by the Spanish missions which
abounded in Mexico, California, Louisiana and elsewhere.
Continuing to apply his method, Lemkin evokes and gives exam-
ples of other categories of genocide, from looting and pillaging
of Indian wealth to destruction of cultural centres and devasta-
tion of Indian leadership in the murder of one chief or king after
another. Under the heading of ‘Responsibility’, Lemkin argues
that with few exceptions the Spanish colonists of New Spain were
guilty of genocide: ‘the colonists were guilty on all counts’.6
Here I will deploy the outline as a method for analysing some
Greek tragedies.
GENOCIDAL CONSCIOUSNESS IN AESCHYLUS’S
AGAMEMNON
Let’s think now of the features of genocide that Lemkin regards as
recurring through history as they might bear on Aeschylus’s
Agamemnon, a play that is precious to humanity’s heritage. In
terms of Lemkin’s opening heading, ‘Background – historical’, we
can think of the various mythological stories that concern and
AESCHYLUS AND EURIPIDES
[ 65 ]

curse the House of Atreus. Agamemnon, the son of Atreus, older
brother of Menelaus and husband of Helen’s sister Clytemnestra,
leads the Greek expedition against Troy, commanding 100 ships,
the largest force in the fleet. In the outline, under ‘Conditions
leading to genocide’, Lemkin lists ‘Colonial expansion or milit.
conquest’. Agamemnon, King of Argos, and Menelaus, King of
Sparta, sail eastwards not to conquer and then colonize the Asian
city of Troy, but to enact revenge on Priam its king by military
defeat. Priam’s city is to be overrun, its fighting men slain,
including Paris who abducted Helen from Sparta and her husband
Menelaus, its women and children captured as trophies of war and
enslaved, the city burnt to ashes, and Helen either to be killed or
brought home to Greece. Yet almost immediately, at the begin-
ning, before the avenging fleet can sail, Agamemnon risks and
earns disapproval both divine and human. While hunting, the king
catches a stag, and then unwisely boasts that he is a better hunter
than Artemis; offended, the goddess holds the fleet wind-bound at
Aulis, and the Greeks, upon the advice of the army seer Calchas,
decide to appease Artemis by sacrificing to her Iphigenia,
Clytemnestra’s beloved daughter; Iphigenia is sent for on the
pretext of her marrying Achilles, and once she is sacrificed by the
Greeks the fleet can sail with favourable winds. After a ten-year
siege, the destruction of Troy will occur consequent upon the
Trojans being deceived by the Wooden Horse harbouring Greek
soldiers.
In Aeschylus’ s Agamemnon (performed 458 BCE), the first
of his Orestes cycle of plays, Agamemnon himself kills Iphige-
nia, for which he is never forgiven by Clytemnestra, who nurses
her desire for revenge until her husband returns. In the play,
Agamemnon, triumphally coming home to his palace as
conqueror of Troy, enters in his chariot, followed by another
chariot loaded with the spoils of war, including Cassandra the
daughter of King Priam and his wife Queen Hecabe. The
extraordinarily formidable Clytemnestra, who will shortly put to
death both Agamemnon and Cassandra, welcomes home the
king her husband; she instructs her maids to carpet the way into
THE ORIGINS OF VIOLENCE
[ 66 ]

the palace with crimson tapestries and invites her husband to
walk on them into his home. Agamemnon in cold reply suggests
to Clytemnestra that her welcome is inappropriate: a woman
should not engage in public praise of a warrior and conqueror;
and, as we can see from our epigraph, he regards with disdain the
crimson cloth as ‘soft attentions’ which will ‘woman’ him in an
Asian way, as if Clytemnestra is a ‘fawning Persian’.7
After a vigorous exchange during which he accuses her of
going beyond her sex (‘It does not suit a woman to be combative’),
Agamemnon gives in, gets an attendant to untie his shoes and
begins to walk his silken way inside. He advises Clytemnestra that
she should treat Cassandra well, for his new slave is the ‘army’s
gift’ to their leader, the chosen jewel of ‘Troy’s wealth’ that has
been taken by the victors. He betrays no consciousness that while
he returns with the daughter of a foreign king as concubine, he had
killed his and Clytemnestra’s daughter ten years before, and
indeed he appears to have forgotten that her death had ever
occurred. Cassandra ‘the prophetess’, the ever unfortunate
foreteller of fate, never to be believed, at first refuses to leave the
loot-chariot as we might call it, fearful of what might happen.
Cassandra soon realizes that like Agamemnon she will be killed
once inside the palace, home of a family doomed by generations
of gruesome violence and vengeance. Cassandra also prophesies
that in her turn Clytemnestra will be killed in revenge for
Agamemnon’s death by their son Orestes, currently living in
exile.8
When, however, Clytemnestra exultantly declares to the
chorus that she has killed Agamemnon by netting him in his bath
and then stabbing him (the ‘crimson rain’ of his blood falling on
her, she says, like ‘the dew of heaven when buds burst forth in
Spring’), she is confident that Justice has been served, her daugh-
ter’s cruel sacrifice has been avenged, and she in turn will not
suffer revenge for what she has done.9
Now to the Powers that persecute
Our race I offer a sworn pact:
AESCHYLUS AND EURIPIDES
[ 67 ]

With this harsh deed and bitter fact
I am content; let them forget the past,
Leave us for ever, and oppress
Some other house with murderous wickedness.10
It is a recurring motif of the ancient Greek tragedies – and perhaps
such is an insight into a general pattern of history – that those
enacting revenge for a perceived great wrong believe that they
themselves will not experience revenge. Vengeance, they feel,
stops with them, because in their view, as Clytemnestra says,
justice has been fulfilled.11 The cycles of revenge, they feel sure,
will now cease.
In ‘Conditions leading to genocide’, Lemkin refers to the
‘evolution of genocidal values in genocidist group (contempt for
the alien, etc.)’. In Agamemnon, the returned conqueror Agamem-
non in his tone towards Clytemnestra clearly valorizes masculine
warrior values above all others; in warfare, a man can attain ever-
lasting fame, fame he himself has earned by his victory over Troy.
Agamemnon has contempt for women as not warriors, and for
Trojans who in a ‘Persian’ way are given to ‘fawning’ to power
and who, as it were, unman themselves in their love of luxury.
When Clytemnestra asks him to imagine what Priam would have
done if he were the conqueror, Agamemnon disdainfully replies:
‘Walked on embroidered satin, I have little doubt.’ When Lemkin
refers to ‘intent’ under the heading ‘The Genocidists’, we can
think that Agamemnon is profoundly pleased that his intent to
destroy Troy, its city and people, its world and its cosmos, has
been resoundingly fulfilled. As a genocidist, his bearing is one of
pride and arrogance as he coldly converses with his wife whom he
hasn’t seen for ten years and instructs her to accept Cassandra as
part of their household; he is not afflicted by any doubts, any
uncertainties concerning his actions, which in his view were
amply justified by the crime of Priam’s son Paris against
Menelaus, an insult to the Greeks as a whole; he does not question
war, violence or revenge; as victor he is certain that the immortal
gods were fully supportive of what he has done, and that he was
THE ORIGINS OF VIOLENCE
[ 68 ]

‘pious’ in carrying out his task, which was to doom ‘Troy’s walls
to dust, her men to the sword’s edge’. Lemkin lists ‘separation of
families’ under the heading ‘Methods and techniques of genocide
– Biological’: Cassandra the child of Priam and Hecabe has been
torn from her home, enslaved, and is to be sexually available for
her captor. In terms of those suffering genocide, Lemkin, listing
‘Responses of victim group – active’, refers to ‘submission’ and
also ‘escape (suicide, hiding, etc.)’. Cassandra escapes her
captivity by choosing death at the hands of Clytemnestra, in effect
suicide; when the chorus asks her why she is entering the palace
knowing she will die, Cassandra despairingly tells them that she
will submit to the comforting embrace of death. In his outline’s
final section, ‘Aftermath’, Lemkin refers to ‘cultural losses’, and
here we can recall that immediately upon his return Agamemnon
tells the chorus of his satisfaction in destroying an oriental city, its
‘wealth and luxury’ now ‘dead’.12
PERPETRATOR AND VICTIM CONSCIOUSNESS IN
EURIPIDES’ HECABE: TERROR AND TRAUMA
If female figures in Aeschylus’s Agamemnon like Clytemnestra and
Cassandra stand out in their eloquence, proud bearing and some-
times terribleness, especially in seeking revenge, there are also,
famously, striking female characters in Euripides’ tragedies later in
the century, after the Peloponnesian War has begun. Hecabe (425
BCE) was produced two years after Mytilene was saved at the last
moment from Athenian destruction. In the play, Troy having been
conquered and its men and warriors massacred, including Priam,
Hecabe experiences unbearable levels of suffering.
We can begin applying Lemkin’s categories of analysis to
this play by interpreting Hecabe’s multiple sufferings as a victim
of genocide. Lemkin’s outline, under ‘Methods and techniques
of genocide – Physical’, lists ‘deprivation of livelihood (starva-
tion, exposure, etc. – often by deportation)’; and under ‘Methods
and techniques of genocide – Biological’, there is ‘separation of
AESCHYLUS AND EURIPIDES
[ 69 ]

families’. Hecabe, once a great queen, learns she is to be
enslaved, having been allotted to Odysseus, one of the
commanders supervising and managing the devastation of the
city; she is to become a humble and humiliated servant in his
household on his return home. In this dramatic situation,
enslavement is, then, very much like deportation: Troy’s remain-
ing population of women and children is to be transferred, as in
ethnic cleansing in modernity, from Troy to cities in Greece. It is
a tiny comfort to Hecabe that she and her remaining family
members will still be alive even if enslaved, but it turns out not
to be quite so, and as news of what is to happen reaches Hecabe,
agony is heaped upon agony, shock upon shock, bearing down
on her so that on stage she can barely walk, or she lies down or
crawls in anguish as she learns of fresh deaths or threats that will
mercilessly turn into deaths. Here is genocide as bodily and
mental trauma of the victim.13
In Hecabe Hecabe herself, as her woes multiply, appeals to
Agamemnon at one point to see her suffering as if with a
painter’s eye: ‘here you see the face of misery; / Stand back and
view it like a painter. Pity me.’14 Hecabe is suggesting that we
can be more moved by art’s representations of suffering than by
direct witnessing of it. The aestheticizing of suffering and
violence is an interesting aspect of the play.
When we first see Hecabe, supported by two younger women,
leaning on a stick, she confides her hope that her one remaining
son, Polydorus, too young to fight in the war and who has been
sent to Thrace to be looked after by a supposedly friendly
neighbouring king, is still alive and is being given continued
protection; all her other sons have been killed. Hecabe has also
just learnt that the ghost of Achilles is demanding ‘a maiden’s
blood in sacrifice’, and she desperately hopes that her ‘darling
daughter Polyxena’ will not be chosen. The chorus, however,
composed of Trojan women held prisoner by Agamemnon and
allotted to various Greek warriors as slaves, as ‘spoils of war’,
have to tell Hecabe that her daughter Polyxena will indeed be
sacrificed to Achilles’ ghost.
THE ORIGINS OF VIOLENCE
[ 70 ]

The Greeks, the chorus has heard, had argued over whether
she should be sacrificed, with ‘two Athenians, the sons of
Theseus’, distinguishing themselves by insisting that she should
be killed, her throat to be cut over Achilles’ tomb in the presence
of the Greek army. In the event, the matter is decided by Odysseus,
a figure who, in contrast to the portrait of Odysseus as wanderer
and trickster in the Odyssey, is decidedly not admired in Hecabe,
the chorus referring to him as a ‘cunning, honey-tongued quib-
bler’, a ‘pleaser of the mob’.15 In the discussion among the Greeks,
the chorus reports, Odysseus urges the army not to ‘dishonour the
bravest of all the Greeks’ for the ‘sake of a slave’s throat’; to sacri-
fice Polyxena is, Odysseus tells them, a patriotic duty. It should
not be said, he avers, that ‘Greeks forget their debts to Greeks’,
that the Greeks ‘came away from the plains of Troy / Neglecting
those who died there for our country’. Odysseus’ view is agreed
to, and he takes it upon himself to request that Hecabe give Polyx-
ena up for sacrifice. When Polyxena and Hecabe learn of the
army’s decision and that Odysseus is approaching, Polyxena
herself tells her mother that she is resigned to die, for that way her
life will avoid ‘shame and misery’ as a slave: in the terms of
Lemkin’s outline, she chooses escape by death, in effect by
suicide.16
Odysseus appears and tells Hecabe that he has come to take
Polyxena to Achilles’ tomb where she will be slain, an act to be
overseen and performed by Achilles’ son. There follows a remark-
able dialogue – anticipating in many ways the Melian Dialogue in
Thucydides’ History – between Odysseus and Hecabe; between
genocide perpetrator and victim. Hecabe questions Odysseus on
the morality of his actions as if in a courtroom scene. As would the
Melians to the Athenians at Melos in Thucydides’ later narration,
Hecabe attempts to appeal to Odysseus’s compassion and
humanity, but finds only mercilessness and indifference. Hecabe
reminds Odysseus that she had once saved his life, when he had
come as a spy into Troy; Helen had recognized him, and told only
Hecabe; he had clung to Hecabe’s knees as a ‘humble suppliant’,
and ‘invented 20 arguments to save’ his life. Hecabe had sent him
AESCHYLUS AND EURIPIDES
[ 71 ]

back unharmed from Troy. She suggests to Odysseus that it would
be more appropriate to sacrifice a bull to Achilles’ tomb, rather
than shed a ‘child’s blood’. She reminds him that in his own
‘country’s law’ killing is killing: no distinction is made between
the killing of a slave or a free person, so to do what he is propos-
ing to do to Polyxena would be judged as murder in his society.
Hecabe also pleads that she be sacrificed in place of Polyxena. To
this last plea, Odysseus’s answer is short: ‘Achilles asked for your
daughter, Hecabe, not you.’17
Odysseus’replies to Hecabe are curiously dull and mechanical,
to a degree where we can certainly think of Hannah Arendt’s
description of Eichmann as an impersonal functionary, indifferent to
any suffering, banally efficient in his genocidal consciousness.
Odysseus in these exchanges with Hecabe and Polyxena, who also
makes moving speeches in this scene, emerges as one who has a
rational bureaucratic task to perform, to collect Polyxena from her
mother and take her to be sacrificed as part of the overall series of
actions that are required to organize and complete the destruction of
the conquered city. Indeed, at the beginning of their conversation,
Odysseus had warned Hecabe that when ‘things are worst, it’s still
wise to be rational’.18
Powerless to prevent her daughter’s death, Hecabe exclaims:
‘O gods! How wretched is the condition of a slave, / Forced to
endure the wickedness of conquerors!’ Odysseus’ banality of
evil can be understood as also part of the general ethical deteri-
oration in those who conquer that Arendt talked of in The
Origins of Totalitarianism, referred to in previous chapters. Such
ethical deterioration – what Lemkin in his outline lists under the
heading ‘The Genocidists’ as ‘demoralization’, and under the
final heading ‘Aftermath’ as ‘moral deterioration’ – is evident
here in the Greeks engaging in human sacrifice, with Achilles’
son enjoining that his dead father in his tomb ‘drink this maid’s
dark untainted blood’, as an offering of the ‘whole army’. The
assembled ‘whole army’ observes the scene of Polyxena’s death
with keen interest, as if it is occurring on stage, a spectacle to be
savoured and remembered. As Achilles’ son is about to cut her
THE ORIGINS OF VIOLENCE
[ 72 ]

throat, Polyxena tears her dress to her waist, ‘and showed her
breasts, and all / Her body to the navel, like the loveliest / of stat-
ues’. Polyxena dies, taking care to fall becomingly, ‘hiding what
should be hidden from men’s view’. The assembled Greeks feel
exalted by the once noble Polyxena’s honourable and almost
erotic death, in a kind of pornography of violence reminding us
of the carnivalesque and ecstatic perpetrator enjoyment of killing
in group situations that Dan Stone has commented on.19 The
young princess Polyxena has been delivered to her aestheticized
public death by Odysseus’ unmoved and indifferent, bureaucratic
and impersonal, banal perpetrator consciousness.20
Hecabe’s sufferings, though she already feels that no woman
could suffer more, that she has already died (‘of all women I am
the most miserable’), have not come to an end. Now occurs in the
drama a kind of peripeteia, a turning point, when Hecabe goes
from suffering victim to a victim seeking revenge, initially against
Helen. One suggestion Hecabe makes to Odysseus is that Helen,
not Polyxena, be sacrificed to Achilles, for hadn’t Achilles come
to Troy and lost his life because of Helen? (The chorus of enslaved
Trojan women also call down a curse on Helen and hope that she
will be drowned on her way back from Troy to Hellas.) Then
Hecabe learns from an attendant that her youngest son, Polydorus,
is no longer alive. Hecabe can now understand a dreadful dream
she has had, that her son has been killed by the Thracian king
Polymestor whom Priam had thought a friend. The Thracian king,
to whom Priam secretly sent his son for protection, has in fact
taken advantage of the siege of Troy to kill Polydorus, cast his
body into the sea and purloin Priam’s gold. In terms of Lemkin’s
categories, under the heading ‘Responses of outside groups’ with
its further categories ‘collaboration’ and ‘demoralization
(exploitation of genocide situation)’, the neighbouring Thracian
king has cynically taken advantage of the destruction of Troy to
collaborate in the genocide for his own benefit. Hecabe now asks
permission from Agamemnon to enact ‘vengeance on a murderer’,
on the Thracian king, and from this point on in the play sympathy
ebbs away from her, as she undergoes in Lemkin and Arendt’s
AESCHYLUS AND EURIPIDES
[ 73 ]

terms an ethical deterioration. With Agamemnon’s permission and
connivance, Polymestor is lured to Troy, where Hecabe and her
women stab and blind him and kill his two sons with their
brooches. Enraged and stumbling about, Polymestor swears there
are no monsters like women on the earth, only to be rebuked by
the chorus: ‘Because you suffer, why should you so arrogantly /
Include all women in one general reproach?’21
In his turn, Polymestor warns Hecabe that the Thracian
prophet Dionysus has told him that Hecabe will not reach Greece
by ship. She will fall headlong into the sea from a masthead, then
be transformed into ‘a dog with glaring tawny eyes’, thence to die
and be buried at ‘Cynossema, the Dog’s Grave’, as a sign for pass-
ing sailors. Hecabe replies that she does not care, for she has been
‘avenged’. Polymestor then adds that the Thracian prophet has
foreseen that both Agamemnon and Cassandra will die when they
return to Argos, at the hands of Agamemnon’s wife, raising her
axe on high. Neither Hecabe nor Agamemnon believe Polymestor,
Agamemnon in his closing speech hoping now that Heaven will
grant the Greeks a ‘prosperous voyage, and peace and happiness
at home’.22 In his perpetrator consciousness, Agamemnon, his
genocidal destruction of Troy completed, cannot believe he
himself could now be subjected to murderous violence.
As a perpetrator of the violence of revenge, Hecabe, feeling
that justice has been met in the blinding of Polymestor and the
death of his sons, also cannot believe the cycles of revenge will
continue, that Cassandra will be murdered in Argos. Indeed, the
chorus, just before Polymestor is blinded and his sons killed by
Hecabe and the Trojan women, confidently declare that once
Justice is done, the cycles of revenge and violence end:
There is a debt to Justice, and a debt to the gods;
Where these two coincide,
The payment is final and complete.23
Yet in pursuing violent revenge, Hecabe has done what Lemkin in
his manuscript history more generally evokes, become an example
THE ORIGINS OF VIOLENCE
[ 74 ]

of how often in history the formerly persecuted can become cruel
and brutal persecutors themselves.24 And, Gandhi would have
added, such will always lead to further violence.25 Recall also the
opening stories in Herodotus’s Histories where violence and
revenge leading to further violence is created as unending.26
ANDROMACHE: THE SLAVE AS THE STRANGER WHO
DISTURBS
In his outline, Lemkin includes under ‘Responses of victim group’
a variety of possibilities that include ‘submission’, ‘escape’ by
‘suicide’, and ‘terror’. In Hecabe, the leader of the chorus of
Trojan women about to be enslaved, cries out in anguish:
Oh, my children, my children!
My poor father! My country!
Every house a smouldering ruin,
Every soul a prisoner,
Spoils of war for the men of Argos!
And I, in a foreign country,
Bearing the name of slave,
Transplanted far from Asia
Into a European home,
Shall live the life of the dead in Hades.27
In Greece, in Europe, the enslaved Trojan women fear they will be
the living dead, the undead, ever demoralized, existing in a kind of
terror of nothingness, of loss of identity, status, bodily integrity,
culture and respect.
Euripides’ Andromache, its date uncertain, somewhere
between 430 and 424 BCE, concerns the enslaved life of one of
these Trojan women, wife of the great Trojan warrior Hector, son
of Hecabe and Priam. Hector had been slain by Achilles, and
now his widow Andromache is allotted to Achilles’ son Neop-
tolemus. Andromache is taken to Greece, where she becomes the
AESCHYLUS AND EURIPIDES
[ 75 ]

concubine of Neoptolemus and has a son, Molossus, by him. Her
position worsens when she becomes the slave and servant of
Hermione after Hermione and Neoptolemus marry; Hermione is
the daughter of Helen and Menelaus. We do not see Helen in
Andromache, but we do see quite a lot of Menelaus, who is
created in the play as unworthy and despicable. The play opens
with Andromache reporting that Hermione, fearful of her slave
as competitor for her husband’s attentions, is threatening to kill
her, with the assistance of Menelaus who has come from Sparta
for this purpose, Neoptolemus being away at Delphi (where we
later learn he has been killed by Orestes). To save her life and the
life of her son, Andromache has come as a supplicant seeking
sanctuary to the nearby shrine of Thetis the immortal sea-
nymph, at the same time sending Molossus into hiding, though
he will be found by Menelaus; as with Hecabe, her situation
becomes ever more dire.28
During the play Andromache recounts her sufferings in Troy,
her evocation bringing to mind Lemkin’s category of ‘deporta-
tion’ under the heading ‘Method and techniques of genocide –
Physical’:
I saw Troy crumble in the pitiless flames. Men held
Me by the hair, and hauled me to the Argive ships.
When I came here, it was to live as concubine
To the man whose father killed my husband.29
She recalls that she wore about her head the ‘hateful hood of
slavery’ as she went with the other women to the ‘crowded
shore’ ready to be deported. In Greece, ‘my city gone, / Hector
my husband dead’, Andromache feels that her ‘griefs’ clamour
for unending lamentation, her life ‘harsh and joyless’, an exis-
tence to be dragged out amidst unceasing tears. Now in fear of
her life, her only desperate hope is that the goddess Thetis might
hear and help her.30
Yet while Andromache like Hecabe experiences extremes of
terror and trauma, she strikingly reveals a victim response to
THE ORIGINS OF VIOLENCE
[ 76 ]

genocide identified by Lemkin under the heading ‘Responses of
victim group – active’: ‘resistance’. In Andromache we see
figured a different kind of consciousness for women deported as
slaves to be concubines and servants. Yet how can she resist?
Addressing her, the chorus of local women, though Greek while
‘you are an Asiatic’, express sympathy for her plight; neverthe-
less they also feel that her attempt at revolt against her situation
by taking refuge at Thetis’ shrine is hopeless. Andromache
should realize that she is ‘nothing’, that as a slave from Troy she
belongs to Hermione, who is a Spartan princess. How, they ask,
can ‘you fight against her?’31
Here we can think of the brilliant early twentieth-century essay
‘The Stranger’ by the German sociologist Georg Simmel. The
stranger, Simmel writes, is the wanderer who comes today and stays
tomorrow; while s/he belongs to a spatially defined group, s/he
always remains a potential wanderer. The stranger exhibits towards
the group a kind of abstraction, a detachment, which is not to be
confused with passivity. Such detachment gives him or her a kind
of freedom, in terms of perception, understanding and evaluation of
what others in the group take as given. Simmel offers as an exam-
ple the trader in history, and he also cites European Jews as a clas-
sical instance.32 Leopold Paula Bloom, wandering in Dublin in
James Joyce’s Ulysses, is a kind of embodiment of Simmel’s
stranger.33 We could also think of the character of Rebecca in Sir
Walter Scott’s Ivanhoe (1819), spirited, learned and wise, a trader
along with her father Isaac; Rebecca as representative of the
Jewish–Muslim–Christian social, intellectual, cultural and trading
world of the medieval Middle East, North Africa and Moorish
Spain. In Ivanhoe, Rebecca disturbs the Saxon–Norman conver-
gence of English national identity of late twelfth-century England;
a convergence that excludes her as an oriental stranger and nearly
leads to her being burned to death as a witch.34 The life of the
stranger can be precarious, threatened by violence, as it is for both
Bloom and Rebecca.35
In the drama of Andromache, Andromache is a high-born
slave brought by force from Troy, yet in her ‘Asiatic’ difference
AESCHYLUS AND EURIPIDES
[ 77 ]

and her eloquence, dignity and powerful rationality she disturbs
and challenges the mundane Orientalist assumptions and values of
those who oppress and wish to kill her, Hermione and her father
Menelaus. When Hermione appears at the shrine, she immediately
launches into a volley of insults, in a language of almost grotesque
ethnic hatred:
As for you – a slave-woman, a prize of war –
You want to own this place; to get rid of me;
Your witchcraft makes my husband hate me; for your gain
My womb is barren, dead. You oriental women
Are expert in such devilry – but I’ll stop you.
You’ll find no help in Thetis, neither temple nor
Altar will save you; you shall die.36
In Lemkin’s outline, in the category ‘Propaganda – rationalization
of crime’, there is mention of ‘appeal to popular beliefs and intol-
erance’. It is in this spirit that Hermione continues her verbal
assault: ‘You Orientals are all alike’, practising incest between
father and daughter, brother and sister, mother and son; oriental
law countenances murder; in such ‘foreign morals’, polygamy is
acceptable. Andromache will have to cast off her ‘queenly airs’
and learn to bow low, kneel humbly to her mistress and sweep the
floors. During this confrontation, this agon, Andromache refuses
to submit: ‘No one shall say that I don’t stand up for my rights’;
she demolishes Hermione’s arguments and replies to all her fears.
In particular, she scorns Hermione’s claims to possess a suppos-
edly exclusive Greek and European quality of being ‘self-
controlled’. It is Hermione, says Andromache, who lacks
‘common intelligence’. Hermione’s threats become hysterically
violent: ‘I’ll scar your flesh, I’ll mangle you and torture you’;
Andromache is a ‘brazen foreign beast’.37
Menelaus meanwhile has found where Andromache’s son
Molossus has been hidden, and now tells Andromache that unless
she leaves the sanctuary, ‘This child’s throat shall be cut instead of
yours.’38 How contemptible Menelaus is in Andromache! In their
THE ORIGINS OF VIOLENCE
[ 78 ]

agon, Andromache easily proves superior to the Spartan king in
wisdom, insight, perceptiveness and humanity, her speeches to
him a riposte to the Orientalist view that Orientals lack reason and
self-control. Not that Andromache conceals her contempt for
Menelaus and his daughter:
You! Did a coward like you lead the picked fighting-men
Of Hellas against Priam to conquer Troy? And has
Your childish daughter talked such spirit into you
That you dare challenge a defenceless slave-woman?39
Andromache then says to Menelaus, ‘come now – let us reason
the matter out,’ and as with Hermione, she demolishes all his
attempts at argument. The chorus of Greek women, however, are
scandalized by what they see as an unacceptable overturning of
the established Greek gender order: ‘You have said more than a
woman ought to say to a man,’40 recalling Agamemnon’s similar
attempt to reprove and silence Clytemnestra in Aeschylus’ s play.
The character of Andromache here in relation to Menelaus,
woman to man, slave to king, intersects with a long cultural
history of World Upside Down, of the kind Natalie Zemon Davis
refers to in her famous essay ‘Women on Top’ about male–female
inversion in carnival, festive practices and pictorial representation
in early modern Europe. Davis offers as an example the medieval
affection for a story from antiquity involving Alexander, the old
philosopher Aristotle and Phyllis, one of Alexander’s new subjects
in India, who persuades Aristotle before Alexander’s eyes to get
down on all fours and, saddled and bridled, carry her round the
garden.41
In their agon, Andromache accuses Menelaus of cruelty,
murderousness, deceit and treachery: ‘And this, with Spartans,
passes for intelligence?’42
As it turns out, Andromache and her son’s lives are saved by
the intervention of Peleus, Achilles’ father and Neoptolemus’
grandfather, who shares her disdain for Menelaus as
‘contemptible’. Menelaus retreats from the angry old man and
AESCHYLUS AND EURIPIDES
[ 79 ]

leaves the scene; Hermione breaks down in fear of the return of
her husband, revealing the lack of reason and excess of emotion
she has ascribed to oriental women. When, however, Peleus learns
that Neoptolemus has been killed by Orestes, he feels his life is
over, he now has lost both his son and grandson. Peleus is rescued
from despair by Thetis the sea-nymph, the goddess who had
formerly been his wife, and who now promises to accept him
again as her husband and make him into a god. The goddess also
foretells a fortunate fate for Andromache, who will become the
‘lawful wife’ of Helenus, while her son Molossus will beget a
prosperous dynasty of kings ruling over the land of Molassia to
which they are now headed. At the play’s end, Thetis reflects that
even though the goddess Pallas (Athene) had demanded the fall of
Troy, the gods overall have not entirely abandoned the Trojans:
‘even to Troy the gods extend their kindly care.’43
Through the opinions of various characters, Andromache
ponders the perennial question of who is to blame for the Trojan
War. Andromache, like Hecabe and the other Trojan women, is
sure that Helen is to blame, for when Paris brought Helen back to
‘share his home and bed’, the Fury of revenge followed: ‘For
Helen Greece vowed vengeance’; it was because of Helen that in
the subsequent war Greeks like Achilles and Trojans like Hector
died, Andromache saying to Hermione: ‘Helen killed Achilles.’ In
his agon with Menelaus, Peleus offers a different view. Peleus
charges that both Helen and Menelaus are at fault, are the prime
causes of the war, though the more he expostulates, the more it is
Menelaus whom he sees as primarily responsible. Helen, Peleus
froths, is more wicked than any woman who ever lived, though
such wickedness is owing, he adds, to her disgusting Spartan
upbringing, for Spartan girls never grow up modest, they never
stay at home, they go out with ‘bare thighs and loose clothes’ and
they ‘wrestle and run races’ alongside the young men. ‘I call it
intolerable,’ says Peleus.44
It is no surprise, then, in Peleus’ scornful opinion that with
such an immodest girlhood Helen should gad off with her
young man to foreign parts, abandoning her home and ‘all
THE ORIGINS OF VIOLENCE
[ 80 ]

sacred ties’. Peleus tells Menelaus that he was a fool to have
been away from his house while Paris was visiting, and it is no
wonder he was cuckolded. Yet knowing the kind of loose Spar-
tan woman Helen was, Menelaus should not have declared war
on the Trojans, he should not have ‘stirred a single spear for
her’; rather he should have let Helen stay in Troy, indeed he
should have paid her money never to ask to be taken back.
Menelaus, then, for no good reason sent ‘brave men by their
thousands to their deaths’, including Achilles. It is Menelaus
who is responsible for the sadness of so many old men and
women in Greece, now childless. To cap it all, Peleus charges,
Menelaus, when he did conquer Troy, showed himself to be an
amorous weakling; instead of immediately killing Helen, she
‘had only to bare her breast’ and Menelaus threw down his
sword and accepted her back. Unsurprisingly, Menelaus’s view
of why the war began differs. He cannot, he says, blame Helen
for leaving him, because what she did occurred by ‘divine voli-
tion, not from her own choice’. In any case, by being a cause
for war, Helen conferred great benefits on Hellas, for formerly,
he feels, weapons and fighting were unknown to the Greeks;
the war brought out their ‘manly qualities’ and also brought
‘different kinds of Greeks together’. As for not killing Helen as
soon as he set eyes on her, that, he tells Peleus, was simply
admirable ‘self-control’.45
Menelaus’s reference to Helen being somehow divinely
guided in her leaving him for Paris brings to the fore the question
of the gods and how much they influence human actions, in partic-
ular, the possibility that responsibility for the war lay ultimately
with the Judgement of Paris, involving the goddesses Hera,
Athena and Aphrodite. The chorus laments what occurred when
the ‘three lovely goddesses’ visited Paris, then a young shepherd,
on Mount Ida, each wishing to be judged by him the most
beautiful. Paris chooses Aphrodite (her reward being that he
would love the world’s most beautiful woman), so setting in
motion the sequence of events – Paris finding Helen in Sparta and
leaving with her for Troy – that caused the war. Here, then, in the
AESCHYLUS AND EURIPIDES
[ 81 ]

divine interference of the three goddesses, might be the primary
cause for the Trojan War that doomed Troy and its people to
eventual destruction and ruin.46 Certainly Cassandra thought so, as
the chorus recalls. Foreseeing all that would later happen if Paris
when small remained alive, Cassandra had pleaded with every
elder and councillor in Troy, ‘Kill that child!’, ‘Kill him!’47 But
Cassandra was never listened to.
WAR, GENOCIDE AND FEMALE AND CHILD 
SUFFERING: THE WOMEN OF TROY
Euripides’ The Women of Troy (415 BCE) was performed when
memory of the Athenian destruction of Melos (416–415 BCE)
during the Peloponnesian War, with the killing of all the male inhab-
itants of military age and enslaving of the women and children,
would still have been vivid. Set in the ruins of Troy, two days after
the city’s capture, the play revisits the misery of Hecabe and her
daughter Cassandra and daughter-in-law Andromache, and once
more we will analyse their sufferings and responses in terms of
Lemkin’s outline. New and horrific details are added to what we
earlier know from Hecabe and Andromache, in particular, what the
victorious Greeks decide to do with Astyanax, Andromache’s infant
son from her marriage with Hector. Early in the play, Andromache
knows that, humiliatingly, she will be taken to Greece as the slave
of Achilles’ son, but she does not yet know what will be the fate of
her small child. When Talthybius the Greek herald approaches, he
tells Andromache that he has terrible news for her. Andromache
wonders if the news concerns herself and her son, that they will be
‘assigned to different masters’: recall the category in Lemkin’s
diagram, under the heading ‘Methods and techniques of genocide –
Biological’, of ‘separation of families’, here child from mother.
Later in the play, the chorus of captive Trojan women evoke the
scene at Troy’s gates, where the Trojan ‘children / Cling and cry by
hundreds’, calling out for their mothers.48 Hundreds of mothers and
children, it would appear, are to be separately enslaved.
THE ORIGINS OF VIOLENCE
[ 82 ]

The herald, however, confesses that he can barely bring
himself to say what his news is.
Andromache:At least you show some scruple, if you bring no
joy.
Talthybius:
Then know the worst: the Greeks are going to kill
your son.
Andromache: Oh, no, no! This is worse than what they do to me.
Talthybius:
Odysseus in a full assembly made his point –
Andromache: But this is horrible beyond all measure! Oh!
Talthybius:
That such a great man’s son must not be allowed to
live –
Andromache: By such a sentence may his own son be condemned!
Talthybius:
But should be thrown down from the battlements 
of Troy.49
Talthybius advises Andromache to be ‘sensible’ and accept the
decision. When Andromache looks at her crying child clinging to
her fingers and tugging at her dress, about to be thrown on
Odysseus’ advice from the city walls, we might think here of
Lemkin’s category, under the same heading referring to biological
genocide, of ‘destruction of foetus’. With justice does Andro-
mache cry out against such child sacrifice as a ‘Greek ritual of
murder’: ‘Hellenes! Inventors of barbaric cruelties!’50
Hecabe’s bodily and mental trauma is once more featured in
The Women of Troy; indeed we are first made aware of Hecabe
lying on the stage as, in the words of the god Poseidon, once the
chief god of Troy, a ‘prostrate figure’, pitiable, ‘drowned in tears /
For a world of sorrows’. When Hecabe learns of what is to happen
to her grandson, she calls the Greeks ‘murderers’ and wonders if
the Trojan women like Andromache and herself have reached the
‘abyss of pain’. The death of the child intensifies Hecabe’s
torment and desolation close to madness. Cassandra in The Women
of Troy does go to the edge of madness, singing and dancing in so
demented a way (reminding us perhaps of Ophelia in Hamlet) that
the chorus pleads with her mother: ‘Queen Hecabe, she is out of
AESCHYLUS AND EURIPIDES
[ 83 ]

her mind.’51 Genocide is here entwined with the possibility of
psychological damage of an extreme kind.
Helen makes an appearance in The Women of Troy, excoriated
by the Trojan women, who seek revenge on her, desiring that she be
killed immediately by Menelaus, again reminding us of Lemkin’s
categories of ‘demoralization’ and ‘moral deterioration’ in victims
of genocide. The play, however, takes an almost comic turn with the
entry of Menelaus, created as a buffoon, blustering that he will kill
Helen either on the spot or after he has taken her back to Hellas; he
orders his soldiers to drag her out by the hair, the ‘bloodthirsty
murderess’, she will pay with her blood for all his friends who have
died at Troy. Hecabe applauds his plan to kill Helen. But when
Helen appears with the soldiers, her calm, dignity and steady
reasoning puncture Menelaus’s risible threats. Helen argues that she
did not cause the war, for a number of reasons. Priam, she says,
echoing Cassandra, should have heeded the prophecy about her and
Paris and killed Paris at birth. When, because of the goddess
Aphrodite, Paris sought out Helen famed for her beauty, Menelaus
sailed off to Crete leaving her alone with Paris; she had then fallen
in love with Paris, finding love an irresistible force, just as Zeus, she
reminds her former husband, had on occasion found love irre-
sistible. Finally, she makes it clear that she did try to leave Troy and
rejoin the Greek ships so that the war could end, but had been
thwarted by Paris’s brother Deiphobus (this was after Paris’s death),
who took her ‘by force’ and kept her as his wife.52
The plea of Hecabe and the chorus that Helen be killed instantly,
in the interest of ‘noble vengeance’, is ignored by Menelaus, who
insists, convincing no one, that he will certainly kill Helen, perhaps
by stoning, when they have returned to Sparta.53
If Menelaus is a weak, clownish figure in The Women of Troy,
the portrait of another genocidist, Odysseus, is chilling, as it had
been in Hecabe. The herald Talthybius reports that it was Odysseus
who persuaded the full Greek assembly that Andromache’s child
has to be disposed of, because as Hector’s son he might one day
become powerful. As in Hecabe, Odysseus is glimpsed in The
Women of Troy as Eichmann-like in the passionless banality of his
THE ORIGINS OF VIOLENCE
[ 84 ]

evil, rationally taking care of every necessary detail of the genocide.
When Hecabe learns that she has been assigned as a slave to
Odysseus, to be taken to Ithaca to become servant to Penelope, she
expresses her contempt for him as a ‘perjured impious outcast, who
defies / Man’s law and God’s’. In her lamentation speech over her
little grandson’s body, she condemns Odysseus as a ‘cunning
coward’. Soon after Hecabe attempts suicide: ‘Now! Into the fire!
There is a royal way to die – / Wrapped in the flame that swallows
my beloved city!’ Hecabe is saved, however, by the Greek soldiers,
because she must be kept alive as ‘prize’for Odysseus, to whom she
now ‘belongs’.54
At play’s end, we are left with images of the final destruction
of Troy and its imminent disappearance from the world.
Hecabe: Dust mingled with smoke wings to the sky,
I can see nothing, the world is blotted out!
Chorus: Earth and her name are nothing;
All has vanished, and Troy is nothing!55
Here are images that will haunt all subsequent world history, the
genocidal spectre that what happened to Troy could happen to any
other city, society, country, land, people.
CONCLUSION
In these great tragedies, from Aeschylus’ s Agamemnon earlier in
the fifth century to the Euripides plays during the Peloponnesian
War, the Greeks who destroyed Troy were, in Lemkin’s terms,
guilty of genocide on all counts. In relation to Lemkin’s category
in his outline of ‘Aftermath – cultural losses’, the devastation of
Troy clearly answers to the technique of cultural genocide, of the
desecration and destruction of cultural centres and symbols
(objects of art, religious relics, etc.); destruction of cultural lead-
ership; and prohibition of cultural activities or codes of behaviour.
Loss of culture occurs during looting, for Lemkin lists ‘loot’ under
AESCHYLUS AND EURIPIDES
[ 85 ]

‘Methods and techniques of genocide – Cultural’; Poseidon at the
beginning of the play observes the measureless gold ‘and all the
loot of Troy’ that is going down to the Greek ships.56 Loss of
culture would also apply to the children sent away from Troy to be
enslaved, and such taking away would be considered a crime
under Article II of the 1948 UN Genocide Convention, which
condemns: ‘Forcibly transferring children of the group to another
group’.57 The enslaved children would inevitably be assimilated
into the host society into which they would be sold.
Near the end of The Women of Troy the chorus laments the loss
of their beloved city. No longer will there be:
Music of prayer, sweet singing, mystic nights
Of darkness and of vision, the dear forms
Of golden gods we knew …
Nor will they ever again be able to see its beautiful surroundings,
including Mount Ida where ‘steep snow-swollen rivers foam and
fall / Through ivied forest glades’.58 In Lemkin’s terms, the
destruction of Troy represents a genocidal disappearance of one of
the world’s cultures, a permanent loss to humanity, a narrowing of
its heritage, an assault on humanity itself.
The tragedies raise the question of religious genocide. What is
the attitude of the gods towards the way Troy is destroyed? Are the
gods on the side of the apparent victors in history, the genocidists
Agamemnon and Menelaus and Odysseus, or of the victims of the
genocide, the women and children, some but not all of whom
survive? In The Women of Troy Andromache is sure the gods have
been against the Trojans ever since Paris was spared at birth ‘to
live and destroy his country / For the sake of accursed Helen’.
Near the end of the play, facing catastrophe, the chorus concludes:
‘So, Zeus, our God, you have forsaken us,’ and they demand of
him, as the ‘Monarch of all that lives’, that he answer their chal-
lenge, ’What does this mean to You?’59 At the play’s end, as Troy
burns in a holocaustal fire, Hecabe finally loses her lingering faith
that the gods will save her:
THE ORIGINS OF VIOLENCE
[ 86 ]

Gods! Gods! Where are you? – Why should I clamour to
the gods?
We called on them before, and not one heard us call.60
Yet, unbeknownst to the women, the play in its overall move-
ment makes it clear that the gods have not entirely abandoned
the Trojans. The Women of Troy opens with Poseidon sorrowing
for what is happening to Troy, as he watches it being stripped,
sacked and left smouldering. ‘Troy and its people’, he laments,
‘were my city.’ He acknowledges his defeat by Athene, with
whom he has feuded in the past, and who had planned the
Wooden Horse ruse, so he is surprised when the goddess appears
and seeks his help on ‘behalf of Troy’. Athene admits that she
had once hated the Trojans and had helped the Greeks to win, but
now confides that she is ‘disposed to favour the Trojans’. When
Poseidon asks why her change of heart, Athene replies that she
is appalled by the Greeks’ impiety, not least their insult to her
own temple, when Cassandra was dragged from its sanctuary.
Athene’s new plan, she tells him, is to make their homeward
voyage by sea disastrous for the Greeks. Zeus, she says, has
already agreed to visit upon the Greek ships flooding rain, inces-
sant hail and tornadoes; she asks Poseidon to assist by stirring up
the sea with waves and whirlpools, so that the ocean becomes
thick with floating corpses and the ‘Greeks may learn in future /
To respect my altars and show humility before the gods’. Posei-
don readily agrees, for he too, he tells her, feels that punishment
should attend those who, during the general destruction of a city,
devastate the temples of the ‘high gods and tombs that honour
the dead’.61
The audience knows, and we in the future know, that in the
mythological stories the Greek ships are scattered by the actions
of the gods with many becoming lost for long periods on the
return voyage. In Helen, when Menelaus appears as a ‘wretched
castaway’ washed up on the shores of Egypt, he explains that for
years he has been an ‘unhappy wanderer upon the stormy wastes
of the grey ocean’: ‘I long to reach my own country; but the
AESCHYLUS AND EURIPIDES
[ 87 ]

gods have not thought me worthy.’ He tells Helen that since Troy
he has been voyaging ‘seven summers and seven winters’.62 In
the many stories in the ancient Greek world of the post-Troy
dispersal of their fleet, the gods can be witnessed severely
punishing the Greeks for their religious genocide of the Trojans,
as a warning to all those who might wish to do the same.
THE ORIGINS OF VIOLENCE
[ 88 ]

[
4 UTOPIA AND DYSTOPIA:
PLATO AND CICERO’S
REPUBLICS
Your advantages are the disadvantages of others. Hence
building an empire involves expropriating other people’s
territory and enriching yourself at their expense. Aggressive
generals are held to be the embodiment of valour and excel-
lence. Teachers of philosophy give the cloak of tradition
and authority to folly and crime.
(Philus in Cicero, The Republic, Book Three)1
Now the earth itself seemed so small to me that I felt
ashamed of our empire, whose extent was no more than a
dot on its surface.
(‘The Dream of Scipio’ in Cicero, The Republic, 
Book Six)2
Classical Athenian culture bequeathed a dual, uncertain and
ambivalent legacy in relation to war, conquest, empire, colonization
and Orientalism.
On the one hand, as we can see in Pericles’ speeches to
Athenian assemblies evoked in Thucydides’ History of the Pelo-
ponnesian War, and as Sophie Mills has outlined in Theseus,
Tragedy and the Athenian Empire (1997), Athens enjoyed an
idealized self-image. Athens was to be historically wondered at
as an example to humanity, for it was the city of justice and
mercy, opposing all forms of tyranny, a civilizer and liberator. 
[ 89 ]

In the view of Periclean Athens, there was a positive and 
productive relationship between democracy and war, because
Athenian military might was always used in the service of
enlightened values, of loyalty to friends and selfless intervention
in defence of the weak and the vulnerable. Furthermore, in
regarding Theseus as its mythological hero, Athens could claim
a degree of divine support for its military actions and altruistic
ethos which, as in the remarkable feats of Theseus himself,
combined strength and skill with intelligence and wisdom.3 In
this seductive self-image, Athens was always honourable in its
conduct of war and as a creator and builder of empire. Athenians
felt they had the right to be supersessionist (they would educate
Greece to be like them and they would represent Greece for the
future, superseding as inferior all other Greek societies), and to
believe (because of Theseus’ semi-divine ancestry) that they
were a chosen people blessed by gods.
Yet such self-admiration was shadowed by powerful 
questioning and contrary images and representations, not least in
historiography and tragedy, as we have noted in previous chapters.
Herodotus and Thucydides’ histories, as well as Athenian tragedy
concerned with the genocidal destruction of ‘Asiatic’Troy, allegori-
cally challenged those in the Athenian present as well as those in the
future of the West who would wish to endorse empire and colonial-
ism as a historical project. Part of the classical legacy, too, was a fear
that empire is always insecure: the Persians could be defeated by a
much smaller force of Greeks, the Athenians would lose their
empire after defeat in the Peloponnesian War. Furthermore, there
was always the danger that empire could lead to a marked ethical
deterioration in those who conducted its policies. In view of
Herodotus and Thucydides’ cosmopolitanism, anti-ethnocentrism
and internationalism, and the powerful denunciations of and protests
at empire, colonization and genocidal destruction in their histories
and in Euripides’ Trojan plays, how could empire, colonization and
destruction of other societies continue to be unproblematically
promoted by those trained in the Greek classical tradition? In
Thucydides’ History, the Melians warned that the Athenians would
THE ORIGINS OF VIOLENCE
[ 90 ]

PLATO AND CICERO’S REPUBLICS
[ 91 ]
be judged harshly in history for their desire for war and their impe-
rial amorality; they would suffer an eternal loss of historical pres-
tige.4 How could such judgments and passionate reflections be
avoided by those who nonetheless wished to participate in, establish
and justify empires and found colonies?
Such a legacy of doubt, of foundationally conflicted
thought, of competing perspectives, has haunted Western history
to the present. Most immediately, it would haunt the Roman
world, which was so profoundly influenced by and in constant
conversation with Greek philosophy and culture.
In this and following chapters, I discuss attitudes and values in
relation to empire, conquest, war, colonization and Orientalism in
some famous texts of Greco-Roman antiquity, in political philoso-
phy, epic, and historical writing: The Republic of Cicero (106–43
BCE), the Aeneid of Virgil (70–19 BCE), and the Agricola and
Germania of Tacitus (c.56–117 CE). I choose these texts because
their attempts to negotiate the troubling legacy of classical Greek
thought, pro-war and anti-war, pro-empire and critical of empire,
were so important in subsequent thinking about colonization and
empire in early modern Europe and later Western history, in ways
that are still salient, of continuing and contemporary significance.
The questions I explore are: given the challenge posed by
Herodotus and Thucydides and Greek tragedy set in the mytholog-
ical era to those who favour colonization and empire, how could
one be a honourable colonizer? Can one be a honourable colo-
nizer? Do empires and colonizers bring death and dispossession
and destruction, or are they admirable bringers of culture and law?
Do they genocidally destroy the cosmos of other peoples, or do
they include other peoples in an overarching cosmos that is
divinely approved? Do they act according to natural law that is
universal and applies to all humanity and which all humanity
should observe, or does a claim to universal natural law always
work in favour of specific interests, that is to say, the powerful
states and nations?
There are immediate differences in historical situation
between the two great Greek historians in particular and these

THE ORIGINS OF VIOLENCE
[ 92 ]
Roman writers. Herodotus was an outsider to any settled ethnic
and national identity in the Greek world, while Thucydides was
exiled from Athens for much of the Peloponnesian War; they were
accused in later antiquity of being too harsh towards Greeks in
general (Herodotus) and Athens in particular (Thucydides).5
Cicero, Virgil and Tacitus were in varying ways much closer to the
centre of their society, though in an imperial Roman state where
times were always dangerous. My focus, however, will be on the
texts themselves. In deploying the critical and cultural theory of
modernity, especially of Mikhail Bakhtin as I outlined in the Intro-
duction, as well as Walter Benjamin, I explore the play of genre,
textual tensions, ambivalences, unresolved differences in attitudes
and viewpoints, singularities, oddities, extremes. Such constitute
their legacy to the future, not presumed essentialized intellectual
positions held by ‘Cicero’, ‘Virgil’ and ‘Tacitus’.
The Nachleben, the afterlife, of the classical Greek and Greco-
Roman writings are far more complicated and contradictory, and far
more interesting, than such sterile intellectual history can allow.
One more introductory note: while the focus in this chapter is
on the Greco-Roman world, I will be including some comparative
discussion of Greco-Roman texts and Jewish and Christian
religious histories. Greco-Roman polytheistic, and Jewish and
Christian monotheistic, histories increasingly intersected in the
ancient world; and concepts and historical processes that I am
arguing throughout this book are important in world history, in
particular genocide, supersessionism, victimology, chosen people
and culture-bearers can be perceived crossing the monotheism–
polytheism divide. In these terms, I will be comparing aspects of
the relationship between the Old Testament and the New
Testament to features of Cicero’s Republic.
PLATO
Cicero was an important political and intellectual figure in Roman
history during the collapsing world of republican politics, as a

PLATO AND CICERO’S REPUBLICS
[ 93 ]
barrister, orator, high official (holding the consulate among other
offices), political philosopher and writer; he was well travelled
and profoundly versed in and familiar with Greek learning, includ-
ing as a student of philosophy and rhetoric in Athens and Rhodes.
The Republic is clearly in intimate conversation with Plato’s
Republic, both being concerned with the nature of political
wisdom and the ideal character of the state, and sharing aesthetic
features of literature as philosophy, philosophy as literature. Each
proceeds by question and rejoinder between a number of inter-
locutors. Yet such conversations relate to wider cultural histories,
of genre and carnivalesque. To understand aesthetic and rhetorical
features of Cicero’s Republic, we have to have some sense of
Plato’s Republic and how its generic features relate to and contrast
with other Plato texts, especially The Symposium.
Bakhtin’s comments in his Problems of Dostoevsky’s Poetics
on the serio-comic literary-philosophical genres of antiquity such
as the Socratic dialogue, the symposium and the menippea, which
infuse, help shape and interact in both Plato’s and Cicero’s
Republics, are illuminating here.6 Bakhtin regards the Socratic
dialogues as a genre of great vitality in literary, cultural and philo-
sophical history. As he explains in Problems of Dostoevsky’s Poet-
ics, which seeks to evoke the long and rich generic history that
informs the polyphonic novel and finds a summit in Dostoevsky,
the genre of the Socratic dialogue grew out of carnivalistic folk-
lore, with a dialogic method of investigating ideas and searching
for truth. In the Socratic dialogue, says Bakhtin, an idea is organ-
ically combined with the image of a person, the carrier of the idea;
the person in the text, the character, becomes in effect an image of
the idea. In these terms, Bakhtin admires Plato’s Socratic
dialogues, where truth is not ready-made but is born between
people as they collectively search for it. Socrates, says Bakhtin,
called himself a pander, someone who brought people together
and made them collide in a quarrel; Socrates also referred to
himself as a midwife, assisting in the birth of an emergent truth.7
Nevertheless, Bakhtin distinguishes between Plato dialogues
featuring Socrates as pander and midwife, and other Plato

THE ORIGINS OF VIOLENCE
[ 94 ]
dialogues where Socrates has become a monologic teacher. Here
the Socratic dialogue reduces itself, Bakhtin laments, to a simple
mode for expounding ready-made truths, ultimately degenerating
into a question and answer form similar to a catechism, in danger
of losing all connection with a carnival sense of the world.8
In such Bakhtinian terms, we can say that in Plato texts like
The Symposium Socrates is created as but one character amongst
others putting forward theories. A brilliant dialogic philosophical
and historical novel (written early in the fourth century but set in
416 BCE), The Symposium explores the meaning of love. Its scene
is one of after-dinner relaxation between (male) friends and
acquaintances, including Aristophanes as well as Socrates, where
the entertainment is the art of conversation itself. In Problems of
Dostoevsky’s Poetics, Bakhtin observes that the symposium is a
banquet dialogue:
Dialogic banquet discourse possessed special privileges
(originally of a cultic sort): the right to a certain license,
ease and familiarity, to a certain frankness, to eccentricity,
ambivalence; that is, the combination in one discourse of
praise and abuse, of the serious and the comic. The
symposium is by nature a purely carnivalistic genre.9
In The Symposium multiple representations of love glance off
each other as in a kaleidoscope, ranging from Aristophanes’
fascinating burlesque images, a highlight of the novel, to mysti-
cal interpretations of homosexual desire and love in Socrates’
contribution to the discussion, highly curious in its mode. Walter
Benjamin, talking in the prologue to The Origins of German
Tragic Drama of the kind of philosophical history that he
preferred, wrote of its critical method that the representation of
ideas should move sideways, should constitute itself as digres-
sion (Darstellung als Umweg), and such is a feature of Socrates’
elliptical procedure in The Symposium.10 When asked for his
opinion by his companions, Socrates doesn’t answer directly but
instead recounts a conversation he once had with a female

PLATO AND CICERO’S REPUBLICS
[ 95 ]
philosopher, Diotima, ‘the woman from Mantinea’, who taught
him, he says, his method of proceeding by question and answer;
she was also, he confides, ‘my instructress in the art of love’.
Socrates then relates to his listeners a long question and answer
session with Diotima where she treats him at times quite roughly
for his philosophical ignorance and inadequacy while leading
him to see the sacredness that ideally inheres in the desire for
beauty, goodness and truth. What features in their exchange, as
happily reported by Socrates himself, are male–female inversions
of knowledge, wisdom and rigour of argumentation.11
In terms of Bakhtin’s contrast, however, between dialogic and
monologic Plato texts, in Plato’s Republic Socrates is far more the
acknowledged authority in the conversation, explaining, explicating,
expounding, the text’s node of truth. With Socrates too much in
control, the question and answer sessions are close to catechism, his
interlocutors reduced to passivity, assenting to whatever he as
master thinker declares to be so.
Nevertheless, Plato’s Republic presented world history with a
most remarkable utopia, always challenging and certainly
influential. The Republic explores questions of lasting interest to
humanity: for example, the immortality and transmigration of
souls, who should ideally govern a society, what do we think of
the multitude, how should men and women relate, which is the
best form of government, democracy or oligarchy. There are the
wonderful parables, of the Sun, the Divided Line and the Cave.12
The Republic is especially controversial for its view that the ideal
state should be governed by the Guardians, an elite of philosopher
rulers, who are eugenically bred to be educated and knowledge-
able above anyone else, and who are held to be superior by a very
wide margin to the despised multitude in history.
We can contrast Plato’s Republic with Thucydides’ History in
this regard. In The Republic, the spectre of political violence
inheres in its recommendation of an authoritarian, not to say total-
itarian state, a mode of governance with a long and appalling
history, culminating in twentieth-century totalitarian societies that
took advantage of precisely what Plato’s Republic points out, the

THE ORIGINS OF VIOLENCE
[ 96 ]
willingness of the multitude not to think for itself, to be submis-
sive before power and leaders. Thucydides had already observed
such dangerous submissiveness and lack of critical reason in the
multitude in his History; but he had also pointed out that authori-
tarian regimes, based on notions of superiority of a particular
group, would necessarily be dependent on political violence for
their establishment and maintenance.
Yet how contradictory a text Plato’s Republic is! For example,
the constitution of the Guardian elite bears on the position of
women in history. Socrates tells his interlocutors that the elite men
and women must be equal, though it should be remembered that
males are stronger than females. Women should receive the same
education and be as free as men to engage in a variety of occupa-
tions, skills and activities (administrative work, medicine, music,
athletics, soldiering, philosophizing). What of exercising together,
Socrates is doubtfully asked, for don’t Greek men always exercise
naked? Yes, says Socrates, women of any age should exercise
naked alongside men of any age in the gymnasium, as part of
women’s physical training and education which fits them to carry
arms and join in hunting and military service. How, Socrates is
asked, are children conceived and brought up in the community of
Guardians? Socrates’ view, which anticipates notions of collective
rearing of children and abolition of the private family in the
science fiction and utopian social thought and experiments of
modernity,13 is that the Guardians are to have partners and children
in common.14
In the community of the ruling elite the family and private
property have been abolished. The Guardians will have mating
festivals, leading to couples breeding, but the children will 
be brought up in state nurseries. Men and women Guardians 
will be forbidden by law to live in separate households. Children
will be held in common, and no parent should know its child, or
child its parent. Guardian officers, who may be men or women,
will take the children bred to be the best to another part of the city,
so that Guardian stock can be kept ‘pure’, and the Guardians are
to be restrained from too close an association and attachment

which may lead back to a desire for the private family.15 The
remarkable passage on breastfeeding is well worth quoting:
They [the officers] will arrange for the suckling of the chil-
dren by bringing their mothers to the nursery when their
breasts are still full, taking every precaution to see that no
mother recognizes her child; if the mothers have not
enough milk they will provide wet-nurses. They will see
that the mothers do not suckle children for more than a
reasonable length of time, and will hand over all the sitting
up at night and hard work to nurses and attendants.16
In this way, child-bearing will be made easy for the Guardian
mothers, so that they can devote themselves to their occupations.
Children, however, who are judged inferior in some way, for
example if they be born ‘defective’, will be ‘quietly and secretly
disposed of’, a formulation that has raised the troubling question
ever since of whether or not The Republic supports infanticide.17
While the bulk of Plato’s Republic is monologic, it closes with
the beautiful witty parable, ‘The Myth of Er’, evoking the varied
journeys involved in the transmigration of souls.18 ‘The Myth of
Er’ anticipates the genre of the menippea so admired by Bakhtin –
I very much admire it myself!19 – and which he saw, along with
the Socratic dialogues and the symposium, as significantly
contributing to the development of novelistic notions of
polyphony and the dialogic.20
We can think of ‘The Myth of Er’ in Bakhtin’s terms as a
menippea, exploring in fantastical situations the idea of immortal-
ity and transmigration of souls. ‘The Myth of Er’ relates the
observations of a soldier, Er, killed in battle, but who comes to life
again on the funeral pyre and can then tell the story of what his soul
had seen in ‘the other world’. His soul came to a place where there
were gaping chasms in the earth, and, opposite, gaping chasms in
the sky; between the chasms sat Judges, who delivered verdicts on
the destinations of the unjust, to go downwards into the underworld,
and the just, to ascend into heaven. When Er comes before them, the
PLATO AND CICERO’S REPUBLICS
[ 97 ]

Judges order him to listen to and learn all that goes on, so that he
can report back to the living about what awaits them. Er sees the
souls in their travels and travails choosing future lives, sometimes
crossing between humans and animals. The soul of Orpheus the
great singer, for instance, was unwilling to be born of a woman
because Orpheus hated all women after his death at their hands (he
had been torn to pieces by Maenads, female followers of Dionysus),
and so chose the life of a swan. Agamemnon, ‘because of his suffer-
ings hated humanity’, and so his soul decided on the life an eagle.
Odysseus’s soul, because the ‘memory of his former sufferings had
cured him of all ambition’, settled on the ‘uneventful life of an
ordinary man’.21
Later in this chapter I will look at ‘The Dream of Scipio’,
modelled on ‘The Myth of Er’, though treating of different
subjects.
CICERO
In contrast to Plato’s, Cicero’s Republic, as we have it, is in its
ideas a far more sober text, but it is also more polyphonic and
contrapuntal in its juxtapositions of attitudes to fundamental
questions, especially in relation to how much humanity should
value the creation and possession of empires. It was originally
composed of six books, but only survived antiquity in incom-
plete and fragmented form.22 The complete text was lost after
about 600, though portions were preserved by other writers,
including Augustine, and became widely known in the Middle
Ages and Renaissance, not least ‘The Dream of Scipio’, which,
like ‘The Myth of Er’ in Plato’s Republic, closes the final book.
(Early in the nineteenth century, in 1819, a portion of The
Republic was also brought to light as part of a palimpsest in the
Vatican library.) In dialogue form, The Republic was set in a
previous time, in 129 BCE at the home of the ex-general and
public figure Scipio Aemilianus. Scipio is prominent in the
conversations, as is his friend, Gaius Laelius. Another friend of
THE ORIGINS OF VIOLENCE
[ 98 ]

Scipio’s who participates, in very interesting ways, is Lucius
Furius Philus, sometimes as one who willingly agrees with
Scipio, at other times as one who advances contrary positions in
the manner of classical rhetoric. The dialogue occurs over a
number of days, and Cicero provides prefaces to the books by
which to frame the conversations.23
Like Plato’s, Cicero’s Republic is a philosophical and historical
novel, where the characters refer to actual figures in the past. To
those in genocide studies, however, the choice of figures is very
strange. In his Scipio Aemilianus, A.E. Astin tells us that Cicero
admired, to the point of idealizing, Scipio as somewhat of a politi-
cal giant, a great man of public affairs, who in Republican Rome
had enacted what for Cicero was an ideal combination of success in
action with enjoyment of learning, an exemplar, along with his
friend Laelius, of traditional Roman virtues that were becoming
increasingly rare, in Cicero’s view, in his own time. Astin also warns
that figures like Scipio and Laelius are characters and there is no
necessary relationship between the views that Cicero’s Republic
imputes to them and the actual opinions they might have held.24 This
is a warning to be closely heeded, for it suits my own approach to
The Republic as, in Bakhtin’s terms, a text working by counterpoint
and agon, much more so than the main part of Plato’s Republic.25
Cicero’s Republic reveals an aspect of the menippea concerned with
the adventure of philosophical ideas where no character possesses
any final truth or position that is uncontested, and where the author
as narrator is one character amongst others, his opinions, even when
they attempt to frame the discussions as with Cicero’s prefaces,
only one view amongst others. Characters function as author-
thinkers, taking philosophical positions that are to be considered in
their own right.26 In these Bakhtinian terms, neither Cicero’s
historical admiration for Scipio nor his framing prefaces control the
text; characters have the dialogic right to answer back, to present
alternative views. We will analyse the Republic as polyphonic and
menippean in a moment.
While granting that Scipio is indeed a character in a text, it
is nonetheless difficult not to feel very uneasy as a modern
PLATO AND CICERO’S REPUBLICS
[ 99 ]

reader in knowing that his name refers to a historical personage
– Cornelius Scipio Aemilianus Africanus (Numantinus) – who,
in the terminology of Raphaël Lemkin, was an egregious geno-
cidist, infamous for the destruction not only of Carthage in 146
BCE, but also of Numantia in Spain in 132; a serial genocidist,
we might say. In Axis Rule in Occupied Europe, Lemkin refers
to the destruction of Carthage as an example of wars of extermi-
nation waged in classical times in which nations and groups
were completely or almost completely destroyed.27
Laelius was with Scipio in the siege of Carthage. Astin
relates that in the spring of 146, the siege entered its last agoniz-
ing phase as Scipio launched his final assault against Carthage’s
starving defenders. A force under Laelius captured a section of
the wall, and after a week of what Astin describes as continuous
and horrifying street fighting, there was a surrender from the
central citadel of many thousands of wretched survivors,
destined to be sold into slavery. Scipio cursed anyone who might
wish to resettle there. However, as victor, Scipio reminded those
around him of the mutability of fortune and the folly of
presumptuous words and deeds. Some time after the capture of
the city, Scipio gave the order to set fire to those parts of it
which still stood, to complete its devastation. It is reported that
Scipio, watching the conflagration, turned with tears in his eyes
to his friend Polybius, the Greek historian, confessing his dread
that the same thing might happen to his beloved home city of
Rome. On his return to Rome, the destruction of Carthage was
celebrated in a triumph, conferring on Scipio great glory and
making him a powerful figure in the political life of the imperial
capital.28
When he took command of the war against Numantia, Astin
tells us, the organization of the siege of the Spanish hill-town was
relentless and efficient from the outside, full of horror and agony
for those within. Numantia suffered the same fate as Carthage;
those who survived were enslaved, and it was razed to the
ground.29 Again, Scipio returned in triumph to Rome.
Let’s return to Cicero’s Republic, observing the Bakhtinian
THE ORIGINS OF VIOLENCE
[ 100 ]

PLATO AND CICERO’S REPUBLICS
[ 101 ]
convention that we are dealing with characters who are independent
author-thinkers. The Republic is a menippea where ultimate
questions are entertained.
There are differing unresolved attitudes in the dialogues,
tensions between supersessionism and questioning of supersession-
ism, teleology and scepticism of its hubris, utopia and anti-utopia,
war and anti-war, the importance of empire and belittling of empire,
natural law and questioning of natural law, should cities be coastal
or inland, and ethnocentrism and dislike of cosmopolitanism as
against interest in human diversity. From the fragments we have, it
is Scipio who pronounces conventional views concerning Rome
and its history. Scipio emerges as an arch-supersessionist, exalting
in utopian spirit the supremacy of Rome as humanity’s ideal future,
history’s telos. In the early part of the text his interlocutors, Laelius
and Philus, keep rather obsequiously agreeing with Scipio, as if 
we are reading a monologic text like Plato’s Republic. Scipio’s 
listeners assent to whatever he says, treating the general as a teacher
of ready-made truths.
Indeed, in Scipio’s view, Rome is to be considered blessed in
all fundamental aspects of a society and polity. Scipio makes it
clear that in the production of political theory, concerned with the
supervision and management of a society, Romans, the ‘toga-
wearing people’, are not to be considered inferior to even the
wisest and foremost of the Greeks. The Roman constitution, a
carefully proportioned mixture of monarchy, democracy and rule
by a select group (aristocracy), is incomparable.30
There is another way that Rome supersedes Greece and soci-
eties like it. What kind of society is superior in history, the coastal
or the inland? By the divine Romulus’ careful foresight, Rome,
Scipio judges, is ideally situated away from the coast, as an inland
settlement, thus giving it the best chance of permanence and
power. The disadvantage of a coastal city is that a maritime, naval
enemy can be suddenly upon one, whereas with an inland settle-
ment we are given advance warning of an enemy’s approach. Also,
the moral character of coastal cities is prone to corruption and
decay, by reason of what we might refer to as the threat of

cosmopolitanism. In the coastal city, people are exposed to a
‘mixture of strange talk and strange behaviour’; foreign customs
are imported along with foreign merchandise; ancestral institu-
tions cannot persist unaffected; the inhabitants of coastal cities do
not stay at home, either dashing off to foreign parts ‘full of airy
hopes and designs’, or, even when they stay put, wandering abroad
in their imaginations. Such restlessness and dispersal of their citi-
zens were primarily responsible for the ultimate overthrow of
Carthage and Corinth, for they failed to attend to their land and
their army. The sea brings enticements to luxury in the form of
booty and imports; the attractiveness of a coastal site ‘represents
many temptations to sensual indulgence’, whether through extrav-
agance or idleness. Scipio is sure that what applies to Corinth
applies to ‘Greece as a whole’, for the Peloponnese is largely
surrounded by the sea, and the Greek islands ‘almost float on their
surface along with the customs and institutions of their cities’.
Seafaring, therefore, Scipio concludes, was ‘clearly the cause of
Greece’s misfortunes’, including her political instability, which
resulted from the characteristic vices of coastal cities. Scipio also
mentions the Phoenicians as barbarians who sailed the seas in
order to trade.31
In Scipio’s view, what Romulus achieved, by founding
Rome on the banks of a river whose broad stream flowed down
to the sea, was a combination of the advantages of a coastal city
in terms of trade, with the advantages of being an inland settle-
ment. Due to such foresight, Rome would eventually form, says
Scipio, ‘the site and centre of a world empire’. Rome was also
endowed, following the example of Romulus, with an intense
interest in military pursuits that led to brilliant success in war,
yet its military tradition was tempered by religious ceremonies,
and ‘mild and civilized behaviour’ as in fairs and games. By such
means, longevity was ensured, because Rome came to be
characterized by ‘two factors which, above all others, ensure that
states will last, namely religion and humane behaviour’. Not
only was its mixed constitution history’s best practice, but its
education and culture were also unsurpassable, for Rome
THE ORIGINS OF VIOLENCE
[ 102 ]

absorbed into itself the ‘rich flood of moral and artistic teaching’
that flowed into it from Greece.32
The relation of Rome to Greece is one of supersession,
evidenced in Scipio himself. Laelius assures Scipio that his
method of exposition is superior to any Greek treatise, indeed
superior to Plato’s Socrates. 33 Scipio the Roman, then, supersedes
Socrates the Greek. In his preface to Book Three, Cicero himself
enthuses that in the art of ‘governing and training peoples’, good
and able men like Scipio, Laelius and Philus have produced an
‘almost incredible and superhuman kind of excellence’. Statesmen
such as these combine in themselves experience in the manage-
ment of great affairs, an art in itself, with other arts, such as the
pursuit of wisdom that history usually associates with Socrates;
they are therefore superior to Socrates, who practises only one art,
that of philosophy. Such eminent, almost godlike, Roman men,
therefore, combining action with study, attain the highest distinc-
tion in life, adding ‘foreign learning derived from Socrates to the
native traditions of their forefathers’.34
We can think here of a comparable supersessionist teleology
in Jewish and Christian history in the Middle Eastern and Mediter-
ranean world of antiquity. The biblical scholar Robert P. Carroll
writes, in Wolf in the Sheepfold: The Bible as a Problem for Chris-
tianity (1991), that so much of the religion of the Hebrew Bible
belongs to Canaanite belief and practice that we should now
understand the strictures against the Canaanites as a way of
distancing the new religion from its antecedents. Similarly, Carroll
goes on to observe, the Christian churches distanced themselves
from being Jewish while clearly taking over some of the beliefs
and practices of the Jewish communities of their time. Carroll
exclaims of the historical irony involved in both situations that
‘what the Jews did to the Canaanites in the Hebrew Bible, the
Christians did to the Jews in the New Testament!’35
In like terms, Rome absorbed Greek culture into itself, while
regarding itself as historically superior to Greece; in this double
movement, Greece is both included and transcended, just as the
Hebrew Bible is included within Christianity as the Old Testament,
PLATO AND CICERO’S REPUBLICS
[ 103 ]

THE ORIGINS OF VIOLENCE
[ 104 ]
with Judaism transcended in the New Testament. (There are perhaps
similarities in this kind of process with Hegel’s notion of Aufhe-
bung, or sublation, indicating a forward movement in history,
including and preserving that which it overcomes.)
DEBATING THE VIRTUES OF EMPIRE, ROME, 
NATURAL LAW
Yet in the drama of Cicero’s Republic as a text of polyphony and
counterpoint, supersessionist discourse comes to be opposed,
especially, by Philus’s later interventions. Asked to take contrary
views for the sake of rhetorical argument, Philus eloquently
proceeds to question any conventional view which might suggest
that whatever is Roman is ideal.
There is, for example, a juxtaposition of opposing arguments
presented by Laelius and Philus concerning natural law.
In Book Three, Laelius asserts the universal truth of natural
law, that it is the basis of all human societies, and that Rome and
its empire have been created in its terms. Laelius contends that
law is ‘right reason in harmony with nature’, and that it spreads
throughout the whole human community in a way that is
‘unchanging and eternal, calling people to their duty by its
commands and deterring them from wrong-doing by its prohibi-
tions’. Indeed, says Laelius in high-flown language, ‘all peoples
at all times will be embraced by a single and eternal and
unchangeable law’, supervised by god, the ‘one lord and master
of us all’. There are leaves of The Republic missing, but it would
appear from quotations in other ancient authors that Laelius
expands on what he considers are the foundational truths of
natural law: for example, when it is just for a state to pursue war.
Thus, ‘the best kind of state never resorts to war except in
defence of its honour or its security.’ Laelius is also quoted in
another ancient source as stating, again high-mindedly, that:
wars are unjust when they are undertaken without proper
cause. No just war can be waged except for the sake of

PLATO AND CICERO’S REPUBLICS
[ 105 ]
punishment or repelling an enemy. … No war is deemed
to be just if it has not been declared and proclaimed, and
if redress has not previously been sought.
He then goes on to argue that it is just for superior to rule over
inferior.36
In Book Three, Philus’s views are in this context refractory,
dissident and irreverent. As a rhetorical exercise, and because it is
known that he likes to argue both sides of a case, Philus is asked
to offer arguments why injustice is necessary and advantageous.
There are quite a few leaves missing from Book Three, and in
places what Philus may have said (as with Laelius) has had to be
reconstructed by later scholarship where The Republic has been
quoted by other authors in antiquity. But what fascinating things
Philus does say! For he presents powerful arguments questioning
much of the supersessionist confidence in Roman superiority in
history that shines forth in Scipio’s earlier expositions, Cicero’s
prefaces and now Laelius’s arguments in Book Three. Since, in
Bakhtin’s terms, Philus is appearing in Book Three very much as
an independent author-thinker, what he says is salient and
challenging, not merely a rhetorical exercise. What, Philus asks,
constitutes justice in the puzzlingly contradictory history of
humanity?
Let’s take attitudes to the notion of natural law, that it is natu-
ral for humanity to do certain just things, a notion that is extremely
important in the long history of European and Western colonizing
and empire-building. In his preface to Book One, Cicero is sure of
a ‘basic fact’ of existence, that ‘nature has given to mankind such
a compulsion to do good, and such a desire to defend the well-
being of the community, that this force prevails over all the temp-
tations of pleasure and ease’; nature spurs humanity on to fulfil a
purpose, which is to increase the wealth of the human race and to
make men’s lives safer and richer.37 In Book One, Scipio also
refers to ‘the universal law of nature’, which is that ‘nature decrees
that nothing belongs to anyone except the person who can handle
and use it.’38 Scipio is formulating a natural law that anticipates
the mythos of agriculture that we will soon find in the Aeneid, and

also the doctrine of res nullius that became part of international
law, the law of nations, drawn on to justify colonizing and empire
from early modern European times to modernity.
In Book Three, Philus reprises the relativizing and pluralizing
play of perspectives in Herodotus and Thucydides’ histories
questioning classical Greek ethnocentrism and Athenian self-
admiration. He proceeds by undermining Roman certainty that
they are putting in practice in their state and empire what is
universally natural for human communities to do. It should follow
from the notion of natural law, Philus points out, that if nature has
laid down the Roman system of justice, then every other country
would have the same laws, and would always have had them
through time. However, the notion of natural law, the argument
from nature, cannot hold for all humanity, not least in the case of
justice; if, he points out, justice were a part of nature, like hot and
cold, or bitter and sweet, then ‘just and unjust would be the same
for everyone’. But what we see is that people’s customs are ‘vastly
different’. Quite clearly, Philus reflects, given humanity’s extraor-
dinary variety of peoples and societies, justice is not an element of
nature but a political phenomenon that changes from society to
society. The ‘varieties of laws, institutions, customs and habits’are
so diverse among the nations, and have in any case changed so
much even within any one nation, that the doctrine of natural law
cannot hold.39
After all, Philus points out, it is clear that there is constant
change among societies, nations, cities and laws, including
within the history of Rome itself, and there is therefore no
reason to think present Roman law is necessarily just or ideal.
For example, referring to the ‘rights of women’, Philus points
out how unfair Roman law, ‘passed in the interests of men’, is
against women in regard to bequests and legacies. ‘Why’, Philus
asks, ‘shouldn’t a woman possess money of her own?’ Here, he
says, is a ‘serious injustice’.40
Bakhtin writes of the menippea that, in its experimental
fantasticality, there is the possibility of observation from some
unusual point of view, from on high, for example, resulting in a
THE ORIGINS OF VIOLENCE
[ 106 ]

radical change in the scale of the observed phenomena of life.41
Let’s imagine, Philus says to his interlocutors, that we are on high,
as if in a chariot in the sky. Looking down and surveying many
different cities and countries, what would the onlooker see? He
would see the most diverse of attitudes, where what is just in the
view of one society is unjust in the view of another. In the land of
Egypt, the bull Apis and many other beasts are worshipped as
gods. In Greece, the onlooker would notice splendid temples
consecrated to statues in human form, a practice followed by the
Romans as well, but which the Persians regarded as sacrilegious.
Indeed, did not Xerxes order the temples of Athens to be burnt,
believing it was ‘impious to confine within walls gods whose
abode was the whole universe’?42
Recalling the ethnographic sweep of Herodotus’s Histories,
Philus asks his friends to think of a range of nations and rulers,
from the Taurians on the Black Sea to Basiris, King of Egypt, to
the Gauls and Carthaginians, who have regarded human sacrifice
‘as a holy act, most welcome in the sight of the immortal gods’.
As for we Romans, says Philus, we imagine ourselves to be
‘paragons of justice’, yet don’t we ‘forbid the tribes beyond the
Alps to plant olive-trees and vines, in order to enhance the value
of our own products’? How can this be considered just? What of
Lycurgas the great law-giver, didn’t he give the land of the rich to
the common people, for the latter ‘to work as slaves’? There is,
then, Philus observes, ‘nothing natural about justice’.43
In passages that appear in other ancient authors, Philus pres-
ents an alternative to natural law theory, choosing instead a mode
of historicizing the notion of justice, a comparative sociology,
stressing features in history like expediency, self-interest, mystifi-
cation of motives, war for gain and dubious claims to divine
support. In this alternative view, Philus certainly does not spare his
fellow Romans, as we can see in our epigraph to this chapter, as
well as in the following quotations:
The Romans themselves illustrate the difference between
justice and expediency. By declaring war through the
PLATO AND CICERO’S REPUBLICS
[ 107 ]

fetial priests they have given a specious legality to lawless
behaviour; and by seizing other people’s land they have
acquired a world empire.44
Every empire is gained by war, which always involves
harm for the gods of the conquered as well as for the
conquered themselves.45
Drawing on the sceptical thinking of Carneades, Philus says, ‘If
the Romans decided to be just and return other people’s property,
they would at once revert to poverty and live in huts’.46 Philus’s
witty comment on empire here immediately brings to mind Peri-
cles admitting to his fellow Athenians, as evoked in Thucydides’
History (2.63), that it may have been wrong for Athens to have
taken possession of its empire in the first place, because it had
become a tyranny, but if the Athenians wish to continue as a great
society, they must not let their empire go. Philus rebukes the
Romans for their imperial arrogance, in wishing to ‘rule over as
many subjects as possible, enjoy pleasures, and revel in power,
supremacy, and dominion’.47
In these critical reflections, Philus also reprises the ethical
questioning of empire in Herodotus’s Histories (1.204–14 and
3.21), in the powerful speeches to the invading Persians by the
Queen of the Massagetae and the King of Ethiopia. ‘Justice’,
Philus insists, in the anti-ethnocentric and cosmopolitan spirit of
Herodotus and Thucydides’ histories, ‘teaches us to spare all
men, take thought for the interests of mankind, give everyone his
due, and not lay hands on the things belonging to the gods, the
state, or somebody else’.48 We might recall here that central to
Lemkin’s thought are notions of world culture and the oneness
of the world, valuing the variety and diversity of human
cultures.49 Philus suggests, then, that the history of Rome,
‘whose empire now controls the world’, is not a narrative of
justice for humanity, but of its reverse, a story of what has been
gained in terms of particular Roman interests: ‘Wealth, positions
of power, possessions, offices, military commands, and dominion
THE ORIGINS OF VIOLENCE
[ 108 ]

over individuals or nations’.50 And as Philus has just noted, there
is no natural or divine right by which any one nation such as that
of Rome lays hands on things ‘belonging to the gods’.51 In
Philus’s view, the Roman Empire is not divinely ordained.
In these counterpointings in Book Three, it is clear that what
is universally natural and just for Laelius represents in Philus’s
view local and arbitrary acts of self-interest, the self-interest of
empire and those who are advantaged by it; a self-interest always
put forward, and indeed believed in, as just according to natural
law, imbued with honourable intentions, defensive in orientation,
never aggressive towards other nations and peoples, never
covetous and self-seeking.
CONCLUSION: ‘THE DREAM OF SCIPIO’
I will close this discussion of the polyphony of Cicero’s great
Republic with a brief glance at its final scene, ‘The Dream of
Scipio’, a most interesting short narrative. In Book One, Scipio
had stated with great certainty that the human species is ‘not
made up of solitary individuals or lonely wanderers’, but is
inspired by an innate desire to form communities.52 In Book
Two, Scipio had complained of coastal cities that they encourage
a dangerous wandering of body and mind, which he associated
with Carthage but also Greece as a mark of weakness and infe-
riority.53 Yet in Book Six, in ‘The Dream of Scipio’, in a state of
solitude, Scipio’s mind does indeed wander. We can regard ‘The
Dream of Scipio’ in Bakhtin’s terms in Problems of Dostoevsky’s
Poetics as a miniature menippea, a fantastical journey. The story
partakes of the menippean opportunity of observation from
unusual heights, as Philus had talked of in relation to someone
looking down at the world from a chariot. The menippea also, as
Bahktin notes, permitted exploration of unusual moral and
psychic states, revealed in unrestrained daydreaming or strange
dreams; in such dreams, a person loses his or her finalized
quality and ceases to mean only one thing; one ceases to
PLATO AND CICERO’S REPUBLICS
[ 109 ]

coincide with oneself; there can be a dialogic relationship to
one’s own self, with the possibility of split personality.54
In ‘The Dream of Scipio’, a dialogue of the dead occurs in a
dream, so Scipio reports to his friends, that he once had in
Africa. Scipio says he had come to Africa as military tribune of
the fourth legion, two years before he destroyed Carthage. He
pays his respects to a local ruler, King Masinissa, a close friend
of his own illustrious military family, in particular Scipio’s
(adoptive) grandfather, Africanus. After he goes to bed, Scipio
falls into a deeper sleep than usual, and while he is asleep, the
souls of his dead grandfather and his father Paulus appear to him
in his dream. They engage Scipio in a startling conversation, a
conversation we can describe as carnivalesque, overturning his
usual modes of perceiving and valuing his life and Roman impe-
rial society more generally. The souls of his grandfather and
father are in heaven. They take Scipio on a journey where he is
able to look down on the earth from ‘a high place which was
clear and shining in the radiance of starlight’.55
From this heavenly vantage point Scipio can comprehend the
whole universe, and the effect is to disturb his self-image that he
is central to and a victor in history, part of a glorious empire that,
as is frequently repeated by the interlocutors in The Republic,
covers and controls the world. Wandering on high in his dream,
Scipio has a nightmarish realization: ‘Now the earth itself seemed
so small to me that I felt ashamed of our empire, whose extent was
no more than a dot on its surface’ (I’m repeating here my second
epigraph). Not only is the earth small, but the Roman empire is
only a dot on the earth. Consider, Africanus tells Scipio, that the
world is encircled by two habitable belts; the one on the south
could never be part of the Roman empire, because from the point
of view of the northern belt its people walk upside down; as for the
northern belt, the Roman empire is only a tiny area. The ‘glory’
which you, Scipio, Africanus says, are so eager to extend, and the
‘fame’ you seek, has never gone beyond the far side of the Cauca-
sus or swum across the Ganges, nor is it present in the remaining
areas of the east and west, north and south. Fame and glory never
THE ORIGINS OF VIOLENCE
[ 110 ]

in any case endure anywhere on earth, Africanus tells his grand-
son: ‘a person’s reputation’ does not last for ever, and ‘vanishes as
posterity forgets’.56
In this part dream, part nightmare, becoming like a solitary
individual or lonely wanderer enables Scipio to open his think-
ing to new perspectives that question the hubris of empire he so
conventionally accepts and extols. His own hubris and the value
of his life as a conqueror are brought into question. In his
dialogue with his dead grandfather and father, seeing his world
from another place, Scipio becomes an outsider, a stranger, to his
own previous life, implying the possibility of transformation and
metamorphosis. ‘The Dream of Scipio’ perhaps anticipates the
baroque memento mori of early modern European cultural
history, where consideration of the nearness of death, and of the
judgement of the soul that will ensue, prompts thought about the
illusions of worldly pursuits, here empire and its supersessionist
delusion of everlasting worldwide greatness and glory as if they
should constitute life’s purpose.
Cicero’s Republic ends, then, in dazzling ambivalences and
intriguing questioning of a remarkable menippean and contrapuntal
kind.
PLATO AND CICERO’S REPUBLICS
[ 111 ]


5 VICTIMOLOGY 
AND GENOCIDE: 
THE BIBLE’S EXODUS,
VIRGIL’S AENEID
And I [God] am come down to deliver them out of the
hand of the Egyptians, and to bring them up out of that
land unto a good land and a large, unto a land flowing
with milk and honey; unto the place of the Canaanites,
and the Hittites, and the Amorites, and the Perizzites, and
the Hivites, and the Jebusites.
(God to Moses, Exodus 3: 8)
He [Aeneas] will wage a great war in Italy and crush its
fierce tribes. He will build walls for his people and establish
their way of life.
(Jupiter to Venus in Virgil, Aeneid, Book One)1
At last she [Dido] replied on a blaze of passion: ‘You are
a traitor. … He [Aeneas] did not sigh when he saw me
weep. He did not even turn to look at me. Was he over-
come and brought to tears? Had he any pity for the woman
who loves him? … He was thrown helpless on my shores
and I took him in and like a fool settled him as a partner
in my kingdom. He had lost his fleet and I found it and
brought his companions back from the dead. … And now
we hear about the augur Apollo … and to crown all the
messenger of the gods is bringing terrifying commands
[ 113 ]

THE ORIGINS OF VIOLENCE
[ 114 ]
down through the winds from Jupiter himself. … I do not
hold you or bandy words with you. Away you go. Keep on
searching for your Italy with the winds to help you. Look
for your kingdom over the waves. But my hope is that if
the just gods have any power, you will drain a bitter cup
among the ocean rocks, calling the name of Dido again
and again, and I shall follow you not in the flesh but in the
black fires of death and when its cold hand takes the
breath from my body, my shade shall be with you wher-
ever you may be. You will receive the punishment you
deserve, and the news of it will reach me deep among the
dead.
(Dido to Aeneas, Aeneid, Book Four)2
… the whole agony of exile.
(Aeneid, Book Five)3
Why is it right for Trojans to raise the black-smoking
torches of war against Latins, to put other men’s lands
under their yoke, to carry off plunder, to pick and choose
who are to be their fathers-in-law, to tear brides from their
mothers’ laps and to hold out the olive branch of peace
with their weapons fixed on the high sterns of their ships?
(Juno to Jupiter, Aeneid, Book Ten)4
… the genocidal advocacies of the Pentateuch.
(Robert P. Carroll, Wolf in the Sheepfold)5
Throughout this book I argue that Greco-Roman polytheism and
Jewish and Christian monotheism shared concepts and notions that
are important in world history for their relationship to violence.
Notions of divinely sanctioned genocide and victimology, conquest
and colonization, along with supersessionist discourse, can be
perceived crossing the monotheism–polytheism divide. In the
ancient world of the Mediterranean and Middle East, the Greco-
Roman polytheistic and Jewish and Christian monotheistic peoples

THE BIBLE’S EXODUS, VIRGIL’S AENEID
[ 115 ]
did not necessarily have to know each other for them to interact and
converge; convergence could be at the level of ideas, though the
different histories did increasingly intersect as the Roman Empire
spread, with the Empire finally becoming Christian.
My aim in this chapter is to complicate the polytheism–
monotheism divide itself. I will be suggesting that in the ancient
world what we now take to be a kind of absolute opposition between
polytheism and monotheism, as hostile philosophical and cosmo-
logical systems, could be blurred, inchoate, incomplete and
confused. A monotheistic father god could see himself (the supreme
god always being presented as male) as one amongst other gods and
divine figures, for all he might desire was absolute power over a
particular people; a polytheistic god, especially one designated as
all-powerful, could conduct himself very much as we usually
conceive a monotheistic father god. In addition, the historical claim
that a crucial distinction between them is that in monotheism God
is hidden and invisible, while polytheism stresses the visuality of its
deities, can also be questioned. Wasn’t the Egyptian supreme deity
Ra hidden, invisible, inscrutable? Wasn’t the character we call God
in the biblical stories very often visible?
To pursue these questions I will bring into conversation, for
their narrative and ethical similarities, the biblical story of Exodus
and Virgil’s Aeneid, two of world history’s most powerful and last-
ingly influential victimological narratives. By victimological narra-
tive, I mean, as outlined in the introduction to this book, the belief
that earlier bondage, persecution and suffering justifies later
violence, conquest and destruction. In their operation, reception and
eventual imbrication in Western history, these texts represent an
ethical disaster, with highly destructive consequences for humanity
as a whole, especially for indigenous peoples and peoples already
in a land coveted by others as chosen and promised.
Lemkin thought that instances of the formerly persecuted
becoming persecutors themselves, victims in the past becoming
oppressors in the future, were a recurring feature in the history of
genocide. Such exchanges between persecuted and persecutors,
victims and perpetrators, help shape the narrative of Exodus and of

other aspects of the Pentateuch and Old Testament concerning the
ending of exile in a homeland, as well as the Aeneid. In this chap-
ter I will be considering Richard Waswo’s remarkable The Found-
ing Legend of Western Civilization (1997), which contends that the
Aeneid was and remains, some two millennia after its writing, of
central importance to Western notions of colonization and expan-
sion into other people’s territories, with associated valuing of agri-
culture, culture-bearing, law and cities, and an overriding distinction
between civilization, represented in the city, and barbarity, signified
by forest and wilderness.6 While I find Waswo’s argument persua-
sive, I will be suggesting that Exodus is equally powerful, and
equally pernicious, as a founding legend of the West.
VICTIMOLOGY AND GENOCIDAL VIOLENCE:
EXODUS AND THE AENEID
The narrative similarities of these two great legendary stories are
startling. Both Exodus and the Aeneid tell the harrowing tale of
peoples whose long historical existence in a certain place has been
destroyed, for the Israelites in Egypt by Pharaoh, for the Trojans
in Troy by the Greeks led by Agamemnon and Ulysses, the latter
a figure of hatred in Virgil’s long epic poem. In Exodus, the
Israelites, led by Moses as saviour and father of his people, guided
by a monotheistic God with whom he enjoys frequent intimate
talks, leave Egypt (with some difficulty) and wander in the desert
for many years of exile, hardship and suffering. At last they
approach the land of Canaan, which God has promised will be
their new home: a land which, with God’s advice, encouragement
and assistance, they will genocidally conquer after fierce warfare
against the peoples already there, its indigenous inhabitants. In the
Aeneid, as Troy falls to the Greeks, Aeneas the Trojan warrior, also
a saviour and father of his people, leads a group of survivors out
of the burning city. The Trojans will wander across the desert-like
Mediterranean sea for many years of exile, hardship and suffering,
until they can approach the land of Italy, which Jupiter, the near-
THE ORIGINS OF VIOLENCE
[ 116 ]

THE BIBLE’S EXODUS, VIRGIL’S AENEID
[ 117 ]
monotheistic Olympian father god, has promised to them as their
new home; a land which, with the advice, encouragement and
assistance of Jupiter and fellow gods Venus (Aeneas’s mother) and
the prophet god Apollo, they will genocidally conquer after fierce
warfare against the indigenous peoples already living there.
In the early part of these narratives, the Israelites and Trojans
start out as victims of persecution and destruction, as people of
great suffering; in the middle part of the narrative, they continue
to suffer in their wanderings as lost and homeless people; in the
final section, their wanderings and misery end as they become
victors and conquerors themselves. What is the ethical relation
of that earlier suffering to that which in these narratives the
Israelites and Trojans eventually do, the terrible violence they
commit, in other places and upon other peoples? It is this ques-
tion that in recent times has energized discussion of Exodus and
the Aeneid in critical and cultural theory concerned with ques-
tions of settler colonialism. From the late twentieth century, both
texts, and their historical consequences, have been sharply – if
usually separately – interrogated on ethical grounds. I’ll try now
to bring that questioning within the one discussion.
In The Founding Legend of Western Civilization, Waswo does
acknowledge similarities between the Old Testament and the Aeneid
as foundational creation stories, the one sacred, the other secular,
but he does not pursue the comparison in his book.7 With my own
interest in the importance of a postsecular perspective, I will do so
here, with the proviso that I cannot see why we should regard the
Aeneid as any less a religious text than is Exodus, or later books like
Joshua and Judges which evoke the invasion of the promised land,
as God and Moses in Exodus had recommended.8
EXODUS (AND JOSHUA AND JUDGES)
The contemporary critique of Exodus in terms of postcolonial and
exilic diaspora theory was inaugurated by a striking and now 
classic postsecular essay by Edward Said, ‘Michael Walzer’s

THE ORIGINS OF VIOLENCE
[ 118 ]
Exodus and Revolution: A Canaanite Reading’ (1986). Said
suggests that the dangerous seductiveness of the Exodus story,
promising liberation to the suffering and oppressed, should be resis-
ted. The narrative of Exodus, Said points out, considered as a whole,
has an inspiring vision of freedom for one people that is yet
premised on defeat and even extermination for another, the Canaan-
ites, those who already inhabit the Promised Land, a land which by
divine injunction is to be conquered and occupied. Said sees the
displaced and dispossessed Palestinians as the present-day Canaan-
ites of the Middle East, part of a world history where Exodus has
unfortunately proven all too exemplary, inspiring Puritans in New
England to slay Native Americans or South African Boers to lay
claim to and move in on huge areas of African lands.9
In an essay of great acuity and wisdom, ‘The Lie of the Land:
The Text beyond Canaan’ (1989), Harry Berger Jnr, discussing
Genesis and Exodus, contrasts what he refers to as ‘possessive
nomadism’ to mobile pastoral nomadism, to customary wanderers
who wish to keep wandering. In these terms, the Israelites, by
taking possession of the Promised Land, the land of Canaan, lost
their diasporic freedom to wander and to think as wanderers.
Descending on Canaan, the Israelites placed themselves in
bondage to possessive nomadism, the species of nomadic group
who invade and take over a settled agricultural society. The
inevitable corollary of such a conception of the nomadic is a
notion of exile as separation from a land claimed to be one’s own,
exile as loss that has to be remedied. In conquering the land of
Canaan, however, Berger points out, the Israelites went from fugi-
tives to ‘captors and victors themselves’, and in doing so they
incorporated features of social, state and religious organization of
the land they had fled from, imperial Egypt, in the new society
they developed. In Canaan, the Israelites instituted a kingdom that
was bureaucratic, hierarchical and authoritarian, with its instituted
judgeship, notions of monarchy, settled state and rule-bound
priesthood; in Berger’s felicitous phrasing, the Israelites, in the
apparently new society, legitimated restoration ‘of the very world
from which Exodus relates the exodus’.

THE BIBLE’S EXODUS, VIRGIL’S AENEID
[ 119 ]
Yet Berger feels that Exodus is not a closed text; it remains
open and contradictory, as does the textuality of the Old Testament
in general, in the ways it both represents ideas and desires 
yet subjects them to ‘continuous critique’, and so keeps alive
customary wandering as a mode of thought. In such textuality,
tensions between tent as against house, nomadism as against agri-
culture, wilderness as against possessing Canaan, wandering and
exile as against settlement, diaspora as against ingathering in a
state, remain unresolved. Old Testament textuality, Berger feels,
becomes, in its self-criticality, a kind of travelling ark of interpre-
tation and reinterpretation, permitting in the dispersal of diaspora
the possible development of an ‘ideal of autonomous internalized
ethical art’.10
Berger’s notion here of exile enabling adventures of ideas
and ethical arts of self-fashioning, in one way looks back to
Spinoza’s judgement on Moses and Exodus in Tractatus Theo-
logico-Politicus, that the flight from Egypt delivered the
Hebrews into another kind of ‘bondage’, where Moses
‘commanded’ them to love God and keep his Law. In Spinoza’s
view, Moses infantilized the Hebrews, teaching them how to act
and behave in the same way as parents teach children who have
not reached the age of reason; Moses sought to promote
obedience, not to impart knowledge, and hence denied them true
freedom, the freedom to reason for themselves and accept God
in their own individual ways, from their own independent mind
and spirit.11 In another way, Berger’s argument is clearly close to
Said’s own conception of exile and diaspora as conflicted, as
both pain and loss yet also opening onto the possibilities for the
individual thinker of unhoused speculation, the creativity of new
and unexpected perspectives.12
In The Curse of Cain: The Violent Legacy of Monotheism
(1997), Regina M. Schwartz comments on the influence of 
the Exodus story in authorizing a biblical version of the
victimological narrative: that earlier victimhood warrants later
violence and justifies present exclusionary or discriminatory
policies. Old Testament narratives like Exodus, Schwartz argues,

have been and continue to be vastly influential not only in the
history of Christianity, but in secularized forms in modern
European history in the phenomenon of collective identities like
nationalism. Schwartz sees Zionism and the modern nation state
of Israel as part of this history.13 Like Berger, Schwartz also
wishes to stress that the narratives of Exodus and the Old
Testament more generally (we could also think of the book of Job)
are nonetheless richly heterogeneous, complex and contradictory,
always offering grounds for counter-movement, doubt and
critique, both supporting and unseating authorized codes like
conquest of a promised land.14 Berger and Schwartz’s approach
resonates with Robert Carroll’s argument in Wolf in the Sheepfold,
that the sheer wildness, opacity and unruliness of biblical stories,
metaphors and images will always exceed and confound every
attempt in Western history, not least in Christian theology, the
object of his spirited critique, to systematize the Bible into
coherent or essentialized or absolute meanings.15
Such writing by Said and Schwartz proved to be profoundly
influential in stimulating postsecular critiques of the power of
narratives like Exodus in settler-colonial situations and histories
around the world, in Palestine-Israel, the United States and
Australia. In her well-known essay ‘Antinomies of Exile: Said at
the Frontiers of National Narrations’, Ella Shohat suggests that
the United States is so receptive to Zionism, rather than to the
plight of the Palestinians, because Americans like to stress their
similarity with Israelis in relation to British colonialism, the
British pharaoh, which each rejected and fought against. Amer-
icans admire the image of the sabra pioneer, the new Israeli-
born Jewish man, just as they admire in themselves the true
American as Adam charged with a civilizing mission in a New
Canaan, the Promised Land of the New World, in a virgin state
until the American Adam’s redemptive arrival. Both New Jewish
Man and New American Man see themselves as blessed with the
divine prerogative of naming the elements and features of the
new world they encounter. And in each case the presence and
societies of the indigenous inhabitants, the Palestinians and
THE ORIGINS OF VIOLENCE
[ 120 ]

Sephardi and Oriental Jews in Israel and the Native Americans
in North America, are ignored or held to be of no account.16
In another well-known essay, ‘Expulsion, Exodus and Exile
in White Australian Historical Mythology’ (1999), Ann
Curthoys notes that in its engagement with victimology white
Australian history reveals the uneasy workings of both Genesis
and Exodus. In the popular mythology of the settler colony –
an ongoing history – there is a persistent strand of discourse
where white Australians are perceived as having been expelled
from the British Eden conceived as the mother land, a primal
wound in the white Australian psyche, of rejection by the
mother. Popular mythology also, however, draws on a myth of
exodus from the British pharaoh and settlement in a promised
land far from the British pharaoh’s shores, enabling a new soci-
ety and national narrative and sensibility to be created.
Curthoys argues that white Australians see themselves in orig-
inary ways as victims: victims as convicts and, as pioneering
settlers in a harsh land, of drought and fire and flood; victims
too of misuse by powerful nations like Britain or the United
States. Regarding themselves as victims, aware always of their
own suffering and hardship and defeats, they cannot, Curthoys
suggests, view themselves as victimizers, as responsible for the
suffering and hardship and tragedies they inflict on others,
those they displace and dispossess and persecute.17
In The Bible and Zionism (2007), Nur Masalha analyses the
manifold ways that Exodus has been used as a creation story by
Zionism since the late nineteenth century, and has become crucial
as the mythological underpinning for the modern settler colonial
state of Israel. Masalha supports Said’s path-breaking postcolonial
reading of Exodus, and also refers to a Saidian critique of
Exodus’s narrative from an indigenous viewpoint by the North
American author Robert Allen Warrior, who writes that those who
seek to see in Exodus a kind of liberation theology overlook what
happened to the Canaanites: ‘Especially ignored’, Warrior points
out, ‘are those parts of the story that describe Yahweh’s command
to mercilessly annihilate the indigenous population.’18
THE BIBLE’S EXODUS, VIRGIL’S AENEID
[ 121 ]

Masalha also highlights the contribution to these debates of
the late Michael Prior, whose writings, influenced by Said’s turn-
ing a Canaanite lens on Exodus, analyse the ways in which the
Bible has been deployed to justify Western settler colonialism in
Latin America, South Africa and Palestine. Prior critiques conven-
tional Christian theological support for Zionism and its unwilling-
ness to question the biblical narratives that Zionism has called on
to justify its historical project, especially Exodus, Deuteronomy
and Joshua, that mandate genocide against the indigenous peoples
of Canaan. In terms of contemporary international law, Prior
noted, the practices recommended in these narratives, of ethnic
cleansing and extermination of peoples cast as enemies, would
now be considered war crimes and crimes against humanity.19
It’s as well to quickly remind ourselves how genocidal, in
Lemkin’s terms, the Pentateuch and other early books of the Old
Testament like Joshua and Judges egregiously are. Famously,
Moses died before he reached the promised land, but in the book
of Joshua we find that Joshua, Moses’ disciple and successor,
successfully carries out the long-planned invasion. Joshua and the
Israelite army cross the Jordan to launch their military conquest of
the promised land, where on the east and west live the Canaanites,
in the mountains live the Amorites, the Hittites, the Perizzites and
Jebusites, and also in the land reside the Hivites (Joshua 11: 3).
The kings of these peoples meet and decide to resist. God tells the
Israelites not to be afraid, because he will assist them to fall on
these kings’ armies and slay them across the whole land, which
duly occurs, the Israelites smiting them until none remains,
indeed, ‘utterly destroying them’. Joshua also burns the cities of
these kings (Joshua 11: 5–17). It’s difficult not to recall here the
mythology, epic and drama of the Greeks conquering Troy, loot-
ing its treasures, killing all the men and capturing and selling into
slavery the women and children. We learn in the book of Joshua
that the Israelites smote every man with the edge of the sword
‘until they had destroyed them, neither left they any to breathe’.
However, ‘the spoil of these cities, and the cattle’ the Israelites
reserved for themselves (Joshua 11: 14), though it is not clear here
THE ORIGINS OF VIOLENCE
[ 122 ]

what the Israelites, if they had killed all the men and looted treas-
ures and cattle, did with the enemy women and children, unless
they also were killed. Nonetheless, in other places in Joshua, when
cities were taken, everyone and everything that breathed was put
to the sword (Joshua 10: 28–40). In sum, we learn, ‘Joshua smote
all the country of the hills, and of the south, and of the vale, and
of the springs, and all their kings: he left none remaining, but
utterly destroyed all that breathed, as the Lord God of Israel
commanded’ (Joshua 10: 40).
After destruction comes replacement. ‘So’, we are told in the
final verse of Chapter 11, ‘Joshua took the whole land, according
to all that the Lord said unto Moses; and Joshua gave it for an
inheritance unto Israel according to their divisions by their tribes’
(Joshua 11: 23). Lemkin’s definition in Axis Rule in Occupied
Europe, then, where an abiding feature of genocide is the destruc-
tion of a society and its replacement by an incoming group, clearly
applies to the book of Joshua. The Israelites with God assisting
enact genocide on the peoples who already inhabit the land of
Canaan, destroying their societies and then dividing the land up
amongst themselves, at the same time taking possession of their
cities, vineyards and olive groves (as God reminds the Israelites in
Joshua 24: 13). The Israelites under the command of Joshua
invade the land of Canaan because they have been commanded to
do so by Moses in Exodus, and Moses in turn has been
commanded by God. At the end of the book of Joshua, Joshua
adds another reason why the Israelites should remain obedient. He
tells the Israelites that for their own sake and safety they should
obey God, because God had aided them in their endeavours in
Canaan just as he had helped them in Egypt (Joshua 24: 7), and
because he is clearly ‘a jealous God’ who will not forgive their
‘transgressions nor … sins’ (Joshua 24: 19).
The book of Joshua suggests a fundamental question: who or
what is God? In general, the Old Testament stories create God as
a character who speaks or whose views are reported by other char-
acters like Moses and Joshua, and who on more than one occasion
shows himself in some form. Near the beginning of Exodus, for
THE BIBLE’S EXODUS, VIRGIL’S AENEID
[ 123 ]

example, and rather comically, God appears before Moses as a
burning bush (‘God called unto him out of the midst of the bush,
and said, Moses, Moses’ – Exodus 3: 4). Indeed, it has long been
noticed, from Spinoza in the seventeenth century to Daniel
Boyarin and Robert Carroll in the twentieth, that God is fond of
making an appearance. In Tractatus Theologico-Politicus, Spinoza
refers to Exodus 24, where the Israelites’chief men behold God on
Mount Sinai (another incident amuses Spinoza, when God appears
to Moses but, playfully and rather lewdly, only shows his back
parts – Exodus 33: 23).20 Boyarin also draws attention to sight-
ings of God in Exodus at vital moments in the narrative, in the
crossing of the Red Sea and the giving of the Torah.21
As Robert Carroll astutely notes, each story of the Old
Testament constructs the character of God as part of a specific
narrative infused with troubling or puzzling metaphors and
images, where the different representations of the deity do not
add up to a single, consistent description. In this sense, Carroll
reflects, God is a figure of fiction, sometimes arbitrary, savage
and cruel, who at times deceives and lies even to prophets, who
creates evil as well as good, who can slaughter thousands of
people, who even, early in Exodus, for reasons that are not
explained, tries to slay Moses (‘And it came to pass by the way
in the inn, that the Lord met him, and sought to kill him’), who
is only saved by the quick thinking of Zipporah, Moses’ Midian-
ite wife (Exodus 4: 24–26).22 Furthermore, Carroll observes,
images relating to the alleged hiddenness of God, a notion so
important to theology, indeed a fiction of theology, are only a
small part of the Old Testament, and much more common are
occasions when God is, energetically and visibly, present in vari-
ous stories, events and encounters.23 We can conclude that the
historical claim that polytheism and monotheism divide over the
issue of visibility or hiddenness cannot be sustained. We will
return to this issue in our next chapter commenting on German
religion in Tacitus’ Germania.
In the book of Joshua, we can contemplate in Lemkinian spirit
the motivation of the character called God to commit genocide.
THE ORIGINS OF VIOLENCE
[ 124 ]

God insists to Joshua that the Israelites should remember his
active interventions on their behalf on their journey towards and
during their invasion of Canaan. God says he destroyed peoples
like the Amorites because they were in the way of the Israelites (‘I
gave them into your hand, that ye might possess their land; and I
destroyed them from before you’ – Joshua 24: 8). Near the end of
the Book of Joshua, God admits that he had provoked the wars
with the kings who ruled in Canaan, he had chosen ‘to harden their
hearts, that they should come against Israel in battle’, so that
Joshua could then ‘destroy them’ (Joshua 11: 20). (It is worth
interpolating here that the contemporary Israeli military have for
many years continuously deployed a similar strategy to the one
God confides to Joshua; the military provoke the Palestinians into
violent resistance; the Israelis then claim to the Western world that
they are victims of Palestinian aggression, enabling them to turn
far greater violence on the long-suffering people of Palestine.)
God’s motivation, it would appear, is that he wishes that he and he
alone, not other strange gods, should be followed and obeyed by
the Israelites. He knows the Israelites have followed other gods in
the past and might be tempted to do so again, but now he wants
them to ‘put away the gods which your fathers served on the other
side of the flood, and in Egypt’ (Joshua 24: 14). Otherwise, as
Joshua warns, God will ‘turn and do you hurt, and consume you’
(Joshua 24: 20). The Book of Joshua invites us to ponder the
moral character of a deity whose only interest seems to be in
himself and his own desires and ambitions, for whom and for
which the peoples he destroys or helps destroy are of no interest,
except that their destruction will help him secure the loyalty of a
people he feels he needs to obey him and only him.24
In the Book of Joshua, God does not condemn the Israelites
for having been polytheistic in the past. He only says he wants
them to select and be loyal to him as their god, and to help them
in their decision he will use his superpowers – which he had
already deployed to best Pharaoh, as he showed to spectacular
effect in Exodus25 – to gift them other peoples’ countries, lands,
cities, groves and fields (Joshua 24: 11–-16).
THE BIBLE’S EXODUS, VIRGIL’S AENEID
[ 125 ]

In the Book of Joshua, God is created as one of the Old Testa-
ment’s greatest, and therefore one of history’s most influential,
genocidists.
In terms of Lemkin’s outline, in the Book of Joshua, God,
Joshua and the Israelites are guilty of genocide on all counts.
In terms of victimology, where before the Israelites had been
victims, now they are perpetrators; where before they had cruelly
suffered, now they make others cruelly suffer.
In his illuminating notes to the Book of Joshua in the edition
of The Bible he co-edited, Carroll points out how influential this
‘savage’ narrative was in later times, not least in early modern
England. The annihilation of those perceived as enemies in Joshua
and other biblical books was taken to heart by the seventeenth-
century English Puritans. Contemporary Protestant discourse
equated Catholics with heathen Canaanites. When, in 1649, Oliver
Cromwell invaded Ireland, he slaughtered those Irish Catholics
who refused to surrender their cities, as in the massacres of
Drogheda and Wexford; with the book of Joshua as their divinely
prescribed military handbook, Cromwell’s men in Ireland behaved
like the ancient Israelites in Canaan.26 In God, Gulliver, and Geno-
cide, Claude Rawson also writes that Cromwell saw the conquest
of Canaan celebrated in the Book of Joshua as the prototype of his
subjugation of the Irish; Cromwell told his troops embarking at
Bristol that they were Israelites about to extirpate the idolatrous
Canaanites.27
I’ll close this part of my argument with some brief reflec-
tions on the Book of Judges. In his Bible notes, Carroll points
out that whereas the book of Joshua gives the impression that
Joshua and his army successfully annihilated the Canaanite
kings and took over their cities and lands, Judges gives a differ-
ent picture. Here the Canaanites were not driven out of some of
the cities, and in other areas the Israelites were unable to drive
them out of the valley; the Canaanites survived in various areas
to live alongside the Israelites.28 In the first chapter of the Book
of Judges, we learn that after the death of Joshua, the brothers
Judah and Simeon slew many Canaanites and Perizzites (Judges
THE ORIGINS OF VIOLENCE
[ 126 ]

1: 5) and, as the Greeks had done to Troy, they destroyed
Jerusalem: ‘Now the children of Judah had fought against
Jerusalem, and had taken it, and smitten it with the edge of the
sword, and set the city on fire’ (Judges 1: 8). Yet, as Carroll
comments, conquest was not complete. Thus the Lord assisted
Judah to drive out the inhabitants of the mountains, but he ‘could
not drive out the inhabitants of the valley, because they had
chariots of iron’ (Judges 1: 19). When the Israelites had become
‘strong’ in the new land, ‘they put the Canaanites to tribute, 
and did not utterly drive them out’, with the surviving Asherites
and Amorites also becoming ‘tributaries’ (Judges 1: 28–35).
Rather than being exterminated, as in the Book of Joshua, the
Canaanites in Judges were subjugated and reduced to being
‘tributaries’, perhaps in a state close to slavery.
Recall Lemkin’s definition of genocide in Chapter 9 of Axis
Rule in Occupied Europe, where he makes a distinction between
two kinds of destruction and replacement as processes: after
destruction of the national pattern of the oppressed group, the
imposition of the national pattern of the oppressor ‘may be made
upon the oppressed population which is allowed to remain, or
upon the territory alone, after the removal of the population and
the colonization of the area by the oppressor’s own nationals’.29
Such could describe the difference Carroll notes between the
books of Joshua and Judges. Genocide as a process of removal of
the population and colonization of the area by the oppressor’s own
nationals would fit the Book of Joshua. Genocide as the imposi-
tion on the surviving inhabitants of the land of the oppressor’s
national pattern would fit the Book of Judges.
Contemporary Zionist Israel, in the late twentieth and early
twenty-first centuries, justifying itself in terms of biblical stories,
represents an uneasy and unstable blending of both kinds of
genocidal processes as described by Lemkin, which is why
contemporary scholars have reached for a variety of terms by
which to evoke modern Israel as genocidal or on the way to being
genocidal. Baruch Kimmerling referred to ‘politicide’ to evoke the
destruction of the national political life of the Palestinians. I have
THE BIBLE’S EXODUS, VIRGIL’S AENEID
[ 127 ]

THE ORIGINS OF VIOLENCE
[ 128 ]
invoked Lemkin’s definition in Chapter 9 of Axis Rule linking
genocide with colonization to refer to Israel as a genocidal settler
colony, reducing and replacing the Palestinian population where it
can. Ilan Pappé has called on terms like ethnic cleansing, urbani-
cide and ‘memoricide’ to describe continuing Israeli attempts to
destroy Palestinian society and identity.30
In his brilliant chapter ‘The Memoricide of the Nakba’ in The
Ethnic Cleansing of Palestine, Pappé evokes the appalling ways
that the Zionists from 1948 have deployed biblical sources, in a
systematic scholarly, political and military project, to de-Arabize
the terrain of conquered Palestine, its names, geography, ecology
and history. The Israelis, Pappé writes, seek always to establish a
‘metaphorical palimpsest’: ‘the erasure of the history of one
people in order to write that of another people’s over it’.31 We
might think here of Deuteronomy, where God instructs the
Israelites to carry out precisely such erasure on the landscape of
Canaan, to de-Canaanize it:
Ye shall utterly destroy all the places, wherein the nations
which ye shall possess served their gods, upon the high
mountains, and upon the hills, and under every green tree:
And ye shall overthrow the altars, and break their
pillars, and burn their groves with fire; and ye shall hew
down the graven images of their gods, and destroy the
names of them out of that place.
(Deuteronomy 12: 2–3)32
Do such processes of divinely promoted and assisted genocide and
colonization, of destruction, ethnic cleansing, politicide, urbani-
cide, memoricide, replacement, feature in the events and episodes
of Virgil’s masterpiece?
And what should we think of Jupiter, Yahweh’s equivalent
divine power in the Aeneid? In Wolf in the Sheepfold, Carroll says
that Yahweh in the Old Testament stories is created very much like
other deities in ancient literature, sitting on his throne between the
host of heaven (other divine beings). In this sense, Carroll feels,

Yahweh is very similar to other supreme gods in the ancient Near
East, its religious cultures tending to have one high god who
controls all the other gods, like Zeus in Homer.33
THE AENEID
In The Founding Legend of Western Civilization, Waswo’s analy-
sis of the Aeneid, from what we might say is a ‘Canaanite’ optic,
is similar to the Said-inspired postcolonial critique of Exodus and
related biblical stories. Waswo evokes the wandering Trojans,
looking for a home promised to them by Jupiter, very much in
Berger’s terms concerning different kinds of nomads. Wandering
forlornly for seven years across and about the Mediterranean, the
Trojans are not customary wanderers who wish to keep wandering
in place, time and thought; rather, the Trojans are beholden to a
notion of possessive nomadism, the mindset of a nomadic group
who invade and take over a settled agricultural society. And just as
the Israelites go from being a people fleeing loss and experiencing
suffering to being captors and victors themselves, from victims to
perpetrators, so the Trojans in the Aeneid, Waswo points out, go
from being a people fleeing a burning Troy to a people who invade
and conquer Italy and assume power over its local inhabitants,
thence founding Rome and setting the scene for the greatest
empire the ancient world had yet seen.
In the spirit of Berger and Regina Schwartz talking about
Exodus and Old Testament textuality, Waswo asks us to consider
the Aeneid as a great poem that offers grounds for being critical of
the ‘linear teleology’ that drives the epic relentlessly along. We
must distinguish, in Waswo’s view, between the consciousness of
Aeneas, the poem’s hero, and the events, representations, images
and motifs of the poem as a whole. ‘In sum’, says Waswo, ‘it
would be hard to overestimate either the intelligence or the
complexity and ambivalence of Virgil’s founding epic.’ In particu-
lar, Waswo argues, the poem in its entirety as a text demonstrates
the ‘cost’ of what Aeneas achieves in his invasion of Italy. Aeneas
THE BIBLE’S EXODUS, VIRGIL’S AENEID
[ 129 ]

and the Trojans face Latins, along with Etruscans and Rutulians,
who already possess what the Trojans value, civilization based on
agriculture and cities. The Trojans assume, nevertheless, that these
peoples and societies haven’t got as much of such civilization as
the cultivated Trojans, for the Trojans never lose their assumption
that they are superior, they are history’s paradigmatic culture-
bringers. Aeneas and the Trojans will bring civilization as they
understand it to the Italians, and as Waswo acidly notes, what we
register is that in the process the rude Italians may get civilized, or
become more civilized, at the hands of the Trojans, but also, ‘most
of them get dead’.34
Waswo suggests that the predominant way the Aeneid has
been received in Western culture does not, however, recognize the
poem’s complexity and self-questioning. On the contrary, from
Roman antiquity to modernity, the Aeneid has been perceived as
an honourable justification for invasion, colonization and destruc-
tion of indigenous societies. What developed, he feels, is a West-
ern ‘myth’ of the Aeneid, even to the fantastical extent of
accepting it for 2,000 years after its writing as actual history.35
In his preface, Waswo outlines the constituent elements of the
myth that is diffused about the poem. The Aeneid is taken as
defining what culture is and who possesses it. Culture signifies
cultivation, which is linked both to notions of high culture, as in
religion and art, and to the act of tilling the soil. Civilization signi-
fies a settled agricultural community that sows, harvests, builds
cities and institutes law. The reverse of civilization is savagery,
from the Latin silvestris, of the woods, and the designation of
savagery can be applied to all other relations that human beings
may have with the earth, as in hunting, gathering and nomadic
pastoralism. Civilization also, however, makes journeys, is in
constant motion. Civilization always comes from elsewhere. Here
the journey of Aeneas and the Trojans, as escapees from the
destroyed city of Troy who proceed to settlement and empire-
building in another place, to which they bring culture, learning and
law, is exemplary. The Trojans then become the ancestors of
choice for medieval Europeans from Britain to Bohemia, from
THE ORIGINS OF VIOLENCE
[ 130 ]

THE BIBLE’S EXODUS, VIRGIL’S AENEID
[ 131 ]
Sicily to Iceland. In their successive journeys and settlings, from
the Trojans as heroes in the Aeneid to medieval and later times,
Trojan-like culture-bringers ‘assimilate or destroy the indigenous
people and ways of life they find there’. Even when, Waswo
reflects, it ceased to be regarded as actual history, the definitions
and categories associated with the accepted myth of the Aeneid
were absorbed into the fabric of Western discourse. In particular,
the myth’s emplotment of admirable conquest and settlement
becomes a universal Western narrative that prescribes, up to the
very present, what is civilized and what uncivilized for all culture,
and hence what is progress for humanity.36
In the myth associated with the Aeneid, Waswo maintains,
because the Trojans founded Rome and become Romans, all those
who subsequently deployed the myth as justification for what they
did in its name could claim not only the Trojans but the ancient
Romans, they who had established a great empire, as their spiritual
ancestors; they could claim not only Aeneas as a founding father
figure, but Rome’s first emperor, Augustus, portrayed in the Aeneid
as Aeneas’s lineal descendant. Furthermore, Waswo points out,
having effected a settlement and taken possession of somewhere, as
Columbus did when he was held to discover America, the culture-
bringers also inaugurate history itself in the new place or new
situation; all indigenous histories, including the aboriginal
languages, before the culture-bringers come and found the new, are
infantilized, are regarded as of little contemporary interest. Here
again the story of the coming of Trojan Rome is regarded as
exemplary, ignoring or minimizing its costs and consequences for
those who were there before Rome. As Waswo graphically writes,
the foundation of Rome inevitably entailed the unfounding of some-
body else: ‘The walls and towers of Rome rise over and upon the
blood and bones of non-Romans.’ And here Waswo, like so many
others who ponder the history of the West and its alleged deserved
triumph as a civilization, is moved to call on Walter Benjamin’s
aphorism – or should we say epitaph? – in ‘Theses on the Philoso-
phy of History’, that there is no document of civilization which is
not at the same time a document of barbarism.37

NARRATIVE AND COUNTER-NARRATIVE: THE COSTS
OF CONQUEST, COLONIZATION, EMPIRE
Waswo’s analysis is very illuminating indeed. What I would like to
do now is extend his argument by pursuing a comparison of the
Aeneid with Exodus and other Old Testament narratives, in terms of
my interest in Jupiter’s similarities with the character of God in
stories like the books of Exodus and Joshua, and my more general
interest in notions of victimology, genocide, supersessionism and
ethical deterioration. In The Founding Legend of Western Civiliza-
tion, Waswo stresses not only the costs involved in the Western
myth of the Aeneid for those, especially the indigenous of the world,
who are killed, removed, displaced, subjugated and assimilated by
‘Trojans’ who are idealized as, or idealize themselves as, rightful
conquerors and culture-bringers; he also points out the costs of
conquest and notions of culture-bringing for the conquerors 
and colonizers themselves, in terms of ethical deficiencies and
limitations. Here, his book suggests, in the complex and ambivalent
structure inhering in the Aeneid, there is a tension between on the
one hand a triumphalist narrative of Trojan success leading to the
founding of Rome as city and empire, and on the other hand a
counter-narrative, of the costs and consequences for both conquered
and conquerors of that success.38
For example, as Waswo says, a notorious feature of the Aeneid
is the ‘passivity of its hero’ and ‘the general apparent lack of any
human agency’. Aeneas, usually described as dutiful and pious,
father of his people, the embodiment of its culture and civilization,
throughout the poem hopes and trusts that he is carrying out a
teleological plan already thought out for him by Jupiter. Aeneas,
Waswo observes, never initiates any course of sustained action. He
might worry about what is happening, or what he should do next, or
mistake where to go, or react to what others say and do. But if he
strays too far away from Jupiter’s preordained project of conquer-
ing Italy and creating Rome, when for instance he falls in love with
Queen Dido in Carthage and looks like he will stay there with her
in marriage and partnership, Jupiter will intervene to remind him of
THE ORIGINS OF VIOLENCE
[ 132 ]

THE BIBLE’S EXODUS, VIRGIL’S AENEID
[ 133 ]
his eventual goal and steer him onwards towards it. Aeneas’s
frequent perplexity and anxiety is related directly to his lack of
knowledge of what Jupiter might want him to do at any stage of his
journey, but he never questions the rightness and correctness of
what, once he learns what Jupiter wants, he should do. It is Jupiter
who, Waswo notes, despite the contrary efforts especially of his
wife and sister Juno to secure a different outcome, controls, from
beginning to end, the overall journey and its goal.39
Let’s now compare Aeneas with Moses in relation to human
and divine agency in terms of Spinoza’s judgement that Moses in
Exodus infantilizes his followers, making sure they submit to
God’s commands. In so doing, Moses himself experiences a
severe ethical limitation: he refuses what Berger refers to as an
ideal of autonomous internalized ethical art. Perhaps here is one
meaning of the strange incident I mentioned before that occurs
early in Exodus, when God attacks Moses even before he has
returned to Egypt on God’s suggestion to rescue the Israelites
from bondage.
And it came to pass by the way in the inn, that the Lord
met him, and sought to kill him.
Then Zipporah took a sharp stone, and cut off the
foreskin of her son, and cast it at his feet, and said, Surely
a bloody husband art thou to me.
So he let him go: then she said, A bloody husband
thou art, because of the circumcision.
(Exodus 4: 24–26)
As bafflingly opaque and obscure as this episode is, it could
suggest that the character we know as God in Exodus is warning
Moses, to the point of violent death, never to be independent,
never to cultivate an autonomous internal ethical art. Moses
should carry out God’s commands when he learns what they are,
he should never subject them to profound interrogation and chal-
lenge, neither in terms of developing in himself and the Israelites
a sensibility of questioning and self-questioning, nor in terms of

THE ORIGINS OF VIOLENCE
[ 134 ]
the costs to other nations of what God enjoins the Israelites to do
when they eventually invade the promised land. Should they
invade the lands of others? Here, surely, Moses and Aeneas share
a disturbing lack of criticality and self-criticality.
There is, however, an interesting difference in terms of gender
signified in the incident of God attacking Moses in the inn.
Throughout the encounter, Moses remains curiously passive. But
Zipporah does not remain passive before God, she immediately
acts, heroically and resolutely, to save Moses. Zipporah’s action
underlines her belief in the strength of their relationship, and how
much women can act powerfully in history; she reminds us of the
formidable women of classical Greek tragedy, of Clytemnestra or
Andromache. In Book Four of the Aeneid, Jupiter, irritated that
Aeneas is ‘dallying’ with Dido, tells his messenger Mercury to go
‘speak to the Trojan leader who now lingers in Tyrian Carthage
without a thought for the cities granted to him by the Fates’.40
Alighting in Carthage, Mercury quickly reminds Aeneas that
his ‘destiny’ is to obey the commands of Jupiter, ‘the ruler of the
gods himself, by whose divine will the heavens and the earth
revolve’. Just as the God of Exodus and Joshua had reminded the
Israelites that they were to take over the land of Canaan for their
inheritance, Mercury reminds Aeneas that his son and heir Asca-
nius will one day inherit ‘the land of Rome and the kingdom of
Italy’. As soon as he hears what Mercury has to say, Aeneas jumps
to attention, longing ‘to be away and leave behind him this land he
had found so sweet’. When Dido tells him that she feels ‘utterly
betrayed and desolate’, Aeneas struggles ‘to fight down the
anguish of his heart’, but acquires the necessary determination
when he recalls Jupiter’s warnings. He informs Dido that he has
no choice: ‘Do not go on causing distress to yourself and to me by
these complaints. It is not by my own will that I search for Italy.’
The cost of that search to himself, then, will not only be the love
and passion he shares with Dido but also his own capacity for
Bildung, his ability and desire to cultivate an autonomous internal
ethical art, his freedom to think and be different from what the
father god has decreed is his fate.41

Part of Dido’s anger at Aeneas, as we can see from our
epigraph, is her realization that Aeneas has no will of his own, that
he has made himself an instrument of a destiny and purpose
designed for him by Jupiter and Apollo, and that he won’t resist
these gods, he won’t stand up for his love and his relationship with
Dido even as he sees how distraught and despairing she had
become at the news of his departure, which he had tried to conceal
from her.42
The story of Dido is a key part of the counter-narrative of the
Aeneid, her pathos and tragedy an eternal commentary on the
human costs of Aeneas’s ethical passivity.43 (We might think here
of Rebecca in Walter Scott’s Ivanhoe, created like Dido as orien-
tal, her near-death as a witch in late twelfth-century England a sad
commentary on medieval Christian exclusions, persecutions and
brutality.)44
WOMEN AND MEN
In the Aeneid, women are hindrances and obstacles, as Dido 
unhappily proved to be. Women are to be left behind or abandoned
or lost sight of. In Book Two, ‘The Fall of Troy’, as Troy burned 
at the hands of the Greeks, Aeneas loses sight of his wife Creusa and
never sees her again, though she appears before him as a ghost to
reassure him that the ‘King of High Olympus’ has decreed that she
not go to Italy where the Trojans’‘long exile’will be ended: ‘There
prosperity is waiting for you, and a kingdom and a royal bride.’45
Creusa: gone! Women also become possessed by irrational
madness, as occurs with Dido in Book Four when she is over-
whelmed by grief. In her desire for revenge against Aeneas, Dido
even sows the seeds of the future destruction of Carthage by the
Romans. Dido prays to her fellow Tyrians that ‘you must pursue
with hatred the whole line’of Aeneas’s descendants in time to come:
‘Make that your offering to my shade. Let there be no love between
our peoples and no treaties.’46 In Book Five, ‘Funeral Games’, when
the Trojan fleet stops over at a friendly shore, the women, while the
THE BIBLE’S EXODUS, VIRGIL’S AENEID
[ 135 ]

men participate in various games and contests, realize they are tired
of travel across endless seas; they long to stay where they are and
build a city to live in. Their feelings of exhaustion and weariness are
worked on by Juno’s messenger Iris into a kind of madness, the
women setting fire to Aeneas’s ships so that the Trojan journey may
end. Fortunately, on Aeneas’s appeal, Jupiter sends down a ‘deluge
of torrential rain’which saves most of the fleet. Aeneas then decides
to leave the women behind, along with the old men and anyone else
worn down by their long exile. Only a ‘small band’ of ‘warriors’,
‘their hearts … high for war’, would now press on to fulfil ‘the
command of Jupiter’.47
In the Aeneid’s counter-narrative, it is women even in what
appears to be their irrational madness who are strong, the men
weak because without will or ideas of their own. Like Zipporah
in Exodus, women in the Aeneid can choose to be indifferent to
divine plans, to the father god, can resist, can insist on other
courses or values, can be independent unlike pious, dutiful,
obedient men such as Aeneas. I’m reminded of an observation
by Gandhi: ‘To call women the weaker sex is a libel; it is man’s
injustice to woman … If by strength is meant moral power then
woman is immeasurably man’s superior.’48 As Waswo’s book
argues, and as the victimological narrative shared by both
Israelites in Exodus and the Old Testament and Trojans in the
Aeneid appears to warrant, those who have suffered persecution
and exile, and believe the father god is arranging their destiny,
and are sure they are superior culture-bringers, feel they have the
right to go anywhere without asking permission of a land or
island’s inhabitants. As soon as they arrive on a shore, they
assume rights of plunder or settlement, without checking to see
if it is inhabited or not.
It is resisting women or female figures, like the Harpies or
Juno, who in the Aeneid spell out the costs and consequences of
conquest and colonization. In Book Three, ‘The Wanderings’,
Aeneas relates how his ships are thrown off course in a storm; they
drift blindly in the waves for three starless nights, until they
happen upon the Strophades, islands in the Ionian sea. The Trojans
THE ORIGINS OF VIOLENCE
[ 136 ]

are unaware that the islands are inhabited by Harpies, whom
Aeneas regards as ‘the vilest of monsters’, ‘birds with the faces of
girls, with filth oozing from their bellies, with hooked claws for
hands and faces pale with a hunger that is never satisfied’. On
entering a harbour, the Trojans see on every side rich herds of
cattle and flocks of goats unguarded on the grass; they draw their
swords and rush upon them, ‘calling on the gods and on Jupiter
himself to share our plunder’. As they sit about feasting on this
‘rich fare’, they are suddenly attacked by the Harpies. Aeneas
immediately orders his ‘men to arm themselves to make war
against this fearsome tribe’. In reply, Celaeno, one of the Harpies,
challenges the right of the Trojans to land anywhere and plunder: 
Is it war you offer us now, sons of Laomedon, for the
slaughter of our bullocks and the felling of our oxen? Is it
your plan to make war against the innocent Harpies and
drive us from the kingdom of our ancestors?49
Celaeno’s question is the cry of the invaded through history, a cry
we have already witnessed in the King of the Ethiops and Queen
of the Massagetae in Herodotus, and made by the women of Troy
in Euripides’ tragedies.
It is another powerful female figure, this time Juno herself,
Queen of Heaven, who, as we can see from our epigraph, provides
the counter-narrative of the Aeneid with sharp questioning of the
presumed ethical right of the Trojans to conquer and colonize
Italy. In Book Ten, in defiance of Jupiter’s support for the Trojan
invasion, Juno wonders why it is that he does not support the
indigenous leader Turnus instead of the invader Aeneas. Why is it
wrong, she asks, ‘for Turnus to take his stand in the land of his
fathers’?50
Juno is not heeded by Jupiter, who continues to support
Aeneas’s invasion and forbids her from any further interference.
It is not a woman of power, authority and equality in relation-
ship that Aeneas, guided by Jupiter, ends up with in Italy. When he
secures the hand of the Italian king’s daughter Lavinia in marriage,
THE BIBLE’S EXODUS, VIRGIL’S AENEID
[ 137 ]

the weak Lavinia is but an instrument of the advancement of his
conquest and final terms of settlement with the subjugated peoples
of Italy. She has no say in the matter, Aeneas does not love her, and
they enter a loveless marriage together. Lavinia, however, had been
loved by Turnus (‘Turnus was distraught with love’ – Book
Twelve)51 – who is savagely killed by Aeneas at the end of the
poem.52
ORIENTALISM AND EUROPEAN IDENTITY
Juno, nonetheless, is listened to by Jupiter on another matter, the
question of what kind of people the Trojans, once successful in
their conquest of Italy, should be in terms of ethnos: should they
remain an oriental people, from Troy/Asia, or become a European
people? Recalling Agamemnon’s contempt in Aeschylus’ great
tragedy for Troy as oriental and effeminate in its liking for beau-
tiful materials, Aeneas, in his journey westwards, is frequently
perceived as oriental. In Book Four, in Carthage, Mercury notices
that Aeneas’s sword is ‘studded with yellow stars of jasper, and
glowing with Tyrian purple there hung from his shoulders a rich
cloak given him by Dido into which she had woven a fine cross-
thread of gold’. In Book Nine, in Italy, Ascanius is mocked along
with the other Trojan warriors as an effeminate Phrygian: ‘you like
your clothes dyed with yellow saffron and the bright juice of the
purple fish. … You have sleeves to your tunics and ribbons to keep
your bonnets on. You are Phrygian women, not Phrygian men!’ In
Book Twelve, Turnus also accuses Aeneas of being an ‘effeminate
Phrygian’.53
In Book Twelve, the final book of the Aeneid, Juno suggests
to Jupiter that he should not command the defeated Latins of
Italy ‘to change their ancient name in their own land, to become
Trojans. … They are men. Do not make them change their voice
or native dress.’ Juno’s urging that the ‘stock of Rome be made
mighty by the manly courage of Italy’ is readily agreed to by
Jupiter, who says he will make the Trojans and the peoples
THE ORIGINS OF VIOLENCE
[ 138 ]

they’ve conquered ‘all Latins, speaking one tongue’. Juno is
arguing against a genocidal aspect of assimilation, that the
conquered peoples of a land should lose their culture and iden-
tity. Yet the effect of Juno’s intervention is a repudiation of
aesthetic and cultural aspects of the Orient from which the
Trojans had come, in terms of dress, style and language. The
Trojans will be de-orientalized and de-Asianized, to become
Romans and Europeans. To be European is to be manly, not
effeminate, and perhaps another implication of Aeneas’s even-
tual marriage with Lavinia is that European women should be
like Lavinia, insipid and accepting, not strong, powerful and
passionate like the oriental Carthaginian Dido.
The cost of such repudiation of the Orient is a loss of conver-
sations and mutual interactions with the Orient. As the Trojans
become Romans, the European and Western ethnos is remodelled
into a single exclusive identity.
CONCLUSION
Neither of the father gods, Jupiter or God, brooks any disagree-
ment with their plans and commands, which are set firmly
against the indigenous peoples and nations of Italy or of Canaan,
or by extension of anywhere else in the world. The narratives of
Exodus and Aeneid suggest, reassuringly for those who wish to
engage in such activities, that divine sanction is given to
conquest, colonization and genocide. In terms of Waswo’s
important insight in The Founding Legend of Western Civiliza-
tion, the rights of invading culture-bringers are privileged over
the rights of the indigenous of any land, who should not resist
their coming.
If the moral character of both father gods is dubious and
dangerous for humanity, so too is the moral character of Aeneas
and Moses. Aeneas and Moses are unchanging or fixed characters
as defined by Mikhail Bakhtin in his famous essay ‘Forms of Time
and Chronotope in the Novel’ in The Dialogic Imagination; their
THE BIBLE’S EXODUS, VIRGIL’S AENEID
[ 139 ]

qualities as heroes in a narrative are tested in situations of danger
and tribulation, through which their initial virtues are proved and
affirmed, but they do not open themselves to transformation and
metamorphosis.54 If Jupiter commands Aeneas, and the God of
Exodus commands Moses, neither Aeneas nor Moses can exercise
any ethical choice when it comes to conquest and colonizing, even
when they know what the destructive consequences for other
peoples and nations will be. Moses knows, since God has told him
early in Exodus, that the lands of a considerable number of soci-
eties, those of the Canaanites, Hittites, Amorites, Perizzites,
Hivites and Jebusites, along with their milk and honey, will be
violently taken away from them (Exodus 3: 8). Moses does not
question the justice of such a genocidal procedure, he does not say
to God, such an action with such consequences would be wrong.
Similarly, early in Book Six, ‘The Underworld’, when Aeneas
consults the Sibyl of Cumae concerning the future of the Trojans,
she replies that the Trojans, ‘the sons of Dardanus’, will come into
their kingdom in Italy (‘put that fear out of your mind’), but, she
says, ‘it is a coming they will wish they had never known. I see
wars, deadly wars, I see the Thybris foaming with torrents of
blood.’55 When in the underworld Aeneas meets his father,
Anchises, he learns from him of the ‘glory that was to come’ for
the Trojans and Rome and its ‘mighty empire’, glory that would
be won by war against and slaughter of many peoples, from the
Nile to the Caspian Sea, including the wars that Aeneas himself
would have to fight in Italy in order to establish Rome. Given such
prophecy and knowledge, Aeneas could, but does not, question the
rightness of the wars to come, the justice of war, conquest,
colonization and empire.56
In Raphaël Lemkin’s terms, the Trojans enact genocide on the
peoples and nations of Italy. Such genocide, however, is not
carried out on the model of what occurs in the Book of Joshua,
where the Canaanites and other peoples are exterminated. Rather,
it is similar to what occurs in the Book of Judges, where the
Canaanites and Perizzites and the other nations are not utterly
destroyed or driven out, but are subjugated and become tributaries.
THE ORIGINS OF VIOLENCE
[ 140 ]

In this sense, the Trojan invasion of Italy in the Aeneid recalls that
part of Lemkin’s definition of genocide in Axis Rule, where, after
destruction of the national pattern of the oppressed group, the
national pattern of the oppressor is imposed upon the oppressed
population which is allowed to remain.57
Two final reflections. As Waswo remarks, the extreme
violence and fury of Aeneas’s killing of the indigenous leader
Turnus, the event that brings the Aeneid to a close, clearly reprises
the savagery of Achilles’ killing of Hector in the Iliad.58 Aeneas
and the Trojans, in terms of their moral consciousness as created
in the Aeneid, have learnt nothing from the Greek destruction of
Troy: despite their sufferings, they took away no fundamental
sense that it is morally wrong to invade, destroy, reduce, burn,
subjugate, enslave another city, another people, another land.
What Aeneas and his band of Trojan male warriors (‘their hearts
… high for war’ – Book Five), took away as a lesson of history
from the Greek destruction of Troy was that they were victims
who were now condemned to years of wandering and homeless-
ness. But they did not conclude that they themselves, if they had a
future opportunity, should not inflict destruction on other peoples
in other lands, especially if they could claim that they had a distant
ancestral connection with a land, the Trojans frequently reminding
themselves that they were descended from Dardanus who had
once come from Italy and had founded Troy.59 In terms of supers-
essionism, throughout the Aeneid the Trojans express their dislike
and contempt for the Greeks, their desire that they supplant them
in history, often to the point of anti-Greek racism, characterizing
‘the ways of a whole people’ (Book Two) in terms of treachery,
cruelty, artfulness, scheming, cunning and cowardice.60 Yet by
poem’s end, in the culmination of the counter-narrative in
Aeneas’s killing of Turnus, the Trojan invaders and colonizers are
the new Greeks of their world, the successors of Agamemnon and
Ulysses as ruthless, brutal conquerors.
Similarly, in the biblical stories, the Israelites, having experi-
enced oppression and persecution in Egypt, did not resolve that they
should abjure violence, oppression and persecution in relation to
THE BIBLE’S EXODUS, VIRGIL’S AENEID
[ 141 ]

other peoples, as in the land of Canaan. Similarly with the contem-
porary Zionists. The Zionists, who created the modern state of Israel
in 1948 and who since that time have dominated Jewish organiza-
tions and community thinking across the globe, did not take away
from the Holocaust a historical lesson that different peoples should
live in amity, share a polity and learn from each other, be cosmopol-
itan and international. Nor did they become interested in non-
violence, as in Gandhi or, in Jewish tradition, Josephus.61 They did
not look back to Moorish Spain, to the living together in the one
land of Jews, Muslims and Christians, as an inspiring example of
what a society could ideally be. To the contrary, the Zionists have
kept on working towards achieving a European nationalist and
settler-colonial ideal that they had conceived in the 1890s: they have
kept on working towards genocide of the Palestinians, to subjugate,
reduce, displace, expel and kill them whenever and wherever within
Palestine-Israel they can, in order to replace them with their own
colonial settlements and exclusive society. They refuse to the
indigenous of Palestine, the Palestinians and Sephardim and Orien-
tal Jews, equality, dignity, sharing, interaction, mutual respect. The
Zionists, since the 1890s, have seen themselves as European
culture-bringers, before whom the rights of the indigenous peoples
of Palestine are of no account. Every day the Zionists commit geno-
cide against the Palestinians in Lemkin’s terms of displacement and
replacement, and every day the Western world looks on approv-
ingly, only occasionally murmuring if the Zionists move towards
genocide based on Joshua rather than Judges. The West does so, to
adapt Waswo’s terms in The Founding Legend of Western Civiliza-
tion, because the West accepts that ‘Trojans’ and ‘Israelites’,
culture-bringers and rightful colonizers, as in the Aeneid and
Exodus, have every right to go anywhere, while the indigenous of
any land have no or minimal rights.
My last point concerns first contact, and returns us to puzzling
aspects of the overall history of Western conquest, colonization
and empire, engaging with the important question of intent.62
How much did the Trojan entry into Italy in the Aeneid
involve conscious deception of the indigenous inhabitants? In
THE ORIGINS OF VIOLENCE
[ 142 ]

Book Seven, ‘War in Latium’, Aeneas orders a hundred men to go
to the local king, Latinus, bearing olive branches and ‘carrying
gifts and asking for peace for the Trojans’. Meanwhile, belying
such apparently peaceful intentions, Aeneas immediately busies
himself at his ‘first settlement on the shore with a stockade and
rampart as though it were a camp’. Latinus ‘kindly’ offers his visi-
tors ‘guest-friendship’. Ilioneus, spokesman for the Trojans, tells
him of their sufferings after the fall of Troy and their sailing over
desolate seas since that ‘cataclysm’; in their homelessness, all the
Trojans ask, he pleads, is ‘for a little piece of land for our fathers’
gods, for harmless refuge on the beach, for the air and sea which
are there for all men’. He also brings some ‘small relics’ from
Aeneas, gifts to the king rescued from the flames of Troy, a gold
cup, a sceptre, a sacred headdress. Yet Ilioneus also introduces a
larger purpose, and hints at a threat of force, telling the king that
the Trojans are seeking out his country by ‘the commands of
divine destiny’, ‘the destiny of Aeneas and his right arm … strong
in war and the weapons of war’. He advises the king to submerge
his interests in the destiny of Aeneas and the Trojans, for that way
the king will win ‘great fame’.63 In his image of the ‘air and sea
which are there for all men’, there is a hint of the doctrine of
natural law that had been both put forward as natural and right but
also sharply questioned as indefensible and unjust in Cicero’s
Republic: that people have a natural right to go anywhere, it is the
human condition itself.
In such conversation with the indigenous inhabitants of Italy,
are the Trojans being truthful and honourable? Do they really
mean it when they say they would rest content with a little piece
of land and harmless refuge on a beach? Or are they, in passing
before their interlocutors the image of Aeneas’s military prowess,
‘strong in war and the weapons of war’, intimating, threatening
and promising force and war in the service of a wider aim, which
they regard as divinely sanctioned and prophesied, to take posses-
sion of the whole land they have arrived at and subjugate the
peoples therein? Do the Trojans themselves know what they
mean? Have they arrived as supplicants or invaders, courteous
THE BIBLE’S EXODUS, VIRGIL’S AENEID
[ 143 ]

curious visitors or with conquest in their hearts? We know from
elsewhere in the Aeneid that the Trojans admire warrior ideals and
anticipations of glory and glorious death. (In Book Six in the
underworld, Anchises’ visions of the Trojan future in Italy kindled
in Aeneas’s mind ‘a love for the glory that was to come … the
wars he would in due course have to fight’; in Book Nine, Nisus
and Euryalus earn a glorious death by their military deeds.)64 Are
the Trojans, ur-colonizers as it were, uncertain and confused, and
so do they create uncertainty in and confuse those they talk to in
the land to which they have come?65
Such questions will have resonance in our following chapters,
and indeed have keen resonance for the whole history of European
colonization from early modern times onwards.
THE ORIGINS OF VIOLENCE
[ 144 ]

6 ROMAN SETTLER 
IMPERIALISM 
IN BRITAIN: 
NARRATIVE AND
COUNTER-NARRATIVE
IN TACITUS’S AGRICOLA
AND GERMANIA
On them [the Romans] I impose no limits of time or place.
I have given them an empire that will know no end … the
people of Rome, the rulers of the world, the race that
wears the toga. So it has been decreed.
(Jupiter to Venus, Aeneid, Book One)1
Pillagers of the world, they [the Romans] exhausted the
land by their indiscriminate plunder, and now they
ransack the sea. A rich enemy excites their cupidity; a
poor one, their lust for power. East and West alike have
failed to satisfy them. … To robbery, butchery, and rapine,
they give the lying name of ‘government’; they create a
desolation and call it peace.
(The Caledonian leader Calgacus in Tacitus, 
the Agricola, Chapter 30)2
In this chapter we explore the Agricola and Germania, the works by
[ 145 ]

which Tacitus launched his career as a historian, written early in the
Common Era (both appearing in 98 CE), as the Roman empire
attempted to secure its ongoing imperial domination in Britain and
Germany. To move from Exodus and the Aeneid, in order to analyse
the Agricola, and to a lesser extent the Germania, is to move from
poetry to historiography. Yet if the texts of Exodus and the Aeneid
are conflicted, are crossed by tensions between a narrative that
affirms certain values and a counter-narrative that interpolates
doubts, so too are these historical texts, which reveal, in Mikhail
Bakhtin’s terms, quite an abundance of polyphony.
In Bakhtin’s view, genres have their own memory. In Prob-
lems of Dostoevsky’s Poetics, Bakhtin writes that a genre is
always the same and yet not the same, always old and new
simultaneously. A genre lives in the present, but always remem-
bers its past, its beginnings, even its archaic elements. At every
new stage in the development of literature and in every work of
a given genre, genre is reborn and renewed.3 The Agricola and
Germania move between a number of genres: biography, eulogy,
ethnography, military history, family history; and these genres in
turn are inflected by the literary-philosophical mode of the
menippea, with its sharp edges and reflective ethos. The menip-
pea does not resolve textual tensions.4 In these terms, the Agri-
cola and Germania are intriguingly grainy, not smoothly
finished, texts.
In contrast to Herodotus and Thucydides in relation to impe-
rial Athens, Tacitus was throughout his life at the centre of Roman
society and culture, as orator, senator, consul, provincial governor,
however difficult he might find life under unjust and cruel emper-
ors. He became the son-in-law of Julius Agricola (40–93 CE),
governor of Britain 77–84 CE, and he himself would become
governor of the prized Roman province of Asia. I will, however,
observe the critical convention of distinguishing between the
author and historical figure Tacitus, and ‘Tacitus’ as troubled and
uncertain narrator of a text with its own independent life and force
and long generic history. I am mindful here of Bakhtin’s observa-
tion, in the essay ‘Forms of Time and Chronotope in the Novel’ in 
THE ORIGINS OF VIOLENCE
[ 146 ]

TACITUS’S AGRICOLA AND GERMANIA
[ 147 ]
The Dialogic Imagination, that in literature at the time of 
Tacitus and Plutarch in the Hellenistic and Roman era, the image
of the public unity and wholeness of the individual was
beginning to break up, accompanied by a differentiation between
biography and autobiography.5 Tacitus inherits aesthetically and
discursively powerful modes and models of historical writing,
including rhetorical strategies concerning the set speeches of
various protagonists in historical situations for or against a
particular action or design. Indeed, we might also say that rhet-
oric has its own memory. By such rhetorical strategies, in an
interplay of affirmative narrative and critical counter-narrative,
his historical writing participates in those traditions of question-
ing fundamental values of one’s world evident in Cicero’s
Republic and Virgil’s Aeneid as much as in their great predeces-
sor texts in the classical Greek world, Herodotus’s Histories and
Thucydides’ History of the Peloponnesian War.
There are fissures within the narrative voice, especially of
the Agricola, between a monologic, centripetal desire to stress a
single positive meaning for empire, and a dialogic, centrifugal
release of other perspectives, unsettling, dissenting, anxious.
Biography as eulogy meets autobiography as doubt and detach-
ment. Biography as admiring family history of an imperial colo-
nizer becomes entangled with intimations of disintegrating
family life for those experiencing imperial and colonial rule,
including the kidnapping of children (Agricola, 15). In terms of
ethnography, the sympathies of the narrator become divided and
confused; there is no univocal rendering of a triumph of values
of the victors in history. As military history, it is made clear how
the values of the invading army conflict with the very different
values of those attempting armed resistance.
The play of narrative and counter-narrative constitutes these
texts as menippean, the testing of an idea, embodied in the image
of a wise man who seeks the truth of this idea in extraordinary
situations, in unknown and fantastic lands.6 In the Agricola and
Germania, that idea is the notion and possibility of honourable
colonization. The wise man, or apparently wise man, who seeks to

embody this idea is Agricola, the Roman governor of Britain,
Tacitus’s own father-in-law and putative hero of his narration,
come to reside at the edge of the known world.
In the Agricola and Germania as menippean texts we witness
tensions between the discourse of honourable imperial and colo-
nial rule, and critical reflections, both from indigenous figures
experiencing the Roman imperium and the narrator himself,
which test and interrogate that discourse. These tensions also work
themselves out as conflicts between inherited historical ideals,
between the cosmopolitanism, anti-ethnocentrism and internation-
alism of Herodotus and Thucydides’ histories, and rival claims to
the centrality of Rome, divinely assisted in its imperial glory.
AFFIRMATIVE NARRATIVE
Tacitus’s Agricola and Germania would prove profoundly influ-
ential in later European colonizings and empires, conceived as a
history of sensibility and consciousness. The idea of honourable
colonization became an extremely important discourse in Euro-
pean and Western history, enabling colonization, with the best
and most sensitive and highest of motives, to occur and keep
occurring; motives that apparently transcend the particular
consequences for those being invaded, colonized and dispos-
sessed.7 In the figure of Agricola, Tacitus’ text, as biography and
eulogy, appears to celebrate successful imperial power, wise
administration and Roman glory. In Agricola as a created char-
acter, we can witness the actions and thinking of the honourable
colonizer.
Agricola, passing his boyhood and youth in the ‘cultivation
of all the liberal arts’, appreciated ‘Greek refinement’, though he
also came to realize that contemporary Roman society differed
in its attitudes to knowledge from classical Greece. Tacitus as
narrator recalls that Agricola would say that ‘in his early youth
he was tempted to drink deeper of philosophy than was allow-
able for a Roman and a future senator’ (4). In a Rome that would
THE ORIGINS OF VIOLENCE
[ 148 ]

TACITUS’S AGRICOLA AND GERMANIA
[ 149 ]
periodically banish its philosophers, Agricola knew that he
would never succeed in an active life if he did not dampen his
enthusiasm for philosophy (2, 4). In Rome and the empire, polit-
ical and military success were entwined, and it was a military
path that Agricola pursued. When young, the Agricola tells us,
Agricola served his ‘military apprenticeship’ in Britain, and his
spirit became ‘possessed by a passion for military glory’ (5).
When, later in life, Agricola took control of Roman rule in
Britain, he liked to infuse his soldiers with a similar passion. In
one campaign, Agricola goes north to combat and attempt to
subdue the Caledonians. In his pre-battle speech, he reminds his
soldiers that he and they are conquering Britain ‘in the name of
imperial Rome’s divinely guided greatness’ (33). As it turns out,
Agricola decisively wins the battle, the Caledonians flee and
‘pursuit’ of them goes on ‘till night fell and our soldiers were tired
of killing’; ‘some 10,000’ of ‘the enemy’ are killed (37). With this
victory Agricola secured a large degree of Roman domination of
Britain, a domination he nevertheless wished could be complete.
Agricola, Tacitus records, was often heard to say that he would
like to conquer Ireland, for if the Britons were completely
surrounded by Roman armies so that ‘liberty’ became unthink-
able, the Roman hold on Britain would become much easier to
maintain (24).
The affirmative narrative is staunchly committed to the
overwhelming importance of Rome in and to the world and to
certain Roman ideals. The narrator admires martial virtues and
military glory, however suspicious emperors were of those who
achieved fame by such means (5). When Vespasian (father of
Domitian) had restored stable government to Roman Britain,
there came to the island, Tacitus as narrator enthuses, a ‘succes-
sion of great generals and splendid armies’ (17). By his
successful campaigns in Britain, Agricola was extolled as a
brilliant governor, though Agricola himself wisely decided, the
narrator adds, not to ‘use his success to glorify himself’, even
choosing to say that his action in subduing one tribe was not a
‘campaign of conquest’ but merely one of keeping a defeated

THE ORIGINS OF VIOLENCE
[ 150 ]
tribe under control (18). At the end of his biography as eulogy,
Tacitus acclaims the ‘glorious life’ of Agricola (45), a glory
based mainly on imperial military success.
The narrator tends to judge a people or society by its posses-
sion or not of military virtues. The Gauls are commented on
harshly for brave displays in challenging danger yet ‘cowardice in
shirking it when it comes close’ (11). The Romans will achieve
‘glory’ even if they die in battle, for, as Agricola says to his
soldiers before the battle with the Caledonians, such ‘honourable
death’ is better than a ‘disgraceful attempt to save our lives’ (33).
Above all, the narrator believes in the ‘glory of Rome’ and its
empire, a glory and empire that, as Agricola assures his troops in
Britain, is ‘divinely guided’ towards ‘greatness’ (23, 33).
The narrator believes that peace is disabling for a society,
remarking of the Britons in the Agricola that they show more
spirit than the Gauls because they, the Britons, ‘have not yet
been enervated by protracted peace’ (11). It is a view that, rather
in the spirit of Pericles in addressing the Athenian assembly,
lauds warfare and anticipation and enjoyment of war as worthy
ideals of an active energetic society. Romans are also to be
admired for their historical consciousness, their knowledge of
and capacity to reflect on their own history. By contrast, ‘barbar-
ians’ like the Britons are barbarians in a pejorative sense (not
simply foreigners) because they lack historical consciousness,
Tacitus observing of the Britons that they knew nothing of where
they had come from, whether they were ‘natives or immigrants’
(11). The 10,000 Caledonians killed by Agricola’s troops appear
to inspire no pity in Tacitus as narrator, no Iliad-like foreground-
ing of the misery of war. Instead, he records with sadness the
death of a Roman soldier Aulus Atticus who had perished
through youthful impetuosity, carried deep into the ranks of the
enemy by his mettlesome horse (37).
Many of these themes and motifs are shared between the Agri-
cola and the Germania, though there is more ethnography in the
Germania than in the Agricola, with its biographical portrait. The
narrator of the Germania admires many qualities of the Germans,

TACITUS’S AGRICOLA AND GERMANIA
[ 151 ]
for example, their generous hospitality, including to strangers, and
the strength of relationships between men and women. In battle,
squadrons and divisions are composed of men of one family or
clan; close by them in the fighting are their ‘nearest and dearest,
so that they can hear the shrieks of their women-folk and the wail-
ing of their children’. The women and children are the witnesses
that each man reverences the most and whose praise he most
desires; it is to their mothers and wives that they go to have their
wounds treated; the women also carry supplies of food to the
combatants and encourage them in the battle. The Germania
praises the monogamous German marriage code, where on marry-
ing the new wife is encouraged to be the partner of her husband’s
‘toils and perils’, sharing his sufferings and adventures in both
peace and war; the wife realizes that she is not ‘excluded from
aspirations to manly virtues or exempt from the hazards of
warfare’ (Germania 18, 21).
The Germania says it is on record that German armies
wavering and on the point of collapse have been rallied by the
women, ‘pleading heroically with their men, thrusting forward
their bared bosoms, and making them realize the imminent
prospect of enslavement’, a fate, the narrator comments, that the
‘Germans fear more desperately for their women than for them-
selves’. The Germans believe that there resides in women an
element of ‘holiness and a gift of prophecy’, and they take heed
of their advice. One German group, the Suebi, sacrifice to Isis, a
form of worship, the narrator notes, that must have come from
abroad (Germania 7, 8, 9).
The Germania admires the Germans because they possess a
spirit of ‘freedom’, more than other peoples the Romans faced, not
only in Spain and Gaul but also the Carthaginians, as well as the
whole of ‘the East’; the ‘freedom’ enjoyed by the Germans
enables them to be ‘more energetic’ in military actions than East-
ern peoples under ‘despotism’ (37). Nevertheless, however much
the Germania admires certain aspects of the Germans, which
remind the narrator of earlier simpler virtues of the Roman repub-
lic, the narrator has no doubt that Rome has a historic right to

conquer Germany. It has this right because the Romans are a
chosen people, chosen to be great by ‘the gods’ who support their
spread of empire by means of ‘military discipline’; an empire
chosen by ‘destiny’ (30, 33).
There are aspects of German society that the text doesn’t
admire. The Germania convicts the Germans of being ‘barbar-
ians’ because of their lack of historical consciousness; their
unreflectiveness in terms of mind and intellectual capability.
Referring to the Aestii, who collect amber to serve ‘Roman
luxury’, Tacitus comments on their lack of curiosity about
amber’s origins: ‘Like true barbarians, they have never asked or
discovered what it is or how it is produced’ (45). The Germania
is also critical of the Germans for their method of worshipping
the god Mercury: they ‘include human victims in the sacrifices
offered to him’. Such human sacrifice is contrasted with worship
of Hercules and Mars, who are appeased by ‘offerings of
animals, in accordance with ordinary civilized custom’ (9).
However, in other terms, the Germania admires the religious
consciousness of the Germans, who do not think it in keeping
with the ‘divine majesty to confine gods within walls or to
portray them in the likeness of any human countenance’. Rather,
the Germans, whose holy places are in woods and groves, apply
the names of deities ‘to that hidden presence which is seen only
by the eye of reverence’ (9). I might recall here my discussion in
the previous chapter that the monotheism/polytheism divide is
not necessarily defined by the claim that in polytheism there is
always visuality, while in monotheism the deity is hidden.
COUNTER-NARRATIVE
If the narrative affirms, the counter-narrative disturbs. This
happens in two ways: through the divided consciousness of the
narrator, and through the powerful anti-imperial speeches by
Britons that protest at Roman colonizing and critically reflect on
Agricola as colonizer and empire builder. Bakhtin noted in Prob-
THE ORIGINS OF VIOLENCE
[ 152 ]

lems of Dostoevsky’s Poetics that in the menippea there was often
an interest in split personality, and such can be wondered of the
narrator of the Agricola and Germania.8
Referring to the recurrent Roman attempts to pacify Britain’s
‘barbarians’ (Agricola, 11), the counter-narrator explains why
Britain was ‘worth conquering’, for its ‘gold, silver, and other
metals’ (12). However, the Britons, as colonization continued,
while they were ‘broken in to obedience’ were not as yet habitu-
ated to ‘slavery’ (13), and revolts break out, as in the time of the
governor Suetonius Paulinus.
When, this more detached and reflective narrator tells us,
Agricola arrives as governor in Britain, he establishes a sound
administration, encourages the building of temples, public squares
and good houses, and educates the sons of the British chiefs in the
liberal arts. There occurs a kind of cultural conquest by, as Jupiter
puts it in the Aeneid in our epigraph, the people that wear the toga.
The counter-narrator’s evocation is not at all free of critical
scrutiny of Agricola and Roman colonization:
The result was that instead of loathing the Latin language
they became eager to speak it effectively. In the same way,
our national dress came into favour and the toga was
everywhere to be seen. And so the population was gradu-
ally led into the demoralizing temptations of arcades,
baths, and sumptuous banquets. The unsuspecting Britons
spoke of such novelties as ‘civilization’, when in fact they
were only a feature of their enslavement.
(Agricola, 21)
In Lemkin’s terms, what is invoked here as the irony of assimila-
tion is genocide of the distinctive culture and life world of the
indigenous. I’m reminded of a quote from India’s 1930 Declara-
tion of Independence, concerning British education in India:
‘Culturally, the system of education has torn us from our moorings
and our training has made us hug the very chains that bind us.’9
Despite such attempts at assimilation and complete domination,
TACITUS’S AGRICOLA AND GERMANIA
[ 153 ]

THE ORIGINS OF VIOLENCE
[ 154 ]
unrest continues, and Agricola has to launch campaigns against
remaining British resistance, as in the northern campaign against 
the Caledonians. Here, as in Thucydides’ History, the Agricola
provides opposing speeches for the leaders of the two sides about to
be locked in battle. Agricola’s exhortations to his troops we have
already noted as part of the text’s affirmative narrative. The Agricola
also sets before us the comments of Calgacus, the Caledonian leader
who laments what is happening to his people at the hands of the
Roman invaders. Calgacus says that ‘there are no more nations
beyond us; nothing is there but waves and rocks’, a distance that had
protected his people until the Romans came: ‘We, the most distant
dwellers upon earth, the last of the free, have been shielded till today
by our very remoteness and by the obscurity in which it has shrouded
our name’ (30). Calgacus is ‘a man of outstanding valour and 
nobility’, who might well remind us of the Syracusan leader 
Hermocrates during the Athenian invasion of Sicily (Thucydides
6.76–77).
This, says the counter-narrator, is the ‘substance of what he
is reported to have said’ in denouncing the Romans, hoping his
revolt will begin the restoration of ‘liberty for the whole of
Britain’. We have already read part of this extraordinary
condemnation in our second epigraph:
Nature has ordained that every man should love his chil-
dren and his other relatives above all else. These are now
being torn from us by [Roman] conscription to slave in
other lands. Our wives and sisters, even if they are not
raped by enemy soldiers, are seduced by men who are
supposed to be our friends and guests. Our goods and
money are consumed by taxation; our land is stripped of
its harvest to fill their granaries; our hands and limbs are
crippled by building roads through forests and swamps
under the lash of our oppressors. … We Britons are sold
into slavery anew every day. … We, the cheap new
acquisitions … are marked out for destruction.
(Agricola, 31)

Calgacus’ denunciation of Rome and its empire reprises a history
of similar powerful anti-imperial speeches, from the Queen of the
Massagetae and King of the Ethiops in Herodotus’s Histories,
Hermocrates and the Melians in Thucydides’ History, Philus in
Cicero’s Republic, Celaeno the Harpy and Juno in the Aeneid. In
the Agricola, the Britons protest at the slavery that they are being
asked to submit to: ‘We gain nothing by submission except heav-
ier burdens for willing shoulders. … Our bondage is … ruinous.
… Nothing is any longer safe from their greed. … [The Romans]
seize our homes, kidnap our children, and conscript our men’ (15).
The counter-narrative of the Agricola critically reflects on the
various meanings of slavery, for both colonizers and colonized.
For the Britons, slavery, as these powerful speeches of protest
make plain, means submission to Roman rule and loss of their
liberty, independence and distinctive culture; recall that, as Tacitus
records, Agricola was often heard to say that he would like to
conquer Ireland, for if the Britons were completely surrounded by
Roman armies ‘liberty’ would become unthinkable (24). Clearly,
for Agricola, liberty was reserved for the imperial colonizers; in
such a view, encouraging a desire for liberty in the colonized
would only fan their desire for freedom and independence, a threat
to imperial control and domination. Liberty for the circle of colo-
nizers, but denial of liberty to those being colonized, would
become a very long tradition indeed in the history of Western
colonization.10
Aspects of what it means to be a slave or slave-like, however,
can also encompass the victors, the imperial and colonizing
Romans themselves. The Agricola begins its narrative by
denouncing the rule of the previous emperor Domitian
(81–96 CE), who for 15 long years had nearly destroyed what
Tacitus admires as the ‘Rome of old’, republican Rome which had
explored and enjoyed ‘the utmost limits of freedom’ in terms of
political liberty to debate and discuss and exchange ideas in
conversation.11 In Domitian’s time, however, there were informers
everywhere, and Romans were reduced to ‘subservience’, indeed,
to the ‘depths of slavery’ (2–3). Romans could also be corrupted
TACITUS’S AGRICOLA AND GERMANIA
[ 155 ]

by their colonial possessions, or at least tempted to be corrupt.
When younger, Agricola had been elected quaestor in the wealthy
Roman province of Asia under the proconsul Salvius Titianus,
who was, says Tacitus, an ‘abject slave to greed’ (6); the prudent
Agricola, however, chose not to emulate his superior.
If the Romans are the chosen people of the gods, the counter-
narrator also ponders that Rome’s divinely ordained destiny to be
a great empire is actively assisted by discord among the foes it
encounters. The Germania refers to a battle between a German
group, the Bructeri, and a coalition of neighbouring tribes, which
was believed to have been observed by the Romans:
We were even permitted to witness the battle. More than
60,000 were killed, not by Roman swords or javelins, but
– more splendid still – as a spectacle before our delighted
eyes. Long, I pray, may foreign nations persist, if not in
loving us, at least in hating one another; for destiny is driv-
ing our empire upon its appointed path, and fortune can
bestow on us no better gift than discord among our foes.
(Germania, 33)
The Germania entertains the playful thought that the battle may
have been a ‘special favour accorded to us by the gods’ (33). Yet
perhaps, amidst the triumphalism of the moment, a slight but
significant doubt about the effectiveness and duration of Rome’s
divine support may be implied here. The Roman hold on the world
might be more fragile than appears, for it may only be weakness
and division amongst its enemies that maintains imperial power.
Not too far away might be the thought that those the gods select as
a chosen people may be, as it were, unchosen. We might recall that
Josephus in The Jewish War had judged that God had unchosen the
Jews because of their folly in the revolt of Jerusalem against the
Romans, and that the Romans were now his chosen people; but
that state, too, Josephus reflected, may not last; chosenness could
be transferred to yet another nation or people.12
THE ORIGINS OF VIOLENCE
[ 156 ]

CONCLUSION: A DIVIDED LEGACY
The Agricola and Germania as troubled, edgy, nervous
menippea could not but leave a fissured legacy for the future of
European ideas of colonizing and empire, especially in the
Renaissance where so much of classical thought energized
intellectual life, including in ideas about how to promote and
justify the establishing of colonies in Ireland or outside Europe.
On the one hand, these texts affirm the supersessionist notion
of the Romans as a chosen people, assuring the conquerors’ nation
and empire of a divine status, a rightness in history. Also in super-
sessionist mode, the texts assume that the Romans are superior to
barbarians in their possession of historical consciousness (Germa-
nia, 45): a notion of a hierarchy of humanity that would prove
constitutive of future European racial thinking. It is a notion, for
example, important in Kantian philosophy and articulated with
enthusiasm by nineteenth-century historians like Ranke and
Burckhardt.13 The belief in a hierarchy of humanity supported and
assisted centuries of worldwide colonization, empires, genocide
and the Holocaust.
On the other hand, there are moving speeches of those like
Calgacus who wished to resist colonization so that the Britons will
not lose their freedom. We also witness the counter-narrator’s
reflections that the Britons in adopting Roman culture were losing
their own culture, and his anxiety that the Romans might experi-
ence through colonization and empire an ethical deterioration;
they might be enslaved by ‘Asiatic’ indulgence (Agricola, 6) in
possessing lands whose wealth tempts the colonizers to greed and
lassitude.
Nevertheless, the framework of thinking in the counter-narra-
tive has its limits, its boundaries. The counter-narrator at no stage
in the Agricola permits himself to venture that Roman coloniza-
tion should cease and the Romans should leave Britain and go
home and so restore to the Britons their freedom, independence
and their own culture. Not colonizing at all, or withdrawing from
colonizing when its destructive effects became clear, appeared not
TACITUS’S AGRICOLA AND GERMANIA
[ 157 ]

to be thinkable. The ultimate ethical test for those who participate
in colonization would be that if one sees that colonization is going
terribly wrong for the colonized, as the speeches of those facing
colonization like Calgacus in the Agricola testify, then what would
be truly honourable would be to say: ‘We have to leave, we have
to stop being colonizers.’ The counter-narrator signally failed this
test of honour. There is here, in aspects of the counter-narrative, a
kind of bad faith.14
There are other troubling aspects of these texts. At one point
the narrator in the Germania refers to a non-German people, the
Sarmatians, as of a ‘repulsive appearance’ (Germania, 46),
suggesting a discourse of racial judgement and contempt, based
on physical appearance and aesthetic judgement, that looks
forward to Enlightenment and post-Enlightenment European
racial thinking and actions.15 Unlike the Germans, who have
‘settled homes’, the Sarmatians ‘live in wagons or on horseback’
(46). We might think here of the distinction Waswo makes in The
Founding Legend of Western Civilization between the settled as
signifying the civilized, the unsettled as indicating those who are
barbarous in history. The distinction between the Germans as a
settled people residing in houses, their soil good for ‘cereal crops’
(5), and the Sarmatians as living in wagons or on horseback, might
have helped influence a long tradition in Western thought distin-
guishing between supposedly settled peoples in history and
hunter-gatherer or wandering pastoral peoples, to be regarded with
disdain; we might recall Hugh Brody’s argument in his The 
Other Side of Eden concerning the world-shaping hostility of
agricultural society to hunter gatherers.16
The invocation by Tacitus in the Agricola of the threat of
‘Asiatic’ corruption by wealth and luxury continues an Orientalist
aspect of the Aeneid, when Jupiter agrees with Juno that the
Trojans should in effect repudiate their Oriental past as coming
from an Asian culture. Both the Aeneid and the Agricola in this
respect prepare the way for and anticipate what would become a
strand of Western historical consciousness, a long-standing
contempt for Asia; as we noted in our analysis of the Aeneid, this
THE ORIGINS OF VIOLENCE
[ 158 ]

became a way of defining Europe, as if a self-contained entity,
against Asia.
In more general terms, we can conclude our chapters on key
texts of the Greek classical and the Greco-Roman world with the
thought that such a multiply inflected legacy was influential in the
centuries of European colonization after 1492, and continues to be
so. Divided and conflicting ideas, ideals, representations, images
and modes of sensibility and consciousness have for millennia
been entwined and entangled.
TACITUS’S AGRICOLA AND GERMANIA
[ 159 ]


7 THE HONOURABLE
COLONIZER
Thou [Gog of the land of Magog] shall fall upon the
mountains of Israel, thou, and all thy bands, and the
people that is with thee [from ‘Persia, Ethiopia, and
Libya’]: I will give thee unto the ravenous birds of every
sort, and to the beasts of the field to be devoured. … And
I will send a fire on Magog.
(God on Gog, Ezekiel, 39: 4–6)
In this chapter I investigate notions of colonization, conquest and
empire in early modern Europe, in terms of the guiding concepts of
this book: genocide, supersessionism, victimology, chosen people,
promised land and culture-bringers. I will focus on the manifold,
heterogeneous and contradictory ways European colonizers, from
early modern times onwards, justified their colonizing projects,
including in terms of the law of nations, or international law, the
claimed purity of their intentions, biblical justifications, and myth
and fantasy. Waswo’s notion in The Founding Legend of Western
Civilization of wandering Trojan-like colonizers as self-admiring
culture-bringers, and his interpretation of early modern European
understandings of natural law, will be invaluable for these analyses,
and for the critique of Shakespeare’s The Tempest I essay here. The
notion of the colonizer as culture-bringer is allied with, close to, the
notion of honourable colonization, the overall focus of this chapter
and a major concern of this book.
I begin these explorations through a critical reading of
Andrew Fitzmaurice’s striking and informative Humanism and
[ 161 ]

America: An Intellectual History of English Colonization
1500–1625 (2003). For my reading I will draw on the playful,
irreverent Nietzschean spirit of historiography so admired by
Foucault, in his essay ‘Nietzsche, Genealogy, History’, that we
should occasionally laugh at history.1 As I will suggest, Fitzmau-
rice, while he usually writes with sympathy and praise for the
learning, high ideals and exemplary intentions of the Renais-
sance English humanist promoters of colonization who are the
subject of his book, is himself drawn to occasional moments of
comic wonder at his material. I would like to conduct with
Humanism and America a lively dialogue, and in doing so
pursue more general questions concerning motivations for
colonization, conquest and empire. My directing question is,
how did the English Renaissance humanist promoters help estab-
lish the conceptual foundations for the genocidal destruction of
the indigenous peoples of North America?
PROMOTERS AND ADVENTURERS
In Humanism and America Fitzmaurice sets himself a revisionary
historiographical task.2 He wishes to dispel what he sees as a
reductive, anachronistic view amongst theorists of colonialism
and empire that British ideas of colonization in the sixteenth and
seventeenth centuries were continuous with later British posses-
sive expansionism. He also wants to challenge a common percep-
tion that when the early modern promoters of colonies in Ireland
and North America revealed a pervasive ‘ambivalence over profit’,
this was merely a ‘cynical cloak’ to cover their avariciousness.3
Such a view, he comments, is far too simple, and discounts the
motivating power of ideas in history, in particular ideas inherited
from Greco-Roman moral and political philosophy, as in Cicero,
and historical writing, as in Tacitus.
Since I also believe in the power of ideas in history, I am
very sympathetic to Fitzmaurice’s project. His approach,
however, draws on that of the well-known intellectual historian
THE ORIGINS OF VIOLENCE
[ 162 ]

THE HONOURABLE COLONIZER
[ 163 ]
Quentin Skinner, and so adopts Skinner’s essentializing ‘neo-
roman’ approach to the history of ideas. As revealed in his
programmatic Liberty before Liberalism (1998), a study of the
‘coherence’ of the ‘neo-roman theory of free citizens and free
states’ in mid-seventeenth-century England, Skinner narrowly
conceives of intellectual history as the study of political ideas.4
Liberty before Liberalism also reveals that Skinner’s intellectual
history project is uninterested in the ideas of the colonized. For
example, in relation to the American Revolution against British
rule in the eighteenth century, his focus is only on relations
between metropolitan Britain and the white colonial group in
America. Skinner admires the ‘exceptional courage’ of Richard
Price (in his Two Tracts on Civil Liberty of 1778) in protesting
to the British government that the American colonies were in a
state of dependence that amounted to ‘enslavement’. Startlingly,
however, the enslavement of African Americans, and the genoci-
dal destruction of the foundations of life of the Native American
colonized, are simply not present in Skinner’s tender concern for
the English/American colonists.5 Such disregard of the views and
feelings of the colonized would surely have surprised the Tacitus
of the Agricola and Germania. Skinner’s legacy and influence for
those who choose to follow his prescriptive approach into the
study of colonialism, though promising, as he says in Liberty
before Liberalism, broader traditions and frameworks of thought,
would appear to be very restrictive, very problematic, indeed.
A dubious Eurocentric methodological inheritance, then,
hangs over Fitzmaurice’s book. Humanism and America is
certainly an illuminating contribution to the history of ideas that
informed early modern and modern European colonization. In
what follows I hope I make it clear that I very much admire
Humanism and America, from which I learned a great deal. I will
also, however, be gently deconstructing it; I will be drawing out
from it biographical sketches, and the implications of different
kinds of history, in order to test the limits of its as it were
Skinnerian ‘intellectual history’. My argument will be that the
very rationalism of this mode of intellectual history leads to

certain worrying kinds of naivety and narrowness when applied
to the history of colonization and empire.6
Humanism and America contends that thinking about colo-
nizing in the period 1500–1625 emerged from Renaissance
humanism, with its complex inheritance of high neo-roman
ideals stressing republican virtue, a selfless morality and notions
of wise governance, where thought is always combined with
action (vita contemplativa entwined with vita activa). Renais-
sance humanism also revealed a cyclical view of history, unlike
a later notion of inevitable progress as in the nineteenth century.7
Such humanism included protest at colonization where it was
pursued only for profit, rather than for glory. It viewed coloniza-
tion as wrong when it denied justice to those being colonized,
and where it might involve a deterioration of morality in the
metropolitan society or amongst the colonizers themselves,
especially when profit was pursued in a Machiavellian spirit
concerning means and ends. The humanists did not exclusively
represent the indigenous Americans as ‘backward and savage’,
for while they frequently commented upon what they saw as the
‘simplicity of the native culture’ and the ‘obnoxious nature of
some its practices’, they could also admire the Native Ameri-
cans’ possession of ‘classical virtues’, in terms of government,
manners, athleticism, oratory and martial valour.8
Fitzmaurice draws attention to arguments from Roman moral-
ists like Sallust, Cicero and Tacitus who suggested that the virtue
of the Roman republic was always in danger of being undone by
the corrupting influence of Rome’s foreign possessions, an ethical
threat conceived both in Roman antiquity and in the English
Renaissance as ‘Asiatic’.9 Cicero, Fitzmaurice notes, recognized
that while the strongest ties are with those closest to us, there
should also be an ideal of unlimited fellowship among humanity.
Cicero – here perhaps echoing Pericles’ Funeral Oration in Thucy-
dides’ History (2.40) where he reflected on Athens’ empire,
though Fitzmaurice doesn’t make this comparison – lamented that
there was a time when the Roman empire had been maintained
through acts of kind service, a time when wars were ended with
THE ORIGINS OF VIOLENCE
[ 164 ]

THE HONOURABLE COLONIZER
[ 165 ]
mercy, such that then Rome was more a protectorate of allies than
an empire ruling by injustice.10
Tacitus, Fitzmaurice tells us, enjoyed great popularity in
Europe in the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries, when English
colonial activity in America began in force; in Elizabethan and
Jacobean England he was held to be foremost among Roman
historians. Fitzmaurice observes that the English promoters – or
adventurers as he also often calls them – frequently participated in
colonizing projects in both Ireland and North America. They were,
he stresses, especially wary of being perceived in the way Calga-
cus, the British leader, had in Tacitus’s Agricola described and
judged the Romans in Britain, the Roman empire a mere name for
those given to plunder, butchery and theft. As Fitzmaurice puts it,
the English promoters of colonies had ‘little stomach’ to be
accused of identifying colonizing or empire with, as Calgacus had
graphically phrased it, robbery, slaughter and plunder.11
In the terms of my book, the promoters saw themselves as
honourable men, honourable colonizers.
Fitzmaurice repeatedly tells us that the English promoters of
colonies, inspired by the Roman moralists, placed ideals above
profit, though like the Romans they certainly saw profit as a proper
element of colonizing, particularly when it was for the benefit not
of the colonizers themselves but altruistically of the colony and the
empire as a whole. It is in this spirit that Fitzmaurice decries histo-
rians who have in his view suggested that the early modern English
colonizers were interested only in profit. On the contrary, Fitzmau-
rice argues, if we look at their pamphlets, sermons and poems we
see that their ‘humanist imagination’was enthused by what he refers
to as the ‘highest ideals of the Ciceronian conception of the active
life’. The vita activa involved the leading of a virtuous life working
for the common weal not private wealth; it pursued honour and
glory, and admired martial virtues, including preparedness to risk
one’s life in distant endeavours.12
How could the English promoters of colonies pursue coloniza-
tion and yet not be indicted as violent, destructive and enslaving
colonizers in the way Calgacus had indicted the Romans in

THE ORIGINS OF VIOLENCE
[ 166 ]
Britain? How could they envisage colonizing without colonizing?
How could they be colonizers without being colonizers? How
could they be honourable colonizers?
Fitzmaurice’s answer, his book-length answer, is disturbingly
ingenuous and disablingly rationalist. He appears to assume that
the neo-roman ideals and thinking of the early modern English
promoters of colonies, trained in the neo-classical learning of
Renaissance humanism, must be wholly admirable, or nearly so.
Furthermore, in Fitzmaurice’s view, the English promoters of
colonies deserved praise for their utopianism. The promoters
were, Fitzmaurice says, drawn to New World colonies as a chance
to realize dreams of ideal commonwealths of the kind extolled in
More’s Utopia.13 Here once more Fitzmaurice is writing in the
tradition of Skinner, who in Liberty Before Liberalism warmly
defends utopianism: ‘I have never understood why the charge of
utopianism is necessarily thought to be an objection to a theory of
politics.’14
We might contemplate, however, how much utopianism has
proved an inspirational force in the history of European coloniza-
tion from early modern times to modernity, associated with the
attempted realization of certain ideals at the expense of the colo-
nized and indigenous. Such colonizing utopianism reached its
apogee in the history of Nazism. Wendy Lower in her Nazi
Empire-Building and the Holocaust in Ukraine tells us that in the
interwar period the colonialist fantasies of Nazi Party ideologues,
based on admiration for what the British had done in India, and to
be enacted with catastrophic consequences in Ukraine during the
Second World War, combined utopianism about the possibilities of
lebensraum with racism, völkisch nationalism and anti-Semitism.
Hitler had a vision of Ukraine as Germany’s New Indian Empire.15
Such ingenuousness on Fitzmaurice’s part is, I think, an effect
of writing within the Skinnerian mode of intellectual history when
it assumes that the history of ideas can be divorced from wider
histories that might, for example, explore the devastating conse-
quences of colonization. Fitzmaurice explicitly argues in relation
to English colonization of the New World that we must be careful

THE HONOURABLE COLONIZER
[ 167 ]
‘not to argue from consequences’.16 Perhaps not, but the knowl-
edge of devastating consequences should at least make us wary,
and in any case, as this chapter will argue, the motivations of the
promoters were more questionable than Ftizmaurice allows.
How questionable, how often absurd, such motivations could
be is revealed by Fitzmaurice himself, for example, in his analysis
of ‘legal humanism’, which he says furnished a number of
arguments held by the English promoters in the sixteenth and
seventeenth centuries to constitute a legal right to colonize in
North America. Legal humanism, Fitzmaurice points out,
provided an entirely separate basis for European colonizing from
other legal concepts like natural law, the law of nations, the notion
of res nullius, rights to trade, rights of strangers and friendship,
and just war. The English promoters, says Fitzmaurice, were
distinctive as colonizers in devoting far greater space in their texts
to historical claims, claims which stressed legal rights to territory
conferred by discovery and precedent. There was urgency in such
thinking, Fitzmaurice explains, for the Spanish had in effect
claimed the whole of the Americas for Spain by right of discovery
of the New World by Columbus.17
The English promoters elaborated in their writings a rival set
of historical claims, repeated from one writer to another, one text
to the next. Fitzmaurice attempts to keep a straight historian’s
face in informing us that the English promoters decided to repu-
diate the Spanish claims by bringing forth their own Columbus
figure. They countered with what Fitzmaurice himself desig-
nates as ‘the fantastic story’ of a legendary voyage by the Welsh
prince Madoc in 1170. John Dee, one of the promoters, argued
in the 1570s that Madoc had crossed the Atlantic and established
a colony. Furthermore, Dee wrote, the explorers John Cabot and
Sebastian Cabot were the first to discover the mainland of North
America. Dee’s claims about Madoc and John Cabot (the Venet-
ian sea-captain who crossed the Atlantic in 1497 with a patent
from Henry VII) and Sebastian Cabot (who crossed to the New
World in 1508–9) were then repeated and enlarged upon by other
and succeeding promoters. George Peckham, for example, lent

credence to a story that Montezuma had once told his people that
their forefathers had in ancient times come from a far away
country; they had sent back a king to this country, who had then
sent Madoc to Mexico as their ruler. Peckham also was sure that
the Amerindian languages were indebted to Welsh, for the word
penguin seemed to be common to both.18
At this point Fitzmaurice laments that the philological skills
deployed in the development of legal humanism had ‘degener-
ated into unintentional burlesque’. Indeed. Such stories of
exaggeration heaped upon exaggeration struck me as decidedly
Falstaffian in their rhetorical technique, if I may invoke another
Renaissance cultural context, of carnivalesque theatricality.
They also reminded me of the entirely legendary stories of the
Aeneid, where a justification for the Trojans saying they had a
right to be in Italy was that a distant ancestor, Dardanus, had
come from there. But, says Fitzmaurice, rallying, we should
note that the promoters themselves were ‘serious’ in deploying
the Madoc ‘myth’, because in quoting one another they could
assemble an appeal to historical precedent that secured the legal
humanist basis for colonization. The promoters could now assert
that these discoveries by Madoc and the Cabots, borne out by
chronicles, patents and maps, preceded every other European
nation in the discovery of North America. Such could now be
proffered by the promoters to be an ancient English right and
claim. Yet, in a slight note of scepticism and discomfort,
Fitzmaurice admits that the consensus on ‘historical myth’, built
up by mutual reference in print to each other’s writings that
constituted their legal case, was wholly self-referential and
owed much to what he describes as the humanist gift for
advertising and self-promotion. Through such self-reference and
self-promotion, Fitzmaurice dryly notes, colonization could
become the legitimization of itself.19
I’m reminded here of Larissa Behrendt, contemplating Euro-
pean law in the context of the colonization of Australia, remarking
that international law is a literature that is constitutively infused
with metaphors, tropes, narratives, myth and fantasy.20
THE ORIGINS OF VIOLENCE
[ 168 ]

FOUNDING LEGENDS
I’m reminded too of Waswo’s The Founding Legend of Western
Civilization, concerning the enduring power in European colonizing
around the world of the legend of Aeneas in Virgil’s Aeneid. As we
saw in our chapter on Exodus and the Aeneid, Waswo argues that in
the Western myth that developed around Virgil’s epic, the Trojans
who escape the destroyed city of Troy, regarding themselves as
history’s ideal culture-bearers, feel they have a right to end their
wanderings in colonizing and conquering elsewhere. Their abiding
notion of culture distinguishes themselves, the agricultural ‘civi-
lized’, they who cultivate the soil, build cities, establish law, from
those who are ‘savages’ because of their hunting and gathering or
nomadic pastoralism. The myth of Trojan descent was, Waswo
observes, eagerly adopted as a founding story in medieval Europe
by peoples from elsewhere who wished to dispossess and replace,
or dominate and assimilate, the indigenous or prior inhabitants of a
land. Waswo refers to its popularizing in the twelfth century by
Geoffrey of Monmouth, in a reworking of the legend where the
incoming Britons are referred to as Trojans and build a city on the
Thames known as New Troy, later to be renamed London. They first
have to overcome the indigenous giants of the island, saving only
one, Gogmagog, for a walk-on part in their foundational narrative;
we will return to this aspect of the story in a moment. Another
aspect of the story as Geoffrey of Monmouth tells it is that the
Trojan leader, named Brut, divides Britain among his three sons.
Waswo points out that this story of the three sons would be ‘alleged
in legal negotiations by two late medieval English kings’, Edward I
and Henry IV, ‘to justify England’s claim to feudal sovereignty over
the Scots’. A fantastical legend, Waswo comments, would help
shape the history of European international law.21
In Chapter 15, ‘Myth in Law’, of his book, Waswo argues that
international law was developed as a special branch of law that could
negotiate conflicts among the major European powers, conflicts
intensified by competing claims over territory and trading privileges
in the New World, and also over vexed questions concerning the
THE HONOURABLE COLONIZER
[ 169 ]

THE ORIGINS OF VIOLENCE
[ 170 ]
respective rights of the colonizers and colonized. In this chapter,
Waswo discusses a lineage of early modern European theorists of
international law from the Salamanca school of theologians to later
legal thinkers like Hugo Grotius and Samuel Pufendorf, forming a
tradition that is usually held to be highly critical of European
colonization in the Americas. Waswo, however, questions this
conventional view, suggesting that such theorists do indeed offer a
justification for colonization, a justification that would become enor-
mously influential in later European thought, and highly productive
of colonization and the way it was conducted. Waswo points, for
example, to the Salamanca school theorist Francisco de Victoria (an
alternative name for Francisco de Vitoria, as he is more commonly
known), who in the sixteenth century rejected ‘almost all contempo-
rary justifications for the Spanish takeover of America but one’.
Victoria set about refuting all usual arguments that justify the Span-
ish conquest: neither their gross sins nor their heretical unbelief bars
the Americans from ownership or sovereignty; they possess reason,
as is evident in features of their society such as their orderly arrange-
ments in politics, marriage, magistracy and systems of exchange.
Furthermore, in Victoria’s view, since neither Christian prince nor the
Pope can claim temporal lordship of the globe, then the Americans
cannot be attacked and dispossessed for refusing their demands, 
even if these demands are based on truth. The Americans cannot be
colonized and dispossessed because they are unbelievers.22
How, then, does Victoria justify colonization, by what principle?
Waswo contends that Victoria invokes the universalism enshrined in
Roman notions of natural law; notions we encountered in Chapter 4
while discussing Scipio’s defence of natural law in Cicero’s
Republic. In Victoria’s view, natural law is more universal than
Christianity. Victoria homes in on the claim in natural law that
humanity has a natural right of sociability and fellowship; in these
terms, all people have the right to travel, visit, settle, trade and mine
in the territory of others, so long as they do no harm. Waswo
suggests that Victoria’s support for a universal natural law of friend-
ship permitting travel anywhere and requiring hospitality from those
one visits, is influenced by the mythical events of the Aeneid. He

cites a crucial passage in Book One concerning the arrival of the
Trojans at Carthage. The old Trojan Ilioneus complains to Queen
Dido that their ships, buffeted and scattered by a storm, had washed
up on the Carthaginian shore; instead of receiving hospitality as was
the right of travellers and strangers, however, the Trojan sailors had
been treated harshly and refused entry by Dido’s coast guards.23 We
could also recall here what Ilioneus says much later in Book Seven,
after the Trojans first land in Italy and Aeneas sends members of his
group to talk to the Italian king Latinus. We ‘ask’, says Ilioneus to
Latinus in phrases that remind us of the claims to universality of
Roman natural law theory, ‘for a little piece of land for our fathers’
gods, for harmless refuge on the beach, for the air and sea which are
there for all men’.24
Now, Waswo argues, Victoria has his justification for both
colonization and just war. There is a universal right to travel, visit,
settle, trade and mine, and if any of these are refused, even though
asked for nicely as Waswo wittily puts it (and in Book Seven, we
note, Ilioneus did ask King Latinus nicely for a tiny plot of land),
then here is a reason for just war; after all, the visitor is only
defending what is a worldwide natural right. Victoria’s one
principle, Waswo sadly reflects, was infinitely extendable, leading
to the assumption of a right to settle territories and carry on trade,
culminating in the dispossession of the indigenous of the New
World on a huge scale, the extermination of whole cultures, and
appalling atrocities and cruelties. In the remainder of this illuminat-
ing chapter, Waswo points out how the natural law principle of
friendship and hospitality, permitting territorial expansion of
Europe around the world, was reprised and developed in later
European thinking in figures like Grotius and Pufendorf.25
We could add here that Victoria’s principle of friendship as
Waswo outlines it, of universal sociability and fellowship, extends
also to the later Enlightenment, in Kant’s complex musings in his
1795 essay ‘Perpetual Peace: A Philosophical Sketch’. In his ‘Third
Definitive Article of a Perpetual Peace: Cosmopolitan Right shall be
Limited to Conditions of Universal Hospitality’, Kant writes that
hospitality:
THE HONOURABLE COLONIZER
[ 171 ]

THE ORIGINS OF VIOLENCE
[ 172 ]
means the right of a stranger not to be treated with hostil-
ity when he arrives on someone else’s territory. He can
indeed be turned away, if this can be done without caus-
ing his death, but he must not be treated with hostility, so
long as he behaves in a peaceable manner in the place he
happens to be in. … All men are entitled to present them-
selves in the society of others by virtue of their right to
communal possession of the earth’s surface.26
It is a principle that is also clearly related to notions of honourable
colonization evident in the early modern English thinking about
colonization that Fitzmaurice analyses.
In Humanism and America, Fitzmaurice alerts his readers to the
importance of the theological and philosophical arguments of the
sixteenth-century Thomists at the University of Salamanca, who
included Francisco de Victoria and those they influenced like
Bartolomé de Las Casas. Fitzmaurice records that the English
promoters believed that it was legal to take the land away from the
indigenous peoples of North America because, unlike the peoples
encountered by the Spanish, they had not exploited the natural
resources of the land and so had no rights of property; they had never
established ownership.27 Fitzmaurice notes, however, that while the
Salamanca school authors were interested in abstract philosophical
questions, the English promoters devoted themselves to ‘practical
ends’. Once the promoters had satisfied themselves that their aims
were legal, just and ‘honourable’, they moved directly to their
‘concern’, Fitzmaurice tells us, ‘with how to establish colonies’, to
the ‘honour and advantage of the adventure’.28
INTERNATIONAL LAW, EARLY MODERN ENGLISH
STYLE
Fitzmaurice points out that the promoters were ‘cynical’ in the
opportunistic ways they mixed and matched contradictory argu-
ments from international law to justify their planned activities,

though, somewhat obscurely, he defends their cynicism as a
‘mechanism through which political argument responds to its
context’.29 In any case, they could be observed employing a
‘whole battery of frequently conflicting arguments’ associated
with the justification of ‘agricultural colonies and conquest’. For
example, John Donne, in a sermon before the Virginia Company
(published in 1622) stressed that under the law of nations if a land
is not being improved by cultivation, that is, it is in a state of res
nullius, then it can be possessed by those who announce a desire
to improve it. But Donne also suggested another argument besides
res nullius and indeed contradicting it, this time that if the indige-
nous of a land produce an abundance because, it now turns out,
they do cultivate the land and yet they don’t share this abundance
with others, then under the law of nations force is justified in
remedying this situation.30
For the promoters, colonization could be justified in a remark-
able number of ways, reminding me of Hermocrates of Syracuse
in Thucydides’ History observing the readiness of the leaders of
the Athenian empire to offer different reasons for depriving the
Ionians of their independence, ‘bringing forward … any plausible
excuse to fit each particular case’ (Thucydides, 6.76). There was,
for example, Fitzmaurice writes, making us immediately think of
Waswo’s discussion of Victoria, the promoters’ expansive
understanding of the natural law position on ‘rights of trade and
friendship’, highly generous to themselves, requiring that the
indigenous should not prevent the entry onto their land of people
who want to form communities of friendship. Under the law of
nations protecting strangers, the indigenous should give safe
harbour to such peaceable strangers, who might then wish to trade
as is their right. The indigenous should not prevent such trade,
which includes the right of colonizers to trade for the indigenous
inhabitants’ land. It is also part of the law of nations that the
settlers can take possession of any land they judge the indigenous
inhabitants can spare, including land for planting.31
Furthermore, while the promoters and adventurers do not
believe in force, violence and conquest, they do believe in force,
THE HONOURABLE COLONIZER
[ 173 ]

THE ORIGINS OF VIOLENCE
[ 174 ]
violence and conquest. They were, Fitzmaurice points out,
frequently drawn to the Roman law doctrine of the right of
conquest, which met the ‘humanist appetite for glory’.32 The
Roman law doctrine of just war could also be invoked, for if the
indigenous peoples employ violence against the colonizers, they
are justified in resisting force with force; they can draw their
swords to defend themselves.33
The doctrine of just war in colonial situations would appear
to work on the trope of victimology and narrative reversal whose
salience and longevity in settler-colonial situations Ann
Curthoys has commented on; when the colonized resist colo-
nization, the colonizers can now see themselves as the victims in
the colonial situation.34 As we saw in Chapter 4, the universal
claims of just war were disputed in Cicero’s Republic by Philus,
in an exemplary dissection. There is also in Book Three of the
Aeneid the interesting episode involving the Harpies, when the
Trojans enter the harbour on their island without seeking permis-
sion, proceed to feast on the Harpies’ cattle and goats, yet are
surprised when the Harpies suddenly swoop down on them in
anger. Aeneas immediately orders ‘his men to arm themselves to
make war against this fearsome tribe’. We are left to contemplate
the Harpy Celaeno’s condemnation of Aeneas and his warriors.
‘Is it your plan to make war against the innocent Harpies and
drive us from the kingdom of our ancestors?’35
BIOGRAPHY AND MORALITY
Fitzmaurice’s admiration for the English promoters of colonies –
even the ‘burlesque’ of the Madoc stories is, in his view, ‘uninten-
tional’ – seriously frays at the edges when he turns to biographical
sketches of some of the key figures. Here biography perhaps
unwittingly extends this kind of intellectual history into turbulent
and discomforting areas of social history, where the adventurers
might reveal themselves to be the reverse of admirable; they could
be pirates, thieves, killers and cannibals.36 Fitzmaurice tells us of

an early expedition in 1536 led by a Richard Hore; on board one
of his ships, the Trinity, were many gentlemen; while the Trinity
succeeded in crossing the Atlantic it became stranded on the coast
of Labrador, the gentlemen on board suffering such extreme
privation that they began to eat one another, or perhaps the crew.
Fortunately, a well-provisioned French ship came into the same
bay, and the English somehow – Fitzmaurice does not divulge the
presumably violent details – overcame the French ship and sailed
off in it. As Fitzmaurice comments, there was ‘no material here for
a humanistic celebration of glorious deeds’, for praise of
honourable actions.37
Fitzmaurice’s portrait of the prominent humanist adventurer
Humphrey Gilbert also threatens to undermine his admiration for
the neo-roman promoters of colonies. Gilbert was, says Fitzmau-
rice, the first to formulate colonizing designs for both Ireland and
America. Gilbert had, we learn, a passion for the studia humanitatis,
was respected by his contemporaries for his learning, and wished
from 1570 to establish a new university in London devoted to a
humanist curriculum. He became interested in colonization, which
he saw as a field of application for humanism, and he was drawn
into the project to colonize Ireland by Sir Henry Sidney, appointed
in 1565 Lord Deputy of Ireland; a project not considered warmly or
favourably by the Irish themselves. In the four years Gilbert spent
in Ireland, from 1566 to 1570, he was, Fitzmaurice remarks,
‘effective and brutal in quashing resistance’, for which he was
knighted. He announced plans to voyage to new lands, though Fitz-
maurice notes that such plans to establish colonies overseas may
have been ‘intended also in part to hide’from the Spanish ambassa-
dor an interest in ‘privateering’.38 When in 1578 Gilbert was granted
the first letters patent by the English crown to establish a colony in
the New World, he was given the power:
To discover … such remote and heathen and barbarous
landes … not actually possessed of any Christian prince
… And the same to have hould occupie and enjoye … all
the soyle of such landes.
THE HONOURABLE COLONIZER
[ 175 ]

As it turned out, the expeditionary force of eleven ships and 500
men, including his half-brother Walter Raleigh, never crossed
the Atlantic, being more interested in piracy against French and
Spanish ships.
In 1583, however, Gilbert did set out on a colonizing expe-
dition with five ships and made for Newfoundland; when he
landed in the harbour of St John’s he claimed possession of the
land within 200 leagues. In a storm soon after the Squirrel, in
which Gilbert was travelling, disappeared and he was not seen
again.39 Rather fortunately for those facing colonization at his
hands, one might think.
It’s of interest to glimpse Gilbert in the accounts and evalua-
tions of other historians, especially in their observations of Gilbert
as an important, not to say infamous, figure in the sixteenth-
century Elizabethan conquest and colonization of Ireland. The
mentions of Gilbert in these accounts sometimes refer to incidents
also discussed by Fitzmaurice. Colm Lennon tells us that, faced
with rebellion in Munster, Sir Henry Sidney appointed Gilbert as
colonel and governor of the province in September 1569. Empow-
ered to govern by martial law, Gilbert took to his task of quelling
the revolt with ‘ruthless efficiency’: ‘Within six weeks he had
taken twenty-three castles and slaughtered all occupants, men,
women and children’; indeed, Lennon comments, his ‘savage
methods’, including the killing of non-belligerents and the arrang-
ing of a ‘corridor of severed heads’ to induce abject surrender, not
only won Gilbert notoriety but introduced a new dimension into
Irish warfare.40 In A Military History of Ireland, Gilbert is noticed
as distinguishing himself amongst Elizabethan military command-
ers by his recourse, on a ‘limited scale’, during the first Desmond
rebellion, to ‘total war by means of scorched earth and territorial
clearance’.41
Patricia Palmer, in her work on English Renaissance literature
and imperial expansion, sees Gilbert as a figure who should be
rightly mocked and scorned.42 Palmer regards Gilbert as an
Elizabethan linguistic nationalist, his military and intellectual
endeavours revealing a unity of purpose. In Ireland, Gilbert was
THE ORIGINS OF VIOLENCE
[ 176 ]

heard to say that he thought his dog’s ears were too good to listen
to the Irish speech of the Munster rebels, however noble by
descent they were. A year after quelling the rebellion with ‘calcu-
lated savagery’ – leaving behind his own legenda negra in songs
and rhymes – Gilbert wrote Queene Elizabethes Achademy. Here
he advocated the establishment of a London variant of Oxford,
where there would be a stress on teaching in English not Latin,
and where civil and military subjects were to be combined; there
would be training in navigation, mapping, artillery, marching and
skirmishing. When he arrived in the harbour named by the English
as St John’s, in Newfoundland in 1583, Gilbert, before a motley
assembly of European fishermen, formally took possession of the
territory for Queen Elizabeth and her church by making a speech.
Palmer notes that there is ‘no mention of native witnesses to the
performance’, the only interpreting being done between the Euro-
peans there. In Palmer’s view, Gilbert’s declaration, reminiscent
of the proclamations of ownership delivered in Spanish to the
bewildered indigenous occupants of New Spain, evinced an ‘arro-
gant absurdity’, and ‘would be risible were its implications not so
far-reaching’.43
Clearly, these references to and interpretations of Gilbert
create a far more disturbing portrait of the adventurer than
Fitzmaurice, perhaps blinded by his affection for the neo-roman
humanists, permits himself.
THE RIGHT TO COLONIZE
In my view, the English humanist adventurers were highly contra-
dictory in what they wrote and did because they were thinking and
acting in terms of highly contradictory frameworks. They did not
wish to harm or dispossess the Americans in any way because they
desired to present themselves, and to regard themselves, as sensi-
tive and honourable colonizers; but they also believed in martial
virtues and military glory, and how were such to be gained except
in warfare? They believed in just war theory, where they would
THE HONOURABLE COLONIZER
[ 177 ]

arrive peacefully in a place and only take up arms when forced to
defend themselves against attacks by the colonized. Yet they knew
or must have known from previous colonizing, by the Spanish to
the south in the Americas, or their own experience in Ireland, or
their reading of Tacitus, their favoured Roman historian, that those
experiencing colonization were very likely to become violent
when faced with those they considered illegitimate intruders on
their lands and feared as usurpers of their world, their cosmos,
their livelihoods and their lives.
The right to colonize could also be sought in religion. Indeed,
the promoters’ fealty to God and Christianity, an inspiration which
suggests not a cyclical but a teleological and supersessionist view
of history, is reminiscent of the right of conquest divinely
supported by God in Exodus and Jupiter in the Aeneid. For the
promoters, this was an ideal of progress in and across the world
for those who possess the Christian spirit and feel authorized to
act by God and Christian rulers.
Religion, as Fitzmaurice on occasion observes, complemented
the promoters’ neo-roman humanism, in particular a sense of serv-
ing the glory of God. The egregious Gilbert, we’ve seen, was given
in 1578 the power by the English crown to possess any ‘remote
and heathen and barbarous landes’ not actually ‘possessed of any
Christian prince’. Some promoters like Samuel Purchas also felt
that God himself had commissioned them to plant and create
plantations, which would then reflect glory on God. It was also
important to attempt to convert the indigenous infidels of new
lands to Christianity.44 International law, then, was crossed and
entwined with a Christian desire to be culture-bringers. The
promoters offered to indigenous peoples ‘spiritual goods’,
Christianity for their souls; such goods could be traded for land.45
The right of conquest could include a specifically Christian
component. One promoter, Robert Gray, pondered the problem
of what should the English do when they were ‘unwronged or
unprovoked’ by indigenous people. By what right or warrant
can we, he asked, ‘enter into the land of these Savages, and
plant ourselves in their places’? Gray’s anxiety is soothed by
THE ORIGINS OF VIOLENCE
[ 178 ]

arguments from religion that justify colonization in these
unfortunate circumstances. It was, Gray wrote, lawful for a
Christian king to make war ‘upon barbarous and savage people’
in order to reclaim them for a life of ‘humanitie, pietie, and
honestie’.
Gray says more, and more fantastically, when he invokes the
warrant of the Old Testament. The English promoters, Fitzmaurice
quotes him saying, can heed Joshua’s advice to his people, which
is to ‘destroy God’s enemies’, who were ‘Perrizzites and Giants’,
but may be any ‘abominable Idolators’.46 In Gray, it very much
appears, ideas of colonization drawn from neo-roman humanism,
international law, Christianity and the Old Testament, however
contradictory they may be, mix, conjoin and support each other.
Let’s follow up Gray’s reference to the Perizzites, whom we
noticed in Chapter 5. In Genesis, God says to Abraham he will
make a covenant with him and his descendants so that they can
possess ‘land from the river of Egypt unto the great river, the river
Euphrates’, a vast stretch of territory that would include the lands
not only of the Perizzites but also of the Kenites, Kenizzites,
Kadmonites, 
Hittites, 
Rephaims, Amorites, 
Canaanites,
Girgashites and Jebusites (Genesis 15: 18–21). In Genesis 17, God
says that if Abraham circumcises, this would guarantee the
covenant and its consequences. God will then ‘give unto thee, and
to thy seed after thee, the land wherein thou art a stranger, all the
land of Canaan, for an everlasting possession; and I will be their
God’ (Genesis 17:8).47 Recall also that in succeeding Old Testa-
ment stories, in Exodus, Joshua and Judges, as the Israelites
embark on what is finally a colonizing and genocidal journey to
the promised land of Canaan, God frequently reassures them that
he will personally remove, or assist them to remove, any peoples
who are an obstacle to their possession of Canaan, peoples who
include of course the Perizzites (Joshua 11:3, 5–17). With God’s
help, the Israelites can also take their land. All such peoples are
now to be superseded in history.
What of Gray’s lurid vision of giants, when he advises the
English promoters to heed Joshua’s advice to his people, to
THE HONOURABLE COLONIZER
[ 179 ]

‘destroy God’s enemies’ such as ‘Perrizzites and Giants’? Gray’s
linking of Perizzites and giants suggests a biblical source, and
resonates with contemporary scholarship. In an essay on Gog and
Magog, who figure in Ezekiel as giant and land of giants (as in our
epigraph), Victor I. Scherb writes of their long history from bibli-
cal story, where God wipes out these apparently appalling
monsters living to the north of the Israelites – whom, we might
add, God provokes into war, as he had provoked into war the
Canaanites and Perizzites and other nations, in Joshua – to the
ways they figure as characters in medieval and early modern
English cultural and political history.48
Along the way, from biblical antiquity to early modernity, the
stories accumulate and diversify, with Gog and Magog becoming
the names of giants, their names sometimes conjoined as well, as
Goemagog or Gogmagog. Scherb tells us that by late classical
times, biblical commentators and romance writers had linked Gog
and Magog to the story of Alexander the Great, who with God’s
help encloses these monstrous beings in the Caucasus mountains,
behind iron gates (commonly known as the Caspian Gates). In this
romance tradition, Alexander is horrified at their barbaric
customs, which include cannibalism as in eating their dead.
English romance writers added incest, free love, lawlessness and
bestiality to their satanic sins, as well as the eating of pregnant
women, and they could be variously identified with Celts, Goths,
Scythians, Huns, Arabians, Turks, Magyars, Parthians and
Mongols. In medieval literature, as in English versions of
Mandeville’s Travels, the Jews are indicted as primal outsiders,
with Gog and Magog identified with the Ten Tribes of Israel,
posing an apocalyptic threat because if they were to escape from
their mountain prison, they would organize the world’s Jews to
destroy Christianity.49
In his Historia Geoffrey of Monmouth weaves, Scherb argues,
Gog and Magog into a narrative of successful colonization. In
England there lived an indigenous race of giants. Fortunately, they
were defeated and mostly slain by the incoming Britons, who
regarded themselves as descendants of the Trojans. One giant,
THE ORIGINS OF VIOLENCE
[ 180 ]

THE HONOURABLE COLONIZER
[ 181 ]
however, Goemagog, is kept alive and finds himself pitted in a
wrestling match against Corineus, champion of the Trojans/
Britons. Finally, Corineus manages to hurl Goemagog off a cliff
into the sea.50 (There is perhaps a trace in this story of the
Olympians defeating the Titans in Greek mythological history.)
The defeat of Goemagog reveals to the satisfaction of the
Trojans/Britons that they are a chosen people who, in so glori-
ously vanquishing the indigenous inhabitants of the island, will
now move forward in history. However, Scherb recounts, Goema-
gog, or Gogmagog as he would become known, also emerges in
later cultural history as the chronicler for the medieval English of
their historical origins, relating how he was overcome by the
champion of the Britons/Trojans, was converted to Christianity,
and is now accepted as an English giant. In early modern English
culture, Scherb observes, these various traditions of Gog and
Magog, biblical, romance and historical, are invoked for story
telling. Sometimes now Magog is a giant who, riding a camel, is
associated with the Saracens and other exotic eastern peoples;
again, however, on being converted and taking a new name, he
testifies to the power of Christianity. By the sixteenth century,
civic authorities regularly appropriate Gogmagog and his
conqueror Corineus for ceremonies, greeting visiting royalty as
pageant giants who bespeak Britain’s claim to an ancient and
noble genealogy traceable back to Troy; they are now particularly
associated with London, capital city of a new international
empire.51
Shino Konishi has pointed out that a belief in giants –
giantology – was long-standing in Western representations of
indigenous peoples such as Australian Aboriginals. When in the
late eighteenth and early nineteenth-century French explorers
like Nicolas Baudin visited Australia on scientific voyages, they
nevertheless seriously entertained the view that New Holland
harboured giants. As Konishi comments, it is clear that the
Enlightenment never severed reason from fantasy.52 Nor, we
might add, had the early modern English humanist promoters of
colonization in North America.

If, in this long tradition of representation, Gogmagog signi-
fied the indigenous of England who are rightfully conquered by
the incoming Trojans/Britons, those same Trojans/Britons now,
Gray’s suggestion is, had the right to conquer and destroy any
indigenous giants and monstrous beings they found in North
America.
HONOURABLE COLONIZATION IN THE TEMPEST
Let’s look now at the Shakespeare play famous for its
exploration of questions of colonization. We can view The
Tempest in Bakhtin’s terms as polyphonic in its different
perspectives, and menippean both in its fantasticality and its
refusal of any certain position by which to judge ideals and
actions. As in the character of Agricola created by Tacitus, the
philosophical idea that The Tempest explores as a menippea is
that of honourable colonization, an idea embodied in a wise
man, or man who designates himself as wise, Prospero the magi-
cian, exile and would-be ruler of an island, with a new subject,
Caliban, its previous sole occupant. The Tempest develops in its
own distinctive ways the tradition of evocation of genocide,
colonization and conquest, and questioning of genocide, colo-
nization and conquest, that I have been exploring in Herodotus
and Thucydides’ histories, Greek tragedy in Aeschylus and
Euripides, biblical stories like Exodus, Joshua and Judges,
Cicero’s Republic, Virgil’s Aeneid and Tacitus’s Agricola and
Germania. Caliban reprises those figures, not least the British
leader Calgacus in the Agricola, who in this tradition have
passionately protested against the conquest and colonization
visited upon them by conquerors from elsewhere.
Briefly, I’ll analyse aspects of the play in relation to concepts
I have been developing so far in this book and that bear on the idea
of honourable colonization: victimology, genocide and Waswo’s
notion of colonizers as culture-bearers, at least in their own self-
admiring image. Let’s think first in terms of victimology, where
THE ORIGINS OF VIOLENCE
[ 182 ]

those who escape violence and possible death in one place
wander in misery and then claim another land or island, while
feeling that their previous sufferings justify any violence and
sufferings they might inflict on others in another place; we have
discussed the narratives of Exodus and the Aeneid in these terms.
Prospero decides to give up governing as Duke of Milan for a
while to pursue a life of contemplation; he is then usurped by his
perfidious brother Antonio, who arranges for Prospero and his
then little daughter Miranda to be put on a ruined ‘barque’. They
are left to die on the open sea. Fortunately as it turns out Pros-
pero has with him some books he prizes ‘above my dukedom’
(1.2: 140–51, 161–8); he has knowledge to bring somewhere, if
he can reach a place of safety. Prospero and Miranda wander in
the wilderness of the sea, arriving at last at an island, which they
find to be inhabited by someone else, Caliban, who regards
himself as its rightful owner.
Prospero, however, feels no need to ask Caliban for
permission to be on his island. Rather, he immediately assumes
possession and rights of settlement. In Waswo’s terms in The
Founding Legend of Western Civilization, Prospero, coming from
elsewhere like the Trojans, intensely aware of his own agony as a
displaced ruler, sees himself as a culture-bearer who has a right to
be on the island because he comes as a voyager requiring refuge
and hospitality. He is an honourable visitor, friendly and helpful to
Caliban. He and Miranda try to teach the local inhabitant elements
of their superior culture, reminding us of Tacitus’s Agricola where
the Romans wish to absorb the Britons into Roman culture; such
assimilation is judged as a form of enslavement by the Agricola’s
sceptical narrator.
Caliban, however, reminding us of Calgacus decrying the loss
of liberty and independence of the Britons at the hands of the
Roman invaders, protests, pointing out that Prospero has dispos-
sessed him of his world, his way of life that he enjoys and that he
feels constitutes his distinctive existence, that had been rightfully
given to him by his mother Sycorax. Let’s quote the famous
passage, Caliban’s eternal cry of the indigenous and dispossessed:
THE HONOURABLE COLONIZER
[ 183 ]

This island’s mine by Sycorax my mother,
Which thou tak’st from me. When thou cam’st first,
Thou strok’st me and made much of me; wouldst give me
Water with berries in’t, and teach me how
To name the bigger light and how the less,
That burn by day and night; and then I loved thee,
And showed thee all the qualities o’th’ isle,
The fresh springs, brine pits, barren place and fertile –
Cursed be I that did so! All the charms
Of Sycorax, toads, beetles, bats light on you!
For I am all the subjects that you have,
Which first was mine own king, and here you sty me
In this hard rock, whiles you do keep from me
The rest o’th’ island.
(1.2: 331–44)
It is a speech that perhaps has something of the tragic grandeur of
Shylock’s protest at his belittlement and humiliation in The
Merchant of Venice.
Caliban resists his dispossession not only in bitter angry
words but also in action, violently so, attempting to violate
Miranda (no longer a child). In terms of natural law, Caliban is no
longer providing hospitality to the strangers who have come to his
shore, and so the stranger, the visitor, the new settler, has the right
to reply with force. Prospero now visits upon Caliban just punish-
ment. In terms of Lemkin’s definition of genocide in Axis Rule in
Occupied Europe, of genocide as destruction of the foundations of
life of an oppressed society, subjugation of its local population and
replacement by the new pattern of the oppressor, Prospero
destroys Caliban’s world and replaces it with his own, reducing
the once proud and independent Caliban to slavery. Prospero
exploits Caliban’s labour, which he knows he cannot do without,
in the agricultural project that Prospero hopes to realize on the
island, attempting to replace the savage, that is to say, non-agricul-
tural mode of existence Caliban has enjoyed before the awful
magician’s arrival. In the masque performed in Act 4 there is a
THE ORIGINS OF VIOLENCE
[ 184 ]

hymn to an ordered and idyllic agricultural abundance, Iris
addressing Ceres as ‘most bounteous lady’ and wishing for ‘rich
leas / Of wheat, rye, barley, vetches, oats, and peas; / Thy turfy
mountains, where live nibbling sheep …’ (4.1: 60–2).
Prospero needs Caliban’s labour; the master needs his slave.
In terms of medieval and early modern legends, we can think here
of the Trojans coming to a land or island and conquering indige-
nous giants like Gog and Gogmagog while keeping one alive, to
be made useful to the conquerors. The ‘Trojan’ Prospero, having
conquered the monstrous figure of Caliban, whom he scornfully
describes as ‘not honoured with / A human shape’ (1.2: 283–4),
puts him to use as a kind of domestic and agricultural labourer. We
could also think here of genocide theory. In his report, ‘On Geno-
cide’, that he presented to Bertrand Russell’s International War
Crimes Tribunal in 1967, Sartre contends that, unlike in the Amer-
ican war in Vietnam, in the French colonization of Algeria the
genocidal desire to destroy and replace the indigenous society was
inhibited by the economic necessity to use Algerian labour.53
Let’s also think now of the categories, discussed especially in
my analysis of Euripides’ Trojan plays, by which Lemkin wished
to analyse historical genocides.54 In Lemkin’s outline, he refers
under the heading ‘Conditions leading to genocide’to the category
of ‘economic exploitation (e.g. slavery)’, and such is painfully
clear for Caliban; Prospero, too, is angered that he as master is
dependent on the labour of a slave and cannot rid himself of him
(1.2: 310–15). Another category under this heading is ‘evolution
of genocidal values in genocidist group (contempt for the alien,
etc)’, and here we think of the change from friendliness in Pros-
pero as honourable colonizer, consequent upon Caliban’s resisting
colonizing and his attempt to rape Miranda, to the violent
language of insult and goading that Prospero continually rains
down upon Caliban.
When a still uncowed Caliban refuses to show himself when
called, Prospero regales him: ‘Thou poisonous slave, got by the
devil himself / Upon thy wicked dam, come forth!’ (1.2:
319–20). Under the heading ‘Methods and techniques of
THE HONOURABLE COLONIZER
[ 185 ]

genocide – Physical’, Lemkin refers to ‘mutilation’, and here we
can think of the cruelties and tortures that Prospero makes
Caliban suffer: cramps, side-stitches, being pinched and stung
all over his body (1.2: 325–30). Under ‘Methods and techniques
of genocide – Cultural’, Lemkin refers to ‘demoralization’, and
here we can think of the fear of Prospero that Caliban experi-
ences and which keeps him subjugated (1.2: 365–73); we can
also think of the ignominious drunkenness that Caliban increas-
ingly falls into as the play goes on. Under the heading ‘The
Genocidists’, there is also a category of ‘demoralization’, and
here we might contemplate Prospero’s ethical deterioration as a
genocidist colonizer: his resort to a language of insult with not
only Caliban but his other slave Ariel; his querulousness and
authoritarianism, even with Miranda; his use of torture and the
pleasure he takes in Caliban’s pain; his manipulativeness, as
when he uses his daughter for his own ends in relation to Ferdi-
nand. Under the heading of ‘Responses of victim group’, both
active and passive, Lemkin refers to differing features that we
can see characterizing Caliban’s responses to his situation of
oppression and enslavement: ‘submission’ through ‘terror’, yet
also ‘resistance’ both to ‘assimilation’ and ‘subordination’,
though by play’s end Caliban appears to be completely demoral-
ized. He has descended from a near-tragic figure revealed in his
great speech to a minor fool, similar perhaps to the way, as Erich
Auerbach pointed out in an essay in Mimesis, Shylock descends
as a character delivering a great anti-racist speech to, by the end
of The Merchant of Venice, a low figure of farce.55
CONCLUSION
The humanist imagination, we can observe, was disordered,
incoherent, chaotic and fantastical.
I’ll close with some reflections on international law. In the
affirmative narrative of Tacitus’s Agricola and Germania, as we
noted in the previous chapter, the Romans are to be considered a
THE ORIGINS OF VIOLENCE
[ 186 ]

chosen people of the gods who have the right to supersede other
and lesser peoples (though such people as the Britons and
Germans could be admired in some ways when they remind the
Romans of their better and older selves). The Romans are now the
heirs of history, rightful conquerors of lands near and far. In these
terms, the early modern English promoters of colonization were
also clearly supersessionists. They, as Christian Europeans and
more particularly as Christian English, versed in the Old Testa-
ment as well as the learning and thinking of the pagan Romans, in
possession of honourable ideals, were now a chosen people of
history, with the right to discover and claim the rest of the world,
though they had to overcome the ever present danger that other
Christian European powers might have got to a place before them
and established, what to fellow Europeans at least, was a plausible
legal claim by discovery and precedent (that is, repetition of the
claim of discovery).
The law of nations, or international law, as it developed in
early modern English humanism, was a historical fantasia of justi-
fications, stories, legends and myths. International law was a
repertoire by which to sanction colonization and empire with the
highest of motives and ideals. What was designated international
law were principles, often contradictory, agreed to by the power-
ful and influential of European states. International law has been,
and in some respects still is, conceived and continuously refined
not to protect the colonized from conquest or colonization or
empire or war but rather to regulate conquest and colonization and
war amongst the powerful nations at any one time.56
Early modern English notions and myths of international law
could be laughed at in the spirit of Nietzsche and Foucault were it
not for the genocidal consequences of colonization and empire.
THE HONOURABLE COLONIZER
[ 187 ]


8 WAS THE 
ENLIGHTENMENT 
THE ORIGIN OF THE
HOLOCAUST?1
It seemed less desirable to give a merely narrative account
of the growth and vicissitudes of the philosophy of the
Enlightenment than to set forth, as it were, the dramatic
action of its thinking.
(Cassirer, The Philosophy of the Enlightenment,
Preface)2
Religion did not merely retain a powerful presence
throughout eighteenth-century Europe, it was central to
the Enlightenment project itself.
(Grell and Porter, Toleration in Enlightenment Europe,
Introduction)3
In the second half of the twentieth century and in the new millen-
nium the Enlightenment has been indicted for initiating, providing
and lending its authority to the conceptual underpinnings of the
Holocaust. The influential frame-story here is Modernity and the
Holocaust (1989), with Zygmunt Bauman in the preface telling us
that he once thought the horror and inhumanity of the Holocaust
was a momentary madness that grew like a cancerous growth on
the body of civilization and modernity. Bauman hopes his book
will contribute to Western self-awareness and self-questioning,
that it was modernity itself, in its ordinary practices of passionless
[ 189 ]

impersonal rationality, bureaucratic efficiency and social engi-
neering, that enabled and was manifested in the Holocaust; a point
he feels that had already been made by Hannah Arendt in her 1963
Eichmann in Jerusalem but which still needs insisting on and
drawing out.4
In implicating the Enlightenment in the Western ‘civilizing
process’ of which modernity and the Holocaust are outcomes and
expressions,5 Bauman draws on George L. Mosse’s Toward the
Final Solution: A History of European Racism (1978), which
argues that eighteenth-century Europe was the ‘cradle of modern
racism’. The ‘major cultural trends’ of the eighteenth century
‘vitally affected the foundations of racist thought’, in particular an
entwining of science and aesthetics. Scientific endeavour, with its
interest in observation, measurement and comparison, was
‘directed towards a classification of the human races according to
their place in nature and the effect of the environment’. The
comparative physical measurements made in the new sciences like
anthropology, phrenology and physiognomy relied on a
resemblance to ancient beauty and proportion; such fusion of
classificatory science with ideals of ‘Greek beauty’, embodying
‘order and harmony’, determined the ‘value of man’; henceforth
racial judgements were to be based on a particular kind of 
outward appearance. Such ‘continuous transition from science to
aesthetics’ became a ‘cardinal feature of modern racism’.6
Bauman contributed the opening essay ‘The Duty to Remem-
ber – But What?’ to the collection edited by James Kaye and Bo
Stråth, Enlightenment and Genocide, Contradictions of Modernity
(2000), where he restates the conclusions of Modernity and the
Holocaust. We should cease seeing the Holocaust as a ‘bizarre and
aberrant event’ and rather view it as had in their separate ways
Adorno and Arendt: ‘It was my intention to pick up where Adorno
or Arendt had left a blatantly unfinished task: to exhortate fellow
social thinkers to consider the relation between the event of the
Holocaust and the structure and logic of modern life’, with its
exaltation of abstraction, (mis)treating people as categories and
impersonality; genocide in modernity, in the Holocaust in the near
THE ORIGINS OF VIOLENCE
[ 190 ]

THE ENLIGHTENMENT AND THE HOLOCAUST
[ 191 ]
past as in Rwanda in the near present, is the ‘ultimate triumph of
all-defining, all-classifying modern bureaucracy’.7
In Enlightenment and Genocide, Contradictions of Moder-
nity Bauman’s contribution is immediately followed by way of
contrast with Robert Wokler’s essay, ‘The Enlightenment Project
on the Eve of the Holocaust’. Wokler says as a scholar of the
eighteenth century he will defend the Enlightenment in this
discussion, as he has done elsewhere, against its assorted critics,
modernist, postmodernist, feminist.8 Wokler sees Bauman’s
harsh judgement on modernity as a continuation of Adorno and
Horkheimer’s pessimistic view in Dialectic of Enlightenment
(1944), that through its enactment of the Holocaust civilization
rendered itself perfectly barbarous, not by abandoning its princi-
ples but in fulfilling them.9 Rather than Adorno and Horkheimer,
Wokler suggests that scholarship could well return to Ernst
Cassirer’s project in his life work, especially in Die Philosophie
der Aufklärung, written in the winter and spring of 1932 and the
last book he produced in Germany: to portray the pervasive
cosmopolitanism of European thought, that German thinkers
were influential in the European Enlightenment as a whole, and
that the real spirit of Germany was not nationalist and militarist
but humanist, tolerant, pluralist, and cosmopolitan, in the tradi-
tion of Leibniz, Goethe and Lessing.10 In Wokler’s view, the
pathos of Cassirer journeying into exile with the coming to
power of Hitler was not that Nazi Germany and the Holocaust
fulfilled the foundational modes of thought of the Enlighten-
ment. Rather, what characterized Nazi Germany was its
nationalism, which was a culmination of the conception of the
nation-state brought into play in modern European history by the
French Revolution. As revealed in the course of the Revolution
from 1789, and particularly in the Terror of 1793–94, the modern
nation-state required that those who fall under its authority be
above all united, that they form one people, morally bound
together by a common identity. For Wokler, the unitary principle
of the post-French Revolution modern nation-state leads to
violence, including totalitarian violence.11

In Wokler’s view, then, it is the French Revolution and the
modern nation-state which ‘betrayed’ the Enlightenment’s notions
of common humanity and attachment to universal rights.12 For
henceforth only persons comprising nations which formed states
could have rights, so that modernity has been marked by the abuse
of human rights by nation-states which alone have the authority to
determine the scope of those rights and their validity. Wokler
suggests that the Enlightenment by contrast admirably embodied
the principles of civilization in its ideals and discursive practices
of toleration of religious minorities, dislike of bigotry, and oppo-
sition to persecution of heretics. The Enlightenment Project was,
Wokler suggests, an active ‘campaign’ for the creation of a party
of humanity (here Wokler calls on Hume), an international society
of the republic of letters, practised in the eighteenth century’s
literary salons, journals and academies. And many Enlightenment
figures were themselves forced into exile, to become, as Wokler
puts it, an intellectual diaspora, part of an ‘outcast culture’ which
fermented more richly abroad than in their home societies. Given
such dimensions, Wokler feels, the ‘Enlightenment did not just
exclude the possibility of the Holocaust but in fact combated
ethnic cleansing in all its pre-modern forms’. The Enlightenment
Project, Wokler urges, can be conceived as ‘civilization’s
confrontation with barbarism’ and proactive opposition to
‘genocide’ in its every manifestation.13
In their introductory essay to the volume, editors James
Kaye and Bo Stråth point to the conflict of optimistic and
pessimistic views between Wokler and Bauman. Yet it quickly
becomes clear that Bauman is the hero of their narrative, that
Wokler’s protests are in their view unconvincing, and Bauman’s
negative dialectic of the Enlightenment and modernity has for
them the status of unchallengeable truth.14 Appealing to Bauman
as authority, they constate as axioms of history that the ‘very
foundations’ of the Enlightenment knew ‘little or no doubt’. The
Enlightenment’s enshrining of reason went hand in hand with
abstraction: a ‘veritable obsession to categorise and classify
emerged’, which promoted the ‘instrumental dimension in the
THE ORIGINS OF VIOLENCE
[ 192 ]

THE ENLIGHTENMENT AND THE HOLOCAUST
[ 193 ]
concepts of reason and rationality’. The Enlightenment’s ‘driv-
ing force’ was the ‘quest for absolute knowledge’ and ‘total/final
rationality’ to the ‘end of changing i.e. improving the world’.
Enlightenment involved the idea that modernity was perpetually
unfinished, it was always restlessly envisaging ‘utopian ideas of
some end goal’. As a ‘messianic and millenarial project’,
Enlightenment is hence ‘fundamentally linked’ both to modernity
and genocide.15
The editors do concede that one criticism of Bauman’s
seeing the Holocaust as the expression of a general modernity is
the question of why the Holocaust came to be engineered in
Germany in particular, why not elsewhere; they also agree with
Wokler that the French Revolutionary conception of the nation-
state must be brought into the discussion.16 Kaye and Stråth
could, however, have also pointed out that while Bauman
appeals to Hannah Arendt’s famous analysis of the banality of
evil in relation to Eichmann and the industrial killing of the
Holocaust, Arendt in her multi-faceted thinking was not neces-
sarily opposed to the Enlightenment and the ‘long eighteenth
century’: there is, for example, her appreciative portrait of Less-
ing in Men in Dark Times (1970), her admiration for Berlin’s
cosmopolitan salon culture of the 1790s, her interest in Jeffer-
sonian democracy in America.17 Furthermore, Arendt gave a
number of reasons for the historical development of National
Socialism, including in The Origins of Totalitarianism that
imperialism from 1884 to 1914 was a formative influence:
‘Some of the fundamental aspects of this time appear so close to
totalitarian phenomena of the twentieth century that it may be
justifiable to consider the whole period a preparatory stage for
coming catastrophes’.18
It is not hard to appreciate Wokler’s own pessimism that
Enlightenment scholars are on the defensive, feeling that they are
not being heard in the face of a general contemporary anti-Aufk-
lärung orthodoxy, disheartened that their appreciation of the
Enlightenment based on intimate knowledge and familiarity with
the ‘long eighteenth century’ is being disregarded.19

THE ORIGINS OF VIOLENCE
[ 194 ]
Contrary to Bauman’s harsh judgement and linear historiogra-
phy, I will evoke my own enchantment especially with theologico-
philosophical writing in the late seventeenth and early to middle
eighteenth century, from Spinoza to John Toland to Hume.20
I wish to give edge to my enchantment by deploying a post-
secularist approach.21 Arguments about monotheism, polythe-
ism, world religions and the continuing importance of
interpretations of biblical narratives bear directly on how we
conceive the Enlightenment. I wish to join those historians of
ideas like Grell, Porter, McCalman, Champion and Berti, who
dispute a historiography of the Enlightenment as a desire to
create a secular world of reason and science.22 Postsecularist
historiography draws attention to the salience of religion in the
Enlightenment in both its Radical and Moderate branches, that
in thinkers from Spinoza to Isaac Newton to John Toland to
Joseph Priestley there was a continuum of interests in their writ-
ing and speculation, from astronomy and mathematics and
chemistry to arguments over the Trinity, biblical dating and
prophecy, philosemitism, millenarian visions, politics and civil
society and the public sphere, the problem of the multitude, the
place of philosophy, the freedom of intellectuals.
I will be further agreeing with, and trying to extend, a sugges-
tion of Wokler concerning a possible convergence between the
writing and thinking of Enlightenment figures, and postmodernist
appreciation of variety, difference, alterity, plurality, specificity,
uniqueness, toleration, anti-colonialism, anti-Eurocentrism.23 I
will argue that postmodern theorists do not simply join in the
modernist condemnation of the Enlightenment (as in Adorno and
Horkheimer) but are in their attitudes and musings highly ambiva-
lent and contradictory and often reveal – as in Deleuze and
Lyotard – significant affinities with aspects of the Enlightenment.
Throughout I will be pondering the question, Was there ever a
single unified ‘Enlightenment Project’?
In my conclusion I will return to the haunting question: is
there imbrication of the Enlightenment with barbarism, with
violence?

THE ENLIGHTENMENT AND THE HOLOCAUST
[ 195 ]
SPINOZA
Do philosophy and theologico-philosophical speculation, major
defining genres of the Enlightenment, bear out the
Bauman–Mosse thesis? For many years now historians in the field
of Enlightenment studies have defined ‘the long eighteenth
century’ as beginning in the latter part of the seventeenth century.
In these terms, how does the Bauman–Mosse thesis and more
general anti-Enlightenment condemnation fare when the thought
of Spinoza and Spinozism is considered? In particular, did the
Enlightenment – here the Radical Enlightenment – work by a
discourse of certainty that knew not doubt? Was it obsessed by
categorizing and classifying? Did it aim for final, exhaustive
knowledge as its ideal and practice? Was it supremely instrumen-
tal in its notions of reason? Was it directed by the messianic and
utopian?
Intellectual historians have pointed out aspects of Spinoza
akin to mysticism, enjoyment of enigma, and practices of writ-
ing that undermine certainty. Deleuze – recall Wokler’s urging
of affinities between postmodernism and Enlightenment – points
to a kind of split or doubled textuality in the Ethics, the flow of
definitions, propositions and demonstrations in contrast to the
passionate scholia.24 Yirmiyahu Yovel suggests the influence of
his Portuguese Marrano family and diasporic history on
Spinoza’s consciousness and philosophy, creating the great early
Enlightenment figure as harbinger of the sensibility of
modernity – and, we might add, postmodernity as well. The
implications of Yovel’s argument are that Spinoza and Spin-
ozism were radically anti-utopian: the intellectual emerges from
this cultural history as a connoisseur of ambiguity, ambivalence
and paradox, enjoying an ironic self-consciousness that
preserves a detachment from any community that might claim
his/her identity or belonging; both inside and outside a society
at the same time; careful, cautious, wary of the tyrannical major-
ity (the multitude) stirred into mob violence by persecutory
theologians, priests, preachers and pastors; yet adventurous in

thought and writing and belonging only to an international,
cosmopolitan republic of letters.25
The feminist postmodern philosopher Genevieve Lloyd,
taking as her point of departure Yovel’s portrait of Spinoza as
Marrano and outsider, evokes in Spinoza fascinating ideas about
mind, body, death and eternity.26 Lloyd says that a startling aspect
of Spinoza’s thought in the Ethics (published posthumously in
1677) is his anti-Cartesian argument that the mind is the ‘idea’ of
the body. The mind is the idea of an individual body, and there-
fore, Lloyd points out, there is no way it can totally transcend its
limited position in the whole to understand all things adequately.
Further, since mind and body are entwined, the mind ceases to
exist when the body ceases to exist; the mind, like the body, will
after death have no duration, no immortality. Yet, in the final, diffi-
cult, highly speculative Part Five of the Ethics, Lloyd says we
must ponder the quite different implications of Spinoza’s proposi-
tion XXIII, that the human mind cannot be absolutely destroyed
with the body, but there remains something of it which is eternal.
Lloyd points out that Spinoza posits a highest form of knowledge,
the intellectual love of God where God and Nature are inter-
changeable; such a form of knowledge is open only to the wise,
those who are self-reflexive about knowledge, it is not open to the
multitude. This highest form of knowledge is not accessible by
means of reason alone, but in reason working with intuition, imag-
ination, emotion (love) and recognition of ‘fiction’ and even of
‘feigning’.27
How can this be? Spinoza, says Lloyd, believes that the eter-
nity of the mind emerges from considering the intellectual love of
God only when it is related to the mind. The mind might have a
form of being that somehow remains beyond the existence of the
body, and the mind’s understanding of itself as eternal is its high-
est achievement, the state of blessedness. Yet here the mind, in
understanding itself as eternal, has to resort to a fiction, a feign-
ing: in the highest form of knowledge the mind begins to know its
own eternity, that we are in God and are conceived through God.
But if the mind is already eternal, then there can be no question of
THE ORIGINS OF VIOLENCE
[ 196 ]

THE ENLIGHTENMENT AND THE HOLOCAUST
[ 197 ]
beginning. The idea of a beginning of consciousness of one’s mind
as eternal is then a fiction, a necessary fiction to aid understand-
ing of one’s mind as eternal; but one’s mind has always been
eternal. The mind needs such a fiction of a beginning in order to
relate to history, to being in a certain time and place. In this way,
the mind shifts between two ways of understanding itself in rela-
tion to the substance of which the universe is composed. In one
way the mind understands itself as eternal, in another it knows
itself as durational, as involved with time and place. Nevertheless,
Lloyd feels, Spinoza was very aware that the state of blessedness
is difficult to reach, for no mind is always wise and wisdom is in
any case always precarious.28
In Collective Imaginings: Spinoza, Past and Present, Moira
Gatens and Genevieve Lloyd evoke a Spinoza whom they feel is
of great contemporary relevance in conceptualizing notions of
freedom, responsibility and difference. Gatens and Lloyd
suggest that Spinoza’s philosophy, reprising yet also transform-
ing concerns of ancient philosophy especially in the Stoics and
Epicurians, does not attempt to transcend difference or assimi-
late differences into a universalized sameness. Rather, Spinoza
conceived of bodies and minds as involving both affinities and
antagonisms, harmonies and conflicts. For Spinoza, because the
universe consists of one substance (God or Nature), it has no
final causes or telos, no natural end or aims, hence permitting the
flourishing of difference, diversity and experimentation. Such
monism is to be understood as a multiplicity of irreducibly
distinct individual modes. And because, famously and mysteri-
ously, Spinoza treats the mind as the ‘idea’ of the body, human
minds consequently reflect human bodies in their persistence
and flourishing and their equally complex vulnerability to
antagonistic powers. The body, imagination and affect do not in
themselves represent limits to reason and knowledge, and
through reflecting on them we come to develop our powers of
reason and increase our knowledge. In particular, Spinoza
highlights the imagination, which plays a positive role in even
the highest forms of intellectual life.29

In Neuropolitics: Thinking, Culture, Speed (2002), William E.
Connolly likewise suggests that Spinoza’s thinking is opposed to
‘narrow intellectualism’, that Spinoza sees not only the mind’s but
the body’s powers as mysterious and unpredictable. Connolly
quotes from Part Three proposition II of the Ethics here: Nobody
has yet determined the limits of the body’s capabilities. Spinoza at
this point is arguing that the mind cannot control or dominate the
body: ‘the body can by the sole laws of its nature do many things
which the mind wonders at.’30
In Radical Enlightenment: Philosophy and the Making of
Modernity 1650–1750, a remarkable work of transnational
history, Jonathan I. Israel suggests that the Enlightenment was
multiply-stranded, between and within the Moderate and the
Radical, and that such multiplicity and tension and conflict
between the various strands meant that the European intellectual
arena grew ever ‘more complex, fragmented, and uncertain’;
there came everywhere to prevail ‘confusion, hesitation, and a
rapid fragmentation of ideas’; there was bafflement, ‘dilemma’
and ‘enigma’. In the drama of the Enlightenment, Israel accords
Spinoza a central role.31 Israel argues that Spinoza and Spin-
ozism became the formative influences that created the Radical
Enlightenment in its relations with the Moderate Enlightenment
and in shaping the key ideas and urbane cosmopolitan culture of
Enlightenment philosophy throughout Europe.32
Spinoza, Israel writes, was influential in all spheres of new
thinking in the ‘long eighteenth century’, the political, the ethical,
the erotic, the cosmological. Spinoza was the first major thinker in
modern times to embrace democratic republicanism as the highest
and most fully rational form of political organization. In works
like Tractatus Theologico-Politicus (1670) and the Ethics Spinoza
was a leader in the Enlightenment struggle for toleration, tolera-
tion as the enjoyment of individual freedom in thought and speech
as well as freedom to publish and to distribute what one has
published. Spinoza believed in political freedom in a positive
active sense, rather than as being defined negatively as absence of
obstacles. Yet Spinoza did not believe in overthrowing a monarch
THE ORIGINS OF VIOLENCE
[ 198 ]

or ruler even when a regime’s tyranny was apparent to all; he was
anti-revolutionary, he disliked political violence and was intensely
wary of mass conformity, believing the common people usually
venerate whatever form of power there is that rules them. Since
Spinoza held that there was no transcendental God who would
guarantee or could ordain any form of morality as absolute, his
thought suggested the relativity of good and evil, that they were
modes of thinking, and that depending on circumstances the same
thing can be considered good, bad or neutral.33
Spinoza himself, Israel points out, used terms like ‘unmanly’
to indicate those who did not seek the guidance of reason, and he
considered women naturally intellectually weak. But, says
Israel, Spinoza’s views on the nature of the universe had 
widespread implications for issues of sexuality, eroticism and
the place of women in society, for the more radical the philo-
sophical standpoint as in Spinoza and Spinozism, the more
emphatic the levelling and egalitarian tendencies which in turn
generated impulses towards not only female emancipation but
emancipation of the human libido itself. There were also impli-
cations for freedom of conversation between men and women, in
a kind of new Epicureanism. In such a libertarian culture or
Radical Enlightenment public sphere, which thrived in the fluid
social relationships afforded by the tea and coffee shops that
began to proliferate in Holland, London and Hamburg from the
1660s and 1670s, what mattered was not membership of a partic-
ular family or noble group, but a new kind of meritocracy of
mind and attitude, given to philosophical knowledge, irreverent
writing and refined pleasure-seeking.34
In my own 1492: The Poetics of Diaspora, I point out that in
Tractatus Theologico-Politicus Spinoza does not believe in the
hubris of reason, that it can master or control the world. We should
not imagine Nature is so limited that ‘man’ is its chief part. In
discussing the biblical stories, Spinoza asks: ‘Could we live our
lives wisely if we were to accept as true nothing that could
conceivably be called into doubt on any principle of scepticism?
Are not most of our actions in any case fraught with uncertainty
THE ENLIGHTENMENT AND THE HOLOCAUST
[ 199 ]

and hazard?’35 In a letter to Blyenbergh, Spinoza stressed the
value of uncertainty, of not knowing: ‘For my own part, as I
confess plainly … I do not understand the Scriptures.’36 It is the
necessity of uncertainty and the hazards of interpretation, in a
spirit of wryness and the cultivation of doubt about the limitations
of knowledge, that Spinoza stressed in his works and in correspon-
dence with his contemporaries. He acknowledged the value of
recognizing unknowability.
TOLAND
It was my fascination with Spinoza which led me to become
interested in John Toland, perhaps the most well-known and
controversial ‘English’ freethinking theologian of the early ‘long
eighteenth century’ – born in 1670 near Londonderry, educated in
Glasgow, Leiden and Oxford, advocating cosmopolitanism for
intellectuals meeting in coffee shops and salons while always
under the political pressure of patrons like Shaftesbury and
Harley, dying in poverty in 1722.37
Toland is usually referred to as a kind of English Spinozist. I
will argue that their intellectual relationship is not at all simple;
their ideas meet and miss in a complex choreography in terms of
biography, situation and philosophy.
Jan Assmann in Moses the Egyptian tells us that so infamous
a figure was Spinoza in European intellectual and theological
life after Tractatus Theologico-Politicus that he could often only
be referred to by his admirers by a code-name, ‘Egypt’.
Assmann feels that in England Toland was a Spinozan in the
sense that he followed Spinoza’s dramatic philosophical claim
that God is Nature and Nature is God; since there is no anthro-
pomorphic or transcendental God, there did not need to be a
Mosaic Distinction between one true religion following the one
true god and false religions following a false god or gods; such
was the ground of pantheism, the pantheism that Toland would
champion in the eighteenth century.38
THE ORIGINS OF VIOLENCE
[ 200 ]

Yet there is I think a play of similarity and difference between
Toland and Spinoza. In terms of affinity, Toland as a young man
published in 1696 his Christianity Not Mysterious, in which like
Spinoza before him he finds, deploying a sustained detailed
forensic textual critique, that the notion of miracles is contrary to
‘natural reason’ and always misused to their own advantage by
power-seeking priesthoods and orthodox divines.39 Not long after
he visited his native Ireland, there to find a hostile reception: the
book was burnt by the common hangman, and Toland escaped
arrest for blasphemy by returning to England. He was now an
outsider – as Spinoza had been in relation to the Dutch Sephardim
– to his own community of origin. Toland would henceforth
become, in Georg Simmel’s terms, a stranger amongst the nations,
someone who comes today and stays tomorrow,40 in various soci-
eties and courts in England and Europe, living in exile from his
native Ireland and the Catholicism he was born into. Toland shared
with Spinoza an approach to religion that is sociological and
historical. Toland’s writing and thinking is also Spinozan – and
‘marrano’ – in suggesting that philosophers must necessarily 
be Janus-faced, distinguishing between public utterance and
private thought. Such, Toland would argue, had been the practice
of philosophers in pre-Christian times and in non-Christian
philosophies and religions.
In Clidophorus (1720) Toland, like Spinoza before him,
contemplates how intellectuals can act in the world. How can they
escape threat, harm and persecution? Toland suggests that the
ancient pagan philosophers effected a careful distinction between
an external doctrine, which was open and public and accommo-
dated to popular prejudice and religious practices established by
law, and a philosophy that was hidden and secret, safe from the
attentions of ‘ambitious Priests, supported by … the Mob’, an
internal realm of ideas discussed by the capable and discreet few,
who addressed truth and the nature of things. In the spirit of Egyp-
tology, the conviction that ancient Egypt is the source of the
wisdom of the ages, Toland writes that the Egyptians, ‘who were
the wisest of mortals’, practised such a ‘two-fold doctrine’, as did
THE ENLIGHTENMENT AND THE HOLOCAUST
[ 201 ]

the Greeks, following Pythagoras, who travelled to Egypt and
there ‘suffer’d himself to be circumcised’ so that he might be
admitted to the secret sanctuaries of knowledge. In Egypt, as
recorded by Plutarch, Isis was known to the vulgar as a royal ruler.
But according to the philosophers Isis was ‘the Nature of all things
… who held the Universe to be the principal god, or the supreme
being’ (a view that Toland sees as anticipating the Cabala). In this
remarkable formulation, we can see why Toland could be recog-
nized as Egyptological and pantheistic in the spirit of Spinoza. In
comparatist mode Toland writes that the Egyptian double manner
of teaching religion and philosophy, the exoteric and esoteric, was
also in use ‘among other oriental nations’, especially the Ethiopi-
ans and Babylonians as well as ‘antient and modern Bramins, the
Syrians, Persians and the rest, principally instructed by Zoroaster’.
Such a two-fold practice is prevalent amongst the ‘present
Chinese, Siamese and Indians’. In general for Toland, then, as for
Spinoza before him, the wary life of the true philosopher consists
in ‘despising the Mob, detesting the Priest, and delighting in his
own Liberty’. The philosopher should be very careful in relation
to state power and the treachery of rulers, practising prudence,
even apparent ignorance. Thales is exemplary here. When Cresus
demanded of Thales what he thought of the gods, Thales obtained
some days for deliberation, and then finally ‘answer’d, Nothing’.41
In Pantheisticon (1751), Toland forges an exuberant witty
manifesto for a modern Socratic Society composed of a Brother-
hood of Pantheists, those who believe that All Things are from the
Whole, and the Whole is from All Things. Pantheists deny, says
Toland, that there is any ‘Center of the Universe, in any Sense
whatsoever’. The Brotherhood is structured on the distinction of
the exoteric and esoteric, which latter always ‘shuns the Multi-
tude, as conscious of its Jealousy and Hatred’. The Pantheists meet
in secret, enjoying the Socratic banquet and believing that philoso-
phers belong to a universal city: ‘The Sun is my Father, the Earth
my Mother, the World’s my Country, and all Men are my Rela-
tions’. In terms of such internationalist and cosmopolitan spirit,
Toland writes that the Pantheists enjoy metropolitan cities like
THE ORIGINS OF VIOLENCE
[ 202 ]

Paris, Venice, the cities of Holland especially Amsterdam, even
papal Rome, and they abound in London. The Pantheists have
nothing to do with institutional knowledge, as in the British Royal
Society or the French Academy. They practise in their Socratic
entertainments the arts of conversation. Toland draws up a list of
the ancients who taught or acted nobly, and these include not only
the Greek philosophers but also Confucius.42
Neither Spinoza nor Toland, however, were as prudent as they
thought philosophers ideally should be; both were drawn into
public interventions, controversy and polemic. Leibniz related that
he spoke with Spinoza about the events of 1672 when the De Witt
brothers, republican political leaders, were killed and mutilated by
a crowd that included respectable, middle-class burghers. Spinoza
had been dissuaded by his landlord from putting up a public sign
outside his lodgings denouncing barbarism, his landlord fearing
his lodger would also be torn to pieces.43 Toland had to negotiate
various patrons claiming him for particular party political views
and reasons of state.
Yet there are differences between Spinoza and Toland, not
least in terms of gender. Toland did not share Spinoza’s androcen-
trism, his disdain for ‘womanish tears’, and his employing
metaphors of the witch and siren who lure men away from reason
and philosophy.44 In Pantheisticon, Toland reveres both the
women and men among the ancient philosophers who are
honourable in the history of pantheism, including the Platonic
philosopher and teacher Hypatia.45
In 1720 Toland published an extended essay on Hypatia
(Tetradymos, Part III), head of the flourishing Platonic academy
in Alexandria early in the fifth century. Toland reproves his own
gender for its ‘vulgar prejudice’ in slighting women like Hypa-
tia, who was both beautiful and learned. With libertarian earthi-
ness, Toland tells a menstruation anecdote where Hypatia,
vehemently solicited in love by one of her young gentleman
scholars, happened to be under an indisposition ordinary to her
sex; she took a handkerchief, of which she had been making
some use on that occasion, and throwing it in his face, said:
THE ENLIGHTENMENT AND THE HOLOCAUST
[ 203 ]

THE ORIGINS OF VIOLENCE
[ 204 ]
‘This is what you love, young fool, and not anything that’s
beautiful’, that is, the abstract Platonic virtues of goodness and
truth. Toland writes with scorn of Cyril, the Bishop of Alexan-
dria later monstrously made a saint, grasping for secular power
and instituting with enthusiasm the schismatic practices that
have characterized, says Toland, Christianity to this day. Cyril
expelled the Jews of Alexandria from the city, where, says
Toland, ‘they had liv’d in great opulance from the time of
Alexander the Great, to the no small benefit of the place’. Toland
says he is accustomed to reading ‘monstrous lyes of this unfor-
tunate nation, especially that thread-bare fiction of crucifying a
child’. Cyril barbarously licensed the ‘multitude’ to seize all the
goods of the expelled Jews. In a similar act of barbarity, Cyril,
who disliked Hypatia both for her wisdom and because she was
a friend of and acted as an oracle for the city’s governor, Orestes,
had her abducted by his clergy in 415, removed to a church,
stripped, killed and then taken away and burnt to ashes.46
Toland’s story creates Hypatia as an allegorical figure, the
narrative of her vibrant life and cruel death suggesting for him
contemporary meanings: the desire to recover pagan knowledge
ruthlessly destroyed by official Christianity; the fraught relations
between an intelligentsia fighting for its own sphere of intellectual
freedom in opposition to a Christianity interfering in matters of
knowledge; the rights of government to insist on a civil order it
controls, including in religious matters; and knowledge and
gender. In the Preface to his earlier Letters to Serena (1704)
Toland made a passionate plea that women should be able to share
with men the same advantages of education, travel, company and
the management of affairs; a plea that looks back to the discourse
of sexual equality in Plato’s Republic as well as anticipating simi-
lar strongly held views by Lady Mary Wortley Montagu, who in a
1753 letter to her daughter Lady Bute, on the education of her
granddaughters, wrote: ‘To tell truth, there is no part of the world
where our sex is treated with so much contempt as in England,’
where women are ‘educated in the grossest ignorance, and no art
omitted to stifle our natural reason’.47

There is a clear difference between Spinoza and Toland in
evaluation of the worth and legacy of Moses and Mosaic Law.
Both Spinoza and Toland were regarded as Socinians in their
admiration of Jesus as man not god. Unlike Spinoza, however,
Toland also frequently declared himself an admirer of the Moses
of Exodus, referring to him as ‘this incomparable legislator’.48
Toland wished to reconcile Exodus and Egyptology by invoking a
natural human religion that could be counterposed to the power,
canonical practices and encroachments on civil society of English
institutional Christianity.49 Further, Toland’s philosemitism
extended to Islam as well as Judaism, whereas Spinoza appears to
have been at best indifferent to Islam, certainly uninterested in its
theological ideas and its possible importance in contemporary
European religious history, though impressed, as he was by the
Catholic Church, with its authoritarianism.50
PHILOSEMITISM AND ISLAMOPHILIA
In his remarkable text Nazarenus: Or, Jewish, Gentile, and
Mahometan Christianity (1718), Toland constructs a kind of
theological detective story, discovering by chance hidden treas-
ures as in the Arabian Nights. The detective narrator tells his
readers that when in 1709 he was in a library in Amsterdam he
was privileged to catch sight of a new gospel, a ‘Mahometan
Gospel’, unknown to any Christians; he perceives that it was
translated from the Arabic into Italian, its ink and paper delicate
and fine, with notes in Arabic in the margins. He could only
peruse it for a short time, but that was long enough for him to
feel confident that it was based on a lost gospel of Barnabas.
That the Mahometans should use for their own devotion an early
Christian gospel is not, says Toland, surprising, since they
acknowledge that their religion is founded in four books, the
Pentateuch of Moses, the Psalms of David, the Gospel of Jesus
and the Alcoran of Mahomet. The Mahometans have preserved
the lost gospel of Barnabas because they are indeed a kind of
THE ENLIGHTENMENT AND THE HOLOCAUST
[ 205 ]

THE ORIGINS OF VIOLENCE
[ 206 ]
Christian sect, just as Christianity was at first esteemed a branch
of Judaism. The lost gospel shows that the Mahometans have
kept and continued an early form of Christianity. In particular,
the Mahometans reprise in their religion ‘primitive’ Christianity,
as with the Ebionites, also known as the Nazarenes.51
In the Ebionite or Nazarene system, Toland reminds us, Jesus is
a man, just as Mahomet is a man, a messenger. The long-lost gospel
of Barnabas in common with most of the ancient Christian sects
thus disputes Paul’s view that Jesus is the Son of God; and in
regarding Jesus as human only, the early Christians as well as later
Mahometans believe in the ‘unity of the Deity’, like ‘our modern
Unitarians’ and Socinians.52
In opposition to Paul as well, says Toland, the Ebionites and
Nazarenes were pluralistic in their religious practices, believing with
Jesus that they can both be good Christians and still observe their own
country’s rites, that is, the Levitical law of Moses. At the same time,
the Jewish Christians did not believe in imposing Levitical law on the
Gentiles, for example, the rite of circumcision. For Toland, the
Mahometans’practice of circumcision is following the Levitical law
of Moses in the Pentateuch, in the spirit of the early Christians.53
Toland also defends Mahometan food laws, in particular the
distinguishing between clean and unclean meat, since here again the
Mahometans are following the practices of the early ‘Jewish Chris-
tians’ who, drawing on a passage from Genesis 9: 3–4, abstained
from ‘blood and things strangl’d’: a practice, Toland suggests, that
‘did not only continue in all places (as it still does in the Eastern
churches) till Augustine’s time; but, even till the eleventh century, in
most parts of the Western Church’. Toland, citing Herodotus, relates
such food laws to a similarity with the Egyptians, whom he else-
where, in Letters to Serena, sees as indeed the source of the ancient
wisdom of the Eastern nations, from North Africa through the
Middle East to India, for example in notions such as the immortality
of the soul.54
In Nazarenus Toland believes that the Mahometans, in looking
back to the Ebionites and Nazarenes, are observing ‘the true origi-
nal plan of Christianity’, which implies and permits a diversity of

observances and ceremonies. It was not only Paul but Constantine,
Toland says, who was the disastrous enemy of such plurality. By
contrast, Toland observes, what is most admirable about the early
Christians was their very lack of ‘uniformity’.55
Toland believes that it was truly stupid of the Church fathers to
expel the Jewish Christians simply because they wished to continue
to observe older Jewish ceremonies: ‘The Jews therefore were cut off
for ever … from the body of that Church which they had founded,
where their Law is continually read to this day, where the Gentiles are
proud to bear their proper names.’European history has been charac-
terized by the disaster of exclusion, repression and expulsion, where
the Church fathers were ‘prone on the slightest occasions, sometimes
for mere punctilios of Criticism or Chronology (wherein they were
generally wrong) to send not onely private persons, but even whole
societies, churches, and nations a packing to the Devil’.56
By contrast, Toland points out, the Mahometans of the Ottoman
Middle East include the peoples of the four books of Pentateuch,
Psalms, Gospel and Alcoran – Jews and Christians as well as
Mahometans – within a multi-religious space. He suggests that
‘consequently’ the Mahometans ‘might with as much reason and
safety be tolerated at London and Amsterdam, as the Christians of
every kind are so at Constantinople’. Accordingly, the ‘Mahometans
may be as well allow’d Moschs in these parts of Europe, if they desire
it, as any other Secretaries’.57
When Toland suggests that modern Europe could be multi-
religious and multicultural – its cityscapes graced by mosques and
synagogues as well as churches – he anticipates recent thinkers
like Ammiel Alcalay, Ella Shohat and Maria Rosa Menacol, who
have drawn attention to a poetics of heterogeneity and conviven-
cia between Muslim, Jew and Christian in the Arab and Otto-
man Empires, pre-1492 Moorish Spain being, perhaps, its most
spectacular example.58
Toland’s philosemitism, embracing Islam as well as Judaism,
drew on and developed a long genealogy in the ‘long eighteenth
century’, from Stephen Nye who appears to have been the first to
have introduced the term Unitarian into English literature, in his 
THE ENLIGHTENMENT AND THE HOLOCAUST
[ 207 ]

THE ORIGINS OF VIOLENCE
[ 208 ]
A Brief History of the Unitarians, called also Socinians, published
in 1691. Nye suggests that because of the corruptions of institu-
tional Christianity in Europe, the ancient Nazarene faith that God
is One has only been preserved in Turkish and other Mahometan
and Pagan dominions; in Europe the true religion of the Nazarenes
is, however, now being revived amongst the Unitarians and
Socinians.59 Philosemitism includes as well defences of Mahomet
from the standard Christian charges made by Dr Prideaux in his
1697 Life of Mahomet that Mahomet was an imposter interested
only in his own lust, ambition and power. Here is a remarkable
literature returning the gaze and suggesting admiration for Arabia
and Arabians rather than an inherited Judeo-Christian exclusive
focus on the Israelites as if no other people or religion mattered in
the Middle East, as in ‘Mahomet no Imposter, written in Arabick
by Abdulla Mahumed Omar’, published in Killigrew’s Golden
Medley in 1720, a year before the publication of Montesquieu’s
Persian Letters; or the Count of Boulainvilliers’ Life of Mahomet,
translated into English in 1752, which defends Mahometan
polygamy, circumcision and food laws.60
In such philosemitism we can see attentiveness to the possibility
of cultural, philosophical and religious exchanges between Europe
and Orient – to the point of questioning the very idea of ‘Europe’ as
self-sufficient, as clearly defined and definable, as always in an oppo-
sition designated ‘Europe and its others’,61 the Orientalist opposition
articulated in the ancient world by characters in Aeschylus’s
Agamemnon, Euripides’ Andromache and Virgil’s Aeneid. Toland’s
Enlightenment philosemitism was an intervention into long-standing
arguments and conflicts within Western thought and literature
concerning differences between Europe and Orient, West and East.
HUME, LYOTARD, DELEUZE
We come now to the irrepressible figure of Hume: Hume on
polytheism and mythology, Hume on philosophy as delirium;
Lyotard’s affinities with Hume; Deleuze suggesting Hume’s

empiricism is a philosophy of difference. And Hume brings us
back to Spinoza and certain Spinozan themes, of suspicion of
anthropomorphic monotheism, of the notion of the mind as idea 
of the body, and the productive relations between reason,
understanding, imagination, fiction and feeling.
Toland’s Nazarenus and his other theologico-philosophical
writings anticipate in their pluralizing and relativizing spirit Hume’s
explorations later in the century, in his playful, quizzical, 
ambivalent 1757 The Natural History of Religion. Hume gestures in
orthodox, theological fashion that monotheism is superior to poly-
theism because of its conception of God as an ‘invisible spiritual
intelligence’, a distinction between polytheism and monotheism
that, along with Robert Carroll’s Wolf in the Sheepfold, I have been
challenging in this book. Yet Hume also feels that monotheism’s
insistence on one sole object of devotion leads to sectarianism and
hatred fuelled by sacred zeal and rancour, the most furious and
implacable of all human passions (a thought as well of Spinoza, who
wrote that hatred of those considered enemies of God is ‘the bitter-
est and most persistent of all kinds of hatred’).62 By contrast, says
Hume, polytheism – which he suggests is humanity’s natural
original religion – exhibits, as in the Roman Empire, a spirit tolerant,
sociable, international and cosmopolitan, accommodating to mytho-
logical stories complex, contradictory and discordant, unburdened
by any desire to find or impose inviolable scriptural canons.63
Hume writes – here anticipating Nietzsche – that when a deity
like the monotheistic god is presented as infinitely superior to
humanity, the human mind is apt to sink into abject submission,
abasement, humility, mortification, penance, passive suffering,
cowardice and slavish obedience. But where the gods are
conceived to be only a little superior to humanity, we are more at
our ease in addressing them, and may even, without profanity,
aspire sometimes to rivalship and emulation: ‘Hence activity,
spirit, courage, magnanimity, love of liberty, and all the virtues,
which aggrandize a people’.64
Hume relates polytheism to allegory, as in his remarks on
what he refers to as the ‘gross polytheism and idolatry of the
THE ENLIGHTENMENT AND THE HOLOCAUST
[ 209 ]

vulgar’, attaching divinity to visible figures and the realm of the
senses. Here, he says, we will not find allegories of a refined kind.
Rather, in ancient popular pagan religion, mythology and fictions,
we find that the mythological stories that allegories work with are
ever slipping into incoherency, as in Mars being the unlikely lover
of Venus. Why is Harmony the daughter of Mars as well as Venus?
Sleep we can understand as brother of Death, but why describe
Sleep as enamoured of one of the Graces? Hume notes that the
forms of the mythological tradition are ‘wild and unaccountable’.
Yet such is also, Hume thinks, a historical strength of polytheism:
its stories cannot possibly be reduced to any standard and canon,
or afford any determinate articles of faith, since the narratives of
the gods were numberless, and though perhaps everyone believed
a part of these stories, no one could believe or know the whole. All
in polytheism must acknowledge that no one part stood on a better
foundation than the rest, so there was no reason for preferring one
to the other. The pagan religion, therefore, Hume observes, seems
to vanish like a cloud whenever one approaches it. It could never
be ascertained by any fixed dogmas and principles.65
Hume notices in polytheism what Assmann in Moses the
Egyptian calls the principle of cosmopolitan translatability, the
translation of deities from different cultures into each other. 
In terms of affinities between postmodernism and the
Enlightenment, Lyotard in Just Gaming admiringly evokes
features of polytheism and mythology that reprise Hume’s
Natural History of Religion. Lyotard tells us of his delight in
‘paganism’, which he also identifies with ‘modernity’ and, in an
urgent qualifying footnote, with ‘postmodernity’; such are
modes of thought that can exist at any time rather than being
located in a specific historical period. We are in ‘modernity’ and
‘postmodernity’ whenever we lack firm ‘criteria’. What is
characteristic in the stories of Greek and Roman mythology as in
pagan rhetoric and the thinking of the Sophists is that ‘there is
no stable system to guide judgments’. What we see in Greek
mythology is a society of gods that is constantly forced to
redraw its code; no prescription can be surely founded upon such
THE ORIGINS OF VIOLENCE
[ 210 ]

stories. It is, says Lyotard, very much a loss, indeed it is a sign
of Western ethnocentrism, that Western thought has tried to erad-
icate such paganism within itself and has also refused to see
affinities between its own past paganism and traditional story-
telling in non-Western pagan societies such as the Cashinahua,
Indians from the upper Amazon. Their storytelling features
poetic and rhetorical inventiveness, jokes, miming, insertion of
novel episodes, so much so that when narratives get repeated
they are never identical; such storytelling occurs within a world
of many gods.66
Lyotard compares here the pagan Cashinahua with the Greek.
Whereas the Christian God is a master of the word and wishes to
create the world, the Greek gods are masters neither of the word
nor the world. The gods ‘are not all-knowing’. Whatever we know
of the opinions of the gods comes from stories told about them and
the stories they tell themselves. Furthermore, there can never be an
original source for such stories, and there is never a first utterer.
What we learn of the possible origins of stories is related ‘in terms
of stories that presuppose other stories that in turn presuppose the
first ones’. The gods become the ‘heroes of numerous, almost
innumerable, narratives, all set into each other’, and narratives in
such a pagan world are close to games and masks: ‘This bars the
way to the very notion of a subject identical to itself through the
peripeteia of its history.’67
When the gods speak to humans, as when they consult an
oracle, there is always uncertainty, ruse, the possibility of decep-
tion, the allowing for chance. Whatever the oracle says is to be
taken with prudence, with measure, perhaps even with humour:
‘There is always the possibility of relating things differently.’
The relations of humans with the gods is a space of ceaseless
negotiation, between the stories the gods tell and the stories
humans tell; in paganism, which is modernity and postmoder-
nity, we are always immanent to stories in the making, there is
no authoritative outside, no metalinguistic position we can take
up. Further, appearance and reality don’t necessarily coincide,
for one does not know if the person one takes at first for a
THE ENLIGHTENMENT AND THE HOLOCAUST
[ 211 ]

beggar is actually a god; one lives in a world of sudden possible
metamorphosis, of perpetually uncertain identity.68
At one point in Just Gaming Lyotard wonderingly asks: ‘Is
there a real difference between a theory and a fiction?‘69 Deleuze
explores just such a question in relation to Hume’s theory of
knowledge in his remarkable 1953 book Empiricism and Subjec-
tivity, drawing threads of ideas from Hume’s early work A Trea-
tise of Human Nature (1739–40). Here, says Deleuze, Hume
suggests empiricism is not concerned with the problem of the
origin of the mind, but with the problem of the constitution of
the subject. What the philosopher, the Humean subject, experi-
ences when s/he attempts to know the world is, says Deleuze,
‘madness and scepticism’.70 Why does empiricism involve such
bafflement?
In Deleuze’s view, empiricism for Hume is not to be defined
as a theory according to which knowledge derives from experi-
ence; empiricism is not a philosophy of the senses. What the
subject is aware of in the world is a succession of perceptions,
which are distinct and independent. Such is the ‘principle of
difference’, and the principle of difference is the ‘fundamental
principle of empiricism’. As human subjects we have to believe
in a principle of identity, that things and bodies are indeed
invariable and continuous; we have to believe that there is
continuous existence through time and space even though our
own impressions are discontinuous. Empiricism is necessarily a
philosophy of the imagination, for what makes a subject a
subject is believing and inventing, is inference and artifice:
‘From what is given, I infer the existence of that which is not
given: I believe.’ I have always to ‘move from the known to the
unknown’. The philosopher realizes that the world as we think it
is an outright fiction of the imagination. Knowledge involves an
imagination which becomes constitutive and creative, so that the
world is an Idea of the imagination. Even space and time are ‘in
the mind’. Memory, the senses and understanding are all
grounded in the imagination. Imagination and fiction and
‘fancy’, then, are necessary to reason itself. Philosophy knows
THE ORIGINS OF VIOLENCE
[ 212 ]

that it cannot reconcile the contradiction between imagination
and reason. Philosophy is the knowledge that any reconciliation
between reason and imagination is always fictional: ‘I affirm
more than I know.’ Such awareness leads philosophy to know
and reflect on itself as ‘delirium and madness’.71
CONCLUSION
Both Bauman and Wokler in their different ways, negative and
positive, wish to constitute the Enlightenment as a Project.
Bauman defines the Enlightenment in terms of a single pervading
spirit: the Enlightenment disastrously created reason for
modernity, a reason that was obsessed with certainty, exhaustive
knowledge, categorizing and classifying, that was instrumental,
and was messianic and utopian, believing it could create the future
in its own image, bend the world to its will to knowledge: reason
as ever-dangerous hubris; a reason that consumed sensibility and
deprived it of a capacity for wonder, doubt and speculation.
Wokler turns this judgement on its head, suggesting that the
Enlightenment Project was cosmopolitan, internationalist and
anti-colonialist, and reveals significant affinities with post-
modernist theories that emphasize an anti-instrumentalist view of
reason.
I think and hope I’ve gone a very long way to support
Wokler’s admiration for the Enlightenment in terms of knowledge
and sensibility. I have addressed mystical aspects of Spinoza that
deserve profound pondering, as well as the Spinozan position that
the mind is intimately involved with body, imagination, intuition,
affect, and even fiction and feigning. I have argued, especially in
relation to Toland, that in the late seventeenth and early eighteenth
century theologico-philosophical critiques of institutional Chris-
tianity, in their decentred conceptions of God and the universe,
openness to other religions, interest in literary conventions of the
return of the gaze, admiration for strong female figures and female
education, and relativizing thinking about the body, represented a
THE ENLIGHTENMENT AND THE HOLOCAUST
[ 213 ]

desire to interact with many others. The enemies of one’s enemy
are one’s friends, or at least one’s animus inspires one to be more
sympathetic to those marginalized by one’s enemy, in this case,
institutional Christianity – the apparently forgotten, the ignored,
the usually abhorred, the persecuted; and such could include
women, Jews, Mahometans and the Jewish Christian sects of
antiquity. Toland called new creation stories into play that could
include and resume diverse religious and philosophical histories,
at the same time as they might shock and provoke Europe itself.
And I have evoked Hume’s appreciation of polytheism because it
is the reverse of a discourse of certainty, as well as suggesting
affinities between Hume’s speculative approach to knowledge and
postmodern thinkers like Lyotard and Deleuze in terms of a
philosophy of difference.
Enlightenment thinking in its abundance and diversity
cannot be characterized as utopian and messianic. In a ‘long
eighteenth century’ of great eccentricity and idiosyncrasy,72 there
could certainly be utopian visions, as in Gulliver’s Travels with
its ideal society of the Houyhnhnms, though Gulliver’s Travels
remains everywhere – as Claude Rawson points out in God,
Gulliver, and Genocide – a bafflingly ironic text. Yet there was
no overriding mode of utopian or millenarian desire projected by
Enlightenment thinkers, and we should not forget that in
Voltaire’s Candide (1758) historical optimism and the view that
the universe is ultimately harmonious is relentlessly satirized in
the ridiculously deluded figure of Pangloss. At novel’s end the
chief characters decide that European or indeed any earthly insti-
tutions relating to politics, religion and war are so irredeemably
a disaster that they will spend the rest of their days in the Orient,
living quietly on a little farm near Constantinople, working their
garden.73 Further, formative Enlightenment intellectuals like
Spinoza distrusted any kind of centralizing of power (this was a
major point of his critique in Tractatus Theologico-Politicus of
the ancient Israelite nation and of Mosaic law as represented in
the biblical stories), rather urging that democracy has to base
itself on a separation of powers, in particular, of church, state
THE ORIGINS OF VIOLENCE
[ 214 ]

and intellectual life.74 Spinoza and Toland considered that
ideally intellectuals should address only each other in an inter-
national republic of letters, and that if they were forced to relate
to the wider society in which they found themselves it should
always be with caution, rather than messianic millenarian
fervour. Spinoza and Toland did not project political leadership
as the expression of the general or popular will of the people, as
in the French Revolution, for Enlightenment thinkers like
Spinoza and Toland were extremely wary of the multitude, the
possibly tyrannical majority which they considered incapable of
philosophical reason; here they were in some ways reprising the
distrust of the multitude in classical Greek thought, in Thucy-
dides, Socrates, Plato. The most that could be hoped for was that
reasonable institutions might be created so that the majority
could act reasonably through being influenced by such institu-
tions. Here Wokler is surely right to suggest that the French
Revolution and its Terror was a sharp historical break with the
Enlightenment.
Was the Enlightenment pervaded by a single spirit of instru-
mental reason? No, it wasn’t. Certainly in the Enlightenment we
can observe the importance, especially in European pan-world
voyaging, of practices of exactitude, measurement, comparison
and classification. Yet Enlightenment thought also could empha-
size and revel in the fragmentary and dispersed, the wayward and
enigmatic, the ironic and irreverent; there was frequently a close
association of reason with imagination and affect, rather than the
passionlessness of categorization and classification.
Yet I don’t wish admiration to be the only note with which I
address the Enlightenment. Regard must be much more mixed.
What is admirable in the cosmopolitanism, internationalism,
toleration and interest in difference and plurality in Enlightenment
philosophy, dissident thinking about religion, and poetics is indeed
in tension with the race-thinking associated with colonialism,
empire and imperium; race-thinking that assumed that rather than
equality between the peoples of the earth there was a hierarchy of
humanity, more or less steep.75 Whenever there is such a conception
THE ENLIGHTENMENT AND THE HOLOCAUST
[ 215 ]

of inequality of peoples, and even more, when such a conception is
entertained in societies that are colonizing, the genocidal is always
a temptation, in desire or practice or both.
We can also think of the argument of Rawson’s God, Gulliver,
and Genocide, that major figures of the Enlightenment, whilst
their writings contradictorily participate in both racism and anti-
racism, cruelty and outrage against cruelty, the exterminatory and
protest against exterminatory wishes and practices, also deploy
phrases indicating velleities and desires, however teasingly
ambivalent, that participate in a nexus of associations that antici-
pate in relation to the Catholic Irish what occurred with the Nazis
in relation to the Jews. Rawson refers for example to Swift’s
Proposal for Giving Badges to the Beggars in all the Parishes of
Dublin (1737), as well as to ideas in Gulliver’s Travels where an
unsettling modern parallelism rears its head in Nazi practices of
castration and sterilization.76
The notion of the Enlightenment Project should be rejected
because it unifies the Enlightenment just as much in Wokler as in
theorists of the Holocaust and modernity like Bauman. We should
recognize the Enlightenment as irreducibly contradictory, hence
always open to further explorations of the entwined relationships
in Western history of civilization and barbarism.77
THE ORIGINS OF VIOLENCE
[ 216 ]

10 CONCLUSION: 
CAN THERE BE AN 
END TO VIOLENCE?
In my view, Gandhian thought provides hope for the world.
Gandhi’s notions of non-violence remain the key alternative to the
endless recourse to violence in history and the contemporary era,
whether such violence be pursued by governments or by those who
oppose persecution and oppression. Gandhi’s thought reveals a
cosmopolitan, internationalist, pluralist and critical interest in many
religions, in Buddhism, Hinduism, Jainism, Christianity, Islam and
Judaism. Gandhi does not see non-violence as simply a strategy or
tactic for particular occasions. Rather, for Gandhi non-violence is a
way of life, a mode of spirit and being, a kind of ensoulment, a
Bildung, a mode of moral reflection.
Gandhi’s thought reprises counter-traditions of questioning of
violence, colonialism, empire and genocide in Herodotus and
Thucydides, Greek classical tragic drama concerned with the
mythological destruction of Troy, and, in the Greco-Roman world,
the counter-narratives of Cicero’s Republic, Virgil’s Aeneid, and
Tacitus’s Agricola and Germania. These counter-traditions in turn
have helped shape contemporary international law, in Lemkin’s
definition of genocide and his writings published and unpublished,
and more generally, the 1948 UN Convention on genocide and
international courts devoted to combating crimes against humanity.
Yet – what could be more sadly clear! – Gandhian principles
of non-violence make little headway in a world which also
inherits long, long traditions of action and thought that sanction
[ 217 ]

intergroup violence. In these traditions, colonization, conquest,
war, empire building and imperium are viewed as honourable in
altruistic purpose and kindly in intentions to do good, to protect
and defend the weak and vulnerable, to spread culture and law.
The ancient international rights and conventions protecting
strangers, exiles, supplicants, ambassadors and heralds, to whom
hospitality must always be given, were historically extended to a
‘natural law’ position that it is natural and right for humans to be
able to go anywhere in the world and be given hospitality and be
able to settle, farm and mine, and if this natural right is not met,
or is broached, then just war can be waged.
In this book I have argued that concepts that appear
honourable and deserving of sympathy – victimhood, chosen
people, promised land, culture-bringing, support from God or the
gods – often deserve intense scrutiny for the ways they become
entwined with other notions that inspire intergroup violence in
history: especially supersessionism, the belief that some human
groups have the historical right to supersede other human groups;
a belief that sanctions genocidal destruction of other human
groups.
The most egregious example in the twenty-first century of
such supersessionist destruction can be daily seen in the ongoing
attempts by the Zionist government of Israel to destroy the
foundations of life of the Palestinians. In the late 1930s and 1940s
Gandhi had decried Zionist plans to take over Palestine, saying it
would lead to the displacement and humiliation of the Arab
peoples of that ancient region. I have argued that there are Jewish
traditions in antiquity, especially in Josephus, that can be seen as
anticipating Gandhian notions of non-violence, and that can be
counterposed to the endless desire for violence in Zionist Israel, a
violence that issues directly from Israel’s history as a genocidal
settler colony.1
Yet perhaps in history there is a profound and continuing
desire for an end to violence, and what we can do is keep looking
to alternative traditions of non-violence as part of a heightened
historical consciousness that can help shape world history.
THE ORIGINS OF VIOLENCE
[ 218 ]

NOTES
PREFACE
1.
Benedetto Croce, ‘History and Chronicle’, in Hans Myerhoff (ed.),
The Philosophy of History in Our Time (Doubleday Anchor, New
York, 1959), p.46.
2.
See my ‘In Praise of Polytheism’, Semeia, No. 88, 2001, pp.149–72,
and ‘The Challenge of Polytheism: Moses, Spinoza, and Freud’, in
Jane Bennett and Michael J. Shapiro (eds), The Politics of 
Moralizing (Routledge, New York and London, 2002), pp.201–22.
3.
John Docker, ‘The Enlightenment, Genocide, Postmodernity’, 
Journal of Genocide Research, Vol. 5, No. 3, 2003, pp.339–60.
4.
See Mark Dorrian, ‘On Some Spatial Aspects of the Colonial
Discourse on Ireland’, The Journal of Architecture, Vol. 6, 2001,
pp.27–51.
INTRODUCTION
1.
Primo Levi, If This is a Man and The Truce, trans. Stuart Woolf
(1958, 1963; Abacus, London, 2006), author’s preface, p.15.
2.
Raphaël Lemkin, Axis Rule in Occupied Europe: Laws of
Occupation, Analysis of Government, Proposals for Redress
(Columbia University Press, New York, 1944), esp. Chapter 9
‘Genocide’.
3.
See John Docker, ‘New History and the New Catastrophe: Ilan
Pappé, the New History, and the Question of Israeli Genocide’,
Arena Magazine, No. 66, August–September 2003, pp.32–6.
4.
Lemkin, Axis Rule in Occupied Europe, pp.79–80.
5.
Cf. Katerina Clark, ‘M.M. Bakhtin and “World Literature”’, JNT:
Journal of Narrative Theory, Vol. 32, No. 3, 2002, pp.266–92, and
[ 219 ]

Ned Curthoys, ‘The Émigré Sensibility of World Literature: Histori-
cizing Hannah Arendt and Karl Jaspers’ Cosmopolitan Intent’,
Theory and Event, Vol. 8, No. 3, 2005. Apropos Einstein see Fred
Jerome, The Einstein File: J. Edgar Hoover’s Secret War against the
World’s Most Famous Scientist (St. Martin’s Press, New York,
2002). 
6.
Lemkin, Axis Rule in Occupied Europe, pp.91 and 91 note 51;
Lemkin, ‘Totally Unofficial Man’, in Samuel Totten and Steve
Leonard Jacobs (eds), Pioneers of Genocide Studies (Transaction
Publishers, New Brunswick, 2002), p.377; ‘Genocide: A Modern
Crime’, Free World – ‘A Magazine Devoted to the United Nations
and Democracy’, April 1945, pp.39–43, accessed at http://www.
preventgenocide.org/lemkin/freeworld1945.htm.
7.
Lemkin Collection, American Jewish Historical Society, 15 West
16th Street, New York, Box 8, Folder 11, History of Genocide.
Projected Book and North American Indian Correspondence,
1947–1949, 1951. Ann Curthoys sets out the list in her essay
‘Raphael Lemkin’s “Tasmania”: An Introduction’, Patterns of Prej-
udice, Vol. 39, No. 2, 2005, pp.162–6. See also Tony Barta, ‘With
intent to deny: on colonial intentions and genocide denial’, Journal
of Genocide Research, Vol. 10, No. 1, 2008, p.117.
8.
Mikhail Bakhtin, Problems of Dostoevsky’s Poetics, edited and trans-
lated Caryl Emerson (Manchester University Press, Manchester,
1984), pp.113, 119, 122.
By menippea I mean a form of satire which does not judge 
society or history or ideas from a fixed standpoint or in terms of
ideal values.
9.
Bakhtin, Problems of Dostoevsky’s Poetics, pp.112–20.
10. Claude Rawson, God, Gulliver, and Genocide: Barbarism and the
European Imagination, 1492–1945 (Oxford University Press, New
York, 2001); I make this point in my review in Journal of Genocide
Research, Vol. 5, No. 1, 2003, p.163.
11. See Anthony D. Smith, Chosen Peoples: Sacred Sources of National
Identity (Oxford University Press, Oxford, 2003).
12. See Shino Konishi, ‘The Father Governor: The British Administra-
tion of Aboriginal People at Port Jackson, 1788–1792’, in Matthew
McCormack (ed.), Public Men: Political Masculinities in Modern
Britain (Palgrave Macmillan, Hampshire, 2007), pp.54–72, and
Julie Evans, ‘Colonialism and the Rule of Law: The Case of South
NOTES
[ 220 ]

NOTES
[ 221 ]
Australia’, in Barry S. Godfrey and Graeme Dunstall (eds), Crime
and Empire 1840–1940: Criminal Justice in Local and Global
Context (Willan Publishing, Cullompton, 2005), pp.57–75.
13. See Ann Curthoys and John Docker, Is History Fiction? (UNSW
Press, Sydney, 2005), pp.111–14; also Curthoys and Docker, ‘Defin-
ing Genocide’, in Dan Stone (ed.), The Historiography of Genocide
(Palgrave, London, 2008).
14. I am grateful to David Pritchard for discussions about the close 
relationship between democracy and war in the classical world.
15. See Hannah Arendt, The Origins of Totalitarianism, third edition
(George Allen and Unwin, London, 1967), p.123; also Curthoys and
Docker, Is History Fiction? p.47.
16. See Curthoys and Docker, Is History Fiction? pp.128–9; Elisabeth
Young-Bruehl, Hannah Arendt: For Love of the World (Yale Univer-
sity Press, New Haven, 1982), pp.200, 203; Samuel Weber, ‘Geneal-
ogy of Modernity: History, Myth and Allegory in Benjamin’s
“Origin of the German Mourning Play”’, MLN, 106 (1991),
pp.468–73.
17. Edward W. Said, Freud and the Non-European (Verso, in association
with the Freud Museum, London, 2003), pp.28–9. 
My thanks to Ned Curthoys for alerting me to Said’s reflections
on late style in Freud and the Non-European and also in Edward W.
Said, On Late Style (Bloomsbury, London, 2006).
18. Cf. Hilary Rose and Steven Rose (eds), Alas, Poor Darwin: Argu-
ments against Evolutionary Psychology (Harmony Books, New
York, 2000).
1.
GENOCIDE AS ANCIENT PRACTICE: CHIMPANZEES,
HUMANS, AGRICULTURAL SOCIETY
1.
Jane Goodall, The Chimpanzees of Gombe: Patterns of Behavior
(The Belknap Press of Harvard University Press, Cambridge, Mass.,
1986), p.530.
2.
Jared Diamond, The Rise and Fall of the Third Chimpanzee (1991;
Vintage, London, 1992), p.266.
3.
Paola Cavalieri, ‘The Animal Debate: A Reexamination’, in Peter
Singer (ed.), In Defense of Animals: The Second Wave (Blackwells,
Malden, Mass., 2006), p.57.

NOTES
[ 222 ]
4.
Hugh Brody, The Other Side of Eden: Hunter-Gatherers, Farmers,
and the Shaping of the World (2000; Faber and Faber, London,
2002), p.127.
5.
Dan Stone, History, Memory and Mass Atrocity: Essays on the
Holocaust and Genocide (Vallentine Mitchell, London, 2006),
pp.196–8.
6.
Raphaël Lemkin, Axis Rule in Occupied Europe: Laws of Occupa-
tion, Analysis of Government, Proposals for Redress (Columbia
University Press, New York, 1944), esp. Chapter 9 ‘Genocide’. See
Ann Curthoys and John Docker, Is History Fiction? (UNSW Press,
Sydney, 2005), pp.111–14; also Curthoys and Docker, ‘Defining
Genocide’, in Dan Stone (ed.), The Historiography of Genocide
(Palgrave, London, 2008). 
7.
Lemkin, Axis Rule in Occupied Europe, Chapter 9, pp.79–95; for an
extended evocation of Chapter 9, see Ann Curthoys and John
Docker, ‘Introduction – Genocide: Definitions, Questions, Settler-
colonies’, Aboriginal History, Vol. 25, 2001, pp.5–11.
8.
For my first report on this research, see my talk, ‘Raphaël Lemkin’s
History of Genocide and Colonialism’, for the United States Holo-
caust Memorial Museum, Center for Advanced Holocaust Studies,
Washington DC, 26 February 2004, on their website.
9.
See John Docker, ‘Are Settler-Colonies Inherently Genocidal? Re-
reading Lemkin’, in A. Dirk Moses (ed.), Empire, Colony, Geno-
cide: Conquest, Occupation, and Subaltern Resistance in World
History (Berghahn, New York, 2008).
10. See Samantha Power, ‘A Problem from Hell’: America and the Age
of Genocide (Perennial/HarperCollins, New York, 2003), pp.62–3;
also http://www.preventgenocide.org/law/convention/text.htm.
11. Donna Haraway, Primate Visions: Gender, Race, and Nature in the
World of Modern Science (Routledge, New York, 1989), pp.2, 7, and
Chapter 7, ‘Apes in Eden, Apes in Space: Mothering as a Scientist
for National Geographic’, esp. pp.150–6, 158, 164–8, 170–9, 184–5.
Haraway discusses The Chimpanzees of Gombe on p.172. In The
Chimpanzees of Gombe, Introduction, p.4, Goodall writes: ‘Man’s
inherent curiosity and insatiable love of adventure led to Christopher
Columbus’ discovery of America; in our generation it has landed
people on the moon.’
12. Goodall, The Chimpanzees of Gombe, pp.2–3.
13. Goodall, The Chimpanzees of Gombe, pp.3–4.

NOTES
[ 223 ]
14. Goodall, The Chimpanzees of Gombe, pp.488–9, 493–4, 500–1, 519.
15. Goodall, The Chimpanzees of Gombe, pp.500, 504–14.
16. Goodall, The Chimpanzees of Gombe, pp.522–5.
17. See Lyndall Roper, Witch Craze: Terror and Fantasy in Baroque
Germany (Yale University Press, New Haven, 2004), pp.17–18,
92–3, 158, 160–2, 165, 168, 173, 177–8; persecution of older
women as witches also persisted into the eighteenth century – see
Chapter 10, ‘A Witch in the Age of Enlightenment’, esp. p.228. Cf.
Robert Thurston, ‘Stalinism in Context and Perspective: Sources of
Permission to Hate in Europe’, in James Kaye and Bo Stråth (eds),
Enlightenment and Genocide, Contradictions of Modernity (P.I.E.-
Peter Lang, Brussels, 2000), pp.194–5.
18. Roper, Witch Craze, pp.74–6, 101, 121.
19. Goodall, The Chimpanzees of Gombe, p.532.
20. Goodall, The Chimpanzees of Gombe, pp.525, 527–8.
21. Goodall, The Chimpanzees of Gombe, p.528.
22. Goodall, The Chimpanzees of Gombe, pp.528–30.
23. Goodall, The Chimpanzees of Gombe, pp.530–1. Concerning
Darwin and genocide, see Tony Barta, ‘Mr Darwin’s Shooters: On
Natural Selection and the Naturalizing of Genocide’, Patterns of
Prejudice, Vol. 39, No. 2, 2005, pp.116–37, also published in Dirk
Moses and Dan Stone (eds), Colonialism and Genocide (Routledge,
London, 2007).
24. Goodall, The Chimpanzees of Gombe, pp.531.
25. Goodall, The Chimpanzees of Gombe, p.532.
26. Goodall, The Chimpanzees of Gombe, pp.532–3.
27. Goodall, The Chimpanzees of Gombe, pp.533–4.
28. Goodall, The Chimpanzees of Gombe, pp.509–10, 518, 528.
29. Dan Stone, History, Memory and Mass Atrocity, pp.198–9, 206–9.
30. Walter Benjamin, Illuminations, trans. Harry Zohn, ed. and introd.
Hannah Arendt (Fontana, London, 1992), p.248, and Maxime
Rodinson, Cult, Ghetto, and State: The Persistence of the Jewish
Question (Al Saqi Books, London, 1983), p.182. Cf. John Docker,
1492: The Poetics of Diaspora (Continuum, London, 2001), p.130.
31. Stone, History, Memory and Mass Atrocity, p.211; Stone is quoting
from Georges Bataille, Eroticism, trans. Mary Dalwood (Marion
Boyars, London, 1987), p.186.
32. Hilary Rose and Steven Rose, Alas, Poor Darwin: Arguments
against Evolutionary Psychology (Harmony Books, New York,

NOTES
[ 224 ]
2000), esp. chapter by Hilary Rose, ‘Colonizing the Social
Sciences’, pp.127–53, and Steven Rose, ‘Escaping Evolutionary
Psychology’, pp.299–318.
33. See Caroline Elkins, Imperial Reckoning: The Untold Story of
Britain’s Gulag in Kenya (Henry Holt, London and New York,
2005).
34. Diamond, The Rise and Fall of the Third Chimpanzee, pp.277–8.
35. Diamond, Rise and Fall, pp.250–9.
36. Diamond, Rise and Fall, p.264.
37. Goodall, The Chimpanzees of Gombe, pp.331–3, 532.
38. Diamond, Rise and Fall, pp.251, 261–4.
39. Diamond, Rise and Fall, pp.164, 166–7. My thanks to Ned Curthoys
for alerting me to this chapter on agricultural society.
40. Diamond, Rise and Fall, pp.163–4, 167–9.
41. Diamond, Rise and Fall, pp.168–9.
42. Diamond, Rise and Fall, pp.169–72.
43. Diamond, Rise and Fall, pp.171–2.
44. Jared Diamond, Guns, Germs and Steel (1997; Vintage, London, 1998),
pp.16–17, 27, 196–7, 210–14. The relevant chapter for the imbrication
of animals and disease is Chapter 11, ‘Lethal Gift of Livestock’.
45. John M. Wilkins and Shaun Hill, Food in the Ancient World
(Blackwell, Oxford, 2006), p.7.
46. Ann Curthoys, ‘Whose Home? Expulsion, Exodus, and Exile in
White Australian Historical Mythology’, Journal of Australian 
Studies, No. 61, 1999, pp.1–18.
47. Curthoys and Docker, Is History Fiction?, pp.27–8. See also John
Docker and Gerhard Fischer (eds), Race, Colour and Identity in
Australia and New Zealand (UNSW Press, Sydney, 2000), ‘Intro-
duction: Adventures of Identity’, pp.10–11.
48. In Patterns of Prejudice, Vol. 39, No. 2, June 2005, p.247, Mark
Levene, opening a review of A. Dirk Moses’ collection Genocide
and Settler Society (2004), writes as his first sentence: ‘Coinciden-
tally, while reviewing this volume, I also happened to be reading The
Other Side of Eden (2000), Hugh Brody’s wonderful evocation of
hunter-gatherer peoples in the Arctic and sub-Arctic regions of
Canada.’ Levene then goes on to point out what Yunupingu had
argued, that it is those who come from an agriculturalist-pastoral
tradition who are the wanderers, not the Aborigines. I was so struck
by this resonance with Yunupingu and what Ann Curthoys and I had

NOTES
[ 225 ]
been suggesting for a number of years, that I immediately emailed
my favourite bookshop in all the world, Gleebooks in Sydney, to
send a copy of Brody’s book, just in time to include it in a footnote
to our analysis of Herodotus’s Histories and the Scythians: see Is
History Fiction? p.241 note 21.
49. Brody, The Other Side of Eden, p.7.
50. Brody, The Other Side of Eden, p.145.
51. Brody, The Other Side of Eden, pp.158–9, 337–8 note 157.
52. Brody, The Other Side of Eden, pp.144, 189, 200.
2.
GENOCIDE, AND QUESTIONING OF GENOCIDE, IN
THE ANCIENT GREEK WORLD: HERODOTUS AND
THUCYDIDES
1.
Homer, The Iliad, translated and introduced Martin Hammond
(Penguin, London, 1987), p.125.
2.
Herodotus, The Histories, trans. George Rawlinson, edited Hugh
Bowden (Everyman, London, 2000).
3.
Thucydides, History of the Peloponnesian War, trans. Rex Warner
(Penguin, London, 1972).
4.
Hannah Arendt, Eichmann in Jerusalem: A Report on the Banality
of Evil (1963; Penguin Books, New York and London, 1994), 1964
Postscript p.288.
5.
See Ann Curthoys, ‘Raphaël Lemkin’s “Tasmania”: An Introduc-
tion’, Patterns of Prejudice, Vol. 39, No. 2, 2005, pp.162–9;
Curthoys’ reference to Lemkin and Ancient Greece is on p.166.
6.
Cf. Ann Curthoys and John Docker, Is History Fiction? (UNSW
Press and The University of Michigan Press, Sydney and Ann Arbor,
2005), pp.12–49.
7.
My profound thanks to Daniel Joyce for telling me about Judge
Shahabuddeen’s reference to Thucydides in the judge’s separate
opinion to the 1999 international tribunal on the former Yugoslavia.
8.
Cf. Raphaël Lemkin, Axis Rule in Occupied Europe: Laws of Occu-
pation, Analysis of Government, Proposals for Redress (Columbia
University Press, New York, 1944), pp.79–80.
9.
Ann Curthoys, ‘Genocide in Tasmania: The History of an Idea’, in
A. Dirk Moses (ed.), Empire, Colony, Genocide (Berghahn, New
York, 2008).

10. Dan Stone, History, Memory and Mass Atrocity: Essays on the
Holocaust and Genocide (Vallentine Mitchell, London, 2006), 
chapter on ‘Genocide as Transgression’, pp.198–9, 206–9.
11. Cf. Curthoys and Docker, Is History Fiction?, pp.22–3.
12. Jane Goodall, The Chimpanzees of Gombe: Patterns of Behavior
(The Belknap Press of Harvard University Press, Cambridge, Mass.
and London, 1986), pp.532–3.
13. Cf. Curthoys and Docker, Is History Fiction?, p.25.
14. Cf. Curthoys and Docker, Is History Fiction?, p.16.
15. Cf. Curthoys and Docker, Is History Fiction?, p.49.
16. Walter Benjamin, Illuminations: Essays and Reflections, edited and
introd. Hannah Arendt (Schocken, New York, 1969), p.256.
17. Cf. Baruch Kimmerling, Politicide: Ariel Sharon’s War Against the
Palestinians (Verso, London, 2003), and As’ad Ghanem, ‘Collective
Rights and Education: Lessons from Quebec in Canada’, in Duane
Champagne and Ismael Abu-Saad (eds), Indigenous and Minority
Education: International Perspectives on Empowerment (Ben-
Gurion University of the Negev, Beersheba, Israel, 2005); see my
review article in Holy Land Studies, Vol. 5, No. 1, 2006, pp.113–18.
18. Hannah Arendt, The Origins of Totalitarianism (George Allen and
Unwin, London, 1967), p.123; Curthoys and Docker, Is History
Fiction?, p.47.
19. Cf. Curthoys and Docker, Is History Fiction?, pp.39–41.
20. For savage satire on Cleon as demagogue and his persuading the
assembly to continue the war with Sparta, see Aristophanes, The
Knights (produced 424 BCE): Aristophanes, The Birds and Other
Plays, trans. David Barrett and Alan H. Sommerstein (Penguin,
London, 1978), p.66.
21. Isaiah Berlin, Historical Inevitability (1954; Oxford University
Press, London, 1955), pp.15–20, 25, 32–4, 50–3, 57, 71, 75;
Curthoys and Docker, Is History Fiction?, p.118.
22. Sophie Mills, Theseus, Tragedy and the Athenian Empire
(Clarendon, Oxford, 1997), pp.79–86.
23. Mills, Theseus, Tragedy and the Athenian Empire, pp.2–6, 10, 13,
16–17, 22–5, 59–63, 66.
24. Mills, Theseus, Tragedy and the Athenian Empire, pp.2–14, 18.
25. Cf. in particular David Pritchard’s interventions: ‘War and Democ-
racy in Ancient Athens: A Preliminary Report’, Classicvm, Vol.
XXXI, No.1, April 2005, pp.16–25; ‘Athletics, War and Democracy
NOTES
[ 226 ]

NOTES
[ 227 ]
in Classical Athens’, Teaching History, Vol. 39, No. 4, December
2005, pp.4–10; ‘Democracy and War: the Case Study of Ancient
Athens’, Polis, Vol. 24, No. 2 (2007).
26. Cf. Curthoys and Docker, Is History Fiction?, p.47.
27. See Frank Chalk and Kurt Jonassohn, The History and Sociology of
Genocide: Analysis and Case Studies (Yale University Press, New
Haven, 1990), pp.65–73.
28. Cf. John Docker, ‘Josephus: Traitor or Gandhian avant la lettre?’,
Borderlands e-journal, Vol. 4, No. 3, 2005, essays on ‘Gandhi,
Nonviolence and Modernity’, edited by John Docker and Debjani
Ganguly.
29. Samantha Power, ‘A Problem from Hell’: America and the Age of
Genocide (Perennial, New York, 2003), p.74.
3.
GENOCIDE, TRAUMA, AND WORLD UPSIDE DOWN IN
ANCIENT GREEK TRAGEDY: AESCHYLUS AND 
EURIPIDES
1.
Aeschylus, Agamemnon, in The Oresteian Trilogy, translated and
introd. Philip Vellacott (Penguin, London, 1959), pp.73–4.
2.
Euripides, Hecabe in Medea and Other Plays, translated and introd.
Philip Vellacott (Penguin, Harmondsworth, 1964), p.71.
3.
Euripides, Helen, in The Bacchae and Other Plays, trans. Philip
Vellacott (Penguin, London, 1973), p.171.
4.
I would like here to acknowledge the suggestions and encourage-
ment of David Pritchard. See also David Konstan’s very interesting
essay, ‘Anger, Hatred, and Genocide in Ancient Greece’, Common
Knowledge, Vol. 13, No. 1, 2007, pp.170–87, though Konstan does
not refer to Lemkin’s definition of genocide. (My thanks to David
Konstan for this reference.)
5.
I reproduced the outline in my paper for the United States Holocaust
Memorial Museum, Center for Advanced Holocaust Studies, Wash-
ington DC, 26 February 2004; see also Ann Curthoys, ‘Raphaël
Lemkin’s “Tasmania”: an introduction’, Patterns of Prejudice, Vol.
39, No. 2, 2005, pp.164–6, and also my essay ‘Are Settler-Colonies
Inherently Genocidal? Re-reading Lemkin’, in A. Dirk Moses (ed.),
Empire, Colony, Genocide (Berghahn, New York, 2008). Note that
sometimes additional phrases were interpolated in handwriting in

pen or pencil, including an entry ‘panic and flight’ crossed out and
replaced in a handwritten notation as ‘(suicide, hiding, etc.) escape’.
6.
Cf. M.A. McDonnell and A.D. Moses, ‘Raphaël Lemkin as Histo-
rian of Genocide in the Americas’, Journal of Genocide Research,
Vol. 7, No. 4, 2005, pp.501–29.
7.
Aeschylus, Agamemnon, pp.69, 72–3.
8.
Aeschylus, Agamemnon, pp.75, 80, 87.
9.
Aeschylus, Agamemnon, pp.91–2.
10. Aeschylus, Agamemnon, p.97.
11. Aeschylus, Agamemnon, pp.94–5.
12. Aeschylus, Agamemnon, pp.70–1, 75, 87.
13. Sophie Mills, ‘Campaigns Without Calamities: Euripides, War and
the Portrayal of Athens’, paper for Sydney Democracy Forum on
Democracy and War: The Case Study of Ancient Athens, University
of Sydney, 31 August 2007, draws attention to how much we ‘must
repeatedly focus on Hecaba’s disability as she limps along or
sprawls prostrate, buried under sorrow’. For detailed evocation of
the dramaturgy, see Judith Mossman, Wild Justice: A Study of
Euripides’ Hecuba (Clarendon, Oxford, 1995), p.57.
14. Euripides, Hecabe, p.87.
15. Cf. Mossman, Wild Justice, p.105.
16. Euripides, Hecabe, pp.65–9.
17. Euripides, Hecabe, pp.70–4.
18. Euripides, Hecabe, p.69.
19. Dan Stone, History, Memory and Mass Atrocity: Essays on the
Holocaust and Genocide, pp.198–9, 206–9.
20. Euripides, Hecabe, pp.73, 79.
21. Euripides, Hecabe, pp.71, 75, 83, 85, 90–1, 99.
22. Euripides, Hecabe, p.102.
23. Euripides, Hecabe, p.94.
24. Ann Curthoys and John Docker, ‘Defining Genocide’, in Dan Stone
(ed.), The Historiography of Genocide (Palgrave, London, 2008),
p.12.
25. Cf. Debjani Ganguly and John Docker (eds), Rethinking Gandhi in
a New World Order: Global Perspectives (Routledge, London,
2007).
26. Cf. Ann Curthoys and John Docker, Is History Fiction? (UNSW
Press, Sydney, 2005), pp.18–19.
27. Euripides, Hecabe, p.77.
NOTES
[ 228 ]

NOTES
[ 229 ]
28. Euripides, Andromache, in Orestes and Other Plays, translated and
introd. Philip Vellacott (Penguin, Harmondsworth, 1972), pp.146,
150.
29. Euripides, Andromache, p.158.
30. Euripides, Andromache, pp.148–9.
31. Euripides, Andromache, pp.149–50.
32. The Sociology of Georg Simmel, ed. and trans. Kurt H. Wolff (The
Free Press, Glencoe, Il., 1950), pp.402–8.
33. Cf. Docker, 1492: The Poetics of Diaspora (Continuum, London,
2001), pp.86–7.
34. Docker, 1492: The Poetics of Diaspora, Chapter 3.
35. Docker, 1492: The Poetics of Diaspora, pp.68–70.
36. Euripides, Andromache, p.150.
37. Euripides, Andromache, pp.151–4.
38. Euripides, Andromache, pp.155–6.
39. Euripides, Andromache, p.156.
40. Euripides, Andromache, pp.156–7.
41. See Natalie Zemon Davis, Society and Culture in Early Modern
France (Stanford University Press, Stanford, 1975), Chapter 5,
‘Women on Top’; John Docker, Postmodernism and Popular
Culture: A Cultural History (Cambridge University Press,
Melbourne, 1994), p.194.
42. Euripides, Andromache, p.159.
43. Euripides, Andromache, pp.166, 173, 185–6.
44. Euripides, Andromache, pp.148, 153, 164–5.
45. Euripides, Andromache, pp.165–7.
46. Euripides, Andromache, pp.154–5. Euripides’ Helen reprises a story
well known in the ancient world, that Helen had never gone to Troy
with Paris. In her opening lamentation on her fate, Helen explains
what happened when Paris judged that of the three goddesses Hera,
Aphrodite, and Athene, Aphrodite was the first in beauty. Hera,
resentful that Paris has not chosen her, contrives that the Helen who
goes to Troy is only an ‘airy delusion’, a ‘living image compounded
of the ether in my likeness’; meanwhile, on Zeus’s orders, Hermes
transports Helen ‘wrapped in a cloud’ to Egypt. See Euripides,
Helen, in The Bacchae and Other Plays, p.136.
47. Euripides, Andromache, p.155.
48. Euripides, The Women of Troy, in The Bacchae and Other Plays,
pp.89, 108, 112–13, 125.

49. Euripides, The Women of Troy, pp.113–14.
50. Euripides, The Women of Troy, pp.115, 126–8.
51. Euripides, The Women of Troy, pp.90, 100–1, 116.
52. Euripides, The Women of Troy, pp.118–21.
53. Euripides, The Women of Troy, pp.123–4.
54. Euripides, The Women of Troy, pp.99, 114, 126–9, 131–2.
55. Euripides, The Women of Troy, p.133.
56. Euripides, The Women of Troy, p.90.
57. See Curthoys and Docker, ‘Defining Genocide’, p.14.
58. Euripides, The Women of Troy, pp.124–5.
59. Euripides, The Women of Troy, pp.109, 124–5.
60. Euripides, The Women of Troy, pp.131–2.
61. Euripides, The Women of Troy, pp.89, 91–3.
62. Euripides, Helen, pp.147, 160.
4.
UTOPIA AND DYSTOPIA: PLATO AND CICERO’S
REPUBLICS
1.
Cicero, The Republic and The Laws, translated by Niall Rudd,
introd. Jonathan Powell and Niall Rudd (Oxford University
Press, Oxford, 1998), p.65.
2.
Cicero, The Republic and The Laws, p.89.
3.
Sophie Mills, Theseus, Tragedy and the Athenian Empire (Clarendon,
Oxford, 1997), pp.2–6, 10, 13, 16–17, 22–5, 59–63, 66.
4.
Cf. Ann Curthoys and John Docker, Is History Fiction? (UNSW
Press, Sydney, 2005), p.47.
5.
Cf. Curthoys and Docker, Is History Fiction?, pp.14, 17, 34.
6.
Mikhail Bakhtin, Problems of Dostoevsky’s Poetics, ed. and trans.
Caryl Emerson (Manchester University Press, Manchester, 1984),
p.109.
7.
Bakhtin, Problems of Dostoevsky’s Poetics, pp.107–11.
8.
Bakhtin, Problems of Dostoevsky’s Poetics, p.110.
9.
Bakhtin, Problems of Dostoevsky’s Poetics, p.120. See also Bakhtin,
The Dialogic Imagination (University of Texas Press, Austin, 1981),
p.187, and Rabelais and His World (Indiana University Press,
Bloomington, 1984), pp.168–9, 284.
10. Walter Benjamin, The Origin of German Tragic Drama, translated
John Osborne (1928; Verso, London, 1996), ‘Epistemo-Critical
NOTES
[ 230 ]

Prologue’, pp.28–9, 35, 41, 44–7. See also Curthoys and Docker, Is
History Fiction?, p.96.
11. Plato, The Symposium, translated by Walter Hamilton (Penguin,
London, 1951), pp.79–95.
12. Plato, The Republic, translated and introd. Desmond Lee, revised
edition (Penguin, London, 1987), pp.305–25.
13. See e.g. Bruno Bettleheim, The Children of the Dream (Macmillan,
New York, 1969); the novels of Ursula Le Guin; the anti-nuclear
family ethos that informed collective households of the 1960s/70s in
the Western counter-cultures.
14. Plato, The Republic, pp.225–36.
15. Plato, The Republic, pp.237, 241.
16. Plato, The Republic, p.241.
17. Plato, The Republic, pp.241, 244–6.
18. Plato, The Republic, pp.225–36.
19. See John Docker, The Nervous Nineties (Oxford University Press,
Melbourne, 1991), pp.116–17, and Postmodernism and Popular
Culture: A Cultural History (Cambridge University Press, Melbourne,
1994), pp.125–6, 170–1.
20. Bakhtin, Problems of Dostoevsky’s Poetics, pp.112–22.
21. Plato, The Republic, ‘The Myth of Er’, pp.448, 454.
22. See James E.G. Zetzel (ed.), On the Commonwealth and On 
the Laws (Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1999), 
Introduction, p.xii.
23. Zetzel, Introduction, pp.xi–xiii, xv, xx.
24. See A.E. Astin, Scipio Aemilianus (Clarendon, Oxford, 1967), pp.
7, 9.
25. Cf. Bakhtin, Problems of Dostoevsky’s Poetics, p.71, where Bakhtin
is criticizing a Tolstoy story for containing ‘neither polyphony nor
… counterpoint’.
26. Bakhtin, Problems of Dostoevsky’s Poetics, pp.5–7, 16–17, 111–37;
also Curthoys and Docker, Is History Fiction?, pp.30–1.
27. Raphaël Lemkin, Axis Rule in Occupied Europe (Columbia Univer-
sity Press, New York, 1944), p.80 note 3. See also Ben Kiernan, ‘Le
Premier génocide: Carthage, 146 A.C.’, Diogène, No. 203 (2003):
32–48.
28. Astin, Scipio Aemilianus, pp.75–80; concerning the friendship of
Scipio and Laelius, see p.81; there is a sketch of L. Furius Philus, a
close associate of Scipio and Laelius, on pp.81–2.
NOTES
[ 231 ]

29. Astin, Scipio Aemilianus, pp.136, 153.
30. Cicero, The Republic, Book One, pp.16, 19–21, 25, 32–3.
31. Cicero, The Republic, Book Two, pp.36–7.
32. Cicero, The Republic, Book Two, pp.38–9, 42–3, 45.
33. Cicero, The Republic, Book Two, p.41.
34. Cicero, The Republic, Book Three, p.61.
35. Robert P. Carroll, Wolf in the Sheepfold: The Bible as a Problem for
Christianity (SPCK, London, 1991), p.113. See also The Bible:
Authorized King James Version with Apocrypha, with introduction
and notes by Robert Carroll and Stephen Prickett (Oxford University
Press, Oxford, 1997); see Carroll’s notes, esp. pp.322–6.
36. Cicero, The Republic, Book Three, pp.68–9.
37. Cicero, The Republic, Book One, pp.3–4.
38. Cicero, The Republic, Book One, p.14.
39. Cicero, The Republic, Book Three, pp.63–4.
40. Cicero, The Republic, Book Three, p.64.
41. Bakhtin, Problems of Dostoevsky’s Poetics, p.116.
42. Cicero, The Republic, Book Three, p.63.
43. Cicero, The Republic, Book Three, pp.63–4.
44. Cicero, The Republic, Book Three, p.65.
45. Cicero, The Republic, Book Three, p.65.
46. Cicero, The Republic, Book Three, p.65.
47. Cicero, The Republic, Book Three, p.66.
48. Cicero, The Republic, Book Three, p.66.
49. Lemkin, Axis Rule in Occupied Europe, pp.91 and 91 note 51;
Lemkin, ‘Totally Unofficial Man’, in Samuel Totten and Steven
Leonard Jacobs (eds), Pioneers of Genocide Studies (Transaction
Publishers, New Brunswick, 2002), p.377; ‘Genocide – A Modern
Crime’, Free World – ‘A Magazine Devoted to the United Nations
and Democracy’, April 1945, pp.39–43, accessed at http://
www.preventgenocide.org/lemkin/freeworld1945.htm.
50. Cicero, The Republic, Book Three, p.66.
51. Cicero, The Republic, Book Three, p.66.
52. Cicero, The Republic, Book One, p.19.
53. Cicero, The Republic, Book Two, p.37.
54. Bakhtin, Problems of Dostoevsky’s Poetics, pp.112–20.
55. Cicero, The Republic, Book Six, ‘The Dream of Scipio’, pp.87, 89.
56. Cicero, The Republic, Book Six, ‘The Dream of Scipio’, pp.89–92.
NOTES
[ 232 ]

5.
VICTIMOLOGY AND GENOCIDE: THE BIBLE’S
EXODUS, VIRGIL’S AENEID
1.
Virgil, Aeneid, trans. and introd. David West, revised edition
(Penguin Books, London, 2003), Book One, p.10.
2.
Virgil, Aeneid, Book Four, pp.79–80.
3.
Virgil, Aeneid, Book Five, p.111.
4.
Virgil, Aeneid, Book Ten, pp.213–14.
5.
Robert P. Carroll, Wolf in the Sheepfold: The Bible as Problematic for
Theology, second edition (1991; SCM Press, London, 1997), p.xiii.
6.
Richard Waswo, The Founding Legend of Western Civilization: From
Virgil to Vietnam (Wesleyan University Press, Hanover, 1997). 
My thanks to Barry Hindess for suggesting I read Waswo’s book.
7.
Waswo, The Founding Legend of Western Civilization, p.7.
8.
Concerning a postsecular methodology, see John Docker, 1492: The
Poetics of Diaspora (Continuum, London, 2001), p.viii.
9.
Edward Said, ‘Michael Walzer’s Exodus and Revolution: A Canaan-
ite Reading’, Arab Studies Quarterly, Vol. 8, No. 3, 1986,
pp.289–303, also in Edward Said and Christopher Hitchens (eds),
Blaming the Victims: Spurious Scholarship and the Palestinian
Question (Verso, London, 1988), pp.161–78.
10. Harry Berger Jnr, ‘The Lie of the Land: The Text beyond Canaan’,
Representations, Vol. 25 (1989), pp.123, 126–9, 134–6, 138 n.12.
11. Baruch Spinoza, Tractatus Theologico-Politicus, trans. Samuel
Shirley, intro. Brad S. Gregory (E.J. Brill, Leiden, 1989), pp.84,
96–7, 118, 221; Docker, 1492: The Poetics of Diaspora, p.134, also
p.139 for Spinoza’s comparison of Jesus and Moses.
12. Cf. Ned Curthoys, ‘Edward Said’s Unhoused Philological Human-
ism’, in Ned Curthoys and Debjani Ganguly (eds), Edward Said:
The Legacy of a Public Intellectual (Melbourne University Press,
Melbourne, 2007), pp.152–75.
13. Regina M. Schwartz, The Curse of Cain: The Violent Legacy of
Monotheism (University of Chicago Press, Chicago, 1997), pp.x–xi,
6, 8, 10, 16–17, 95, 121–2, 140–1, 158–9.
14. Schwartz, The Curse of Cain, pp.9, 16–20, 55–62, 69, 101, 134,
140–1, 165–6, 169.
15. See Carroll’s impassioned preface to the second edition of Wolf in
the Sheepfold, pp.xi–xv.
16. Ella Shohat, ‘Antinomies of Exile: Said at the Frontiers of National
NOTES
[ 233 ]

Narrations’, in Michael Sprinker (ed.), Edward Said: A Critical
Reader (Blackwell, Oxford, 1992), pp.140–1.
17. Ann Curthoys, ‘Expulsion, Exodus, and Exile in White Australian
Historical Mythology’, in Richard Nile and Michael Williams (eds),
Imaginary Homelands: The Dubious Cartographies of Australian
Identity (University of Queensland Press, Brisbane, 1999), pp.1–18.
See also Roland Boer, Last Stop Before Antarctica (Sheffield Acad-
emic Press, Sheffield, 2001), Chapter 3, and Docker, 1492: The
Poetics of Diaspora, pp.140–8.
18. Nur Masalha, The Bible and Zionism: Invented Traditions, Archae-
ology and Post-Colonialism in Palestine-Israel (Zed Books,
London, 2007), pp.15–18, 269–70, 282–3; Robert Allen Warrior,
‘Canaanites, Cowboys and Indians’, in R.S. Sugirtharajah (ed.),
Voices from the Margin: Interpreting the Bible in the Third World
(SPCK, London, 1991), p.279.
19. Masalha, The Bible and Zionism, pp.265–74. In the Enlightenment
Pierre Bayle, in an essay on King David, argued that the stories
concerning the king revealed not only his deceit, licentiousness, and
injustice, but also, in his plans to slaughter all the family and herds
of Nabal as punishment for inhospitality, an indisputable criminal-
ity; in warfare David revealed great brutality, annihilating all males,
young and old. See Adam Sutcliffe, Judaism and Enlightenment
(Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 2003), pp.93–4. (Thanks
to Ned Curthoys for this reference.)
20. Cf. Jonathan Kirsch, The Harlot by the Side of the Road (Johns
Hopkins University Press, Baltimore, 1987), p.8; Docker, 1492: The
Poetics of Diaspora, pp.118–19.
21. Spinoza, Tractatus Theologico-Politicus, p.63; Daniel Boyarin, ‘The
Eye in the Torah: Ocular Desire in Midrashic Hermeneutic’, Critical
Inquiry, 16 (Spring 1990), pp.534–43; Docker, 1492: The Poetics of
Diaspora, pp.118–19 and 128 n.16.
22. Cf. Kirsch, The Harlot by the Side of the Road, Chapters 8 and 9;
Docker, 1492: The Poetics of Diaspora, pp.147–8.
23. Carroll, Wolf in the Sheepfold, Chapter 2, ‘God the Hidden
Problematic’, pp.38–41, 44–7, 57–8, 60.
24. Cf. Thomas L. Thompson, The Bible in History: How Writers Create
a Past (Jonathan Cape, London, 1999).
25. Berger, ‘The Lie of the Land’, pp.126–7, 129, 134, writes that in Exodus
Yahweh acts as a phantom double of the Pharaoh, a super-pharaoh.
NOTES
[ 234 ]

26. Robert Carroll and Stephen Prickett (eds), The Bible. Authorized
King James Version (Oxford University Press, Oxford, 1998),
‘Notes to the Old Testament’, p.337.
27. Claude Rawson, God, Gulliver, and Genocide: Barbarism and the
European Imagination, 1492–1945 (Oxford University Press,
Oxford, 2001), pp.269, 301–2.
28. Carroll, ‘Notes to the Old Testament’, p.337.
29. Raphaël Lemkin, Axis Rule in Occupied Europe (Columbia University
Press, New York, 1944), pp.xi, 79–80.
30. Baruch Kimmerling, Politicide: Ariel Sharon’s War Against the
Palestinians (Verso, London, 2003); John Docker, ‘Ilan Pappé, the
New History, and the Question of Israeli Genocide’, Arena Maga-
zine 66, August–September 2003, pp.32–6; Ilan Pappé, The Ethnic
Cleansing of Palestine (Oneworld, Oxford, 2006).
31. Pappé, The Ethnic Cleansing of Palestine, Chapter 10, pp.225–34.
32. Cf. Docker, 1492: The Poetics of Diaspora, pp.125–6.
33. Carroll, Wolf in the Sheepfold, pp.39, 46.
34. Waswo, The Founding Legend of Western Civilization, pp.21, 36.
35. Waswo, The Founding Legend, pp.xi, 36.
36. Waswo, The Founding Legend, pp.xi–xii.
37. Waswo, The Founding Legend, pp.xii, xiv–xv.
38. Waswo, The Founding Legend, pp.21–8.
39. Waswo, The Founding Legend, pp.22–7.
40. Virgil, Aeneid, p.75.
41. Virgil, Aeneid, pp.77–9; cf. Waswo, The Founding Legend, pp.22–5.
42. Virgil, Aeneid, p.77.
43. Cf.Waswo, The Founding Legend, p.27.
44. Cf. Docker, 1492: The Poetics of Diaspora, Chapter 3, ‘The Colli-
sion of Two Worlds: Sir Walter Scott’s Ivanhoe and Moorish Spain’.
45. Virgil, Aeneid, pp.41, 46–7.
46. Virgil, Aeneid, pp.82–9.
47. Virgil, Aeneid, pp.106–11.
48. I saw this quote when I visited Mani Bhavan Gandhi Museum,
Mumbai, in early February 2008. It is from Young India, 10 April 1930.
49. Virgil, Aeneid, pp.54–5.
50. Virgil, Aeneid, p.213.
51. Virgil, Aeneid, p.266.
52. Virgil, Aeneid, p.290; cf. Waswo, The Founding Legend, p.27.
53. Virgil, Aeneid, pp.76, 204, 267.
NOTES
[ 235 ]

54. Mikhail Bakhtin, The Dialogic Imagination (University of Texas
Press, Austin, 1981), pp.106–7, 111–21; Docker, Postmodernism
and Popular Culture: A Cultural History (Cambridge University
Press, Melbourne, 1994), p.225.
55. Virgil, Aeneid, p.117.
56. Virgil, Aeneid, pp.136–40; cf. Waswo, The Founding Legend,
pp.26–7.
57. Lemkin, Axis Rule in Occupied Europe, pp.79–80.
58. Waswo, The Founding Legend, p.27.
59. Virgil, Aeneid, Book Two, pp.47, 50–1, 53, Book Five, p.91, Book
Six, p.133, Book Seven, p.147. 
60. Virgil, Aeneid, Book One, p.24, Book Two, pp.27–31, Book Six,
pp.128, 138.
61. Cf. John Docker, ‘’Re-Feminising’ Diaspora: Contemporary Jewish
Cultural Studies and Post-Zionism’, Holy Land Studies, Vol. 4, No.
2, 2005, pp.71–90, and ‘Josephus: Traitor or Gandhian avant la
lettre?’ in John Docker and Debjani Ganguly (eds), special series of
essays on ‘Gandhi, Non-Violence, and Modernity’, Borderlands
e-journal, 2005/6.
62. I owe much to discussion with Shino Konishi concerning the
subtleties of first contact history.
63. Virgil, Aeneid, pp.145–8.
64. Virgil, Aeneid, pp.139, 192–200.
65. Cf. Shino Konishi, ‘The Father Governor: The British Administra-
tion of Aboriginal People at Port Jackson, 1788–1792’, in Matthew
McCormack (ed.), Public Men: Political Masculinities in Modern
Britain (Palgrave Macmillan, Hampshire, 2007), pp.54–72.
6.
ROMAN SETTLER IMPERIALISM IN BRITAIN: 
NARRATIVE AND COUNTER NARRATIVE IN 
TACITUS’ AGRICOLA AND GERMANIA
1.
Virgil, Aeneid, trans. and introd. David West, revised edition
(Penguin Books, London, 2003), p.11.
2.
Tacitus, The Agricola and The Germania, trans. H. Mattingly,
revised translation S.A. Handford (Penguin Classics, London,
1970), section 30.
NOTES
[ 236 ]

3.
Cf. Mikhail Bakhtin, Problems of Dostoevsky’s Poetics (Manchester
University Press, Manchester, 1984), p.106.
4.
Bakhtin, Problems of Dostoevsky’s Poetics, pp.112–22. Bakhtin
writes, p.113, that the menippea is a ‘carnivalized genre,
extraordinarily flexible and changeable as Proteus, capable of 
penetrating other genres’.
5.
Mikhail Bakhtin, The Dialogic Imagination (University of Texas
Press, Austin, 1981), pp.132–3.
6.
Bakhtin, Problems of Dostoevsky’s Poetics, p.114.
7.
Cf. Patrick Wolfe, ‘Against the Intentional Fallacy: Marking the Gap
Between Rhetoric and Outcome in United States Indian Law and
Policy’ (in preparation).
8.
Bakhtin, Problems of Dostoevsky’s Poetics, pp.116–17.
9.
I read this quote at the Mani Bhavan Gandhi Museum, Mumbai, in
early February 2008.
10. Cf. Ann Curthoys, ‘Liberalism and Exclusionism: A Prehistory of
the White Australia Policy’, in Laksiri Jayasuriya, David Walker,
and Jan Gothard (eds), Legacies of White Australia: Race Culture
and Nation (University of Western Australia Press, Perth, 2003),
pp.8–33.
11. For Tacitus’ dislike of the Julio-Claudian emperors, see The Annals
of Imperial Rome, trans. and introd. Michael Grant, revised edition
(Penguin, London, 1996).
12. Josephus, The Jewish War, trans. G.A. Williamson, revised edition
with a new introduction by E. Mary Smallwood (Penguin, London,
1981), pp.217, 317.
13. See Robert Bernasconi, ‘Will the Real Kant Please Stand Up: The
Challenge of Enlightenment Racism to the Study of the History of
Philosophy’, Radical Philosophy 117, January–February 2003,
pp.13–22, and Curthoys and Docker, Is History Fiction?, pp.57–61,
72–3. (My thanks to Ida Nursoo for referring me to the Bernasconi
essay.)
14. I owe this point to Ned Curthoys.
15. Cf. George L. Mosse, Toward the Final Solution: A History of Euro-
pean Racism (Dent, London, 1978).
16. Hugh Brody, The Other Side of Eden: Hunter-Gatherers, Farmers,
and the Shaping of the World (Faber and Faber, London, 2002).
NOTES
[ 237 ]

7.
THE HONOURABLE COLONIZER
1.
See Ann Curthoys and John Docker, Is History Fiction? (UNSW
Press, Sydney, 2005), p.184.
2.
See also David Armitage, The Ideological Origins of the British
Empire (Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 2000), Chapter 1,
‘Introduction: State and Empire in British History’, pp.1–23.
3.
Andrew Fitzmaurice, Humanism and America: An Intellectual
History of English Colonisation, 1500–1625 (Cambridge University
Press, Cambridge, 2003), p.19, referring – extremely unfairly – to
Peter Hulme, ‘Nymphs and Reapers Heavily Vanish: The Discursive
Con-texts of The Tempest’, in John Drakakis (ed.), Alternative
Shakespeares (Routledge, London, 1985), p.200.
4.
Quentin Skinner, Liberty before Liberalism (Cambridge University
Press, Cambridge, 1998), pp.101–5, 112.
5.
Skinner, Liberty before Liberalism, pp.13, 50.
6.
Cf. Sarah Irving, ‘ “In a Pure Soil”: Colonial Anxieties in the Work
of Francis Bacon’, History of European Ideas, Vol. 32 (2006),
pp.250–3, 257.
7.
Concerning the cyclical view of history of the humanists, see Fitz-
maurice, Humanism and America, pp.162 note 84, and 189.
8.
Fitzmaurice, Humanism and America, pp.162–3.
9.
Concerning ‘Asiatic’, see Humanism and America, pp.3, 20, 25, 38,
129–36, 163, 189. Cf. Skinner, Liberty before Liberalism, p.64.
10. Humanism and America, pp.164–5.
11. Humanism and America, pp.159–60, 166. See Tacitus, The Agricola
and the Germania (Penguin, London, 1970), Agricola, Chapters
29–32.
12. Humanism and America, pp.1, 11, 37.
13. Humanism and America, pp.1, 21, 28, 39, 47–8, 190.
14. Skinner, Liberty before Liberalism, pp.78–9.
15. Wendy Lower, Nazi Empire-Building and the Holocaust in Ukraine
(University of North Carolina Press in association with the United
States Holocaust Memorial Museum), pp.20–1, 24–5.
16. Humanism and America, p.187. Cf. Patrick Wolfe, ‘Palestine,
Project Europe and the (Un-)Making of the New Jew: In memory of
Edward W. Said’, in Ned Curthoys and Debjani Ganguly (eds),
Edward Said: Debating the Legacy of a Public Intellectual
(Melbourne University Press, Melbourne, 2007), pp.313–37.
NOTES
[ 238 ]

17. Humanism and America, pp.149–50.
18. Humanism and America, pp.25, 151–2.
19. Humanism and America, pp.152–5.
20. Larissa Behrendt, ‘Genocide: The Distance between Law and Life’,
pp.142–46, and ‘Eliza Fraser: A Colonial and Legal Narrative’, in
Iain McCalman and Ann McGrath (eds), Proof and Truth: The
Humanist as Expert (The Australian Academy of the Humanities,
Canberra, 2003).
21. Richard Waswo, The Founding Legend of Western Civilization:
From Virgil to Vietnam (Wesleyan University Press, Hanover, 1997),
pp.xi, xv, 57, 60, 63.
22. Waswo, The Founding Legend, pp.136–7.
23. Waswo, The Founding Legend, pp.137–8.
24. Virgil, Aeneid, translated by David West (Penguin, London, 2003),
Book Seven, p.147.
25. Waswo, The Founding Legend, pp.138, 140–8.
26. H.S. Reiss (ed.), Kant: Political Writings (Cambridge University
Press, Cambridge, 1991), pp.93–130. I must acknowledge here
discussions with Ida Nursoo concerning the relationship between
cosmopolitanism and hospitality in Kant’s ‘Perpetual Peace’ essay.
See also Robert Bernasconi, ‘Will the Real Kant Please Stand Up:
The Challenge of Enlightenment Racism to the Study of the History
of Philosophy’, Radical Philosophy 117, January–February 2003,
pp.13–22.
27. Fitzmaurice, Humanism and America, pp.140–3.
28. Humanism and America, p.148.
29. Humanism and America, pp.19, 146.
30. Humanism and America, pp.143, 147. Concerning res nullius, see
also Andrew Fitzmaurice, ‘The Genealogy of Terra Nullius’,
Australian Historical Studies, Vol. 38, No. 129, 2007, pp.1–15.
31. Humanism and America, pp.144–5. See also Ida Nursoo, ‘Dialogue
Across Différance: Culture, Kant and Imperial Hospitality’ (in
preparation).
32. Humanism and America, p.140.
33. Humanism and America, p.147.
34. Ann Curthoys, ‘Expulsion, Exodus, and Exile in White Australian
Historical Mythology’, in Richard Nile and Michael Williams (eds),
Imaginary Homelands: The Dubious Cartographies of Australian
Identity (University of Queensland Press, St. Lucia, 1999).
NOTES
[ 239 ]

35. Virgil, Aeneid, Book Three, pp.54–5.
36. Apropos Elizabethan piracy, see Barbara Fuchs, Mimesis and
Empire: The New World, Islam and European Identities (Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge, 2001), Chapter 5, ‘Faithless Empires:
Pirates, Renegadoes, and the English Nation’, pp.118–38.
37. Humanism and America, pp.31–2.
38. Humanism and America, pp.35–6, 39–41.
39. Humanism and America, pp.41, 43.
40. Colm Lennon, Sixteenth-Century Ireland: The Incomplete Conquest
(Gill and Macmillan, Dublin, 1994), pp.214–15. In terms of the use
of severed heads as a mode of terror and intimidation, Gilbert was
reprising an at least occasional Roman practice of war. 
Brian Campbell, ‘Power without Limit: “The Romans Always
Win”’, in Angelos Chaniotis and Pierre Ducrey (eds), Army and
Power in the Ancient World (Franz Steiner Verlag, Stuttgart, 2002),
p.169, refers to a ‘stratagem of using severed enemy heads to intim-
idate the survivors and bring a war to a close after a successful
battle’. (My thanks to David Pritchard for the reference to 
Campbell’s essay.)
41. Ciaran Brady, ‘The Captains’ Games: Army and Society in Eliza-
bethan Ireland’, in Thomas Bartlett and Keith Jeffrey (eds), A Mili-
tary History of Ireland (Cambridge University Press, Cambridge,
1996), pp.139–40, 146.
42. Patricia Palmer, Language and Conquest in Early Modern Ireland:
English Renaissance Literature and Elizabethan Imperial Expan-
sion (Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 2001), pp.4–9,
13–21, 47, 111, 122.
43. Palmer, Language and Conquest in Early Modern Ireland, pp.69,
110, 124, 149, 154–5.
44. Humanism and America, pp.3, 41, 48–9, 54 note 199, 138.
45. Humanism and America, pp.144, 146.
46. Humanism and America, p.146.
47. Cf. John Docker, 1492: The Poetics of Diaspora (Continuum,
London, 2001), pp.122–5.
48. Victor I. Scherb, ‘Assimilating Giants: The Appropriation of Gog
and Magog in Medieval and Early Modern England’, Journal of
Medieval and Early Modern Studies, Vol. 32, No. 1, 2002, pp.59–84.
My thanks to Shino Konishi for this reference.
49. Scherb, ‘Assimilating Giants’, pp.62–5.
NOTES
[ 240 ]

50. Concerning the Britons as Trojans, and touching on the story of
Gogmagog and Corineus, cf. Waswo, The Founding Legend of 
Western Civilization, pp.57–8.
51. Scherb, ‘Assimilating Giants’, pp.66–9, 71–6. Apropos giants and
monsters, see also Walter B. Stephens, Giants in Those Days: Folk-
lore, Ancient History, and Nationalism (University of Nabraska
Press, Lincoln, 1989); Jeffrey Jerome Cohen, Of Giants: Sex,
Monsters, and the Middle Ages (University of Minnesota Press,
Minneapolis, 1999).
52. See Shino Konishi, ‘In Search of Giants: Revisiting the Baudin
Expedition’s First Encounters with Aboriginal People at Shark Bay,
Western Australia, 1803’, Indian and Pacific Crossings: Perspec-
tives on Globalisation and History Conference, Edith Cowan
University, Fremantle, 12–15 December 2006, and ‘“Inhabited by a
Race of Formidable Giants”: French Explorers, Aborigines, and the
Endurance of the Fantastic in the Great South Land, 1803’,
Australian Humanities Review, March 2008. www.australianhuman-
itiesreview.org/archive/Issue-March-2008/konishi.html.
53. Jean-Paul Sartre, On Genocide and a Summary of the Evidence and
Judgments of the International War Crimes Tribunal by Arlette El
Kaïm-Sartre (Beacon Press, Boston, 1968), pp.67–9, 74–6.
54. Lemkin Collection, American Jewish Historical Society, 15 West
16th Street, NYC, Box 8, Folder 11, History of Genocide. Projected
Book and North American Indian Research. Correspondence,
1947–1949, 1951.
55. Erich Auerbach, Mimesis: The Representation of Reality in Western
Literature, with a new introduction by Edward Said (Princeton
University Press, Princeton, 2003), Chapter 13, ‘The Weary Prince’,
pp.314–316, 328. My thanks to Ned Curthoys for this reference.
56. Cf. A. Anghie, Imperialism, Sovereignty, and the Making of Interna-
tional Law (Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 2004), Chap-
ter ‘Francisco de Vitoria and the Colonial Origins of International
Law’, pp.13–31; Paul Keal, ‘“Just Backward Children”: Interna-
tional Law and the Conquest of Non-European Peoples’, Australian
Journal of International Affairs, Vol. 49, No. 2, 1995, pp.191–206;
Anthony Pagden, European Encounters with the New World: From
Renaissance to Romanticism (Yale University Press, New Haven,
1993); T. Todorov, The Conquest of America: The Question of the
Other (1982; Harper and Row, New York, 1992).
NOTES
[ 241 ]

8.
WAS THE ENLIGHTENMENT THE ORIGIN OF THE
HOLOCAUST?
1.
An earlier version of this chapter, entitled ‘The Enlightenment,
Genocide, Postmodernity’, was published in Journal of Genocide
Research, Vol. 5, No. 3, 2003, pp.339–60.
2.
Ernst Cassirer, The Philosophy of the Enlightenment, translated
F.C.A. Koelln and J.P. Pettegrove (Princeton University Press,
Princeton NJ, 1951), p.v.
3.
Ole Peter Grell and Roy Porter (eds), Toleration in Enlightenment
Europe
(Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 2000), 
Introduction, p.1.
4.
Zygmunt Bauman, Modernity and the Holocaust (Polity Press,
Cambridge, 1989), pp.xii–xiii, 20, 184.
5.
Bauman, Modernity and the Holocaust, pp.xiv, 68–9.
6.
George L. Mosse, Toward the Final Solution: A History of European
Racism (Dent, London, 1978), pp.xvi, 1–3, 5, 10–11.
7.
Bauman, ‘The Duty To Remember – But What?’, in James Kaye and
Bo Stråth (eds), Enlightenment and Genocide, Contradictions of
Modernity (P.I.E. – Peter Lang, Brussels, 2000), pp.31, 36–8. I have
no space here to discuss the fine final part of Bauman’s essay
(45–57) where he ponders the ethical consequences of ways the
Holocaust has been remembered. Memory of suffering could, he
feels, involve ‘the life-long dedication to the fight against inhuman-
ity, cruelty and pain-inflicting as such’. Instead, he perceives an
opposite conclusion being drawn, as in much Zionist discourse and
official Israeli policy and diplomacy, where the ‘tendency’ is to draw
the lesson ‘that humankind is divided into the victims and the
victimisers, and so if you are (or expect to be) a victim, the point is
to reverse the tables’ (p. 45).
8.
See Wokler, ‘The Enlightenment Project on the Eve of the Holo-
caust’, in Kaye and Stråth (eds), Enlightenment and Genocide,
Contradictions of Modernity, pp.70–3. See also Wokler, ‘Multicul-
turalism and Ethnic Cleansing in the Enlightenment’, in Grell and
Porter (eds), Toleration in Enlightenment Europe.
9.
Wokler, ‘The Enlightenment Project on the Eve of the Holocaust’, in
Kaye and Stråth, p.60; see also James Schmidt, ‘Genocide and the
Limits of Enlightenment: Horkheimer and Adorno Revisited’, in the
same volume, pp.81–102.
NOTES
[ 242 ]

10. Wokler, ‘The Enlightenment Project on the Eve of the Holocaust’, in
Kaye and Stråth, pp.71, 74–5, 77.
11. Wokler, ‘The Enlightenment Project on the Eve of the Holocaust’, in
Kaye and Stråth, pp.60–3.
12. Wokler, ‘The Enlightenment Project on the Eve of the Holocaust’, in
Kaye and Stråth, p.60. Compare Bauman’s view of the continuities
between the Enlightenment and the French Revolution, in Peter
Beilharz (ed.), The Bauman Reader (Blackwell, Oxford, 2001),
p.261 (reprinted 1984 essay ‘Dictatorship Over Needs’).
13. Wokler, ‘The Enlightenment Project on the Eve of the Holocaust’, in
Kaye and Stråth, pp.64–9, 77.
14. Oddly, in his essay in their volume Bauman doesn’t mention the
Enlightenment, focusing only on modernity. See, however, Beilharz
(ed.), The Bauman Reader, p.272: ‘the kind of universe dreamed up
and promised by the philosophers of the Enlightenment … A king-
dom of reason, the ultimate exercise in human power over nature,
the ultimate display of the infinite human potential’ (reprinted 1995
essay ‘A Century of Camps?’).
15. Kaye and Stråth, Introduction, pp.13–15, 19, 26–7.
16. Kaye and Stråth, Introduction, pp.14, 16. See also Dirk Moses’
critique, ‘Modernity and the Holocaust’, Australian Journal of Poli-
tics and History, Vol. 43, 1997, pp.441–445: ‘ he [Bauman] down-
plays the motivating effect of ideology in the name of an extreme
functionalism. … There is, in other words, more to National Social-
ism and the Holocaust than instrumental reason.’ Cf. Schmidt in
Kaye and Stråth, pp.95, 97–8.
17. Cf. Ned Curthoys, ‘The Politics of Holocaust Representation: The
Worldly Typologies of Hannah Arendt’, Arena Journal, Vol. 16,
2000/1, p.56; also his ‘Hannah Arendt and the Politics of Narrative’,
JNT: Journal of Narrative Theory, Vol. 32, No. 3, 2002, pp.348–70.
18. Hannah Arendt, The Origins of Totalitarianism (George Allen and
Unwin, London, 1967), p.123.
19. Wokler, ‘The Enlightenment Project on the Eve of the Holocaust’, in
Kaye and Stråth, pp.65, 72.
20. See also John Docker, ‘The Enlightenment and Genocide’, JNT:
Journal of Narrative Theory, Vol. 33, No. 3, 2003, pp.292–314, test-
ing the Bauman-Mosse view of the Enlightenment in relation to
eighteenth-century literary Orientalism. My thanks to Ian Higgins
for leads into the labyrinth of the English Enlightenment.
NOTES
[ 243 ]

21. Cf. William E. Connolly, Why I Am Not a Secularist (University of
Minnesota Press, Minneapolis, 1999), John Docker, 1492: The Poet-
ics of Diaspora (Continuum, London, 2001), and Jane Bennett, The
Enchantment of Modern Life (Princeton University Press, Princeton
NJ, 2001).
22. See J.A.I. Champion, The Pillars of Priestcraft Shaken: The Church
of England and its Enemies, 1660–1730 (Cambridge University
Press, Cambridge, 1992), Sylvia Berti, ‘At the Roots of Unbelief’,
Journal of the History of Ideas, Vol. 56, No. 4, 1995, pp.555–75, Iain
McCalman, ‘New Jerusalems: Prophecy, Dissent and Radical
Culture in England, 1786–1830’, in K. Haakonssen (ed.), Enlighten-
ment and Religion: Rational Dissent in Eighteenth Century Britain
(Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1996).
23. Wokler, ‘Multiculturalism and Ethnic Cleansing in the Enlighten-
ment’, in Grell and Porter (eds), Toleration in Enlightenment
Europe, pp.74–82.
24. Gilles Deleuze, Spinoza: Practical Philosophy, translated R. Hurley
(City Lights Books, San Francisco, 1988), pp.28–9; Docker, 1492:
The Poetics of Diaspora, p.90.
25. Y. Yovel, The Marrano of Reason (Princeton University Press,
Princeton, NJ, 1989), pp.23–30; Docker, 1492: The Poetics of 
Diaspora, pp.99–102.
26. Genevieve Lloyd, Spinoza and the Ethics (Routledge, London,
1996), pp.4–5.
27. Lloyd, Spinoza and the Ethics, pp.6, 121–4, 127–8, 131.
28. Lloyd, Spinoza and the Ethics, pp.114–16, 122, 124–5, 130.
29. Moira Gatens and Genevieve Lloyd, Collective Imaginings: Spinoza,
Past and Present (Routledge, London, 1999), pp.1–5, 14–15.
30. William E. Connolly, Neuropolitics: Thinking, Culture, Speed
(University of Minnesota Press, Minneapolis, 2002), p.138; Baruch
Spinoza, On the Improvement of the Understanding, the Ethics,
Correspondence, translated R.H.M. Elwes (Dover, New York,
1955), p.132.
31. Jonathan I. Israel, Radical Enlightenment: Philosophy and the
Making of Modernity 1650–1750 (Oxford University Press, Oxford,
2001), pp.7–10, 13, 22, 94–5, 160–1, 259, 523.
32. Israel, Radical Enlightenment, pp.7, 60, 91.
33. Israel, Radical Enlightenment, pp.5, 76–7, 237, 259, 265–8, 279.
34. Israel, Radical Enlightenment, pp.60–1, 67, 86, 91, 236.
NOTES
[ 244 ]

35. Baruch Spinoza, Tractatus Theologico-Politicus, translated S.
Shirley (Brill, Leiden, 1989), p.234; Docker, 1492: The Poetics of
Diaspora, pp.93–6.
36. Spinoza, On the Improvement of the Understanding, p.337, letter
dated Voorburg, 28 January 1665.
37. Stephen H. Daniel, John Toland: His Methods, Manners, and Mind
(McGill-Queen’s University Press, Montreal, 1984), pp.5–13.
38. Jan Assmann, Moses the Egyptian: The Memory of Egypt in Western
Monotheism (Harvard University Press, Cambridge Mass., 1997),
pp.5, 8, 20.
39. John Toland, Christianity Not Mysterious (1696; Friedrich From-
mann Verlag, Stuttgart-Bad Cannstatt, 1964), pp.46, 90, 97, 153,
170–1.
40. Georg Simmel, The Sociology of Georg Simmel, edited and trans-
lated Kurt H. Wolff (The Free Press, Glencoe, Il., 1950), Chapter
‘The Stranger’, pp.402–8; Docker, 1492: The Poetics of Diaspora,
pp.86–7.
41. Toland, Clidophorus, Or, of the Exoteric and Esoteric Philosophy
(London, 1720), pp.65, 68, 70–78, 89, 94. Thales was also a
favourite philosopher of Spinoza (Israel, Radical Enlightenment,
p.174). In Letters to Serena (London, 1704), p.31, Toland also writes
of ‘Pythagoras, one of the greatest Travellers in the World … suffer-
ing himself to be circumcis’d that he might be admitted to hear the
secret Doctrines’ of the Egyptian Priests and Prophets.
42. Toland, Pantheisticon: Or, the Form of Celebrating the Socratic-
Society (London, 1751), pp.13, 15, 19, 33, 58–9, 64, 66, 70.
43. Steven Nadler, Spinoza: A Life (Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge, 1999), p.306.
44. Spinoza, Tractatus Theologico-Politicus, p.49; Nadler, Spinoza: A
Life, pp.339, 344, 348.
45. Toland, Pantheisticon, p.64.
46. Toland, Tetradymos (London, 1720), Part III, Hypatia, pp.103–9,
118–19, 122–7, 130–3, 136. Israel, Radical Enlightenment, p.91,
discusses Toland’s interest in Hypatia and refers to the menstruation
story and responses to it by his conservative critics.
47. Lady Mary Wortley Montagu, Selected Letters, edited R. Halsband
(Penguin, Harmondsworth, 1986), p.246. See also Israel, Radical
Enlightenment, pp.89, 91 concerning Toland, women, and 
education.
NOTES
[ 245 ]

48. Toland, Hodegus, Or, The Pillar of Cloud and Fire not Miraculous,
in Tetradymos, p.6; Clidophorus, p.65. See also Assmann, Moses the
Egyptian, pp.91–6, and Champion, ‘Toleration and Citizenship in
Enlightenment England: John Toland and the Naturalization of the
Jews, 1714–1753’, in Grell and Porter (eds), Toleration in Enlight-
enment Europe, p.141. Champion here is discussing Toland’s 1714
pamphlet Reasons for Naturalising the Jews.
49. See also Champion, The Pillars of Priestcraft Shaken, Chapters 5–6.
50. Israel, Radical Enlightenment, p.227.
51. Toland, Nazarenus: Or, Jewish, Gentile, and Mahometan Christian-
ity (London, 1718), Preface and pp.4–6, 9, 12–15. Israel, Radical
Enlightenment, pp.66, 613 also finds Nazarenus an ‘astounding’
text, and refers as well to its admiration of Islam, comparing it to
that of Boulainvilliers in France (572–3); see also Champion, The
Pillars of Priestcraft Shaken, pp.125–9, 234.
52. Toland, Nazarenus, pp.16–17, 22–3, 44; on p.28 Toland defines
Socinianism: Jesus was a mere man, but his mother was a Virgin
conceived by virtue of the Spirit of God.
53. Toland, Nazarenus, pp.37–9, 42.
54. Toland, Nazarenus, pp.44–8; Letters to Serena, pp.21–2, 30–3, 40.
55. Toland, Nazarenus, pp.52–3, 56.
56. Toland, Nazarenus, p.59.
57. Toland, Nazarenus, pp.4–5, 56, 61.
58. Ammiel Alcalay, After Jews and Arabs: Remaking Levantine
Culture (University of Minnesota Press, Minneapolis, 1993); Ella
Shohat, ‘Taboo memories and Diasporic Visions: Columbus, Pales-
tine and Arab-Jews’, in M. Joseph and J. Natalya Fink (eds),
Performing Hybridity (University of Minnesota Press, Minneapolis,
1999), pp.131–156; and Maria Rosa Menacol, The Ornament of the
World: How Muslims, Jews and Christians Created a Culture of
Tolerance in Medieval Spain (Little Brown and Co., New York,
2002).
59. Stephen Nye, A Brief History of the Unitarians, Called also Socini-
ans. In Four Letters, Written to a Friend (London, 1691). See also
Champion, The Pillars of Priestcraft Shaken, pp.109–10. In
Nazarenus, p.25, Toland refers to ‘Mr Nye’s Judgement of the
Fathers’.
60. Humphrey Prideaux, The True Nature of Imposture Fully Display’d in
the Life of Mahomet (London, 1697); T. Killigrew (ed.), Miscellaneous
NOTES
[ 246 ]

Aurea: Or the Golden Medley (London, 1720); H. Boulainvilliers, Life
of Mohamet (London, 1752). Concerning the interest in and disputes
about Islam in the ‘long eighteenth century’, see Champion, The Pillars
of Priestcraft Shaken, passim.
61. Cf. Lisa Lowe, Critical Terrains: French and British Orientalisms
(Cornell University Press, Ithaca NY, 1991); see also Lowe’s chap-
ter, ‘The Worldliness of Intimacy’, in Ned Curthoys and Debjani
Ganguly (eds), Edward Said: The Legacy of a Public Intellectual
(Melbourne University Press, Melbourne, 2007), pp.121–51.
62. Spinoza, Tractatus Theologico-Politicus, pp.264–5; Docker, 1492:
The Poetics of Diaspora, p.138.
63. David Hume, The Natural History of Religion, edited by W. Colver
(Clarendon Press, Oxford, 1976). Toland, in his long essay on the
Druids in A Collection of Several Pieces (1726), Vol. I, p.52, refers
to the religious tolerance of the Romans, though the Romans
suppressed the Druidic religion in Gaul and Britain, Toland
suggests, because of the ‘barbarous Tyranny’ exercised by the Druid
priesthood over the ‘credulous people’. Concerning the cosmopoli-
tanism of the ancient polytheistic world, cf. Assmann, Moses the
Egyptian, pp.20, 45–54, 136, 168, 193, 209, 217.
64. Hume, The Natural History of Religion, pp.62–3.
65. Hume, The Natural History of Religion, pp.45, 49, 75.
66. Jean-François Lyotard and Jean-Loup Thébaud, Just Gaming, trans-
lated Wlad Godzich (University of Minnesota Press, Minneapolis,
1994), pp.15–17, 29, 32–3.
67. Lyotard, Just Gaming, pp.39–40, 43. Lyotard’s evocation of pagan
storytelling is very close to the narratology of The Thousand and
One Nights in the eighteenth century; see John Docker, ‘The
Enlightenment and Genocide’.
68. Lyotard, Just Gaming, pp.28, 32–3, 36, 39–43.
69. Lyotard, Just Gaming, p.5.
70. Gilles Deleuze, Empiricism and Subjectivity: An Essay on Hume’s
Theory of Human Nature, translated C.V. Boundas (Columbia
University Press, New York, 1991), pp.33–4.
71. Deleuze, Empiricism and Subjectivity, pp.81–7, 90–1, 108, 126–7.
72. Cf. McCalman, ‘New Jerusalems …’
73. Voltaire, Candide, translated John Butt (Penguin, London, 1947),
pp.136, 143–44.
74. Docker, 1492: The Poetics of Diaspora, pp.134–40.
NOTES
[ 247 ]

75. Cf. Kathleen Wilson, The Sense of the People: Politics, Culture and
Imperialism in England, 1715–1785 (Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge, 1995).
76. Claude Rawson, God, Gulliver, and Genocide: Barbarism and the
European Imagination, 1492–1945 (Oxford University Press,
Oxford and New York, 2001), pp.232, 249. See my review in 
Journal of Genocide Research, Vol. 5, No. 1, 2003, pp.161–5.
77. See also J. Schmidt, ‘What Enlightenment Project?’ Political
Theory, Vol. 28, No. 6, pp.734–57.
CONCLUSION: CAN THERE BE AN END TO
VIOLENCE?
1.
See my essay on Gandhi and Josephus in Debjani Ganguly and John
Docker (eds), Rethinking Gandhi and Nonviolent Relationality
(Routledge, London, 2007), pp.205–22.
NOTES
[ 248 ]

A
Aboriginal see indigenous
Aeneas, 113–17, 129–44, 169,
171, 174
Aeneid, 6–8, 91, 105, 113–47,
153, 155, 158, 168–70, 174,
178, 182–3, 208, 217
Aeschylus, 5, 8, 61–2, 65–6, 69,
79, 85, 138, 182, 208
African Americans, 163
Agamemnon, 61–2, 65–70, 73–4,
79, 85–6, 98, 116, 138, 141,
208
aggression, 19, 20–2, 25, 125
agriculture, agricultural society,
xii, 6, 7–8, 11, 13–14, 31, 3–4,
118, 129, 158
see also disease
American Jewish Historical 
Society, New York, xv, 3, 15,
64
Andromache, 62, 75–86, 134, 208
anti-Semitism, 22, 166
Arendt, Hannah, xiv, 2, 10, 40,
50, 72–3, 190
Asia, Asiatic, 46, 66–7, 75, 77,
90, 138–9, 146, 156–9, 164,
187
see also Orient
assimilation, 139, 153, 183, 186
Athens, Athenian, 8, 9, 10,
39–41, 43, 46–59, 69, 71, 82,
89–93, 106–8, 146, 150, 154,
164, 173
Auerbach, Erich, 2, 186
B
Bakhtin, Mikhail, xiv, 3–4, 92–5,
97, 99–100, 105–6, 109, 139,
146, 152, 182
The Dialogic Imagination,
139, 147
Problems of Dostoevsky’s 
Poetics, 4, 93, 94, 109, 146
see also dialogic, menippean,
polyphony
barbarism, 5, 28, 131, 192, 194,
203, 216
Bataille, Georges, 28
Bauman, Zygmunt, 11, 189,
194–5, 213, 216
Behrendt, Larissa, xiv, 168
Benjamin, Walter, xiv, 2, 10, 28,
29, 49, 92, 94, 131
Berger Jnr, Harry, 118–20, 129,
133
Bible, biblical stories, 5, 6, 8, 22,
103, 115, 119–22, 126–9, 141,
161, 180–2, 194, 199, 214
see also Deuteronomy, 
INDEX
[ 249 ]

Exodus, Ezekiel, Genesis,
Joshua, Judges
biography, 8, 10, 146–50, 174,
200
biological genocide, 65, 83
Boyarin, Daniel, 124
Brody, Hugh, 7, 8, 13, 35–7, 158
C
Caledonian, 145, 149–50, 154
Calgacus, 145, 154–5, 157–8,
165, 182–3
Canaan, Canaanites, 103, 113,
116, 118–23, 125–29, 134,
139–42, 179–80
cannibalism, 22, 25–6, 45, 180
carnivalesque, 4, 73, 79, 93–4,
110, 168
Carroll, Robert P., 103, 114, 120,
124, 126–8, 209
Carthage, 100, 102, 109–10, 132,
134–5, 138, 171
Cassandra, 66–9, 74, 82–4, 87
Cassirer, Ernst, 189, 191
children, 15–17, 22–3, 32, 40, 52,
58–9, 62, 65–6, 70, 75, 82, 86,
96–7, 119, 122–3, 127, 147,
151, 154–5, 176
chimpanzees, 17–30, 37
chosen people, 5–6, 90–2, 152,
156–7, 161, 181, 187, 218
Cicero, 5–8, 89–93, 98–111, 143,
147, 155, 162, 164–5, 170,
174, 182, 217
Dream of Scipio, The, 89, 98,
109–11
Philus, 89, 99, 101–9, 155,
174
Republic, 6–7, 89–93,
98–111, 143, 147, 155, 170,
174, 182, 217
Scipio, 89, 98–105, 109–11,
170
circumcision, 133, 206, 208
civil war see warfare
civilization, civilized, 6, 28, 30,
42, 48, 55–6, 89, 102, 116,
120, 130–2, 139, 152–3, 158,
161, 169, 183, 189–92, 216
Clytemnestra, 61, 66–9, 79, 134
collaboration in genocide, 64, 73
colonization, xii, xiii, xiv, xv, 2,
5–9, 15–18, 3–35, 40–7, 52,
89–91, 114–16, 120–8, 130,
136, 139–44, 147–8, 153, 155,
157–9, 161–8, 170–82, 185,
187, 218
see also biological genocide,
collaboration in genocide,
cultural genocide, religious
genocide
Columbus, 16, 33
concentration camps, 16
cosmopolitanism, xiii, 2, 55, 90,
101–2, 148, 191, 200, 215
see also hospitality
counter narratives, 132, 135–7,
141, 146–7, 152, 155, 157–8 
counter traditions, 217
Croce, Benedetto, xi, xii
Cromwell, Oliver, 126
cruelty, xi, 2, 10, 22, 25–6, 79,
141, 216
cultural genocide, 3, 15–6, 65, 85
culture-bringers, 5–7, 131–2, 136,
139, 142, 161, 178
Curthoys, Ann, ii, xiv, xv, xvi, 3,
15, 34, 121, 174
INDEX
[ 250 ]

Is History Fiction? xii, xv, 35
Curthoys, Ned, xiv, xv, xvi
D
Davis, Natalie Zemon, 79
Deleuze, Gilles, 194–5, 208–14
democracy, 2, 9, 11, 41, 48, 50,
90, 95, 101, 193, 214
Herrenvolk or ethnic 
democracy, 50
deportation, 16, 63, 69–70, 76
determinism, xiii, 28
Deuteronomy, 122, 128
dialogic, 4, 93–99, 110, 147
dialogue of the dead, 4, 110
Diamond, Jared, 7, 8, 13, 29–37
Dido, 113–14, 132–5, 138–9, 171
disease, 16, 31–6
see also agricultural society,
plague
dispossession, 36, 91, 171, 184
Donne, John, 173
E
Eichmann, 40, 72, 84, 190, 193
empire, xii, xiii, 2, 8–11, 40–3,
47–51, 54–5, 59, 89–91, 98,
101–11, 115, 129–32, 140,
142, 145–50, 152, 157, 161–2,
164, 165–6, 173, 181, 187,
207, 209, 215, 217–18
Enlightenment, xii, xiv, 158, 171,
181 189– 216
ethical deterioration, 10, 50, 64,
72, 74, 84, 90, 132, 157, 186
ethnic cleansing, 43, 47, 52, 58,
70, 122, 128, 192
see also population transfer
ethnobiology, 11
Euripides, 5, 8, 62, 69, 75, 82, 85,
90, 137, 182, 185, 208
evolution, xii, xiv, 2, 7, 11, 13,
18–19, 24, 58, 63, 68, 118,
163, 185, 191–3, 199, 215
exile, 6, 14, 46, 67, 92, 114, 116,
118–21, 135–6, 182, 191–2,
210, 218
Exodus, 5, 8, 22, 113–42, 146,
169, 178–9, 182–3, 205
Ezekiel, 161, 180
F
father god, 6, 115, 117, 134, 136,
139
Fitzmaurice, Andrew, 161–8,
172–9
Francisco de Victoria, 170–3
French Revolution, 191–3, 215
Freud, xiii, 2, 11
Moses and Monotheism, xiii,
11
friendship, 44, 49, 143, 164, 167,
170–3
see also hospitality
G
Gandhi, Gandhian, 40, 46, 62, 75,
136, 142, 217–18
Gatens, Moira, 197
gender, xii, xiii, 16, 18, 19–23,
26–7, 69, 79, 94–8, 134,
136–7, 199, 203–4, 213
masculinity, 20, 25, 47, 68,
81, 138–9, 151, 199
women, 18, 22, 31–2, 40, 52,
59, 62, 65–6, 68–87, 95–8,
106, 122–3, 134–9, 151,
176, 180, 199, 203–4, 214
INDEX
[ 251 ]

see also stranger females 
Genesis, 118, 121, 179, 206
genocide, xi–iii, xv, 1, 3, 4–11,
13–38, 39–60, 61–88, 92, 99,
113–144, 153, 157, 161, 182,
184–6, 190–3, 214, 216–17
see also biological genocide,
collaboration in genocide,
cultural genocide, geno-
cidist, Lemkin, religious
genocide
genocidist, 3, 16, 63–4, 68, 72,
84, 86, 126, 185–6
giants, giantology, 169, 179–82,
185
Gilbert, Humphrey, 175–8
God, 2, 5–7, 47, 85, 113–19,
122–8, 132–4, 139–40, 156,
161, 178–80, 196–200, 206–9,
211–16, 218
see also father god
goddesses, xiii, 66, 76, 80, 81, 82,
84, 87
see also ‘Judgement of Paris’
gods, xiii, 2, 6, 7, 44, 46–7, 54,
68, 72, 74, 80–1, 86–8, 90,
107–9, 113–17, 125, 128–9,
134–5, 137, 139, 143, 152,
156, 171, 187, 200, 202,
209–11, 218
see also father god
Gog, 161, 169, 180–2, 185
Goodall, Jane, 7, 13, 17–30, 45
Gray, Robert, 178–82
H
Haraway, Donna, 17–18
hatred, 22, 49, 52, 58, 78, 116,
135, 202, 209
Hecabe, 62, 66, 69–76, 80–6
Hegel, 104
Helen, 56, 62, 66, 71, 73, 76,
80–1, 84, 86–8
Herodotus, xv, 7, 8, 35, 39–47,
62, 75, 90–2, 106–8, 137,
146–8, 155, 182, 207, 217
Hitler, 166, 191
Holocaust, xiv, 1, 11, 14, 86, 142,
157, 166, 189–216
homicide, 1, 2, 15, 17
honourable colonization, 
colonizer, xv, 3, 5, 7, 91,
147–8, 161–87
hospitality, 151, 170–1, 183–4,
218
see also cosmopolitanism,
Francisco de Victoria,
friendship, Kant, Waswo
hubris, 10, 35, 44, 55–6, 101,
111, 199, 213
human sacrifice, 72, 107, 152
Hume, David, 192, 194, 208–14
hunter-gatherer society, peoples,
xii, 7, 8, 14, 30–7, 158
I
Iliad, 39, 141, 150
imperial, imperialism, imperium,
2, 9–10, 18, 40, 44, 47, 49–51,
55–8, 91–2, 100, 108, 110,
118, 145–59, 176, 193, 215,
218
settler imperialism, 145–59
indigenous, 2, 6–7, 33, 36–7, 43,
115–17, 120–2, 130–2, 137,
139, 141, 142–3, 148, 153,
162, 164, 166, 169, 171–85
infanticide, 21, 32, 97
INDEX
[ 252 ]

intellectual history, xiv, 3–5, 92,
162–3, 166, 174
intent, intention, 16, 24, 63, 68,
109, 142–3, 161–2, 168, 174,
190, 218
international law, 8–9, 16, 41, 46,
58–9, 106, 122, 161, 168–72,
178–9, 186–7, 217
law of nations, 9, 106, 161,
167, 173, 187
internationalism, xiii, 2, 90, 148,
215
Ireland, xv, 31, 126, 149, 155,
157, 162, 165, 175–6, 178, 201
Islamophilia, 205–8
Israel, Jonathan I., 198
Israel, xi, xiv, xv, 1–2, 50,
116–29, 133–4, 136, 141–2,
161, 179, 180, 198–9, 208,
214, 218
J
Jerusalem, 40, 57, 127, 156, 190
Jews, Jewish, xv, 1, 3, 14–15,
22–3, 57, 64, 77, 92, 103, 114,
120–1, 142, 156, 180, 204–7,
214, 216, 218
Sephardic and Oriental, 121,
142, 201
Josephus, 57, 142, 156, 218
Joshua, 5, 8, 117, 122–7, 132,
134, 140, 142, 179–80, 182
Joyce, James, 77
‘Judgement of Paris’, 81
Judges, 5, 8, 117, 122, 126–7,
140, 142, 179, 182
Juno, 114, 133, 136–9, 155, 158
Jupiter, 113–17, 128–9, 132–40,
145, 153, 158, 178.
just war, 104, 167, 171, 174, 177,
218
K
Kant, 157, 171
Kaye, James, 190, 192–3
Kimmerling, Baruch, 127
Konishi, Shino, xv, 181
L
Las Casas, Bartolomé, 65, 172
Lemkin, xiv, 1–9, 14–7, 26–9, 40,
52, 62, 64–86, 100, 108, 115,
122–8, 140–2, 153, 184–6,
217
Axis Rule in Occupied
Europe, 1–2, 5, 14–5, 40,
100, 123, 127–8, 141, 184
‘Revised Outline for 
Genocide Cases’, 3, 62–6,
69, 71–2, 75, 78, 82, 85,
126, 185
Lessing, Gotthold, 191, 193
Levi, Primo, 1
liberty, 44, 52, 149, 154–5, 163,
166, 183, 202, 209
Lloyd, Genevieve, 196–7
Lower, Wendy, xiv, 166
Lyotard, J.-F., 194, 208–14
M
Masalha, Nur, xiv, 121–2
masculinity see gender
massacre, 2, 22, 27–8, 39, 51, 57,
63, 65, 69, 126
Melos, Melians 8, 9, 10, 51–3,
57–8, 71, 82, 90, 155
Melian Dialogue,10, 50–1,
56, 58, 71
INDEX
[ 253 ]

memoricide, 128
Menacol, Maria Rosa, 207
Menelaus, 66, 68, 76–81, 84–7
menippean, 4, 99, 109, 111,
147–8, 182
migrants, migration, 7, 20, 34–5,
43, 64, 150
Mills, Sophie, 55, 57, 89
modernity, xii, xiii, 4, 9–10, 11,
15, 50, 70, 92, 96, 106, 130,
166, 180, 189–93, 198, 210,
211–16
monotheism, xiii, 2, 6, 11, 92,
114, 115, 119, 124, 152, 194,
209
Moorish Spain, 77, 142, 207
Moses, xiii, xiv, 11, 113, 116–17,
119, 122–4, 133–4, 139–40,
200, 205–6, 210
Mosse, George L, 190, 195
multitude, the, 45, 71, 95–6,
194–6, 201–2, 204, 215
mutilation, 2, 16, 26, 28, 63, 186
mythology, xiii, 3, 5, 10, 22, 35,
55, 62, 65, 87, 90–1, 97–8,
105, 121–2, 130–2, 161,
168–70, 181, 187, 208–10,
217
N
nationalism, 2, 120, 166, 191
Native Americans, 29, 34, 118,
121, 164
natural law, 9, 91, 101, 104–9,
143, 161, 167, 170–3, 184,
218
Nazism, 2, 14, 166, 191, 216
neo-roman, 163–6, 175–9
New Genocide Studies, xiv
New Testament, xiii, 92, 103–4
nomads, nomadic, nomadism, 7,
32, 34–6, 118–19, 129–30,
160. 
non-violence, 46–7, 217–8
North America, 16, 36, 121, 162,
165, 167–8, 172, 181–2
O
Odysseus (Ulysses), 62, 70–3,
83–6, 98, 116
Old Testament, xiii, 92, 103,
116–29, 132, 136, 179, 187
Orient, Orientialism, 62, 69, 77,
78–80, 89, 91, 121, 135,
138–9, 142, 158, 202, 208,
214
outsider, 92, 111, 180, 196, 201
P
Palestinians, xii, xv, 2, 118, 120,
125, 127, 142, 218
Palmer, Patricia, 176
Pappé, Ilan, xiv, 128
Paris, 81, 82, 84, 86
see also Helen, ‘Judgement
of Paris’
parvenu, 10 
Pericles, Periclean, 39, 48–50,
55–6, 89–90, 108, 150, 164
‘Funeral Oration’ 48, 164
Perizzites, 113, 122, 126, 140,
179–80
perpetrator, 14, 27, 62, 71, 73–4,
115, 126, 129
Persian, 8, 39–40, 43–4, 46–7,
53–4, 61, 67–8, 90, 107–8,
202, 208
philosemitism, 164, 205–8
INDEX
[ 254 ]

plague, 32–3, 48–9
see also disease
Plato, Platonic, 5, 8, 13, 93–99,
101, 103, 203–4, 215
‘The Myth of Er’, 97–8
Republic, 8, 93, 95–99, 101,
204
The Symposium, 93–4
polyphony, 4, 97, 104, 109, 146 
polytheism, xiii, 2, 6, 11, 92,
114–15, 124, 152, 194,
208–10, 214
population transfer, 43, 47
see also ethnic cleansing
postmodern, 191, 194–6, 210–11,
213–4
postsecular, xiii, 117, 120, 194
primatology, xii, xiii, 17, 23
primates 7, 14, 17, 25–6, 37
Prior, Michael, 122
promised land, 5–6, 117–18,
120–2, 134, 161, 179, 218
Puritans, xiii, 118, 126, 218
R
Rawson, Claude, 5, 126, 214
refugees, 46
religious genocide, 15, 86, 88
Renaissance, 4, 98, 157, 162,
164, 166, 168, 176
res nullius, 106, 167, 173
Roper, Lyndal, 22
Rodinson, Maxime, 28
Rose, Hilary, xiv, 28
Rose, Steven, xiv, 28
S
Said, Edward, 11, 117–22, 129
‘late style’, 11
Salamanca school, 170, 172
Sartre, Jean-Paul, 185
Scherb, Victor I., 180–1
Schwartz, Regina M., 119–20, 129
Scott, Sir Walter, 77, 135
Ivanhoe, 77, 135
settler colonialism, xi, xiv, 11,
117, 122
Shahabaddeen, Mohammed,
Judge, 42, 57–9
see also international law
Shakespeare, 3, 161, 182
The Merchant of Venice, 184,
186
The Tempest, 3, 161, 182–6
Shohat, Ella, 120, 207
Simmel, Georg, 77, 201
Skinner, Quentin, 163, 166
slavery, 16, 39–40, 43, 51–5, 59,
62–79, 82, 85–6, 100, 107,
122, 127, 141, 151, 153–7,
163, 183–6
Socinian, 205–6, 208
Socrates, 93–6, 103, 215
Socratic dialogue, 4, 93–4, 97
Sparta, 9, 46, 48, 51, 57, 59, 66,
76–7, 79–81, 84
Spinoza, Baruch, 119, 124, 133,
194–203, 205, 209, 213–15
Ethics, 195, 196, 198
Tractatus Theologico-
Politicus, 119, 124,
198–200, 214
sterilization, 63, 216
Stone, Dan, xiv, 14, 27–8, 44, 73
stranger females, 19–21, 27
strangers, 21, 23, 25, 27, 46, 151,
167, 171, 173, 184, 218
Stråth, Bo,190, 192–3
INDEX
[ 255 ]

suicide, 44, 56–7, 64, 69, 71, 75, 85
supersessionism, xvi, 5, 6, 8, 92,
101, 132, 141, 161, 218
Swift, Jonathan, 216
symposium, 4, 93–4, 97
T
Tacitus, 5, 6, 7, 8, 91–2, 124,
145–59, 163–5, 178, 182–3,
186, 217
Agricola, 6, 7, 8, 91, 145–59,
163, 165, 182, 186, 217
Germania, 6, 8, 91, 124,
145–59, 163, 182, 186, 217
Tasmania, 29, 43
territoriality, 18–9, 23, 25
terror, 22, 64, 69, 75–6, 186, 191,
215
Thucydides, xv, 5, 7–10, 39–59,
62, 71, 89–92, 95–6, 106, 108,
146–8, 154–5, 164, 173, 182,
215, 217
toga, toga-wearing people, 101,
145, 153
Toland, John, 194, 200–9, 213–5
torture, 2, 21–2, 26, 28, 78, 186
trauma, 33, 70, 76, 83
Trojan War, 3, 75, 80, 82, 116, 138
Troy, 7, 8, 62, 66–90, 116, 122,
127, 129–30, 135, 137–8, 141,
143, 169, 181, 217
U
UN Convention on the Prevention
and Punishment of the Crime
of Genocide (1948), 9, 15–16,
40, 58, 86, 217
utopia, anti-utopia, 4, 89, 95–6,
101, 166, 193, 195, 213–14
V
victim, 3, 16, 21, 24, 26–8, 35,
50, 62–4, 69–77, 84, 86, 92,
115, 117, 119, 121, 125–6,
129, 141, 152, 174, 186, 218
victimology, 5–6, 92, 113–44,
161, 174, 182
Virgil, 5, 6, 7, 8, 91–2, 113–44,
145, 147, 169, 182, 208, 217
see also Aeneid
Voltaire, 214
W
warfare, 13, 17, 19, 24–6, 33, 39,
48, 68, 116–17, 150–1, 176–7
civil war, 40, 47, 57–8
misery of war, 39, 44, 47, 150 
Waswo, Richard, 5–6, 116–17,
129–33, 136, 139, 141–2, 158,
161, 169–71, 173, 182–3
witches, 21–2
Wokler, Robert, 191–5, 213,
215–16
world history, xii, xiv, 2, 5, 6, 7,
8, 16, 18, 35, 37, 41, 85, 92,
95, 114–15, 118, 218
X
xenophobia, 25, 30
Y
Yunupingu, Galarrwuy, 7, 34–5
Z
Zeus, 84, 86–7, 129
Zionism, xiv, xv, 50, 120–2,
127–8, 142, 218
Zipporah, 124, 133–4, 136
INDEX
[ 256 ]

