
The China Model


The  
China  
Model
Polit ical  Mer it ocr ac y  
and  t he L imit s  
o f  Democr ac y
Daniel A. Bell
Princeton University Press 
Princeton and Oxford
•
•

Copyright © 2015 by Princeton University Press
Published by Princeton University Press, 41 William Street,  
Princeton, New Jersey 08540
In the United Kingdom: Princeton University Press, 6 Oxford Street, 
Woodstock, Oxfordshire OX20 1TW
press.princeton.edu
Jacket photograph: A general view of the closing session of the  
National People’s Congress, at the Great Hall of the People on March 16, 2007. 
Photograph © Andrew Wong/Getty Images.
All Rights Reserved
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Bell, Daniel (Daniel A.), 1964–
The China model : political meritocracy and the  
limits of democracy / Daniel A. Bell.
pages cm
Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN 978-0-691-16645-2 (hardback)
1. Political culture—China. 2. Merit (Ethics)—Political aspects—China.  
3. Political leadership—China. 4. Elite (Social sciences)—Political activity—
China. 5. Democracy—China. 6. China—Politics and government— 
1976–2002. 7. China—Politics and government—2002– I. Title. 
JQ1516.B45 2015
306.20951—dc23     2014044502
British Library Cataloging- in- Publication Data is available
This book has been composed in Electra LT Std
Printed on acid- free paper. ∞
Printed in the United States of America
1 3 5 7 9 10 8 6 4 2

To my Chinese mother and father


Contents
Acknowledgments 
ix
Introduction 
1
Chapter 1  
Is Democracy the Least Bad Political System? 
14
Chapter 2  
On the Selection of Good Leaders in a Political Meritocracy 
63
Chapter 3  
What’s Wrong with Political Meritocracy 
110
Chapter 4  
Three Models of Democratic Meritocracy 
151
Concluding Thoughts: Realizing the China Model 
179
Notes 
199
Selected Bibliography 
283
Index 
307


Acknowledgments
I 
should confess that there is not a single original idea in this book, 
except perhaps for the way ideas have been put together. I have re-
lied on the kindness of both strangers and intimates to think 
through these ideas, and the product is a communal work (though I 
need to take final responsibility for what’s written on the page). If I were 
to thank everyone who generously gave of their time, I’d have to add an 
additional page of notes on each page, thanking this or that person for 
nearly every idea in this book. Plus, I also need to confess that I’ve for-
gotten most of who said what. So let me offer thanks here, though I 
need to doubly apologize for my memory lapses because I’m sure I’ve 
forgotten some people.
Early drafts of chapters were presented and discussed in lectures, 
seminars, and workshops. I am grateful for the feedback of colleagues 
and students at the following institutions: Tsinghua University, Peking 
University, Shandong University, Renmin University, Wuhan Univer-
sity, National Taiwan University, Wesleyan University, Kenyon College, 
Harvard University, Stanford University, State University of New York 
at Buffalo, National University of Singapore, Nanyang Technological 
University, Sungkyunkwan University, the Seoul Institute, the Nordic 
Institute of Asian Studies (Copenhagen), University of Iceland, Univer-
sity of Greenland, University of Duisberg-Essen, Université de Mon-
tréal, and McGill University, as well as Unirule (Beijing), Intelligence 
Squared debate (Hong Kong), and annual meetings of Ideacity (To-
ronto), the World Economic Forum (Davos and Dalian), the Institute 

x 
Acknowledgments 
for New Economic Thinking (Hong Kong), the Asan forum (Seoul), 
and the American Political Science Association (Washington, D.C.).
Special thanks to Tan Sor-hoon and Terry Nardin for organizing 
sabbatical leave at the University of Singapore that allowed me to 
work on this book in an intellectually stimulating environment (and 
with unrestricted access to the Internet!). I am also grateful for the 
support of colleagues and friends at Tsinghua’s Department of Phi-
losophy and Schwarzman Scholars program. For (in)valuable research 
assistance, I thank Jia Peitao, Liu Yuhan, Sun Simeng, Wang Binfan, 
Wei Ran, Yuan Jingyan, and Zeng Rui. For meticulous copyediting, I 
thank Madeleine Adams, and for efficient help with production, Nata-
lie Baan.
I thank the following friends and colleagues for helpful discussions 
and/or for providing material helpful to my research: Joseph Adler, 
Roger Ames, David Anderson, Yuen Ang, Steve Angle, Anthony Ap-
piah, Timothy Garton Ash, Julien S. Bell, Thomas Bernstein, Ben 
Richard Kelsey Blumson, Cai Xianhui, James Caldwell, Mark Cam-
eron, Gilles Campagnolo, Cao Feng, Ivan Cardillo, Kateri Carmola, 
Jennie Chen, Chen Lai, Chung-Ying Cheng, Siyao Cheng, Valerie 
Cher Goh May, Ja Ian Chong, Chien-min Chou, Chu Yun-han, Chua 
Beng-huat, Jon Chua, Jean-Marc Coicaud, Margaret Conley, Sam 
Crane, Cui Zhiyuan, Fred Dallmayr, Jørgen Delman, John Delury, 
Avner de-Shalit, Bruce Dickson, Doh Chull Shin, Els Van Dongen, 
Wolfgang Drechsler, Du Lun, Duan Demin, Prasenjit Duara, Peter 
Edwards, Yiran Elenaz, Mark Elliott, Amitai Etzioni, James Fallows, 
Fan Ruiping, Fang Fenglei, Fang Zhaohui, Paolo Farah, Allan Fels, 
Ann Florini, Edward Friedman, Francis Fukuyama, Gan Chunsong, 
Gan Yang, N. Ganesan, Mobo Gao, Nathan Gardels, Farah Godrej,  
A. Tom Grunfeld, Linyu Gu, Werner Gundel, Seref Ulug Guner, Hahm 
Chaibong, Ken Hammond, Han Sang-jin, Dag Hareide, He Baogang, 
Geir Helgesen, Tze-ki Hon, Huang Jing, Huang Yusheng, Michael Ig-
natieff, Bruce Jacobs, Martin Jacques, Kanishka Jayasuriya, Sivanathan 
Jheevanesh, Jiang Haibo, Jiang Qing, Kang Xiaoguang, Peter Katzen-
stein, John Keane, David Kelly, Parag Khanna, Sang- jun Kim, Sung-
moon Kim, Leo Koguan, Kong Lindong, Kong Xinfeng, Chandran 
Kukathas, Kwa Chin Lum, Mean Luck Kwek, Martin Laflamme, Lee 
Chun-yi, Richard Levin, David Li Daokui, Li Qiang, Li Wanquan, Li 

 
Acknowledgments 
xi
Yong, Liang Zhiping, Chong Ming Lim, Teng Leng Lim, Liu Chun-
rong, Liu Kang, Liu Wei, Susanne Lohr, Simon Long, Lu Feng, Lu 
Keli, Du Lun, Steve Macedo, Kishore Mahbubani, Philippe Major, Ian 
Malcolm, Margali Menant, Thaddeus Metz, Donald Moon, So Young 
Moon, Christopher Mosch, Guido Muehlemann, David Mulroney, Ng 
Han Wei, Van Hiep Nguyen, Joseph Nye, Leanne Ogasawara, Lynette 
Ong, Evan Osnos, Jeremy Paltiel, Pan Wei, Pas quale Pasquino, Randy 
Peerenboom, Peng Guoxiang, Jane Perlez, Philip Pettit, Ora-orn 
Poocharoen, Ethan Putterman, Qian Jiwei, Qin Hui, Gideon Rach-
man, M. Ramesh, Marie-Eve René, Sidney Rittenberg, Daan Rog-
geveen, Philippe C. Schmitter, Mark Schwartz, Orville Shell, Sheng 
Hong, Geir Sigurdsson, Neil Sinhababu, Billy So, Dorothy Solinger, 
Jaeyoon Song, Song Min, Kristin Stapleton, Andrew Stark, Su Jun, 
Anna Sun, Sun Hsiao-Li Shirley, Sun Zhe, Charles Brian Suresh, Mi-
chael Szonyi, Kevin Y. L. Tan, Tan Sek-loong, Fred Teng, Carsten 
Boyer Thøgersen, Tu Weiming, George E. Vaillant, Marius Vermaak, 
Michael Walzer, Wan Junren, Wang Hui, Juan Wang, Jun Wang, Kan 
Wang, Ken Wang, Wang Shaoguang, Wang Xuedian, Daniel Wein-
stock, Leif Wenar, Tang Wenming, Lynn White, Charles Wolf, Benja-
min Wong, Reuben Wong, Wu Genyou, Wu Wanwei, Wu Yun, Xiao 
Geng, Hong Xiao, Xiao Wei, Xie Weihe, Xibai Xu, Alexander Yakob-
son, Yan Xuetong, David Yang, Yang Mu, Yang Ping, Yang Qianru, 
Yang Ruqin, Yang Xiao, Yao Xinzhong, George Yeo, Yvonne Ying, Yu 
Yongding, Yuan Yue, Zhang Feng, Lovis Zhang, Zhang Maoqi, Zhang 
Mei, Zhang Ming, Ning Zhang, Zhang Weiwei, Zhang Xudong, 
Zhang Yongle, Zheng Yongnian, and Qin Zhu. I should add that while 
I’ve learned from the views of the people named here, some will vehe-
mently disagree with the normative orientation of the book.
I am particularly grateful to friends and colleagues who generously 
gave of their time to write comments on earlier drafts of chapters: Bai 
Tongdong, Gerald Chan, Joseph Chan, Chen Ruoyu, Cheng Xiaoxu, 
John Dryzek, Benjamin Elman, Émilie Frenkiel, Jean-Yves Heurtebise, 
P. J. Ivanhoe, Liu Yuhan, Richard William Miller, Paik Wooyeal, Gra-
ham Parkes, Qiu Feng, Sun Haiyan, Sun Yan, Kenneth Paul Tan, Me-
lissa Williams, and Elena Ziliotti.
Last but not least, I am most grateful to: (1) my friends Ian Holliday, 
Robert Lawrence Kuhn, Li Chenyang, Yuri Pines, Qian Jiang, and 

xii 
Acknowledgments 
Matthias Risse, who wrote detailed comments on earlier drafts of the 
whole manuscript; (2) two referees for Princeton University Press, who 
wrote lengthy and constructive reports on an earlier draft; (3) my edi-
tor, Rob Tempio, for his support and insights (and for coming up with 
the title!); (4) Mo Yingchuan and Zhao Bingbing, for co-authoring the 
two online appendices to this book; (5) Nicolas Berggruen, for his com-
mitment to the world of ideas; (6) Vice-Minister for the Environment 
Pan Yue, for inspiring discussions about Chinese culture and political 
reform; (7) Eric X. Li, for support of a workshop on political meritoc-
racy and always stimulating conversation; (8) my family members in 
Canada, China, the United States, France, and Japan, who make the 
whole thing worthwhile; (9) my wife, Bing, who has shaped and refined 
my ideas more than anybody else; and (10) my Chinese mother Xue 
Yunjing and father Song Xiaolun, for their commitment to a beautiful 
family and a beautiful country. I dedicate this book to them.

The China Model


Introduction
I
n October 2013, a slick cartoon video of mysterious provenance 
went viral, with more than ten million viewings in two weeks.1 The 
video, released at the time of the U.S federal government shut-
down, contrasts the selection of leaders in different countries. It depicts 
the meteoric rise of President Barack Obama, aided by hundreds of 
millions of dollars in campaign financing, with victory coming in the 
form of a countrywide national election on the basis of one person, one 
vote. This process is labeled “democracy.” It also depicts President Xi 
Jinping’s decades- long ascent to the pinnacle of Chinese power: his 
promotions from leadership in a primary- level office to the township 
level, the county division, department levels, the province- ministry 
level, the Central Committee, the Politburo, and then the leading spot 
in the Standing Committee of the Politburo, with rigorous and ultra-
competitive evaluations at each stage meant to test his political leader-
ship abilities. This process is labeled “meritocracy.” The clear implica-
tion of the video is that Chinese- style political meritocracy is a morally 
legitimate way of selecting top political leaders, perhaps even better 
than democratic elections.
The video was likely produced and distributed by a Chinese Com-
munist Party (CCP) organ, but if political meritocracy is so good, why 
can’t the CCP take responsibility for the video? More generally, why 
can’t the CCP officially embrace political meritocracy and openly take 
pride in its meritocratic system? The main reason is that Chinese- style 
political meritocracy is imperfect in practice. But this leads to the ques-
tion of what should be the moral standards for evaluating political 

2 
Introduction 
progress (and regress) in a regime that aspires to be a political meritoc-
racy? More questions come to mind. The video suggests that political 
meritocracy and electoral democracy are fundamentally incompatible 
political systems. But is it possible to reconcile the best of meritocratic 
and democratic practices, and if so, how? The video says nothing about 
China’s harsh treatment of political opponents. If the system is so great, 
why is there a need to crack down on political dissent? Is it really pos-
sible to structure political meritocracy so that it is seen as legitimate by 
the people and avoids the abuses of authoritarian rule? My book is an 
attempt to answer such questions.
Political meritocracy is perhaps the most studied and the least stud-
ied topic in political theory. The idea that a political system should aim 
to select and promote leaders with superior ability and virtue is central 
to both Chinese and Western political theory and practice. The reason 
seems obvious: we demand trained and qualified persons in leadership 
positions in science, law, and corporations; why not also in the most 
important institution of all? As the distinguished American sociologist 
Daniel Bell (1919–2011) put it, “one wants men in political office who 
can govern well. The quality of life in any society is determined, in 
considerable measure, by the quality of leadership. A society that does 
not have its best men at the head of its leading institutions is a socio-
logical and moral absurdity.”2 Hence, political thinkers—from Confu-
cius, Plato, and Zhu Xi to John Stuart Mill, Sun Yat- sen, and Walter 
Lippmann—struggled to identify the ways of selecting the best possible 
leaders capable of making intelligent, morally informed political judg-
ments on a wide range of issues.
But such debates largely stopped in the post–World War II era. In 
China, they stopped because Maoism valued the political contribu-
tions of warriors, workers, and farmers over those of intellectuals and 
educators. Whatever the top- down political reality, revolutionary lead-
ers claimed they were building a new form of participatory socialist 
democracy from the ground up, and defenders of political elitism were 
nowhere to be seen (or publicly heard from) in mainland China. In the 
West, they stopped largely because of the intellectual hegemony of 
electoral democracy.3 A democracy demands only that the people select 
their leaders; it is up to the voters to judge the merits of the candidates. 
If voters are rational and do a good job choosing leaders, there is no 

 
Introduction 
3
need to agonize too much over what ought to be the qualities of good 
leaders and which mechanisms can best select such leaders. Political 
theorists therefore shifted their interests to questions such as how to 
deepen democracy in politics and other spheres of social life and how 
to promote fair forms of wealth distribution in the nation and the world 
at large.
The debates over political meritocracy were revived in the tiny city- 
state of Singapore. Starting from the 1960s, the country’s leaders advo-
cated the institutionalization of mechanisms aimed at selecting leaders 
who were best qualified to lead, even if doing so meant imposing con-
straints on the democratic process. They argued that political leaders 
should take a long- term view rather than cater to electoral cycles, and 
the political system can and should be structured to prevent the exer-
cise of power by short- term- minded “populist” political leaders. But 
Singapore’s discourse on political meritocracy failed to gain much trac-
tion abroad, largely because it was not presented as a universal ideal. 
Rather, Singapore’s leaders emphasized that the need to select and pro-
mote the most capable and upright people is particularly pressing in a 
tiny city- state with a small population, limited resource base, and po-
tentially hostile neighbors. Hence, why debate the exportability of an 
ideal that is meant to fit only a highly unusual city- state?
But two recent developments put debates about political meritocracy 
back on the global map. For one thing, the crisis of governance in 
Western democracies has undermined blind faith in electoral democ-
racy and opened the normative space for political alternatives. The 
problem is not just that democratic theorists came to realize the diffi-
culties of implementing democratic practices outside the Western 
world; the deeper problem is that actually existing democracy in the 
Western world no longer sets a clear- cut positive model for other coun-
tries. In difficult economic times, for example, voters often select popu-
list leaders who advocate policies inimical to the long- term good of the 
country, not to mention the rest of the world. Hence, innovative politi-
cal thinkers argue that governance in Western democracies can be im-
proved by incorporating more meritocratic institutions and practices.4
Equally important, the theory of political meritocracy has been re-
invigorated by the rise of China. Since the early 1990s, China’s politi-
cal system has evolved a sophisticated and comprehensive system for 

4 
Introduction 
selecting and promoting political talent that seems to have under-
pinned China’s stunning economic success. Like earlier practices in 
imperial China, the political system aims to select and promote public 
servants by means of examinations and assessments of performance at 
lower levels of government. Chinese- style meritocracy is plagued with 
imperfections, but few would deny that the system has performed rela-
tively well compared to democratic regimes of comparable size and 
level of economic development, not to mention family- run dictator-
ships in the Middle East and elsewhere. And the world is watching 
China’s ex periment with meritocracy. China, unlike Singapore, can 
“shake the world.” In the early 1990s, nobody predicted that China’s 
economy would rise so fast to become the world’s second largest econ-
omy. In twenty years’ time, perhaps we will be debating Chinese- style 
political meritocracy as an alternative model—and a challenge—to 
Western- style democracy.
Before saying more, let me clarify some terminology. My book is a 
defense of political meritocracy. Liberal democracies empower merito-
cratically selected experts in administrative and judicial positions, but 
they are accountable, if only indirectly, to democratically elected lead-
ers.5 They are meant to exercise power in a narrowly defined domain 
and should try to remain politically neutral to the extent possible. For 
example, British civil servants are meant to serve elected politicians 
and may need to set aside their own political views as they do so.6 In 
contrast, political leaders in meritocracies such as China are meant to 
exercise political judgment in a wide range of domains. They hold the 
ultimate power in the political community (including control over the 
instruments of violence), like elected leaders in democracies. And there 
is no clear institutional distinction between civil servants and political 
leaders in a political meritocracy. In short, meritocratically selected 
public servants in democratic countries are not meant to be political, 
whereas meritocratically selected public servants in political meritocra-
cies are meant to exercise political power.
It is also important to distinguish between political and economic 
meritocracy. In English, the term meritocracy can refer to a principle 
governing the distribution of economic resources:7 meritocracy is a sys-
tem that distributes wealth according to ability and effort rather than 

 
Introduction 
5
class or family background. Karl Marx criticized capitalism because it 
tends to distribute resources according to class background, notwith-
standing the myth that people are rewarded mainly according to ability 
and effort. Communism aims to abolish class differences, and the dis-
tribution of resources in the immediate postcapitalist period (“lower 
communism”) will translate capitalist rhetoric into reality: economic 
resources will be distributed according to the principle “from each ac-
cording to his ability, to each according to his contribution.” Although 
this seemingly meritocratic principle recognizes no class differences, it 
is still flawed because “it tacitly recognizes unequal individual endow-
ment and thus productive capacity as natural privileges.” That is, peo-
ple should not benefit from unearned natural talent and it is unfair to 
penalize those who are less productive through no fault of their own. 
Hence, society should move on to “higher communism” so resources 
can be distributed according to the principle “from each according to 
his ability, to each according to his needs.”8
John Rawls, the most influential political philosopher in the twenti-
eth century, similarly recognized the danger that seemingly fair oppor-
tunity could lead to “a callous meritocratic society.”9 Being born with 
ability confers no moral right to wealth because what one is born with, 
or without, is not of one’s own doing. Instead of distributing wealth on 
the basis of productive contribution, Rawls defends the “difference 
principle” that inequalities are allowed only if they benefit the least 
well- off. More surprisingly, perhaps, the world’s most powerful central 
banker, then– Federal Reserve chairman Ben Bernanke, expressed a 
similar critique of meritocracy in a graduate address at Princeton Uni-
versity in 2013:
A meritocracy is a system in which the people who are the 
luckiest in terms of their health and genetic endowment; lucki-
est in terms of family support, encouragement, and, probably, 
income; luckiest in terms of educational and career opportuni-
ties; and luckiest in so many ways difficult to enumerate: these 
are the people who reap the largest rewards. The only way for 
even a putative meritocracy to hope to pass ethical muster, to 
be considered fair, is if those who are the luckiest in all of those 

6 
Introduction 
respects also have the greatest responsibility to work hard, to 
contribute to the betterment of the world, and to share their 
luck with others.10
I am sympathetic to these critiques of “meritocracy” as an economic 
system, but my aim here is not to defend a particular theory governing 
the distribution of material goods. My concern, to repeat, is to defend 
political meritocracy—the idea that political power should be distrib-
uted in accordance with ability and virtue—and I invoke arguments 
about the distribution of economic resources only insofar as they bear 
on the issue of how to establish a morally desirable and politically real-
istic form of political meritocracy (see chapter 1, section 2 and chapter 
3, section 2).11
1. Outline of the Book
The idea that political leaders should be chosen according to one per-
son, one vote is taken for granted in so many societies that any attempt 
to defend political meritocracy should begin with a critique of electoral 
democracy: most readers in Western societies won’t even be willing to 
contemplate the possibility of morally justifiable alternatives to one per-
son, one vote as a means of selecting political leaders, so a book argu-
ing in favor of an alternative must at least raise some questions about 
democratic elections. Some philosophers have defended the rights to 
vote and run for office on the grounds that political liberties are intrin-
sically valuable for individuals whether or not they lead to collectively 
desirable consequences. These arguments, however, have been vigor-
ously contested. And if the aim is to promote electoral democracy in 
China, arguments for democracy appealing to the intrinsic value of 
voting will not be very effective because political surveys consistently 
show that citizens in East Asian societies understand democracy in sub-
stantive rather than procedural terms: that is, they tend to value democ-
racy because of its positive consequences rather than valuing demo-
cratic procedures per se. So the politically relevant question is whether 
democratic elections lead to good consequences. Democracy has had a 

 
Introduction 
7
good track record over the past few decades: rich, stable, and free coun-
tries are all democratic. But democracies also have key flaws that may 
spell political trouble in the future, and it is at least arguable that politi-
cal meritocracies can minimize such problems.
Chapter 1 discusses four key flaws of democracy understood in the 
minimal sense of free and fair elections for the country’s top rulers, and 
each flaw is followed by a discussion of theoretical and real merito-
cratic alternatives. The first flaw is “the tyranny of the majority”: irratio-
nal and self- interested majorities acting through the democratic pro-
cess can use their power to oppress minorities and enact bad policies. 
Examinations that test for voter competence can help to remedy this 
flaw in theory, and Singapore’s political meritocracy is a practicable al-
ternative. The second flaw is “the tyranny of the minority”: small 
groups with economic power exert disproportionate influence on the 
political process, either blocking change that’s in the common interest 
or lobbying for policies that benefit only their own interest. In theory, 
this flaw can be remedied by means of a citizen body that excludes 
wealthy elites, and China’s political system is a practicable alternative. 
The third flaw is “the tyranny of the voting community”: if there is a 
serious conflict of interest between the needs of voters and the needs of 
nonvoters affected by the policies of government such as future genera-
tions and foreigners, the former will almost always have priority. One 
theoretical remedy is a government office charged with the task of rep-
resenting the interests of future generations, and Singapore’s institution 
of a president with the power to veto attempts by politicians to enact 
policies that harm the interests of future generations is a practicable 
alternative. The fourth flaw is “the tyranny of competitive individual-
ists”: electoral democracy can exacerbate rather than alleviate social 
conflict and disadvantage those who prefer harmonious ways of resolv-
ing social conflict. A system based on consensus as a decision- making 
procedure can help to remedy this flaw, and China’s political model 
has some practical advantages in terms of reducing social conflict.
In short, there may be morally desirable and political feasible alter-
natives to electoral democracy that help to remedy the major disadvan-
tages of electoral democracy. If the aim is to argue for political meritoc-
racy in a Chinese context, however, we do not need to defend the 

8 
Introduction 
strong claim that political meritocracy consistently leads to better con-
sequences than electoral democracy. We can simply assume that Chi-
na’s one- party political system is not about to collapse and argue for 
improvements on that basis.12 Chapter 2 proceeds on the following as-
sumptions: (1) it is good for a political community to be governed by 
high- quality rulers; (2) China’s one (ruling) party political system is not 
about to collapse;13 (3) the meritocratic aspect of the system is partly 
good; and (4) it can be improved. On the basis of these assumptions, I 
draw on social science, history, and philosophy to put forward sugges-
tions about which qualities matter most for political leaders in the con-
text of large, peaceful, and modernizing (nondemocratic) meritocratic 
states, followed by suggestions about mechanisms that increase the 
likelihood of selecting leaders with such qualities. My findings about 
which abilities, social skills, and virtues matter most for political lead-
ers in the context of a large, peaceful, and modernizing political meri-
tocracy are then used as a standard for evaluating China’s actually ex-
isting meritocratic system. My conclusion is that China can and should 
improve its meritocratic system: it needs exams that more effectively 
test for politically relevant intellectual abilities, more women in leader-
ship positions to increase the likelihood that leaders have the social 
skills required for effective policy making, and more systematic use of a 
peer- review system to promote political officials motivated by the desire 
to serve the public.
Any defense of political meritocracy needs to address not only the 
question of how to maximize the advantages of the system but also how 
to minimize its disadvantages. Chapter 3 discusses three key problems 
associated with any attempt to implement political meritocracy: (1) rul-
ers chosen on the basis of their superior ability are likely to abuse their 
power; (2) political hierarchies may become frozen and undermine so-
cial mobility; and (3) it is difficult to legitimize the system to those 
outside the power structure. Given that electoral democracy at the top 
is not politically realistic in China, I ask if it is possible to address these 
problems without democratic elections. The problem of corruption 
can be addressed by mechanisms such as independent supervisory in-
stitutions, higher salaries, and improved moral education. The prob-
lem of ossification of hierarchies can be addressed by means of a hum-

 
Introduction 
9
ble political discourse, opening the ruling party to diverse social groups, 
and allowing for the possibility of different kinds of political leaders se-
lected according to new ideas of political merit. The problem of legiti-
macy, however, can be addressed only by means of more opportunities 
for political participation, including some form of explicit consent by 
the people. The question, therefore, is how to reconcile political meri-
tocracy and democracy. Can it be done in morally desirable ways with-
out multiparty competition and free and fair elections for top leaders?
Chapter 4 discusses the pros and cons of different models of “demo-
cratic meritocracy”: more specifically, models that aim to reconcile a 
meritocratic mechanism designed to select superior political leaders 
with a democratic mechanism designed to let the people choose their 
leaders. The first model combines democracy and meritocracy at the 
level of the voter (e.g., allocating extra votes to educated voters), but 
such proposals, whatever their philosophical merit, are not politically 
realistic. The second (horizontal) model aims to reconcile democracy 
and meritocracy at the level of central political institutions, but such a 
model will be almost impossible to implement and sustain even in a 
political culture (such as China’s) that strongly values political meritoc-
racy. The third (vertical) model aims to combine political meritocracy 
at the level of the central government and democracy at the local level. 
This model is not a radical departure from the political reality in China 
and it can also be defended on philosophical grounds.
The political model in China, however, is not simply democracy at 
the bottom and meritocracy at the top: it is also based on extensive and 
systematic experimentation in between the lowest and highest levels of 
government. The concluding chapter sketches out three basic planks of 
the China model and shows how political reform in the post- Mao era 
has been guided by the principles of “democracy at the bottom, experi-
mentation in the middle, and meritocracy at the top.” There remains a 
large gap between the ideal and the reality, however, and I suggest ways 
of closing that gap. The legitimacy problem is perhaps the most serious 
threat to the meritocratic system. At some point, the Chinese govern-
ment may need to secure the people’s consent to the Chinese adapta-
tion of vertical democratic meritocracy by means such as a referendum. 
The chapter ends with remarks about the exportability of the China 

10 
Introduction 
model: while the model as a whole cannot readily be adopted by coun-
tries with a different history and culture, different planks of the model 
can be selectively adopted and the Chinese government can play a 
more active role promoting its model abroad.
This book’s central area of concern is the question of how to maxi-
mize the advantages and minimize the disadvantages of a political sys-
tem that aims to select and promote political leaders of superior virtue 
and ability, particularly in the contemporary Chinese context. Other 
than arguing for the need to enact policies that benefit the people, I 
have been deliberately vague about what those leaders should do: 
China is a large, complex country with different needs and priorities in 
different times and places, and any informed answer needs to be partly 
based on what the Chinese people actually want. That said, some gen-
eral guidance may be helpful and the book includes two appendixes 
published online at http://press.princeton.edu/titles/10418.html. The 
first appendix is a Harmony Index that ranks countries according to 
how well they do at promoting four different types of social relations 
characterized by peaceful order and respect for diversity. This kind of 
index, either in part or in whole, can be used to judge social progress 
(and regress) in China and elsewhere. Another possible use of the Har-
mony Index more specific to the Chinese context is that it can be con-
sidered as a standard to judge the performance of political officials for 
purposes of promotion (or demotion), especially given the widespread 
consensus that economic growth can no longer be used as the sole in-
dicator of good performance.
The second appendix is a real political dialogue (carried out in per-
son and via email) with a political official in the CCP. My own ethical 
commitments are largely inspired by Confucian values, but I do not 
think that Confucianism is the only way to justify political meritocracy, 
so I have not been too explicit about the empirical and normative rele-
vance of Confucianism in this book. Still, Confucianism can influence 
how one thinks about political meritocracy, and the second appendix 
focuses more directly on the role of Confucianism in shaping China’s 
political meritocracy. The dialogue is a rare window into the views of 
an erudite CCP official who is speaking in a private capacity. The ap-
pendix is titled “A Conversation between a Confucian and a Commu-
nist,” but by the end of the dialogue it will not be clear who’s who.

 
Introduction 
11
2. A Note on Method
Notwithstanding the importance of the topic, there is a dearth of con-
temporary political theorizing about political meritocracy (in contrast, 
there are thousands of books about democratic theory). So the main 
research for this book involved extensive reading in the social sci-
ences, philosophy, and history (in English, Chinese, and French), and 
trying to put together a book out of material that does not always (or 
even usually) bear directly on the topic. Equally if not more impor-
tant, I have benefitted from exchanges with people who helped me to 
make sense of the theory and practice of political meritocracy. In a 
(selfish?) effort to help further my own thinking, I coorganized two 
conferences with leading philosophers, historians, and social scientists 
that examined the rise (or revival) of political meritocracy and what it 
will mean for political developments in China and the rest of the 
world. The first (English- language) conference, coorganized with 
Chenyang Li, took place at Nanyang Technological University (Singa-
pore) in January 2012 and led to the publication of an edited volume 
(coedited with Chenyang Li) titled The East Asian Challenge for De-
mocracy: Political Meritocracy in Comparative Perspective (Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press, 2013). The second (Chinese- language) 
conference, coorganized with the Department of Philosophy at Tsing-
hua University and the Equinox (Chunqiu) Institute in Shanghai, took 
place at Tsinghua University in October 2012 and led to the publica-
tion of a special issue of Wenshizhe in March 2013. I have benefitted 
tremendously from the intellectual exchanges at these two confer-
ences. I have also benefitted from interviews with political leaders in 
China and Singapore. I am grateful to several academic friends who 
generously took time to comment on earlier drafts of this book. Last 
but not least, I have assigned readings on political meritocracy (in-
cluding, I confess, my own half- worked- out ideas) to students at Tsing-
hua University (Beijing), Shanghai Jiaotong University, and the Na-
tional University of Singapore over the past few years and have 
benefitted much from their criticisms and suggestions for improve-
ment. I am particularly grateful to graduate students in the Depart-
ment of Philosophy at the National University of Singapore who orga-
nized an informal reading group to comment on an earlier draft of 

12 
Introduction 
this book: I hope you will judge this book to have been improved as a 
result of your critiques!
3. A Note on Motivation
Why do I care about this topic? I developed an interest in political mer-
itocracy as a result of engagement with the Confucian tradition, and 
my earlier writings on political meritocracy tended to be inspired more 
by Confucian philosophy than by actual politics. Over the past few 
years, I came to realize that China’s political system has meritocratic 
characteristics, if only because my own high- achieving students at 
Tsing hua University were being increasingly recruited in the CCP. 
Clearly it made sense to relate philosophizing about political meritoc-
racy more directly to the political reality of China. I realized that I had 
stumbled onto something of political importance and wrote some op- 
eds in leading media outlets in China and the West. However, I was 
ruthlessly savaged by critics, accused of being everything from an apol-
ogist for the CCP to an agent for Goldman Sachs (my wife’s employer).14 
Hence, I realized the need to write a book with more detailed and nu-
anced argumentation, filled with the usual academic qualifications 
and notes (all the while trying to write in as accessible a manner as 
possible). I’m not sure if I’ve succeeded, but I’ve done my best during 
the course of a self- imposed five- year plan.
It’s also worth asking why I’m publishing a book that seems mainly 
about China with an American academic publisher. One reason is that 
I write in English.15 But this book will likely be translated into Chinese 
and I hope that it will have an impact in China; the mechanics of how 
the political system works will be familiar to Chinese readers, but the 
book may contribute to more discussion of appropriate standards for 
judging political progress (and regress). I also hope the book can be 
read in English- speaking countries to promote better understanding of 
political meritocracy as an ideal and the Chinese political system as a 
reality, and perhaps even to inspire meritocratic reform in democratic 
countries.16 At the very least, Western readers may benefit by being 
given Chinese perspectives on topics they usually take for granted: I 
would not have written this book without a decade’s experience living 

 
Introduction 
13
and teaching in Beijing, and perhaps I would have been shocked by 
some of my own arguments had I read them two decades ago. But the 
truth is that my political views are quite middle- of- the- road among aca-
demics living and working in China.17 This book is not meant to be 
provocative or contrarian, even if it may be viewed as such by Western 
readers. Notwithstanding more legally protected freedom of speech in 
Western countries, there is much better understanding of Western- 
style democracy in China than of Chinese- style meritocracy in the 
West, and my book is meant provide some symmetry. I look forward to 
the day when Westerners and Chinese can have informed debates 
about politics without deep ideological fissures or cultural misunder-
standings, and if I can contribute a tiny bit to making that day a reality, 
I can go to bed a happy man.

Ch pter 1
Is Democracy the Least  
Bad Political System?
I
t is a truism that modern Western societies are pluralistic. We argue 
about everything and agree, it seems, about nothing. Actually, we 
do agree about one thing: that we should choose our political lead-
ers by means of one person, one vote.1 Electoral democracy has as-
sumed almost sacred status in modern Western societies. We can ques-
tion faith in God without being accused of having lost our moral 
compass, but the same tolerance is not extended to those who question 
faith in one person, one vote; almost inevitably, they are tarred with the 
brush of being apologists for “bad” authoritarian regimes.
Plus, we agree that electoral democracy is a universal political good. 
It is good not only for us, but for the rest of the world. Hence, when 
“bad” authoritarian regimes fall, they are supposed to be replaced by a 
form of government chosen by means of one person, one vote. Hardly 
anyone contemplates an alternative. From a normative point of view, 
democracy is seen as the best possible political regime. More precisely, 
it is a necessary condition for the best possible regime. Free and fair 
elections for political leaders need to be supplemented by other politi-
cal goods—and here there are endless disputes about what those goods 
should be (civil society, social justice, democracy in the workplace, fo-
rums for deliberation, additional ways of monitoring power,2 etc.)—but 
we agree that those goods (whatever they are) should be implemented 
on a foundation of electoral democracy.

 
Is Democracy the Least Bad Political System?  
15
That said, political “realists” warn us that democracy cannot readily 
be established in poor, developing countries. In his 1968 work Political 
Order in Changing Societies,3 Samuel Huntington controversially ar-
gued that political order was necessary for economic and social devel-
opment. Premature increases in political participation—including 
early elections—could destabilize fragile political systems in the devel-
oping world. Hence, a modernizing dictatorship that provides political 
order, the rule of law, and the conditions for successful economic and 
social development may be necessary. Still, Huntington did not mean 
to justify dictatorship as a permanent arrangement. Once the building 
blocks are in place, then the time is ripe for democracy and further 
delays are not justified from a moral point of view.
In other words, the dispute between “idealists” and “realists” is pri-
marily a dispute about timing; neither side means to question the ideal 
of electoral democracy. Ethnic warfare, crippling poverty, pervasive 
corruption, and lack of education may pose obstacles to the successful 
establishment and consolidation of democracy, but they are seen as un-
fortunate (we hope temporary) afflictions that delay what Francis Fuku-
yama (Huntington’s student) called the “end of history,” when democ-
racy has finally triumphed over its rivals. It is widely assumed that 
democracy is something that all rational individuals would want if they 
could get it.
Surprisingly, perhaps, the view that electoral democracy is the best 
possible political regime is commonly (but far from unanimously) 
held in China as well. Whatever we hear about “civilizational differ-
ences” between China and the West, many Chinese political thinkers 
share the view that democracy is the best possible political system. It is 
dangerous to organize a movement for the implementation of multi-
party competitive elections in China—that’s what landed Liu Xiaobo 
in jail—but Chinese political thinkers can and do argue for electoral 
democracy as an ideal in academic publications. An often- heard argu-
ment among Chinese intellectuals is that democracy should not be 
implemented now because of the prevalence of “low- quality” Chinese 
farmers, but democracy will become more viable once Chinese peo-
ple become more educated and urbanized.4 The political reformer Yu 
Keping famously authored an essay titled Democracy Is a Good Thing 

16 
Chapter 1 
and has called for more electoral competition at different levels of gov-
ernment.5 Yu Chongqing argues that the fundamental building block 
of democracy is multicandidate competitive elections—whether at the 
local or the central level of government—and it is meaningless to talk 
about other forms of democracy (such as intraparty democracy, dem-
ocratic deliberation, or local- level democracy) without this founda-
tion.6 More cautiously, Ma Ling argues that the immediate task in 
China is to implement “democratic supervision,” but he goes on to 
say that it should be followed by democratic elections.7 Here too, the 
dispute is less about the desirability than about the timing of electoral 
democracy.8
On the face of it, it is hard to understand why electoral democracy 
came to have such widespread appeal. For one thing, the practice of 
choosing a country’s top leaders by means of free and fair competitive 
elections has had a relatively short history (less than a century in most 
countries, compared to, say, thirteen hundred years for China’s exami-
nation system).9 Like any other political system, it has advantages and 
disadvantages, and it seems too soon to affirm that it’s the best system 
of all time for all time. More fundamentally, it seems peculiar to take 
an almost unquestioned stance in favor of a system that does not re-
quire experience (and expertise) for leadership. There are many ways of 
exercising power—in workplaces, schools, hospitals, prisons, and so 
on—and the natural assumption is that prior experience is necessary 
for the exercise of power by top leaders. No corporation or university 
would pick a top leader without substantial leadership experience of 
some sort, preferably in the same field.10 Yet political power is an excep-
tion: it’s fine to pick a leader with no prior political experience, so long 
as he or she has been chosen on the basis of one person, one vote.
So why exactly did we come to believe that electoral democracy is a 
necessary foundation for a morally desirable political system? Few peo-
ple have the time and motivation to read the debates in political sci-
ence journals,11 so the key explanation cannot be the result of reflective 
endorsements of arguments in the academic literature.12 The value 
placed on equal voting rights may be a result of prolonged political 
struggles by (formerly) marginalized sectors of the political commu-
nity, such as women and minority groups.13 Another reason may be the 
growing significance of national identities in the twentieth century: as 

 
Is Democracy the Least Bad Political System?  
17
more and more people think of their prime identities as tied to their 
nation, they come to value the equal right of participating in national 
politics as key to human dignity. Another reason may be the economic, 
political, and ideological hegemony of the United States in the post–
World War II period, especially since the collapse of the Soviet bloc. 
The United States promotes electoral democracy as the “only game in 
town,” and the rest of the world sits up and listens. To paraphrase Karl 
Marx, the ideas of the ruling country are the ruling ideas. Perhaps the 
idea that we are equal in the eyes of God became transmuted into the 
idea that we are political equals in the eyes of the government,14 and 
the idea that we are political equals then became translated in the pop-
ular mind into the (mistaken) belief that political equality must take 
the form of one person, one vote.15 There is something about the act of 
voting that confers an experience of psychological power: I come to 
feel that I have a say in choosing my ruler (even if my vote does not 
make any difference), and I come to treasure the right to vote, a sense 
of empowerment that may also extend to other areas of social life.16 Any 
attempts to modify or abolish one person, one vote will be intensely 
controversial because those deprived of an equal vote will feel that they 
are “losers” and officially labeled as inferior in terms of the capacity to 
make informed political judgments.17 Perhaps the idea of choosing 
leaders by means of competitive elections is easy to understand and 
implement. And maybe voting is a communal ritual that produces and 
reinforces a sense of civic solidarity for the people involved: we feel part 
of a community when we vote. Most likely, different combinations of 
these factors operate to different degrees in different contexts.18
Whatever the history and the psychological mechanisms that under-
pin support for voting, it is worth asking if the arguments for electoral 
democracy are morally defensible. Philosophers tend to distinguish be-
tween two sorts of arguments for democracy. Some philosophers argue 
that the rights to vote and run for political office are intrinsically valu-
able for individuals whether or not they lead to collectively desirable 
consequences: democratic procedures such as the equal right to vote 
and majority decision making express intrinsically valuable goods such 
as equality, fairness, dignity, autonomy, participation, solidarity, and 
mutual trust, which do not depend on desirable consequences for their 
moral power.19 But such arguments have been vigorously contested,20 

18 
Chapter 1 
and the leading Anglo- American philosophers from J. S. Mill to John 
Rawls and Ronald Dworkin tend to defend political equality in the 
form of one person, one vote on instrumental grounds.21 And if the aim 
is to promote electoral democracy in China, arguments for democracy 
appealing to the intrinsic value of voting will not be very effective be-
cause political surveys show that citizens in East Asian societies typi-
cally understand democracy in substantive rather than procedural 
terms:22 that is, they tend to value democracy because of its positive 
consequences rather than valuing democratic procedures per se.
So the politically relevant question is whether democratic elections 
lead to good consequences. The prodemocracy case in terms of conse-
quences is perhaps best captured by Winston Churchill’s famous quip: 
“Democracy is the worst form of government, except for all those other 
forms that have been tried from time to time.” This quotation is end-
lessly trotted out as a defense of democracy, more often than not as a 
way of silencing debate about the pros and cons of democracy.23 What-
ever the flaws of democracy, other alternatives are even worse, so let’s 
not push too hard to undermine our faith in democracy. Even the 
harshest contemporary philosophical critic of the right to vote in the 
Western world affirms (without any empirical evidence) that “democ-
racy performs better, even with low voter participation, than its com-
petitors (oligarchy, etc.) do.”24
But is democracy really the least bad system? True, the two major 
political alternatives in Churchill’s day—Nazism and Soviet- style com-
munism—have been (rightly) consigned to the dustbin of history. But 
the case for democracy as the least bad regime is not so clear if the al-
ternative is political meritocracy as it has been practiced in the modern 
world. Consider the two most seemingly iron- clad consequentialist ar-
guments in favor of democracy: (1) Amartya Sen’s argument that fam-
ines do not occur in democracies,25 and (2) the argument that democra-
cies do not go to war against one another.26 Without questioning the 
validity of such arguments, it is worth noting that they also hold true in 
two nondemocratic countries—China and Singapore—since they have 
consciously implemented meritocratic reforms designed to improve the 
quality of political leadership (starting from the mid- 1960s in Singa-
pore and the early 1980s in China). Singapore has achieved a stunning 

 
Is Democracy the Least Bad Political System?  
19
economic miracle and has not gone to war since independence in 1965. 
In the case of China, not only has it eradicated famine, it also has a 
much better record on malnutrition than, say, democratic India.27 And 
China’s last full- scale war was with Vietnam in 1979.28 Still, I do not 
mean to question the point that democracies have the best record over-
all compared to other forms of government in the past. What I do mean 
to question is the idea that democracies will continue to perform better 
than political meritocracies on key indicators of good government in 
the foreseeable future.
Hence, in this chapter I will discuss some standards of good govern-
ment that should not be too controversial—voters should do their best 
to select wise leaders, the government should try to structure the econ-
omy so that the benefits do not accrue only (or mainly) to a small group 
of rich people, leaders should not enact policies that wreck the environ-
ment for future generations, and the political system should not poison 
social relations and unduly penalize those who seek harmonious ways 
of resolving conflict—and ask if there are meritocratic alternatives, both 
in theory and practice, that produce better (or less bad) consequences 
than democracies. My aim here is simply to cast doubt on the idea that 
one person, one vote is the least bad way of choosing leaders to enact 
good policies, not to provide a comprehensive defense of political meri-
tocracy as an alternative to electoral democracy. In other words, I seek 
only to establish that the consequentialist case for democracy is not so 
straightforward. Once we “desacralize” democracy, then we can pro-
ceed to discuss the advantages and disadvantages of political meritoc-
racy with a more open mind.
To make my case harder, however, I want to emphasize that my tar-
get will be free and fair competitive elections (or the kinds of elections 
that would be endorsed by the Carter Center).29 The political econo-
mist Paul Collier has written a grim book on democracy in poor, ethni-
cally divided countries (the “bottom billion”). Over the past two de-
cades or so, high- income countries have actively promoted democracy 
across the low- income world, with the result that democracy increased 
political violence. But elections in the poorest countries tend to be 
characterized by bribery, the intimidation of voters, exclusion of strong 
candidates, and miscounting votes; in other words, the elections are not 

20 
Chapter 1 
free and fair.30 It would be too easy (from a theoretical point of view) to 
criticize flawed elections, so I will criticize the main flaws of free and 
fair elections.
And to make my case even harder, I will draw most of my examples 
from the most powerful and influential democracy in modern times: 
the United States.31 Given that my book is mainly written with the Chi-
nese context in mind, it might make more sense to compare China 
with democratic countries such as India and Indonesia, which are 
closer to China in terms of GDP per capita and population (in the case 
of India). It would not be a big challenge to point to widespread malnu-
trition in India or corruption in Indonesia to show the superiority of the 
Chinese political system in terms of delivering benefits that the popula-
tion cares about. But I draw most of my examples from the United 
States for the following reasons: (1) there is an extensive academic lit-
erature on the pros and cons of the American political system, and  
(2) most Chinese intellectuals and reformers typically compare their 
system to the American political system on the (implicit) assumption it 
should set the standard for evaluating China’s political future.32
To make my case that there are desirable (or less bad) alternatives to 
democracy, I need to argue for alternatives that conflict with the prac-
tice of free and fair competitive elections. It will not suffice to argue for 
meritocratic institutions within an overall democratic context, such as 
the Supreme Court, the Federal Reserve, and the military in the 
United States or the civil service in the United Kingdom. These institu-
tions can exercise power only in a restricted domain and are ultimately 
accountable and subordinate to democratically elected politicians; they 
are meant to supplement, rather than pose alternatives to, electoral de-
mocracy.33 In other words, I need to argue for political proposals and 
institutions composed of leaders not chosen by means of free and fair 
elections (one person, one vote) with the power to debate and decide on 
a wide range of issues affecting the political community in ways that 
can override the decisions of democratically elected leaders.
In this chapter, I will discuss four key problems with electoral de-
mocracy: the tyranny of the majority, the tyranny of the minority, the 
tyranny of the voting community, and the tyranny of competitive indi-
vidualists. Criticisms of democracy have a long history—from Plato 
onward—but I will focus mainly on key drawbacks of electoral democ-

 
Is Democracy the Least Bad Political System?  
21
racies today.34 Following a discussion of each drawback, I will argue for 
theoretical alternatives to electoral democracy that do better (or less 
badly) than actually existing democracies. However, it seems unfair  
to compare the flaws of actually existing democracies with as- yet- 
unrealized theoretical alternatives, so I will end each section by dis-
cussing examples of actually existing political meritocratic arrange-
ments in China and/or Singapore that may minimize the flaws of 
electoral democracies.
1. The Tyranny of the Majority
In an electoral democracy, voting power translates into political power. 
Perhaps the most common criticism of democracy is that the majority 
of voters can use their power to oppress the rest. For Plato, rule of the 
“many” meant that simple- minded citizens can easily be swayed by 
the emotive arguments of demagogues (or Sophists), leading to injus-
tices such as the death penalty for his teacher Socrates. In The Repub-
lic, Plato defended the idea that a minority of moral experts should 
rule. Just as a ship should be captained by a trained and competent 
expert, so the leaders of political communities should be trained in 
the philosophy of how to rule in a just way and serve at lower levels of 
government before they are put in command of the whole. Plato’s stu-
dent Aristotle held that since most men pursue the useful and not the 
good, citizens should be those with virtue and ability; hence citizen-
ship should be restricted to elites with sufficient free time to seek the 
good life. The phrase tyranny of the majority was popularized by the 
nineteenth- century British philosopher J. S. Mill, who worried that 
 irrational and self- interested majorities acting through the democratic 
process could use their power to oppress minorities and enact bad 
policies.
In the twentieth century, however, liberal democracies consolidated 
constitutional restraints on majority rule, and liberal democracies typi-
cally protect minority groups and unpopular individuals from gross 
abuses of human rights. The progress did not always (or even usually) 
come about as a result of enlightened views about the need for mutual 
respect between groups—Michael Mann argues that the idea of rule by 

22 
Chapter 1 
the people has often defined “the people” as the dominant ethnic 
group, generating organic conceptions of the nation and the state that 
encouraged the murderous cleansing of minorities so as to produce 
many monoethnic citizen bodies in the present, a process that has fin-
ished passing through the North and is now engulfing parts of the 
South35—but it is hard to argue against the claim that wealthy, consoli-
dated liberal democracies now better protect individuals and minority 
groups from gross abuses of human rights than other forms of govern-
ment. The problem, however, is that the majority of voters in electoral 
democracies, including rich and wealthy liberal democracies, do not 
perform well in selecting political leaders with the motivation and abil-
ity to enact wise policies in areas such as economics and science. In 
Chinese terms, this means that voters in “advanced” democracies are 
also “low- quality”; lack of political competence is a feature not just of 
Chinese farmers. Let’s review some evidence for this criticism, fol-
lowed by suggestions for improvement and comparisons with political 
meritocracies.
The original democracy—ancient Athens—treated citizens as 
equals, but slaves and women (the majority) were excluded from citi-
zenship. Aristotle put forward dubious arguments on behalf of their 
exclusion—women and slaves were said to be naturally inferior and 
thus presumably must be ruled despotically. Aristotle did, however, 
hold out the possibility that slaves could be freed, thus suggesting that 
slavery need not be a permanent state.36 Even “natural inferiors” could 
be educated, with the exception of those with undeveloped mental ca-
pacities similar to mentally handicapped people in the modern world. 
Today, it is widely recognized that there are differences in innate intel-
ligence; not everyone can be Einstein, and professors and human re-
source officers often compare the intelligence of others, assuming that 
differences will emerge even with similar family backgrounds and edu-
cational profiles. Still, for purposes of citizenship, none of this should 
matter; the large majority of people can and should be educated to be 
rational voters and twelve or thirteen years of compulsory schooling 
should suffice.
In short, modern- day democratic politics is founded on the idea that 
people generally act rationally in pursuit of their interests and prefer-
ences.37 We know what we want and we will vote in ways that satisfy our 

 
Is Democracy the Least Bad Political System?  
23
wants.38 A common critique of this view is that voters should not be too 
selfish. Voting is not like going to a movie; if I watch a bad movie, I 
waste my own time but do not impose costs on other people. In con-
trast, I vote for political leaders who exercise power not just over me but 
also over other members of the political community. Hence, I have a 
moral obligation to consider the legitimate interests of other people 
when I vote: in other words, I have a duty to vote for the common 
good.39 But, the story goes, most people vote their pocketbooks. In fact, 
the empirical evidence suggests that voters tend to vote according to 
what they perceive to be the national common good rather than what 
they perceive to be in their self- interest.40 The basic problem is not that 
most voters seek to maximize their self- interest, but rather that most 
voters lack the knowledge necessary to make informed political judg-
ments. Even if the majority wanted to maximize their self- interest, they 
often lack the knowledge that would allow them to do so.
For one thing, most people lack the time to inform themselves about 
political events and vote accordingly. The problem may be even worse 
now than in the time of ancient Athens: as Bai Tongdong puts it, the 
use of slave labor
freed Athenian citizens from daily work and made it possible 
for them to fully participate in political matters. But even by 
using slaves, the adequacy of the political competence of Athe-
nian citizens was still challenged by classical writers such as 
Plato and Aristophanes. Then how likely is it that the common 
people in a modern democracy, who need to work hard to 
maintain their desired standard of living (this is a basic fact of 
capitalism and perhaps all modern societies that rid themselves 
of the guilty pleasure of slavery), can participate in politics to 
the extent of acquiring the political competence necessary for 
a desirable form of liberal and deliberative democracy?41
The problem is not just lack of time. Compared to ancient Greek 
city- states, modern- day democracies are large in scale, and individual 
votes are not likely to make any statistical difference in the outcome. 
Hence, it is rational for voters to spend time doing other things: as Jason 
Brennan puts it, “citizens are rationally ignorant. Individual citizens 

24 
Chapter 1 
have almost no power over government, and individual votes have al-
most zero expected utility. Thus, political knowledge does voters little 
good. Acquiring knowledge is costly and difficult. If you knew that your 
vote were likely to be decisive, then you would invest time and effort 
into acquiring political knowledge. However, when you realize that 
your vote makes no difference, you probably decide not to bother.”42 In 
short, voters in modern- day democracies lack both the time and the 
motivation to improve their political competence.
Even if voters had the time and motivation to learn about politics, 
they would be subject to various cognitive biases—unconscious errors 
of reasoning that distort our judgment of the world. The Nobel prize 
winner Daniel Kahneman has summarized several decades of aca-
demic research showing that people place too much confidence in 
human judgment. An example of overconfidence is a “pervasive opti-
mistic bias” that generates the belief that we are in control of things: 
“Psychologists have confirmed that most people genuinely believe that 
they are superior to most others on most desirable traits. . . . The obser-
vation that ‘90% of drivers believe that they are better than average’ is a 
well- established psychological finding.” Entrepreneurs suffer from such 
delusions too: “The chances that a small business will survive for five 
years in the United States are about 35%. But the individuals who open 
such businesses do not believe the statistics apply to them. . . . Fully 
81% of the entrepreneurs put their personal odds of success at 7 out of 
10 or higher, and 33% said their chance of failing was zero.” Kahneman 
suggests that it is possible to improve our judgment and biases, but “lit-
tle can be achieved without considerable effort.” Moreover, it is easier 
to identify a cognitive minefield “when you observe others wandering 
into it than when you are about to do so.” And “organizations are better 
than individuals when it comes to avoiding errors, because they natu-
rally think more slowly and have the power to impose orderly proce-
dures.”43 Kahneman doesn’t say this, but the voting booth—where indi-
viduals express their political preferences without any obligation to 
inform themselves beforehand (i.e., no effort required) and without any 
feedback from other people or organizations that might be able to 
check cognitive biases—seems almost designed to maximize irrational 
decision making.

 
Is Democracy the Least Bad Political System?  
25
Given that most voters lack the time, motivation, and cognitive skills 
to acquire political knowledge, it should come as no surprise that most 
voters often seem ignorant on key issues: “For example, 79 percent of 
Americans cannot identify their state senators. During election years, 
most citizens cannot identify any congressional candidates in their dis-
trict. Immediately before the 2004 presidential election, almost 70 per-
cent of American citizens were unaware that Congress had added a 
prescription drug benefit to Medicare, though this was a giant increase 
to the federal budget and was the largest new entitlement program in 
decades. Generally, citizens in other democracies are no better in-
formed than Americans.”44 Some voters “have patently stupid beliefs. 
For instance, a 2009 poll of likely voters in New Jersey found that 8 
percent of them (including 5 percent of Democrats and 14 percent of 
Republicans) believe Barack Obama is the anti- Christ, while 19 per-
cent of them (including 40 percent of self- identified left- liberals) be-
lieve George W. Bush had knowledge of the 9/11 attacks before 9/11.”45 
A poll for the American Bar Association in 2005 found that 22 percent 
of respondents thought the three branches of government were “Re-
publican, Democrat, and Independent,” and in 1987—before the So-
viet Union had collapsed—about half of Americans thought Karl 
Marx’s dictum “from each according to his ability, to each according to 
his needs” was in the U.S. Constitution.46
Contemporary politics, of course, is not just about knowledge of po-
litical personalities and institutions. Economic policy is a primary ac-
tivity of the modern state, yet Bryan Caplan has shown that beliefs 
about economics are riddled with severe systematic errors: “People do 
not understand the ‘invisible hand’ of the market. I call this antimarket 
bias. People underestimate the benefits of interaction with foreigners. I 
call this antiforeign bias. People equate prosperity not with production, 
but with employment. I call this make- work bias. Lastly, people are 
overly prone to think economic conditions are bad and getting worse. I 
call this pessimistic bias.”47 Science also matters for politics, and voters’ 
beliefs about science are equally riddled with systematic errors. Defy-
ing a near- consensus among scientists, only 44 percent of Americans 
believe that global warming is caused mostly by human activities; in 
contrast, 77 percent of Americans believe there are signs that aliens 

26 
Chapter 1 
have visited earth.48 An overwhelming majority (97 percent) of the sci-
entific community says that humans and other things have evolved 
over time due to natural processes, but only 21 percent of Americans 
believe in evolution.49
Perhaps voter ignorance is not really a challenge for democracy. Vot-
ing is simply a fair procedure that gives everyone an equal chance of 
influencing political outcomes, and we cannot expect democratic deci-
sions to respect standards or truth, prudence, or justice. But fair proce-
duralism, taken alone, is a weak reason for endorsing democracy. As 
David Estlund explains, “Democratic procedures (some of them any-
way) might indeed be fair, but this will turn out to be morally too small 
of a matter to support an account of authority and legitimacy. Proce-
dural fairness alone cannot explain most of the features of democratic 
institutions that we are likely to feel are crucial. To anticipate my argu-
ment with a one- liner, if what we want is a procedure that is fair to all, 
why not flip a coin? That is, why not choose a law or policy randomly?”50 
In other words, we care about the voting process not just because it is a 
fair procedure (a coin toss is equally fair) but also because we think it 
will lead to fair outcomes.
Another reason not to worry about voter ignorance is the argument 
of “collective wisdom,” first put forward by Aristotle himself. A large 
group has more wisdom and virtue than a small group: however imper-
fect individual knowledge might be, when the views of the “many” are 
added up, it makes for some form of collective wisdom. There is some 
evidence for this view: for example, a simple average of well- known 
economic forecasts is substantially more accurate than individual fore-
casts.51 However, such beneficial outcomes will occur only when indi-
vidual beliefs are already informed by substantial knowledge: for in-
stance, the average American thinks that 18 percent of the federal 
budget is devoted to foreign aid (in fact, it’s about 1 percent), and hence 
most Americans would prefer to see foreign aid reduced.52 There is no 
“invisible hand” in politics that aggregates wrongheaded views into 
beneficial outcomes. As Brennan puts it, “Systematically biased crowds 
do not make good predictions. . . . When it comes to making accurate 
predictions, increasing the amount of cognitive diversity among deci-
sion makers is as important as increasing the predictive power of indi-
viduals within the group.”53 That is, the “collective wisdom” argument 

 
Is Democracy the Least Bad Political System?  
27
works only if the crowd is not wrongheaded in the first place—which is 
not the case with most voters.
Perhaps the most compelling reason not to worry about voter igno-
rance is that the politicians they elect are not so ignorant. Voters may 
lack knowledge about political institutions and policies, but what mat-
ters is that democratic citizens are good enough judges of character 
that they can choose leaders with sufficient virtue and expertise to 
guide the polity wisely. And when politicians do pander to voter irratio-
nality during campaign season, they routinely break campaign prom-
ises that they know to be unrealistic or immoral after they are elected. 
For example, U.S. presidential challengers since the 1970s have tapped 
voters’ antiforeign bias by accusing incumbents of “coddling” China, 
but then typically continue in the same moderate vein as their prede-
cessors once they assume positions of power.54 Even if politicians hold 
the wrongheaded views of the people who elected them, judicial and 
administrative agencies composed of meritocratically selected experts 
often serve to inject good sense in the policy- making process. In the 
most clear- cut case, the U.S. Supreme Court has the power to overturn 
laws that curb individual rights protected in the U.S. Constitution.
Unfortunately, such checks on voter irrationality are not sufficient to 
prevent (or minimize) bad policies. The best social scientific research 
shows that politicians generally attempt to give people what they ask 
for, with the result that “citizens have to live with racist and sexist laws, 
unnecessary wars, fewer and lower- quality opportunities, higher levels 
of crime and pollution, and lower levels of welfare.”55 The problem may 
be particularly acute in newly democratizing countries: in societies 
with intense levels of hatred and mutual mistrust, the majority group 
often decides to oppress minority groups democratically, which may be 
a special reason for pessimists (realists?) to worry about democratiza-
tion in China.56 As mentioned, ethnic conflict tends to be muted in 
established liberal democracies with constitutionally enshrined mecha-
nisms such as federalism and minority rights.
But there are few checks against other forms of irrationality that can 
lead to disastrous political consequences. A study of CFOs showed that 
those who were most confident and optimistic about the S&P index 
before the 2007–2008 financial crisis (followed by the Great Recession) 
were also overconfident and optimistic about the prospects of their own 

28 
Chapter 1 
firms, which went on to take more risk than others. As Kahneman 
notes, “optimism is highly valued, socially and in the market; people 
and firms reward the providers of dangerously misleading information 
more than they reward truth tellers.”57 Unfortunately, politicians and 
regulators had the same optimism bias (or at least did not feel the need 
to check the optimism bias of people in the business world). In Califor-
nia, ordinary voters repeatedly vote for lower taxes and higher public 
spending—an irrationality enshrined in 1979 by Proposition 13, which 
severely limited California counties’ primary source of financing by 
freezing property taxes—leading to mountains of public debt and more 
public spending on prisons than on higher education.58
Poor knowledge of science in the voting community also has nega-
tive political consequences. Most obviously, the disjunction between 
expert opinion and voter ignorance makes it harder for U.S. policy 
makers to counteract climate change, which perhaps ought to be the 
biggest political issue of our day. Less obviously, science and demo-
cratic politics have fundamentally different cultures that make it hard 
to cross from one domain to another. Scientists value intellectual hon-
esty: as Mark Henderson puts it, “There is no shame in having a bad 
idea that fails to survive contact with evidence, so long as it is not clung 
to in defiance of the data. Scientists are allowed—encouraged even—
to change their minds.” But successful democratically elected politi-
cians often prefer to proclaim the unshakable truth of their convic-
tions, and what ought to be seen as new thinking in response to new 
information is seen by voters as an indication of an untrustworthy and 
unprincipled political player who can’t stick to his or her views. Hence, 
few scientists go into politics and even fewer are elected to high office, 
with the result that the value of science “is seldom grasped either by 
the ministers, advisers and officials who take the decisions that shape 
everybody’s lives.”59
In the United States, “too many policies fly in the face of empirical 
principle. Medicine remains driven far more by business concerns than 
by data. We still forbid needle exchanges for addicts despite overwhelm-
ing evidence that we should do otherwise. We let pharmaceutical com-
panies push new, more expensive drugs, even though they work no bet-
ter than cheaper drugs we already have.”60 Even China policy trades on 
voter irrationality, to the detriment of voters themselves: In 2009, the 

 
Is Democracy the Least Bad Political System?  
29
Obama administration unilaterally imposed a duty on imports of Chi-
nese tires, a move questioned by most economists. The tariffs protected 
twelve hundred American jobs but cost American consumers $1.1 bil-
lion in 2011 alone in higher- priced tires, or about $900,000 per job.61 In 
short, the lack of political, economic, and scientific knowledge on the 
part of the electorate often translates into bad policy making.62
So what should be done? John Stuart Mill famously defended de-
mocracy on the grounds that political participation serves to educate 
the citizen.63 Just as jury duty forces the participant to think beyond his 
or her narrow self- interest and to deliberate in a rational way about 
what’s good for others, so the necessity of exercising power is valuable 
training for the people who have to do it. By allowing and encouraging 
people to stand up for their rights and by requiring a degree of public 
spirit, democratic participation leads to the moral and intellectual de-
velopment of the people. We are exposed to other perspectives, refine 
our own views, and consider the interests of other people. In other 
words, the solution to voter ignorance is to provide more meaningful 
opportunities for political participation, from the village council to 
global Internet communities. Unfortunately, the evidence shows other-
wise: the deliberative citizen who has frequent crosscutting political 
discussion, who can intelligently articulate arguments both on behalf 
of her own views and on behalf of contrary views, and who has a high 
level of objective political knowledge tends not to participate in poli-
tics, and the active political citizen tends not to deliberate much.64
So the solution to voter ignorance may be more straightforward: to 
educate voters. In a recent book, Jamie Terence Kelly discusses the im-
pact of one cognitive bias—the framing effect—on political behavior. 
He shows that different but equivalent formulations of a problem result 
in substantively different political decisions. To remedy the problem, 
Kelly suggests programs of public education designed to overcome cog-
nitive pathologies like framing effects. The problem, as he recognizes, 
is that there is no strong evidence that public education can eliminate 
all (or even most) biases. Moreover, such programs “can be financially 
expensive, and they do require some deference to expertise.”65 Given 
an anti–big government and anti- elitist political culture in the United 
States, it is hard to imagine such programs being implemented on a 
widespread basis.

30 
Chapter 1 
More worrying, the people who most need education to overcome 
cognitive biases are the least likely to read articles and books designed 
to be helpful. In the afterword to his book The Ethics of Voting, Bren-
nan suggests a few tips designed to help us overcome cognitive biases, 
such as “For a period of one year, don’t read anything defending your 
current view.”66 But such tips are likely to lead to a period of political 
paralysis, leaving the political field to extremists and dogmatists. Bren-
nan does argue that those inclined to vote wrongly (that is, in an im-
moral and/or irrational way) should abstain from voting, but how many 
irrational voters will contemplate his arguments and take his advice? 
Brennan writes: “a person who votes to ban gay marriage because she 
finds it disgusting would, except in extraordinary circumstances, be 
guilty of harmful voting.”67 Is this homophobe (or sincere Christian) 
likely to read Brennan’s sentence and conclude, yes, he’s right, I should 
refrain from voting? Is there any evidence that making ignorant voters 
conscious of their false political beliefs will cause them to abstain from 
voting? Economists are virtually unanimous in thinking that it is hard 
for an individual investor to beat stock market indexes, but only 55 per-
cent of the American public agreed; the public actually grew more con-
fident in its ability to pick stocks successfully after learning that econo-
mists think it is close to impossible.68 In Thailand, “84.2% expressed 
confidence in their ability to participate in politics—and included 
among these were a striking 71.7% who said they could participate even 
though they could not understand politics.”69 The uncomfortable truth 
is that the best (perhaps only) way to reduce the political influence of 
ignorant voters is to deprive them of the vote.
In a more recent article, Brennan takes the plunge. He argues that 
citizens have a right that any political power held over them should be 
exercised by competent people in a competent way, and that universal 
suffrage violates this right. Hence, he argues that suffrage should be 
restricted to citizens of sufficient political competence and he suggests 
that a properly administered voting examination system could serve to 
implement this principle. But Brennan’s argument is questionable. He 
appeals to the jury analogy to defend the competence principle: juries 
hold serious power over defendants, and hence potential jurors can and 
should be disqualified because they exhibit certain bias or certain kinds 
of incompetence. In the same vein, voters exercise power over others 

 
Is Democracy the Least Bad Political System?  
31
and should be disqualified for immorality or incompetence. But there 
is a key difference. If a jury is incompetent, the impact on a person’s life 
is clear and immediate (e.g., the defendant will go to jail). If a voter is 
incompetent, however, the causal chain on policy outcomes is highly 
indirect at best. So an incompetent voter is not as much of a threat (or 
source of worry) as an incompetent juror. In any case, the key objec-
tions to Brennan’s proposal are political. He suggests that “we [Ameri-
cans] might experiment with voter examination systems on a relatively 
small scale at first. For instance, perhaps it would be best if one state in 
the US tried the system first. . . . If the experiment succeeds, then the 
rules could be scaled up.”70 But such experiments are not likely to be 
constitutional.
More serious, it seems hard to imagine voters ever agreeing to an 
“experiment” that takes away their right to vote, especially in the United 
States with its strong “anti- elitist” political culture.71 In fact, I do not 
know of any single modern- day democracy where voters agree to qual-
ify the practice of one person, one vote: the political pressure is always 
for fewer limits, such as reducing the voting age from eighteen to six-
teen. Once electoral democracy is in place, the only way to change the 
political system is by the use of military force (as in Egypt). Arguments 
for “epistocracy” (rule by the “knowers”) are more likely to be taken se-
riously in East Asian societies with a deeply rooted culture of political 
elitism and where democracy in the form of one person, one vote has 
yet to achieve almost sacred status.72
An Alternative to Electoral Democracy:  
Singapore- Style Political Meritocracy
Singapore has democratic elections, but they are severely constrained: 
ballots are numbered (hence, the voter may worry about being identi-
fied after the vote), the media is far from free, open, and balanced, 
there are strict constraints on the freedom of association, voters are 
threatened with retaliation (e.g., with slower upgrades of public hous-
ing in opposition districts), and opposition candidates have been sub-
ject to severe retaliation.73 Singapore has improved (from a democratic 
point of view) over the past decade or so, but elections are still far from 

32 
Chapter 1 
free and fair. It should come as no surprise that the same party—the 
People’s Action Party (PAP)—has ruled Singapore since independence 
in 1965.
Westerners tend to divide the political world into “good” democra-
cies and “bad” authoritarian regimes, but Singapore’s leaders reject this 
dichotomy. Rather, they argue that the concept of meritocracy best de-
scribes Singapore’s political system: given Singapore’s small population 
and limited resource base, the country should be led by people with 
the greatest talent and best characters, chosen according to merit. As 
founding father Lee Kuan Yew put it:
Singapore is a society based on effort and merit, not wealth or 
privilege depending on birth. [The elite provides] the direc-
tion, planning, and control of [state] power in the people’s in-
terest. . . . It is on this group that we expend our limited and 
slender resources in order that they will provide the yeast, that 
ferment, that catalyst in our society which alone will ensure 
that Singapore shall maintain . . . the social organization 
which enables us, with almost no natural resources, to provide 
the second highest standard of living in Asia. . . . The main 
burden of present planning and implementation rests on the 
shoulders of 300 key persons. . . . The people come from poor 
and middle- class homes. They come from different language 
schools. Singapore is a meritocracy. And these men have risen 
through their own merit, hard work, and high performance.74
The basic idea of political meritocracy is that everybody should have an 
equal opportunity to be educated and to contribute to politics, but not 
everybody will emerge from this process with an equal capacity to 
make morally informed political judgments. Hence, the task of politics 
is to identify those with above- average ability and to make them serve 
the political community. If the leaders perform well, the people will 
basically go along.
Such an approach resonates strongly with the Confucian ideals of 
Singapore’s Chinese community. As Prime Minister Lee Hsien Loong 
explains, “Many Confucian ideals are still relevant to us. An example is 
the concept of government by honorable men (junzi), who have a duty 

 
Is Democracy the Least Bad Political System?  
33
to do right for the people, and who have the trust and respect of the 
population. This fits us better than the Western concept that a govern-
ment should be given as limited powers as possible, and always be 
treated with suspicion, unless proven otherwise.”75
Over the past few decades, Singapore has evolved a rigorous and so-
phisticated method for recruiting and promoting political leaders. The 
search for top talent begins in the school system, where promising stu-
dents are identified and trained for future leadership roles in govern-
ment. Major national examinations are conducted at key stages of stu-
dents’ school life. The high- performing students are then further tested 
for intellectual ability as well as integrity, commitment, leadership 
skills, and emotional intelligence. Those ranked highest are then 
awarded government scholarships to study at prestigious overseas uni-
versities (and they are contractually bound to return to Singapore). 
Upon graduation, a minority of scholars are then selected to join the 
elite Administrative Service. The process of selecting ministers is as 
systematic and even more rigorous, and once they are identified, they 
are expected to stay at least three to five terms in office because (ac-
cording to Lee Kuan Yew) it takes about two terms in office for a min-
ister to become good at his job. As a consequence, Singapore has a 
high percentage of trained political leaders with expertise in econom-
ics and science, and political leaders who can engage in long- term so-
cial and economic planning.76
What makes Singapore- style meritocracy attractive is its stunning 
economic success: the PAP has guided the country “from the Third 
World to First,” as Lee Kuan Yew put it.77 Hence, the PAP has won the 
large majority of the vote since the early 1960s, and even social critics 
contend that most citizens are relatively satisfied and support the sys-
tem with good reason. So why doesn’t Singapore become a “true” elec-
toral democracy, with free and fair elections? The key reason is the 
contradiction between meritocracy and democracy. Singapore- style 
meritocracy is based on the assumption that political leaders have a 
better sense of the community’s long- term interest than ordinary citi-
zens do. For example, the PAP has attempted to combat all forms of 
ethnic parochialism by fostering the growth of a new Singaporean 
identity that would underpin security and prosperity. The government 
broke up ethnic enclaves by moving people into ethnically mixed pub-

34 
Chapter 1 
lic housing blocs and marginalized ethnic Chinese clan associations.78 
It also promoted the use of English, which involved overriding the 
wishes of all groups, including the majority Chinese. Lee is quite ex-
plicit that Singapore’s nation- building exercise was incompatible with 
majority rule:
Supposing we had chosen Chinese or tried to sponsor Chinese, 
how would we make a living? How would we fit ourselves into 
the region and into the world? We could not have made a liv-
ing. But the Chinese then would have wanted it. And if we had 
taken the vote, we would have had to follow that policy. So 
when people say, “Oh, ask the people!”, it’s childish rubbish. 
We are leaders. We know the consequences. . . . They say peo-
ple can think for themselves? Do you honestly believe that the 
chap who can’t pass primacy six knows the consequences of his 
choice when he answers a question viscerally, on language, cul-
ture and religion? But we knew the consequences. We would 
starve, we would have race riots. We would disintegrate.79
Today, English is the lingua franca in Singapore and the race riots 
from the more democratic era of the 1960s are a distant memory.
Moreover, the need for training of leaders over several electoral cy-
cles means that meritocracy is incompatible with multiparty rule and 
the possibility that it would lead to the alternation of political power. 
Given Singapore’s small talent pool (it is a tiny city- state of five million 
citizens), Singapore’s top talent would not put themselves through a 
decades- long training process if they felt that success would not be re-
warded with political power, and they would refrain from throwing 
themselves into the political turmoil of a multiparty system without 
likely victors. Even if talented leaders were chosen, they would lack the 
motivation to engage in long- term planning if they worried about los-
ing power every four or five years.
That said, further democratization may be necessary to make the 
government more responsive and sensitive to the needs of ordinary citi-
zens. Meritocracy has served as a powerful ideological resource to 
maintain the PAP establishment’s hegemony, particularly over the de-
cades of national survival and rapid development. In recent years, how-

 
Is Democracy the Least Bad Political System?  
35
ever, the state’s ideological hegemony has begun to crack. New social 
formations bearing alternative perspectives have come to be more au-
dible and persuasive to a larger segment of Singaporeans with new 
media. As the problems that attend Singapore’s commitment to eco-
nomic globalization pervade the daily aspects of citizens’ experience, 
popular belief in meritocracy has weakened, leaving a strong sense that 
in its place is now elitism of the kind that focuses on winning and 
maximizing rewards for the winners, while downplaying factors and 
reasons that limit opportunities for the disadvantaged. Meritocracy, as 
Kenneth Paul Tan puts it, has become a dirty word in Singapore.80
As meritocracy has lost moral authority, counterhegemonic leader-
ship and alternative ideological formations have been energized in an 
expanded and politicized new media environment. The 2011 parlia-
mentary elections proved to be a watershed moment in Singapore’s po-
litical history: the PAP won “only” 60 percent of the popular vote, and 
it lost six parliamentary seats.81 In response, the PAP establishment has 
taken steps to catch up with the new media environment, and Singa-
pore has now become more politically open. Arguably, the PAP needs 
to expand its narrowly technical and academic notion of merit, in part 
to recognize the importance for political success in competitive elec-
tions of communicative talent and emotional intelligence. The ques-
tion is whether it can do so before the energized and (relatively) uncon-
strained opposition forces really threaten PAP rule. What if the PAP 
fails to win a majority (or a plurality) of the vote in a future election? 
Will the PAP voluntarily give up (or even share) power? At that point, 
the contradiction between Singapore- style meritocracy and democracy 
will really show itself. Perhaps it was a mistake to try to build single- 
party meritocracy on the foundation (or form) of a democratic electoral 
system inherited from British colonial rulers.
China, of course, does not even pretend to select its top leaders via one 
person, one vote, and it has been looking to Singapore’s political model 
for inspiration.82 Since the early 1990s, Chinese officials have gone to 
Singapore for training and to learn from the Singapore experience.83 
Of course, Singapore’s political values and institutions cannot readily 
be transferred to a huge country such as China, but aspects of the Sin-
gaporean political system may be transferable.84 From Deng Xiaoping 

36 
Chapter 1 
to Xi Jinping, China’s leaders have repeatedly stressed the need to study 
aspects of Singapore’s political model. Partly inspired by Singapore, 
China has evolved a sophisticated and comprehensive system for select-
ing and promoting political talent (see chapter 2). As a result, the Chi-
nese government has a high proportion of economists and scientists 
willing to experiment on the basis of trial and error (most of whom 
could not have been elected in a democratic context), and several hun-
dred million Chinese have been lifted out of poverty over the past three 
decades. The meritocratic ideal—the idea that government officials are 
selected and promoted on the basis of ability and morality rather than 
political connections, wealth, and family background—is still a long 
way from the political reality in China. But if China continues to “mer-
itocratize” and avoids the bad policy making stemming from voter ig-
norance in democratic countries (especially the United States, the 
powerful and populous country it is usually compared to), it will set a 
model for others. At the moment, China is not good enough (in terms 
of governance), and the United States not bad enough, for China’s po-
litical meritocracy to exercise much soft power abroad. But things can 
change and China may pose more of a normative challenge to elec-
toral democracies in the future.85
2. The Tyranny of the Minority
In a democracy, according to Aristotle, the lower classes (the majority) 
will dominate, and the property of the rich will not be secure. He did 
recognize that the rich could exercise a corrupting power by tempting 
other citizens to embrace a life aimed at acquiring unlimited wealth 
(and the shallow pleasures to which wealth gives access) at the expense 
of living well—which helps to explain why he favored depriving traders 
of citizenship in the best possible regime86—but he didn’t foresee the 
possibility that the rich minority could find ways of furthering its eco-
nomic interests at the expense of the majority in democratic political 
systems where the poor (theoretically) have more political power.
America’s founding fathers, whatever their political differences, 
agreed with Aristotle that commerce undermines the capacity for inde-
pendent political judgment.87 To minimize the power of private prop-

 
Is Democracy the Least Bad Political System?  
37
erty, “the Constitution included what were, at the time, extremely lim-
ited property qualifications for voters and—in a dramatic break with 
most states’ practices—no property qualifications for elected represen-
tatives.”88 But the founders feared mob rule by the poor more than the 
economic power of the rich, and they sought to check the tyranny of 
the majority with institutions like the electoral college, the deliberative 
Senate, and nonelected bodies like the Supreme Court. A free press 
would help to expose abuses of power by elites, and the founders may 
also have been heartened by what seemed to be a dawning pluralist age 
“when a wide spectrum of social groups, relatively equal in power and 
influence, might supplant the rich/poor citizen cleavage that prevailed 
in the republics of previous ages.”89 It seemed highly unlikely that the 
rich could exercise economic tyranny in a democratic system based 
on one person (or, more precisely, one white man), one vote; hence, 
the founders did not seek to minimize the power of the wealthy by 
designing institutions that acknowledged, addressed, or reflected so-
cioeconomic distinctions. The chief danger of democracy, as Alexis de 
Tocqueville put it in his 1835 masterwork Democracy in America, is 
rather that the less affluent majority would use its political power to 
expropriate wealth: “In all the nations of the world, the greatest num-
ber has always been composed of those who did not have property, or 
those whose property was too restricted for them to live in ease without 
working. Therefore universal suffrage gives the government of society 
to the poor.”90
What the founders didn’t foresee (or fear) was the rapid development 
of industrial capitalism in the following two centuries, along with at-
tendant concentrations of wealth and widening inequality. Today, well- 
funded and organized minority interests can and do get their way 
against relatively powerless majorities on issues such as environmental 
regulation, gun control, and the regulation of financial institutions. Be-
cause most people have little time or energy to devote to politics, small 
groups with a strong commercial or ideological motivation can exert 
disproportionate influence on the political process,91 either blocking 
change that’s in the common interest or lobbying for policies that ben-
efit only their own interest. The problem is magnified when the wealthy 
class has both a clear sense of its economic interests and the motivation 
to defend them against the interests of the majority of voters.

38 
Chapter 1 
The influence of money on politics is the scourge of most existing 
democracies, and the United States is perhaps the most extreme case. 
In contrast to the shared prosperity that defined the decades immedi-
ately after World War II, the vast majority of Americans have fallen 
further and further behind a tiny superrich segment of society over the 
past generation: “From 1979 until the eve of the Great Recession, the 
top one percent received 36 percent of all gains in household income—
even after taking into account the value of employer- sponsored health 
insurance, all federal taxes, and all government benefits. . . . Economic 
growth was even more skewed between 2001 and 2006, during which 
the share of income gains going to the top one percent was over 53 
percent.”92 This income split is often blamed on technological change 
and globalization, which handsomely reward winners but leave their 
many losers behind: as Charles A. Kupchan puts it, “the primary source 
of the declining fortunes of the American worker is global competi-
tion.”93 But inequality in the United States has grown consistently more 
quickly than in other affluent democracies, and an important cause, 
according to Jacob S. Hacker and Paul Pierson, is a long series of policy 
changes in government that overwhelmingly favored the rich: political 
lobbying by corporate and financial sectors led public officials to re-
write “the rules of American politics and the American economy in 
ways that have benefited the few at the expense of the many.”94 From 
tax laws to deregulation to corporate governance to safety net issues, 
business interests pressured government to enact policies to allow those 
who were already wealthy to amass an ever- increasing share of the na-
tion’s wealth. Even after the 2008 financial collapse, the most culpable 
banks were able to exert continued control over the decisions of policy 
makers and legislators, and the small group of individuals hauling in 
more than $50 million annually increased fivefold from 2008 to 2009.95 
As the economy recovered in 2009–2010, 93 percent of the income 
gains went to the top 1 percent of taxpayers.96
Perhaps a glaring income split, even if new wealth is concentrated at 
the very top, need not be cause for concern. From the point of view of 
justice, what matters is really the fate of the disadvantaged: according 
to John Rawls’s theory of justice, income inequalities can be justified if 
they benefit the less well off. In the United States, however, the poor 
have gotten poorer: In November 2012, the U.S. Census Bureau re-

 
Is Democracy the Least Bad Political System?  
39
ported that more than 16 percent of the U.S. population lived in pov-
erty, including almost 20 percent of children (the highest level since 
1993), up from 14.3 percent in 2009.97 And the poorest of the poor are 
even worse off: In 2011, extreme poverty in the United States, meaning 
the number of households living on less than $2 per day before govern-
ment benefits, was double 1996 levels at 1.5 million households, includ-
ing 2.8 million children.98 In short, the problem is not just that the su-
perrich are getting richer but also that the poorest of the poor are 
getting poorer.
Another argument against egalitarian critics is that large income 
gaps are necessary for economic progress. The economist Daron Ace-
moglu argues that cutthroat capitalism in the United States allows for 
more innovation than welfare spending does in relatively egalitarian 
countries such as Sweden: “effort in innovative activities requires in-
centives which come as a result of differential rewards to this effort. As 
a consequence, a greater gap between successful and unsuccessful en-
trepreneurs increases entrepreneurial effort and thus a country’s contri-
bution to the world technology frontier.”99 Innovation increases the 
growth rate of the entire world economy, with the implication that 
“cuddly capitalists” free ride on the United States’ cutthroat form of 
capitalism (one might add that the United States’ outsized military ex-
penditures provide security protection for allies and allow them to 
spend more on welfare). But much of the income growth has benefited 
the financial sector and it is at least arguable that complex financial in-
novations did more economic harm than good by concealing risks from 
traders, buyers, and regulators, ultimately contributing to the 2007–
2008 financial crisis.100 Moreover, the idea that Nordic societies are less 
innovative than the United States is contentious, and Acemoglu him-
self recognizes that the United States can provide more of a safety net at 
the bottom while allowing for outsized rewards at the top.101
In any case, income inequality is not worrisome to the point that it 
threatens the democratic political system. Voters in the United States 
still have faith that their country is rich in opportunities to move up the 
income ladder even if the reality is different:
[The United States is] less mobile than nearly every other in-
dustrialized democracy in the world. . . . And yet, in one of the 

40 
Chapter 1 
grand ironies of American public opinion, the United States is 
still the place where the meritocratic faith burns brightest. . . . 
Since 1983 an occasional CBS/New York Times poll has asked 
people: “Do you think it is still possible to start out poor in this 
country, work hard, and become rich?” In 1983, 57 percent an-
swered yes, and by 2007 the number had risen to 81 percent. 
Even in 2009, after the worst financial crisis in recent memory, 
and epidemic levels of unemployment, the overwhelming ma-
jority of those surveyed (72 percent) still held on to this singu-
lar faith.102
Such (false) beliefs stabilize the political system because the “losers” 
do not blame the system as much as they ought to. The electoral system 
itself also provides an element of illusory control. Discussion of current 
politics—in the media and in everyday life—is dominated by the con-
ventional narrative of election- driven change. As Hacker and Pierson 
put it, “Clashes between the ‘red team’ and the ‘blue team’ become no 
different from a game between the Celtics and the Lakers. This is no 
doubt why politics as electoral spectacle is so appealing to the media: 
It’s exciting, and it’s simple. Aficionados can memorize the stats of their 
favorite players or become experts on the great games of the past. Ev-
eryone, however, can enjoy the gripping spectacle of two highly moti-
vated teams slugging it out.”103 In reality, policy making takes place be-
tween elections, largely outside the glare of media focus: that’s when 
big business interests mobilize and pressure policy makers to influence 
the structure of “private” markets in their favor. To pursue the sports 
metaphor, it’s as though baseball fans believe they influence outcomes 
in baseball because they can vote for the players in the All- Star Game, 
without realizing that outcomes are largely determined by the teams’ 
wealth and the league’s rules of ownership. An election, in other words, 
helps to divert attention from political problems by inducing the (often 
false) belief that changing the government is the most effective way to 
get political change,104 and voter irrationality helps to limit the political 
damage of income inequality.
From a moral point of view, an economic and political system that is 
stabilized by false beliefs is not as desirable as it should be. More impor-
tant, perhaps, income inequality is bad for society: the more unequal 

 
Is Democracy the Least Bad Political System?  
41
the society, the less the social mobility.105 Drawing on extensive statisti-
cal evidence, the social scientist Richard Wilkinson argues that in-
equality leads to stress, stress creates sickness on the individual and the 
mass levels, and society overall suffers widespread unhappiness and 
high levels of violence, depression, and mistrust across the social spec-
trum. Even small reductions in inequality can lead to better health, 
less violence, and more harmonious relations with family members, 
society, and the environment.106 In other words, there is a need to re-
duce high levels of income inequality, even if the worst off are not des-
perately poor, the economy is highly innovative, and inequality is sup-
ported by voter irrationality.
So what should be done? Timothy Noah puts forward solutions to 
the problem of income inequality that do not call into question elec-
toral democracy: a more progressive tax system, putting more workers 
on the federal payroll, increasing importation of skilled labor, universal 
preschool, price controls on colleges and universities, regulation of 
Wall Street, and reviving the labor movement; he urges voters to sup-
port a Democratic president.107 There may be reasons for optimism. 
Echoing the revival of progressive causes after the Great Depression, 
the financial crisis and its aftermath has focused more public concern 
on income inequality and its real causes. From President Obama’s cri-
tique of financial institutions to publications and media reports that 
highlight the economic dominance of the 1 percent, “the many” may 
be waking up to reality and demanding change. 
But perhaps the problem runs deeper and cannot be addressed 
merely by writing books that expose the causes of income inequality 
and urge voters to become more rational and to seek political change in 
the majority’s economic interest. If the democratic system can be cap-
tured so easily by organized groups that promote the interests of the 
wealthy elite and if elections themselves focus people’s attention away 
from the real problem (and if people seem more inclined to believe in 
Horatio Alger–type rags- to- riches fairytales than the hard evidence of 
social scientists), is it possible to take measures to reduce inequality 
without calling electoral democracy into question? An increasing num-
ber of critics argue that the primarily electoral model of popular gov-
ernment fails to keep political elites accountable and responsive to the 
general public and neglects to counteract the disproportionate influ-

42 
Chapter 1 
ence of the wealthy on the workings of government.108 Electoral politics 
can be supplemented by institutions such as deliberative polls meant to 
create more informed and reflective public opinion, but so long as elec-
tions are viewed as the only (or main) mechanism to choose “real” deci-
sion makers, it will be difficult, perhaps impossible, to counteract the 
“tyranny of the wealthy minority” in capitalist democracies.
An Alternative to Electoral Democracy: Curbing Capitalists
Perhaps there’s a need for more strong- arm tactics to curb the power of 
capitalists. Most famously, Karl Marx called for expropriation of private 
property and a “dictatorship of the proletariat” as a temporary stage on 
the way to true communism, but “experiments” with Marxism in the 
twentieth century have (rightly) discredited that option. Still, there 
may be other possibilities. Niccolò Machiavelli is best known for his 
cynical advocacy of the use of cunning and duplicity in statecraft, but 
he despised rule by the rich and argued for republics in which the peo-
ple vigorously contest and constrain the behavior of political and eco-
nomic elites by extraelectoral votes. Inspired by Machiavelli, John P. 
McCormick proposes a citizen body for the American context that ex-
cludes socioeconomic elites and political elites and grants randomly 
selected common people significant veto, legislative, and censure au-
thority within government and over public officials. In theory, this kind 
of powerful citizen body could counteract the disproportionate influ-
ence of the wealthy on the workings of government, but it is not politi-
cally realistic. For one thing, the wealthy are not likely to go down with-
out a fight. McCormick does suggest one measure for “disenfranchising 
the magnates” with their consent: “we might consider whether indi-
viduals under present conditions earning more than, say, $150,000 in 
income, or belonging to households of more than $350,000 in net 
wealth (income, property, and assets), should be relieved of all tax bur-
dens as compensation for giving up eligibility to vote, to stand for of-
fice, or to contribute funds to political campaigns.” But even if the rich 
value wealth more than honors or office, as McCormick recognizes, 
they are not likely to “resist the temptation to convert their economic 
privilege into political power, especially in order to use the latter to in-

 
Is Democracy the Least Bad Political System?  
43
flate the former even further.”109 More fundamentally, the practice of 
one person, one vote (I repeat!) has assumed an almost sacred quality 
in modern democratic societies, and any calls for political institutions 
that formally exclude a class of people are likely to be viewed as beyond 
the moral pale (I leave aside the issue of whether such proposals would 
violate the U.S. Constitution). It’s not just the rich who will object to 
proposals to deprive a class of equal citizenship rights: most people in 
democratic societies will object, even if it’s not in their economic inter-
est to do so.
So again, it’s best to look to nondemocratic societies for realizable 
alternatives. Political meritocracies, unburdened by the need to choose 
political leaders by means of free and fair elections, might find it easier 
to rein in the political power of capital without sacrificing market 
mechanisms that underpin innovation and productive capability. Sin-
gapore’s economic rise has been guided by meritocratically selected 
leaders who have consistently taken advantage of global upheavals. The 
government has kept a tight rein on domestic finance and done what it 
could to induce international firms to come, while keeping abreast of 
the social scientific research about the best means of regulating finance 
and retaining the ability to implement necessary measures unencum-
bered by the lobbying of special interests. As The Economist puts it, 
“The only people who have read all of America’s gargantuan Dodd- 
Frank financial regulation act are American academics, who find it a 
mess, and the Singapore Monetary Authority, which is mulling the op-
portunities it might create.”110 China, for its part, has developed a 
model of state capitalism that keeps the principal levers of intervention 
within the hands of government. The model has allowed it to avoid 
major financial and economic crises that have plagued capitalist de-
mocracies in the past three decades, to orient development in vital sec-
tors such as telecommunications, transportation, and energy, and to 
keep control over foreign investments and financial fluctuations.111
But China and Singapore are not doing much better than the United 
States in terms of income inequality, which has worsened over the past 
two decades.112 Although both countries have high rates of homeown-
ership and low rates of unemployment (especially Singapore), which 
reduce the toxic effects of income inequality, income inequality is 

44 
Chapter 1 
nearly as great a social problem and political challenge as in the United 
States. So what can be done to bring soaring income inequality under 
control? In the case of China, Martin King Whyte argues that the lead-
ership needs to enact strong and comprehensive reforms of taxation 
policy, investment patterns, state bank lending, educational access, and 
the hukou (household registration) system.113
No matter what the political system, however, reforms in highly un-
equal societies will be successful only if the rich are somehow made to 
care more about other members of society.114 And the best way to make 
rich, powerful people care about the less fortunate is not by means of 
rational argumentation, but rather by creating a sense of community 
that emerges from common social interaction.115 For example, it would 
not be too difficult for wealthy Japanese or Swedish citizens to avoid (or 
evade) high tax rates and other measures meant to redistribute wealth, 
but they largely comply with the rules not just because they have to but 
also because they feel a sense of solidarity with the rest of society. A key 
explanation for willing compliance is that the rich have not retreated 
into their own communities: well- off Japanese partake of common ritu-
als and everyday activities that generate a sense of common identity. In 
the United States, however, a geographical shift “has occurred during 
the past three decades—one in which communities are increasingly 
segregated not only by race but by politics, culture, and income. Your 
likelihood of even seeing, much less exchanging views with, anyone 
who doesn’t share your precise demographic identity is becoming more 
and more remote.”116 As a result, America’s wealthy elite is strikingly 
indifferent to working- class concerns such as unemployment and is 
much more conservative than everyone else on a whole range of eco-
nomic issues.117 In China, the trends are similar (if not as extreme), 
with segregation of the rich in urban coastal cities, and within gated 
communities in those cities, with the result that there are fewer shared 
social activities and growing mutual alienation and incomprehension 
between social classes.
So how to promote more social interaction between classes? It is un-
realistic to expect leaders of big business to develop a richer sense of 
solidarity; in an age of globalization, corporations develop interests 
separate from and in conflict with the interests of their “home” coun-
tries, be they democratic or otherwise.118 But political leaders can try to 

 
Is Democracy the Least Bad Political System?  
45
implement policies that mix social classes, such as zoning laws that 
limit gated communities for the rich. Equally if not more important, 
leaders should ensure that school funding does not depend only on 
local income sources so as to avoid the result (more typical in the 
United States) that higher- quality schools in rich neighborhoods mainly 
serve the rich and lower- quality schools in poor neighborhoods mainly 
serve the poor. In the United States, arguably, the top leadership has 
the motivation to help reduce income inequality but lacks the ability to 
do so: President Obama’s efforts are likely to be stymied by lobbying 
efforts that pressure members of Congress to enact measures that ben-
efit the wealthy. In American politics, it is hard to get things done and 
easy to block them, and obstruction by special interests has increased 
over the years.119 China, to oversimplify, has the opposite problem: the 
top leadership has greater ability to enact measures designed to reduce 
the income gap (including measures designed to mix social classes),120 
but lacks the motivation to do so. Top Chinese leaders, for one thing, 
tend to be either wealthy personally or linked to families with tremen-
dous assets.
So which system is likely to improve? To my mind, it is less difficult 
to change the motivation of leaders in a system that generally allows 
leaders to implement policies once they make up their minds to do so 
than to change a dysfunctional political system that blocks well- 
intentioned leaders. The key to changing motivation is to encourage 
more direct experience with the less well off, so as to generate sympa-
thy with their fate. In the United States, progressive political leaders 
such as President Obama can make a deliberate effort to engage with 
the underprivileged in deprived neighborhoods as part of a self- imposed 
program of political education. But most leaders will lack such fore-
sight. In China, by contrast, there is growing awareness of the need to 
break down the social barriers between people. Over the past few years, 
CCP cadres have been sent to poor rural communities for extended 
periods (at least one year) as part of their political training, and these 
leaders will rise to the top over the next couple of decades.121
If it’s true that the best way to sensitize powerful elites to the plight 
of the poor is to encourage mixing with different social classes as part 
of political education, then China is on the right side of history. The 
problem in the United States (and other democratic societies) is that 

46 
Chapter 1 
political leaders are chosen by the people and need not have received 
training designed to extend class sympathies; no sort of political leader-
ship training could be made compulsory in electoral democracies. 
Hence, a political meritocracy will find it easier to implement compul-
sory political training for leaders designed to make them understand 
and care for the interests of the less- well- off members of society. At the 
moment, the “tyranny of the minority” may be similarly problematic in 
China and the United States, but it may be more realistic to expect 
improvement in China.
3. The Tyranny of the Voting Community
Even if electoral democracy works as it’s supposed to—voters are ratio-
nal and public- spirited and policies generally benefit the large majority 
of the voting public, not just (or primarily) a wealthy elite—it is still a 
deeply flawed political system. Political equality ends at the boundaries 
of the political community: those outside are neglected. The national 
focus of the democratically elected political leaders is assumed; they 
are meant to serve only the community of voters. The problem is that a 
government’s policies do not affect just the voting community: they 
also affect nonvoters such as future generations and foreigners, yet no-
body represents the interests of nonvoters in a democratic political sys-
tem.122 Hence, if there is a serious conflict of interest between the needs 
of voters and the needs of nonvoters, the former will almost always have 
priority.
One problem is that democratization tends to strengthen the politi-
cal salience of national identity, which can increase tension with neigh-
boring countries.123 But long- established democracies have an even 
longer track record of committing harm against nonvoters. Consider 
gross human rights violations, such as the systematic use of physical 
torture. We tend to think that such violations are primarily done by 
“outlaw” regimes such as North Korea that do not seem overly con-
cerned with the need to adhere to a universal human rights regime. It 
is true that the worst of the worst—with Nazi Germany at the extreme 
end of the spectrum of immoral states—tend to be such outlaw re-
gimes. But Darius Rejali has shown that “some democratic states have 

 
Is Democracy the Least Bad Political System?  
47
legalized torture, treated it as a quasi- legal investigative procedure, or 
practiced it routinely on the quiet, despite a formal ban.” Democratic 
states developed a distinctive form of torture that leaves few bloody 
marks or visible traces in order to avoid public monitoring and account-
ability: “the modern democratic torturer knows how to beat a suspect 
senseless without leaving a mark.” Rejali catalogues, in more than eight 
hundred pages, the various forms of “clean torture” that democracies 
have developed over the past two centuries or so, from the use of elec-
tric torture by French forces in Algeria and American forces in Viet-
nam to the use of positional torture and violent shaking by Israeli forces 
against Palestinians in the occupied territories. Another feature of 
“democratic torture” is that it tends to be carried out most systemati-
cally against noncitizens. In ancient republics, torture was more explic-
itly tied to citizenship, and torture was inflicted exclusively against 
slaves, foreigners, and “barbarians.” In modern democracies such as 
France, torture typically begins in colonies or war zones and may then 
spread backward to the metropole. The victims of torture in democra-
cies today are not spoken of as slaves, but as “street children, vagrants, 
loiterers, and illegal immigrants . . . [who] fall into a class of quasi- 
citizens that is perceived as vicious.” In other words (and Rejali doesn’t 
say this directly), torture by democratic states tends to be carried out 
against those deprived of the vote, with nobody to represent them, show 
outrage, and fight for their interests in the democratic system. And 
sometimes many (or even most) citizens cheer for, or silently endorse, 
what appears to be necessary dirty work to support their democratic 
way of life.124
More commonly, perhaps, nonvoters suffer less egregious violations 
at the hands of the voting community. Consider the phenomenon of 
foreign domestic workers (FDWs) in Hong Kong and Singapore. Both 
territories depend on several hundred thousand FDWs to do the dirty, 
dangerous, and demeaning work that locals won’t do. FDWs have bet-
ter rights and protections in nondemocratic Hong Kong than in Singa-
pore.125 One important reason is that FDWs in Hong Kong (like other 
residents) are free to organize self- help groups and public protests to 
secure their interests. But the relative lack of political rights in Hong 
Kong may be another factor that favors the interests of FDWs. In Sin-
gapore, as noted, there are substantial constraints on the democratic 

48 
Chapter 1 
process, but elections are still competitive, and political parties must 
be seen to campaign for the interests of their constituents. Since em-
ployers are constituents, their interests are more likely to be taken seri-
ously in the political process than the interests of disenfranchised 
FDWs (one Singaporean civil servant told me that the government 
feels constrained by a large constituency that opposes recommen-
dations, such as more days off for FDWs, in a Human Rights Watch 
report issued in 2005). In other words, even well- intentioned and 
 far- seeing political leaders are constrained by antiforeign populist sen-
timent in Singapore.
In Hong Kong, there is no pretense that the people choose their top 
leaders on the basis of one person, one vote, and it is quite likely that 
many political leaders (both before and after the handover to China) 
would not have been chosen by the people in free and fair competitive 
elections. Hong Kong decision makers, in other words, are less con-
strained by the interests of Hong Kong citizens (more precisely, perma-
nent residents), and they can rely to a greater extent on their own sense 
of justice and decency to implement policies that favor FDWs (not sur-
prisingly, prodemocracy parties in Hong Kong have been very cautious 
about articulating proposals that favor FDWs).
In the case of Taiwan, the development of a more democratic, re-
sponsive government has been bad for FDWs—under increasing pres-
sure from specific domestic groups that (mistakenly?) blamed foreign-
ers for growing unemployment of indigenes and blue- collar workers, 
in September 2000 then- President Chen Shui- bian promised to cut 
the number of foreign workers by fifteen thousand annually, the goal 
being to reduce the number by sixty thousand by 2004.126 I do not 
mean to imply, needless to say, that the East Asian public is uniquely 
reactionary: episodes of rights expansions for immigrants in Ger-
many, France, and the Netherlands “were conditional on keeping the 
public out and containing the issue behind the closed doors of bu-
reaucracy and judiciary.”127 In short, there is a tension, both theoreti-
cal and real, between the interests of the voting community and the 
interests of foreigners and foreign residents, and the latter groups often 
pay the price.
That said, democracies can survive the fact that noncitizens are 
often subject to immoral policies at the hands of representatives who 

 
Is Democracy the Least Bad Political System?  
49
act first and foremost for the interests of voters who elect them. Perhaps 
the Achilles’ heel of electoral democracy—what really may lead to its 
downfall—is the negative impact it has on children and future genera-
tions who are deprived of the vote. One problem is what Nicolas Berg-
gruen and Nathan Gardels term “consumer culture” politics: voters 
constantly demand instant gratification and have no patience for long- 
term structural reform or for politicians who impose pain, with the re-
sult that entitlement spending and public debt explodes to unsustain-
able levels.128 Greece is the poster child of how things can go wrong as 
“the result of the fatal alliance between politicians who gave the people 
everything they wanted in return for votes, and the people who voted 
for politicians who promised them the impossible, as if no one ever ex-
pected the bill to arrive.”129 But electoral democracies may really come 
under strain when the United States and Japan—the two most econom-
ically powerful democratic countries—need to rein in their soaring na-
tional debts (in the case of Japan, the national debt is more than twice 
the size of its economy) if it means imposing serious costs on the inter-
ests of the voting community.130
The most worrisome threat to future generations, arguably, is global 
warming. Dealing with it requires a decades- long horizon, and elec-
toral democracies seem singularly ill- equipped to make the sacrifices 
that are necessary to benefit future generations several decades from 
now. The philosopher Tim Mulgan imagines an eerily plausible future 
world where resources are insufficient to meet everyone’s basic needs 
and where a chaotic climate makes life precarious. In this world, peo-
ple are not kept alive once they can no longer make a productive con-
tribution or when they have little chance of survival even if they are 
fed. The reason such a world came about, Mulgan suggests, is that af-
fluent democracies did not treat future people justly. In theory, demo-
cratic voters could have chosen future- friendly policies, but “once inter-
generational conflict began to bite, and democratic citizens (raised to 
expect the state to pander to their whims) were called on to make sig-
nificant personal sacrifices to save future lives, their intergenerational 
compassion proved inadequate.”131 Hence, it should not be surprising 
that policies meant to curb global warming such as Australia’s carbon 
pricing scheme get repealed by populist governments as soon as they 
are seen to impose substantial economic costs on voters.132

50 
Chapter 1 
So what can be done? If it seems recklessly optimistic to expect that 
voters will sacrifice their own interests to benefit people fifty years 
from now, how is it possible to protect the interests of future genera-
tions without challenging the idea that the country’s most powerful 
decision makers should be chosen by means of one person, one vote? 
Political thinkers have put forward proposals to appoint representatives 
for future people, such as reserving a few seats in the legislature for 
future representatives or appointing special future- oriented officials 
with the task of issuing reports, warnings, or advice to voters and legis-
lators regarding the likely future impact of policy proposals.133 To date, 
however, no affluent democracy has seriously tried to enfranchise 
 future people,134 and there is no reason to expect much progress in  
the future.135
An Alternative to Electoral Democracy: Veto Power  
for Representatives of Future Generations
Once again, we need to look to nondemocracies for inspiration. In the-
ory, it is not difficult to imagine political institutions that could repre-
sent interests beyond the community of voters. Consider Huang 
Zongxi’s proposal for what Theodore de Bary terms a “Parliament of 
Scholars.”136 Huang, a seventeenth- century Confucian scholar, pro-
posed strengthening the political role of the schools for the training of 
Confucian scholar- officials. Schools of all levels, in Huang’s view, 
should serve as forums for open public discussion. He noted that dur-
ing the Eastern Han (25–220 ce), scholars at the Imperial College, the 
top school for the training of scholar- officials, engaged in outspoken 
discussion of important issues without fear of those in power, and the 
highest officials were anxious to avoid their censure. Moreover, Huang 
proposed that the rector of the Imperial College, to be chosen from 
among the great scholars of the day, should be equal in importance to 
the prime minister, and that once a month the emperor should visit the 
Imperial College, along with the prime minister and other ministers. 
The emperor was to sit among the ranks of the students while the rec-
tor questioned him on the administration of the country.137 The pri-
mary function of the system would be to hold rulers accountable, but 

 
Is Democracy the Least Bad Political System?  
51
Huang also proposed revising the Confucian examination system for 
selecting scholar- officials. He condemned the examinations of his day 
for rewarding superficiality and plagiarism, thus failing to identify 
scholars of “real talent.” Examinations, in his view, should test for both 
the capacity to memorize the classics and subsequent commentaries as 
well as the capacity for independent thought: “After listing one by one 
what is said by the various Han and Song scholars, the candidate should 
conclude with his own opinion, there being no necessity for blind ac-
ceptance of one authority’s word.”138
Even if Huang’s proposal for a parliament of scholar- officials could 
empower scholars of “real talent,” the main problem from a contempo-
rary standpoint is that it still deprives ordinary people of any voice in 
politics. But his proposal can be modified to make it more appealing 
today. For example, a Huang- style meritocratic house composed of 
representatives selected on the basis of competitive examinations can 
be combined with a democratic house composed of representatives 
selected by competitive elections. The democratic house would have 
the task of representing the interests of voters, and the meritocratic 
house would have the task of representing the interests of nonvoters 
affected by the policies of government, such as foreigners and future 
generations. Deputies of the meritocratic house could be chosen on 
the basis of examinations that test not just for knowledge of the clas-
sics, but also for knowledge of international relations and environmen-
tal science. To ensure that the interests of nonvoters are not systemati-
cally marginalized in the political process, the meritocratic house 
could have veto power over any policies that it judges harm the inter-
ests of future generations.139
Whatever the theoretical appeal of this proposal, it is not realistic 
from a political point of view: a democratically elected legislature 
would never allow itself to be subject to the veto power of a house of 
government charged with the task of representing the interests of non-
voters. But there may be more hope in nondemocracies, or at least, po-
litical systems that allow a voice for the people but without free and fair 
elections for the country’s most powerful leaders. Consider Singapore’s 
“elected presidency.” Since 1993, the president needs to be elected by 
the majority of the people, but a person who wishes to run for the office 
of president has to fulfill stringent qualifications, such as being a “per-

52 
Chapter 1 
son of integrity, good character, and reputation” who has served for a 
minimum of three years as minister, chief justice, or speaker, or “in any 
other similar or comparable position of seniority and responsibility.”140 
The strictness of these qualifications led to the 1999 and 2005 elections 
being walkovers as S. R. Nathan was the only qualified candidate on 
nomination day. Critics rightly complain that the elected presidency 
serves as a constraint on democracy,141 but that is the whole point. The 
president has the power to veto attempts by democratically elected poli-
ticians to enact policies that harm the interests of future generations, 
for example blocking attempts by the government to draw on reserves 
not accumulated by the government during its current term of office. It 
remains to be seen whether the president has sufficient powers to take 
necessary measures for Singapore to do its share to protect the world 
from the effects of catastrophic climate change, but perhaps the institu-
tion of the elected presidency is a step in the right direction.
In any case, the real player (among nondemocratic countries) in the 
climate- change debate is China, given its size and power. If we can’t 
expect electoral democracies to take necessary measures to protect the 
interests of people several decades from now, is there any reason to be 
optimistic that China’s unelected leaders can do better? From the plan-
et’s point of view, it is imperative that China set a good example. If 
China were to use as much energy per capita as the United States does, 
it would produce carbon emissions in such volume that our planet 
would be condemned to unmanageable climate change. So, clearly, 
China must embrace an outlook that puts resource management at the 
center of all policy making.142
Equally clearly, China’s disastrous environmental record is cause for 
concern. Yet the Chinese government also seems to be taking steps in 
the right direction, if only because growing public concern over air pol-
lution in China has made environmental sustainability a political issue. 
China has won praise for its efforts to boost energy efficiency and invest 
in green technologies;143 it installed more solar power in 2013 than the 
United States has in its whole history.144 The central government has 
built an infrastructure of high- speed rail that is more carbon efficient 
than air travel, and it has prioritized the development of electric vehi-
cles.145 It has launched experiments with carbon permit markets in 
seven pilot areas that cover areas accounting for nearly one- third of 

 
Is Democracy the Least Bad Political System?  
53
China’s GDP (in contrast, the United States has resisted such market- 
based schemes to reduce carbon emissions).146 An important reason for 
China’s pollution problem is that in the past cadres tended to be pro-
moted almost exclusively based on standards that measured economic 
growth, but wider assessment criteria are being used now: targets for 
pollution control are being linked to cadre evaluation processes,147 and 
the promotion of cadres in experimental low- carbon- emission cities 
such as Hangzhou is based on criteria that incorporate environmental, 
energy, and climate- change- related performance criteria.148 China’s 
powerful economic ministry is considering an outright cap on emis-
sions for its next five- year plan (2016–2020), which could help to break 
the stalemate in global climate talks.149 And the government has ad-
opted an environmental protection law that gives authorities more 
power to crack down on polluting industries than they have in large 
electoral democracies such as India: as Stephen O. Andersen of the In-
stitute for Governance and Sustainable Development in Washington 
puts it, “It’s easier for them to put the national interest before the inter-
est of one manufacturing sector.”150 In comparison to other large emerg-
ing economies, China has slowed the rate at which its greenhouse gas 
emissions have grown in the past decade, thanks partly to policies to 
improve efficiency and boost renewable energy.151 Finally, the govern-
ment recognizes that top- down approaches won’t be sufficient, and it 
has tolerated and even encouraged a surge of bottom- up green initia-
tives over the past decade or so.152
Perhaps the best reason to be optimistic is that the same party will 
likely still be in power several decades from now. The CCP is likely to 
stick to its long- term commitments. In 2014, both President Xi and 
President Obama made pledges to curb net greenhouse gas emissions: 
in the case of the United States, to reduce net greenhouse gas emis-
sions by 26–28 percent below 2005 levels by 2025, and in the case of 
China, to reach a peak year for its carbon emissions by 2030 and to in-
crease the share of renewable energy to 20 percent by that year.153 Who 
is more likely to stick to these pledges? The United States may set aside 
its pledge if the Republicans win the presidency.154 No such worries in 
China, unless the whole political system collapses. In addition, the 
CCP derives much of its legitimacy from its capacity to perform well, 
including its ability to anticipate and respond to natural and social di-

54 
Chapter 1 
sasters. The idea that the government is responsible for disaster preven-
tion, especially flood control due to the enormous scale of the project, 
goes far back in Chinese history and the same is true today (see chapter 
3, section 3). In contrast, political rulers in democracies derive legiti-
macy by virtue of being chosen by voters, and if things go wrong several 
decades from now, the particular government at the time will take most 
of the blame. In other words, it is in China’s rulers’ self- interest to pre-
pare for disasters both short- term and long- term, and if the CCP doesn’t 
do so, it will lose much of its legitimacy. I do not know if China will be 
able to develop an environmentally sustainable way of life, but so long 
as it does not adopt a democratic system that privileges the interests of 
the voting community at the cost of future generations, that’s where I’d 
place my bet.155
4. The Tyranny of Competitive Individualists
One feature of electoral democracy is the open competition for politi-
cal power: a major election is typically a period of sustained and in-
tense mobilization and engagement, in which contending sides reach 
out to and seek the support of every last voter. The problem is that 
electoral democracy can exacerbate rather than alleviate social con-
flict. “Negative campaigning” is a feature of most elections, with politi-
cians and political parties tainting electoral competitors with false and 
unsubstantiated allegations in order to saddle them with the disappro-
bation of the voters. Such campaigning is both rampant and effective: 
as the American journalist Dan Rather put it, “Negative campaigning 
works!”156 In the worst cases, political leaders representing the interests 
of majority groups appeal to ethnic and racial solidarity and tyrannize 
minority groups, both during the electoral campaign and after they 
win the vote (see section 2). Electoral political divisions generate “iden-
tity politics” in which voting for a certain party becomes something 
akin to a tribal identity, as in Thailand, polarizing society to the point 
of endangering the polity’s survival. If the question of who counts as 
“we the people” has not been settled in democratic countries, the 
threat of civil war is omnipresent.

 
Is Democracy the Least Bad Political System?  
55
In more established liberal democracies basic civil and political 
rights cannot easily be abridged by a majority vote, but electoral cam-
paigns can be so poisonous that reasonable accommodation of differ-
ences becomes almost impossible: in the U.S. case, the vitriolic hatred 
between Republicans and Democrats has made compromise a dirty 
word. Differences between political groups stem from genuine dis-
agreements over ways of life and conceptions of the good, but elections 
can and do exacerbate differences,157 in the same way that going to 
court as a first option for dealing with family conflict is likely to further 
disrupt harmony between family members.158 And if the Tocquevillian 
argument that the power to participate in electoral politics also empow-
ers individuals in other spheres of social life is correct, it is also true 
that divisive elections can set a bad model for resolving conflict outside 
of the political arena.159
In a society composed of competitive individualists, the disruption 
of social harmony is something to be expected: I fight for my interests 
or my interpretation of the common good, you fight for yours, and let 
the best person win. The problem is that many people prioritize social 
harmony, and they are disadvantaged in a political system that has the 
effect of exacerbating social conflict. Consider adherents of Confucian 
ethics. Confucians emphasize that a good life is characterized, first and 
foremost, by rich and diverse social relations. This is not just a descrip-
tive banality about how our identities are shaped by our communities, 
but is rather a normative claim that human flourishing is constituted 
by social relations of certain kinds, so that we have an obligation to 
nourish those relations. More specifically, we should strive for harmo-
nious social relations, whether in the family, society, or the world or 
with nature. Harmony, at a minimum, means peaceful order (or the 
absence of violence). Conflict is unavoidable, but it should be dealt 
with in a nonviolent way to establish a peaceful order. But peaceful 
order is not sufficient for a relationship to be characterized as “harmo-
nious.” The Confucian idea of harmony also values diversity. Partly, 
there are aesthetic reasons to value diversity: an ingredient, such as salt, 
that tastes bland on its own becomes flavorful when mixed in a soup 
with other ingredients. There are also moral reasons to value diversity: 
early Confucians emphasized that the ruler should be open to different 

56 
Chapter 1 
political views so that mistakes can be exposed and corrected. In short, 
the Confucian- inspired ideal of harmony is that relations among fam-
ily members, citizens, and countries, as well as between humans and 
nature, are key to human flourishing, both in the sense that they mat-
ter for well- being and in the moral sense that they generate social obli-
gations. Those relations should all be characterized by peaceful order 
and respect for diversity.
One response might be to question the extent to which the ideal of 
harmony is still endorsed today. It may have been a dominant value of 
preindustrial Chinese society,160 but today we are supposed to care 
more about individual freedom, including the right to vote, than about 
a society that seeks to maximize harmony. But social scientists in a 
wide array of fields maintain that Chinese characteristically value and 
strive for Confucian- style harmony in their everyday lives to a much 
greater degree than average Westerners do.161 And there is widespread 
agreement that harmony should be an important goal of government 
policy: even in Hong Kong—supposedly the most individualist part of 
China—55.3 percent of people surveyed by the Chinese University of 
Hong Kong in 2012 agreed that harmony should be the goal of devel-
opment, compared to 17.8 percent that saw democracy and freedom as 
goals.162
Moreover, the ideal of harmony is widely shared and prioritized out-
side of China. Confucianism spread beyond China to East Asian soci-
eties such as Japan, South Korea, and Vietnam, and today East Asian 
societies still tend to prioritize the value of harmony. Beyond East Asia, 
many other societies and cultures also value harmony, even if they have 
not been influenced by Confucianism in historical practice. Ubuntu, 
the main ethical tradition in sub- Saharan Africa, is strongly committed 
to harmony. Buen vivir (good living), an idea rooted in the worldview of 
the Quechua peoples of the Andes that has gained popularity through-
out Latin America, emphasizes living in harmony with other people 
and nature. And so on. In fact, it could be argued that the value of 
harmony is more widely shared and prioritized in the world’s cultures, 
ethical systems, and religions than supposedly universal values such as 
freedom. As in many other domains where the citizens of Western, ed-
ucated, industrialized, rich, and democratic (WEIRD) societies are the 
international outliers,163 the “Western” devaluation of the ideal of har-

 
Is Democracy the Least Bad Political System?  
57
mony is highly controversial in the rest of the world.164 In any case, it 
doesn’t take a lot of thought to realize the importance of harmony for 
human well- being: how many of us can thrive without families and 
societies characterized by peaceful order and respect for diversity, not 
to mention a peaceful international order and a nondestructive ap-
proach to the natural environment?165
Another response might be to question the value of harmony from 
the perspective of human nature. At the end of the day, we are com-
petitive egoists, and any society that seeks to promote the value of social 
harmony goes against the grain of human nature. Xunzi, perhaps the 
third most influential Confucian thinker in the preimperial era, fa-
mously questioned Mencius’s claim that we are born good. To show 
innate goodness, Mencius used the example of a child falling down a 
well: even if we have no personal relationship with that child, we im-
mediately feel a sense of alarm and distress rooted in natural human 
sympathy. In contrast, Xunzi argued that we are born bad and con-
cerned first and foremost with maximizing our own desires.166 Contem-
porary studies in decision neuroscience show that Mencius may have 
been correct: the brain areas that are active when a person experiences 
pain firsthand are the same areas that are active when a normally devel-
oping child or adult sees someone else experience pain. Even six- 
month- old infants prefer helpers over neutral parties and neutral par-
ties over competitive types.167 The ability to feel concern and to respond 
with sympathy and imaginative perspective is a deep part of our evolu-
tionary heritage, and it is shared with primates of many species.168 That 
said, it is obvious that people can become ruthlessly competitive and 
egoistic if they are placed in a social context that inhibits or punishes 
the realization of goodness. Mencius himself said that the government 
must provide for common people’s basic means of subsistence so that 
they won’t go morally astray: “The people will not have dependable 
feelings if they are without dependable means of support. Lacking de-
pendable means of support, they will go astray and fall into excesses, 
stopping at nothing.”169 Other than heroic figures such as Mahatma 
Gandhi or Jesus Christ, most people will not behave morally toward 
non–family members if they are in a situation that necessitates bad be-
havior in order to survive. More specifically, research suggests that peo-
ple behave badly when they are not held personally accountable, when 

58 
Chapter 1 
nobody raises a critical voice, and when human beings over whom they 
have power are dehumanized and deindividualized.170 Here we can add 
that competitive elections, instead of allowing for the flourishing of 
human goodness that underpins social harmony, almost counteracts 
human nature by allowing for, if not encouraging, the demonization of 
political opponents. And the privacy of the voting booth encourages 
bad behavior by allowing people to act without being accountable for 
their actions and without anybody raising a critical voice.
So what can be done? Democratic optimists propose solutions to 
improve other- regarding behavior and social harmony without ques-
tioning the political institution of one person, one vote. Martha Nuss-
baum argues that moral education in the humanities can teach stu-
dents to think critically and become knowledgeable and empathetic 
citizens.171 Deliberative democrats argue that citizens can and should 
seek public- spirited perspectives on public issues and promote mutu-
ally respectful decision making rather than flattening the political 
landscape into a contest among interests and preferences.172 The prob-
lem is that nothing prevents politicians from taking the low road on the 
way to electoral victory. And there is little evidence that the arguments 
of well- intentioned political theorists have succeeded in promoting a 
form of political discourse that stems the tide of competitive individual-
ism. If anything, the advent of the Internet facilitates irresponsible and 
mean- spirited political speech that further (and needlessly) poisons so-
cial relations.173
An Alternative to Electoral Democracy: No Party Politics
Yet again, we need to turn to alternatives to competitive electoral de-
mocracy for inspiration. The philosopher Kwasi Wiredu argues that 
democracy should not be conceived only as multiparty competition for 
power. Given that democracy is government by consent, the question is 
how to devise a form of democracy that is less adversarial than the party 
system. Wiredu contends that a system based on consensus as a 
decision- making procedure is a better form of democracy. The kind of 
consensus need not be agreement regarding questions of truth and mo-

 
Is Democracy the Least Bad Political System?  
59
rality, but rather agreement about what needs to be done. A consensual 
system of this sort would be a nonparty arrangement.174
Wiredu’s theory is inspired by the precolonial history of government 
by consensus in Africa, but early Anglo- American theorists of represen-
tative democracy were also skeptical of multiparty politics. America’s 
founding fathers saw a no- party system as the best for the democracy 
they envisioned,175 and the nineteenth- century British liberal theorist 
John Stuart Mill similarly argued against political parties as expres-
sions of partial interests rather than the common good. The problem is 
that the system of one person, one vote necessarily slides into multi-
party politics as people with different interests and values coalesce into 
different groups. Wiredu argues that multiparty politics can be pre-
vented by institutionalizing formal representation for different groups 
in the legislature: “civil organizations might be assigned some agreed 
number of representatives in the governing body.”176 Wiredu’s proposal 
is similar to Hegel’s proposal for a lower house of corporations and so-
cial guilds. Hegel worried that individuals not tied to any groups or 
organizations would be, in his words, “elemental, irrational, barba-
rous, and terrifying.”177 According to Hegel, individuals come to take 
an interest in common enterprises and to develop a certain degree of 
political competence only by joining and participating in voluntary 
associations and community groups, with the political implication 
that the lower house should be composed of corporations and pro-
fessional guilds (the upper house should be composed of the landed 
propertied class).
In the modern world, the closest approximation of the Hegel/Wiredu 
ideal is the Legislative Council of Hong Kong. In 1985, the British co-
lonial government decided to institute elections for a number of seats 
in order to represent more authoritatively the views of Hong Kong peo-
ple. But it disparaged the idea of introducing direct elections for univer-
sal suffrage on the grounds that this might lead to instability. So the 
government decided that a large number of seats should be allocated to 
functional constituencies based on various interest groups, a system 
that still exists, with the largest block of seats assigned to business 
groups and professional associations. But the functional system lacks 
legitimacy: most functional constituency representatives are perceived 

60 
Chapter 1 
as serving the narrow interests of the richest groups and most privileged 
members of the community, and there are endless disputes over how to 
draw the lines within and between the various voting blocs. Not sur-
prisingly, the large majority of Hong Kongers prefer to replace this sys-
tem with directly elected seats based on multiparty competition and 
one person, one vote178 (i.e., precisely the kind of democratic system 
that is rejected by Wiredu). To be fair, Wiredu argues for a democratic 
system that would be based on consensus, with policies being enacted 
only after agreement about what needs to be done by all groups in the 
legislature, so groups could not simply represent (or be seen to repre-
sent) the interests of a particular group. But appealing to the value of 
consensus solves one problem at the cost of creating an even bigger 
one: the expectation that everybody in a large, modern, and pluralistic 
political community can agree about what needs to be done is not real-
istic. Perhaps small, relatively homogenous communities can agree in a 
consensual way about what needs to be done, but the result of striving 
for a genuine, unforced consensus in a country like China is that noth-
ing would get done.
In fact, there is no need to posit an entirely imaginary (and unrealis-
tic) political ideal if the aim is to minimize adversarial politics and 
promote social harmony. China has many problems, but most citizens 
perceive China as a harmonious society and the country is more har-
monious than large democratic countries such as India and the United 
States.179 Here China’s political model may be helpful. At the local vil-
lage level, elections take place without competitive party politics on the 
assumption that there can be some sort of village- based consensus 
about what needs to be done. While there is a large gap between the 
ideal and the reality, it is not unrealistic to strive for more such “democ-
racy by consensus” in villages where the issues are not complex, people 
know one another and their political leaders, and there may be a stron-
ger sense of community (see chapter 4, section 3). At the central level of 
government in a country of 1.3 billion people, the best we can hope for 
(in terms of achieving consensus) is a common view that emerges from 
public- spirited deliberation among elites. Of course, China relies on 
force to prevent the open articulation of diverse interests and the for-
mation of political parties that compete for political power, which may 
only serve to bottle up social conflict so that it explodes later. Social 

 
Is Democracy the Least Bad Political System?  
61
harmony in China may be (at least partly) the product of top- down 
campaigns that are not as effective at promoting other- regarding behav-
ior (especially toward strangers) as citizen empowerment and commu-
nity development.180 Hence, political reformers in China argue for in-
traparty democracy that would allow for internal competition within 
the CCP, more independent organizations in civil society, and a freer 
media environment.181 Such developments can and should help to 
bring about a more harmonious society. But full democratization in 
the form of one person, one vote and a competitive multiparty system is 
likely to aggravate social conflict and forever bury the ideal of a harmo-
nious society.
This chapter was written primarily for Western readers brought up in a 
political culture that sanctifies electoral democracy as the best (or least 
bad) regime and for Chinese democrats with a blind faith in the bene-
fits of electoral democracy.182 I have argued that there are morally desir-
able and politically feasible alternatives to electoral democracy that can 
help to remedy major disadvantages of electoral democracy. I realize 
that the discussion of nondemocratic theories and real politics in Sin-
gapore and China is bound to be controversial, and I do not expect the 
reader to endorse the view that political meritocracy is superior to elec-
toral democracy. But my aim thus far has been more modest: to “desa-
cralize” the ideal of one person, one vote by showing that electoral de-
mocracies do not necessarily perform better than political meritocracies 
according to widely shared standards of good government. At the very 
least, Chinese- style political meritocracy can be viewed as a grand po-
litical experiment with the potential to remedy key defects of electoral 
democracy, and outsiders should encourage the experiment rather than 
hoping for its failure (not to mention promoting a “prodemocracy” for-
eign policy designed to increase the likelihood of failure).
So long as the reader is willing to question the view that democracy 
is the least bad system, then we can proceed to the next chapter. There 
is no point in arguing for political meritocracy with democratic funda-
mentalists. That said, it may not really matter what democratic funda-
mentalists think. If the aim is to propose suggestions for improving 
China’s political system, we can simply assume that China’s one- party 
system is not about to collapse and argue for improvements on that 

62 
Chapter 1 
basis. Hence, I will not pursue the question of whether China should 
adopt one person, one vote and competitive multiparty politics to 
choose its top rulers because that question is not likely to be on the 
political agenda in the foreseeable future. It is a nonquestion, politi-
cally speaking.

h p
 2
On the Selection of Good Leaders  
in a Political Meritocracy
I
n the early 1990s, several Asian officials and their supporters put 
forward the idea of “Asian values” to assert that Asian societies 
should not adopt liberal democratic political values and practices. 
As Singapore’s former prime minister Lee Kuan Yew put it, “Asians 
have little doubt that a society where the interests of society take prece-
dence over that of the individual suits them better than the individual-
ism of America.”1 Such claims attracted international attention primar-
ily because East Asian leaders seemed to be presiding over what a 
United Nations human development report called “the most sustained 
development miracle of the twentieth century, perhaps all history.”2
The debate over “Asian values” was led by political leaders with 
questionable motives, but the views of Lee and his colleagues did have 
some traction in Asian societies: it prompted critical intellectuals in the 
East Asian region to reflect on how they can locate themselves in a de-
bate on human rights in which they had not previously played a sub-
stantial part.3 In the 1990s, the values debate focused mainly on human 
rights. How “universal” is a human rights regime that draws only (or 
mainly) on the moral aspirations and political practices found in West-
ern liberal democratic societies? If Asian cultures are less individualis-
tic than Western ones, then perhaps certain forms of governance and 
policies are more suitable to Asian societies that are different from the 
human rights standards typically endorsed by liberal theorists, Western 
governments, and international human rights documents formulated 

64 
Chapter 2 
without substantial input from East Asia. How can “Asian values” and 
cultural traditions enrich the “international” human rights regime so 
that it truly becomes an international order based on universally ac-
cepted human rights? Asian critics of “Western- style” human rights 
criticized liberals both for not respecting nonliberal moralities in Asia 
that might justify deviations from a “Western” human rights regime, 
and for failing to do what must be done to make human rights a truly 
universal ideal.
In 1997–1998, however, the East Asian miracle seemed to have col-
lapsed. And the debate over “Asian values” was one casualty of the cri-
sis. For many, the end came not a minute too soon because the whole 
debate seemed to rest on faulty theoretical premises. Most obviously, 
Asia is a huge and exceptionally diverse landmass, encompassing much 
of the world’s population. It hosts a number of religions, such as Islam, 
Hinduism, Confucianism, Christianity, and Buddhism, as well as myr-
iad races, ethnicities, customs, and languages. The assumption that 
Asia has its own cultural essence fundamentally different from that of 
the West is, to say the least, dubious. And Asian politicians such as 
South Korea’s former president Kim Dae Jung openly questioned the 
idea of “Asian values” defended by Lee Kuan Yew, arguing that liberal 
democratic political values and practices are both universal and appro-
priate for his country.4 It would be only a slight exaggeration to say that 
“Asian values” were really “Singaporean values” as interpreted by that 
country’s political leaders!
Ironically, few paid attention to the really innovative Singaporean 
contribution to the debate about political values: the official discourse 
from Singapore has theoretical and practical interest not so much be-
cause it challenges the universality of human rights but because it 
challenges the universality of democracy. Singapore’s leaders reject 
the dichotomy between “good” democratic and “bad” authoritarian re-
gimes. Rather, they argue that the concept of meritocracy best de-
scribes Singapore’s political system: given Singapore’s small popula-
tion and limited resource base, the country should be led by people 
with the greatest talent and best characters, chosen according to merit. 
But what does it mean to select political leaders according to merit? 
Which abilities and which virtues matter for political leaders? For Sin-
gapore’s leaders, intellectual ability matters most, as measured by su-

 
On the Selection of Good Leaders 
65
perior academic performance. In terms of political virtues, Singapor-
ean leaders emphasize clean government, meaning lack of corruption. 
Leaders are not selected so much on the basis of positive virtues,5 but 
they are deselected if they are shown to be corrupt.6 In short, Singa-
porean leaders argue for the need to institutionalize selection and pro-
motion mechanisms for choosing noncorrupt and highly intelligent 
leaders with the power to decide on a wide range of issues affecting 
the political community, even if it means constraints on the demo-
cratic process.
Since the country’s independence in 1965, Singapore’s leaders 
gained the trust of the population by presiding over stunning economic 
growth. Over the past few years, however, the Singapore government 
has struggled to retain the trust and respect of the population. There-
fore it has changed its ways. In response to widespread aspirations for 
more political participation, the government has loosened controls on 
political speech and no longer relies on harsh retaliation against politi-
cal opponents. In response to high income inequality and less social 
mobility, the government has provided more benefits for the disadvan-
taged and the middle class. The government still emphasizes that meri-
tocratically selected leaders should take the long view beyond the next 
electoral cycle, but it recognizes the need for political leaders with a 
more caring outlook. The new outlook has been termed “compassion-
ate meritocracy.”7
Such debates over political merit have a long history in China. The 
idea of “elevating the worthy” emerged in the wake of the disintegra-
tion of the pedigree- based order of the Spring and Autumn period 
(770–453 bce) and proliferated rapidly throughout the Warring States 
period (453–221 bce), being shared by every major intellectual current. 
As Yuri Pines shows, there was wide disagreement over what counts as 
“worth” or “merit.”8 For Confucius and his followers, “worthiness” is 
primarily related to one’s morality. For pragmatic statesmen known as 
Legalists, morality cannot be objectively measured and they warned 
that unless precisely defined, “worthiness” can be manipulated by hyp-
ocrites and one’s partisans rather than used as a criterion for selecting 
truly capable public servants. Imperial China’s great contribution to 
the debate on political meritocracy is the public service examination 
system: for more than thirteen hundred years, public officials were se-

66 
Chapter 2 
lected largely by means of competitive examinations. Here too, politi-
cal thinkers debated what constitutes political merit (and whether 
exams are appropriate mechanisms for selecting political leaders with 
merit), but the idea that political theorizing should be concerned with 
the question of how to select political leaders with superior abilities and 
virtues was rarely questioned.
The ideal of political meritocracy is not foreign to Western political 
theory and practice. Plato famously defended a meritocratic political 
ideal in The Republic: the best political regime is composed of political 
leaders selected on the basis of their superior ability to make morally 
informed political judgments, who have the power to rule the commu-
nity. Meritocracy was influential throughout subsequent history, al-
though thinkers from Aristotle on rarely defended a pure form of politi-
cal meritocracy. The U.S. founding fathers were committed to some 
form of democracy, but they also agreed that the political system should 
be designed with the aim of selecting rulers with superior ability and 
virtue: as Thomas Jefferson wrote in a letter to John Adams in 1813,
I agree with you that there is a natural aristocracy among men. 
The grounds of this are virtue and talents. . . . There is also an 
artificial aristocracy founded on wealth and birth, without ei-
ther virtue or talents; for with these it would belong to the first 
class. The natural aristocracy I consider as the most precious 
gift of nature for the instruction, the trusts, and government of 
society. . . . May we not even say that that form of government 
is the best which provides the most effectually for a pure selec-
tion of these natural aristoi into the offices of government?”9
In the same vein, nineteenth- century “liberal elitists” such as John 
Stuart Mill and Alexis de Tocqueville put forward political ideas that 
tried to combine meritocracy and democracy. In the second half of the 
twentieth century, however, such debates in Western political theory 
(and in the discourse of political leaders) largely came to an end. The 
key reason is the almost universal consensus (in Western societies) that 
political leaders with the power to exercise political judgments in a 
wide range of domains should be selected by means of one person, one 
vote.10 Liberal democracies do empower experts selected because of 

 
On the Selection of Good Leaders 
67
their abilities in administrative and judicial posts, but those experts 
must be accountable, if only in an indirect way, to democratically 
elected leaders. They are not meant to exercise power beyond the lim-
ited mandate endorsed and given to them by democratically elected 
leaders. It is fine to discuss, say, what ought to be the desirable character 
traits of democratically elected leaders with the aim of influencing vot-
ers, the leaders themselves, and/or the democratic process,11 but those 
leaders should be chosen by the voters, not by an alternative mecha-
nism explicitly designed to maximize the likelihood that leaders will 
have those character traits. The question of how to institutionalize non-
electoral mechanisms for choosing political leaders with superior abili-
ties and virtues that have the power to decide on a wide range of issues 
affecting the political community has come to be regarded as irrelevant 
to political theorizing, if not beyond the moral pale.
In contemporary China, it’s a different story. After the political 
chaos of the Cultural Revolution, Chinese leaders realized the need to 
implement a system for the selection and promotion of high- quality 
leaders appropriate for a period of peaceful economic development. 
Inspired by China’s history of selecting officials by examination and 
recommendation12 and (to a lesser extent) by the Singapore model (see 
chapter 1, section 1), they devised a sophisticated and comprehensive 
system for selecting and promoting political officials, involving de-
cades of training and a battery of exams at different stages of their ca-
reers.13 Yet the system is still in its early stages and plagued by imper-
fections: officials are selected and promoted not just on the basis of 
ability and morality, but also (if not more so) on the basis of political 
loyalty, social connections, and family background (see section 3). The 
political system is notoriously corrupt and the practice of buying and 
selling posts at lower levels of government in poor areas has yet to be 
completely eradicated.14 More serious (from a theoretical point of 
view), the ideal itself is not so clear: which abilities and virtues should 
set the standard for the selection and promotion of government offi-
cials so that the Chinese political system can be improved? And what 
sorts of mechanisms and institutions can increase the likelihood that 
officials are selected and promoted on the basis of those abilities and 
virtues? Given the centrality of these questions to China’s political fu-
ture, the absence of systematic research is striking (and disappointing). 

68 
Chapter 2 
Hence, any answer is somewhat speculative and needs to be put to the 
test of social scientific research.
This chapter, I say without any false modesty, is the beginning of a 
sketch of an answer. The first section will discuss the context for the 
relevant kind of leadership: how does political leadership differ from 
other forms of leadership, and what does it mean to be a leader in a 
modernizing, relatively peaceful society such as China that aims to be 
governed by meritocratically selected leaders? The following three sec-
tions will put forward ideas of what ought to be the key qualities (intel-
lectual abilities, social skills, and virtues) of political leaders and sug-
gest mechanisms that increase the likelihood that leaders will be 
selected and promoted on the basis of those qualities. This chapter is 
written with the Chinese context in mind, but each section begins with 
more general considerations that may apply to considerations of politi-
cal leadership in other societies.
1. Leadership in Context
According to one estimate, more than 250 English- language books on 
leadership are published every year.15 I confess I haven’t read them all, 
but the ones I did read often share a common trait: they describe the 
qualities of good leaders as though the same qualities apply regardless 
of context. Perhaps all leaders of large organizations in the modern 
world do share some qualities. But it is hard to describe those qualities 
without resorting to general platitudes—leaders should make sound de-
cisions and implement them effectively, manage individuals as they 
move through the organization, appropriately disburse funds, meet cer-
tain outcomes, be responsive to the needs of the stakeholders, and so 
on—that do not really deepen understanding, not to mention serve as 
concrete guides for action. If the aim is to think about the qualities of 
political leaders and to specify mechanisms that can increase the likeli-
hood of such leaders being recruited and promoted, it is important to 
be more sensitive to context. Surely different organizations have differ-
ent requirements, meaning that they may need leaders with different 
abilities, skills, and virtues. And surely the same organization may have 
different requirements at different times, meaning that it may need dif-

 
On the Selection of Good Leaders 
69
ferent kinds of leaders at different times with different kinds of quali-
ties. So what are the qualities required of political leaders? To be more 
specific, what are the qualities required of leaders in the upper echelons 
of the CCP?
In August 2013, Singapore’s former foreign minister George Yeo 
published a thought- provoking article titled “China and the Catholic 
Church.”16 Yeo argues that the newly installed leaders of the Catholic 
Church and the CCP face similar challenges. Both head organizations 
responsible for about one- fifth of humanity. Neither was elected by the 
entire citizenry or congregation of the faithful, and in both cases “the 
idea of direct election to the top leadership would have been thought 
absurd.” Despite centralized bureaucratic governance, there is much 
regional and local diversity in both organizations. With the social 
media revolution, the hierarchical structures of both organizations are 
coming under attack and leaders once protected by ritual and distance 
and sometimes hypocrisy and ignorance now seem more human. Cor-
ruption and sexual misdeeds have been widely reported in both organi-
zations, not necessarily because they have become more common but 
because they are harder to cover up. And the leaders of both organiza-
tions have responded to the new challenges in similar ways. Both Presi-
dent Xi and Pope Francis have made efforts to seem more authentic 
and close to the people than their predecessors. Both leaders took sym-
bolic actions signaling that leaders with power should be humble and 
lead modest lifestyles. In short, even organizations that seem strikingly 
different (the CCP is officially atheist!) require similar abilities and vir-
tues in their top leaders.17
Still, it must be recognized that there are also organization- specific 
leadership skills. Consider the sixth- century Book of Pastoral Rule by 
St. Gregory the Great, a Christian classic that details the qualities re-
quired of those who come to a position of spiritual leadership. Some 
qualities seem applicable to leaders of different sorts of organizations—
for example, “He must set such a positive example for others that he has 
nothing for which he should ever be ashamed.” But other qualities 
seem specific to the Catholic Church—for example, “He must be dead 
to the passions of the flesh and live a spiritual life.”18 Ascetic experience 
may be a prerequisite for leadership in the Catholic Church, but a po-
litical leader need not be entirely dead to the passions in order to serve 

70 
Chapter 2 
the public, nor should he or she spend too much time living a spiritual 
life if it interferes with, say, communicating with the public and read-
ing up on current events. Moreover, it may be true that “the spiritual 
director in his zeal should not desire to please others, but should focus 
on what ought to please them,”19 but a political leader should be at least 
partly concerned with pleasing others, not simply with trying to imple-
ment a vision of the common good that owes nothing to what people 
actually want. Clearly, leaders of religious organizations are concerned 
first and foremost with a spiritual mission that may require qualities 
different from those required of political leaders.20
Today, it is more common to compare leadership skills required in 
business and those required in politics. In January 2012, I was lucky 
enough to participate in the annual World Economic Forum meeting 
in Davos, Switzerland. At a luncheon meeting with CEOs of Fortune 
500 companies, I asked the CEOs if they think the qualities required of 
leaders in large business organizations differed in any way from the 
qualities required of political leaders. To my surprise, the whole panel 
of CEOs agreed that there were no differences. To press the point, I 
then asked a CEO on the panel, “Is there anything that you do that you 
think leaders of government should NOT do?” Again, he responded, 
no, leadership is leadership.
In fact, such views are not uncommon. Most books on leadership are 
written for the business world and few distinguish between the quali-
ties required of business leaders and the qualities required of political 
leaders. One particularly insightful (and entertaining) book on leader-
ship is titled The 100- Mile Walk. A father- and- son team, separated by 
differences in generation and political outlook, discuss the qualities of 
leadership during the course of long walks over several days. Contrary 
to expectations, they settle on common ideas about leadership. Effec-
tive leaders must be able to inspire, not simply direct or compel follow-
ers. Other traits include having sufficient self- esteem to recruit and re-
ward intelligent people and to accept criticism from them. Leaders also 
need a sense of purpose and passion. Leaders should continuously work 
at their craft. Such traits do indeed seem like general traits of all effec-
tive leaders. But some traits clearly seem confined to the business world. 
For example, the elder Flaum says that leaders should be paranoid (like 
fighter pilots) and do what is necessary to keep a competitive edge and 

 
On the Selection of Good Leaders 
71
not be copied by others. But for political leaders, paranoia may be a 
vice rather than a virtue (President Nixon is a famous case) and it is 
not necessarily a problem if good policies are being copied by other 
political leaders. The book also praises a former New York City fire 
commissioner for relating better to low- status people than to wealthy 
elites: a sound practice for a public servant, perhaps, but not necessar-
ily a desirable trait for a CEO. Yet not once in the book is there any 
attempt to distinguish between the different requirements of leader-
ship in politics and business. The leadership qualities of public offi-
cials such as John Glenn are praised along the same lines as the lead-
ership qualities of senior leaders of PepsiCo and Johnson and Johnson, 
as though the same types of leaders are meant to serve different types 
of organizations.21
To the extent business leaders do recognize that there are differences 
between politics and business, the point is often that government can 
and should learn from business. Some of the world’s business leaders, 
including Jack Welch, have suggested that government should be run 
more like a business.22 Over the past few decades, government has be-
come more businesslike in the management of its affairs: government 
reliance on advisors and services provided by the corporate sector has 
hastened the advance of businesslike approaches in government, with a 
substantial increase in the use of modern management tools and prin-
ciples, such as business strategy, key performance indicators, profes-
sional procurement, and operational efficiency. Hence, it should not be 
surprising that aspirants to political leadership such as Mitt Romney 
and Donald Trump often tout their business experience as evidence of 
their ability to manage the affairs of their country.23
While some business leaders have made relatively successful transi-
tions to the political world (Michael Bloomberg is a good example), the 
experience with bringing business models into government is not so 
positive: highly polarizing cases such as Thaksin Shinawatra in Thai-
land, and Silvio Berlusconi in Italy may be more typical than success. 
Similarly, political leaders often fail when they venture into business. 
The Chinese government has acknowledged the concern among many 
economists that China’s state- owned enterprises (SOEs) are an unsus-
tainable drag on the country’s economy and that the government’s 
overwhelming role in appointing the top leaders of SOEs promotes not 

72 
Chapter 2 
just corruption but also inefficiency. Hence, China’s leaders launched 
pilot schemes to improve corporate governance, including measures al-
lowing SOEs’ boards of directors to appoint senior management and set 
performance metrics regardless of the policy orientations of the state.24 
The aim of the reforms is to open recruitment at state firms for senior 
management jobs and increase the likelihood that key personnel are 
selected on commercial rather than political grounds.25 Although there 
may be a good case to be made for the CCP’s Organization Depart-
ment (responsible for the selection and promotion of party cadres) to 
promote some form of “leadership training” in state firms,26 given the 
importance of economic considerations in shaping political decisions,27 
the idea that the government should use purely political criteria to se-
lect leaders for top posts in SOEs is just as controversial as the idea that 
political leaders should govern the polity strictly according to the same 
criteria used to run a business.
An important reason that business models do not translate so well 
into politics, and vice versa, is that public and private organizations 
have different aims.28 For better or worse, few business leaders would 
deny that the primary purpose of business is the maximization of profit. 
There are different views about whether it should be in the short term 
or the long term, but business leaders cannot lose sight of the fact that 
business is ultimately about making a profit. In contrast, the task of 
government is not so clear. Most political thinkers, whatever their ori-
entation, agree that government leaders are supposed to serve the peo-
ple. But what is the government supposed to do for the people? Provide 
security, combat poverty, protect individual liberty, increase happiness, 
reduce inequality, promote social harmony, protect a country’s histori-
cal heritage, or all of the above in different proportions? What consti-
tutes performance within government “is more complicated, pluralis-
tic, value laden, and controversial than is true with the performance of 
private firms. . . . Unlike private firms for which profits and returns on 
investment provide widely accepted measures of success, for public or-
ganizations the criteria of success are many and controversial. . . . 
There is also a significant symbolic component to the actions of gov-
ernment, consisting of the language and the images to describe what is 
taking place and the public’s reactions to those messages. Appearances 
matter almost as much as reality.”29

 
On the Selection of Good Leaders 
73
Given the different aims of business and government, leaders often 
need different qualities. In business, the key stakeholders are relatively 
clear: the owners and (to a lesser extent) employees. In government, the 
stakeholders are more comprehensive and diverse. Who are political 
leaders supposed to serve? All those affected by the policies of govern-
ment, the people in the country’s territory, future generations, ances-
tors, or all of the above in different proportions? How to distribute de-
sired goods among the relevant group of people and who is supposed to 
pay for them? Whatever the political leader’s own views, she should be 
willing to revise her views in response to input from the diverse set of 
stakeholders. Hence, a government official should be willing to listen 
to diverse and often conflicting perspectives, to balance different goals, 
values, and interests, and to shape her aims at least partly in response to 
such widespread engagements. A business leader needs to incorporate 
the views of other people, but only insofar as it contributes to the bot-
tom line. A CEO such as Jack Welch can use methods such as “criticiz-
ing, demeaning, ridiculing, humiliating”30 that are unlikely to be effec-
tive in a political world that relies more on cooperation, praise, and 
strategic ambiguity to get things done.31 And different sectors of society 
in a modern political community will evaluate and criticize the perfor-
mance of political leaders; in business, there is less need for public 
scrutiny. Hence, political leaders need to be more willing to accept and 
respond to criticisms from diverse sectors of society.
The focus on profit also means that business leaders need to reward 
high performers, meaning those who contribute to the profitability of 
the firm. Regarding underachievers, the business leader should “be di-
rect and honest. . . . [W]hen employees fall short, you have to have the 
courage to walk your talk, to confront the issue and make the 
change. . . . Just as you have to have the courage to take out your weak 
players, you must take care of your great achievers no matter what, be-
cause if you don’t, they’ll walk.”32 For example, MetLife asks managers 
to use a lifeboat ranking for their team, and the bottom 20 percent are 
either placed on probation or lose their jobs.33 In contrast, political 
leaders need not be as concerned with high economic achievers; de-
fenders of the free market will say that successful economic actors are 
best left alone, social democrats will say that high achievers should pay 
a relatively high share of taxes, but both sides agree that political lead-

74 
Chapter 2 
ers need not devote all (or most) of their time to considering the inter-
ests of successful and high- status members of the political community. 
Nor should political leaders “take out” the weak members of the politi-
cal community because they do not contribute to the overall good of 
the state. Quite the opposite: political thinkers from Mencius to Rawls 
argue that political leaders need to be particularly concerned with the 
plight of the disadvantaged.34 Finally, innovation is more important for 
business: in a cutthroat capitalist world, most businesses must innovate 
to compete; in government, innovation may not be the number one 
priority, and the state won’t go “out of business” if it doesn’t innovate.
Another key difference is that business leaders need not be overly 
concerned with the well- being of the society in which they operate, nor 
need they be overly concerned with respecting its traditions and his-
torical heritage. To the extent that social responsibility is part of a busi-
ness enterprise, it should not interfere with its core profit- making mis-
sion. Hence, most corporations today maintain a clear dichotomy 
between profit- making and social responsibility functions, which are 
managed separately. Moreover, it is common for corporate social re-
sponsibility functions to be aligned as much as possible with initiatives 
to further maximize profit. For example, a bank may sponsor an inter-
national sporting event to increase brand recognition among the pub-
lic, or a mining company may invest in social infrastructure for remote 
communities to facilitate access to nearby mineral resources.35
Corporate social responsibility need not always serve commercial in-
terests, but when the good of the company conflicts with the wider so-
cial good, the former has priority. If a bank can increase its profit at 
some cost to the social whole, it will normally be expected to do so. It is 
the task of government regulators, not CEOs, to try to minimize dam-
age to the overall society. If a company can make substantially more 
profit by moving its operations abroad or by being taken over by a for-
eign company, it can do so. Business leaders need to be concerned with 
the greater social good if it affects the profitability of the firm, but they 
need not otherwise be patriotic or attached to a particular society.36 
Hence, it is not uncommon to appoint foreigners to head large compa-
nies, even in supposedly xenophobic societies such as Japan. In con-
trast, the leader of a political community, no matter what the form of 
government, needs to be from that community. In the past, colonial 

 
On the Selection of Good Leaders 
75
powers appointed overlords to rule over foreign lands, but it would not 
be acceptable today. At a minimum, a political leader must be seen to 
be a patriotic member of the political community.
Max Weber’s “Politics as Vocation”
In short, political leaders face quite distinct challenges that require dis-
tinct abilities and virtues. So what exactly are the qualities of good po-
litical leaders? The most influential twentieth- century work on the 
qualities of political leadership is Max Weber’s essay “Politics as a Vo-
cation,” first delivered as a lecture to the Free Students Union at the 
University of Munich in 1919. He begins the essay with the famous 
definition of the state as a human community that (successfully) claims 
the monopoly of the legitimate use of physical force within a given ter-
ritory. He then invokes the equally famous distinction between tradi-
tional, charismatic, and legal sources of legitimacy (meaning the dif-
ferent ways that domination is seen to be morally justified by the ruled), 
and he specifies that his lecture is concerned with the qualities of lead-
ers that dominate by charisma, that is, domination by virtue of the de-
votion of those who obey the purely personal charisma of the leader: 
“Devotion to the charisma of the prophet, or the leader in war, or to 
the great demagogue in the ecclesia or in parliament, means that the 
leader is personally recognized as the innerly ‘called’ leader of men. 
Men do not obey him by virtue of tradition or statute, but because they 
believe in him. If he is more than an upstart of the moment, the leader 
lives for his cause and ‘strives for his work.’ The devotion of his disci-
ples, his followers, his personal party friends is oriented to his person 
and to its qualities.”
But political leaders with the “inner charismatic qualities that make 
a leader” are a specific breed. A political leader must live for politics 
and make politics his life, and not just live off politics, meaning that 
politics is viewed primarily as a source of income.37 Political officials 
can be transferred, dismissed, or at least temporarily withdrawn, in 
contrast to administrative officials in the bureaucracy who develop spe-
cialized expertise through long years of preparatory training. The po-
litical leader must take exclusive personal responsibility for what he 

76 
Chapter 2 
does, in contrast to the civil servant who must execute conscientiously 
the order of the superior authorities, even if it appears wrong to him. 
The political leader enjoys the feeling of power: “the knowledge of in-
fluencing men, of participating in power over them, and above all, the 
feeling of holding in one’s hands a nerve fiber of historically important 
events.” But the good political leader will also ask “through what quali-
ties can I hope to do justice to this power.”
Weber says that three preeminent qualities are decisive for the politi-
cian: passion, a feeling of responsibility, and a sense of proportion. Pas-
sion matters, in the sense not of emotional excitation but rather of de-
votion to a cause. The political leader must also make responsibility to 
this cause the guiding star of action. And a sense of proportion is 
needed to “let realities work upon him with inner concentration and 
calmness. Hence his distance to things and men.” The question for the 
good political leader, in short, “is simply how can warm passion and a 
cool sense of proportion be forged together in one and the same soul?” 
In the case of the bad political leader, “the striving for power ceases to 
be objective and becomes purely personal self- gratification, instead of 
exclusively entering the service of ‘the cause.’ For ultimately there are 
only two kinds of deadly sins in politics: lack of objectivity and—often 
but not identical with it—irresponsibility. Vanity, the need personally 
to stand in the foreground as much as possible, strongly tempts the poli-
tician to commit one or both of these sins.”
The good politician should be guided by an “ethic of responsibility,” 
meaning he has to give an account of the foreseeable results of his ac-
tions, not simply by an “ethic of ultimate ends” that only values good 
intentions. An ethic of ultimate ends provides guidance as to which 
ends are right, but it cannot stand alone without consideration of re-
sults. The political leader must be prepared to use morally dubious 
means for good results: “The world is governed by demons and that he 
who lets himself in for politics, that is, for power and force as means, 
contracts with diabolical powers and for his action it is not true that 
good can follow only from good and evil only from evil, but that often 
the opposite is true. Anyone who fails to see this is, indeed, a political 
infant.” Whoever wants to engage in politics as a vocation has to realize 
these ethical paradoxes and accept responsibility for the results: “He 

 
On the Selection of Good Leaders 
77
who seeks the salvation of the soul, of his own or of others, should not 
seek it along the path of politics, for the quite different tasks of politics 
can only be solved by violence.”38
In short, politics is the art of compromise and decision making based 
on social benefits and weighed against costs and backed up by the in-
struments of violence, so political action cannot solely be guided by 
convictions. Political leaders must take into account all that is at stake 
in making a political decision and accept responsibility for the out-
comes. Political leaders most likely to satisfy these requirements will 
have both passion for politics driven primarily by moral conviction and 
a cool- headed ability to consider diverse perspectives and make use of 
the instruments of violence for the sake of less- than- perfect political 
decisions.
Weber’s analysis helps us think further about how political leadership 
differs from other forms of leadership. But the requirements of political 
leadership will also vary according to different political contexts.39 It is 
hard to blame Weber for the general character of his account of the 
qualities of the good political leader (he was delivering a lecture, and 
only a few lines speak directly to the topic), but even his general re-
marks do not apply in certain contexts. Weber’s account of the charis-
matic political leader seems more applicable in times of warfare or vio-
lent civil strife. A wartime leader needs to be driven by conviction and 
to dominate people by the power of charisma. He also needs to solve 
problems by resorting to violence and take personal responsibility for 
the outcomes.
In the context of a modernizing, largely peaceful society character-
ized by collective leadership such as China, the desired traits of a leader 
are likely to be different, perhaps closer to the characteristics of what 
Weber calls the “civil servant,” with long periods of preparatory train-
ing and intellectual knowledge of different disciplines. Hence, when 
wartime heroes try to govern in peaceful times, from the First Emperor 
of Qin to Mao Zedong and Robert Mugabe, they often turn out to be 
disasters.
Weber’s distinction between the political leader who decides and 
the civil servant who implements is also context- specific. In imperial 

78 
Chapter 2 
China (as Weber recognizes), there was no distinction between civil 
servants and political leaders: the successful examination candidates 
were put on the road to be political leaders with the power to decide on 
matters affecting the lives of millions of people (although they were 
still supposed to serve, in an ultimate sense, at the behest of the em-
peror). In contemporary China, the public service examinations (mis-
leadingly translated as “civil service examinations”) are also stepping-
stones to political power; there are not separate tracks for political 
officials and civil servants.40 Nor does Weber distinguish between the 
qualities required of political leaders at different levels of government; 
in a huge country such as China, for example, superior intellectual 
ability (not mentioned by Weber) may be particularly important for 
central- level political leaders, which may not be the case for village 
leaders. In the Ming dynasty, for example, government officials in the 
capital had to meet more demanding evaluation requirements than 
those outside.41
Today, prospective officials for posts at higher levels of government 
in China are tested for different abilities than those at lower levels: the 
public service examinations for lower levels of government test for the 
ability to implement the goals of the organization and the ability to re-
solve problems (as well as reading comprehension and writing expres-
sion), but the exams for higher levels of government (subprovincial and 
above) also test for the ability to “comprehensively analyze” (analyzing 
all parts of the contents, standpoints, or questions of the given informa-
tion and to make reasonable inferences or evaluation) and the ability to 
“raise and resolve problems” (based on the understanding and analysis 
of the given information, use one’s own practical or living experience 
to find and define problems, provide evaluation or trade- offs, and pro-
pose a solution plan or course of action).42 Upper- level cadres are also 
typically expected to have a university education.43
In short, context matters. If the aim is to discuss the abilities and 
virtues of a good leader, it is important not just to differentiate between 
leadership in politics and other spheres of social life, but also between 
different kinds of political leaders in different places and times. So 
here’s the context I have in mind: the qualities required of political 
leaders selected by nondemocratic mechanisms at higher levels of gov-

 
On the Selection of Good Leaders 
79
ernment in large, modernizing countries with relatively secure territo-
rial boundaries. In reality, China is the only country that comes close 
to fitting that description, but there is a large gap between the merito-
cratic ideal described here and the reality in contemporary China; the 
point of discussing an ideal is to provide standards for reform.
Given the focus on political meritocracies, I will not discuss quali-
ties that may be more appropriate for political leaders in democratic 
societies, such as a very thick skin, the ability to think quickly on one’s 
feet, the need to exaggerate differences with political opponents and to 
give the same partisan stump speech with the same apparent degree of 
enthusiasm repeatedly during the campaign season, as well as the abil-
ity to switch to a more inclusive political discourse that seeks to explain 
and justify policies to the public after election victory.44 Nor will I dis-
cuss in any detail what those leaders should do because China is a large 
and complex country with different needs and priorities in different 
times and places,45 and any informed answer depends partly on what 
the Chinese people actually want. Hence, I will assume that leaders 
should seek to promote the well- being of the people, but beyond that 
my discussion of the qualities required of leaders in a political meritoc-
racy is meant to be compatible with many different theories and views 
regarding the purposes of government (see section 4). In each section, I 
will begin by discussing general qualities of political leadership in po-
litical meritocracies, followed by a discussion of qualities that may be 
more China- specific. I will also propose nondemocratic mechanisms 
that increase the likelihood of selecting and promoting political leaders 
with those qualities.
2. On the Need for Intellectual Ability
Which abilities matter for public officials also depends on the context. 
In ancient times of incessant warfare, physical abilities were most im-
portant: for example, the Warring States thinker Shang Yang proposed 
that soldiers should be promoted based on the number of decapitated 
heads of enemy soldiers.46 In today’s world, intellectual abilities matter 
more.47 A political leader needs to understand complex arguments and 

80 
Chapter 2 
make decisions based on knowledge of the latest developments in a 
number of interconnected disciplines that bear on the policy- making 
process: economics, science, international relations, psychology, and so 
on. In addition, sound decision making requires a global outlook. Glo-
balization and technological innovation in the past few decades have 
made the world increasingly interconnected, with the result that finan-
cial, political, social, and environmental shocks spread faster and be-
come more disruptive.48 To ensure social stability and sustained growth, 
political leaders need to be adaptable, agile, and responsive to looming 
global risks.49 Hence, it is insufficient to rely on well- crafted national 
political institutions and laws: an ability to understand the world and 
respond to rapid changes in a risk- prone world in an informed and in-
telligent way is an essential requirement of what it means to be an ef-
fective political leader today, and arguably the qualities of political 
leaders matter more than ever before in human history.
Singapore, once again, has been ahead of the curve. Its leaders 
have long emphasized intellectual ability. As Singapore’s founding fa-
ther Lee Kuan Yew put it, “I am sorry if I am constantly preoccupied 
with what the near- geniuses and the above average are going to do. 
But I am convinced that it is they who ultimately decide the shape of 
things to come.”50 Lee himself graduated with a rare double first- class 
honors degree from Cambridge University, and his son Lee Hsien 
Loong (the current prime minister) graduated from the same univer-
sity by scoring twelve more alphas than his nearest competitor (which 
had never been seen in the history of Tripos at Cambridge). It should 
not be surprising that Singapore has institutionalized a rigorous sys-
tem for the recruitment of political talent that starts with the search 
for high academic achievers in the school system, followed by a bat-
tery of examinations at key stages in the selection and promotion pro-
cess. Almost all of Singapore’s key political decision makers have stel-
lar academic backgrounds, which surely helps to explain why 
Singapore’s policy- making process is usually supported by social scien-
tific research and knowledge of best practices abroad, perhaps more so 
than any other political community. China has been learning from 
Singapore in this respect, as well as looking to its own past as inspira-
tion for meritocratic reform.

 
On the Selection of Good Leaders 
81
A Mechanism for Recruiting Political Officials with  
Intellectual Ability: The Imperial Examination System
The idea of using exams as a mechanism to search for political talent 
might seem odd to Westerners, but it has deep roots in Chinese politi-
cal culture. As we saw, the principle of political meritocracy—the ap-
pointing of officials according to merit rather than their pedigree—was 
shared by every major intellectual current in the preimperial period. 
Yet thinkers argued over not just the content of merit but also the kinds 
of mechanisms necessary to identify political merit. The establishment 
and institutionalization of the examination system largely settled the 
latter debate in imperial China, with even harsh critics of the examina-
tion system such as Zhu Xi (1130–1200) agreeing that the examinations 
were necessary for selecting political officials.51
Emperor Wu of Han (r. 141–87 bce) started an early form of the 
imperial examinations: local officials would select candidates to take 
part in an examination on the Confucian classics, from which he 
would select officials to serve by his side. There were other avenues for 
promotion, but examinations were specifically designed to broaden ac-
cess to government service for the local elites. During the Eastern Han 
(25–220 ce), examinations for talent were used to screen candidates to 
ensure competence in specialized fields, such as flood control and for-
eign policy, and the Imperial University expanded to the point that it 
significantly influenced composition of the officialdom. But local mag-
nates objected to state- based competitive examinations and argued in 
favor of promoting the people according to their moral behavior, as 
judged by neighbors and approved by local officials. Recruitment on 
the basis of local recommendations was adopted at the very end of the 
Han and continued to dominate the process of selecting officials for 
the next three hundred years or so. As power devolved to the local com-
munities with the court rubber- stamping local recommendations, the 
composition of the elite turned into a powerful hereditary aristocracy 
closed to outsiders, and examinations gradually lost their prestige.52
Examinations were revived and expanded during the Sui (581–618) 
and Tang (618–907) dynasties with the aim of discontinuing aristo-
cratic rule and reconfirming the right of the throne to have the final 

82 
Chapter 2 
say in determining one’s rank. Recruitment in the imperial govern-
ment became an imperial prerogative rather than a duty to be per-
formed by lower levels, and selection by recommendation was replaced 
by selection by examination. The tests—the world’s first standardized 
tests based on merit—were designed as objective measures to evaluate 
the educational attainment and merit of the examinees, as part of the 
process of final selections and appointments to political office. In the 
Tang period, examinations became a necessary condition for official-
dom for the first time in Chinese (or human) history: candidates for 
political office took qualifying examinations, and then underwent a se-
lection process that evaluated moral character and determined the 
level of appointment.53 The examination system was consolidated 
under the Song dynasty, and examinations became the primary chan-
nel for entry into officialdom: all successful candidates examined in 
the capital were automatically appointed to government offices.54 Song 
rulers also implemented institutional reforms of the examination sys-
tem that were to characterize the institutional form of the examina-
tions for the next millennium, such as creating three levels of examina-
tions and establishing a triennial schedule for the examinations.55
The examination system was briefly interrupted at the beginning of 
the (Mongol) Yuan dynasty (1280–1368), but the dynasty belatedly re-
newed the examination system in 1313. The Yuan rulers incorporated 
aspects of Song dynasty “Learning of the Way” (or Neo- Confucianism) 
in the examination curriculum, though the examination system was 
still a minor avenue for entry into officialdom. The system matured 
under the Ming: for the first time, examination success at the provin-
cial level opened the way to an official career. Neo- Confucian ideas 
about moral thought and classical statecraft served as important models 
for the examination curriculum (and intellectual orthodoxy more gen-
erally) during both the Ming and (Manchu) Qing dynasties.56 The ex-
amination system also spread to Korea and Vietnam as a means of 
drawing in (and maintaining a grip on) top national talent.57
Although the meritocratic idea of selecting officials by means of ex-
aminations was often flawed in practice, particularly toward the end of 
dynasties,58 the whole system was challenged as a result of humiliating 
military defeats at the hands of French, British, and Japanese powers in 
the second half of the nineteenth century. The main question became 

 
On the Selection of Good Leaders 
83
how to build up China’s national power by relying on popular mobili-
zation for collective purposes, and Western- style education designed 
for mass mobilization rather than bureaucratic recruitment was seen as 
key for popular mobilization.59 Hence, the examination system was 
abolished in 1905 on the grounds that it was incompatible with the 
quest for national power. At the same moment, ironically, the Western 
world was beginning to embrace meritocratic examinations as a means 
of modernizing its political systems,60 but with one crucial difference: 
examinations were employed to select civil servants with the task of 
implementing the decisions of democratically elected officials, not for 
selecting political officials with the power to decide on a wide range of 
matters affecting the political community.61
The longevity and global influence of the examination system can 
be explained because of its social advantages. First, and most obvious, 
the imperial examination system was relatively fair and impartial as a 
method for selecting political officials with superior abilities compared 
to political systems that selected rulers on the basis of race, sex, family 
ties, or social connections. In the transformation from the Tang to the 
Song, the Chinese state established the examination system at least 
partly with the aim of challenging the educational and political mo-
nopoly held by aristocratic families. In the Song dynasty, the emperors 
expanded the examinations and the government school system to 
counter the influence of military aristocrats, quadrupling the number 
of those who passed the exams and broadening the social base of 
scholar- officials. As Song dynasty founder Emperor Taizu (r. 960–976) 
put it, “The country has fastened upon examinations to select scholars, 
choosing men to become officials. Since picking and ranking men in 
the public court is preferable to [receiving their] thanks for favors in 
private halls, this will serve to rectify customs that have been lacking.”62 
To ensure fairness in the examination process, Song rulers instituted 
measures that are still used today, such as blind grading (papers were 
recopied in order not to allow biases by revealing the candidate by his 
calligraphy).63 In practice, the system was often plagued by cheating 
that undermined the claims of impartiality and fairness (especially in 
certain periods, such as the late Northern Song, the late Ming, and the 
late Qing), but in its better moments the imperial examination system 
(arguably) reduced the influence of arbitrary factors in the political tal-

84 
Chapter 2 
ent selection process compared to other systems in other places at the 
same time. In contemporary China, examinations for political officials 
play a similar role. It is true that several top political leaders are the 
children (“princelings”) of leading political families from China’s revo-
lutionary era, but they began their ascension to power before the estab-
lishment (or revival) of the examination process for selecting political 
officials in the 1990s. Given the ultracompetitive nature of university 
and public service examinations that are increasingly viewed as neces-
sary stages for the political recruitment process, it is likely that there 
will be a declining percentage of “princelings” in the political system 
in two or three decades.
Second, the examination system allowed for more social mobility 
than less meritocratic systems. As the censor—a political official with 
the task of criticizing mistaken government policies—Wang Ji put it in 
the tenth century, “If examination selection is not strict the powerful 
will struggle to be foremost and the orphans and poor will have diffi-
culty advancing.”64 Records from the Song dynasty indicate the possi-
bility of impressive upward mobility through imperial examinations: in 
1148, for example, 330 people successfully passed the national exami-
nations, and of the 279 graduates with family information on record, 
157 had no forebears in the government.65 That said, the reality did not 
always (or even usually) match up to the myth of the poor peasant boy 
who makes it good on the basis of ability and hard work.66 Benjamin 
Elman argues that true social mobility was never the goal of state pol-
icy in late imperial China (1400–1900). Success at examinations had 
literary requirements, which effectively excluded most peasants, arti-
sans, and clerks (women were formally excluded). The literary require-
ments meant that only the children of wealthy families could compete 
for examination success, and social circulation was mainly an unex-
pected consequence of upward (and downward) movement between 
elites (gentry, merchants, and military men) and (upper) political elites 
with degrees. To the (limited) extent there was upward political mobil-
ity from lower classes, it was normally first via commercial wealth, and 
then success at examinations, and the process normally took more than 
one generation.67 In contemporary China, examinations are theoreti-
cally open to all citizens and most people are literate, but class back-
ground still influences outcomes because the process of studying for 

 
On the Selection of Good Leaders 
85
examinations tends to be time- consuming and costly, requiring leisure 
and tutors that poor families cannot afford.68
Third, the imperial examination system provided an element of so-
cial and political stability. The state could capture the loyalty of local- 
level elites who succeeded at the exams, thus ensuring the integration 
of the Chinese state and countering tendencies toward regional auton-
omy and the breakup of the centralized system (in late imperial China, 
the examination system distributed its prizes according to provincial 
and prefectural quotas, which meant that imperial officials were re-
cruited from the whole country, in numbers proportionally to each 
province’s population). Although only a tiny percentage of those who 
entered the examination competition could realistically expect to 
climb to the top of the ladder, even a minor examination success al-
lowed an individual to join the broad body of literati who were under-
stood to be potential officials and thus were granted social privileges 
and high social status.69 As for the 95 percent who failed to become of-
ficials of any sort, the authority of the classical language necessary for 
examination preparation produced literates of high social status who 
engaged in professions such as medicine, teaching, astronomy, print-
ing, and publishing.70 And even those who truly felt that they were “fail-
ures” could invest hope in their children: the relative fairness of the 
examinations beginning in the Song dynasty meant that any elite male 
could expect that his offspring could earn the right to join the official-
dom.71 The evolving regional and geographical penetration of the 
exams from the capital (in the Tang dynasty) to the provinces (in the 
Song dynasty) down to the fifteen hundred counties (in the Ming–
Qing dynasties) meant that local elites and ambitious would- be mem-
bers of those elites across the whole of China learned and assimilated 
similar values. In short, the examination system gave both “winners” 
and “losers” a stake in the system, notwithstanding a few famous cases 
of examination failures who became outlaws, rebels, and disenchanted 
poets.72
Last but not least, the fact that through examinations the central 
government greatly favored literary studies and advanced civilians to 
important posts (including, from the Song dynasty on, to important 
military posts) meant that military officers, with their concern for phys-
ical power, were kept subordinate to civilians and helps to explain why 

86 
Chapter 2 
there were fewer attempts by the military to seize power (from the Song 
on) than in other societies.73 The examination system was perhaps the 
key tool for the imperial system to consolidate its social, political, and 
cultural influence, and abolition of the examination system in 1905 
had the unexpected consequence of accelerating the demise of the 
whole imperial system.74 Today, the (re)establishment of an examina-
tion system for the selection of political officials has not been accompa-
nied by other features of the imperial system (such as monarchy), and 
there are many other ways of making a mark in Chinese society, but 
the perceived fairness of the examination system (relative to feasible 
alternatives) can still help to provide an important element of legiti-
macy, and hence stability, to the political system.
Finally, the examination system served to limit abuses of political 
power. Preimperial thinkers, as noted, believed that political power 
should be distributed on the basis of ability and virtue. Yet they also 
believed in monarchy, and the monarch owed his position to birth 
rather than merit. That would not pose a problem in an ideal world 
with an all- wise sage- king: as Xunzi put it, “The [True] Son of Heaven 
is the most respectable in terms of his power and position and has no 
rivals in Heaven. . . . His morality is pure; his knowledge and kindness 
are extremely clear.”75 Yet it was only too obvious that actually existing 
monarchs were mediocre in comparison; even Mencius, the most ide-
alistic thinker of the era, said that the True Monarch arrives only once 
in five hundred years (and in his own day, Mencius noted, they had al-
ready been waiting seven hundred years; 2B.13).76 So the question was 
how to ensure that inept rulers would not cause irreparable damage to 
the state in the interim (i.e., most of the time). Xunzi proposed a seem-
ingly ingenious solution: the sovereign, while ostensibly omnipotent, 
should relegate most of his everyday tasks to meritorious aides: “The 
ruler works hard in looking [for proper officials] and is at rest when 
employing them.”77 But Xunzi could not foresee the huge administra-
tive apparatus required of a large imperial state, and the idea of one 
person appointing and selecting all meritorious officials was not practi-
cable in imperial China.78 The imperial examination system solved 
this problem because it proved to be a relatively efficient mechanism 
for selecting political officials to exercise power (and deselecting the 
vast majority). Political officials could check the power of weak and in-

 
On the Selection of Good Leaders 
87
competent rulers (and do the work that even the best rulers could not 
do due to lack of time and expertise).79 Although the emperor had the 
ultimate say over the examination system, in the long term modifica-
tions were not possible without the elite’s consent.80 In contemporary 
China, national examinations limit the power of the political elite by 
limiting access to examination success; the university entrance exami-
nation system, regarded as a steppingstone for political success, is 
flawed in many ways but is perhaps the least corrupt political institu-
tion in China.
Whatever the merits of the imperial examination system, it was far 
from perfect as a mechanism to select political rulers with ability and 
virtue. Critic after critic questioned the careerist approach to learning 
and asked whether examinations test for the right kind of intellectual 
ability required for informed and intelligent political decision making. 
In the late 1060s, the radical reformer Wang Anshi removed the tradi-
tional poetry composition sections from the imperial examinations on 
the grounds of irrelevance to the official functions of government of-
fice. Wang argued for a more practical teaching curriculum that re-
quired changing the content of the exams and reforming the school 
system. But his opponents bitterly complained about unprecedented 
ideological control over the curriculum that was even less helpful for 
selecting talented public officials—“Today in all prefectures and coun-
ties, there are no entrance examinations which test the student’s ability 
to write. The first thing the examiners look for is whether or not the 
candidate’s essays refer to subjects currently tabooed. If the language of 
the candidate’s subjects touches on such tabooed subjects, then no 
matter how well he has written, they are not to pass him.”81
There were similar criticisms in later times. The eight- legged essay 
that had to be mastered to pass the imperial examinations during the 
Ming and Qing dynasties was formulated around a rigid artificial 
structure that tested, among other things, the examinees’ ability to 
insert classical allusions and idioms at the places deemed appropriate. 
Here too, the rigidity of the examination system was mercilessly skew-
ered by critics: as the seventeenth- century essayist Zhang Dai put it, 
the finest of scholars would “find no use for their arsenal of talents and 
knowledge” unless they joined the pack, “submissive in manner, lim-
ited in scope, stale in words, poor in attire, with internal feeling rotted 

88 
Chapter 2 
away. . . . [Those who passed] were either old men waiting for death, 
or naïve youth who understood nothing” (Zhang Dai himself never 
passed the provincial examinations that would have permitted him to 
sit for the national examinations in Beijing; he plunged into depres-
sion and settled for the life of a private scholar and aesthete).82 In short, 
it is far from obvious that the imperial examination system actually 
tested for high- caliber political talent.83
But is the problem with the examination system per se, or with the 
content and form of the imperial examination system? Today, examina-
tions testing for government positions can and should be designed 
without aiming for ideological uniformity and rigid adherence to 
proper form. In fact, today’s public service examinations in China are 
more like IQ tests,84 designed to filter out those without superior ana-
lytical skills85 (it is highly unlikely that someone like Sarah Palin or 
Toronto’s former mayor Rob Ford could pass such examinations).86 
They also ask candidates to answer policy- related questions, with the 
aim of identifying candidates who can look at complex matters from 
different perspectives rather than through a rigid ideological lens.87
This is not to deny that the public service exams can be improved. 
For one thing, there may be a need to test for the ability to make pre-
dictions: policy makers at the highest levels of government need to 
wrestle with the complexities of the world and make plausible predic-
tions about what will happen next. Social scientific research suggests 
that the art of making predictions depends less on expertise in a par-
ticular field and toiling devotedly within one tradition and more on 
knowing many things from an eclectic array of traditions and accept-
ing ambiguity and contradiction as inevitable features of life.88 Hence, 
exams should test for a wide range of knowledge in different disciplines 
and traditions, they should not simply be IQ tests. That said, some dis-
ciplines clearly bear on public policy—economics, environmental sci-
ence, and international relations—so it makes sense to give extra weight 
to basic knowledge of those disciplines. Testing for knowledge of the 
latest research on cognitive biases is helpful, so that leaders know how 
to exert effort designed to minimize biases in decision making.89 Exams 
should also test for basic knowledge of history so that future leaders 
have knowledge of political decision making in the past (both what 
worked and what didn’t) that may still be relevant today.90 There is evi-

 
On the Selection of Good Leaders 
89
dence that bilinguals have a heightened ability to monitor the environ-
ment—a useful quality for political leaders—which may be a case for 
testing of a second language.91 Last but not least, basic knowledge of 
the Confucian classics would be particularly helpful in the Chinese 
context (and elsewhere too, but several of the key texts have not yet 
been translated): the classics are a rich repository of cultural knowledge 
about how to act well in politics (and society more generally). In any 
case, the Confucian classics should be recommended over study of the 
Marxist classics that are singularly devoid of discussion about the good 
qualities of political rulers and what they ought to do.92
In sum, today’s world requires political leaders with superior intellec-
tual abilities—analytical skills and knowledge of different disciplines 
and traditions—and an examination system can help to test for such 
abilities. Of course, the examination system is a flawed mechanism. It is 
hard to settle disputes about what should be the content of exams in 
noncontroversial ways. The question of how to select the examiners 
may be controversial.93 But all political selection mechanisms are flawed 
(controversy cannot be avoided), and the aim is to maximize advantages 
and minimize disadvantages relative to other systems. Clearly there is a 
need for more social scientific research to shed further light on the 
question of how best to test for intellectual abilities required for political 
decision making.94 But it seems hard to dispute the fact that, however 
imperfect, exams can at least filter out candidates who lack basic ana-
lytical abilities and knowledge of the world required for informed and 
morally justified political decision making at the highest levels of gov-
ernment. In a large- scale society, the examination system is the fairest 
and most efficient way of selecting public officials with above- average 
intellectual ability.95 As we will see, however, examinations cannot do as 
well at filtering out candidates who lack the basic social skills and vir-
tues that are also required of political decision makers.
3. On the Need for Social Skills
Intellectual ability is important for political leaders, but it may not be 
the most important quality. The intellectual abilities required for seri-

90 
Chapter 2 
ous academic research—the need to publicly engage with the best 
counterarguments available, the willingness to challenge orthodoxy, to 
make mistakes if they help to push the boundaries of what we know, 
and to articulate original ideas even if they are misunderstood or un-
derappreciated at the time they are made—are not necessarily the abili-
ties required of political leaders.96 We are familiar with the stereotype 
of the academic nerd—the semi- autistic physicist or economist with an 
IQ off the charts—who cannot deal with people in a “normal” way. 
The academic nerd is not likely to be an effective political leader. Here 
too, Singapore’s political meritocracy is an instructive example. In the 
past, leaders were selected mainly according to high performance in 
disciplines such as economics and engineering. But the wooden and 
bookish manner of its political leaders alienates much of the popula-
tion, especially the youth, which has been energized and politicized by 
new social media. In response, a growing number of critics argue that 
the ruling party needs to expand its narrowly technical and academic 
notion of merit, in part to recognize the importance for political suc-
cess of communicative talent and emotional intelligence.97
Clearly, a first- class mind is not sufficient for political leadership. But 
it may not even be necessary. Oliver Wendell Holmes famously said 
that Franklin D. Roosevelt had a second- class intellect but a first- class 
temperament.98 What mattered, as Bill Clinton writes, is that Roosevelt 
surrounded himself with brilliant people who knew more about partic-
ular subjects than he did, and allowed them to argue with one an-
other—and with him—as they searched for the right policies.99 For po-
litical success, in other words, it is not necessary to be able to produce 
and systematize original ideas (perhaps the most important characteris-
tic of a first- class mind), but the leader must appoint talented advisors 
and be sufficiently intelligent to at least recognize what counts as a 
good argument for the purpose of policy making. Even political leaders 
with what look like first- class minds, such as Lee Kuan Yew, recognize 
the importance of appointing talented advisors and encouraging them 
to do much of the thinking and arguing about the right policies.100
But what does it mean to have a “first- class temperament” necessary 
for political success? Again, the answer will differ from context to con-
text, and the temperament required of a political leader in a state of 
war may be different from that required in a state of peace (although 

 
On the Selection of Good Leaders 
91
FDR was one of the few leaders to be successful in both contexts). But 
which social skills matter in times of peace? Writings about leadership 
in politics rarely draw on systematic research, but research in business 
studies can shed some light. As discussed in section 1, there are key 
differences between the qualities required for business and political 
leaders, but some qualities appropriate for leadership in business may 
be transferable to the world of politics. Daniel Goleman analyzed 
competency models from 188 companies and found that “the most ef-
fective leaders are alike in one crucial way: They all have a high de-
gree of what has come to be known as emotional intelligence.” More 
specifically, a group of five skills enabled the best leaders to maximize 
their own and their followers’ performance: self- awareness (knowing 
one’s strengths, weaknesses, drives, values, and impact on others); self- 
regulation (controlling or redirecting disruptive impulses and moods); 
motivation (relishing achievement for its own sake); empathy (under-
standing other people’s emotional makeup); and social skill (building 
rapport with others to move them in desired directions). The more 
leaders had such skills, the better the performance of the companies. 
Cognitive skills such as big- picture thinking and long- term vision also 
matter, but emotional intelligence proved to be twice as important as 
IQ and technical skills. Moreover, “emotional intelligence played an 
increasingly important role at the highest level of the company, where 
differences in technical skills are of negligible importance. In other 
words, the higher the rank of a person considered to be a star per-
former, the more emotional intelligence capabilities showed up as the 
reason for his or her effectiveness.”
Such findings may not be directly applicable to the question of what 
makes an effective political leader, but there are relevant parallels: for 
example, the reasons empathy is particularly important as a component 
of leadership in business—“the increasing use of teams; the rapid pace 
of globalization; and the growing need to retain talent”101—also apply 
to leadership in politics. To the extent that there are differences be-
tween the requirements of leadership in the business and political 
worlds, they do not necessarily undermine, and may in fact reinforce, 
the case for emotional intelligence. For example, the fact that political 
leaders of large countries need to deal with an even larger and more 
comprehensive group of stakeholders than most business leaders means 

92 
Chapter 2 
that social skills may be even more important in politics. A political 
leader needs not just to communicate, cooperate, and compromise 
with colleagues, but also inspire and persuade diverse sectors of society 
and (to a lesser extent) members of the international community.
Given that social skills matter for effective political leadership,102 the 
next question is what mechanisms can increase the likelihood of select-
ing political leaders with superior social skills. One advantage of de-
mocracy is that it is difficult, if not impossible, to be elected without 
superior social skills: the campaign process involves constant dealing 
with people, and voters tend to reward leaders with good social skills. In 
a political meritocracy without one person, one vote to choose top lead-
ers, the answer is less obvious. Exams can test for intellectual ability (if 
imperfectly), but it is harder to test for social skills. Exams can reward 
candidates who are persistent and work hard, but it doesn’t follow that 
exam takers can work well with other people to get things done. Ques-
tions can ask test takers to consider policy issues or ethical dilemmas 
from different perspectives in order to filter out candidates congenitally 
unable to articulate plausible arguments from different points of view 
(Hitler could have been weeded out),103 but most intelligent people can 
answer such questions whether or not they can think well from other 
perspectives in real- world situations. In China, it may be particularly 
important for exams to test for knowledge of Chinese history—if there’s 
one way to describe literate Chinese, it’s the sense of being part of a 
great historical tradition, and much of the Chinese language turns on 
the invocation of the right historical allusion or phrase in the right con-
text; hence, a leading public official who is largely ignorant of Chinese 
history is unlikely to be able to persuade his or her colleagues, no mat-
ter how brilliant the policy proposal—but historical knowledge on 
exams cannot filter out the socially insensitive nerds from the political 
officials with social skills. Testing for another language might also help 
to determine the ability to think from another’s perspective (at least, 
many of the world’s monolingual tyrants could have been filtered out), 
but there is a need for social scientific research to show that those who 
speak more than one language have superior ability to think from the 
perspective of other people.104 Psychological exams that test for the 
traits of effective leaders in the business world have fallen into disfa-
vor.105 An intelligent person can learn the literature on social skills and 

 
On the Selection of Good Leaders 
93
score highly on exams without being able to practice those skills in the 
social world.
So what can be done? One possibility is to require evidence of ad-
ministrative competence as a qualification for examination candidates, 
since good performance at lower levels of government suggests that the 
potential leader has good social skills.106 The historian Qian Mu pointed 
to the advantages of political meritocracy in the Han dynasty: candi-
dates for literary examinations mostly came from aristocratic families 
that provided them with adequate knowledge and familiarity with the 
rules of politics and ritual propriety, hence successful examination can-
didates were already fairly well equipped with the social and practical 
skills required for political success.107 As a consequence, the Han dy-
nasty avoided the problem of overly scholastic successful examination 
candidates in later dynasties. But such qualifications for examinations 
undermine the ideal that all citizens should have an equal opportu-
nity to participate in public service. The obvious solution is to require 
evidence of administrative (or political) competence after, not before 
exams. That is, examination success should not be a sufficient qualifica-
tion for high political office: examination success needs to be followed 
by evidence of good performance at lower levels of government as a 
condition for further promotion up the chain of political command.108
But how can we measure good performance of political leaders? In 
business, as mentioned, the answer is relatively straightforward: good 
performers contribute to the profitability of the company, and the more 
they contribute to profit, the better they perform.109 In government, 
what counts as good performance is intensely controversial, and the 
answer depends at least partly on what recipients of policies think, not 
just what government leaders regard as good performance. That said, it 
is possible to measure the performance of political leaders in relatively 
objective ways under certain conditions. Consider the case of China 
over the past three decades or so. The key priority of government—to 
reduce poverty—has been widely shared among both leaders and peo-
ple. And since economic growth is an essential condition for the reduc-
tion of poverty, government officials were often promoted according to 
the level of economic growth in their district.110 At least partly as a re-
sult of this promotion mechanism, China has seen perhaps the single 
most impressive poverty alleviation achievement in human history:111 

94 
Chapter 2 
the World Bank estimates that the poverty rate fell from 85 percent to 
15 percent between 1981 and 2005, equivalent to six hundred million 
people being lifted out of poverty.112
Needless to say, the personnel promotion system has not always 
worked according to the standard of good economic performance. At 
the local township level, promotion often depends on personal rela-
tionships.113 The selection mechanism for posts at the central level is 
still somewhat opaque and may rely more on patronage than economic 
performance.114 According to a report issued by the CCP’s own Organi-
zation Department, nearly 25 percent of cadres see the official promo-
tion procedures as “going through the motions” to mask the fact that 
decisions have already been made at a high level.115 Overall, however, 
considerable evidence indicates that China’s officials are increasingly 
selected based on performance.116
The more serious problem is that the appropriate standard for mea-
suring performance needs to change. Now that hundreds of millions of 
Chinese have been lifted out of poverty, what should the government 
do for them? The task of government becomes more complex, with 
more diverse interests and values and greater demands for political par-
ticipation, and the unqualified pursuit of economic growth is no longer 
the widely accepted criterion for good performance. And what counts 
as good performance can no longer just be determined from the top: 
what people want and think matters more than before in terms of shap-
ing the government’s priorities. Moreover, the no- holds- barred pursuit 
of economic growth is now often seen as actively harmful to the polity. 
Most obvious, China’s growth has come at the expense of the environ-
ment and people’s well- being,117 with pollution now surpassing land 
disputes as the leading cause of social unrest in China.118 And reward-
ing public officials almost exclusively on the basis of short- term eco-
nomic growth has contributed to a chaotic urbanization process that 
has filled China with nearly empty “ghost cities.”119
In response, academics have urged a more holistic approach to mea-
suring government performance that takes into account multiple indi-
cators that contribute to sustainable human development.120 The Chi-
nese government itself has allowed for experimentation—as party 
secretary of Jiangsu, for example, Li Yuanchao (now vice- president) as-
sessed local officials in terms of performance measured by social and 

 
On the Selection of Good Leaders 
95
environmental factors, as opposed to purely economic ones. In the 
country as a whole, Chinese leaders have elevated environmental pri-
orities through the cadre evaluation system that sets explicit environ-
mental targets.121 The problem, however, is that the more holistic the 
standard, the more controversial it becomes. The government can and 
does make extensive use of polling data and relies on social media to 
stay well- informed about public opinion (see concluding thoughts, sec-
tion 1), but what if different groups of people prioritize different needs 
and the majority’s priorities conflict with expert views about govern-
mental priorities? How should it be determined which factor counts 
more, in what proportion to other factors, and who gets to decide on 
the holistic standard? Even if the holistic standard is widely agreed on 
by the government and the people affected by the policies, it is far more 
difficult to measure performance in areas such as environmental sus-
tainability—should government officials be penalized for failing to an-
ticipate pollution problems that spill over from neighboring jurisdic-
tions?—with the result that short- term economic growth often becomes 
the default way of measuring “successful” performance, regardless of 
the social costs.122 In short, performance at lower levels of government 
is an important indicator of the social skills required for good perfor-
mance at higher levels of government but it becomes more difficult to 
measure performance in noncontroversial ways once the government’s 
priorities move beyond a sole focus on poverty reduction as measured 
by economic growth. Hence, there is an increased need for more objec-
tive ways of measuring social skills required of top political leaders that 
can supplement the increasingly subjective attempts to measure perfor-
mance at lower levels of government.
A Mechanism for Promoting Political Officials  
with Social Skills: Taking Traits Seriously
A company or organization that favors seniority is commonly thought 
to undermine a commitment to promotion on the basis of merit. But 
what if it turns out that the social skills required for leadership correlate 
with age? Then it makes sense to promote people who are older. From 
a Confucian standpoint, it seems obvious that social skills such as self- 

96 
Chapter 2 
awareness, self- regulation, and empathy normally increase as our life 
experience deepens. As we age, we experience different roles (such as 
caring for elderly parents) and deepen our experience performing par-
ticular roles (a teacher with five years’ experience should be better than 
a brand new teacher) that increase our ability to understand and coop-
erate with different kinds of people for the purpose of achieving desired 
ends, so long as we maintain the quest for self- improvement and our 
desire for social interaction. As it turns out, scientific research largely 
bears out this Confucian insight: “One thing is certain: Emotional in-
telligence increases with age.”123 Fredda Blanchard- Fields’s research 
compares the way young adults and older adults respond to situations of 
stress and “her results show that older adults are more socially astute 
than younger people when it comes to sizing up an emotionally con-
flicting situation. They are better able to make decisions that preserve 
an interpersonal relationship. . . . And she has found that as we grow 
older, we grow more emotionally supple—we are able to adjust to chang-
ing situations on the basis of our emotional intelligence and prior expe-
rience, and therefore make better decisions (on average) than do young 
people.”124 Other research shows that older adults seem particularly 
good at quickly letting go of negative emotion because they value so-
cial relationships more than the ego satisfaction that comes from rup-
turing them.125 Being older, in short, improves one’s chances of devel-
oping superior social skills.
The political implications for a meritocratic selection process should 
be obvious: it is best to promote older officials who are more likely to 
have superior social skills necessary to get things done.126 That said, 
older adults suffer from cognitive declines as they enter their sixties and 
seventies,127 so it also makes sense to have age limits for political lead-
ers. The not- so- young may also suffer from declines in energy level and 
physical health; hence, a good case can be made for collective leader-
ship at the highest level of government because the decline of any one 
leader would not be so problematic. The current Chinese system of 
collective leadership seems to have more or less struck the right bal-
ance between rewarding improvements in social skills while taking 
into account cognitive and physical decline:128 seniority plays an impor-
tant role in influencing selection to the ruling Standing Committee of 

 
On the Selection of Good Leaders 
97
the Politburo but there is an informal retirement age of seventy, with 
the result that most members are in their mid- sixties.129
It is worth keeping in mind that there are many exceptions to the 
rule that social intelligence increases with age; hence, age should be 
only one factor influencing the selection of political officials. A minor-
ity of spots can be reserved for innovative younger leaders (see chapter 
3, section 2) and younger leaders can play an important role in an advi-
sory capacity. But political selection mechanisms are necessarily im-
perfect, and social scientific research (as well as philosophical argu-
mentation) can help to reduce imperfections: given the well- documented 
tendency for our social skills to improve as we age, a good case can be 
made that age should count in the evaluation process as a proxy for the 
social skills required for effective political decision making.
Gender is another good proxy for social skills. CEOs interviewed 
about different leadership styles said women were more collaborative, 
better listeners, more relationship oriented, and more empathetic and 
reasonable.130 Neuroscientists have shown that women make less risky 
and more empathetic decisions in stressful circumstances, which may 
explain why large- cap global corporations with at least one woman on 
their boards outperformed comparable companies with all- male boards 
by 26 percent in the years directly preceding and following the 2007–
2008 financial crisis.131 In another study, researchers analyzed the 360-  
degree leadership evaluations of more than 7,280 executives, which 
had been filled out by their peers, bosses, and subordinates. The analy-
sis revealed that at every management level, women were rated higher 
than men, and the higher the level, the wider the gap. Women rated 
higher on twelve of the sixteen competencies that the researchers iden-
tified as most important to overall leadership effectiveness, including 
social skills such as “develops others,” “inspires and motivates others,” 
“builds relationships,” “engages in collaboration and teamwork,” “com-
municates powerfully and prolifically,” and “connects the group to the 
outside world.” Yet the data also showed that the higher the level, the 
higher the proportion of men. In other words, the best people—
women—are not being promoted. The researchers draw the conclusion 
that “by adding more women the overall effectiveness of the leadership 
team would go up. Organizations go outside to recruit effective leaders 

98 
Chapter 2 
when in many cases they may well have internal people who could rise 
to fill the position that is vacant.”132
Again, we need to be cautious about drawing direct implications 
from business to politics. But the same sorts of social skills needed for 
effective leadership in large companies are likely to be even more im-
portant for political leaders of large countries, given the greater impor-
tance of communication, cooperation, and compromise in politics. As 
one CEO interviewed about differences in leadership styles put it, 
“When you’ve got a complex project involving multiple layers, you need 
a leader who is collaborative, and more often than not I have found that 
leader to be a woman.”133 In government, the tasks are often more com-
plex and require more collaboration. In short, there is a strong case for 
women in government: if the concern is to select political leaders with 
superior social skills, it is generally better to choose a woman.134 Yet 
most political leadership positions are occupied by men, especially at 
the higher levels. In China, the trend is going from bad to worse: as 
China’s most influential editor notes, “the percentage of women among 
the top leaders in the Chinese government, especially among members 
and alternate members of the Central Committee of the Chinese Com-
munist Party, shrank from 11.4 percent in 1977 to 7.6 percent in 2002. 
While women can be found serving as officials in more than 80 per-
cent of the country’s provincial- level governments, only about 8 percent 
have a woman as head of the government.”135
So what should be done? First, we must be clear about the sources of 
discrimination so they can be corrected. The “motherhood penalty”—
the assumption that mothers tend to be less competent and less com-
mitted—has been well documented and such biases almost certainly 
contribute to discrimination against women in politics.136 The “mother-
hood penalty” can be overcome if a performance review shows that a 
mother had demonstrated a heroic level of commitment to a previous 
job,137 but clearly women have a huge hurdle to overcome before they 
can be treated as men’s equals in the promotion process, not to men-
tion given special privileges on account of their superior social skills. 
Hence, there may be a need for enforceable laws specifying goals that 
aim to increase the proportion of women in government: Nepal’s 2007 
constitution stipulated that at least 33 percent of candidates in parlia-
mentary elections must be women, and as a result the country has the 

 
On the Selection of Good Leaders 
99
highest proportion of women in government (30 percent) in the Asian 
region.138 In the case of China, preference should be given to women in 
the selection and promotion process for political leaders, other things 
being (roughly) equal.139 If China can substantially increase its propor-
tion of women in government, the government will be more effective 
at doing what it’s supposed to do. But what exactly is the government 
supposed to do? At this point, our discussion of political leadership 
needs to take a more explicitly normative turn.
4. On the Need for Virtue
A leader with superior intellectual and social skills is potentially the 
worst kind of leader, because he or she can figure out the best way of 
realizing immoral purposes. Clearly any theory of leadership that leaves 
out ethics is deficient.140 Adolf Hitler’s singular skills as an orator set 
him above his National Socialist colleagues, and he could hold a crowd 
rapt for hours with his speeches.141 Had his oratorical skills been 
matched by intellectual brilliance, he might have figured out more ef-
fective war strategies and (God forbid) maybe even won the war. On a 
less worrisome scale, sociopaths—those devoid of any conscience—can 
and do achieve social success by means of rational cost- benefit analysis 
of how to manipulate people for their own advantage. With superior 
ability to understand other people and to plan the likely consequences 
of different paths of action, they can outmaneuver other people to get 
what they want. The problem is that sociopaths completely lack com-
passion and feeling for fellow human beings, and only rational calcula-
tion about their own interests stops them from harming other people. 
As a successful law professor put it,
Remorse is alien to me. I have a penchant for deceit. I am gen-
erally free of entangling and irrational emotions. I am strategic 
and canny, intelligent and confident. . . . Yet I am not moti-
vated or constrained by the same things that most good people 
are. . . . [As a child], I envisioned the people in my life as robots 
that turned off when I wasn’t directly interacting with them. . . . 
I have never killed anyone, but I have certainly wanted to. I 

100 
Chapter 2 
may have a disorder, but I am not crazy. In a world filled with 
gloomy, mediocre nothings populating a go- nowhere rat race, 
people are attracted to my exceptionalism like moths to a 
flame.142
The Chinese Legalist thinker Han Fei (c. 280–233 bce) argued that 
political leaders should act like rational sociopaths. He wrote a political 
handbook for power- hungry rulers, and argued that state power needed 
to be strengthened by means of harsh laws and punishments. His aim 
was nothing less than total state control, and he stressed over and over 
again that moral considerations should not get in the way.143 The ruth-
less king of Qin ascended to the throne in 246 bce and drew on Han 
Fei’s advice to conquer and rule all of China under the title of First 
Emperor of the Qin dynasty. This dynasty was short- lived, however, 
and the First Emperor became infamous in Chinese history for his ex-
cessive cruelty and megalomania and Legalism fell into disrepute. Less 
than a century later, the Han dynasty ruler Emperor Wu (r. 141–87 
bce) officially endorsed (a reinterpreted version of) Confucianism as 
the reigning political philosophy, and Confucianism became the main-
stream political tradition in subsequent imperial history.
Like debates in Western political theory, Confucians argue endlessly 
about which people (if any) matter most,144 what is meant by the good 
of the people,145 and how the government should seek the good of the 
people,146 but they share the assumption that power ought to be exer-
cised in the interest of the ruled, not the rulers.147 The pragmatic ideas 
of Legalist thinkers influenced governance practices in imperial China 
(including, arguably, the examination system), but they were supposed 
to be used for the moral purpose of benefitting the people.148 In the 
“communist” era, Mao Zedong openly praised Legalist- style meth-
ods,149 but he also agreed that the government ought to serve the peo-
ple. In short, the sine qua non of any theory of good government (in the 
Chinese context and, arguably, elsewhere) is that political leaders 
should use the power of the state to promote the good of the people 
rather than for personal benefit. Political rulers also need superior in-
tellectual abilities and social skills, but they should use those skills to 
benefit the people. The question, then, is what sorts of mechanisms are 

 
On the Selection of Good Leaders 
101
most likely to produce political rulers with the motivation to promote 
the good of the people?
Immanuel Kant famously argued that “the problem of setting up a 
state can be solved even by a nation of devils.”150 So long as the institu-
tions are designed to produce good outcomes, the self- seeking inclina-
tions of individuals will be neutralized or eliminated. In contemporary 
democracies, however, it is widely recognized that the quality of citi-
zens also matters.151 If voters are ignorant or narrowly self- interested, 
elections will not produce desirable outcomes (see chapter 1, section 1). 
It is also recognized that the quality of political leaders matters, and the 
task of political candidates is to persuade voters of their commitment to 
work for the common good. Hence, candidates for political leadership 
must have the oratorical skills to persuade voters that they will seek 
their good. The power of speaking has long roots in the history of West-
ern civilization. In Greek antiquity, delivering speeches was a primary 
means to achieve legal and political goals, and politicians had to rely 
on oration to persuade one another and the people of their intentions 
and ambitions. Masters of oration from ancient Greece and Rome 
served as inspiration for later generations of political leaders, and deliv-
ering speeches has been an integral part of public life in the West. In 
contemporary democratic societies, oratorical skill is of utmost impor-
tance for running campaigns, directing movements, and managing cri-
ses in order to galvanize voters’ support.152
In East Asian societies with a Confucian heritage, by contrast, verbal 
fluency is not held in high regard.153 As Jin Li explains, the emphasis 
has been on action rather than words: verbal craftiness is viewed as an 
impediment to moral self- cultivation because “(1) a glib tongue di-
vorces the mind from the heart, (2) flattering speech undermines sin-
cerity, and (3) boastful speech lacks humility.”154 Hence, “we could eas-
ily name a long list of great speakers in the West, but we could name 
none in East Asia, not even after an ardent search through the trium-
phant democracies of Japan, Korea, and Taiwan, where eloquence of 
public speaking is supposed to matter.”155 In short, the problem with 
electoral democracy in an East Asian context is not just that voters 
often lack the knowledge and motivation to support the common good 
(like voters elsewhere; see chapter 1, section 1) but also that there is a 

102 
Chapter 2 
strong cultural bias against the main mechanism employed by political 
leaders in the West—eloquent speech—to try to persuade voters that 
they are motivated by the common good.156
In a political meritocracy without democratic elections and without 
a tradition of eloquent speech, which mechanisms can increase the 
likelihood that political leaders will be motivated to seek the good of 
the people? Here too, debates in imperial China centered on the pros 
and cons of the examination system and what could be done with the 
power of the written word. Defenders of the examination system ar-
gued that it can help to select political officials with superior virtue. 
The key argument is that studying the Confucian classics improves the 
virtue of the learner. As the Tang court put it:
Now the Classics are the subtle pointers of the most intelligent 
men and the affairs that were possible for the sages; with them, 
one can make heaven- and- earth constant, regulate yin and 
yang, rectify social norms, and promote morality. On the out-
side they show how to benefit everything in the world, yet on 
the inside they contain behaviors for being good as a person. 
Those who learn them will grow; those who do not learn will 
fall. When in the great enterprise of governing the ruler honors 
[these texts], he completes his imperial virtue. . . . Thus it is 
said, “when one is compliant and sincere, it is thanks to the 
teaching of the Songs; when he sees the larger picture and can 
think ahead, it is thanks to the teaching of the Documents; 
when he is accommodating and harmonious, it is thanks to the 
teaching of the Music; when he is reverent and respectful, it is 
thanks to the teaching of the Rites; and when he writes judg-
ments and finds analogies between cases, it is thanks to the 
teaching of the Spring and Autumn Annals.”157
Hence, by testing knowledge of the Confucian classics, the examina-
tions also test the moral virtue of the candidates.
Critics argued otherwise. Most famously, the Song dynasty Confu-
cian scholar Zhu Xi argued that exams test the wrong kind of knowl-
edge: they should test not just knowledge of the classics themselves but 
also knowledge of interpretations and the candidate’s own interpreta-

 
On the Selection of Good Leaders 
103
tion of the classics.158 Others argued that the problem lies with the ex-
amination system per se: the Tang dynasty Confucian official Lu Zhi 
(754–805 ce) argued that “if examinations are used for selection, peo-
ple will engage in crafty hypocrisy and as a result the righteous man of 
principle will seldom get promoted.”159 In other words, it is easy for in-
telligent candidates to fake virtue in examinations by making what ap-
pear to be ethically correct judgments and arguments, but it takes a 
leap of faith to think that successful candidates will be virtuous once 
they have political power.
In today’s China, there are similar doubts about the examination 
system as a mechanism to select political leaders committed to the pub-
lic good. Success in the public service examinations means automatic 
appointment to government offices (these appointments are usually for 
office staff positions, unlike the Song practice in which the top jinshi 
holders could immediately enter relatively high positions). Over the 
past few years, however, the moral quality of public servants appears to 
have deteriorated (see chapter 3, section 1), and the government re-
cently proposed measures for ethical screening in the national exami-
nations for public servants that would take a candidate’s virtue into 
consideration: according to one report, “candidates who lack political 
integrity, a sense of responsibility, and a willingness to serve the public 
will not be allowed to become public servants.”160 But such criteria are 
vague and hard to measure, and formal policies have not yet been im-
plemented for screening candidates’ moral character.161 One possibility 
(not being considered at the moment) would be to reintroduce more 
systematic testing on the Confucian classics with a rich discourse about 
virtuous political leaders. Although such tests would likely be an im-
provement on the status quo,162 even the most committed Confucians 
concede that examination on the classics is not a sufficient test for po-
litical virtue.163 So what are other possible mechanisms?
If the aim is to identify rulers willing to serve the community, a min-
imum condition is to deselect those who have clearly harmed the com-
munity. Hence, candidates with criminal records, especially convic-
tions for serious crimes such as murder and rape, should be banned 
from public office. In democratic countries such as India and Ukraine, 
many politicians do not meet even this minimal standard,164 but Chi-
na’s political leaders could not hold political office if they were found 

104 
Chapter 2 
guilty of such crimes. In China, it is widely assumed that being filial to 
one’s parents is a necessary step in learning other- regarding behavior 
and extending morality outside the family,165 so it makes sense to bar 
candidates who have violated basic expectations of filial piety. The se-
lection process for public servants has recently been reformed with this 
criterion in mind on an experimental basis in Qufu city.166 Most obvi-
ous, perhaps, officials accused of corruption should be deselected from 
the political system. Here lies the biggest gap between ideal and prac-
tice, as the Chinese government itself recognizes (for further discus-
sion, see chapter 3, section 1).
A more positive way of assessing commitment to serve the people is 
to gauge the extent to which candidates have been willing to sacrifice 
their own interests on behalf of the country. In China’s revolutionary 
past, such candidates were fairly easy to identify: war heroes who put 
their lives at risk to serve the country clearly demonstrated commit-
ment to public service. Today, however, it is harder to identify public- 
spirited heroes. Arguably, political dissidents such as Liu Xiaobo who 
knowingly risk imprisonment for the sake of promoting political ide-
als come closest, but they are not likely to be given opportunities to 
serve as political rulers unless the whole political system collapses 
(not to mention the fact that they do not represent large constituen-
cies even among independent intellectuals, in comparison to, say, 
Nelson Mandela, Vaclav Havel, and Aung San Suu Kyi at the time 
they were imprisoned).167
One way of showing willingness to experience harm for the sake of 
the public is to do volunteer work in poor and remote rural areas for 
long periods.168 Among public officials, perhaps the clearest sign of 
willingness to experience harm on behalf of the community is the will-
ingness to stick to the one- child policy. Although wealthy Chinese 
often pay fines so that they can have more than one child, few if any 
top political leaders have violated the one- child rule. (How many politi-
cians in the West would be willing to sacrifice their personal interests 
in this way?) But the challenge now is to increase the population to 
maintain a sufficient proportion of productive citizens needed to sup-
port China’s rapidly aging population, and the one- child policy is being 
loosened and will likely be abolished in the near future.169 Low salaries 
for public servants are justified on the grounds that Chinese officials 

 
On the Selection of Good Leaders 
105
should be willing to sacrifice their personal interests for the sake of 
serving the community; as Xi Jinping put it, “If you go into politics, it 
mustn’t be for money. . . . [Y]ou must give up any thought of personal 
advantage.”170 But given the extent of corruption in the political system 
(see chapter 3, section 1) and the fact that many people join the party to 
obtain material benefits,171 few will argue that the system works as it’s 
supposed to. If such mechanisms designed to increase the likelihood of 
recruiting and promoting public officials committed to serving the 
public are far from sufficient, then what else is there?
A Mechanism for Selecting Political Officials  
with Virtue: Selection by Peers
Confucius, had he been aware of the possibility, would probably not 
have endorsed the examination system as a method for determining 
the moral character of a candidate. To assess a person, he says, we must 
carefully observe his actions and motives: “The Master said: ‘See what 
a man does; watch his motives; examine what he is at ease with. How 
can a man conceal his character? How can a man conceal his char-
acter?’ ” (2.10). The Tang dynasty official Lu Zhi (mentioned earlier) 
agrees with Confucius that the only way to assess a person is to get to 
know him for an extended period of time and from all angles. On this 
basis, he argues in favor of recommendation by elders and officials “as 
the method of selection and promotion. This method was adopted for 
many benefits: it verifies clearly the actual political/administrative per-
formance of the officials, extends the range of talent selection, encour-
ages the cultivation of virtuous conduct and performance, and, lastly, 
puts the ambition due to pride to rest.”172
The philosopher Joseph Chan defends a contemporary variant of 
Lu’s model. Chan argues for a house of government consisting of se-
nior public servants selected by those who know them best: colleagues, 
senior secretarial staff, and experienced journalists who can evaluate 
the candidates’ public spiritedness, sense of responsibility, fairness, in-
tegrity, and civility.173 Chan’s proposal may be workable in the context 
of a small society like Hong Kong, where public officials are aware of 
one another’s moral character and the pool of selectors is relatively 

106 
Chapter 2 
small. In the context of a huge and populous country such as China, 
however, the proposal is both too rigid and not rigid enough. It is too 
rigid in the sense that the group of selectors is closely tied to the Hong 
Kong context. As Chan recognizes, the “proposal was developed against 
the background of Hong Kong’s political institutions, including its stat-
utory bodies and government advisory bodies, rather than those of 
China as a whole.”174 In greater China, different combinations of subor-
dinates, peers, and superiors at different levels of government will have 
different levels of exposure and different insights into the moral charac-
ter of candidates, and it seems too rigid to confine the group of selectors 
to colleagues, senior secretarial staff, and experienced journalists.175 On 
the other hand, Chan’s proposal is not rigid enough because it seems to 
favor certain groups over others in a way that would leave much room 
for abuse in a political context characterized by corruption and exces-
sive reliance on human relations (guanxi). In mainland China, there is 
a need for a more rigorous and systematic way of assessing moral char-
acter that does not seem to arbitrarily favor certain groups (e.g., “experi-
enced journalists”) over others.
So who should have a say in assessing the moral character of candi-
dates, and in what proportion? The principle that moral character is 
best assessed via close acquaintance and careful observation over pro-
longed periods in different settings is a good starting point. In practice, 
the candidate’s peers—meaning public officials holding posts at the 
same level in the political hierarchy—normally have had the most pro-
longed interaction with candidates, and hence should have the most 
say in assessing their moral characters.176 High peer ratings can and 
should be the most important factor in determining whether the candi-
date possesses the moral qualities necessary for further promotion up 
the chain of political command.177 But the views of subordinates and 
superiors should also be taken into account. Peers can be envious of 
talented colleagues, in which case the views of superiors (who have less 
reason to feel jealous) should be given some weight. And subordinates 
can be in a good position to observe features of moral character due to 
their position in the hierarchy: for example, they can notice if candi-
dates are amiable and deferent to superiors and rude and unhelpful to 
subordinates, implying that the candidate cares more about personal 
ambition than about treating others well. Given the need for a more 

 
On the Selection of Good Leaders 
107
rigorous and systematic way of assessing moral character, it might be 
best to settle on something like a 60:20:20 ratio for assessment of moral 
character, with 60 percent of the weighting given to peers and 20 per-
cent each given to superiors and subordinates.178 Although this ratio (or 
any ratio) is somewhat arbitrary and may be difficult to enforce to the 
letter (or the number), the advantage of a clear and transparent system 
for assessing moral character is that it reduces the possibility of even 
more arbitrary assessments that characterize the actually existing politi-
cal meritocracy in China.
To be fair, the peer rating system seems to work well at the very high-
est level of government in China. About 370 members and alternative 
members of the party’s Central Committee cast preferences for the 
party’s decision- making Politburo, currently a twenty- five- member 
body, and the Politburo Standing Committee, its innermost cabinet, 
currently with seven members.179 In the run- up to the 2012 selection 
process, the outgoing president, Hu Jintao, favored Li Keqiang as his 
successor, but Xi Jinping was ranked highest in an internal survey of 
national senior leaders and therefore Xi was selected as president.180 At 
lower levels of government, however, the views of superiors tend to have 
the most weight in promotion decisions,181 with the result that the sys-
tem favors conservative and cautious candidates over risk- takers and 
candidates with new ideas that challenge the “normal” way of doing 
things as established by superiors. Hence, there may be unnecessary 
attachment to the status quo long after its practical utility has expired.182 
Even more worrisome, the system may reward public officials who 
curry favor with their superiors by less than ethical means,183 and those 
who spend time serving the public rather than their superiors may be 
disadvantaged in the promotion process. Hence, there is a need to im-
plement and rigorously enforce a promotion system that gives extra 
weight to the assessment of peers rather than superiors. Such merito-
cratic reforms, arguably, would do more political good than the kinds 
of electoral reforms that have been the subject of countless articles and 
books in academic and journalistic writings on Chinese politics.
In sum, I have argued that high- level political leaders in large, peace-
ful, and modernizing meritocratic states need to be strong in terms of 
intellectual ability, social skills, and virtue. Note, however, that politi-

108 
Chapter 2 
cal leaders need not be at the top of the scale on any one dimension. 
Theoretical physicists are likely to have greater intellectual ability, top 
business leaders may have stronger social skills,184 and religious leaders 
may be more self- sacrificing and virtuous. What makes political leaders 
distinctive, however, is that they should be above average on all three 
dimensions. That said, not all qualities matter equally. A degree of vir-
tue is indispensable; without any desire to serve the public, a political 
leader can put his or her intelligence and social skills to disastrous uses. 
Next comes social skills, because a political leader needs to be able to 
persuade fellow leaders as well as members of the public. In last place 
comes intellectual ability: a certain degree of intelligence is necessary 
to process information and recognize what counts as a good argument, 
but policy suggestions and original thinking can come from a group of 
talented advisors and experts. The relative importance of each quality 
will also depend on the political priorities of the time. In the early days 
of China’s economic reform, GDP growth mattered most; hence it was 
most important to select and promote government officials with the 
right social skills to get things done. But now that corruption is widely 
viewed as a mortal threat to the political system (see chapter 3, section 
1), more emphasis should be placed on the moral character of political 
officials. To repeat, a certain degree of virtue is always necessary, but 
now it matters even more than before.
This chapter, I freely confess, is not only a theoretical exercise about 
which qualities matter for leaders in political meritocracies and which 
mechanisms are most likely to select and promote leaders with such 
qualities. I had the Chinese context in mind and I tried to answer the 
question of how to improve China’s evolving meritocratic system. 
Hence, I developed an argument about a feasible and desirable political 
meritocracy in the context of a large, peaceful, and modernizing meri-
tocratic state that was used as a standard for evaluating China’s actually 
existing meritocratic system. My conclusion is that China can and 
should improve its meritocratic system, but it must do so within the 
system: a meritocratic system can be explicitly designed to increase the 
likelihood that political leaders have the motivation and ability to enact 
sound policies, and in that sense China has a clear advantage over elec-
toral democracies that leave the whole thing up to the whims of the 
people unconstrained by the lessons of philosophy, history, and social 

 
On the Selection of Good Leaders 
109
science. But any defense of political meritocracy needs to address the 
question of how to minimize the disadvantages of the system, not just 
the question of how to maximize its advantages. The next chapter will 
discuss the main disadvantages of political meritocracy and suggest 
ways of minimizing them in a contemporary Chinese context.

Chapt r 
What’s Wrong with Political Meritocracy
I
n theory, political meritocracy sounds like a good idea. Of course 
the political system should be designed to choose rulers with supe-
rior ability and virtue. Who would prefer to be governed by incom-
petent and corrupt rulers? But good ideas can be disastrous if they are 
implemented in a world composed of imperfect people with different 
values and interests competing for scarce resources. The Great Leap 
Forward seemed like a good idea—let’s skip competitive individualistic 
capitalism and move straight to a world of material abundance and 
equality for all—but it led to a famine resulting in tens of millions of 
deaths. The Cultural Revolution also seemed like a good idea—partici-
patory, bottom- up democracy without any social hierarchies—but it led 
to ten years of insanity. So the question is whether it is possible to im-
plement political meritocracy in ways that won’t go wrong. Electoral 
democracy may not guarantee superior rulers, but at least voters can get 
rid of their rulers if it turns out they made a bad choice. And curbing 
democracy in favor of a political mechanism explicitly designed to 
choose superior rulers who rule for the people’s interests seems too 
risky without strong countermeasures designed to prevent rulers from 
doing bad things.
Plato’s Republic is perhaps the most widely read book in Western 
political theory, but his arguments in favor of rule by philosopher kings 
and queens are so extreme that few people today read the work for in-
sights about how to select political rulers. Perhaps the most outlandish 
argument is that a just regime requires the abolition of private property 
and the family for the “guardian” class to guarantee that rulers serve 

 
What’s Wrong with Political Meritocracy 
111
the political community instead of their own private selfish interests.1 
In an influential essay on The Republic, Allan Bloom speculates that 
Plato’s views “are the absurd conceits of a comic poet who only sug-
gested them in order to ridicule them.”2 By showing the impossibility of 
a utopian political meritocracy, Plato (according to Bloom) sought to 
provide a subtle defense of democracy as a practicable second- best al-
ternative. Even philosophers benefit from a democracy: they may not 
have political power or high social status, but at least they have free-
dom of speech, which allows the pursuit of truth.
The most influential English- language work on meritocracy in the 
twentieth century was a more explicit political satire. In a book titled 
The Rise of the Meritocracy, first published in 1957, the sociologist Mi-
chael Young argued that any attempt to institutionalize a system of 
rewarding people according to their merit (defined as IQ plus effort) 
would lead to a brave new world in which an intellectual elite could 
justify their relative power and prosperity by saying that the outcome 
was fair because they actually were better than others: “If the rich and 
powerful were encouraged by the general culture to believe that they 
fully deserved all they had, how arrogant they could become, how 
ruthless in pursuing their own advantage. . . . If [ordinary people] 
think themselves inferior, if they think they deserve on merit to have 
less worldly goods and less worldly power than a select minority, they 
can be damaged in their own self- esteem, and generally demoral-
ized.”3 Young’s book sold hundreds of thousands of copies and made 
the term meritocracy toxic for succeeding generations of political theo-
rists. Starting from the 1960s, the key issue for theorists became the 
question of how to promote a society of equals. Hierarchies may be 
necessary in a modern, complex society, but theorists in the Western 
world generally agreed that we should regard all hierarchies as morally 
problematic and definitely not attempt to institutionalize them in the 
political system.
More specifically, Young’s work points to three key problems typi-
cally associated with any attempt to implement political meritocracy: 
(1) political rulers chosen on the basis of their superior ability are likely 
to abuse their power; (2) political hierarchies may become frozen and 
undermine social mobility; and (3) it is difficult to legitimize the sys-
tem to those outside the power structure.4 In this chapter, I will discuss 

112 
Chapter 3 
possible ways of addressing those problems in the context of a large, 
modernizing, and peaceful society that aims to institutionalize politi-
cal meritocracy. As in chapter 2, I have contemporary China in mind, 
and I will assume that electoral democracy is not a realistic possibility 
in the foreseeable future; hence, I will ask if it’s possible to fix what’s 
wrong with political meritocracy without electoral democracy.
1. The Problem of Corruption
The most obvious problem facing any system of political meritocracy is 
that meritocratically selected rulers are likely to abuse their power. If 
rulers are not chosen by the people, and if the people cannot change 
their rulers (other than by extreme means such as violent rebellion), 
what prevents the rulers from serving their own interests instead of the 
interests of the community? Whatever we think of the arguments 
against electoral democracy, it is a good means of checking the power 
of rulers because they can be changed at election time.5 Hence, it 
should not be surprising that there are widespread abuses of power in 
China. Perhaps the most serious problem is official corruption—the 
abuse of public office for private gains. The overall level of corruption 
has exploded over the past three decades,6 and it has become a more 
visible political problem in the past few years due to the glare of social 
media and more conspicuous consumption by political elites. Upon 
assuming power, President Xi Jinping recognized that corruption 
threatens the stability of the entire political system and he has made 
combating corruption the government’s top priority.7 Clearly corrup-
tion undermines not just the legitimacy of the Communist Party but 
also the whole aim of building a political meritocracy composed of 
public- spirited rulers. Is it possible to combat corruption in a merito-
cratic system without the mother of all checks, namely, competitive 
elections that empower voters to get rid of bad leaders?
In fact, electoral democracy is not always (or even usually) a strong 
bulwark against corruption. According to Transparency International, 
democratic countries such as Indonesia and India are perceived as 
more corrupt than China;8 in the case of Indonesia, corruption seems 
to have worsened since the advent of political democratization.9 In Tai-

 
What’s Wrong with Political Meritocracy 
113
wan, the authoritarian Kuomintang (KMT) leader Chiang Ching- kuo 
cleaned up what had been one of the most corrupt systems in world 
history, but corruption worsened once the system democratized under 
Lee Teng- hui.10 What does seem to help combat corruption is the level 
of economic development:11 wealthier countries, including countries 
without fully free and fair elections for top leaders such as Singapore, 
Qatar, and the United Arab Emirates, tend to be less corrupt. In his 
book China Modernizes, Randall Peerenboom argues that the quality 
of governance in the East Asian region, including control of corrup-
tion, improves along with level of economic development.12 Within 
China, wealthier parts such as Shanghai tend to be less corrupt than 
poor areas in the rural hinterland. Other factors do influence the level 
of corruption—one study found that Chinese provinces with greater 
anticorruption efforts, higher educational attainment, historic influ-
ence from Anglo- American church universities, greater openness, more 
access to media, higher relative wages of government employees, and a 
greater representation of women in the legislature are markedly less 
corrupt13—but high GDP per capita is still the best bulwark against cor-
ruption.14 So why not just wait a few decades when (assuming an opti-
mistic economic growth scenario) China will have become a wealthy 
country? Put differently, why are Chinese leaders so worried about cor-
ruption now? After all, the United States had high levels of corruption 
when it was going through its industrialization in the late nineteenth 
and early twentieth centuries, but political leaders didn’t worry that the 
whole political system was under threat of collapse.
The main reason for worry in China is related to the meritocratic 
system.15 In a democracy, leaders get their legitimacy from being cho-
sen by the people, and the people can change their leaders in the next 
election if they aren’t satisfied. If the next batch of leaders is still cor-
rupt, to a certain extent the people need to blame themselves. Corrup-
tion in a democracy doesn’t mean that the political system is not demo-
cratic. In a political meritocracy such as China, by contrast, the system 
is supposed to select leaders with superior virtue, meaning that rulers 
are supposed to use power to serve the political community, not them-
selves. In other words, the higher the level of political corruption, the 
less meritocratic the political system. Put negatively, the regime will 
lack legitimacy if its leaders are seen to be corrupt. Hence, Chinese 

114 
Chapter 3 
leaders are not wrong to think that corruption threatens the whole po-
litical system.
Such views are not mere theoretical speculation: the CCP won the 
hearts and minds of the (majority of) Chinese people in its civil war 
with the KMT at least partly, if not mainly, because it was perceived to 
be far less corrupt. From the viewpoint of regime survival, it is indeed 
alarming that corruption in mainland China seems to have reached 
levels similar to those of prerevolutionary China under KMT rule. 
Moreover, Yan Sun has argued that it was corruption, rather than the 
demand for democracy, that lay at the root of the social dissatisfaction 
that led to the Tiananmen protest movement of 1989.16 Over the past 
two decades, most dissatisfaction in China was directed at corruption 
by lower- level officials, but the Bo Xilai and Zhou Yongkang cases 
point to rot at the top that more directly threatens the foundations of 
the political system.17 The same goes for reports by Bloomberg and the 
New York Times that exposed the extravagant fortunes accumulated by 
family members of China’s top political elite. The Chinese government 
reacted by closing down websites of “unfriendly” foreign media, but 
such stopgap measures can only postpone the day of reckoning.18 In 
short, it is clear that meritocratically selected leaders have more incen-
tive to clean up corruption than democratically elected leaders, if only 
because regime survival depends on it.19 But the question remains—is 
it possible to address the problem of corruption by means other than 
electoral democracy? To answer this question, we need to understand 
the root causes of political corruption in China and consider ways of 
addressing the problems.
The most obvious cause of corruption is the absence of independent 
checks on the power of the government; without the rule of law, how is 
it possible to curb the power of corrupt government officials? That said, 
it is not correct to assume that Chinese officials exercise limitless power 
and rule with dictatorial impunity. The Han dynasty devised institu-
tions aiming to decentralize, check, and control the power of the em-
peror that shaped the course of subsequent imperial history, including 
independent institutions for the training of Confucian scholars.20 The 
rule of avoidance prohibited officials from serving in their home areas 
in order to avoid conflict between local ties and pursuit of the common 
good. Political posts could not normally be handed down to the next 

 
What’s Wrong with Political Meritocracy 
115
generation unless sons succeeded in the examination process. Of 
course, the emperor stood at the apex of political power, but the em-
peror did not rule with totalizing, unchecked power. Censors were en-
trusted with the task of checking administrators at each level to prevent 
corruption and malfeasance, and they sometimes directed their criti-
cisms at the emperor himself.21 The examination system also served 
the check the emperor’s power.22 Even symbolically, the emperor was 
not, so to speak, number one: words designating the emperor on exami-
nations had to be written two spaces above the text, but the emperor’s 
parents and ancestors were held to be more important and words refer-
ring to them were raised three spaces above the text.23 As a child, the 
emperor was educated in the Confucian virtues and court historians 
subsequently aimed to monitor almost every aspect of the emperor’s 
conduct and virtue: in the words of a petition to Emperor Shenzong by 
Lü Gongzhu, filed in 1085, “each single action and each word of a 
ruler has to be written down by a historian. If you [the ruler] display a 
lack of virtue, it is not only to the disadvantage of the people but its re-
cording in the histories will serve as a source of ridicule for countless 
generations. Therefore you should rise early and go to bed late, work 
hard and refine your self- cultivation, rule righteously and justly and 
control your heart in agreement with the rites. The most minute good-
ness should be practiced, the smallest evil should be eliminated.”24 
Contemporary political theorists argue that such Confucian disciplin-
ary mechanisms could be adapted to fit government structures in 
modern- day political systems; they may not make rulers into paragons 
of virtue, but at least they can help to prevent abuses of power.25
Nonetheless, it should be recognized that the emperor in imperial 
China was not formally restrained by separate powers. Hence, emperors 
could, and sometimes did, ignore informal constitutional norms if it 
was in their interest to do so.26 As Francis Fukuyama notes, “under capri-
cious or incompetent sovereigns, the enormous powers granted them 
often undermined the effectiveness of the administrative system. The 
empress Wu purged the bureaucracy and packed it with her own un-
qualified supporters; the emperor Taizu abolished the prime minister-
ship and locked his successors into this awkward system; the emperor 
ignored the bureaucracy altogether and government collapsed. The 
Chinese recognize this as the problem of the ‘bad emperor.’ ”27 Fuku-

116 
Chapter 3 
yama adds that “things are not all that different in contemporary China,” 
but the current political system in China has taken measures to solve 
the problem of the “bad emperor.” The principle of collective leader-
ship, term limits, and the introduction of a mandatory retirement age 
prevents leaders from doing as much damage as emperors of the past 
(and modern “emperors” such as Mao Zedong). As Yuri Pines explains, 
“these safeguards may also preclude top executives’ remaining in office 
after becoming physically or mentally debilitated, as occurred with the 
first generation of CPC [Communist Party of China] leaders. Current 
chief executives undergo lengthy processes of recruitment, training, and 
socialization into the top leadership, which renders them incomparably 
fitter for their tasks than were the majority of the emperors.”28
Still, the basic problem has not changed: there are no independent 
legal or political institutions with the formal power to investigate or 
check the power of the collective leadership.29 When anticorruption 
bloggers and transparency advocates are imprisoned,30 it seems hard to 
deny that the regime is concerned with the interests of the rulers rather 
than the ruled.31 The problem of one bad emperor may have been 
solved,32 but not the problem of how to avoid several bad leaders at the 
top of a rotten system. And today, there aren’t censors, court historians, 
or Confucian educators to pressure rulers into doing the right thing.
In contemporary China, the CCP has tried to combat corruption in 
its own way. China’s governing system has two parallel hierarchies—a 
state hierarchy and a party hierarchy—operating on all five administra-
tive levels of the system (the political center, the province, the prefec-
ture, the county, and the township). The state hierarchy is made of 
three different branches—an administration, a judiciary, and a parlia-
ment (a People’s Congress and a People’s Political Consultative Confer-
ence)—that are supposed to check one another. The CCP is supposed 
to bring consistency to the various levels of government as well as pro-
viding a further check on the abuse of state power. At each level of the 
hierarchy, a CCP committee sits parallel to the state. In practice the 
party makes important strategic and personnel decisions, and officials 
in decision- making positions (particularly at the higher levels) are usu-
ally party members. Hence, the big question is how to check abuses by 
party cadres who exercise the most power. The CCP’s Central Disci-
pline Inspection Commission is the most important institution for root-

 
What’s Wrong with Political Meritocracy 
117
ing out corruption and malfeasance among party cadres but it does not 
seem to be sufficient. In recent years, the commission has been very 
aggressive—in 2011 it conducted formal investigations into 137,859 
cases that resulted in disciplinary actions or legal convictions against 
party officials, a nearly fourfold increase since the years before 1989, 
when corruption was one of the main issues that drove the Tiananmen 
protests33—yet perceptions of the level of corruption in the party have 
only worsened.34 The discipline inspection mechanisms have been 
streamlined with more independent power to investigate abuses by 
local officials and more clarity about who is in charge of anticorruption 
work,35 but clearly there is a need for even more substantial changes to 
the political system if corruption is to be contained to the point that it 
no longer poses a threat to the survival of the regime.36
But can changes be made without full- scale political democratiza-
tion in the form of one person, one vote to choose top political leaders? 
In fact, the experience of contemporary societies shows that there are 
several ways of curbing corruption without elections that make leaders 
accountable to the people. Nondemocratic Hong Kong relies on a pow-
erful and independent anticorruption agency, the rule of law, and a 
relatively free press. Less- than- democratic Singapore relies on high sal-
aries and an independent anticorruption agency. For that matter, dem-
ocratic countries also rely on extensive monitoring systems to curb the 
power of their elected leaders, such as “public integrity commissions, 
judicial activism, local courts, workplace tribunals, consensus confer-
ences, parliaments for minorities, public interest litigation, citizens’ ju-
ries, citizens’ assemblies, independent public inquiries, think- tanks, 
experts’ reports, participatory budgeting, vigils, ‘blogging’ and other 
novel forms of media scrutiny.”37
Obviously there is a need for China to draw on such practices and 
institutions. The emergence of independent anticorruption fighters 
using social media to expose official malfeasance is an encouraging 
sign, but whistleblowers also face serious risks of retaliation.38 Budget 
reform, including fiscal transparency, has contributed to the fight 
against corruption, though there is room for improvement.39 Another 
encouraging sign is the increased willingness to experiment with anti-
corruption mechanisms in different parts of China: for example, the 
government has launched an experimental scheme in (parts of) the 

118 
Chapter 3 
province of Guangdong to force public officials to disclose their as-
sets.40 But such measures face substantial opposition, and they do not 
address the problem of family members drawing on political connec-
tions to accumulate wealth in semilegal ways.41 The most far- reaching 
step would be to institutionalize an independent nationwide anticor-
ruption agency similar to the Hong Kong model.42 It is more difficult to 
establish effective anticorruption bureaus at the national level (because 
it’s harder to monitor officials in a big and diverse country), but the 
government can experiment with more independent institutions at 
lower levels.43 A more radical solution at the local level—designed to 
prevent the mai guan (buying a government post) phenomenon that is 
more prevalent at lower levels and in poor regions44—would be to sim-
ply decide on appointments by lots, as was done under Emperor 
Wanli.45 At the very least, there should be more transparency in the se-
lection and promotion process of public officials.46 All these measures 
will help to curb corruption and defuse popular anger and they can be 
implemented without going the way of electoral democracy for China’s 
top leaders.
The second cause of corruption is related to economic development 
and the transition to a market economy. On the one hand, privatization 
gives rise to rent- seeking: in the mixed public- private economy, officials 
have the power to vet and approve applications for land acquisition and 
construction projects.47 On the other hand, state control of the econ-
omy also gives rise to rent- seeking: state- owned enterprises (SOEs) fight 
to maintain their monopolistic powers and have billions of dollars to 
distribute to advance their agendas, and government ministries, divided 
and at odds with one another, are overly keen to accommodate SOEs’ 
requests.48 Moreover, the closed nature of SOEs undermines meritoc-
racy in the economic realm: as Zheng Yongnian puts it, the “manage-
ment layers [of SOEs] from top to bottom are filled with relatives and 
friends of officials. An ordinary person, even if they are extraordinarily 
talented, has a hard time penetrating the networks of the state 
enterprises.”49
So what can be done? The government has successfully decreased 
the number of corruption cases related to the internal administrative 
process (embezzlement and misappropriation of public funds) by 
means such as strengthening the merit- based public service system, im-

 
What’s Wrong with Political Meritocracy 
119
provement of the budgeting and auditing system, fiscal recentralization 
and better monitoring of local governments’ activities, and progress in 
anticorruption regulation and enforcement. At the same time, Chinese 
corruption has made a transition from being an administrative issue to 
being a public–private transactional problem, with a steep increase in 
bribery involving both public and private parties.50 Clearly there is a 
need to reduce dependence between public and private parties and es-
tablish clearer boundaries between the two sectors.
Imperial China may offer some lessons: Tang dynasty law prohibited 
merchants and artisans from social intercourse with officials, banned 
the upper echelons of the public service from entering urban markets, 
and forbade merchants and artisans from sitting for the public service 
exams and holding public office.51 Such drastic measures may be diffi-
cult to implement today, but imposing some limits on social interaction 
between public and private officials can help: for example, Zhang Lu 
suggests that China can learn from an anticorruption law in South 
Korea passed in 2001 that forbids public officials and business persons 
from playing golf together;52 in the case of China, such measures can 
perhaps be extended to other social settings conducive to corruption, 
such as karaoke parlors.
Most important, policies that induce more competition in commer-
cial and political markets could help to reduce corruption:53 in Novem-
ber 2013, the Third Plenum resolved that the market should play a 
“decisive” role in the allocation of resources, and if the deeds match 
the rhetoric corruption can be substantially reduced.54 In addition, 
“public–private partnerships between the government and the civil so-
ciety, for example involving nongovernmental organizations and pri-
vate organizations in designing and implementing anticorruption 
policies, would be helpful to curb bribery.”55 Finally, what look like 
corrupt practices can simply be legalized. In the United States, com-
mercial interests legally influence elected politicians by means of cam-
paign contributions and lobbying between elections. The large major-
ity of Americans believe such practices violate the public interest,56 and 
yet few Americans think that they undermine the value of the constitu-
tional system as a whole. In a nondemocratic system (such as China), 
however, legalization of systemic political corruption would not solve 
the legitimacy problem. Still, legalization of small- scale corruption can 

120 
Chapter 3 
help: for example, the Korean government passed a law in 2011 forbid-
ding gifts to public officials worth more than 180 rmb (approx. U.S.$30), 
thus providing a clear guideline about the limits of “bribery.”57 Such 
small gifts for public officials would not be viewed as morally obscene 
in a Chinese context, especially if they were legalized. Finally, a gen-
eral amnesty can be granted to all corrupt officials, with serious polic-
ing of the boundaries between public and private, with activity pro-
vided to allow them to start afresh.58 Again, none of these measures 
require democracy in the form of one person, one vote.
The third cause of corruption is the low salaries of public officials. 
China’s President Xi Jinping makes an annual salary of roughly U.S. 
$19,000, compared to U.S. President Barack Obama’s $400,000 a year. 
Former Prime Minister Wen Jiabao’s similarly meager salary did not 
prevent his family members from accumulating a hidden trove of 
wealth estimated at $2.7 billion. Fallen political leader Bo Xilai had an 
official salary of $1,600 a month but his family owned assets valued at 
$130 million.59 Lower- level officials earn less, and yet they often seem 
to be far wealthier than people who earn much more.
Why is it that government officials often do not seem satisfied with 
low salaries? In a revolutionary period, when political leaders and their 
followers are fully committed to an ideal, corruption will be minus-
cule. But such times do not last long, and corruption cannot be avoided 
if material benefits are insufficient to cover the basic needs of officials 
and their family members. And corruption can worsen with economic 
development: market reforms brought about the emergence of private 
property and a growing disparity between public service and private 
wealth. There is more money in the system, and public officials com-
pare themselves negatively to those doing well in the private sector. 
Plus, the cost of living has gone up exponentially and—to be charita-
ble—the cost of caring for needy family members often cannot be cov-
ered by official salaries. Hence, public officials have the motivation to 
abuse their public position for private (and family) gain, and punishing 
a few corrupt officials is not likely to help so long as salaries remain so 
low. The connection between low salaries and high levels of corruption 
is familiar to students of Chinese history: in the Ming dynasty, when 
officials’ salaries were the lowest and anticorruption campaigns were 
the fiercest, the level of corruption stubbornly remained the highest.60 

 
What’s Wrong with Political Meritocracy 
121
The solution seems obvious,61 and it’s the same solution put forward by 
Wang Anshi (1021–1086) in the Song dynasty: “The rate of salaries paid 
nowadays is generally too low. . . . What people want is a decent life, to 
earn a good reputation, gain a distinguished title, and get good pay.”62
The Most Highly Paid Public Officials in the World
As Singapore’s economy improved over the years, the government 
found it increasingly difficult to attract and retain its ministers and top 
public service officers. Various policies to close the gap between pri-
vate- and public- sector salaries were explored and implemented. In 
1994, the government decided to benchmark the salaries of ministers 
and top civil servants to the salaries of top earners in the private sector. 
The formula was revised in 2007 to peg the salaries of ministers and 
permanent secretaries to two- thirds of the median salary of the top 
eight earners in six professions. According to the government, eco-
nomic globalization had created a single worldwide market for talent 
and government scholars were keenly sought by top global companies 
like McKinsey & Co. and Goldman Sachs. With the salary revision the 
annual pay of entry- level ministers and senior permanent secretaries 
went up from $1.2 million to $1.6 million, and that of the prime minis-
ter went from $2.5 million to $3.1 million. Top performers in the elite 
Administrative Service, which identifies high- potential talent early on 
and grooms them for top generalist posts, at age thirty- two would be 
paid up to $361,000 a year.63
The advantages of benchmarking compensation in order to keep 
pace with the private section are obvious: as the Boston Consulting 
Group puts it, “it ensures that a talented public servant is not unfairly 
penalized for choosing a career in the public sector, and reduces the 
temptation to engage in corrupt practices.”64 Of course, the govern-
ment is also aware that the policy is politically sensitive and may not be 
feasible in a “pure” electoral democracy with critical media and the 
serious possibility of being voted out of power: in his 2000 National 
Day Rally, then Prime Minister Goh Chok Tong said, “Many Western 
leaders told me in private that they envied our system of Ministers’ pay. 
But they also said that if they tried to implement it in their own coun-

122 
Chapter 3 
tries, they would be booted out.”65 Notwithstanding the government’s 
staunch defense of the policy and less- than- democratic political insti-
tutions, the market- based salary system has proven to be highly contro-
versial in Singapore, particularly at a time when the gap between rich 
and poor increased dramatically and the myth of equal opportunity 
began to be seen as, well, a myth, by Singapore’s disadvantaged (not to 
mention the fact that several members of the Lee family have been in 
positions of economic and political power).66 During the 2011 general 
elections, the policy became a major issue (especially on social media 
sites) and the government won “only” 60 percent of the popular vote 
and it lost six parliamentary seats. In response, the government reduced 
ministers’ salaries by 40 percent, and bonuses were linked not just with 
high economic performance but to the economic state of the poorest 
Singaporeans. The ruling People’s Action Party also acknowledged that 
politicians should be motivated at least partly by “the ethos of political 
service and sacrifice,”67 not just by selfish material interests. Even after 
the cuts, however, the salaries of Singapore’s ministers are the highest 
in the world.
In the case of China, it is clear that the salaries of public officials 
need to be substantially increased to reduce the temptation to engage 
in corrupt practices.68 One solution is to peg salaries to market rates.69 
To further deter any temptation for favoritism or abuse, the large bulk 
of compensation should be made in cash rather than in the form of al-
lowances or benefits (in the case of Singapore, all compensation is pay-
able in cash except for minimal health- care benefits).70 Relative to Sin-
gapore, however, China is poor and cannot afford Singapore- style 
salaries. Moreover, it has a huge pool of talent and need not worry as 
much about losing talent to the private sector. China also has a long 
tradition of public service and a more deeply rooted sense of national 
identity, and the ethos of serving the political community should play a 
relatively important role in motivating public servants. So salaries need 
to increase, but not to Singapore- style levels.
In any case, money per se is not sufficient to deter corruption.71 This 
brings us to the fourth cause of corruption in China: lack of ethics. 
Strict Legalist and utilitarian thinkers dismiss such considerations: as a 
contemporary philosopher puts it, “the law and a code of enforced eth-
ics can regulate behavior more readily and pervasively than any ordi-

 
What’s Wrong with Political Meritocracy 
123
nary ethics can.”72 So long as the right combination of incentives—re-
wards for good behavior and punishment for bad behavior—are in 
place, then public officials will do the right thing. But it is difficult and 
expensive for outsiders to ensure that public officials are always being 
conscientious. The law cannot specify moral behavior in all circum-
stances, and less- than- conscientious public officials can serve their 
own interests at the cost of the public good in ways that do not directly 
(or obviously) violate the letter of the law.
Even when the law is clear, it is not always easy to enforce.73 There is 
no way of monitoring people at all times and places: only internal self- 
regulation can restrain bad behavior when nobody is watching. A Con-
fucian classic—the Zhongyong (Book of the Mean)—emphasizes that 
the mark of an exemplary person is what he or she does in private. In 
other words, guardians need to watch themselves. Even analysts of 
American political culture—famed for its suspicion of political power—
recognize that the ultimate restraints on abuses of the public trust must 
come from within: “The checks that hold the President in line are in-
ternal rather than external. His conscience and training, his sense of 
history and desire to be judged well by it, his awareness of the need to 
pace himself lest he collapse under the burden—all join to halt him far 
short of the kind of deed that destroys a President’s ‘fame and power.’ ”74 
At the end of the day, corruption in China can be substantially cur-
tailed only if it is seen to be deeply shameful and being clean is seen to 
be a matter of honor for public officials.75 As Kwame Anthony Appiah 
puts it, honor “motivates the people to act well, whether or not anyone 
is watching, because honorable people care about being worthy of re-
spect and not just about being respected.”76 Footbinding, despite its 
long history in China, was brought to a swift end more than a century 
ago when the practice began to be seen as shameful for the people in-
volved and the nation as a whole.77 What will it take for corruption to 
be seen as similarly shameful?
The CCP is officially communist in orientation and its cadres are 
supposed to be motivated (and constrained) by Marxist ideology: as 
President Xi Jinping put it, “the Party’s cadres should be firm followers 
of the Communist ideal, true believers of Marxism and devoted fight-
ers for the socialism with Chinese characteristics. . . . They must serve 
the people heart and soul, exercise their power carefully and resist cor-

124 
Chapter 3 
ruption. . . . A CPC official’s integrity will not grow with the years of 
service and promotion of his post but with persistent efforts to disci-
pline himself and study Marxist classics and theories of the socialism 
with Chinese characteristics.”78 The problem is that Marxism is basi-
cally dead as a motivating ideology in contemporary China; the more 
cadres are forced to study the Marxist classics, the more cynical they 
will become. Equally serious, the Marxist classics offer little insight 
into ethical behavior by public officials.79 Karl Marx, in his voluminous 
writings, has nothing to say about the self- cultivation of public officials. 
To the extent that texts in the Chinese Marxist tradition (“socialism 
with Chinese characteristics”) offer insights on the ethical behavior of 
public officials, they owe more to Confucianism than to Marxism.80 So 
why not directly revive the Confucian tradition as the main source of 
moral education for public officials? Influential Chinese intellectuals 
have long been calling for such steps.81 In fact, President Xi has named 
Confucianism—along with Buddhism and Taoism—as one of the “tra-
ditional cultures” that can help fill an ethical void that has allowed 
corruption to flourish and he has invoked Confucian values in a speech 
on party members’ moral training and standards.82 Qufu, the home of 
Confucian culture, is experimenting with an educational program that 
emphasizes more teaching of Confucianism in public schools. And 
Communist Party schools often teach the Confucian classics to public 
officials. But the party has yet to take the formal step of officially replac-
ing communism with Confucianism.83
There are many ways of abusing political power, but I have focused my 
discussion on the issue of corruption because it is widely acknowl-
edged—by the government, the people, and scholars—as the most seri-
ous threat facing the political system in China. In a democracy, corrup-
tion won’t threaten the whole system, but it can make or break a 
political meritocracy. The good news (for a meritocratic regime) is that 
there are many ways of combating corruption without going the way of 
one person, one vote to choose leaders: establishing independent checks 
on political power, reducing dependence between the public and pri-
vate sectors, increasing the salaries of public officials, and implement-
ing a more systematic program in Confucian moral education can help 

 
What’s Wrong with Political Meritocracy 
125
to eradicate corruption. Let’s now turn to the second key problem as-
sociated with the attempt to realize a meritocratic political system.
2. The Problem of Ossification
According to the meritocratic ideal, a political system should aim to 
select and promote leaders with superior ability and virtue. In the War-
ring States period, the market for political talent was basically interna-
tional. Scholars roamed from state to state hoping to persuade rulers of 
their superior qualities and be chosen to serve as ministers and advisors. 
As Mencius put it, “if a ruler gives honor to men of talents and employs 
the able, so that offices shall all be filled by individuals of distinction 
and mark, then all the scholars of All- under- Heaven will be pleased, 
and wish to stand in his court” (2A.5). Moreover, the political system 
should aim to choose the best, regardless of class background. Xunzi 
expressed this idea: “Promote the worthy and capable without regard to 
seniority; dismiss the unfit and incapable without hesitation. . . . Al-
though they may be the descendants of kings and dukes or scholar- 
officials and counselors, if they are incapable of devotedly observing 
the requirements of ritual principles and justice, they should be rele-
gated to the position of commoners. Although they may be descen-
dants of commoners, if they have acquired learning, are upright in con-
duct, and can adhere to ritual principles, they should be promoted to 
the post of prime minister, scholar- official, or counselor” (9.1; see also 
9.4). Around the same period in a different part of the world, Plato ex-
tended meritocratic principles to two other groups. First, the very top 
ruler(s) should also be chosen according to merit (Xunzi did not extend 
meritocracy to the position of king). Second, women should also have 
the opportunity to be rulers. In short, the meritocratic ideal is that ev-
eryone should have an equal opportunity to serve as a political official 
regardless of social background, and the political system should aim to 
choose the most able and virtuous among the contenders.
Early defenders of political meritocracy were ahead of their time, but 
today political meritocracies endorse the ideal that the political system 
should draw on as wide a talent pool as possible (with the exception 

126 
Chapter 3 
that the top positions are reserved for citizens). Given the wide distribu-
tion of talents in society, one would therefore expect that political lead-
ers in meritocratic systems such as China and Singapore would come 
from diverse social backgrounds. In reality, however, political hierar-
chies are increasingly composed of elites from a narrow social back-
ground. This leads to the problem that the political selection process 
may be missing out on talent from other sectors of the population; po-
litical meritocracy is not as good as it could be. But confining political 
leadership to a narrow social circle leads to even more serious problems 
that threaten the viability of the whole system.
First, the political elite downplays social background and luck and 
can easily become convinced of its inherent superiority, with the con-
sequence that it looks down on the “losers” in a supposedly fair com-
petitive race to the top. Here too, the case of Singapore is telling. For-
mer top civil servant Ngiam Tong Dow has noticed “a particular brand 
of elite arrogance creeping in. Some civil servants behave like they 
have a mandate from the emperor. We think we are little Lee Kuan 
Yews.”84 Talented scholars come to feel they are deserving winners in 
tough competition and they often develop a disdainful attitude toward 
ordinary people. In one notorious case, a humanities scholar from an 
elite junior college wrote a blog criticizing a young executive who ex-
pressed concerns about competition from foreigners and the lack of 
opportunities for older workers: “We are a tyranny of the capable and 
the clever. . . . [I]f you’re not good enough, life will kick you in the 
balls, that’s just how things go. . . . [P]lease, get out of my elite uncaring 
face.” This blog created a public uproar and the blogger’s father—a 
scholar and member of parliament—intervened on behalf of his daugh-
ter: “If you cut through the insensitivity of the language, her basic point 
is reasonable, that a well- educated university graduate who works for a 
multinational company should not be bemoaning the Government 
and get on with the challenges of life. Nonetheless, I have counseled 
her to learn from it. Some people cannot take the brutal truth and that 
sort of language.” The publication of the father’s interview caused even 
more general unhappiness because he implied that he continued to 
believe in the “brutal truth.”85 In the popular mind, the word meritoc-
racy has become code for elitism of the kind that focuses on winning 

 
What’s Wrong with Political Meritocracy 
127
and maximizing rewards for the winners, while downplaying factors 
that limit opportunities for the disadvantaged.86
In his 1957 satirical book on meritocracy (set in the year 2033), Mi-
chael Young predicted that meritocratically selected leaders would be-
come arrogant and detached from the rest of society: “some members 
of the meritocracy, as most moderate reformers admit, have become so 
impressed with their own importance as to lose sympathy with the peo-
ple whom they govern, and so tactless that even people of low caliber 
have been unnecessarily offended.” He also predicted the solution: 
“The schools and universities are endeavoring to instill a more proper 
sense of humility.”87 Faced with declining popular support, Singapore’s 
political leaders have rebranded the ruling ideology as “compassionate 
meritocracy.” In striking contrast to Lee Kuan Yew’s less- than- humble 
political discourse, his son, Prime Minister Lee Hsien Loong, empha-
sizes that political leaders must “serve with humility. Let us do the right 
things and do things right, but never be self- righteous or arrogant. 
Being humble also means accepting that government does not have all 
the answers.”88 In short, government leaders should be humble and 
sympathize with the people, not look down on them. But is sympathy 
sufficient?
Political Elitism in France
The École Nationale d’Administration (ENA), created in 1945 by 
Charles de Gaulle, is an institution explicitly designed to realize politi-
cal meritocracy. It aims to select the country’s intellectual political elite 
regardless of social background and train them for public service. Ad-
mission to ENA is based on perhaps the most rigorous and grueling set 
of examinations in the world. The candidates need to take five written 
exams (in public law, economy, general knowledge, a summary of doc-
uments in either European law and policies or social law and policies, 
and a fifth exam to be chosen by the candidate from subjects ranging 
from math to language); then the candidates with the highest marks 
take five oral exams (in public finance, international politics, European 
or social issues, foreign language, and the famous forty- five- minute- 

128 
Chapter 3 
long Grand Oral, open to the public, during which any question can 
be asked, including personal questions), and one test in sports fitness. 
Fewer than one hundred are chosen every year. Following two years  
of ultracompetitive education and training at the ENA, the graduates 
are numerically ranked according to academic performance. They are 
basically guaranteed jobs in the civil service, and the top fifteen per-
formers almost always choose to enter one of three administrative 
corps: the Conseil d’État, the Inspection des finances, or the Cour des 
comptes. The reason is simple: these corps serve as platforms for presti-
gious careers in administration, business, and politics.89 Unlike parlia-
mentary systems in the United Kingdom and Canada, the boundaries 
between the civil service and political leadership are fluid: civil ser-
vants who are elected or appointed to a political position do not have to 
resign their position in the civil service, and if they are not reelected or 
appointed, they may ask for reintegration into their service. Hence, sev-
eral leading politicians are ENA alumni, including French presidents 
(Valéry Giscard d’Estaing, Jacques Chirac, and François Hollande) 
and prime ministers (Laurent Fabius, Michel Rocard, Edouard Balla-
dur, Alain Juppé, Lionel Jospin, and Dominique de Villepin). Typi-
cally, one- third to one- half of every French cabinet since the 1960s 
(with the exception of the Sarkozy administration) is composed of ENA 
alumni. That said, only 3 percent of ENA alumni go into politics: 80 
percent of alumni work in the civil service and the rest enter the pri-
vate sector.90
The education at ENA is meant to produce generalists who can be 
skilled at administration, politics, and business. They are supposed to 
be good at problem solving without worrying about the glare of media 
attention. They learn values such as impartiality toward all citizens, 
loyalty to the democratic government, and ethical usage of public 
funds. They are supposed to be competent technocrats with the ability 
to deal with extremely complex administrative issues without ever for-
getting that policies apply to real flesh- and- blood people. In short, the 
ideal ENA graduate is both a technocrat and a humanist.91 The ENA is 
successful in the sense that the graduates often serve in positions of 
power and derive self- esteem from service to the public.92
Unfortunately, the public image of ENA graduates is less positive. 
They are increasingly viewed as arrogant, detached from the rest of 

 
What’s Wrong with Political Meritocracy 
129
society, and more concerned with serving their own career interests 
than serving the public. And the reality is that ENA graduates increas-
ingly come from privileged backgrounds. Among 2011 graduates, 50 
percent had a parent working in the national education sector, and 
only 3 out of 81 had a working- class background.93 At the start, ENA 
graduates came from diverse social backgrounds (including former 
President Chirac, from a farmer’s family). But it is increasingly difficult 
for those from underprivileged backgrounds to have a shot at the ENA: 
a self- perpetuating elite of the wealthy and the white provide their own 
children with the social skills, financial support, and cultural knowl-
edge to pass the entrance exams, which are normally undertaken after 
an extra two years of intensive study in preparatory schools.94 The re-
sult is a relatively homogenous cohort of graduates, and the current 
director of the ENA, Bernard Boucault, spells out the implications for 
administering the country: “To have a good comprehension of the 
needs of society, the administration must come from the whole of soci-
ety. I realize it’s a contested point, but no matter how open or talented 
the person, there are some things that can be known only from per-
sonal experience.”95
The basic problem is that humble political discourse expressing sym-
pathy with the people, however sincere, is insufficient to motivate pol-
icy making on behalf of the people, especially disadvantaged sectors of 
the population. That is, policy making on behalf of the people de-
pends not just on sympathy but also on social background. Political 
decision making, especially at higher levels of government, involves 
trade- offs between different goods, and politicians are more likely to 
fight for the interests of people from their own background when faced 
with competing considerations. This is not to deny that some people 
can transcend their class backgrounds—even Karl Marx allowed for 
the possibility that capitalists (such as Engels) can take the side of the 
pro le tariat—but it is not likely that an entire social group will do so. 
And if a political elite composed of people from a particular social 
background does make a special effort to help people from other back-
grounds, the rulers may still lack the knowledge required to enact poli-
cies that benefit other groups. Even with thorough briefings by brilliant 
political advisors, leaders born into wealthy and privileged families will 

130 
Chapter 3 
lack the knowledge that comes from lived experience within a particu-
lar social setting.96 Hence, the fact that political elites are composed of 
an increasingly narrow and wealthy sector of the population is a worry-
ing phenomenon.97 Whatever the rhetoric about sympathy for the dis-
advantaged, such leaders will often lack sufficient motivation and 
knowledge to fight for their interests.98 In short, the more political lead-
ers come from diverse social backgrounds, the better the quality of 
policy making.
So what can be done? In a democracy, the problem is not so difficult 
to solve, at least on the surface. In France, for example, people will not 
vote for ENA graduates viewed as privileged elites with neither the mo-
tivation nor the knowledge required to work for the interests of the pub-
lic. Nicolas Sarkozy was elected at least partly because he was viewed as 
different from the ENA- molded political elite; the people wanted a 
leader who looked more like them, stronger in emotional quotient than 
intellect.99 More worrisome, the far right Front National leader Marine 
Le Pen defeated an ENA graduate, Jean- François Cope, in a cantonal 
election with populist rhetoric that verged on hatred: “What contempt! 
What arrogance! This arrogance, Mr. Cope, will lead to you to being 
thrown out of politics. The French people will turn their backs on you. 
The candidates of the Front National are students, unemployed. They 
are also mothers of families and workers. All those you turned your 
back to. Of course, they are not ENA graduates. Ah, we prefer to min-
gle with ENA graduates and high functionaries. Well, all that is fin-
ished.”100 Whether or not the alternative to rule by ENA graduates is 
far- right populism, it seems likely that fewer ENA graduates will be 
going into politics.101
In a political meritocracy, the question of how to deal with closed 
and self- perpetuating political elites is less straightforward. The only 
way to remedy the problem of a ruling class largely composed of people 
from a privileged background is to improve representation of diverse 
social groupings within the political elite. In Singapore, there are vari-
ous constraints on the democratic process and the government will not 
lose power in the foreseeable future, but the ruling party has reacted to 
falling popular support by implementing policies such as limiting 
legacy- based admission in schools and extending scholarship opportu-

 
What’s Wrong with Political Meritocracy 
131
nities to nonelite schools and a more diverse range of students in order 
to equalize opportunities and eventually increase the representation of 
underprivileged classes in the political elite.102 In 2002, the CCP did 
take a major step designed to increase representation of diverse social 
classes within its ranks: it accepted capitalists as members. Mao and 
Marx must be turning in their graves, but the point was to recognize 
that capitalists can help with policy making appropriate for market re-
forms.103 But other social classes have not fared as well.
The CCP aims to select excellent persons from diverse social sec-
tors, but it selects fewer farmers and workers and an increasing propor-
tion of members are highly educated overachievers.104 The problem is 
that it is difficult for families without the economic resources to pay for 
tutors and extra classes that increase the likelihood of success on the 
ultracompetitive national entrance examinations.105 Hence, the stu-
dents at elite universities that serve as key entrance points to political 
leadership are increasingly composed of families from privileged back-
grounds. One short- term way to deal with this problem is to implement 
quotas for students from underprivileged backgrounds.106 Such mea-
sures will be controversial because they conflict with the aim of merito-
cratic selection that is blind to social background,107 but applicants 
from minority groups are admitted to universities with lower scores on 
the national university entrance examinations and such programs can 
be extended to economically deprived students.108
There may also be a need for quotas for disadvantaged sectors of 
the population throughout the promotion process. In China, the CCP 
has implemented institutional rules to systematically promote ethnic 
minorities into its leadership, but the higher the party rank, the fewer 
the proportion of ethnic minorities.109 At the highest levels of govern-
ment, spots can be set aside for minority groups with different reli-
gions and people from economically deprived backgrounds, even if 
they didn’t rise through the political system (of course, they would 
also have to be talented in ways relevant for high- level political deci-
sion making, such as superior analytical ability).110 With respect to re-
ligious groups, the case for representation is clear: only sincere adher-
ents of a religion can really know what’s best for their religion. But 
people from economically deprived backgrounds also tend to have 

132 
Chapter 3 
special insight into the needs and wants of people from their back-
ground,111 and they should be more represented in the system as 
well.112 Ultimately, the best solution is to reduce income gaps and in-
equalities of opportunity in society at large so that people from wealthy 
and powerful families have fewer advantages in the meritocratic com-
petition for political power.113 In other words, a relatively equal society 
is less likely to be ruled by a political elite composed of people from a 
privileged background, assuming that the process of selection and pro-
motion of political leaders is done in a meritocratic way blind to social 
background.114 Political meritocracy depends on a high degree of eco-
nomic equality.
But such measures still won’t be sufficient to deal with the problem 
of rigid and inflexible political hierarchies. Even if political leaders 
come from diverse sectors of society, there will still be a problem if they 
are chosen according to a rigid definition of merit that does not change 
along with new circumstances that require different kinds of leaders 
with different qualities. In Michael Young’s dystopic meritocracy, the 
influence of social background has been minimized, but since leaders 
are chosen according to a narrow definition of merit—IQ scores plus 
effort—the result is a ruling class that lacks social skills and public- 
spiritedness. In France, Marxist- inspired sociologists who argued that 
rewarding abstract skills like mathematics would neutralize the influ-
ence of parents and social origin on school success helped to shape (and 
justify) a selection system for elite universities that emphasizes mathe-
matical skills—only the top 5 percent of secondary- school students in 
math even have a chance at landing spots at top universities. As a con-
sequence, French elites tend to be strong in analytical ability but weak 
at working with teams, listening to others, and practical problem- solving 
skills, as well as prone to arrogance because they come to believe that 
their success is due to their excellence without giving credit to the influ-
ence of luck and social background.115 In China, the political elite is 
more diverse than, say, family- run dictatorships in North Korea and the 
Middle East, and such diversity is key to its success. But measurement 
of merit in the promotion process within the CCP over the past couple 
of decades has largely been confined to economic growth. To the extent 
that other factors have come into play, perhaps the most important has 
been the willingness to please and get along with political superiors.116 

 
What’s Wrong with Political Meritocracy 
133
Hence, the rigorous, multiyear talent selection process has discouraged 
risk- taking, and relatively creative and original minds may have been 
weeded out early because they have offended people or challenged the 
“normal way of doing things.”
In the previous chapter (section 3), I argued that there should be 
more diverse criteria for the selection of top leaders that would result in 
a more diverse ruling class, including more gender balance. But the 
criteria suggested may still be too rigid: in today’s ever- changing world, 
any selection process needs to leave room for new definitions of merit. 
Again, such arguments are not mere idle speculation. In the Warring 
States period, the Qin state’s success was in part related to its ability to 
maintain multiple avenues of social and political advancement, but the 
loss of this diversity after it unified China and established the first dy-
nasty hastened Qin’s collapse. Yuri Pines draws the implications for to-
day’s CCP: “Insofar as manifold routes of individual advancement are 
maintained, the system may be expected to be fairer, more dynamic, 
and more adaptable overall to changes than a too perfectly organized 
one, which would always be prone to ossification.”117 Diversity of ave-
nues of entrance would preserve the flexibility that is particularly im-
portant in today’s fast- changing world.
Hence, the CCP needs not just to seek expansion to include ambi-
tious and high- achieving representatives of currently marginalized 
groups, but also to allow for multiple avenues of entering the top levels 
based on different ideas of merit so as to promote people with more dif-
ferentiated experience. This is not to deny the advantage of a relatively 
stable and rule- bound system of promotion based on transparent crite-
ria of merit, especially at higher levels of government. But a minority of 
places—including in the Standing Committee of the Politburo—should 
be reserved for excellent performers who succeed outside the main-
stream system of selection and promotion, even for non–party mem-
bers. So for example, the top leadership can include a younger person 
with excellent understanding of modern technology and its social im-
plications, an expert in foreign cultures who has spent considerable 
time abroad, a capitalist who has proved good at money- making as well 
as philanthropy, and/or an expert in military affairs. As Pines notes, the 
Qing incorporation of the bannermen into officialdom proved a very 
good gamble that diversified the pool of talent and made the adminis-

134 
Chapter 3 
tration far more effective than was the case under the Ming, when the 
examinations were the exclusive way upward.118
But how to know which people will be most useful for political deci-
sion making in the future? In other words, how to identify new sources 
of political merit? Here John Stuart Mill’s utilitarian arguments for 
freedom of speech are helpful. Freedom of speech matters not just be-
cause it helps to identify what is important,119 but also because it helps 
us to identify who is important. Mill argued that the freedom of speech 
allows for a range of choice that enables us to choose the wise and 
noble among us. Everyone gains from the “experiments of living” of 
the few, and if some “eccentrics” are willing to find out at their own risk 
what new and better ways of life there might be, we should all be grate-
ful, not resentful.120 Mill had in mind a democratic context where edu-
cated citizens would choose the new members of the ruling elite in 
democratic elections, but his point that freedom of speech is necessary 
to identify unconventional sources of merit appropriate for new cir-
cumstances is also valid in the context of a political meritocracy.121
Equally important, new sources of merit, and new ways of measur-
ing merit, can be identified by means of experimentation at subcentral 
levels of government. Here the Chinese political system has demon-
strated clear advantages relative to constitutional democracies with 
rigid divisions of power between different levels of government. In a 
federal system, for example, what works well in one subunit cannot 
necessarily be generalized to the rest of the country if the central gov-
ernment does not have the constitutional power to do so.122 But the 
power to spread desirable local innovations is an important advantage 
of Chinese- style political meritocracy.123 As the authors of China Ex-
periments explain,
Local experiments are the hallmark of how China has under-
taken all sorts of reforms since the end of the Mao era in the 
late 1970s. China’s massive transformations over the past three 
decades are the result of multi- layered and incremental change 
rather than top- down shock- therapy style reform. . . . The ben-
efits of this experimentalist approach are clear: Given the size 
of the country and the relatively underdeveloped nature of its 
government institutions, the repercussions of implementing a 

 
What’s Wrong with Political Meritocracy 
135
policy and getting it wrong are massive, and not easy to correct. 
The socioeconomic variations across the country also demand 
flexibility rather than a one- size- fits- all approach. The decen-
tralized, experimentalist strategy allows the center to set an 
overall objective, but also allows localities to test ideas through 
pilot projects in different places, to gain experience from the 
ground up. The pilots that end up being nationalized are first 
endorsed by central authorities, and their adoption is then pro-
moted through official announcements and press conferences, 
as well as visits and exchanges with other regions.124
The real source of dynamism in China is that the government usually 
takes a hands- off approach to dealing with local affairs, except when 
they prove to be particularly innovative and effective at dealing with 
social problems, in which case the central government seeks to general-
ize good policies elsewhere, to the extent conditions allow. Trial experi-
ments started with economic reform and more recently the government 
has embarked on experiments dealing with tricky governance issues.125 
In order to prevent the ossification of merit- based political hierarchies, 
such experiments from provincial down to township levels can and 
should include different ways of assessing merit and the successful ex-
periments can be scaled up to higher levels of government.126
In short, I have argued that there are three problems related to the os-
sification of political hierarchies and suggested some possible responses 
short of electoral democracy for top leaders. Political elites prone to ar-
rogance should strive to be humble and sympathetic to the people. Po-
litical elites prone to selecting people from their own social grouping 
should strive for representation of diverse social groups in government. 
And political elites prone to selecting people according to the same 
criteria of merit that defined themselves as the best should make room 
for differentiated standards of merit. At the end of the day, political 
elites need to combat the tendency to self- love. Why should they care 
about this argument? The lessons from Chinese history are clear: the 
ossification of political meritocracy is just as threatening to the system 
as systemic corruption. But perhaps there is something even more 
threatening to the system.

136 
Chapter 3 
3. The Problem of Legitimacy
Political legitimacy, according to Jean- Marc Coicaud, “is defined as 
the governed recognizing the right of the governors to lead and, to a 
certain extent, their entitlement to the perks of power.”127 Put simply, a 
government is legitimate when it is morally justified in the eyes of the 
people.128 It is not easy to measure legitimacy: do we use qualitative in-
terviews with people from different social groups, survey data, or elec-
tions? And what counts as legitimate: the views of educated people, a 
majority of the people, or does everybody have to agree? What is clearer, 
perhaps, is when the governors lack legitimacy: they are overthrown in 
a revolution or must use brutal violence to put down popular uprisings. 
In fact, “legitimacy usually enters the analytical picture when it is miss-
ing or deficient. Only when a regime is being manifestly challenged by 
its citizens/subjects/beneficiaries do political scientists tend to invoke 
legitimacy as a cause for the crisis. When it is functioning well, legiti-
macy recedes into the background. Persons take it for granted that the 
actions of their authorities are ‘proper,’ ‘normal’ or ‘justified.’ ”129
In the case of China, the study of legitimacy took off in the early 
1990s. Again, the reason is political: the CCP rulers used extreme vio-
lence to put down a popular demand for change on 4 June 1989, and it 
seemed clear that a regime with legitimacy would not have resorted to 
such means. The more a regime is legitimate—that is, seen as morally 
justified in the eyes of the people—the less it has to rely on coercion to 
get its way.
It also seemed clear—especially to Western analysts—that the re-
gime was doomed. As happened in Russia and Eastern Europe after 
the collapse of the Soviet empire (and more recently in the Middle 
East), the people would sooner or later demand the freedom to orga-
nize political parties and the right to vote for their political leaders. In 
the short term, there may be “democratic reversals” in the form of mili-
tary coups (as in Egypt), but nondemocratic alternatives cannot last 
long. Liberal democracy, as Francis Fukuyama famously put it, is the 
“end of history”; no other regime type could be legitimate in a modern 
or modernizing society. Max Weber’s equally famous distinction be-
tween three ideal types of legitimate authority also seemed to point the 
way to liberal democracy. The first type—traditional authority—seemed 

 
What’s Wrong with Political Meritocracy 
137
to have collapsed along with the Qing dynasty in 1911. The second 
type—charismatic authority—was dying along with Mao Zedong and 
the other heroes of the Chinese revolution. The third type—rational/
legal authority—seemed to be inevitable along with China’s economic 
modernization, with liberal democracy as the only viable regime type 
that could operate according to a rational- legal structure of authority. 
The recent political history of economically developed East Asian soci-
eties with a Confucian heritage seemed to lend further support to the 
view that liberal democracy will eventually triumph in China. Japan, 
South Korea, and Taiwan proved that there is no incompatibility be-
tween a Confucian legacy and democratic forms of rule. They all lifted 
restrictions on political speech and mobilization and adopted democ-
racy in the form of one person, one vote for the country’s political rul-
ers, thus setting the apparent path for modernizing China.130
Yet China’s single- party state structure didn’t collapse. If anything, it 
seemed to strengthen since the early 1990s, and now liberal democracy 
seems to be further off than ever. Survey after survey shows that the 
regime enjoys substantial popular support. As Wang Shaoguang puts it, 
“since the 1990s Western scholars (or scholars born in China and work-
ing in the West) have carried out many large- scale surveys into the le-
gitimacy of Chinese political power. . . . By now scholars familiar with 
the field have virtually all arrived at a consensus: The degree of legiti-
macy of the Chinese political system is very high.”131 Initially, Wang 
adds, “the high degree of acceptance of the regime was interpreted by 
many Western scholars as a result of the respondents being afraid to tell 
the truth. As a result later surveys added various mechanisms to prevent 
people being questioned from telling lies (such as providing options: 
‘don’t know’ or ‘no response’). But the results of each survey were al-
ways the same.”132 There is little doubt that the large majority of Chi-
nese consider the current political system to be the appropriate system 
for their country. In fact, Chinese citizens trust their political institu-
tions more than in any of the eight societies included in a recent Asian 
Barometer Survey, including democratic societies such as Japan, South 
Korea, the Philippines, and Taiwan.133
This is not to deny the fact of widespread social discontent in China. 
According to one estimate, there were 180,000 “mass incidents”—ev-
erything from strikes to riots and demonstrations—in 2010, twice as 

138 
Chapter 3 
many as in 2006.134 And the government has been devoting massive 
resources to public security—624.4 billion yuan spent in 2011, more 
than a quarter more than was spent in 2009135—suggesting that discon-
tent is getting more widespread. But this discontent is largely directed 
at the lower levels of government. As Tony Saich explains, “citizens 
‘disaggregate’ the state and, although they express high levels of satis-
faction with the central government, satisfaction declines with each 
lower level of government. While in 2009, 95.9 per cent were either 
relatively or extremely satisfied with the central government, this 
dropped to 61.5 per cent at the local level.”136 He Baogang uses more 
colorful language to account for this phenomenon in the eyes of the 
people: “In popular terms, the central governmental officials are the 
saviors, in the province they are close relatives, in the county they are 
good people, in the township they are villains, and in the village they 
are the enemy.”137
One apparent paradox is that Chinese citizens profess faith in democ-
racy while endorsing nondemocratic rule. As Shi Tianjian and Lu Jie 
put it, however, “democracy in the minds of ordinary Chinese may not 
match the meaning defined in the liberal democracy discourse; rather, 
it is based on the guardianship discourse.”138 Put simply, there is a widely 
shared view that democracy means government for the people (by elites), 
rather than government by the people.139 So if the Chinese government 
“serves the people,” it is democratic. Surveys do show support for elec-
tions, but those elections should not be accompanied by multiparty poli-
tics organized around competing interests: “While 84% of respondents 
agreed or strongly agreed with having elections for national leaders, 
only 16.3% agreed or strongly agreed with multiparty competition.”140 
Western analysts may complain that recent talk of “intraparty democ-
racy” within the CCP is not truly democratic because it precludes mul-
tiparty competitive politics, but the majority of Chinese people may not 
be using the same standard to evaluate “democratic” progress.
In short, the Chinese government has managed to achieve a high 
degree of political legitimacy (in the sense that the people think the 
government is morally justified) without adopting democracy in the 
sense of free and fair competitive elections for the country’s leaders. So 
how exactly did the government achieve legitimacy without electoral 

 
What’s Wrong with Political Meritocracy 
139
democracy? Put differently, what are the main sources of nondemo-
cratic legitimacy in China? The CCP has drawn on three sources of 
nondemocratic legitimacy: nationalism, performance legitimacy, and 
political meritocracy. Although all three sources of legitimacy have 
been important at different times to a certain extent, nationalism was 
most important in the early days of the regime, performance legitimacy 
in the first couple of decades of the reform era, and political meritoc-
racy is becoming an increasingly important source of legitimacy. The 
question is whether these sources of legitimacy will be sufficient in the 
future.
An important part of legitimacy is something we can call “ideologi-
cal legitimacy”: the state or regime seeks to be seen as morally justified 
in the eyes of the people by virtue of certain ideas that it instantiates 
and expresses in its educational system, political speeches, and public 
policies. The CCP was of course founded on communist or Marxist 
principles, as revised and reinterpreted by Lenin and Mao, and it de-
rives much of its legitimacy by virtue of its ability to live up to those 
principles. The problem now is that few Chinese believe in Marxism. 
As Jiang Qing puts it, “the practice of Marxism- Leninism in mainland 
China over the past thirty years proves not only that it is incapable of 
solving China’s problems but, on the contrary, has delayed the course 
of modernization. . . . Despite the fact that those in power in modern 
China have made strenuous efforts to defend Marxism- Leninism’s mo-
nopoly on power, hoping to use power to maintain the unique author-
ity that Marxism- Leninism enjoyed formerly as the ‘national doctrine,’ 
middle and lower levels of authority—especially the youth—no longer 
trust Marxism- Leninism.”141 This is not to deny that some socialist val-
ues such as the need to secure material welfare for people still resonate 
in society. Arguably, however, they resonate at least partly because they 
are similar to earlier traditional political values (see below). Nor is it to 
deny that there are worthwhile contemporary experiments in land re-
form inspired at least partly by socialist values.142 But it still seems fair to 
say that the CCP has managed to secure political legitimacy despite, 
not because of, its official Marxist ideology. Much of that “ideological 
legitimacy” has come from a turn to nationalism, with the CCP as the 
main vehicle and protector of Chinese nationalism.

140 
Chapter 3 
Winning Hearts and Minds by War
Nationalism is a foreign import. Traditional Chinese political culture 
was shaped by a more global political vision, with the ideal being a uni-
fied world without territorial boundaries governed by a wise and virtu-
ous sage- king. In imperial China, the political elites tended to view 
their “country” as the center of the world. But that all changed once 
China was subject to the incursions of Western and Japanese imperial 
powers from the mid- nineteenth century. For nearly one hundred 
years—the “century of humiliation”—China was subject to one mili-
tary defeat after another, and the country was plunged into poverty and 
civil war. Chinese elites became preoccupied with the painful reality 
that their polity was peripheral within the expanding Westphalian in-
ternational order. If China was to survive, it had to adjust to this new 
system.143 In practice, it meant the need to strengthen the state, almost 
at the cost of all other concerns. As Chiang Kai- shek put it in 1947, 
“during the past hundred years, the citizens of the entire country, suf-
fering under the yoke of the unequal treaties which gave foreigners spe-
cial ‘concessions’ and extra- territorial status in China, were unanimous 
that the national humiliation be avenged, and the state be made 
strong.”144 As we know, the CCP rather than the KMT successfully 
avenged “national humiliation,” and Mao Zedong’s famous declaration 
in 1949 that “the Chinese people have stood up” put a symbolic end to 
abuse and bullying by foreign powers.145
The establishment of a relatively strong and secure Chinese state 
under the leadership of the CCP meant that China had less to worry 
about survival qua political community. However, the Korean War, in-
stability in minority regions, and the break with the Soviet Union (not 
to mention a degree of paranoia among ruling elites) continued to fos-
ter a form of nationalism built on resentment. Global condemnation of 
the Tiananmen Square crackdown and the collapse of the Soviet em-
pire made the regime even more sensitive about “outside interference,” 
and the regime intensified its promotion of “patriotic education” in 
schools, with constant reminders of “humiliation” at the hands of for-
eign powers and the need for a strong centralized CCP leadership to 
protect the Chinese nation from outside interference.146 Such “patriotic 
education” continues to this day: as vice- president, Xi Jinping empha-

 
What’s Wrong with Political Meritocracy 
141
sized that “we suffered over a century of national weakness, oppression 
and humiliation,”147 and shortly after taking power as president he is-
sued a call to realize “the cause of national rejuvenation” that seemed 
to coincide with increased assertiveness of territorial claims over con-
tested islands.
It’s worth asking if resentful nationalism is sustainable.148 One risk to 
CCP rule is that people who have been subject to patriotic education 
turn against the regime for failing to stand up to foreign interference as 
much as it should. Best- selling books such as China Can Say No are 
not so implicitly critical of the regime for being “soft” in the way it 
deals with Japan, Taiwan, and the West. Popular newspapers such as 
the Global Times are viewed as “nationalistic” by outsiders, but much 
of their censorship is directed at excessively belligerent and hawkish 
expressions of nationalism. Anti- Japanese demonstrations are reined in 
by the authorities for fear that they can get out of hand. Bellicose na-
tionalism is almost universally rejected by Chinese intellectuals,149 but 
it resonates more at the popular level (and in military circles) and may 
well go beyond what the government intends. The government may be 
able to rein in discontent, but one can imagine scenarios that could 
spell danger for the regime, such as a military encounter with Taiwan 
and its foreign protectors that “humiliates” mainland China.
Setting aside moral concerns, the best- case scenario from a regime 
survival point of view is for China to win a war. Like, say, the British 
victory over Argentina in the Falklands War, success in war could help 
the regime that led the war.150 On the other hand, the eventual loss of 
support for Margaret Thatcher’s conservative government also shows 
that nationalist legitimacy grounded in military exploits does not last 
long. In times of peace, people more clearly distinguish between the 
good of the nation and the good of the ruling party, and the govern-
ment can gain the trust of the population more by exercising moral 
power than military force.151 This is not to imply that nationalism will 
go away as a legitimizing force in times of peace. But nationalism will 
take “softer” forms, drawing on pride in culture and history rather than 
victory in war and resentment against foreigners.152 The CCP does rec-
ognize the importance of “soft” nationalism in times of peace. As Jyrki 
Kallio puts it, “tradition and history have become the Chinese Com-
munist Party’s tools of choice for bolstering its legitimacy. The Party is 

142 
Chapter 3 
attempting to patch the chinks in its rusting spiritual- ideological armor 
with a concoction of handpicked values from traditional schools of 
thought, especially Confucianism.”153 The government has been stress-
ing Confucian values such as harmony and filial piety in its political 
speeches. The 2008 Olympics in Beijing highlighted Confucian 
themes, quoting the Analects of Confucius at the opening ceremony, 
and downplayed any references to China’s experiment with commu-
nism. Cadres at the Communist Party School in Shanghai proudly tell 
visitors that the main building is modeled on a Confucian scholar’s 
desk. Abroad, the government has been promoting Confucianism via 
branches of the Confucius Institute, a Chinese language and culture 
center similar to Germany’s Goethe Institute.
But the government cannot successfully promote “soft” nationalism 
of this sort on its own: Chinese intellectuals also seek to put forward 
their own interpretations of the national good and whatever the gov-
ernment says will not be credible (at home and abroad) if they are left 
out of the process. Scholars such as Jiang Qing and Kang Xiaoguang 
have been calling for an official embrace of Confucianism,154 but  
the government has resisted because it still officially adheres to Marx-
ism.155 And the debate is not confined to Confucianism: a group of 
liberal, Christian, socialist, and Confucian scholars who “love the land 
of China and are loyal to its people” recently met in Oxford and signed 
a document endorsing values meant to inspire the future development 
of China.156
The point here is that independent intellectuals and other groups 
outside the government distinguish between the national good and the 
good of the ruling party, and they seek to put forward their own defini-
tions of the national good; the idea that the party solely embodies the 
national good is passé. In short, “hard” nationalism justifying CCP 
rule grounded in military victory that unified China after years of pov-
erty, chaos, and bullying by foreign powers cannot forever win the 
hearts and minds of the people. To the (limited) extent that national-
ism will continue to serve as a source of legitimacy in times of peace, 
the government will have to make way for a more participatory and 
open society that allows diverse forces to join the conversation about 
what constitutes the national good. Nationalism won’t go away, but it 
won’t help the CCP as much as it used to.

 
What’s Wrong with Political Meritocracy 
143
If nationalism has a short history in China, the idea that the govern-
ment has an obligation to improve people’s material well- being has 
much deeper roots.157 According to the Analects of Confucius, the gov-
ernment has an obligation to secure the conditions for people’s basic 
means of subsistence and intellectual/moral development. In cases of 
conflict, however, the former has priority: “Ranyou drove the Master’s 
carriage on a trip to Wey. The Master said: ‘What a huge population!’ 
Ranyou said: ‘When the people are so numerous, what more can be 
done for them?’ The Master said, ‘Make them prosperous.’ Ranyou 
asked, ‘When the people are prosperous, what more can be done for 
them?’ The Master replied, ‘Educate them’ ” (13.9).158 This does not 
mean the blind pursuit of a higher GDP. The main obligation is to help 
the needy: “Exemplary persons help out the needy; they do not make 
the rich richer” (6.4; see also 16.1). One important reason for helping 
the needy is that poverty is conducive to negative emotions, whereas 
wealth makes it easier to act in ethical ways: “To be poor without feeling 
resentful is difficult; to be rich without feeling arrogant is easy” (14.11).159
Mencius echoes these concerns. People must be educated so that 
they can develop their moral natures. First, however, the government 
must provide for their basic means of subsistence so that they won’t go 
morally astray:
The people will not have dependable feelings if they are with-
out dependable means of support. Lacking dependable means 
of support, they will go astray and fall into excesses, stopping at 
nothing. To punish them after they have fallen foul of the law 
is to set a trap for the people. How can a humane person set a 
trap for the people? Hence when determining what means of 
support the people should have, a clear- sighted ruler ensures 
that these are sufficient for the care of parents and for the sup-
port of wives and children, so that the people will always have 
sufficient food in good years and escape starvation in bad; only 
then does he drive them towards goodness. In this way, the 
people will find it easy to follow him. (1A.7; see also 3A.3)160
There is no point promoting moral behavior if people are worried about 
their next meal. Thus, the government’s first priority is to secure the 

144 
Chapter 3 
basic means of subsistence of the people. If the government succeeds in 
doing so—in lifting people out of a state of poverty—then it will gain 
the hearts and minds of the people (i.e., it will have political legiti-
macy). Such legitimacy depends on the performance of the govern-
ment, not the procedure used for choosing government officials or the 
participation of the people in government.
The idea that the government has the obligation to secure basic ma-
terial welfare for all members of the state informed policy and helps to 
explain why dynasties lasted as long as they did. According to Yanqi 
Tong, “disaster prevention, especially flood control and disaster main-
tenance, fell squarely on the shoulders of the government, due to the 
enormous scale of the project. The first emperor of the Xia dynasty 
(twenty- first century–sixteenth century bce), Da Yu, became a legend 
for his achievements in flood control.” His achievements are still used 
to illustrate the role the government should play today: “Every Chinese 
knows from childhood that Da Yu was so devoted to his work in flood 
control that he passed his home three times and never went in.”161
In the Ming and Qing dynasties, the state protected farmers against 
subsistence uncertainties by means of local community granaries. As 
R. Bin Wong notes, “the explicit logic of community granaries put re-
sponsibility for the creation and maintenance of these institutions in 
the hands of the local people. The state’s willingness to depend on the 
gentry and others to promote local grain reserves assumed a basic com-
mitment to subsistence security as a key element in social stability.”162 
When disasters struck, the grain storage was opened and the state also 
supported victims by giving relief money to those who could not afford 
coffins and even by helping families to “buy back” children who had 
been sold in desperate circumstances. The government also had an 
obligation to take charge of postdisaster reconstruction by means such 
as reducing or eliminating taxes for the disaster victims, payment for 
the transportation of the affected population to return to their deserted 
lands, and providing crop seeds and other funds for the farmers to re-
sume production.163 In the Qing dynasty, the penal code explicitly se-
cured the right to food by punishing local officials who failed to pro-
vide aid to the needy.164
As paramount leader of the People’s Republic of China from 1978 to 
1992, Deng Xiaoping realized that nationalism and revolutionary en-

 
What’s Wrong with Political Meritocracy 
145
ergy were not sufficient to sustain people’s faith in the CCP. In line 
with traditional ideas about how to win hearts and minds, the govern-
ment needed to provide for the people’s material well- being. Hence, 
Deng embarked on market reforms meant to improve economic perfor-
mance (including a substantial reduction in military expenditures). 
Mao might have been horrified,165 but Marx himself argued that capi-
talism is necessary to develop the productive forces. The result is well 
known. China became one of the fastest- growing economies in the 
world for more than thirty years, and the post- reform era has seen per-
haps the single most impressive poverty alleviation achievement in 
human history.166
The question, however, is whether performance legitimacy is sus-
tainable. What happens when things go wrong? Here too, history offers 
some insights. In traditional China, people judged the performance of 
the state not just in terms of its economic performance, but also in 
terms of how well it does at dealing with crises, and the same is true 
today. Given the general view that the Chinese state did an adequate if 
not admirable job dealing with crises such as the Asian financial crisis 
(1997), the Wenchuan earthquake (2008), and the global financial cri-
sis (2007–2008), we should not be surprised that the legitimacy of the 
regime increased over the past few years. The same is true of the way 
the Chinese state dealt with tensions over Taiwan: when tensions were 
defused, the legitimacy of the Chinese state increased. There is no rea-
son to define performance exclusively in terms of rates of economic 
growth or poverty alleviation.
Nor should we expect that things will necessarily go wrong when 
there are crises: it depends on perceptions of the state’s responsibility 
for crises and its willingness and ability to deal with them.167 We can 
expect performance legitimacy to break down when the state is held 
responsible for bad performance in times of crisis. One reason for the 
widespread popular outrage at the high- speed rail crash in Wenzhou 
(July 2011) is that the state was seen to take much pride in its ability to 
build a network of high- speed rail in record time and subsequently was 
viewed as covering up the aftermath of the crash. Hence, the govern-
ment was seen as being at least partly responsible for the crash—valu-
ing high- profile expensive projects at the expense of safety and concern 
for lives—and it further lost credibility for its seemingly heartless re-

146 
Chapter 3 
sponse to the crash. Such events may not lead to the “end of the dy-
nasty.” But a prolonged economic crisis that undermines faith in the 
government’s economic performance combined with perceptions of a 
heavy- handed or incompetent response to a social crisis or natural di-
saster may be the tipping point.
There is another reason to question whether performance legiti-
macy is sustainable. It may be easier to justify strong government when 
the key priority is widely shared among both leaders and the people, 
such as the elimination of poverty in the past three decades. But what 
happens after the government successfully provides the conditions that 
allow people to secure basic material welfare? At that point, the work  
of government becomes more complex, and there is more of a need  
for input from various social forces to help formulate policy. As Wang 
Shao guang puts it, “in China today, socioeconomic polarization; ur-
banization; and increases in literacy, education, and media exposure 
have conspired to give rise to enhanced aspirations in decision- making. 
If groups within society cannot find institutionalized channels through 
which they can express their needs and interests, their repressed dis-
content could erupt in violence. . . . In the long run, as the variety and 
complexity of interests being articulated increase, the time will come 
for the country to replace its monopolistic structure of interest aggrega-
tion with a competitive one.”168 In short, good performance by political 
leaders per se is not likely to provide long- term stability in China. More 
input by “the people” in the form of institutionalized participation may 
be necessary.169
The third source of nondemocratic legitimacy—political meritoc-
racy—also has ancient roots (as has been emphasized throughout this 
book). But it is the newest source of legitimacy for the CCP. For one 
thing, the establishment of a rigorous selection and promotion process 
for public service officials has a relatively short history in the People’s 
Republic of China, starting from the early 1990s. Moreover, the CCP 
has been cautious about promoting political meritocracy as an ideal 
because it coexists uneasily with egalitarian communist ideology: Mao-
ism valued the social contributions of farmers and workers over those of 
intellectuals and educators. And the idea that a society should be gov-
erned by a political elite explicitly conflicts with Marx’s egalitarian 
ideal of a “higher communist” society where the state would have with-

 
What’s Wrong with Political Meritocracy 
147
ered away. Confucians, by way of contrast, are explicit that even an 
ideal society would need to be governed by leaders of above- average 
moral and political talent: the ideal of “the Great Way” (da dao) in the 
Record of Rites (Liji), a work compiled during the Han dynasty on the 
basis of older materials, is described as an age when the world worked 
for the interests of all people (tian xia wei gong) and this famous line is 
immediately followed by an ideal of political meritocracy in which “the 
worthy and the able were promoted to office” (xuan xian yu neng). But 
the ruling party is called the Chinese Communist Party, not the Chi-
nese Confucian Party.
Nonetheless, the CCP is fully aware that political meritocracy can 
help to justify its rule. Recent survey data shows that there is wide-
spread support for the ideal of political meritocracy in East Asian soci-
eties with a Confucian heritage that affects the way people conceive of 
government. As Doh Chull Shin explains, “Attachment to paternalistic 
meritocracy contributes significantly to understanding democracy in 
substantive terms, while it has an equal negative effect on understand-
ing democracy in procedural terms.”170 As mentioned, Shi Tianjian and 
Lu Jie found that the majority of Chinese people endorse “guardian-
ship discourse,” defined as the need to “identify high- quality politicians 
who care about people’s demands, take people’s interests into consider-
ation when making decisions, and choose good policies on behalf of 
their people and society” over liberal democracy discourse that privi-
leges procedural arrangements ensuring people’s rights to participate 
in politics and choose their leaders.171 Moreover, Shi Tianjian shows 
that attachment to Confucian political values has been increasing in 
China since the 1990s.172
To the extent that the CCP continues to transform itself into a more 
meritocratic political organization, it should therefore be seen as more 
legitimate in the eyes of the Chinese people. Of course, the merito-
cratic system also needs to be made somewhat transparent, so people 
will have a better understanding of the system and respect for those 
who succeed in the ultracompetitive talent- selection process. Hence, it 
should not be surprising that there is more discussion of political meri-
tocracy in Chinese political discourse, both in official circles and by 
independent academics. And for popular consumption, a slick cartoon 
video in Chinese and English contrasting the selection of leaders in 

148 
Chapter 3 
Western democracies and Chinese meritocracy was produced in Octo-
ber 2013 and immediately went viral, with more than ten million view-
ings in a couple of weeks,173 if only because it coincided with the shut-
down of government in the United States that exposed the downside of 
democracy.
Still, it is questionable whether a legitimacy founded solely (or 
mainly) on political meritocracy is sustainable. Although it’s true that 
most social grievances are directed at lower levels of government, they 
are also accompanied by a rise of humble petitions in which disgrun-
tled citizens from all over China travel to Beijing to file complaints at 
the central government office against local officials. Ho- fung Hung 
noted a similar pattern in the mid- Qing and argues that such patterns 
of protest are rooted in a Confucian conception of authority and jus-
tice.174 Under this conception, abused subjects count on the emperor 
as the loving patriarch to redress injustice, as children abused by par-
ents might look to their grandparents for paternalistic protection. Al-
though this attitude has shielded the imperial center from popular 
unrest and helped it survive major social crises, it also contains the 
seeds of instability: “This ‘safety valve’ for the central authorities only 
worked when the subjects generally trusted their rulers were legitimate 
and morally righteous. Such trust could disappear easily, sometimes 
because of rumors about the emperor’s promiscuity, or sometimes be-
cause of the emperor’s perceived failure in performing critical func-
tions. . . . [W]e should not be surprised if an unexpected singular 
event—such as a major economic blunder, a scandal involving the 
highest leaders or defeat in a geopolitical conflict—abruptly displaces 
the popular trust in the central government and precipitates a break-
down of the party- state.”175
Even if the government succeeds in limiting the corruption of high- 
level political leaders (or at least, limiting the perception of corruption 
at the top), the problem of legitimacy in a political meritocracy won’t 
be solved given that the people have high moral expectations of their 
leaders. It may be only a slight exaggeration to suggest that a Clinton- 
like sex scandal involving, say, members of the Standing Committee of 
the Politburo could fundamentally undermine popular support for the 
political system. Even a serious scandal involving a family member of a 
ruler can topple the regime: Mencius famously argued that a ruler 

 
What’s Wrong with Political Meritocracy 
149
whose father had committed a murder should resign from his post and 
flee the country with his father (VIIA.35), suggesting not just that fam-
ily obligations can have priority over political ones, but also that the 
immoral behavior of a family member could taint a ruler to the point 
that he would lose the moral authority to rule.
The deepest problem with a pure form of political meritocracy is 
that it is hard to justify to ambitious and public- spirited people outside 
the system.176 During the course of research for this book, I found that 
the surest way to get a critical perspective on the public service exami-
nations is to ask those who failed the exams (i.e., the large majority). In 
imperial China, the examination “failures” still had high social status 
in local communities and could often obtain valued employment by 
virtue of having prepared for the imperial examinations.177 But today, 
those who fail the public service examinations get nothing.
So the question is how to justify the meritocratic system to exami-
nation failures and more generally to ambitious citizens who seek to 
make a positive difference in Chinese society without going through 
the official selection and promotion process for political leaders. One 
way is to emphasize that being a professional public official is not the 
only way to make a positive difference in society: farmers, family care-
takers, manual workers, medical doctors, and NGO activists all con-
tribute to the social good.178 The government can and should high-
light the achievements of individuals and social groups outside the 
political system, for example by subsidizing television shows that re-
ward outstanding social contributions.179 Political leaders should be 
humble and explicitly recognize that other social groups and citizens 
may be superior in terms of intellectual ability and virtue.180 Most im-
portant, perhaps, “nonpolitical” social contributors can and should be 
rewarded economically, at least as much as public officials. In other 
words, those without political power at the top can and should view 
themselves as “winners” so long as they make a contribution to the 
public good; unequal political power need not violate one’s sense of 
(equal) social worth.181
Still, in a society with a Confucian heritage, it seems likely that po-
litical leaders will continue to have the highest social status. So the 
government must take measures to expand political participation. The 
CCP can continue to co- opt ambitious representatives of diverse social 

150 
Chapter 3 
groups, but not all potentially subversive types can be or want to be co- 
opted. The government can also provide more opportunities for politi-
cal participation by non–party members, especially at lower levels of 
government, but the big question is how to placate the critics of meri-
tocracy at the top. Ultimately, the only way is to show without a shadow 
of a doubt that the people support political meritocracy. In other words, 
democracy may be necessary to legitimize meritocracy.
In this chapter, I have discussed the three main problems of political 
meritocracy with the Chinese context in mind and suggested possible 
solutions that do not require electoral democracy for the country’s most 
powerful rulers. The problem of corruption can be addressed by mech-
anisms such as independent supervisory institutions, higher salaries for 
public officials, and improved moral education. The problem of ossifi-
cation of political hierarchies can be addressed by means of humble 
political discourse, opening the ruling party to diverse social groups, 
more freedom of speech, and allowing for the possibility of selecting 
different kinds of political leaders according to new ideas of political 
merit. The problem of legitimacy, however, can only be addressed by 
means of democratic reforms, including some form of explicit consent 
by the people. The question, therefore, is how to reconcile political 
meritocracy and democracy. The next chapter will discuss the pros and 
cons of different models of “democratic meritocracy.”

Chap
r 
Three Models of Democratic Meritocracy
P
olitical meritocracy—the idea that a political system should aim 
to select and promote leaders with superior ability and virtue—
sounds a bit dubious on first hearing. Both Plato and Confucius 
argued for a form of political meritocracy that effectively excludes the 
majority from political power. Yet nobody argues for establishing a 
purely meritocratic political community today. For one thing, it would 
be hard to persuade people that they should be totally excluded from 
political power. Plato himself recognized the need to propagate a 
“Noble Lie” that the Guardians deserve absolute power because they 
have gold in their souls, unlike everybody else. Regimes like North 
Korea can propagate such myths about the quasi- divine status of their 
rulers,1 but no modern open society can get away with it. No ruler is so 
great that he or she should rule depoliticized masses without account-
ability. It is hard to imagine a modern government today that can be 
seen as legitimate in the eyes of the people without any form of democ-
racy. We are all democrats today.
Yet it takes only a brief moment of reflection to realize that political 
meritocracy is also a good thing. Political leaders have power over us, 
and no rational person would want to be ruled by an incompetent 
leader who lacks a basic understanding of the key issues that should 
inform policy making. What if a geographically challenged president 
mixes up North and South Korea and presses the wrong button in a 
moment of crisis? Ideally, our leaders should have a good understand-
ing of the world, and the better the understanding, the better the policy 
making. In the same vein, no rational person would want to be ruled by 

152 
Chapter 4 
an immoral leader. Who would choose a corrupt and murderous ruler 
over a leader with compassion and integrity? Ideally, our leaders should 
be committed to the common good, that is, they should do their best to 
promote policies that benefit all those affected by their policies, and the 
more they can do that, the better the policy making. In short, it is ratio-
nal to believe that our political leaders should have superior ability and 
virtue. We are all meritocrats today.
So the question is how to reconcile democracy and meritocracy. In 
the last chapter, I argued that sustainable political meritocracy requires 
features typical of democratic societies: the rule of law to check corrup-
tion and abuses of power, and freedom of speech and political experi-
mentation to prevent the ossification of political hierarchies. In princi-
ple, there should not be a problem. However, I also argued that political 
meritocracies will find it difficult if not impossible to solve the legiti-
macy problem without giving the people the right to political participa-
tion. And here the solution is not so obvious. How is it possible to rec-
oncile a meritocratic mechanism designed to select superior political 
leaders with a democratic mechanism designed to let the people choose 
their leaders? That is, how can political meritocracy be reconciled with 
widespread political participation? In this chapter, I will discuss three 
models of democratic meritocracy: (1) a model that combines democ-
racy and meritocracy at the level of the voter; (2) a horizontal model 
that combines democracy and meritocracy at the level of central politi-
cal institutions; and (3) a vertical model with political meritocracy at 
the level of the central government and democracy at the local level. 
Whatever the philosophical merits of the first model, it is a nonstarter 
from a political point of view. I have been a strong defender of the sec-
ond model for nearly two decades. I have changed my mind, however, 
and now I think the third model is best. This chapter will explain why.
1. Voting for the Wise and the Virtuous
What we think of as the distinguishing mark of democracy today—
elections—first arose as a response to the need for meritocracy. In an-
cient Athens, the birthplace of democracy, most political officers (with 
the exception of generals and other military officers) were appointed by 

 
Three Models of Democratic Meritocracy 
153
lottery. The use of the lottery, according to Aristotle, “is regarded as 
democratic, and the use of vote as oligarchical.”2 Voting was meant to 
provide a meritocratic check on the system, with would- be rulers hav-
ing to persuade the electorate that they have the ability and motivation 
to rule well. Eventually, voting itself came to be viewed as democratic, 
and the argument for electoral democracy won out over the system of 
random selection. Today, hardly anybody argues for the selection of 
political officials by means of the lottery, even if random selection 
might make the political system more democratic in the sense that all 
citizens have a truly equal opportunity to rule.3 Rather than let the roll 
of the dice decide who will be leaders, ordinary citizens can be trusted 
to make sensible choices of capable leaders. If people want able and 
virtuous political leaders, they will vote for them at election time. Let 
the people decide!
The problem with this view is that ordinary citizens often lack the 
competence and motivation to make sound, morally informed political 
judgments. In the most infamous case, the Nazis gathered enough 
electoral support to become the largest political party and the effective 
governing power in 1933.4 Today, an often- heard argument among Chi-
nese intellectuals is that China cannot implement democracy now be-
cause relatively uneducated rural people—about half the population—
lack the wisdom to make good political decisions. The assumption is 
that people will improve their ability to vote in rational ways once they 
are more educated and urbanized. But even this assumption may be 
too optimistic. The problem of the irrational voter is not confined to 
poor, rural societies. In relatively wealthy, urbanized, and educated so-
cieties like the United States, many voters still vote in irrational ways.5 
Drawing on extensive empirical research, Bryan Caplan shows that 
American voters often misunderstand their own interests.6 And when 
they do understand their interests, they tend to vote according to their 
short- term economic interests (“voting their pocketbooks,” in popular 
parlance). From a moral point of view, people should vote for the com-
mon good, because their votes affect other people, not just themselves.7 
Even when voters vote according to the common good of the voting 
public, such decision making can have disastrous consequences for fu-
ture generations and people living outside the state who are affected by 
the policies of government (consider global warming). In contemporary 

154 
Chapter 4 
democracies, one is hard pressed to find citizens who vote for leaders 
most likely to take into account the interests and needs of all those af-
fected by the policies of the government. Is the solution then to tamper 
with the voting system so as to increase the likelihood that voters will 
vote for meritorious leaders who take a longer- term, morally informed 
approach to political decision making?
John Stuart Mill’s Proposal for a Plural Voting Scheme
Mill’s Considerations on Representative Government (1861) is rightly 
considered a classic in democratic theory. He argued for universal suf-
frage on the grounds that “it is a personal injustice to withhold from 
any one, unless for the prevention of greater evils, the ordinary privi-
lege of having his voice reckoned in the disposal of affairs in which he 
has the same interest as other people.” Moreover, the right to vote can 
make people more public- spirited than they would otherwise be:
It is by political discussion that the manual laborer, whose em-
ployment is routine, and whose way of life brings him in con-
tact with no variety of impressions, circumstances, or ideas, is 
taught that remote causes, and events which take place far off, 
have a most sensible effect even on his personal interests; and it 
is from political discussion, and collective political action, that 
one whose daily occupations concentrate his interests in a 
small circle round himself, learns to feel for and with his 
fellow- citizens, and becomes consciously a member of a great 
community. But political discussions fly over the heads of those 
who have no votes, and are not endeavoring to acquire them.
Just as members of a jury learn to deliberate about the interests of other 
people, so voters engaged in political discussion learn to deliberate and 
take into account the interests of the whole political community. In his 
own day, the vote was restricted to propertied males, and Mill force-
fully argued for the extension of the suffrage to women and (taxpaying) 
workers.8

 
Three Models of Democratic Meritocracy 
155
Mill also recognized that not all voters are equally moral and 
rational:
Though everyone ought to have a voice—that everyone should 
have an equal voice is a totally different proposition. When two 
persons who have a joint interest in any business, differ in opin-
ion, does justice require that both opinions should be held of 
exactly equal value? If with equal virtue, one is superior to the 
other in knowledge and intelligence—or if with equal intelli-
gence, one excels the other in virtue—the opinion, the judg-
ment, of the higher moral or intellectual being, is worth more 
than that of the inferior: and if the institutions of the country 
virtually assert that they are of the same value, they assert a 
thing which is not. One of the two, as the better or wiser man, 
has a claim to superior weight.
Given inequalities in intelligence and morality, not all voters should 
have an equal say in the political process. Mill proposed that two or 
more votes be given to graduates of universities and members of profes-
sions that require more use of reason; the right to extra votes would also 
be open to anyone who passed a voluntary examination that “might 
prove that he came up to the standard of knowledge and ability laid 
down as sufficient.”9
Mill was a progressive in his own day, but he was only partly on the 
right side of history. Over the following century, the franchise has been 
extended to all adult citizens in electoral democracies, but the idea that 
wiser and more virtuous voters should get extra votes is widely viewed 
as beyond the moral pale. Singapore’s founding father, Lee Kuan Yew, 
did put forward a proposal in Mill’s vein (I do not mean to imply that 
Lee shares other aspects of Mill’s ethical outlook). Lee questioned 
whether the one person, one vote system is the best way to select a “gov-
ernment of the best men.” Young men bent on immediate gratification 
are more likely to vote in a capricious way, not taking into account the 
interests of others, and elderly people are also focused on the short 
term, supporting policies such as free health care that could harm the 

156 
Chapter 4 
economic prospects of future generations. So why not give two votes to 
middle- aged family men who are more likely to be cautious and to con-
sider the interests of their children? Lee’s proposal was put forward in 
1994—after he had retired as premier—and it was viewed as another 
example of the sort of political elitism that is increasingly rejected by 
Singaporeans today.10
So what exactly is wrong with proposals for giving extra votes to 
certain groups of citizens? It seems hard to argue with the premise 
that not everyone is equally able and willing to vote in a sensible man-
ner. The problem is not so much philosophical as political. Mill him-
self was not rigid about the implementation of his proposal for plural 
votes: what matters is that “the distinctions and gradations are not 
made arbitrarily, but are such as can be understood and accepted by 
the general conscience and understanding.”11 But it is hard to imagine 
any distinctions and gradations that “can be accepted by the general 
conscience and understanding.” Selecting target groups of “rational” 
voters is a rough and unreliable procedure, and those denied equal 
democratic rights are likely to perceive the denial as an official insult 
issued by public authority.12 Even if people recognize that they are not 
equal in terms of the capacity and motivation to vote in a sensible way, 
they will object to being officially treated as less than equals in the 
political process and will reject the decisions of whoever decides to 
deprive them of an equal vote.13 If the ruling party decides who gets 
the extra votes, citizens may think that the government is motivated by 
a desire to select the groups most likely to perpetuate its dominance.14 
Even if the proposal for plural votes is implemented at the start with-
out much controversy, it could easily become corrupted in the demo-
cratic process: political parties would promise special favors to groups 
with extra votes, and elected officials might try to award extra votes to 
their own constituencies, regardless of merit. And there are no obvious 
alternatives to letting politicians decide such matters. Caplan proposes 
tests of economic competence for voters to remedy the problem of 
voter irrationality,15 but who would trust an “independent” body of 
economists to identify the groups most likely to vote for competent 
and public- spirited rulers? Even if it were feasible, who would appoint 
this body? And why limit the tests to questions about economics, given 
that many people are also ill informed about many other matters with 

 
Three Models of Democratic Meritocracy 
157
policy implications, such as international relations and environmental 
science?16 Plus, the target group of sensible voters may change over 
time, so the body of social science experts would have to revise the 
“extra- voting” rules at every election. Mill himself recognized that his 
proposal for plural voting “is so unfamiliar to elections in Parliament, 
that it is not likely to be soon or willingly adopted”17 but he didn’t rec-
ognize that the political problem of making the proposal accepted by 
those denied extra votes means that it will never be willingly accepted 
in a democratic context. So let’s turn to other proposals for reconciling 
democracy and meritocracy.
2. A Horizontal Model: Democracy  
and Meritocracy at the Top
Instead of trying to reconcile democracy and meritocracy at the level of 
the voting public, several political thinkers have proposed combining 
the advantages of meritocracy and democracy at the level of central 
political institutions. A properly designed constitutional system should 
have institutions that both reflect the need to choose leaders on the 
democratic basis of one person, one vote, as well as institutions that re-
flect the need for meritorious leaders with above- average ability and 
virtue. But can these two desiderata be combined?
Perhaps the most influential proposal for a horizontal model com-
bining democracy and meritocracy at the top was put forward by Sun 
Yat- sen. Sun died in 1925, before the split between the KMT (Kuomin-
tang) and the CCP (Chinese Communist Party) that led to the civil 
war in China and separate political systems in mainland China and 
Taiwan. He cofounded the KMT and served as its first leader, and pro-
moted active cooperation with the CCP in 1923 with the aim of achiev-
ing a unified, democratic country. Hence, he is regarded as a “found-
ing father” by both sides: in Taiwan, he is referred to as the “father of 
the nation” and in mainland China as the “forerunner of the demo-
cratic revolution.”
Taiwan, however, has been more faithful to Sun’s political vision. 
According to Sun, a democratic constitutional system should incorpo-
rate democracy in the form of voting as well as checks and balances. 

158 
Chapter 4 
He favored three separate branches of government—the legislative, ex-
ecutive, and judicial—similar to the U.S. constitutional system. How-
ever, Sun argued that the U.S. constitutional system was flawed and 
the “future constitution of the Republic of China” should incorporate 
two additional branches that borrow and modernize institutions from 
imperial China. One is an independent Supervisory branch, similar to 
the Censorate in imperial China but freed from its dependence on the 
monarchy. It would also be an improvement on the U.S. constitutional 
system: “In the United States, the supervisory power rests with Con-
gress, which has frequently made arbitrary use of it to coerce the exec-
utive branch into doing its bidding.” The other—more pertinent for 
our purposes—is an Examination branch. Sun was critical of U.S. de-
mocracy because of the low quality of its politicians: “With respect to 
elections, those endowed with eloquence ingratiated themselves with 
the public and won elections, while those endowed with learning and 
ideals but lacking eloquence were ignored. Consequently, members of 
America’s House of Representatives have often been foolish and igno-
rant people who have made its history quite ridiculous.” To remedy the 
problem, Sun argued for an independent Examination branch, similar 
to China’s imperial state examination system but freed from depen-
dence on the arbitrary rule of the monarch: “The future constitution 
of the Republic of China must provide for an independent branch ex-
pressly responsible for public service examinations. Furthermore, all 
officials, however high their rank, must undergo examinations in order 
to determine their qualifications. Whether elected or not, officials 
must pass those examinations before assuming office. This procedure 
will eliminate such evils as blind obedience, electoral abuses, and fa-
voritism.”18 In short, democracy and meritocracy can be combined by 
requiring that political leaders chosen by the people pass exams that 
test competence. The independent Examination branch is meant to 
ensure that the examination process will not be influenced by political 
considerations.
Sun’s ideal of a five- branch constitution influenced the KMT- 
designed 1946 constitution, including the creation of an Exam Yuan. 
Sun himself favored a six- year period of political tutelage before Chi-
nese citizens be given the right to vote, and the KMT took a few de-
cades longer than Sun had anticipated, but today Taiwanese leaders  

 
Three Models of Democratic Meritocracy 
159
are chosen by one person, one vote. However, the Exam Yuan has never 
truly realized the functions envisioned by the original designer. It has 
been basically serving as an organ for the selection, promotion, and 
other duties related to civil servants, but elected officials have not had 
to pass any exams before assuming office. In other words, Taiwan’s con-
stitutional system more closely reflects the “Western” distinction be-
tween elected officials chosen by the people and meritocratically se-
lected civil servants who are supposed to implement the decisions of 
democratically elected officials. Again, the reasons have more to do 
with politics than philosophy. For one thing, elected officials may 
worry that the need to take examinations set by an independent branch 
of government will cause them to lose power. More fundamentally, the 
citizens themselves would find it hard to accept the idea that elected 
politicians should pass exams before assuming office because its effect 
would be to exclude from political power politicians who fail examina-
tions, no matter how popular they may be.19 It is difficult to imagine 
that a government that excludes the people’s chosen leaders could 
achieve much legitimacy in the eyes of the people: consider a situation 
where somebody elected with 80 percent of the vote but who fails ex-
aminations is replaced with a successful examination candidate who 
received only 20 percent of the vote. The people would be up in arms!
Just as it seems politically impossible to subject voters to tests that 
aim for quality control, so it seems politically impossible to subject 
elected politicians to such tests. In a democratic context, the legitimacy 
of the political leaders comes from the fact that they are chosen by the 
people, and the people will not accept any constraints on their right to 
choose leaders by means of one person, one vote. But what about the 
possibility of separate political institutions with separate functions and 
separate sources of legitimacy? One institution could be composed of 
democratically elected political leaders, and another institution com-
posed of leaders selected by a mechanism that explicitly tests for ability 
and virtue. The democratic institution would derive its legitimacy by 
virtue of the fact that its leaders are chosen by the people, and the meri-
tocratic institution would derive its legitimacy by virtue of the fact that 
its leaders have superior competence and virtue. The people could 
choose their leaders as they see fit, and the political community would 
also benefit from having competent and qualified rulers.

160 
Chapter 4 
Friedrich Hayek, the twentieth- century economist and philosopher 
best known for his defense of classical liberalism, put forward an in-
triguing political proposal for a bicameral legislature combining de-
mocracy and meritocracy in Law, Legislation, and Liberty (1973). 
Hayek was more a liberal than a democrat,20 and he worried first and 
foremost about the abuses of state power. The main task of government 
is to protect and promote individual liberty, and government institu-
tions should be designed for that purpose. A single, democratically 
elected assembly is likely to exercise untrammeled power and to abuse 
the rights of minorities. It would be inimical to the protection of indi-
vidual liberty—what Hayek calls “justice.” Hence, Hayek argues for a 
separation of legislative powers at the highest levels of government. In a 
chapter titled “A Model Constitution,” Hayek puts forward a model of 
an ideal government, with the powers of a democratically elected rep-
resentative assembly balanced and constrained by another representa-
tive body entrusted “with the task of stating the general rules of just 
conduct.” The chamber responsible for legislating laws of general ap-
plication and providing for the general rules of conduct could only be 
effective if its members are selected on the basis of merit, as opposed to 
being chosen on the basis of one person, one vote. Its representatives 
would rule for a single term of fifteen years without being constrained 
or controlled by any one party or group. They would be at least forty- 
five years old, with a proven track record of achievement, elected by 
people at least forty- five years old, and would not have to worry about 
pandering to the electorate because they could not be reelected and 
they would be assured of continued public employment after they re-
tire from the chamber.21
Hayek’s proposal has never come close to being realized, and it is 
worth asking why. One reason is that Hayek’s vision of a limited role for 
government is highly controversial: besides protecting individual lib-
erty, most people today accept that the state should also have other 
aims, such as providing opportunities for disadvantaged sectors of the 
population. But the key reason is that Hayek underestimates the com-
mitment to democracy, at least in Western countries. Today, democ-
racy in the form of one person, one vote is valued not just because it is 
a means for liberal aims such as the protection of individual liberty. It is 
valued for a whole range of historical, psychological, and philosophical 

 
Three Models of Democratic Meritocracy 
161
reasons with the result that few citizens in established democracies 
question the idea that political decision makers chosen on the basis of 
one person, one vote should have the ultimate controlling power, in-
cluding the power to “state the general rules of just conduct.”22 The 
idea that political decision makers chosen by means other than one 
person, one vote should have the power to debate and decide on a wide 
range of issues affecting the political community in ways that override 
the decisions of democratically elected decision makers is anathema to 
the political sensibilities of citizens in established democracies. Even 
the idea that democratically elected leaders can choose unelected offi-
cials—such as U.S. Supreme Court justices—with the power to make 
decisions in accordance with a tightly circumscribed mandate (such as 
interpreting a constitution) is controversial today;23 what is clear is that 
any powers beyond that role, such as the powers of Hayek’s second 
chamber, would be deemed fundamentally antidemocratic.
Consider recent proposals to reform the House of Lords in the 
United Kingdom. Its powers are far more limited than Hayek’s second 
chamber. The House of Lords has the power to delay bills passed by 
the House of Commons for one year, though it rarely exercises this 
power. More commonly, it operates as a revising body, refining bills 
from the lower chamber by filling in the details and closing the loop-
holes. It generally performs that task with admirable competence and 
nonpartisanship. Its debates are elegant, nonadversarial, and informa-
tive, and sometimes lead to significant amendments. Many of its mem-
bers have a depth of experience often lacking in the relative youngsters 
occupying the House of Commons.24
Nonetheless, it lacks legitimacy in the eyes of the people because its 
members do not have sufficient democratic legitimacy. Tony Blair’s La-
bour government tried to replace hereditary peers with individuals of 
great distinction (such as eminent academics), but even an assembly of 
meritocrats appointed by democratically elected politicians has proven 
to be too controversial: all three of Britain’s leading parties support 
some sort of plan to reform the House of Lords by replacing its ap-
pointed and hereditary membership with a mostly elected chamber.25 
In theory, as Martin Wolf argues, a good case can be made for an as-
sembly composed of eminent individuals that derive their legitimacy 
primarily by virtue of their competence, even if its powers are simply to 

162 
Chapter 4 
raise the level of political discourse and provide an element of expertise 
lacking in an electoral assembly.26 But neither voters nor political par-
ties are likely to support such proposals in democratic countries: any 
sort of effort to institutionalize a house of government that circum-
scribes the power of politicians elected on the basis of one person, one 
vote seems doomed to failure in democratic countries that have come 
to uphold the system of one person, one vote as an almost sacred politi-
cal value.27
That said, the case for a meritocratic assembly might be easier to 
make in countries that place more value on political meritocracy. In 
China, political surveys show strong attachment to “guardianship dis-
course,” defined as the need to identify high- quality rulers who enact 
good policies on behalf of their people and society, over liberal demo-
cratic discourse that privileges procedural arrangements ensuring peo-
ple’s rights to participate in politics and choose their leaders.28 So per-
haps it makes more sense to put forward proposals that combine 
democracy and meritocracy at the highest levels of government in the 
Chinese context. Any proposal needs to be both desirable and realistic 
if it is to serve as a standard for guiding political reform, and such pro-
posals are more realistic in countries that place a high value on politi-
cal meritocracy.
Jiang Qing’s Proposal for a Tricameral Legislature
Jiang Qing (b. 1952) is one of the most original and influential Confu-
cian political theorists in mainland China. He is a normative thinker 
and his theory of legitimacy is a normative one: he defines legitimacy 
as morally justified rule; his main concern is not the social scientific 
question of what kind of rule happens to be regarded as morally justi-
fied in the eyes of the people. And his main target is the democratic 
theory of legitimacy as developed by liberal democratic theorists from 
Locke on, namely, that a state is legitimate if it has secured the consent 
of the people. Although democracy—a form of government that grants 
ultimate controlling power to democratically elected representatives—
is built on the separation of powers, the separation, Jiang argues, is a 
matter of implementation rather than legitimization. In a democracy, 

 
Three Models of Democratic Meritocracy 
163
legitimacy is based on the sovereignty of the people. But Jiang objects 
to the idea that there is only one source of legitimacy. He claims that 
the modern notion of sovereignty of the people is similar in form to the 
medieval notion of the sovereignty of God, but with the content 
changed from God to the people: “In fact, the sovereignty of the people 
is simply the secular equivalent of the sovereignty of God.”29
In political practice, the overemphasis on popular sovereignty trans-
lates into the politics of desire: “in a democracy, political choices are 
always down to the desires and interests of the electorate.” This leads to 
two problems. First, the will of the people may not be moral: it could 
endorse racism, imperialism, or fascism. Second, when there is a clash 
between the short- term interests of the populace and their long- term 
interests or the common interests of all humankind, the former have 
political priority. Jiang specifically worries about the ecological crisis. It 
is difficult if not impossible for democratically elected governments to 
implement policies that curb energy usage in the interests of future 
generations and foreigners. If China were to follow the American 
model in terms of per capita carbon emissions, for example, the world 
would be damaged beyond repair. But “it is impossible for Green Par-
ties to fully—through legitimization and implementation—realize eco-
logical values in a Western democracy, without radical change in both 
the theory and structure of Western democracy.” Hence, a political sys-
tem must place more emphasis on what Jiang calls “sacred values” that 
are concerned with the well- being of the environment, the welfare of 
future generations, and humanity as a whole.
Jiang’s political alternative is the Confucian “way of the humane au-
thority” (wang dao). The question of political legitimacy, he argues, is 
central to Confucian constitutionalism. He defines legitimacy as “the 
deciding factor in determining whether a ruler has the right to rule or 
not.” But unlike Western- style democracy, there is more than one 
source of legitimacy. According to the Gongyang commentary (a com-
mentary on the Spring and Autumn Annals allegedly compiled by 
Confucius himself that chronicled the history of the state of Lu from 
722 to 481 bce), political power must have three kinds of legitimacy—
that of heaven, earth, and the human—for it to be justified. The legiti-
macy of heaven refers to a transcendent ruling will and a sacred sense 
of natural morality. The legitimacy of earth refers to a legitimacy that 

164 
Chapter 4 
comes from history and culture. And the legitimacy of the human re-
fers to the will of the people, which determines whether the people will 
obey political authorities. All three forms of legitimacy must be in 
equilibrium, but Jiang notes that the equilibrium is not one of equality. 
According to the Book of Changes, the multiplicity of things comes 
from the one principle of heaven, hence the sacred legitimacy of the 
way of heaven is prior to both the cultural legitimacy of the way of 
earth and that of the popular will of the human way.
In ancient times, the “way of the humane authority” was imple-
mented by the monarchical rule of the sage- kings of the three dynasties 
(Xia/Shang/Zhou). But changes in historical circumstances necessitate 
changes in the form of rule. Today, the will of the people must be given 
an institutional form that was lacking in the past, though it should be 
constrained and balanced by institutional arrangements meant to im-
plement the other two forms of legitimacy. Hence, Jiang argues that the 
“way of the humane authority” should be implemented by means of a 
tricameral legislature that corresponds to the three forms of legitimacy: 
a House of the People (shuminyuan) that represents popular legitimacy, 
a House of Exemplary Persons (tongruyuan) that represents sacred le-
gitimacy, and a House of the Nation (guotiyuan) that represents cul-
tural legitimacy.
Jiang goes into more institutional detail. The members of the House 
of the People “are chosen according to the norms and processes of 
Western democratic parliaments,” including universal suffrage and 
election from functional constituencies. The leader of the House of 
Exemplary Persons is a great scholar proposed by the Confucian schol-
ars. The candidates for membership are nominated by the scholars, 
and then they are examined on their knowledge of the Confucian clas-
sics and assessed following a trial period of administration at lower- level 
parliaments, like the examination and recommendation systems used 
in China in the past. The leader of the House of the Nation should be 
a direct descendant of Confucius, who would select from “among the 
great sages of the past, descendants of the rulers, descendants of fa-
mous people, of patriots, university professors of Chinese history, re-
tired top officials, judges and diplomats, worthy people from society as 
well as representatives of Daoism, Buddhism, Tibetan Buddhism, and 
Christianity.”

 
Three Models of Democratic Meritocracy 
165
Each house deliberates in its own way and may not interfere in the 
running of the others. Jiang addresses the key issue of how to deal with 
political gridlock that may arise as a result of conflicts between the 
three houses of parliament. He says that a bill must pass at least two of 
the houses to become law. The priority of sacred legitimacy is expressed 
in the veto power exercised by the House of Exemplary Persons. How-
ever, Jiang notes that the power of the House of Exemplary Persons is 
restrained by the other two houses: for example, “if they propose a bill 
restricting religious freedom, the People and the Nation will oppose it 
and it will not become law.” In that sense, it differs from the Council of 
Guardians in theocratic Iran, where the sacred is the only form of legiti-
macy and “and so at the level of implementation the Council of Guard-
ians has power over the Assembly and is not subject to its restraint.”
Jiang’s proposal for a House of Exemplary Persons helps us to think 
about how to institutionalize the principle of political meritocracy, but 
it is justified with reference to highly controversial transcendent val-
ues. Such a foundation is not acceptable to those who view Confucian-
ism as primarily social rather than religious ethics, not to mention 
those indifferent or hostile to the Confucian tradition.30 But we can 
borrow Rawls’s strategy of striving for an overlapping consensus on 
politics based on different versions of a comprehensive system of (reli-
gious or secular) value.31 Jiang and his critics, in other words, can agree 
to disagree about the justification for the House of Exemplary Persons: 
for Jiang and his supporters, it could be justified with reference to  
a transcendent Heaven, and for nonreligious Confucians and non- 
Confucians it could be justified on secular grounds. Politically speak-
ing, what matters is to secure agreement on what the institution is 
supposed to do: to deliberate about and act on behalf of the interests 
and needs of nonvoters such as future generations and people living 
outside the boundaries of the state who are affected by the policies of 
the government. In practice, one of the main tasks of the House of Ex-
emplary Persons would be to consider the long- term environmental 
consequences of policies that are normally neglected or underempha-
sized in democratic decision making since voters tend to care about 
their own interests first and foremost. If there is agreement on the main 
tasks of the house, it would also be easier to secure agreement on the 

166 
Chapter 4 
criteria for choosing the meritocratically selected leaders who are sup-
posed to represent voters. Given that they are supposed to focus on the 
needs of future generations and foreigners, for example, it may not be 
too controversial to suggest that they should be tested for basic knowl-
edge of environmental science and international affairs.
Still, one may wonder if Jiang’s proposal for a powerful House of 
Exemplary Persons is realistic. Most obviously, it is far removed from 
the current political reality in China, hence the proposal may not sat-
isfy the criterion that a political theory should serve as a realistic stan-
dard for guiding political reform. But rapid and unexpected change is 
not impossible—the Soviet Union did collapse far sooner than most 
analysts expected—so one cannot rule out the possibility of a moment 
of major constitutional change in China.
Let’s imagine that there is substantial political support for a modi-
fied version of Jiang’s proposal. Even then, however, Jiang’s proposal 
may not be realistic. Here’s why. Jiang’s proposal includes a house of 
government with members selected on the basis of one person, one 
vote.32 But once some political leaders are chosen on the basis of one 
person, one vote, it is almost inevitable that those leaders will be seen 
as the legitimate political leaders by the people who elect them and any 
proposal to subordinate their power to institutions with meritocratically 
chosen leaders is likely to be rejected by the people themselves. Even 
political cultures that value political meritocracy rapidly change and 
come to support democracy in the form of one person, one vote once 
the change is made. People in East Asian societies that adopted demo-
cratic forms of rule—from Japan to South Korea and Taiwan—all came 
to develop a preference for democracy over paternalistic Confucian 
legacies after the institutionalization of democracy,33 and East Asian 
democracies with a Confucian heritage have not been plagued by mili-
tary coups that (temporarily?) reverse democratic gains in the Middle 
East and elsewhere. So democracy in the form of one person, one vote 
really is the end of history, but in the bad sense that it cannot be im-
proved. The sad fact is that citizens in electoral democracies won’t even 
question their right to choose their political rulers, no matter how intel-
lectually incompetent or morally insensitive their political judgment 
may be.34

 
Three Models of Democratic Meritocracy 
167
If we want something better than one person, one vote—such as a 
political institution that secures the interests of future generations, with 
the power to complement, and sometimes override, the decisions of 
politicians elected by one person, one vote—it cannot be done in the 
form of proposals for bicameral or tricameral legislatures, no matter 
what the context. Jiang Qing is typically criticized for being too anti-
democratic,35 but the irony is that his proposal is too democratic: if his 
proposal for a tricameral legislature were implemented, the slippery 
slope toward a powerful House of the People could not be stopped and 
the House of Exemplary Persons (as well as the House of the Nation) 
would almost certainly be marginalized, if not made completely irrel-
evant. The same goes for other recent proposals that seek to combine 
democratic and meritocratic chambers at the highest levels of govern-
ment, such as Nicolas Berggruen and Nathan Gardels’s template for 
intelligent governance, Bai Tongdong’s proposal for a bicameral legisla-
ture with one democratically elected house and one meritocratic house 
composed of deputies selected on the basis of exams and performance 
at lower levels of government, and Joseph Chan’s proposal for a demo-
cratic house and a meritocratic house composed of retired civil ser-
vants with a proven record of public experience.36
And now I must confess the same goes for my own proposal of a bi-
cameral legislature with one democratic house and one meritocratic 
house composed of deputies selected by examinations. I have been ar-
guing for modified forms of a proposal for a bicameral legislature since 
the mid- 1990s. In 1999, I predicted a constitutional moment in China 
in the year 2007 when such proposals could be taken seriously. That 
year went by without any hint of political interest. In the Chinese trans-
lation, I changed the year to 2017. But now I realize that the problem is 
not just that I was overly optimistic in anticipating major constitutional 
change in China at the highest levels of government. The problem is 
that such proposals could not be consolidated even if they were tried! 
Just like the House of Lords, any sort of meritocratic chamber is almost 
certain to be progressively weakened once some political leaders are 
chosen on the basis of one person, one vote. So does that mean that we 
should abandon efforts to combine democracy and meritocracy? Yes, at 
the top. But that’s not the only possibility. The other possibility is so 

168 
Chapter 4 
obvious that somehow political theorists have been blind to it until very 
recently.
3. A Vertical Model: Democracy at  
the Bottom, Meritocracy at the Top
Political theorists speculating about China’s political future have 
largely concentrated on the question of how to reconcile democracy 
and meritocracy at the central level of government. The main point has 
been to provide a set of standards to evaluate China’s political reform. 
But standards must be desirable as well as feasible, and we have seen 
that there are two reasons to doubt the feasibility of horizontal models 
that reconcile democracy and meritocracy: (1) the model is too far re-
moved from China’s current political reality, and (2) even if it were im-
plemented, it could not be consolidated. But there is a third reason to 
object to the horizontal model: democracy works best at the local 
level.37 Earlier political thinkers—from Aristotle to Rousseau and Mon-
tesquieu—all converged on the argument that democracy works best in 
small communities, but somehow this point has been obscured from 
modern political thought and practice.38 In small communities, people 
have more knowledge of the ability and virtue of the leaders they 
choose. The issues at the local level are usually relatively straightfor-
ward and easy to understand: do we need to upgrade the local school or 
the hospital? People often have more of a stake in local affairs, and 
what they do is more likely to affect outcomes. Given the moral im-
perative to vote in accordance with the common good—since our votes 
affect not just ourselves, but other people—it is easier to generate a 
sense of community at the local level. Finally, mistakes are less costly at 
the local level: it is not the end of the world if local citizens decide to 
spend more funds on a new road that turns out to be unnecessary; but 
it might be the end of the world if big countries launch nuclear war or 
ignore the perils of global warming.39
In the Chinese context, there is widespread support for the idea of 
democracy at the local level. The Chinese government introduced di-
rect village elections in 1988 to maintain social order and combat cor-
ruption of leaders. In 1998, direct village committee elections were 

 
Three Models of Democratic Meritocracy 
169
made mandatory in the whole country, and by 2008 more than nine 
hundred million Chinese farmers had exercised the right to vote.40 Of 
course such elections are not free of problems. There have been wor-
ries about the quality of decision making and the extent to which local 
elections really curb the power of local cadres and wealthy elites. In 
response, the government has backed experiments with deliberative de-
mocracy at the local level.41 Such experiments hold the promise of aid-
ing the democratic education process and securing more fair represen-
tation. In short, all sides pretty much agree that the solution to the 
problems with local- level democracy lies in more democracy, not less.42
As an empirical matter, local- level electoral democracy has not gen-
erated a widespread sense that voting is something “sacred” that should 
be extended to higher levels of government.43 The psychological feeling 
of empowerment is strongest at the national level, when voters see 
themselves as choosing the most powerful leaders of the political com-
munity, and the further we go down the chain of political command, 
the less voters feel empowered.44 But the normative question is whether 
democracy at the local level should be extended to higher levels of gov-
ernment. Most Western analysts criticize the Chinese government pre-
cisely for the lack of extension to higher levels of government since the 
early 1990s. Given that they associate (explicitly or not) political reform 
with democratic reform (in the form of competitive elections), the typi-
cal view—among political scientists and leading media outlets in West-
ern countries—is that there has been no political reform in China over 
the past couple of decades or so.45 But this view is false. Over the past 
three decades or so, China has evolved a sophisticated and comprehen-
sive system for selecting and promoting political talent at higher levels 
of government: political meritocracy, in short. Aspiring government of-
ficials normally pass the public service examinations, with thousands 
of applicants competing for single spots, and they must perform well at 
lower levels of government, with more rigorous tests and evaluations at 
each step of the way, to move further up the chain of political com-
mand. Of course, the system is flawed in practice, and selection and 
promotion of public officials is often influenced by factors other than 
the ability and virtue of the candidate.46 But there is little doubt that the 
political system has been substantially “meritocratized” over the past 
couple of decades and the political impact of “meritocratization” has 

170 
Chapter 4 
been far more substantial than the widely reported and researched 
local- level elections. Yet somehow—until very recently—the “meritoc-
ratization” of the political system in China has fallen under the radar 
screen of major media outlets and academic researchers have not paid 
sufficient attention to it. I confess I missed it as well, despite having 
lived in Beijing for nearly a decade. A meeting with a top Chinese 
leader, however, helped change my mind.
A Meeting with Minister Li Yuanchao
In May 2012, I was fortunate to participate in the first annual Peace 
and Development Forum near the Great Wall in Beijing. Academics 
and political leaders had instructive discussions about China’s political 
system, as well as even more instructive informal discussions during 
the breaks. On the last day, the academics were invited to a dialogue 
session with Mr. Li Yuanchao, then Minister of the Organization De-
partment of the Communist Party of China Central Committee (the 
following year, Mr. Li was appointed vice- president of China). Fasci-
nated by the discussion about political meritocracy at the forum, I 
asked Minister Li which criteria are used to judge ability and virtue 
during the process of recruiting and promoting government officials. 
Mr. Li replied that the criteria depend on the level of government. At 
lower levels, close connection with the people is particularly impor-
tant. At the higher levels, more emphasis is placed on rationality since 
cadres need to take multiple factors into account and decision making 
involves a much broader area of governance, but virtues such as con-
cern for the people and a practical attitude also matter. Cadres are also 
expected to set a model of corruption- free rule.
To illustrate the rigorous (meritocratic) nature of selection at higher 
levels of government, Minister Li described the procedure used to select 
the Secretary General of the Organization Department of the Commu-
nist Party of China Central Committee. First, there was a nomination 
process, including retired cadres. Those who received many nomina-
tions could move to the next stage. Next, there was an examination, in-
cluding questions such as how to be a good Secretary General. More 
than ten people took the exam, and the list was narrowed to five people. 

 
Three Models of Democratic Meritocracy 
171
To ensure that the process was fair, the examination papers were put in 
the corridor for all to judge the results. Then, there was an oral exami-
nation with an interview panel composed of ministers, vice- ministers, 
and university professors. To ensure transparency and fairness, ordinary 
cadres who work for the General Secretary were in the room, which al-
lowed them to supervise the whole process. Three candidates with the 
highest scores were selected for the next stage. Then, the department of 
personnel led an inspection team to look into the performance and vir-
tue of the candidates, with more emphasis placed on virtue. Two people 
were recommended for the next stage. The final decision was made by 
a committee of twelve ministers who each had a vote, and the candidate 
had to have at least eight votes to succeed. If the required number of 
votes was not secured the first time, the ministers discussed further until 
two- thirds could agree on a candidate.
Mr. Li has a point. Why do we think there is a “one- size- fits- all” solu-
tion to the question of how to select political leaders? Western- style 
democrats tend to think that the same selection process—democratic 
elections—should be used to select leaders at all levels of government, 
from the village to the highest level of government. But surely that’s too 
simplistic! In a large, populous, modernizing country, it seems emi-
nently reasonable to assume that different criteria for selection and pro-
motion should apply at different levels of government. At the local 
level, democracy is desirable. But the process should become more 
meritocratic as we go further up the chain of command. At the central 
level, the issues are more complex, and we need leaders with a good 
understanding of economics, science, international relations, history, 
and, yes, political philosophy. They should also be constantly willing to 
learn and upgrade their skills, particularly in a globalized world that 
changes faster than at any previous time in human history. The issues 
also matter more from a moral point of view, given that policies can af-
fect not just “the people,” but future generations, ancestors, people liv-
ing outside the country, and the natural world. Hence, the leaders 
should have a long- term outlook that takes into account the interests of 
all those affected by government policies, not just those with the loud-
est and most emotional voices. In short, it matters more at the central 
level for leaders to have superior ability and virtue—to be more “ratio-

172 
Chapter 4 
nal,” as Mr. Li put it—and the political selection system should be ex-
plicitly designed to choose such leaders. At the bottom democracy is 
desirable, but at the top meritocracy is desirable. Rather than think in 
horizontal terms about how to reconcile democracy and meritocracy, 
we should think in vertical terms.
The advantages of “actually existing” meritocracy in the CCP are 
clear. Cadres are put through a grueling process of talent selection, and 
only those with an excellent record of past performance are likely to 
make it to the highest levels of government. The training process in-
cludes programs for public administration at various levels of govern-
ment, consulting experts, learning from best practices abroad, rota-
tional career postings though different sectors, as well as the cultivation 
of virtues such as compassion for the disadvantaged by means such as 
limited periods of work in poor rural areas.47 Moreover, this kind of 
meritocratic selection process is likely to work only in the context of a 
one- party state. In a multiparty system, there is no assurance that per-
formance at lower levels of government will be rewarded at higher lev-
els, and there is no strong incentive to train cadres so that they have 
experience at higher levels, because the key personnel can change with 
a government led by a different party. So even talented leaders, like 
President Obama, can make many “beginner’s mistakes” once they as-
sume rule because they have not been properly trained to assume com-
mand at the highest levels of government.48 Top leaders in China are 
not likely to make such mistakes because of their decades- long experi-
ence and training. The fact that decision making at the highest levels is 
by committee—the Standing Committee of the Politburo (currently 
with seven members)—also ensures that no one person with outlandish 
and uninformed views can set wrongheaded policies (such as Lee Kuan 
Yew’s policies in Singapore favoring births by educated women that 
were based on eugenics theories rejected by most scientists).
Once Chinese leaders reach positions of political power, they can 
react more quickly to crises (such as the financial crisis of 2007–2008) 
and undertake great infrastructure projects that underpin economic 
development. Meritocratically selected leaders can make long- term- 
oriented decisions that consider the interests of all relevant stakehold-
ers, including future generations and people living outside the state.49 
In multiparty democracies with leaders chosen on the basis of competi-

 
Three Models of Democratic Meritocracy 
173
tive elections, by contrast, leaders need to worry about the next election 
and they are more likely to make decisions influenced by short- term 
political considerations that bear on their chances of getting reelected. 
Democratically elected leaders are more vulnerable to the lobbying of 
powerful special interests, and the interests of nonvoters affected by 
policies, such as future generations, are not likely to be taken seriously 
if they conflict with the interests of voters and campaign funders. At the 
very least, meritocratically selected leaders have more time to think 
about such issues; they need not waste time and money campaigning 
for votes and giving the same speech over and over again.
Moreover, the fact that the real power holders in Western- style de-
mocracies are supposed to be those chosen by the people in elections 
often means that “bureaucrats” are not considered to be important; 
hence, less talent goes into the bureaucracy. This flaw may be particu-
larly clear in the American political system, where the top layers of the 
bureaucracy are selected by elected leaders—about 10 percent of the 
posts in the federal government are allocated on the basis of political 
patronage, and such political appointments amount to two hundred 
thousand individuals, many of whom hold senior positions in the bu-
reaucracy50—and there is less incentive for ambitious and talented peo-
ple to take permanent jobs in the mid to lower levels of the bureau-
cracy.51 In contrast, the Chinese political system does not clearly 
distinguish between “bureaucrats” and “power- holders” and thus ambi-
tious people of talent are not discouraged from joining the political 
system at the lower levels, with the hope of moving upward.52
Of course, “actually existing meritocracy” is flawed, just like every 
other political system. The success of meritocracy in China is obvious: 
China’s rulers have presided over the single most impressive poverty 
alleviation achievement in history, with several hundred million people 
being lifted out of poverty over the past few decades. Equally obvious, 
however, some problems in China—corruption, the gap between rich 
and poor, environmental degradation, abuses of power by political of-
ficials, harsh measures for dealing with political dissent, overly power-
ful state- run enterprises that distort the economic system, repression of 
religious expression in Tibet and Xinjiang, discrimination against 
women—seem to have become worse while the political system has 
become more meritocratic. Part of the problem is that China lacks de-

174 
Chapter 4 
mocracy at various levels of government that could help check abuses 
of power and provide more opportunities for political expression by 
marginalized groups. But part of the problem is also that political meri-
tocracy has been insufficiently developed in China. The political sys-
tem needs to be further “meritocratized” so that government officials 
are selected and promoted on the basis of ability and morality rather 
than political connections, wealth, and family background. And the 
right formula for judging improvement should be, more or less, the 
vertical model of democratic meritocracy: democracy at the bottom, 
with the system becoming progressively more meritocratic at higher 
levels of government.53
Still, defenders of political meritocracy at the top must confront the 
problem of legitimacy. As argued in chapter 3 (section 3), the nondem-
ocratic sources of political legitimacy that underpinned rule of the 
CCP will prove to be increasingly difficult to sustain. In the context of 
a relatively peaceful, modernizing country such as China, more input 
by “the people” in the form of institutionalized participation and the 
articulation of interests and non- mainstream values may be necessary. 
In response, the Chinese government has recently implemented mech-
anisms that allow for more consultation and deliberation,54 but such 
responses won’t be sufficient. Social critics call for more radical mea-
sures, such as bold steps toward intraparty elections, autonomous orga-
nizations of workers and farmers, judicial independence, and opening 
of the mainstream media.55 But even these steps won’t be sufficient: at 
the end of the day, the government can show that it’s legitimate only by 
showing that it has the consent of the people. One response is to si-
lence political critics and throw them in jail. But the more the govern-
ment relies on harsh measures of this sort, the more it will lose support. 
At some point in the not too distant future, there will be a need for 
more freedom of political speech, democracy at higher levels of govern-
ment, and more independent social organizations. But defenders of po-
litical meritocracy need to draw the line at one person, one vote and 
multiparty competition for top leaders because democracy at the top 
will wreck the whole system.56 Is it possible to secure the people’s sup-
port for a more open society and increased political participation but 
without going the way of “Western- style” democracy?57 In other words, 

 
Three Models of Democratic Meritocracy 
175
is it possible to secure some form of explicit consent by the people with-
out electoral democracy at the top?
A Referendum against Electoral Democracy
The political history of Chile in the second half of the twentieth cen-
tury offers food for thought. Army General Augusto Pinochet took 
power on 11 September 1973 in a violent coup d’état that deposed the 
democratically elected President Salvador Allende. For the next sixteen 
years, Pinochet ruled as Supreme Leader of the Nation. Pinochet pre-
sided over a period of substantial economic growth, but he faced in-
creased pressure to open up politically. In addition to domestic pres-
sure for reform, the international context had changed: the Soviet 
Union under Mikhail Gorbachev—the supposed sponsor of the com-
munist “subversives”—had itself initiated the glasnost and perestroika 
democratic reforms. In 1987, Pope John Paul II visited Chile and called 
on religious forces to actively fight for the restoration of democracy. 
The following year, Pinochet succumbed to pressure and called a na-
tional referendum on his rule. If the majority voted “yes,” Pinochet 
would have remained in power for another eight years.
The referendum was heavily stacked in Pinochet’s favor. In the pre- 
Internet age, the opposition had only fifteen minutes of media time per 
night for twenty- seven days to make its case for “no.” Yet Pinochet lost 
the referendum, with nearly 56 percent of the population voting “no.” 
As depicted in the Oscar- nominated film No, the opposition won (at 
least partly) by employing lighthearted marketing techniques that 
pointed the way to a “happy” future rather than by reminding the pop-
ulation of the Pinochet regime’s grim history of human rights abuses.58 
Following his defeat at the polls, Pinochet wanted to retain power, but 
he was pushed out of power when the heads of the branches of Chile’s 
military refused to support him, thus paving the way for the restoration 
of democracy in that country.
In the case of China, leading political scientists predict that China 
will need to implement some form of electoral democracy and multi-
party rule (at the top) within the next decade or two.59 If China does 
face a major constitutional moment, however, there is a more desirable 

176 
Chapter 4 
and, arguably, more realistic, possibility. What if the CCP were to fol-
low Pinochet’s example and call a referendum, asking the Chinese 
people to vote “yes” in favor of a more open form of political meritoc-
racy, with more freedom of political speech and more freedom to form 
social organizations, but without one person, one vote to choose top 
leaders and without the freedom to form political organizations that 
explicitly challenge CCP rule? A victory for the “yes” could provide an 
important element of democratic legitimacy to the system. Critics in-
side China alleging that the Chinese regime is fundamentally unstable 
or illegitimate because it lacks the support of the people would be si-
lenced by the people, and the government need not worry about their 
social impact.60 A “yes” vote would also be a big coup for China’s soft 
power: the rest of the world would realize that the political system is 
indeed endorsed by the majority of Chinese citizens and sets a good 
model for political reform. The dominant narrative in global media 
coverage would change from “what’s wrong with China’s political sys-
tem?” to “what can we learn from China’s political system?”
Of course, the CCP would be taking a major risk by calling such a 
referendum: after all, Pinochet lost! But the Chinese case is different. 
For one thing, the country is not ruled by a military dictator responsi-
ble for killing thousands of people. True, in a more open environment, 
the “no” side in China could remind people of the CCP’s human 
rights abuses in recent history. But the Chilean case shows that re-
minders of a dark past are not sufficient; the democratic opposition 
would also need to mount an optimistic case for China’s political fu-
ture. And here the opposition would have a harder case. Unlike in 
Chile, many intellectuals would argue for the “yes” side. The referen-
dum would be calling for public support of a morally desirable, largely 
homegrown model of political rule, one that could legitimately serve 
as a source of pride for the people.
Still, there is a worry. Given that voters consistently show irrational 
behavior at election time (see chapter 1, section 1), why should we ex-
pect them to be more rational in a referendum? But elections are differ-
ent. Referenda on key constitutional changes tend to generate extensive 
deliberation and relatively informed debate; it is difficult, if not impos-
sible, to mobilize the same level of interest and enthusiasm on the part 

 
Three Models of Democratic Meritocracy 
177
of the voter in regular elections.61 The meritocrat may still want to 
place voting restrictions to ensure a more rational process: voters could 
be subject to tests of economic competence; extra votes could be given 
to educated people; more votes could be given to voters with young 
children; and so on. But such efforts would be viewed as attempts to rig 
the system to get the desired result, and the “referendum” is not likely 
to provide sufficient democratic legitimation even if restrictions are 
minimal and designed to ensure a more rational voting process rather 
than victory for the rulers. So the referendum must be free and fair, 
which increases the risk. In short, there are good reasons to be cau-
tious, and the Chinese government need not call a referendum now 
that it enjoys substantial support from nondemocratic sources of legiti-
macy as measured by political survey results and (the lack of) unrest 
directed at the central government. But, to repeat, things may change 
in a decade or two, and if the government faces another choice be-
tween, say, maintaining stability by means of June 4th– style repression 
and a referendum that clearly shows that the people endorse the politi-
cal system, the latter option is (needless to say) more humane.62
From the perspective of defenders of political meritocracy, an 
equally serious risk is that the people get used to the idea that the state’s 
political system should be decided by referendum, and there might be 
another call for a referendum in a few years, even if the result is positive 
the first time around. In Uganda, for example, a referendum that re-
stricted political parties (in order to curb sectarian tensions) was ap-
proved by the people in 1986, but citizens voted to restore the multi-
party system in a subsequent referendum in 2000.63 One solution is to 
specify a time period in the referendum itself—say, fifty years—long 
enough to provide stability for the recruitment and training of merito-
cratically selected leaders but without binding the people to perpetual 
CCP- style meritocratic rule.64 The question itself can be formulated in 
terms of an ideal meant to guide political reform within a specified 
time period: for example, “Do you endorse vertical democratic meri-
tocracy as an ideal that will guide political reform over the next fifty 
years?”65 It may not be possible to win over “pure” democrats, but a 
strong “yes” vote could provide sufficient democratic legitimacy to en-
sure a long- lasting political meritocracy.

178 
Chapter 4 
My argument in this chapter has been influenced by greater under-
standing and appreciation of the Chinese approach to political reform 
over the past three decades: a version of the vertical model of demo-
cratic meritocracy, with democracy at the bottom, experimentation in 
the middle, and meritocracy at the top, which we can term the “China 
model.” Still, I want to emphasize that this book is not a defense of the 
status quo. There is a large gap between the reality of political reform 
and the ideals underpinning reform, and I will conclude this book by 
distinguishing between the two and suggesting ways of closing the gap.

Concluding Thoughts
Realizing the China Model
T
he China model is a phrase widely employed to describe China’s 
approach to economic development and governance since the 
era of reform in the late 1970s. Although the phrase means dif-
ferent things to different people,1 it generally refers to China’s approach 
to the establishment of free- market capitalism under the umbrella of 
an authoritarian one- party state that emphasizes political stability 
above all else. In short, the China model is a combination of economic 
freedom and political oppression.2 But trying to understand contempo-
rary China in terms of these two characteristics is highly misleading. 
As an economic model, it is true that China has established aspects of 
a free- market economy, in which labor, capital, and commodities flow 
increasingly freely. But the state still keeps ultimate control over strate-
gic sectors of the economy and a large range of core industries, includ-
ing utilities, transportation, telecommunications, finance, and the 
media.3 To be more precise, the People’s Republic of China has a mixed 
economy with a three- tier enterprise system consisting of large, central 
government firms; hybrid local and foreign firms; and small- scale 
capitalism.4
The assumption that oppressive authoritarian rule is the key politi-
cal characteristic of the China model is equally misleading. It is true 
that the Chinese government spends lavishly on the security apparatus 
to preserve social stability and resorts to harsh measures to put down 
perceived threats to one- party rule. It is also true that the CCP is the 

180 
Concluding Thoughts 
motor of political reform and it will not enact reform likely to lead to 
the party’s demise. But the reform era has been characterized by an 
evolving three- pronged approach to political governance that cannot 
be accurately captured by labeling China a “bad” authoritarian regime 
similar in nature to, say, dictatorships in North Korea and the Middle 
East. Since the model—democracy at the bottom, experimentation in 
the middle, and meritocracy at the top—is unique to China, we can 
call it the “China model.” The China model—referring here to politi-
cal governance rather than an approach to economic reform—is both a 
reality and an ideal. It is a reality that has characterized China’s ap-
proach to political reform over the past three decades or so. It is also an 
ideal that can be used as a standard to evaluate political reform and to 
suggest areas of possible improvement.5 In chapter 4, I argued that ver-
tical democratic meritocracy is a politically realistic and morally desir-
able way of combining political meritocracy and democracy. But 
Chinese- style vertical democratic meritocracy (“the China model”) 
also includes a middle plank of experimentation between local and 
central government. What I say should not be too controversial, but 
scholars have yet to provide a detailed analysis of the model, let alone 
sketch out the basic planks. So let me describe the key features of the 
China model both as a reality and as an ideal, while recognizing the 
need for more detailed academic analysis in future research. I will end 
with some thoughts about the possibility of exporting the China model 
to other countries.
1. The Reality of Political Reform
The first plank of the China model is democracy at the bottom. Argu-
ably, the idea of local democracy has historical roots in Zhu Xi’s Neo- 
Confucian project, based on local voluntary institutions such as the 
community compact, community granaries, and local academies, 
which envisioned a decentralized network of self- governing communi-
ties as the foundation of social order and political stability.6 But com-
munity associations were to be led by local literati; Song dynasty Neo- 
Confucians did not envision the possibility that farmers and women 
would have an equal say in choosing community leaders (and an equal 

 
Concluding Thoughts 
181
right to be chosen as leaders). In modern China, the emergence of vil-
lage self- governance came about largely as a reaction to the chaotic 
situation created by the collapse of the commune system. In late 1980, 
villages in Guangxi province began to establish village committees as a 
kind of self- governing association. A major breakthrough occurred 
when the new constitution adopted in 1982 included a clause defining 
the village committee and residents’ committee as self- governing orga-
nizations of the masses in rural and urban areas, respectively, including 
the provision that officeholders should be selected by election. In the 
1980s, the question of whether the village committee was to be used as 
a means to reorganize rural society became a major item of contention; 
proponents argued that village committees could restore orderly social 
life to the rural areas and exert a degree of control over corrupt cadres 
at the grassroots level, but local cadres worried that village committees 
could become a significant force capable of countering the state and 
party organizations. In 1987, a “provisional law” on village committees 
was adopted by the National People’s Congress Standing Committee, 
and for the next decade more than eight hundred thousand village 
committees were set up. A new national law on village committees ad-
opted in 1998 consolidated the various practices of the previous decade 
and specified the conditions for free and fair elections: a committee 
with a total membership between three and seven members (depend-
ing on the size of the village) would serve for a term of three years; the 
members would have to be directly elected by villagers age eighteen or 
older; nominations of candidates must be made directly by registered 
voters and the elections must be competitive (the number of candidates 
must exceed that of the seats to be returned); the secret ballot system 
must be used; and the law specified a mechanism to dismiss the village 
committee members in cases of wrongdoing.7
By 1996, balloting had been carried out in every province. Turnout 
rates have been generally high (in many locations reportedly more than 
90 percent), and surveys and direct observation by international moni-
tors show that the conduct of elections (including nomination proce-
dures, competitiveness, and secret balloting) has improved over time.8 
Acutely aware of international criticism of its human rights record fol-
lowing the crackdown against the Tiananmen Square demonstrators in 
June 1989 and the need to boost its democratic credentials, the Chi-

182 
Concluding Thoughts 
nese government has been keen to take foreign academics, journalists, 
and donor representatives to view such elections.9 As a result, democ-
racy at the local level is perhaps the most widely researched plank of 
China’s political reform over the past couple of decades, and definitely 
the plank that has received the most international attention. Early en-
thusiasm on the part of some China watchers that village elections 
would pave the way for a Western- style democratic transformation of 
China has since given way to a more sober assessment of reality—the 
power of elected leaders is checked by village committees and town-
ship governments, and the CCP has no intention of expanding an 
electoral system based on one person, one vote all the way to the top—
but as we will see, the general trend is that local elections have become 
more free and fair.
The second plank of the China model is experimentation between 
local and central levels of government: to be more precise, the central 
government checks which policies work at the subcentral level before 
spreading them throughout the country. Here too, there are historical 
antecedents in imperial China. For example, a new population census 
system implemented in the Sui dynasty was first tried by a county offi-
cial, who was subsequently promoted to the central administration.10 In 
the modern era, experimentation in the sense that central policy mak-
ers encourage local officials to try out new ways of problem solving and 
then feed the local experiences back into the national policy formula-
tion was systematically carried out by the CCP from its earliest days. 
But the idea that local experimentation is necessary to find new policy 
solutions owes nothing to Marxist- Leninist ideology. Rather, CCP lead-
ers were influenced by John Dewey’s pleas for social experimentation 
and “learning by doing,” as well as earlier Confucian ideas about teach-
ing by example and learning through role models. The CCP was not 
unique: the KMT and the Confucian thinker Liang Shuming also in-
troduced experiments in rural reform in the Republican era. But the 
CCP tied experimentation to the idea that a strong central power 
should decide what works and what doesn’t. Localized experimenta-
tion was also motivated by necessity: the CCP did not have sufficient 
numbers of well- trained rural cadres to dispatch to hundreds of thou-
sands of villages and lacked the capacity for standardized policy imple-

 
Concluding Thoughts 
183
mentation. Hence, the revolutionary process had to be driven from 
scattered base areas, and an elaborate mode of local policy experimen-
tation under central guidance was developed in the context of experi-
ments with land reform in the Communist base areas. Mao Zedong 
and Deng Zihui initiated controlled experimentation based on the 
establishment of “model villages,” dissemination of “model experi-
ences,” and progressive refinement of policies in the course of expan-
sion. After the intensification of Japanese military campaigns, a base 
area behind enemy lines in Taihang under the leadership of Deng 
Xiaoping introduced experiments with land reform as well as a new 
“bottom- up work style” based on consultation with the populace. In 
1951, two years after the establishment of the PRC, the party’s guide-
lines on land reform were consolidated into six steps, “of which steps 2 
to 6 are crucial to Chinese- style policy experimentation to the present 
day: (1) train work team cadres and send them down to localities; (2) 
carry out model experiments; (3) accomplish breakthroughs in a key 
point; (4) broaden the campaign from point to surface; (5) integrate 
point and surface with regard to the applied measures; (6) unfold the 
campaign in steady steps.”11
But policy experimentation of this sort soon came to an end. From 
the mid- 1950s to the mid- 1970s, feverish ideological campaigns were 
launched in the whole country, and there was no political room for 
generating new policy approaches through decentralized experimenta-
tion; the only option was standardized implementation and swift total 
compliance with Mao’s directives. To the extent there were local mod-
els, they were meant to serve as instantiations of preconceived, cen-
trally imposed ideas to be emulated by the rest of the country, not as 
open- ended experiments meant to generate novel policy instruments. 
Arguably, national disasters such as the Great Leap Forward and the 
Cultural Revolution could have been avoided had the CCP stuck with 
its earlier policy of decentralized experimentation as a test for what 
works and what doesn’t.
The policy of experimenting with subcentral policy alternatives—
what Sebastian Hellman terms “experimentation under hierarchy”12—
was revived in the post- Mao reform era. Deng Xiaoping redefined the 
main mission of the CCP from achieving communism to achieving 
rapid economic growth, and the CCP reactivated a repertoire of policy 

184 
Concluding Thoughts 
experimentation meant to serve that purpose. Policy experimentation 
took several forms, the most internationally famous of which was the 
Shenzhen Special Economic Zone, which tested controversial policies 
such as land auctions, wholly foreign- owned companies, and labor- 
market liberalization that were then applied to the rest of China.13 The 
advantages of “experimentation under hierarchy” are clear—the CCP 
can start market reforms with initial trials in sensitive areas, it can de-
tect hitherto hidden problems and make adjustments before they spread 
to the whole country, and the economy can develop without major 
ideological and social conflicts14—but continued economic growth 
over the past three decades brought about increasingly complex gover-
nance challenges, from inequality and growing demands for social in-
surance to pollution and corruption.
In response, the range of policy innovations pioneered at subcentral 
levels has expanded beyond the economic sphere into administrative, 
social, and political realms.15 In the 2002–2007 period, a wide variety 
of experiments dealt with pressing rural issues such as the marketing of 
rural products, reduction of taxes and levies, land management, and 
cooperative health care. As of 2007, seventy- two cities have the status of 
“experimental point for comprehensive reform.”16 Some cities are em-
powered to experiment with renewable energy and others with differ-
ent ways of reducing income gaps among residents.17 Other experi-
ments defy common assumptions about authoritarian rule, such as 
exploring ways of harnessing nonstate actors to provide health care for 
the elderly and rights for migrant workers, using transparency as a gov-
ernance tool to curb corruption, and improving accountability by al-
lowing citizens to request information.18 Different Chinese cities are 
also experimenting with different ways of evaluating the performance 
of public officials. The city of Foshan, for example, is “giving the public 
a direct role in evaluating the performance of officials. Under the city’s 
new points- based evaluation system, 15% of officials will be assessed via 
an online questionnaire. Officials who score badly will have their pay 
docked; those who score well will receive bonuses. A further 10% of 
points will be awarded for public service, while just 5% will be awarded 
for economic growth. The aim is to reverse one of the key problems 
currently afflicting local governance—that officials are incentivized to 
chase investment and GDP growth, not to optimize the delivery of 

 
Concluding Thoughts 
185
public services.”19 And starting in 2014, more than seventy smaller Chi-
nese cities and counties have dropped GDP as a performance metric 
for government officials in an effort to shift the focus to environmental 
protection and poverty reduction.20
In short, experimentation with different forms of economic, social, 
and political reform in between the local and central levels of govern-
ment, including the question of how best to select and promote govern-
ment officials, is key to explaining China’s adaptability and success 
over the past three decades.21 In contrast to the experience of other 
countries “such as India, where ‘the corpses of pilot projects litter the 
management field,’ Chinese- style experimentation managed to trans-
form many pilot projects into full- scale operational programs that cover 
a broad policy spectrum ranging from economic regulation to organi-
zational reforms within the Communist Party.”22 Notwithstanding its 
economic, social, and political importance in China’s reform era, how-
ever, experimentation in the middle has not been as well researched as 
democracy at the bottom.23
The third plank of the China model is meritocracy at the top. Political 
meritocracy has a long history in China, as discussed throughout this 
book. Its modern incarnation dates from the post- Mao reform era; let’s 
turn to its recent history in more detail.24 Following the chaos of the 
Cultural Revolution, China’s leaders decided that public officials 
should have the managerial skills, professional knowledge, and broad 
understanding of China and the world necessary to lead the country to 
full modernity and global prominence.25 Hence, party leaders empha-
sized that the selection and promotion of cadres should be based on 
expertise rather than revolutionary energy. The government established 
a competitive national university entrance examination system in the 
late 1970s, and the first step for most officials is to be admitted to uni-
versity. Then they must be admitted to the party—students compete 
fiercely to join the party, and usually the party selects students with 
high academic achievement and leadership qualities, preferably from 
elite universities.26 In the early 1990s, the government established na-
tionwide ultracompetitive public service examinations (including writ-
ten and oral tests),27 and today most aspiring officials must succeed at 
these examinations after they graduate from university.28 There is more 

186 
Concluding Thoughts 
emphasis on technical competence for appointment to posts in the gov-
ernment system compared to recruitment for positions in the CCP hi-
erarchy,29 but there are not separate tracks for professional civil servants 
and political officials,30 and appointment to posts for successful candi-
dates depends on level of education and experience.
The most important provisions for the management of cadres above 
the county/division level (xianchu ji) are contained in the “Regulation 
on Selection and Appointment of Party and Government Leading 
Cadres” issued in 2002 by the CCP Organization Department. There 
are requirements of education and experience for appointment and 
promotion to political posts; generally, the higher the level, the more 
demanding the requirements. To be promoted to leading party and 
government posts at the section (village)- head level, officials must have 
at least a college diploma and have worked at a deputy post for more 
than two years. To be promoted to posts higher than the county (divi-
sion) level, candidates must have held at least two positions at lower- 
level organs, and candidates who are promoted from deputy to head 
generally must have worked at the deputy post for more than two years. 
Leading cadres at the bureau level (ju, si, ting) or above should have at 
least a bachelor’s degree.31 Once a year, the Organization Department 
reviews quantitative performance records for each official in the higher 
grades, carries out interviews with superiors, peers, and subordinates, 
vets the official’s personal conduct, and uses public- opinion surveys to 
assess the public’s general satisfaction or dissatisfaction with that offi-
cial’s performance.32 Committees then discuss the data and promote 
the winners.
To get to the top, party officials must typically start from leadership 
at a primary- level office and then be promoted successively to the town-
ship level, a county division, a department bureau, and the province/
ministry level. A public official aiming to reach the position of vice- 
minister has to be promoted from senior member to deputy section 
chief, section chief, division chief, deputy division chief, division chief, 
deputy bureau chief, bureau chief, and vice- minister.33 If one meets the 
minimum length of service at each rank, one needs at least twenty 
years to reach the position of vice- minister. During this process, offi-
cials are typically rotated through the civil service, state- owned enter-
prises, and government- affiliated social organizations such as universi-

 
Concluding Thoughts 
187
ties and community groups, as well as serving in different parts of the 
country. The top candidates are sent for further training at party and 
administrative schools in China, and many promising officials are sent 
to top universities abroad to learn best administrative practices from 
around the world. Out of seven million leading cadres, only one out of 
140,000 makes it to the province/ministry level. A select few move up 
the ranks and make it to the party’s Central Committee and then the 
twenty- five- member Politburo. The members at the very apex of politi-
cal power—the Standing Committee of the Politburo—must normally 
have served as governors or party secretaries of two provinces, each the 
size and population of most countries. In short, top leaders must pass 
through a battery of merit- based tests and accumulate decades of exten-
sive and diverse administrative experience. In contrast, as Eric X. Li 
puts it, “a person with Barack Obama’s pre- presidential professional ex-
perience would not even be the manager of a small county in China’s 
system.”34 Notwithstanding its importance for understanding China’s 
reforms and future political prospects, political meritocracy is perhaps 
the least- studied aspect of the China model.35
The three planks of the China model point to different ways of select-
ing and promoting leaders at different levels of government, but there is 
overlap between them (in addition to the fact that the CCP designed 
and implemented the whole system). The first plank—democracy at 
the bottom—includes elements of experimentation and meritocracy: 
electoral democracy at the bottom started off as an experiment in se-
lected villages before it was generalized to the rest of the country; and 
there is a meritocratic check on the system in the form of a party secre-
tary at the village level appointed from above who is often more edu-
cated than elected leaders and has the task of trying to ensure the im-
plementation of center- driven policies that may be unpopular, such as 
birth control and land acquisition. The second plank—experimenta-
tion in the middle—includes forms of democracy and meritocracy: 
there have been democratic elections in selected townships in Sichuan 
province and experiments with democratic practices such as public- 
opinion polling as part of the evaluation process for cadres at higher 
levels of government;36 and meritocratically selected leaders at the top 
often decide which experiments to carry out and which ones should be 

188 
Concluding Thoughts 
generalized to other parts of the country. The third plank—meritocracy 
at the top—includes forms of democracy and experimentation: there 
has been increased use of democratic practices such as contested intra-
party balloting to select and promote leaders at high levels of govern-
ment; meritocratic practices such as open and competitive examina-
tions for public officials started as pilot projects in certain provinces 
and central administrative organs in the late 1980s before they were 
spread to the rest of the country,37 and there has even been experimen-
tation with different practices and institutions at the very top, such as 
varying the number of spots on the Standing Committee of the Polit-
buro to suit different needs at different times. Overall, however, politi-
cal reform over the past three decades has been informed by commit-
ment to the general principles of the China model: the lower the level 
of government, the more democratic the political system; experimenta-
tion is more likely to take place, including experiments with brand new 
practices and institutions, in between the lowest and highest levels of 
government; and the higher the level of government, the more merito-
cratic the political system.
2. The Ideal of Political Reform
The China model is not simply a reality that has informed political re-
form over the past three decades. It is also informed by ideals that can 
be used to evaluate the reality and point to better ways of doing things. 
We have to ask about the moral purpose of democracy, experimenta-
tion, and meritocracy, whether actually existing practices, laws, and 
institutions are implemented in accordance with what makes those po-
litical goods valuable in the first place, and, if not, how the reality can 
be improved in ways that are politically realistic and morally desirable. 
So let’s turn to a discussion of what makes each plank of the China 
model morally desirable, along with some suggestions of how the inevi-
table gap between reality and the ideal can be reduced.
Democratic elections are valuable if the leaders (1) are chosen in free 
and fair elections (otherwise the leaders do not represent the will of the 
people); (2) exercise real power (otherwise elections are a waste of time 

 
Concluding Thoughts 
189
and money), and (3) exercise power in ways that serve the interests of 
the community (as opposed to serving the interests of the leaders or a 
small segment of the community). In the case of village elections in 
China, however, there is a substantial gap between reality and the 
ideal. For one thing, village- level elections are not always free and fair. 
Candidates have rigged elections through voting blocs, bribes, or 
threats. The government itself recognizes the problem and has tried to 
fix it. A 2009 government circular urged candidates to practice fair play 
in direct elections of village heads amid complaints of bribery and 
other dirty tricks to win votes: the “bribery situation is grave and seri-
ously harms the impartiality of elections,” it said, warning that criminal 
penalties will be enforced against those who try to win votes from vil-
lagers with money, violence, or intimidation and against those who 
cheat in vote counts.38 The government has also promoted the use of 
nomination procedures, competitiveness, and secret balloting to im-
prove the chances of access to power via free and fair elections. Over-
all, “electoral procedures have improved greatly in the past two decades 
and a good number of competitive and reasonably fair elections have 
been held.”39
Access to power does not always (or even usually) translate into the 
exercise of power, however. In other words, even if villagers can express 
their preferences on voting day, it doesn’t follow that their representa-
tives exercise real power: the key problem is that their power is checked 
by the village party secretaries and township governments.40 When 
there is a very clear separation between the personnel of the non–party 
members of the elected village committees and the village party secre-
taries, it is easy for the latter to dominate; and when there is overlap, the 
preferences of the superiors at the township level who have authority 
over the party secretary can easily outweigh the preferences of the vot-
ers (or the elected leaders can be co- opted in the party).41 That said, a 
recent empirical study found that branch committees of the CCP, tra-
ditionally the centers of power in the villages, increasingly share their 
authority with elected villagers’ committees.42
Still, we must ask not only whether elected leaders exercise real 
power but also whether they exercise the right kind of power, namely, 
power that benefits the community. Here too, the record is mixed. The 
good news is that village elections in rural China have increased the 

190 
Concluding Thoughts 
share of public expenditures and reduced the share of administrative 
costs in the village budget.43 And when the administrative boundaries 
of local government overlap with solidary groups such as temples, lin-
eages, or tribes, local officials are more likely to perform well because 
providing public goods and services earns them moral standing among 
fellow group members as well as the help of other local elites in imple-
menting state policies.44 However, elections can also serve to strengthen 
the position of dominant clans at the cost of the weaker members of 
society.45 Empirical studies in India show that decentralization could 
lead to elite capture at the local level if the financing of public goods 
provision is not properly designed, and the same is true in China: rising 
business elites have been found to dominate village elections and can 
use their material power to steer the village committee to adopt pro- 
rich policies. So what can be done? Deliberative polling—randomly 
chosen citizens advised by experts make policy recommendations—is 
one way to curb the power of the rich and increase the likelihood of fair 
distribution of public goods.46 In 2005, the Wenling township in Zhe-
jiang province implemented a form of deliberative polling: randomly 
chosen citizens were invited to review the proposed government bud-
get and to recommend budget priorities.47 Unfortunately, this innova-
tion in local governance has expanded to only one county within the 
province due to lack of support from higher- level political authorities,48 
leading us to the next issue: the gap between the reality and the ideal of 
experimentation.
Experimentation is morally desirable only if successful experiments are 
expanded and failures are discontinued. The problem, however, is that 
central political authorities decide what works and what doesn’t, and 
their decisions are often guided less by social scientific knowledge and 
moral considerations than by “an intensely politicized process driven 
by competing interests, ideological frictions, personal rivalries, tactical 
opportunism or ad hoc policy compromises.”49 In the case of failed ex-
periments, the good news is that they are typically phased out and si-
lently stopped;50 higher authorities are unlikely to seek to spread them 
throughout the country. In the case of local experiments specifically 
tailored to the development needs of a special context,51 all the higher 
authorities need to do is refrain from excessive interference.52

 
Concluding Thoughts 
191
The bigger challenge is to generalize local innovations that could 
benefit other parts of the country because replicating and scaling up 
experiments in institutional innovation requires the support of a cen-
tral leader with the power and the motivation to overcome powerful 
groups that benefit from the status quo. Again, Chinese history offers 
some useful lessons. The empress dowager supported Li Hongzhang’s 
self- strengthening projects at the provincial level in the 1860s, but her 
court failed to broaden and intensify localized reform efforts into a 
comprehensive, empirewide initiative,53 with the result that China fell 
behind Japan in the quest for economic and military modernization. 
Conversely, experiments in market reform in the late 1970s were gener-
alized to the rest of the country because they had the strong backing of 
Deng Xiaoping, and experiments in village elections in the early 1980s 
were generalized because they had the strong backing of Peng Zhen, 
then vice- chairman of the National People’s Congress Standing Com-
mittee.54 As party secretary of Jiangsu, Li Yuanchao experimented with 
a procedure for soliciting public opinion and intraparty elections for 
township party secretaries, and such experiments with “intraparty de-
mocracy”55 were replicated at least partly (if not mainly) because of the 
support of the central authorities (Li is a longtime colleague and confi-
dante of the then- president Hu Jintao).56
On the other hand, experiments that seem promising have yet to be 
generalized because central authorities lack sufficient power and moti-
vation to overcome vested interests. The case of deliberative polling has 
already been discussed. The Tianjin eco- city, a government- to- 
government project between Singapore and China meant to showcase 
an environmentally friendly and resource- conserving form of urban 
development,57 has not (yet?) proven to be successful at least partly be-
cause of competition from nearby development projects.58 Competition 
between experimental zones can be the source of economic dyna-
mism,59 but high- level government support is needed to replicate and 
scale up experiments dealing with social justice or governance issues 
that do not have clear economic benefits for (or that go against the in-
terests of) powerful groups. The experiment with free speech and the 
rule of law in Hong Kong is another example that has yet to be general-
ized in other parts of China.60 The same goes for experiments with 
asset disclosure of government officials in Guangzhou meant to com-

192 
Concluding Thoughts 
bat corruption and the protection of religious freedoms in Tibetan- 
populated areas of Qinghai and Sichuan.61
Even seemingly successful experiments can be relabeled as failures 
and discontinued with a change of central government leadership. For 
example, Li Yuanchao’s experiments with standardizing the process of 
evaluating the performance of public officials by means of greater reli-
ance on competitive voting and examinations for purposes of promo-
tion have been deemphasized since the change of leadership in 2012. 
There may be good reasons for the change. The emphasis on voting 
often poisoned relations between candidates, honest and humble can-
didates who did not “sell themselves” well and those who resolved prob-
lems that required taking on vested interests were unduly penalized, 
and the process of designing the voting process and setting standards 
was often abused by powerful patrons to increase the likelihood of pre-
determined outcomes. Today, voting is not emphasized as much as 
qualitative interviews and an evaluation of work results. The emphasis 
on exams was also reduced because exams were seen as unduly reward-
ing good exam takers; writing ability is still strongly valued for purposes 
of promotion, but more in the sense of the ability to write useful reports 
addressing real problems. Hence, examinations have largely been dis-
continued as a way of assessing performance beyond the initial hiring 
phase. The whole emphasis on standardization often conflicted with 
relevance for the job, which requires more local variation in terms of 
evaluating what counts as good performance; for example, poor parts of 
China should reward officials that contribute to poverty reduction, but 
environmental sustainability should matter more in wealthier parts. 
The need to combat corruption means that Central Commission for 
Discipline Inspection should be given a greater role in evaluating the 
virtue of officials being considered for promotion. Last but not least, 
the need for complex voting and examinations procedures at each step 
of the promotion process substantially increased the cost to the public 
coffers.62 Nonetheless, the fact that these changes took place after the 
change of leadership makes it hard to entirely dispel the worry that they 
were partly driven by political rather than scientific considerations.63
In short, the experimentation with innovative policies meant to ad-
dress new challenges is desirable if successful experiments are consis-
tently replicated and scaled up to other parts of the country, but high- 

 
Concluding Thoughts 
193
level authorities often lack the power and motivation to do political 
battle on behalf of innovations that threaten powerful groups. The po-
litical obstacles may be particularly acute in the case of experiments 
with new ways of evaluating the performance of officials because those 
promoted under the old ways often have a vested (and perhaps psycho-
logical) interest in maintaining the status quo. So what can be done? 
Public pressure can help: various pilot programs in rural health care 
reforms carried out since the 1980s were scaled up to a national reform 
program only after the SARS epidemic in 2003 triggered massive pub-
lic criticism.64 To deal with controversial cases in a more scientific way, 
the government can set up an advisory body of experts in the social 
sciences with the mandate to evaluate the advantages and disadvan-
tages of ongoing experiments in different parts of the country. If ex-
perts are chosen at random from, say, the nation’s twenty leading uni-
versities, the advisory body would be seen as disinterested and could 
make recommendations based on moral considerations and social sci-
entific knowledge.65 If politically sensitive experiments are deemed to 
be successful by a body of independent experts, well- intentioned re-
formers in the central government would have the moral authority to 
promote the experiments and need not take full responsibility for pro-
moting innovations that trample on vested interests.66
The third plank of China’s political reform—political meritocracy at 
the top—is desirable if leaders are selected and promoted on the basis 
of superior ability and virtue. The practice, however, often deviates 
from the ideal. The most glaring gap is the political dominance of 
“princelings”: several of China’s top leaders, including President Xi Jin-
ping, are the descendants of prominent and influential senior Commu-
nist officials.67 In a meritocratic system with equal opportunity to rise 
to the top, one would expect fewer leaders with family ties to past lead-
ers.68 But the princelings began their rise before the institutionalization 
of examinations for public officials in the early 1990s and they were 
initially selected because of their relatively high level of education and 
reformist leanings, not to maintain the status quo; such conditions are 
unlikely to be reproduced in the future.69 Moreover, the avoidance sys-
tem—an antinepotism mechanism with roots in imperial China that 
forbids officials with kinship or other relations to work in the same of-

194 
Concluding Thoughts 
fice—was extended to all public officials in 1991,70 so examples of bla-
tant nepotism have decreased.71
Today, arguably, the more serious challenge to China’s political mer-
itocracy is that cadres are often promoted on the basis of loyalty to po-
litical superiors,72 although here too superiors are increasingly expected 
to pay greater attention to political merit rather than just rewarding 
personal friends.73 But this leads to the normative question of what con-
stitutes political merit. In chapter 2, I drew on history, philosophy, and 
social scientific research to put forward morally desirable and politi-
cally realistic suggestions about which qualities matter most for politi-
cal leaders in the context of a large, relatively peaceful, and moderniz-
ing political meritocracy such as China. More specifically, I discussed 
the intellectual abilities, social skills, and virtues required of political 
leaders and suggested mechanisms that could be implemented to in-
crease the likelihood of selecting and promoting leaders with these 
qualities. These findings were then used as a standard for evaluating 
China’s actually existing meritocratic system and I argued that China 
can improve its meritocratic system by means of exams that more ef-
fectively test for politically relevant intellectual abilities, by selecting 
and promoting more women into leadership positions to increase the 
likelihood that leaders have the social skills required for effective policy 
making, and by more systematic use of a peer- review system (as op-
posed to letting superiors decide) to promote political officials moti-
vated by the desire to serve the public.
But even well- designed political meritocracies are prone to failings 
in practice, and in chapter 3 I discussed three key problems with politi-
cal meritocracy and suggested possible solutions with the contempo-
rary Chinese context in mind. The problem of corruption can be ad-
dressed by means of mechanisms such as independent supervisory 
institutions, higher salaries, and improved moral education. The prob-
lem of ossification of political hierarchies can be addressed by means of 
humble political discourse, opening the ruling party to diverse social 
groups, more freedom of speech, and allowing for the possibility of dif-
ferent kinds of political leaders selected according to new ideas of po-
litical merit. The problem of legitimacy can be addressed by means of 
democratic reforms, including some form of explicit consent by the 
people. In chapter 4, I argued that vertical democratic meritocracy (po-

 
Concluding Thoughts 
195
litical meritocracy at the top, democracy at the bottom) is the best way 
of reconciling political meritocracy and electoral democracy in a large 
country and suggested that China’s leaders may need to put vertical 
democratic meritocracy to a referendum some time in the future in 
order to boost the democratic legitimacy of the political system. In 
short, there is a large gap between the ideal and the reality of political 
meritocracy in China, but it is possible (and desirable) to substantially 
reduce the gap without instituting electoral democracy at the top.
3. Beyond China
China has carried out a model of political reform since the late 1970s 
that is both a reality and an ideal that can be used to judge further im-
provement. It’s worth asking if the model can be exported elsewhere. 
The main limitation is that the model itself is the hybrid product of a 
historical experience unique to China. The practice of village elections 
has roots in earlier ideas about village self- governance, but electoral 
democracy was invented and borrowed from the West. Experimenta-
tion at local levels was carried out in imperial China, but it was first 
systematized into a workable policy by the CCP from the 1930s to the 
1950s. The idea and practice of political meritocracy is central to Chi-
nese political culture and China has proved to be fertile ground for its 
reestablishment in the reform era. Clearly the whole package—democ-
racy at the bottom, experimentation in the middle, meritocracy at the 
top—cannot readily be adopted by countries with a different history 
and culture. Moreover, it is a workable model only in a large and di-
verse country that is committed to a peaceful form of social and eco-
nomic modernization under the guidance of meritocratically selected 
leaders. And the whole thing can be implemented only by a ruling or-
ganization similar to the CCP. Other than perhaps Vietnam, no coun-
try comes close to fitting the requirements for successful establishment 
of the “China model.”
But the different planks of the model can be selectively adopted. 
The practice of free and fair elections at the local level is widely ad-
opted in the world, and even countries that have no plan to establish 
electoral democracy at the highest level of government can and should 

196 
Concluding Thoughts 
consider adopting democracy at local levels, just as China has done. 
The practice of experimentation in between central and local levels of 
government is difficult to implement in democratic contexts because 
experiments can take decades to bear fruit and elected politicians wor-
ried about the next election tend to have shorter time horizons. Also, 
the same party may not control the different levels of government and 
the top may not have the power to launch pilot projects in the whole 
country, particularly with regard to experiments in political reform.74 
Even with the same party in power at different levels of government, 
experimentation in the middle is not likely to be workable in a rigid 
federal system that enshrines strict divisions of powers among different 
levels of government because such experimentation is premised on the 
assumption that the central government has the power to generalize 
successful experiments to other parts of the country. And experimenta-
tion in the middle assumes a relatively large country (it wouldn’t work 
in Singapore).75 Here too, Vietnam is perhaps the only country that 
comes close to meeting these requirements.76
Political meritocracy at the top is the foundation of the China model, 
but it is also the most difficult to export. Citizens in electoral democra-
cies are committed to the practice of one person, one vote to choose 
top leaders and it is hard to imagine getting elected on a platform for 
“meritocratization” of democratic political systems that would involve 
curtailing people’s equal right to vote. Even the idea that civil servants 
need to pass examinations to be hired is intensely controversial in 
countries such as the United States, never mind the idea that political 
officials must do so.77 One cannot rule out scenarios, either pessimistic 
(e.g., nuclear war, global warming, major terrorist attacks) or optimistic 
(e.g., mechanization of necessary labor with more opportunities for cre-
ative work, discovery of new sources of renewable energy), that radically 
change political outlooks in several decades’ time, but for the moment 
democratic constitutional systems appear to be stable. Still, the positive 
qualities of political leaders in meritocratic systems can inspire voter 
preferences in democratic systems (e.g., voters can seek to elect political 
leaders with the traits of leaders in meritocratic systems) and elected 
leaders can seek to model themselves and implement policies accord-
ing to what works in meritocratic systems. Perhaps the best hope for 
defenders of political meritocracy is the fact that many countries have 

 
Concluding Thoughts 
197
yet to consolidate electoral democracy at the top, and China can assist 
other countries seeking to build up meritocratic rule.78 Just as the 
United States promotes democracy abroad via government- funded 
foundations like the National Endowment for Democracy, so the Chi-
nese government can fund an institution—let’s call it the National En-
dowment for Meritocracy—that would fund experiments in political 
meritocracy designed to improve governance in other countries. In 
terms of its foreign policy, China should make it explicit that it seeks 
special ties with political meritocracies abroad, if only to answer the 
criticism that its foreign policy is purely motivated by mercantile 
concerns.
At the end of the day, however, political meritocracy will work as a 
form of “soft power” only if China sets a good model for others: that is, 
it must practice political meritocracy at home. As China closes the gap 
between the ideal and the reality of political meritocracy, the true na-
ture of the system will become more apparent to outsiders. At the mo-
ment, however, China’s harsh treatment of its domestic critics and mi-
nority groups in western China grabs media headlines abroad, and it is 
difficult for defenders of political meritocracy to counter the criticism 
that coercion lies at the heart of its political system. Hence, as Pan Wei 
puts it, the Chinese state should become less oppressive and more toler-
ant.79 Last but not least, the CCP also needs to change its name so that 
it better corresponds to the institutional reality of the organization, as 
well as to what it aspires to be. In fact, the CCP is neither Communist 
nor a party. Few Chinese, including members of the CCP, believe that 
the CCP is leading the march to higher communism.80 Political meri-
tocracy was valued neither by Marx nor by Mao, and Lenin’s idea of the 
vanguard party was also different.81 With eighty-six million members, 
including card- carrying capitalists, the party is not a political party 
among others. It is a pluralistic organization composed of meritocrati-
cally selected members of different groups and classes, and it aims to 
represent the whole country.82 A more accurate name might be the 
Chinese Meritocratic Union (Zhongguo xianneng lianmeng). A more 
politically correct name—given the importance of the term democracy 
(minzhu) in official Chinese political discourse and among indepen-
dent Chinese intellectuals, as well as the fact that the political system 
as a whole incorporates democratic characteristics83—might be the 

198 
Concluding Thoughts 
Union of Democratic Meritocrats (Minzhu xianneng lianmeng). A 
change of public discourse can also help to close the gap between the 
ideal and the reality of political meritocracy because the government 
becomes more obliged to move some way toward realizing stated aspi-
rations.84 In short, the challenge for the Chinese government is not 
simply to walk the meritocratic walk; it should also talk the talk.85

Notes
Introduction
1. See the video at: http://world.time.com/2013/10/17/whats-the-secret-to-chinas 
-incredible-success/.
2. Daniel Bell, “On Meritocracy and Equality,” National Affairs 29 (Fall 1972): 
66–67. Bell (no relation) was one of the few major American thinkers in the post–
World War II era to defend the idea of political meritocracy. He also put forward a 
proposal for a “House of Counselors” composed of a group of experienced and disin-
terested political leaders ready to act for the common good (Bell, “The Old War: After 
Ideology, Corruption,” New Republic, 23 and 30 Aug. 1993). Bell had a special knack 
for tapping into the zeitgeist but in this case he was both behind and ahead of his 
time.
3. It could be argued that the ideal of merit was discredited because of its abuses. 
But other ideals, such as government by popular consent, have also been abused with-
out discrediting the ideal itself. As Joseph F. Kett explains (with reference to the 
American context), “Most Americans doubt that their vote really counts and suspect 
that powerful offstage interests shape policy more than do the voters, but nearly all of 
them defend government by consent. Today merit and consent, each an ideal of the 
founding fathers, nevertheless provoke different reactions. Evidence of the failings of 
popular consent scarcely ruffles the ideal, while evidence of the difficulties encoun-
tered in implementing merit provides derision of the ideal.” One might be more 
skeptical of the ideal of merit if attempts to implement it always (or usually) led to 
negative consequences, but Kett argues otherwise: “Throughout the course of our 
history, invocations of merit have served many hitherto excluded groups in their de-
mand for equal rights.” Kett, Merit: The History of a Founding Ideal from the Ameri-
can Revolution to the 21st Century (Ithaca, N.Y.: Cornell University Press, 2013), pp. 
261–262.
4. See, e.g., Nicolas Berggruen and Nathan Gardels, Intelligent Governance for 
the 21st Century: A Middle Way between West and East (Cambridge: Polity Press, 
2012).
5. See Stephen Macedo, “Meritocratic Democracy: Learning from the American 
Constitution,” and Philip Pettit, “Meritocratic Representation,” both in The East 
Asian Challenge for Democracy: Political Meritocracy in Comparative Perspective, ed. 
Daniel A. Bell and Chenyang Li (New York: Cambridge University Press, 2013). De-
bates over judicial review and the U.S. Supreme Court suggest that the lines are not 

200 
Notes to Introduction 
always so clear between what counts as “political” and what counts as “judicial,” but 
in principle judges are not supposed to exercise political power.
6. Of course, the theoretical distinction between elected politicians who decide 
and civil servants who implement is often violated in practice, as the satirical British 
television show Yes, Minister reminds us.
7. In 1958, the English sociologist Michael Young coined the term meritocracy in 
a political satire that was meant to discredit the ideal, but he conflated political and 
economic meritocracy. Young, The Rise of the Meritocracy (London: Thames and 
Hudson, 1958). The Chinese term for political meritocracy—贤能政治 (xianneng 
zhengzhi)—more clearly refers to the idea that the political system should aim to 
choose leaders with superior ability and virtue rather than an economic principle 
governing the distribution of wealth in society.
8. Karl Marx, The Critique of the Gotha Program (1875, part I) (http://www 
.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1875/gotha/ch01.htm).
9. John Rawls, A Theory of Justice (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1972), p. 100.
10. Cited in Jordan Weissmann, “Ben Bernanke to Princeton Grads: The World 
Isn’t Fair (and You All Got Lucky),” The Atlantic, 3 June 2013.
11. Similarly, I do not mean to justify any particular view regarding “meritocracy” 
in education unless the question of how to distribute places in the educational system 
bears on the issue of how to establish a morally desirable and politically realistic form 
of political meritocracy.
12. What if China’s one- party state collapses and is replaced by “Western- style” 
electoral democracy, as happened in the Soviet Union? In such an (improbable) 
event, the democratic system is still likely to be influenced by key aspects of Chinese 
political culture (just as Vladimir Putin’s Russia has “restored” key aspects of Russian 
political culture), especially its commitment to political meritocracy, so what I say in 
this book in favor of political meritocracy may still be (at least partly) relevant.
13. China is formally a multiparty state under the leadership of the Chinese Com-
munist Party, but the eight officially registered minor political parties are not sup-
posed to compete for political power with the CCP.
14. I haven’t responded to any of these critiques (except for one particularly unfair 
article that contained misleading information about my wife) because I realized that 
any response would need to be very detailed to be persuasive. I’ve faced the same 
problem whenever I’ve presented parts of this book at seminars and lectures at univer-
sities around the world: if I present, say, chapter 2, the questions and comments will 
inevitably turn to issues raised in chapters 3 and 4; if it’s about chapter 4, then people 
want to talk about issues raised in chapters 1 and 3, etc. Hence (and I apologize if this 
sounds pompous), I literally had to write a whole book to answer the criticisms.
15. Another reason is that I value university presses at leading Anglo- American 
universities: their procedures for publication express a commitment to academic free-
dom and academic meritocracy; the same cannot always be said of publishers in other 
countries.
16. In the case of democratic countries, I have in mind reforms of the type sug-

 
Notes to Chapter 1  
201
gested in Berggruen and Gardels’s book Intelligent Governance for the 21st Century, 
which are meant to be built on democratic foundations. My aim is not to undermine 
faith in electoral democracy in countries that have implemented such systems, if only 
because the practical alternatives tend to be military dictatorship or authoritarian 
populism. Also, political meritocracy (unlike electoral democracy) cannot be estab-
lished overnight; it requires decades of work. In the case of China, the practical alter-
native to electoral democracy (in the foreseeable future) is political meritocracy be-
cause such arguments resonate with its dominant political culture and the government 
has been (re)establishing an (imperfect) form of political meritocracy over the past 
three decades or so and it can be improved on the basis of the current model (see 
concluding thoughts).
17. To be more precise: there is a wide range of political views in China, and my 
book falls somewhere in the middle range of the ideological spectrum: leftists (de-
fenders of socialism and Chinese- style democracy) are likely to object to the proposal 
for a referendum and more freedom of political speech, and rightists (defenders of 
capitalism and liberal democracy) are likely to object to the strong critique of electoral 
democracy at the top.
Chapter 1 
Is Democracy the Least Bad Political System?
1. To be more precise, there is also widespread agreement on the value of basic 
human rights and prohibitions against slavery, genocide, murder, torture, prolonged 
arbitrary detention, and systematic racial discrimination, as well as the idea that all 
citizens should be equal before the law in criminal cases. But such values are also 
endorsed in contemporary China at the level of principle (in imperial China, by way 
of contrast, a group of elites, such as successful exam takers, were given special ex-
emptions from criminal punishment simply by virtue of their social status; I do not 
know of any modern Chinese thinkers, including Confucians, who seek to revive that 
form of inequality). In this book, I do not mean to question the value of basic human 
rights or equality before the law in criminal cases (quite the opposite: I wholeheart-
edly endorse such values). My concern here is only to evaluate the desirability of 
choosing political leaders by means of one person, one vote.
2. See, e.g., John Keane, The Life and Death of Democracy (London: Simon and 
Schuster, 2009).
3. Samuel P. Huntington, Political Order in Changing Societies, new ed. (New 
Haven, Conn.: Yale University Press, 2006).
4. Even prodemocracy movement leaders from the late 1980s such as Fang Lizhi 
“expressed only horror at a democratic formula that would give equal voting rights to 
peasants” (Vivienne Shue, “China: Transition Postponed?” Problems of Communism 
41, nos. 1–2 [Jan.–Apr. 1992]: 163).
5. Yu Keping, Democracy Is a Good Thing (Washington, D.C.: Brookings Institu-
tion Press, 2009), and http://www.chinausfocus.com/political-social-development/the 

202 
Notes to Chapter 1  
-case-for-an-orderly-democracy-in-china/. For a mild critique, see Gao Minzheng, 
“Zhongguoshi minzhu ye shi ge hao dongxi—You ‘Minzhu shi ge hao dongxi’ yinfa 
de ji dian sikao” [Chinese- Style Democracy Is Also a Good Thing—A Few Thoughts 
Sparked by “Democracy Is a Good Thing”], Tansuo yu zhengming 11 (2013): 4–10.
6. Yu Chongsheng, “Cha’e xuanju: Zhongguoshi minzhu de yingran zhi lu” 
[Multi- Candidate Elections: A Necessary Way for Chinese- Style Democracy], Tansuo 
yu zhengming 5, no. 271 (2012): 56–59.
7. Ma Ling, “Daiyizhi dui minzhu de fenjie: Minzhu xuanju, minzhu juece he 
minzhu jiandu” [An Analysis of Representative Democracy: Democratic Elections, 
Democratic Decision Making, and Democratic Supervision], Zhanlue yu guanli 5, 
no. 6 (2012): 27–38.
8. Again, not all Chinese intellectuals share this view: as we will see, Confucian- 
inspired thinkers seek to defend strong meritocratic checks on electoral democracy. 
For a comprehensive account of the academic debates about democracy in China, see 
Émilie Frenkiel, Parler politique en Chine: Les intellectuels chinois pour ou contre la 
démocratie [Talking about Politics in China: Chinese Intellectuals for or against De-
mocracy] (Paris: Presses Universitaires de France, 2014).
9. I do not mean to imply that a long history is sufficient to justify a social practice 
(consider the long history of slavery). But a long history is often taken to be an argu-
ment in favor of social practices that do not, on reflection, seem straightforwardly bad 
or good (in contrast, it makes sense to withhold judgment about a controversial event 
without a very long history).
10. I add “preferably” because, at least in the case of university presidents, the ex-
perience need not always be in the same field: for example, Janet Napolitano was ap-
pointed president of the University of California system in July 2013 (at least partly) on 
the basis of her track record running organizations as governor of Arizona and secre-
tary of homeland security.
11. Similarly, few people other than experts in human rights law know that the 
Universal Declaration of Human Rights specifies that “the will of the people shall be 
the basis of the authority of government; this will shall be expressed in periodic and 
genuine elections which shall be by universal and equal suffrage and shall be held by 
secret vote or by equivalent voting procedures” (Article 21 (3)).
12. In fact, knowledge of debates in political science may undermine faith in de-
mocracy. The harshest criticism of electoral democracy as a political ideal in China is 
often made by Chinese intellectuals with PhDs in political science from leading 
American universities (Ren Jiantao, “Jiazhi yinni yu zhishi niuqu: Liu mei zheng-
zhixue boshi dui minzhu de juchi” [Hidden Values and Distortion of Knowledge: 
The Rejection of Democracy by Chinese Scholars Who Have Received Ph.D.s in 
Political Science in the United States], Zhanlue yu guanli 1 [2012]). The author of the 
article is highly critical of such scholars who supposedly exaggerate the weaknesses of 
electoral democracy in the United States and the strengths of “Chinese- style” democ-
racy in China.
13. For an account of the long and contested history of the expansion of the fran-

 
Notes to Chapter 1  
203
chise in the United States, see Alexander Keyssar, The Right to Vote: The Contested 
History of Democracy in the United States (New York: Basic Books, 2009).
14. For an account of the way the history of the popular sovereign has displaced, 
while borrowing from, the revelatory character of the Judeo- Christian God (thus 
helping to explain why many citizens are willing to sacrifice for the state), see Paul W. 
Kahn, Putting Liberalism in Its Place (Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press, 
2005).
15. In principle, political equality can take other forms; for example, everybody 
can have the equal right to take exams that put citizens on the road to political power.
16. As Alexis de Tocqueville put it, the “ceaseless agitation which democratic 
government has introduced into the political world influences all social discourse. . . . 
I have no doubt that the democratic institutions of the United States, joined to the 
physical constitution of the country, are the cause (not the direct, as is so often as-
serted, but the indirect cause) of the prodigious commercial activity of the inhab-
itants” (https://www.marxists.org/reference/archive/de-tocqueville/democracy-america 
/ch14.htm). But the argument that only democratic- style political energy translates 
into social and economic energy is not so straightforward. Social energy is hard to 
measure, but even the most casual observer of contemporary China cannot fail to 
notice the ceaseless motion and social tumult that may also have been characteristic 
of the United States in Tocqueville’s day. If the rate of economic growth is the key 
measurement of economic energy, then both Singapore and China have outper-
formed democratic countries over the past three decades. An oft- heard argument is 
that China will require democracy to allow for more innovation and the creativity 
that underpins economic growth at higher levels of development, but indicators of 
innovation such as the number of Chinese invention patents filed abroad have been 
rising sharply since 2003 (“Chinese Patents: Ever More Inventive,” The Economist, 24 
May 2014; see also “The China Wave: Chinese Management Ideas Are Beginning to 
Get the Attention They Deserve,” The Economist, 13 Sept. 2014).
17. This sentiment won’t be as strong in a country without elections to choose top 
leaders and where people generally support political meritocracy (as in China; see 
chapter 3, section 3), but people become more attached to electoral democracy once 
it’s in place because those “downgraded” in any attempt to modify or abolish the sys-
tem will be viewed as “losers” and will object to the change. On the other hand, 
strong minorities (as in Thailand) and perhaps even majorities (Egypt?) may favor 
military coups if electoral democracy fails to deliver the promised goods.
18. I confess I don’t find any of these reasons psychologically compelling from a 
personal point of view: I haven’t voted for political leaders since I left Canada nearly 
three decades ago and I neither miss it nor feel that my human dignity has been un-
dermined as a result. For those of us who care about political influence, perhaps influ-
ence via means such as teaching and writing is sufficient psychological compensation 
for lack of voting rights.
19. Such arguments are made not only within the liberal or deontological tradi-
tions: Joseph Chan argues from a “Confucian perfectionist” viewpoint that elections 

204 
Notes to Chapter 1  
express the ideal of mutual commitment and trust. See Chan, Confucian Perfection-
ism: A Political Philosophy for Modern Times (Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University 
Press, 2014), chs. 3–4.
20. See Jason Brennan, “Political Liberty: Who Needs It?” Social Philosophy and 
Policy 29 (2012): 1–27. For a critique of influential arguments on behalf of majority 
rule, see Mathias Risse, “Arguing for Majority Rule,” Journal of Political Philosophy 
12, no. 1 (2004): 41–64.
21. Richard Miller, “How Does Political Equality Matter? Mencius Meets Walt 
Whitman,” paper presented at the “Philosophy and Public Policy” Colloquium, 
Wuhan University, 22–23 Mar. 2014. Miller himself defends political equality on the 
noninstrumental grounds that citizens denied political equality will feel humiliated 
and insulted, but such views owe much to the American historical experience that 
deprived African Americans of the vote. It’s unclear why it’s a problem if people do 
not feel insulted by being denied an equal vote and if they feel they derive sufficient 
benefits from a nondemocratic system. Should we say that Chinese people suffer from 
a collective form of false consciousness if they are generally supportive of political 
meritocracy—see chapter 3, section 3—and are well aware of the alternatives?
22. Doh Chull Shin, Confucianism and Democratization in East Asia (Cam-
bridge: Cambridge University Press, 2011), p. 322. See also the discussion in my book 
East Meets West: Human Rights and Democracy in East Asia (Princeton, N.J.: 
Princeton University Press, 2000), ch. 3.
23. It was not Churchill’s original intent: he made this remark in the House of 
Commons in 1947 after he had been voted out of power (in 1945) and had reason to 
feel somewhat bitter (http://wais.stanford.edu/Democracy/democracy_Democracy 
AndChurchill(090503).html).
24. Jason Brennan, The Ethics of Voting (Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University 
Press, 2011), p. 76.
25. Amartya Sen, Democracy as Freedom (New York: Anchor, 1999).
26. See Thomas Christiano, “An Instrumental Argument for a Human Right to 
Democracy,” Philosophy and Public Affairs 39, no. 2 (2011): 163–164.
27. The rate of malnutrition among children in India is almost five times greater 
than that in China. See http://www.worldbank.org/en/news/feature/2013/05/13/helping 
-india-combat-persistently-high-rates-of-malnutrition.
28. From a moral point of view, the tendency to go to war is less problematic if the 
wars are just. A defender of U.S. foreign policy might argue that China is free riding 
on an international order that lets the United States do the dirty work (fighting just 
wars). But both liberals and Confucians would agree that some American- led wars, 
such as the invasion of Iraq in 2003, have been unjust. See the discussion in my book 
Beyond Liberal Democracy: Political Thinking for an East Asian Context (Princeton, 
N.J.: Princeton University Press, 2006), ch. 2.
29. See http://www.cartercenter.org/peace/democracy/des.html.
30. Paul Collier, Wars, Guns, and Votes: Democracy in Dangerous Places (Lon-
don: Vintage, 2010), pp. 28–36, 225.

 
Notes to Chapter 1  
205
31. Of course, power and influence are not the same as success in promoting 
human well- being. Nordic countries typically rank at the top of global indexes mea-
suring human well- being, but it makes little sense to compare China with resource- 
rich and relatively homogenous countries of a few million people. That said, I do dis-
cuss tiny Singapore in this book because Singapore- style political meritocracy has 
been influential in China, and I do not mean to deny that China can also learn from 
aspects of the political experience of Nordic countries.
32. I should also add a personal reason: it may not be obvious from the criticisms 
of the American political system that are about to follow, but I have a special affection 
for the United States (my father and son were both born in the United States, and, yes, 
some of my best friends are Americans). In other words, I write about the United 
States because I care about it and hope it improves.
33. See my introduction to The East Asian Challenge for Democracy.
34. I do not focus on all key drawbacks: for an argument, put forward by political 
theorists of the past but still relevant today, that the norms of democracy (such as 
transparency) conflict with the demands of security, see Rahul Sagar, “Presaging the 
Moderns: Demosthenes’ Critique of Popular Government,” Journal of Politics 71, no. 
4 (Oct. 2009): 1394–1405.
35. Michael Mann, The Dark Side of Democracy: Explaining Ethnic Cleansing 
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2005), esp. chs. 1, 3, and 17.
36. Josiah Ober, Political Dissent in Democratic Athens: Intellectual Critics of 
Popular Rule (Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press, 1998), p. 345.
37. I say “generally” because constitutionally enshrined rights in liberal democra-
cies are meant to protect individuals against the whims of majority decision making 
on the assumption that people are not always rational.
38. Classical economics has also been founded on the assumption that people are 
rational and know what they want. This assumption has been the subject of much 
criticism of late, with even Alan Greenspan conceding that as Fed chairman he was 
too sanguine about the ability of financial institutions to act rationally and prudently, 
and he now gives much greater weight to the role of “animal spirits.” See Greenspan, 
The Map and the Territory: Risk, Human Nature, and the Future of Forecasting (New 
York: Penguin, 2013).
39. See Brennan, The Ethics of Voting, ch. 5.
40. Ibid., p. 127 and ch. 7.
41. Bai Tongdong, “A Confucian Hybrid Regime: How Does It Work and Why Is 
It Superior?” in The East Asian Challenge for Democracy, p. 61. One can imagine 
optimistic scenarios in the future similar to Karl Marx’s version of communism—ma-
chines or robots do most of the necessary labor and we are freed to exercise our cre-
ative talents—but more pessimistic scenarios (e.g., domination by machines) seem 
just as likely.
42. Brennan, The Ethics of Voting, p. 165.
43. Daniel Kahneman, Thinking, Fast and Slow (London: Penguin, 2011), pp. 
258, 259, 256–257, 417–418.

206 
Notes to Chapter 1  
44. Brennan, The Ethics of Voting, pp. 163–164. On the political ignorance of vot-
ers in France, see “Pourquoi Voter?” [Why Vote?], Books 31 (Apr. 2012): 29.
45. Brennan, The Ethics of Voting, p. 10. The fact that Republicans and Demo-
crats tend to attribute false (bad) motives to their opponents, no matter how irrational, 
is explained by a well- documented “partisan bias” that activates the part of the brain 
involved in processing emotions. As the lead scientist on one such study put it: “We 
did not see any increased activation of the parts of the brain normally engaged during 
reasoning. What we saw instead was a network of emotion circuits lighting up, includ-
ing circuits hypothesized to be involved in regulating emotion, and circuits known to 
be involved in resolving conflicts. None of the circuits involved in conscious reason-
ing were particularly engaged. Essentially, it appears as if partisans twirl the cognitive 
kaleidoscope until they get the conclusions they want, and then they get massively 
reinforced for it, with the elimination of negative emotional states and the activation 
of positive ones.” Cited in Denise D. Cummins, Good Thinking: Seven Powerful Ideas 
That Influence the Way We Think (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2012), p. 
120.
46. Jonah Goldberg, “Public Lacks Grasp of Obamacare,” USA Today, 30 Sept. 
2013.
47. Bryan Caplan, The Myth of the Rational Voter: Why Democracies Choose Bad 
Policies (Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press, 2007), p. 10. Kahneman’s finding 
that entrepreneurs tend to be overly optimistic is not necessarily inconsistent with 
Caplan’s findings of a pessimistic bias among voters at large: it could be that the mi-
nority of optimists become entrepreneurs.
48. Nicholas Kristof, “No. 1 Neglected Topic: Climate Change,” New York Times, 
20 Jan. 2014.
49. See http://www.huffingtonpost.com/2013/07/23/evolution-god_n_3640658.html.
50. Cited in Jamie Terence Kelly, Framing Democracy: A Behavioral Approach to 
Democratic Theory (Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press, 2012), p. 77.
51. David Leonhardt, “When the Crowd Isn’t Wise,” New York Times, 8 July 2012 
(reporting the findings of Nate Silver).
52. Brennan, The Ethics of Voting, p. 171.
53. Ibid., p. 103. For more on the special conditions required for Aristotle’s argu-
ment on behalf of collective wisdom to be effective, see Mathias Risse, “The Virtuous 
Group—Foundations for the ‘Argument from the Wisdom of the Multitude,’ ” Cana-
dian Journal of Philosophy 31, no. 1 (Mar. 2001): 53–84. See also Josiah Ober, “De-
mocracy’s Wisdom: An Aristotelian Middle Way for Collective Judgment,” American 
Political Science Review 107, no. 1 (Feb. 2013): 104–122.
54. Lexington, “The China- Bashing Syndrome,” The Economist, 14 July 2012.
55. Brennan, The Ethics of Voting, p. 10.
56. See my book Beyond Liberal Democracy, ch. 7.
57. Kahneman, Thinking, Fast and Slow, p. 262.
58. Nicolas Berggruen and Nathan Gardels, “Political Meritocracy and Direct 

 
Notes to Chapter 1  
207
Democracy: A Hybrid Experiment in California,” in The East Asian Challenge for 
Democracy. See also their book Intelligent Governance for the 21st Century, ch. 6.
59. Mark Henderson, The Geek Manifesto: Why Science Matters (London: Corgi 
Books, 2012), pp, 38, 22. See also John Allen Paulos, “Why Don’t Americans Elect 
Scientists?” New York Times, 13 Feb. 2012.
60. David Dobbs, “Appendix: A Geek Manifesto for America,” in Henderson, The 
Geek Manifesto, p. 321.
61. Sharon LaFraniere, “China and Cheap Tires,” New York Times, 3 Oct. 2012.
62. I do not mean to imply that voters and political decision makers should always 
listen to experts, but experts should have disproportionate political input when their 
results are more reliable. See Harry Collins and Robert Evans, Rethinking Expertise 
(Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2009), pp. 135–136.
63. John Stuart Mill, “Considerations on Representative Government” [orig. pub. 
1861], in Collected Works of John Stuart Mill, ed. J. M. Robson (Toronto: University of 
Toronto Press, 1977), ch. 3.
64. Brennan, “Political Liberty: Who Needs It?” p. 24 (referring to Diana Mutz, 
Hearing the Other Side: Deliberative versus Participatory Democracy [Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press, 2006]). For some contrary evidence showing that there is 
widespread willingness to deliberate in the United States and that people who are less 
likely to participate in traditional nonpartisan politics are most interested in delibera-
tive participation, see Michael A. Noblo et al., “Who Wants to Deliberate—and 
Why?” Faculty Research Working Paper Series, Kennedy School, Harvard University, 
Sept. 2009. But these findings draw on the highly atypical experiment of an invitation 
to deliberate with their member of the U.S. House of Representatives.
65. Kelly, Framing Democracy, p. 121. Some interventions designed to overcome 
cognitive biases may not be so costly or complicated: for example, politicians get away 
with avoiding tough questions by exploiting the fact that people have finite attention 
spans, but research has shown that posting a summary of the question on screen dur-
ing the answer helps people to detect artful dodges (Todd Rogers and Michael I. 
Norton, “A Way to Stop Dodges,” New York Times, 3 Oct. 2012). On the other hand, a 
recent study by Amanda Friesen and Aleksander Ksiazkiewicz comparing identical 
and genetic twins points to a source of political bias that may be particularly difficult 
to overcome: “the correlation between religious importance and conservatism is 
driven primarily, but usually not exclusively, by genetic factors. . . . If these predisposi-
tions are, as Friesen and Ksiazkiewicz argue, to some degree genetically rooted, they 
may not lend themselves to rational debate and compromise” (Thomas B. Edsall, 
“How Much Do Our Genes Influence Our Political Beliefs?” New York Times, 8 July 
2014). Put differently, it is not impossible to change genetically rooted predispositions, 
but it requires prolonged conscious effort and careful weighing of arguments, and 
most people lack the time, motivation, and cognitive skills to do so.
66. Brennan, The Ethics of Voting, p. 182. To be frank, these tips seem somewhat 
half- baked: unlike the rest of the book, they are presented in a superconfident way 
without any empirical evidence suggesting that they will be effective.

208 
Notes to Chapter 1  
67. Ibid., p. 68.
68. “Free Exchange,” The Economist, 12 Jan. 2013.
69. Robert B. Albritton and Thawilwadee Bureekul, “Developing Democracy 
under a New Constitution in Thailand,” in How East Asians View Democracy, ed. 
Yun- Han Chu, Larry Diamond, Andrew J. Nathan, and Doh Chull Shin (New York: 
Columbia University Press, 2008), p. 123.
70. Jason Brennan, “The Right to a Competent Electorate,” Philosophical Quar-
terly 61, no. 245 (2011): 724.
71. Brennan’s proposal may be more appropriate for China, where the political 
culture is less anti- elitist and the central government has the power to carry out local 
experimentation that can be scaled up (see concluding thoughts).
72. See also chapter 4, section 2.
73. See my book East Meets West, ch. 3.
74. Cited in Han Fook Kwang, Warren Fernandez, and Sumiko Tan, Lee Kuan 
Yew: The Man and His Ideas (Singapore: Times Editions, 1998), p. 315.
75. Cited in Edwin Lee, Singapore: The Unexpected Nation (Singapore: ISEAS, 
2008), p. 547. Prime Minister Lee does not make explicit the contrast—repeatedly 
made in the Analects of Confucius—between the junzi (exemplary person) and the 
xiao ren (petty person) because political leaders could not refer to citizens as xiao ren 
without arousing needless controversy. A charitable interpretation of Lee’s point is 
that political leaders in a meritocracy should be evaluated by the standards of the 
junzi, whereas ordinary citizens need not be evaluated according to such lofty 
standards.
76. See Benjamin Wong, “Political Meritocracy in Singapore: Lessons from the 
PAP Government,” in The East Asian Challenge for Democracy.
77. Lee Kuan Yew, From Third World to First: The Singapore Story, 1965–2000 
(New York: Harper, 2000).
78. Eugene K. B. Tan, “Re- engaging Chineseness: Political, Economic and Cul-
tural Imperatives of Nation- Building in Singapore,” China Quarterly 175 (Sept. 2003): 
756.
79. Cited in Han, Fernandez, and Tan, Lee Kuan Yew, p. 134.
80. Kenneth Paul Tan, “Meritocracy and Political Liberalization in Singapore,” 
in The East Asian Challenge for Democracy. It is worth noting that the Singapore re-
gime advocates both political and economic meritocracy (see the introduction) and 
the negative connotations of the term are also the result of growing doubts about 
economic meritocracy in Singapore.
81. For a detailed interpretation of the 2011 election results, see Kevin Y. L. Tan 
and Terence Lee, eds., Voting in Change: Politics of Singapore’s 2011 General Election 
(Singapore: Ethos Books, 2011).
82. See, e.g., Yan Cang, “Xinjiapo moshi de xingcheng yu chixu” [The Formation 
and Continuance of the Singapore Model], Wenhua zongheng, Apr. 2013, pp. 46–51.
83. Since 1992, for example, more than twelve thousand Chinese officials at the 
rank of county mayor or above have gone through executive training programs and 

 
Notes to Chapter 1  
209
postgraduate programs in managerial economics and public administration at Nan-
yang Technological University, and many are now influential decision makers in the 
Chinese government.
84. See, e.g., Song Xiongwei, “Xuexi Shibao kan wen jieshao Xinjiapo zhizheng-
dang zhenggai jingyan” [Study Times Introduces Singaporean Political Parties’ Expe-
rience of Political Reforms], Tencent News, 22 Oct. 2012. Retrieved from http://news 
.qq.com/a/20121022/000098.htm.
85. David Runciman argues that China’s rival political model is one of the four 
major challenges facing democracy. Runciman, The Confidence Trap: A History of 
Democracy in Crisis from World War I to the Present (Princeton, N.J.: Princeton Uni-
versity Press, 2013), pp. 318–323.
86. Ober, Political Dissent in Democratic Athens, pp. 304, 341.
87. Macedo, “Meritocratic Democracy.”
88. Jacob S. Hacker and Paul Pierson, Winner- Take- All Politics: How Washington 
Made the Rich Richer—and Turned Its Back on the Middle Class (New York: Simon 
and Schuster, 2010), p. 76.
89. John P. McCormick, Machiavellian Democracy (Cambridge: Cambridge Uni-
versity Press, 2011), p. 179.
90. Cited in Hacker and Pierson, Winner- Take- All Politics, p. 77
91. John Kay, “A Tyranny of the Minority in an Age of Single- Issue Obsessives,” 
Financial Times, 12 June 2013.
92. Hacker and Pierson, Winner- Take- All Politics, p. 3.
93. Charles A. Kupchan, “The Democratic Malaise,” Foreign Affairs 91, no. 1 
(Jan./Feb. 2012): 64.
94. Hacker and Pierson, Winner- Take- All Politics, p. 6. For detailed evidence that 
economic elites and organized groups representing business interests have substantial 
independent impacts on U.S. government policy, while average citizens and mass- 
based interest groups have little or no independent influence, see Martin Gilens and 
Benjamin I. Page, “Testing Theories of American Politics: Elites, Interest Groups, 
and Average Citizens,” Perspectives on Politics 12, no. 3 (Sept. 2014): 564–581.
Another important cause of economic inequality in the United States is related to 
education: during the first eight decades of the twentieth century, the increase in the 
supply of educated workers was greater than the technologically induced demand for 
them, which had the effect of boosting income for most people and lowering inequal-
ity, but the reverse has been true for the past three decades. Claudia Goldin and 
Laurence F. Katz, The Race between Education and Technology (Cambridge, Mass.: 
Harvard University Press, 2010).
95. Bob Herbert, “Fast Track to Inequality,” New York Times, 1 Nov. 2010. This is 
not to suggest that the superrich are necessarily incapable of looking beyond their 
economic self- interest: Warren Buffett wrote an op- ed in the New York Times that 
ends with this stirring paragraph: “My friends and I have been coddled long enough 
by a billionaire- friendly Congress. It’s time for our government to get serious about 

210 
Notes to Chapter 1  
shared sacrifice. Billionaires like me should pay more taxes” (“Stop Coddling the 
Super- rich,” New York Times, 15 Aug. 2011).
96. Chrystia Freeland, “The Self- Destruction of the 1 Percent,” New York Times, 
13 Oct. 2012.
97. “Census: U.S. Poverty Rate Spikes, Nearly 50 Million Americans Affected,” 
CBS, 15 Nov. 2012.
98. “Extreme Poverty in the United States, 1996 to 2011,” National Poverty Cen-
ter, Feb. 2012.
99. http://opinionator.blogs.nytimes.com/2013/05/29/why-cant-america-be 
-sweden/.
100. Michael Lewis, The Big Short (London: Penguin, 2010), pp. 23, 74, 130–131, 
176, 179, 214, 258.
101. http://opinionator.blogs.nytimes.com/2013/05/29/why-cant-america-be 
-sweden/.
102. Christopher Hayes, Twilight of the Elites: America after Meritocracy (New 
York: Crown, 2012), pp. 62, 63. See also Timothy Noah, The Great Divergence: Amer-
ica’s Growing Inequality Crisis and What We Can Do about It (New York: Bloomsbury 
Press, 2012), pp. 28–29. That said, recent support for the Occupy movement and the 
unexpected runaway success of Thomas Piketty’s tome Capital in the Twenty- First 
Century, trans. Arthur Goldhammer (Cambridge, Mass.: Belknap Press, 2014) point 
to a significant shift in American public opinion about inequality and (lack of) op-
portunity in American society.
103. Hacker and Pierson, Winner- Take- All Politics, pp. 101–102. See also Jeffrey 
Edward Green, The Eyes of the People: Democracy in an Age of Spectatorship (Oxford: 
Oxford University Press, 2011).
104. Consider the differential impact of mass demonstrations in different types of 
political systems. In nondemocratic Hong Kong, more than a half million people took 
to the streets in 2003 to protest a proposed national security law, and the government 
was forced to withdraw the proposal. In democratic Montreal, more than a half mil-
lion people took to the streets in 2012 to protest a plan to increase university fees, and 
the government could divert political pressure with the argument that the people 
should wait till the elections to enact change.
105. Hayes, Twilight of the Elites, pp. 60–62.
106. Richard G. Wilkinson, The Impact of Inequality: How to Make Sick Societies 
Healthier (New York: New Press, 2005). See also Richard G. Wilkinson and Kate Pick-
ett, The Spirit Level: Why Equal Societies Almost Always Do Better (London: Allen 
Lane, 2009).
107. Noah, The Great Divergence, ch. 11.
108. See the references in McCormick, Machiavellian Democracy, p. 171n10.
109. Ibid., p. 181.
110. “Going Swimmingly,” The Economist, 23 Apr. 2011, p. 67.
111. Marie- Claire Bergère, Chine: Le nouveau capitalisme d’État (Paris: Fayard, 
2013).

 
Notes to Chapter 1  
211
112. A wide- ranging survey of Chinese family wealth and living habits by Peking 
University estimated China’s Gini coefficient to be .49 (still very high—the United 
States had a Gini coefficient of .45 in 2007—but lower than the .51 the United States 
had in 2010). Edward Wong, “Survey in China Shows Wide Income Gap,” New York 
Times, 19 July 2013. Singapore’s Gini coefficient worsened from .425 in 1998 to .478 
in 2009. Lam Peng Er, “The Voters Speak: Voices, Choices and Implications,” in Vot-
ing in Change: Politics of Singapore’s 2011 General Election, ed. Kevin Y. L. Tan and 
Terence Lee (Singapore: Ethos Books, 2011), p. 186.
113. Martin King Whyte, “Soaring Income Gaps: China in Comparative Perspec-
tive,” Daedalus 143, no. 2 (Spring 2014): 39–52.
114. Traditional Marxists, of course, would advocate not reform but revolution, 
that is, violent overthrow of the economic ruling class. But such voices are few and far 
between in both China and the United States.
115. I’ve developed this argument, drawing on the philosophy of Xunzi and sup-
ported with examples from East Asian societies, in my book China’s New Confucian-
ism: Political Thinking for an East Asian Context (Princeton, N.J.: Princeton Univer-
sity Press, 2008), ch. 3. For a similar argument with an example from American 
politics, see Jonathan Haidt, “Reasons Matter (When Intuitions Don’t Object),” New 
York Times, 7 Oct. 2012.
116. Noah, The Great Divergence, p. 193.
117. Chrystia Freeland, “Superrich with Political Prowess,” New York Times, 1 
Mar. 2013. See also Daniel Goleman, “Rich People Just Care Less,” New York Times, 
5 Oct. 2013.
118. This is not to imply that CEOs of multinational corporations do not try to 
morally justify their lack of national allegiance or attachment to democracy: see my 
comment from Davos, http://www.huffingtonpost.com/daniel-a-bell/memo-from-davos 
_b_1232758.html.
119. Hacker and Pierson, Winner- Take- All Politics, pp. 83–86.
120. Of course, there are also vested interests in China, such as powerful state 
enterprises with economic interests that attempt to block reform. But China’s leaders 
have successfully taken on such interests in the past—such as Jiang Zemin and Zhu 
Rongji’s efforts to remove the military from business activities and fight protectionist 
resistance against China’s bid to join the World Trade Organization—and the party 
leadership unveiled a plan to embark on an ambitious project of market- based reform 
designed to tackle vested interests at the Third Plenum in November 2013 (only time 
will tell if the plan will succeed).
121. Needless to say, political leaders dispatched to disadvantaged regions should 
be sent for limited terms, unlike during the Cultural Revolution, when “sent- down 
youths” had no hope of return and often became demoralized and alienated.
122. Other groups of nonvoters are affected by the policies of the voting commu-
nity, such as animals and ancestors. Since humans often abuse animals for their own 
needs, Sue Donaldson and Will Kymlicka argue for the need to appoint special legis-
lators with the task of arguing on behalf of animals’ interests. Donaldson and Kym-

212 
Notes to Chapter 1  
licka, Zoopolis: A Political Theory of Animal Rights (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 
2011). In ancient China, the dead were considered at least as important as the living, 
and an important part of political activity involved ceremonies connected with ances-
tor worship. Ch’ien Mu, Traditional Government in Imperial China: A Critical Analy-
sis, trans. Chu- tu Hsueh and George O. Totten (Hong Kong: Chinese University 
Press, 1982), p. 7. The same is true in parts of sub- Saharan Africa today: see John 
Mbiti, “ ‘Ancestors’ (Ancestral Spirits) as Aspects of African Ontology and Geneal-
ogy,” paper presented at the Chinese/African Philosophy Colloquium, Shanghai Jiao-
tong University, 10–12 May 2013. In the case of China, Jiang Qing argues for a gov-
ernment agency with the special task of maintaining cultural continuity of a nation’s 
traditions that can serve, at least partly, to ensure representation for dead ancestors. 
Jiang, A Confucian Constitutional Order: How China’s Ancient Past Can Shape Its 
Political Future, ed. Daniel A. Bell and Fan Ruiping; trans. Edmund Ryden (Princeton, 
N.J.: Princeton University Press, 2012), ch. 1.
123. For a more detailed argument along the same lines, see Mathias Risse, On 
Global Justice (Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press, 2012), ch. 17. In the con-
temporary East Asian context, Cho Il Yun argues that incomplete democratic consoli-
dation, combined with the political salience of national identity, sparked a process of 
intergroup competition among domestic political actors, through which the foreign 
policy orientation of the three East Asian democracies (Taiwan, Japan, and South 
Korea) became belligerent, thereby unnecessarily increasing regional tensions. Cho, 
“Democratic Instability: Democratic Consolidation, National Identity and Security 
Dynamics in East Asia,” Foreign Policy Analysis 8, no. 2 (Apr. 2012): 191–213.
124. Darius Rejali, Torture and Democracy (Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University 
Press, 2007), pp. 45, 3, 56, 46, 57. Surprisingly, Thomas Christiano’s otherwise com-
prehensive review article of empirical results showing that there is a negative relation-
ship between democracy and the violation of rights of personal integrity (including 
the right not to be tortured) at the domestic level does not even mention the possibil-
ity that such an optimistic finding can be (at least partly) explained by the fact that 
democracies carry out their dirty work against noncitizens and outsource torture to 
other countries. See Christiano, “An Instrumental Argument for a Human Right to 
Democracy,” sec. III.
125. For details, see my book Beyond Liberal Democracy, ch. 11.
126. Anne Loveband, “Positioning the Product: Indonesian Migrant Women 
Workers in Contemporary Taiwan,” Working Papers Series, no. 43, City University of 
University of Hong Kong, Apr. 2003, p. 3.
127. Christian Joppke (noting the findings of Virginia Guiraudon), “The Evolu-
tion of Alien Rights in the United States, Germany, and the European Union,” in 
Citizenship Today, ed. T. Alexander Aleinikoff and Douglas Klusmeyer (Washington, 
D.C.: Carnegie Endowment for International Peace, 2001), p. 56.
128. Berggruen and Gardels, Intelligent Governance for the 21st Century, p. 9. See 
also Fareed Zakaria, “Can America Be Fixed? The New Crisis of Democracy,” For-
eign Affairs 92, no. 1 (Jan./Feb. 2013): 22–33.

 
Notes to Chapter 1  
213
129. Nikos Konstandaras, “The Kindness of Strangers,” New York Times, 28 Apr. 
2010. In Greece, “the first thing a government does in an election year is to pull the 
tax collectors off the streets.” Cited in Michael Lewis, Boomerang: The Biggest Bust 
(London: Penguin, 2011), p. 49.
130. On the dangers to future generations posed by an unaffordable security sys-
tem in the United States, see Thomas L. Friedman, “Sorry, Kids. We Ate It All,” New 
York Times, 15 Oct. 2013. Public pension obligations also pose serious threats to cities, 
including wealthy cities such as San Jose, California. See Allysia Finley, “A Liberal 
Mugged by Pension Reality,” Wall Street Journal, 2 Dec. 2013.
131. Tim Mulgan, Ethics for a Broken World: Imagining Philosophy after Catastro-
phe (Montreal: McGill–Queen’s University Press, 2011), p. 213. See also Runciman, 
The Confidence Trap, pp. 313–318.
132. See Julia Baird, “Australia’s Politics of Global Warming,” New York Times, 15 
Nov. 2013.
133. Mulgan, Ethics for a Broken World, p. 217. See also Philippe Schmitter, “Fur-
ther Thoughts on Political Strategies for Sustainable Development” (unpublished 
manuscript).
134. Hungary did establish the institution of an ombudsman for future genera-
tions in 2007 that looked relatively powerful on paper, but it has had very limited im-
pact and its powers were watered down by a populist government in 2012 (http://
mosur.czp.cuni.cz/images/2013/Converge/Converge-POSTER-JNO_3.pdf). Even Nor-
way—the most harmonious society in the world (see appendix 1 at http://press 
.princeton.edu/titles/10418.html)—has resisted such proposals. Dag Hariede, director 
of the Norwegian Humanistic Academy and former leader of the biggest environmen-
tal organization in Norway, proposed an institution with the task of advising demo-
cratically elected politicians about the likely impact of policies on future generations, 
but this proposal—for an advisory body!—has not been supported by any of Norway’s 
major political parties.
135. One objection to such proposals is that it is extremely difficult to claim that 
we can know what future people would want. But as the 2013 United Nations report 
on “Intergenerational Solidarity and the Needs of Future Generations” puts it, “a 
broader agreement exists . . . that there are some basic rights (to life, health, subsis-
tence, peace, etc.) that would be relevant and important to people as biological 
human beings at any time in the future, and that these rights should be protected by 
the present generation insofar as it has the power to do so” (http://sustainabledevelop 
ment.un.org/content/documents/2006future.pdf, article 22). We can assume without 
much controversy that people in Bangladesh do not want to be impoverished or 
driven to civil war as a result of massive flooding caused by global warming.
136. Huang Zongxi, Waiting for the Dawn: A Plan for the Prince, trans. Wm. 
Theodore de Bary (New York: Columbia University Press, 1993), p. 83.
137. The contemporary Confucian thinker Jiang Qing has advocated reviving this 
practice in contemporary China: see Daniel A. Bell and Avner de- Shalit, The Spirit of 

214 
Notes to Chapter 1  
Cities: Why the Identity of a City Matters in a Global Age (Princeton, N.J.: Princeton 
University Press, 2011), p. 160.
138. Huang, Waiting for the Dawn, p. 113.
139. I have modified a proposal put forward in my book Beyond Liberal Democ-
racy, ch. 6. For a similar proposal, see Sheng Hong, Jingjixue jingshen [The Spirit of 
Economics] (Guangzhou: Guangdong Jingji, 1999), pp. 143–144. See also the propos-
als discussed in chapter 4, section 2.
140. Singapore Constitution, art. 19(2)(g)(iv).
141. See Kevin Tan and Lam Peng Er, eds., Managing Political Change in Singa-
pore: The Elected Presidency (London: Routledge, 1997).
142. See Chandran Nair, Consumptionomics: Asia’s Role in Reshaping Capitalism 
and Saving the Planet (Oxford: Infinite Ideas Limited, 2011).
143. Richard Stone, “Climate Talks Still at Impasse, China Buffs Its Green Repu-
tation,” Science, 15 Oct. 2010, p. 305. But Bill Dodson argues that China’s central 
planning approach to implementing alternative energy sources led to overcapacity is-
sues across the sector. Dodson, China Fast Forward: The Technologies, Green Indus-
tries and Innovations Driving the Mainland’s Future (Singapore: John Wiley & Sons, 
2012), ch. 7.
144. Juan Cole, “China Installed More Solar Power in 2013 Than the US Has in 
Its Whole History,” Informed Consent, 25 Jan. 2014. See also J. Matthew Roney, 
“China Leads World to Solar Power Record in 2013,” Earth Policy Institute, 18 June 
2014.
145. Of course, more can be done: for policy suggestions on improving China’s 
electric vehicle policy, see Wang Tao, “Recharging China’s Electric Vehicle Policy,” 
Carnegie–Tsinghua Center for Global Policy, 2013.
146. “China Province Plans Huge Carbon Market,” New York Times, 28 Nov. 
2013; Dodson, China Fast Forward, pp. 159–160; Dirk Forrister and Paul Bledsoe, 
“Pollution Economics,” New York Times, 9 Aug. 2013. For as yet unrealized sugges-
tions, see the China Greentech Report 2013: China at a Crossroads (http://www.report 
.china-greentech.com).
147. Pang Chao, “Ji daqi wuran fangzhi mubiao zerenshu, PM2.5 kongzhi cheng 
yueshuxing zhibiao” [The Hebei Government Signed the Air Pollution Control Re-
sponsibility Contract; PM2.5 Control Has Become an Obligatory Target], Xinhuanet 
News, 29 Sept. 2013. See also “Chinese Shift: Put the Environment above GDP 
Growth,” World Post, 22 Feb. 2014.
148. Jørgen Delman, “Fragmented Authoritarianism and Climate Change Poli-
tics at the City Level in China: Post- corporatism by Design or Default?” (unpublished 
manuscript).
149. Leslie Hook and Pilita Clark, “China Weighs Cap on Carbon Emissions,” 
Financial Times, 28 May 2013. Jørgen Delman argues that China played a construc-
tive role at the Copenhagen Climate Summit in 2009 (“China’s ‘Radicalism at the 
Center’: Regime Legitimation through Climate Politics and Climate Governance,” 

 
Notes to Chapter 1  
215
Journal of Chinese Political Science 16, no. 2 [June 2011]: 183–205), which provides a 
reason to expect more constructive contributions in the future.
150. Cited in Elizabeth Rosenthal and Andrew W. Lehren, “Carbon Credits 
Gone Awry Raise Output of Harmful Gas,” New York Times, 8 Aug. 2012. In April 
2014, the government adopted sweeping changes to the country’s environmental laws 
that give authorities stronger enforcement powers against polluting companies, au-
thorize detention of negligent executives, provide protection for whistleblowers, and 
set penalties for officials who fail to enforce laws. Benjamin van Rooij and Alex Wang, 
“China’s Pollution Challenge,” New York Times, 20 May 2014; “Green Teeth,” The 
Economist, 17 May 2014.
151. “Browner, but Greener,” The Economist, 1 Feb. 2014 (referring to the Envi-
ronmental Performance Index, a joint product of Yale and Columbia universities, 
http://epi.yale.edu/epi); Kelly Sims Gallagher and Qi Ye, “Climate and Clean En-
ergy,” in Debating China: The U.S.–China Relationship in Ten Conversations, ed. 
Nina Hadigan (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2014), esp. pp. 117–122.
152. See Joy Y. Zhang and Michael Barr, Green Politics in China: Environmental 
Governance and State–Society Relations (London: Pluto Press, 2013).
153. Edward Wong, “China’s Climate Plans Raise Many Questions,” New York 
Times, 13 Nov. 2014.
154. Even without the presidency, Republicans can sabotage the deal: “Mitch Mc-
Connell has already said that he will use his new powers as majority leader in 2015 to 
launch a full- scale attack on the EPA rules on power- plant pollution—if that attack is 
successful, it would be all but impossible for the U.S. to meet its carbon- reduction 
commitment.” Jeff Goodell, “The Secret Deal to Save the Planet,” Rolling Stone, 9 
Dec. 2014, http://www.rollingstone.com/politics/news/the-secret-deal-to-save-the-planet 
-20141209?page=4.
155. Stefan Wurster compares democracies and autocracies in terms of strong 
ecological sustainability and concludes that “democracies display significant defi-
cits . . . in overcoming long- term environmental problems for which there are no 
cheap technical solutions, but which must be rectified by means of fundamental 
changes in lifestyles and economy. As the empirical analysis shows, most democracies 
have difficulties in including future interest into their current decision- making pro-
cesses (because of the short- lived political timeframe), despite their stable institu-
tional framework and their measures protecting against the degeneration of power. In 
addition, their steering ability does not often seem sufficient to overcome current 
stakeholder interests that resist moves towards strong ecological sustainability.” 
Wurster, “Comparing Ecological Sustainability in Autocracies and Democracies,” 
Contemporary Politics 19, no. 1 (2013): 89. Wurster also concludes that “the perfor-
mance results for strong sustainability do not provide any evidence for the general 
superiority of autocratic regimes,” but he does not distinguish between meritocratic 
and nonmeritocratic “autocratic” regimes. Perhaps a comparison of meritocratic and 
democratic regimes at similar levels of economic development would show that meri-
tocratic regimes do better in terms of strong sustainability.

216 
Notes to Chapter 1  
156. Cited in Kwasi Wiredu, “Democracy by Consensus: Some Conceptual Con-
siderations,” Philosophical Papers 30, no. 3 (Nov. 2001): 228.
157. For an empirical study showing that competitive elections indirectly reduce 
voters’ feelings of trust and efficacy, see Thomas L. Brunell, “Ideological Representa-
tion and Competitive Congressional Elections,” Electoral Studies 28, no. 3 (Sept. 
2009): 448–457.
158. See Albert H. Y. Chen, “Mediation, Litigation, and Justice: Confucian Re-
flections in a Modern Liberal Society,” in Confucianism for the Modern World, ed. 
Daniel A. Bell and Hahm Chaibong (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2003), 
pp. 257–287. A recent report criticizes family law in Canada for the destructive effect 
of the adversarial system on couples who are vulnerable and prone to go on the attack, 
arguing that judges, lawyers, and law schools must embrace a culture of mediation 
and settlement. Kirk Makin, “Court Told to Overhaul Family Law,” Globe and Mail, 
27 Mar. 2013.
159. For example, the “constitutions” of some small- scale co- ops in New York City 
force residents to make decisions by means of voting rather than striving for consen-
sus, which can needlessly poison relations (I testify here from personal experience).
160. This is not to imply that adherence to the value of harmony always, or even 
usually, prevented disharmonious social and political outcomes: ancient Chinese his-
tory was rife with divisiveness and bitter struggles (see, e.g., Ari Levine, Divided by a 
Common Language: Factional Conflicts in Late Northern Song China [Honolulu: 
University of Hawai’i Press, 2008]). As always, there was a gap between the ideal and 
reality, but the point is that the ideal of harmony sets a standard for evaluating politi-
cal progress and regress.
161. See Wei Xiaohong and Li Qingyuan, “The Confucian Value of Harmony 
and Its Influence on Chinese Social interaction,” Cross- Cultural Communication 9 
(2013): 60–66. See also the empirical evidence cited in Thaddeus Metz, “Values in 
China as Compared to Africa: Two Conceptions of Harmony” (forthcoming).
162. Po- Keung Ip, “Harmony as Happiness? Social Harmony in Two Chinese So-
cieties,” Social Indicators Research, 117, no. 3 (2014), sec. 2.1.
163. Joseph Henrich, Steven J. Heine, and Ara Norenzayan, “The Weirdest Peo-
ple in the World?” Behavioral and Brain Sciences 33 (2010): 61–135.
164. To be more precise, there are parallels to the ideal of harmony in some West-
ern countries—for example, the ideal of solidarity in Nordic countries and in France, 
and of communitarianism in North America—but they tend to be buried beneath 
individualistic understandings, especially in the U.S. case. See Robert Bellah, Rich-
ard Madsen, William Sullivan, and Ann Swidler, Habits of the Heart (Berkeley: Uni-
versity of California Press, 1985).
165. See appendix 1 at http://press.princeton.edu/titles/10418.html for a more de-
tailed discussion.
166. As noted earlier, Xunzi also argued that we can improve morally through 
participation in common rituals and other forms of moral education.
167. Cummins, Good Thinking, pp. 75, 25. On the basis of studies that show that 

 
Notes to Chapter 1  
217
we reward cooperation more generously and punish defection more severely than 
predicted by standard game- theoretic analyses, Cummins questions the assumptions 
of mainstream economic theory based on self- interest (p. 19). For more evidence from 
neuroscience in favor of Mencius’s view of human nature, see Edward Slingerland, 
Trying Not to Try: The Art and Science of Spontaneity (New York: Crown, 2014), p. 
117.
168. One study found that bonobos, among the primates most closely related to 
humans, will share their food with a stranger, and even give up their own meal, if the 
stranger offers them social interaction. “Observatory: Milk of Human Kindness Also 
Found in Bonobos,” New York Times, 7 Jan. 2013. For a book- length argument that 
primates display other- regarding morality, see Frans de Waal, The Bonobo and the 
Atheist: In Search of Humanism among the Primates (New York: Norton, 2013). More 
anecdotally, pet owners will testify that dogs and cats can show empathetic behavior 
when the owner is ill.
169. Mencius, IA.7.
170. Martha C. Nussbaum, Not for Profit: Why Democracy Needs the Humanities 
(Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press, 2010), pp. 36, 43–44.
171. Ibid.
172. See, e.g., Amy Gutmann and Dennis Thompson, Democracy and Disagree-
ment (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1998).
173. Research shows that we need to be quiet and attentive if we want to tap into 
our deeper emotions such as empathy, but technologies such as the Internet con-
stantly interrupt and distract us, hence dampening empathy and encouraging the 
immediate expression of whatever is on our minds, with the result that a lot of nasti-
ness gets expressed that would not have been expressed before. Nicholas Carr, The 
Shallows: What the Internet Is Doing to Our Brains (New York: Norton, 2011).
174. Wiredu, “Democracy by Consensus,” pp. 227–244.
175. Berrgruen and Gardels, Intelligent Governance for the 21st Century, p. 121.
176. Wiredu, “Democracy by Consensus,” p. 243. Wiredu doesn’t say this, but 
presumably open competition by political parties outside of this setting would be 
disallowed.
177. G.W.F. Hegel, Elements of the Philosophy of Right, trans. H. B. Nisbet (Cam-
bridge: Cambridge University Press, 1991), sec. 303; see also sec. 308.
178. See the discussion in my book East Meets West, pp. 294–299.
179. A research report undertaken in 2006 found that 74.9 percent of the people 
surveyed perceived Chinese society as harmonious (cited in Ip, “Harmony as Happi-
ness?” p. 733). According to the Harmony Index (see appendix 1 at http://press 
.princeton.edu/titles/10418.html), population size is the key factor limiting the possi-
bility of establishing a harmonious society, but China is the least unharmonious 
among countries with a population of more than one hundred million people (unlike 
many other global indicators biased in favor of democracy by using the extent of de-
mocracy as a key measurement of well- being, the Harmony Index was deliberately 
designed so that political liberty in the form of one person, one vote is not heavily 

218 
Notes to Chapter 2  
weighted as a measurement of social harmony, the point being to allow for a less bi-
ased comparison of democracies and political meritocracies along the dimension of 
social harmony).
180. In the case of Taiwan, David C. Schak argues that democratization has given 
rise to more civility, especially other- regarding behavior toward strangers in public 
space. Schak, “The Development of Civility in Taiwan,” Pacific Affairs 82, no. 3 (Fall 
2009): 447–465. Schak argues, in a Mencian vein, that predemocratic governments 
did lay the foundation for civility “by overseeing the conditions which brought a rise 
from a poor to a prosperous, highly educated and sophisticated population in two 
generations” (p. 464). An issue not addressed in the article is whether nation- based 
democratization in Taiwan contributed to more nation- based civility based at least 
partly on increased hostility directed toward people outside the nation (especially 
mainland China).
181. See concluding thoughts.
182. Again, I focus on elections because Westerners tend to think they are neces-
sary for selecting political leaders at all levels of government, but I do not mean to 
imply that people think electoral democracy is a sufficient condition for a well- 
functioning democratic regime (certainly, that “minimal” view of democracy is re-
jected by most political theorists). Moreover, the key political debate between “the 
West” and “China” takes place over the value of electoral democracy because other 
features of democracies said to enhance good policy making such as public consulta-
tion and deliberation are far less controversial in China, including in official circles.
Chapter 2 
On the Selection of Good Leaders in a Political Meritocracy
1. Cited in International Herald Tribune, 9–10 Nov. 1991.
2. Cited in Barbara Crossette, “U.N. Survey Finds Rich- Poor Gap Widening,” 
New York Times, 15 July 1996.
3. See, e.g., Joanne Bauer and Daniel A. Bell, eds., The East Asian Challenge for 
Human Rights (New York: Cambridge University Press, 1999).
4. See Kim Dae Jung, “Is Culture Destiny? The Myth of Asian’s Anti- Democratic 
Values,” Foreign Affairs 73, no. 6 (Nov./Dec. 1994).
5. The Singapore government does invoke the need for more positive virtues such 
as the willingness to serve, but there is no attempt to systematically measure and 
evaluate government officials according to such criteria. “Zhiding jizhi tigao zhengfu 
jigou chengxin” [Promulgate Mechanisms to Improve the Integrity of the Govern-
ment], Lianhe zaobao, 2 Oct. 2013.
6. For discussion of Singapore’s anticorruption strategy, see Jon S. T. Quah, Com-
bating Corruption Singapore- Style: Lessons for Other Asian Countries, Maryland Se-
ries in Contemporary Asian Studies, no. 2 (Baltimore: School of Law, University of 
Maryland, 2007).
7. “ ‘Compassionate Meritocracy’ Key to Future,” New Paper, 21 Aug. 2013.

 
Notes to Chapter 2  
219
8. Yuri Pines, “Between Merit and Pedigree: Evolution of the Concept of ‘Elevat-
ing the Worthy’ in Pre- imperial China,” in The East Asian Challenge for Democracy.
9. Thomas Jefferson to John Adams, The Founders’ Constitution (Chicago: Uni-
versity of Chicago Press, 2000), vol. 1, ch. 15, document 61 (http://press-pubs.uchicago 
.edu/founders/documents/v1ch15s61.html).
10. Similarly, such debates came to an end in South Korea since the adoption of 
electoral democracy in the form of one person, one vote: few if any articles or books 
(in either English or Korean) about political meritocracy in Korea have been pub-
lished over the past three decades, notwithstanding the importance of political meri-
tocracy in Korean political culture. Doh Chull Shin’s book Confucianism and De-
mocratization in East Asia discusses the topic but in the context of debates about 
democratization.
11. For discussion of the desirable qualities of various kinds of actors in the Ameri-
can political system—qualities meant above all to strengthen the democratic pro-
cess—see Andrew Sabl, Ruling Passions: Political Offices and Democratic Ethics 
(Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press, 2002).
12. Wang Guoliang, “Rujia xianneng zhengzhi sixiang yu Zhongguo xianneng 
tuiju zhidu de fazhan” [The Political Theory of Confucian Meritocracy and the De-
velopment of a Meritocratic Recommendation System in China], Wenshizhe 3, no. 
336 (2013): 24–31.
13. See Hong Xiao and Chenyang Li, “China’s Meritocratic Examinations and 
the Ideal of Virtuous Talents,” in The East Asian Challenge for Democracy. See also 
concluding thoughts.
14. John P. Burns and Wang Xiaoqi, “Civil Service Reform in China: Impacts on 
Civil Servants’ Behavior,” China Quarterly 201 (2010): 69, 76–77.
15. Sander A. Flaum and Jonathon A. Flaum, with Mechele Flaum, The 100- Mile 
Walk: A Father and a Son Find the Essence of Leadership (New York: American Man-
agement Association, 2006), p. 1.
16. George Yeo, “China and the Catholic Church,” The Globalist, 1 Aug. 2013.
17. It is worth noting that the main point of George Yeo’s article is to urge rap-
prochement between the two organizations.
18. St. Gregory the Great, The Book of Pastoral Rule, trans. George E. Demaco-
poulos (Crestwood, N.Y.: St. Vladimir’s Seminary Press, 2007), p. 43.
19. Ibid., p. 74.
20. This is not meant to be a critique of George Yeo’s role on a special commission 
to advise the Vatican (http://www.channelnewsasia.com/news/singapore/george-yeo 
-appointed-to/750222.html): his task is to advise in matters of administration and gov-
ernance, not to serve as a leader of the Catholic Church concerned with spiritual 
formation of the flock.
21. John Glenn wrote a supportive foreword for the book on the grounds that it 
can “help inspire young people to get involved in public service leadership posi-
tions,” on the apparent assumption that what works in business will also work in 
government.

220 
Notes to Chapter 2  
22. “Interview with Jack Welch,” Piers Morgan Tonight, CNN, 11 June 2011 
(http://transcripts.cnn.com/TRANSCRIPTS/1106/11/pmt.01.html).
23. Sek- loong Tan, “Realizing Political Meritocracy: Lessons from Business,” 
paper prepared for the Center for International and Comparative Political Philoso-
phy, Tsinghua University, 20 July 2011. Sek- loong Tan is a business consultant who 
advises both private and public entities on governance issues.
24. See Gabriel Wildau, “Beijing Identifies SOEs for Reform Pilot,” Financial 
Times, 16 July 2014; Richard Silk, Liyan Qi, and Grace Zhu, “Beijing Moves to Over-
haul State Firms,” Wall Street Journal, 16 July 2014.
25. “Will a New Round of Reforms Shake Up State Firms?” Week in China 
(HSBC weekly newsletter), 25 July 2014.
26. For an overview of how the (Central) Department of Organization selects and 
promotes cadres, see Zhongguo xinwen zhoukan, 8 Sept. 2014 (http://www.duwan 
juan.cn/zhong_zu_bu_ru_he_xuan_guan_yuan). For a more cynical take, see Rich-
ard McGregor, The Party: The Secret World of China’s Communist Rulers (London: 
Penguin, 2010), ch. 3.
27. As John Micklethwait and Adrian Wooldridge put it, “the bureaucrats who re-
turn from the SOEs know how to run things better. If state capitalism allows politi-
cians to shape companies, it also allows companies to shape politicians.” Micklethwait 
and Wooldridge, The Fourth Revolution: The Global Race to Reinvent the State (New 
York: Penguin, 2014), p. 152.
28. Paul Thomas, Performance Measurement, Reporting, Obstacles and Account-
ability: Recent Trends and Future Directions (Canberra: ANU E Press, 2006), pp. 1, 
51–53, 55.
29. Ibid., pp. 9, 19.
30. Cited in Noel M. Tichy and Stratford Sherman, Control Your Destiny or 
Someone Else Will (New York: Random House, 1994), p. 105.
31. Jonathan Powell, The New Machiavelli: How to Wield Power in the Modern 
World (London: Vintage Books, 2010), p. 54.
32. Flaum and Flaum, The 100- Mile Walk, pp. 41, 42.
33. Ibid., p. 103.
34. Another reason that political leaders might need to be more compassionate 
than business leaders is that they can use—and hence misuse—the coercive apparatus 
of the state. If a political leader decides to “take out” the weak members of the politi-
cal community, the implications are much more ominous.
35. Tan, “Realizing Political Meritocracy: Lessons from Business,” p. 4.
36. I do not mean to imply that leaders of multinational corporations are indiffer-
ent to moral concerns, but they are more likely to appeal to universal moral consider-
ations that trump the national good in cases of conflict (see http://www.huffington 
post.com/daniel-a-bell/memo-from-davos_b_1232758.html).
37. Philippe Schmitter argues that political leaders in democratic societies have 
come to be viewed as living off politics rather than for politics, thus contributing to a 
sharp decline in the prestige of and trust in politicians. See Schmitter, “Reflections 

 
Notes to Chapter 2  
221
on Political Meritocracy: Its Manipulation and Transformation,” in The East Asian 
Challenge for Democracy.
38. All quotations are from the English translation of Weber’s lecture: http:// 
anthropos-lab.net/wp/wp-content/uploads/2011/12/Weber-Politics-as-a-Vocation.pdf. 
I stick to male pronouns here because Weber probably had male politicians in mind.
39. Similarly, it is a mistake to think that all business organizations require the 
same types of leaders. Even within the same industry, different companies have differ-
ent cultures and histories that require different abilities. For example, star analysts 
who switch from one Wall Street investment bank to another often suffer an immedi-
ate and lasting decline in performance because their earlier excellence depended 
heavily on their former firms’ organizational cultures and networks. Boris Groysberg, 
Chasing Stars: The Myth of Talent and the Portability of Performance (Princeton, N.J.: 
Princeton University Press, 2010).
40. In Singapore, the distinction is not so rigid: for example, the Civil Service 
College has the task (among others) to prepare reports that provide new ideas and in-
fluence policies; it is not meant simply to train civil servants who implement policies. 
Also, leading civil servants in Singapore often go into politics, which is rarely the case 
in the United Kingdom and Canada. That said, the Singaporean government is con-
sidering drawing a sharper distinction between the civil service and politics by, e.g., 
imposing a waiting period before civil servants can be given political appointments. (I 
am grateful for discussions with officials at Singapore’s Civil Service College.)
41. Chen Guoping, “Mingdai guanyuan kaohe zhidu shulun” [On the Assess-
ment System of Public Officials in the Ming Dynasty], Zhongguo zhengfayuan xue-
bao 1 (1993): 92–96.
42. Zhongyang jiguan jiqi zhishu jigou 2013 niandu kaoshi luyong gongwuyuan 
gonggong kemu kaoshi dagang [2013 National Public Service Examination Syllabus 
for Central- Level Organs and Direct Subordinate Organizations], available at http://
bm.scs.gov.cn/2013/UserControl/download/2013zkjz.rar.
43. Dangzheng lingdao ganbu xuanba renyong tiaoli [Regulations on the Selec-
tion and Appointment of Cadres of the CCP], 2014–1- 15, 8.4, available at http://news 
.xinhuanet.com/politics/2014–01/15/c_118985244.htm.
44. For discussion of the qualities required of the democratic leader, see John 
Kane and Haig Patapan, The Democratic Leader: How Democracy Defines, Empow-
ers, and Limits Its Leaders (New York: Oxford University Press, 2012). Note, however, 
that there are important differences between presidential and parliamentary systems: 
in a parliamentary system, the prime minister can lose the post if she or he loses the 
support of her/his party, and hence faces more pressure to conform to party discipline. 
Commenting on the Canadian case, Michael Ignatieff writes: “Where it [democracy] 
isn’t so healthy is in the place that should be the very temple of our democracy, the 
House of Commons. I can’t remember a speech I heard in five years that was actually 
meant to persuade, though I heard dozens that faithfully recited party talking points” 
(Ignatieff, Fire and Ashes: Success and Failure in Politics [Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard 
University Press, 2013], pp. 95–96; see also p. 134). That said, even some presidential 

222 
Notes to Chapter 2  
candidates speak openly about retaining partisan biases if elected as leaders of the 
state—e.g., Turkish presidential candidate Recep Tayyip Erdoğan said, “I will not be 
an impartial president” (Daily News, 9 July 2014).
45. For example, poverty reduction was the overriding goal in the early days of 
economic reform, and now more attention is paid to distributive issues and environ-
mental sustainability, although China’s poorer regions still emphasize poverty reduc-
tion as the key priority.
46. Pines, “Between Merit and Pedigree.”
47. Again, I have upper levels of government in mind as the relevant context. At 
lower levels, physical strength still matters, as I was reminded recently when I visited 
a village north of Beijing and the (physically imposing) party secretary had to literally 
force himself into a home to break up a fight. Such considerations also help to explain 
why there may be more open discrimination against female cadres at the local level.
48. Joshua Cooper Ramo, The Age of the Unthinkable: Why the New World Disor-
der Constantly Surprises Us (New York: Back Bay Books, 2009).
49. See Global Risks 2012, 7th ed. (Geneva: World Economic Forum, 2012).
50. Cited in Benjamin Wong and Xunming Huang, “Political Legitimacy in Sin-
gapore,” Politics and Policy 38, no. 3 (2010): 523–543.
51. To be more precise, Zhu Xi condemned examinations because they encour-
age an instrumental approach to learning, but he said that 30 percent of time can be 
given to study for examinations. Chu Hsi, Learning to Be a Sage, trans. Daniel K. 
Gardner (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1990), p. 19. See also Hilde de 
Weerdt, Competition over Content: Negotiating Standards for the Civil Service Exami-
nations in Imperial China (1127–1279) (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Asia 
Center, 2007), p. 385.
52. This paragraph draws on an email sent by Yuri Pines. See also Dennis Graffin, 
“Reinventing China: Pseudobureaucracy in the Early Southern Dynasties,” in State 
and Society in Early Medieval China, ed. Albert Dien (Stanford, Calif.: Stanford Uni-
versity Press, 1990), pp. 139–170, esp. pp. 145–155.
53. Benjamin Elman, A Cultural History of Civil Examinations in Late Imperial 
China (Berkeley: University of California Press, 2000), p. 7. On examinations under 
the Tang, see also Penelope A. Herbert, Examine the Honest, Appraise the Able: Con-
temporary Assessments of Civil Service Selection in Early T’ang China (Canberra: 
Faculty of Asian Studies, Australian National University Press, 1988).
54. In the thirteen- hundred- year history of imperial examinations from the Sui 
dynasty onward, the Song dynasty practice of directly appointing successful examina-
tion candidates to government posts is an exception to the rule that examination suc-
cess needed to be followed by other tests and evaluations, but even a top score in the 
national- level examinations (jinshi) in the Song did not guarantee a good career be-
cause it was tacitly assumed that the literary skills of successful examinees did not 
automatically translate into the qualities required of top government officials.
55. John W. Chaffee, The Thorny Gates of Learning in Sung China, new ed. (Al-
bany: State University of New York Press, 1995), p. xxii.

 
Notes to Chapter 2  
223
56. Benjamin A. Elman, “A Society in Motion: Unexpected Consequences of Po-
litical Meritocracy in Late Imperial China, 1400–1900,” in The East Asian Challenge 
for Democracy.
57. Japan also used the Chinese imperial examination system as a model in the 
Heian period (794–1185), but the influence affected only the minor nobility and was 
replaced by the hereditary system during the Samurai era. Liu Haifeng, “Influence of 
China’s Imperial Examinations on Japan, Korea, and Vietnam,” Frontiers of Philoso-
phy in China 2, no. 4 (Oct. 2007): 493–512.
58. See, e.g., Lawrence Lok Cheung Zhang, “Power for a Price: Office Purchase, 
Elite Families, and Status Maintenance in Qing China,” PhD dissertation, Harvard 
University, 2010. Zhang shows that about 25 percent of the time people gained access 
to official positions by paying for it (even when they already had examination de-
grees), and this figure rose substantially toward the end of the dynasty, resulting in a 
debasement of the examination degree and contributing to wider political destabiliza-
tion toward the end of the Qing period.
59. Alexander Woodside, Lost Modernities: China, Vietnam, Korea, and the Haz-
ards of World History (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 2006), pp. 10–11.
60. Liu Haifeng, “Kejuzhi yu xianneng zhiguo chuantong” [The Imperial Exami-
nation System and the Tradition of Building a Meritocratic State], paper presented at 
conference “Quanguo zhengzhi ruxue he xiandai shijie taolun” [Political Confucian-
ism and Its Contemporary Significance in China and the World], Tsinghua Univer-
sity, 27–28 Oct. 2012; Liu Haifeng, “Kejuzhi dui xifang kaoshi zhidu yingxiang xin-
tan” [A New Exploration of the Influence of the Imperial Examination System on 
Western Examination Systems], Zhongguo shehui kexue 5 (2001): 188–208.
61. Again, there was no distinction between civil servants and political officials in 
imperial China. Hence, I use the term imperial examinations to translate keju. The 
usual translation in English—“civil examinations”—makes sense to experts in Chi-
nese imperial history because “civil examinations” is meant to contrast with “military 
examinations ” that were held to recruit army officers, but for most (Anglophone) 
readers civil brings up the misleading connotation of a civil servant who is supposed 
to implement the policies of political officials. For a similar point, see Bai Tongdong, 
China: The Political Philosophy of the Middle Kingdom (London: Zed Books, 2012), p. 
167. For the same reason, I do not use the term bureaucracy to characterize imperial 
China’s political system, because it connotes the idea of specialized bureaucrats who 
implement the decisions of political officials. It is true, as Francis Fukuyama notes, 
that China’s political system shared some features of modern bureaucracy identified 
by Max Weber, such as the practice of impersonally selecting candidates on the basis 
of qualifications and salaried offices treated as careers (Fukuyama, The Origins of Po-
litical Order: From Prehuman Times to the French Revolution [New York: Farrar, 
Straus, and Giroux, 2011], p. 134), but it also differed in important ways: starting from 
the Song dynasty, the successful national examinations candidates were generalists 
(the top jinshi degree holders all held one degree, whereas previously there had been 
various degrees in different subjects), not specialists who held offices defined by func-

224 
Notes to Chapter 2  
tional area with a clearly defined area of competence (the Song did continue multiple 
examination systems below the national level, but the jinshi had preferential access to 
the top offices and hence were more prestigious than other exams), and they often 
had the political power to exercise authority in a wide range of affairs (they were sub-
ject in principle to the authority of the monarch, but the monarch, if only for reasons 
of lack of time, more often than not reigned rather than ruled; see Yuri Pines, The 
Everlasting Empire: The Political Culture of Ancient China and Its Imperial Legacy 
[Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press, 2012], ch. 2).
62. Cited in Chaffee, The Thorny Gates of Learning in Sung China, p. 49.
63. Elman, A Cultural History of Civil Examinations in Late Imperial China, p. 
14.
64. Cited from Chaffee, The Thorny Gates of Learning in Sung China, p. 99.
65. Xiao and Li, “China’s Meritocratic Examinations and the Ideal of Virtuous 
Talents,” p. 343.
66. It could be argued that the Ottoman administrative system “was a model of 
meritocracy” and provided even more social mobility than the Chinese imperial ex-
amination system because slaves taken in the child levy from the empire’s Christian 
subjects—the main source of recruitment into imperial service between the four-
teenth and late sixteenth centuries—“had been selected for their physical grace, 
strength, and intelligence. During their training they underwent constant scrutiny. 
Only the most qualified were sent on to schools where they were trained to be officials 
and generals.” Justin McCarthy, The Ottoman Turks (London: Longman, 1997), p. 
126; see also Colin Imber, The Ottoman Empire, 2nd ed. (Houndmills: Palgrave Mac-
millan, 2009), esp. ch. 3. The “continual ability to draw the best men” may help to 
explain the longevity of the Ottoman Empire (Karen Barkey, Empire of Difference: 
The Ottomans in Comparative Perspective [Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 
2008], p. 19), but slavery should (needless to say) not be viewed as a morally desirable 
starting point when comparing social mobility in different meritocratic bureaucra-
cies. Another important difference with imperial China is that physical abilities were 
given extra weight in the Ottoman administrative system because there was no clear 
distinction between civil government and military command (Imber, The Ottoman 
Empire, p. 330). And when late nineteenth- century Ottoman Empire reformers ar-
gued for more meritocracy and less nepotism, they proposed “recruitment based only 
on merit measured by objective and standardized examinations.” Doğan Gürpinar, 
Ottoman Imperial Diplomacy: A Political, Social and Cultural History (London: I. B. 
Tauris, 2014), p. 90.
67. See Elman, “A Society in Motion.” The archives indicate that peasants, trad-
ers, and artisans, who made up 90 percent of the population, were not among the fifty 
thousand Ming–Qing male palace graduates. Benjamin A. Elman, Civil Examina-
tions and Meritocracy in Late Imperial China (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University 
Press, 2013), p. 320.
68. The second- tier universities offer more opportunities to students from poorer 

 
Notes to Chapter 2  
225
backgrounds because they do not require high scores on the national university 
examinations.
69. Pines, The Everlasting Empire, pp. 113–114.
70. Elman, “A Society in Motion,” p. 205.
71. Pines, The Everlasting Empire, p. 114.
72. For a list of uprisings led by examination failures, see Ichisada Miyazaki, Chi-
na’s Examination Hell: The Civil Service Examinations of Imperial China, trans. Con-
rad Schirokauer (New Haven, Conn.: Yale University Press, 1976), pp. 122–124. And 
the rebels did not always abandon the idea of examinations: the leader of the Taiping 
Rebellion Hong Xiuquan (who had repeatedly failed to become a licentiate) at-
tempted to overthrow the Qing dynasty in the mid- nineteenth century but he also 
instituted an examination process. Elman, Civil Examinations and Meritocracy in 
Late Imperial China, pp. 302–305.
73. Miyazaki, China’s Examination Hell, p. 127.
74. Elman, “A Society in Motion.”
75. Cited from Pines, The Everlasting Empire, p. 51.
76. Confucian thinkers held similar views in imperial China: Song dynasty Neo- 
Confucians concluded that not a single emperor had met the appropriate moral stan-
dard, implying that the emperor and the court were not the final arbiters of how peo-
ple should act and think. Peter K. Bol, Neo- Confucianism in History (Cambridge, 
Mass.: Harvard University Asia Center, 2008), pp. 129–130.
77. Cited from Pines, The Everlasting Empire, p. 52.
78. Xunzi argued that the ruler should select a chancellor whose task is to select 
other officials, but he still seemed to assume that one person could do all the work.
79. In fact, talented emperors felt disempowered by the system to their personal 
detriment: one famous case is the Ming emperor Wanli, who received an excellent 
Confucian education from the best tutors in the land, but once he realized that he 
was largely confined to symbolic duties (and literally confined to the Forbidden City), 
he become uncooperative and helped to bring about the end of the Ming dynasty. See 
Ray Huang, 1587, a Year of No Significance: The Ming Dynasty in Decline (New 
Haven, Conn.: Yale University Press, 1981).
80. Elman, A Cultural History of Civil Examinations in Late Imperial China, pp. 
173–238.
81. Cited from Chaffee, The Thorny Gates of Learning in Sung China, p. 79.
82. Cited in Jonathan D. Spence, Return to Dragon Mountain: Memories of a 
Late Qing Man (New York: Penguin, 2007), p. 51. See also Wu Jingzi, The Scholars, 
trans. Yang Xianyi and Gladys Yang (New York: Columbia University Press, 1992).
83. Adam Yuen- Chung Lui, “Syllabus of the Provincial Examination (Hsiang- 
shih) under the Early Ch’ing (1644–1795),” Modern Asian Studies (Cambridge Uni-
versity Press) 8, no. 3 (1974): 391–396.
84. For past examinations, see http://www.gjgwy.org/gwykszt/ (Quanguo gong-
wuyuan kaoshi wang [National Public Service Examinations Network]). The third 

226 
Notes to Chapter 2  
and fourth parts of the xingzheng nengli ceshi [Administrative Ability Test] test math 
and reasoning abilities, similar to IQ tests.
85. That said, lower- level governments in the 1990s were authorized to provide 
public service employment for demobilized soldiers without going through a com-
petitive selection process. Burns and Xiaoqi, “Civil Service Reform in China,” pp. 
67–68. But such public servants are unlikely to be promoted without participating in 
a competitive selection process.
86. Arguably, some political leaders who are perceived to be relatively successful, 
such as Ronald Reagan, would not have made the cut on such exams. Any system has 
flaws, and the benefits of filtering out those who lack good analytical skills and the 
ability to think about policy questions from diverse perspectives may be worth the 
cost.
87. The dissertation test (shenlun), especially the analytical writing part, requires 
thoughtful analysis.
88. See Philip E. Tetlock, Expert Political Judgment: How Good Is It? How Can 
We Know? (Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press, 2005), p. 2; and Michael C. 
Horowitz and Philip E. Tetlock, “Trending Upward: How the Intelligence Commu-
nity Can Better See into the Future,” Foreign Policy, 6 Sept. 2012.
89. Given that so much scientific and academic material is written in English, 
perhaps exams should also test for reading knowledge of English. On the other hand, 
advisors of top political leaders can translate and provide summaries of key articles 
and books.
90. The Song dynasty thinker Ye Shi advocated “utilitarian” knowledge, with 
emphasis on historical analysis of institutions in order to learn from past failures. Di-
eter Kuhn, The Age of Confucian Rule: The Song Transformation of China (Cam-
bridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 2009), p. 105.
91. Yudhijit Bhattacharjee, “Why Bilinguals Are Smarter,” New York Times, 17 
Mar. 2012.
92. I do not mean to imply that only Confucian classics offer insights into what 
ought to be the good qualities of leaders: the texts of Legalists, for example, offer rel-
evant insights for times of warfare and Marxist classics may also be useful in the sense 
that they offer insights into the workings of capitalist economies that can be helpful 
for political leaders. Moreover, it may be necessary to revise what counts as a classic 
for political purposes in order to deemphasize works that easily lend themselves to 
misuses similar to, say, the Kangxi emperor’s use of Yijing divination to make deci-
sions on matters relating to punishment and foreign policy. See Richard J. Smith, The 
I Ching: A Biography (Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press, 2012), pp. 114–120. 
My argument is that there should be more systematic testing of the Confucian classics 
with historical and normative lessons for rulers today, not that testing should be con-
fined to them.
93. One way to minimize controversy would be to select examiners for high- level 
political positions by means of random selection from among university professors in 
various disciplines.

 
Notes to Chapter 2  
227
94. One reason the examination system as a method for the selection of political 
talent has been underresearched is that political science departments in Western soci-
eties have focused so much energy on researching democratic elections. Greater 
awareness of the need to research mechanisms of political meritocracy in China 
(along with more funding for research of China- specific issues) should help to remedy 
the situation.
95. Still, it is important to keep in mind that what separates the few at the top from 
those directly below depends on luck more than anything else. (I make this point be-
cause Chinese media often seem to make a fetish of the top performers—see, e.g., the 
cover of the Bejing qingnian bao, 24 June 2014, with the photos and brief bios of those 
who scored highest on the university entrance examinations in Beijing.) Moreover, I 
would surmise that students at top universities such as Peking University and Tsing-
hua University often end up with more higher- level jobs than, say, students from 
Shandong University who scored a tiny fraction lower on the university entrance ex-
aminations, because of the increased opportunities and social networking offered to 
students at top universities rather than superior intellectual ability.
96. For a similar point, see Ignatieff, Fire and Ashes, pp. 170–171.
97. Tan, “Meritocracy and Political Liberalization in Singapore.” See also chapter 
1, section 1.
98. Roy Jenkins made the same remark about Tony Blair, another relatively suc-
cessful politician according to the judgment of Jonathan Powell, Blair’s chief of staff 
from 1994 to 2007. See Powell, The New Machiavelli, p. 32.
99. Bill Clinton, “The Legacy of FDR,” Time, 24 June 2009 (http://content.time 
.com/time/specials/packages/article/0,28804,1906802_1906838_1906981,00.html). 
Similarly, Sander A. Flaum writes, “Among the people I would call true leaders . . . 
there is consensus that when it comes to people, you need to recruit, develop, and re-
ward people who are as smart or smarter than you are. And I would add that you have 
to accept their pushback and have the courage to push back at them in order to help 
them be more than they imagined they ever could be” (The 100 Mile- Walk, pp. 
24–25).
100. Lee delegated much of the policy- oriented thinking to brilliant advisors such 
as Goh Keng Swee, who is often referred to as the architect of Singapore’s economic 
and social success. See Tilak Doshi and Peter Coclanis, “The Economic Architect: 
Goh Keng Swee,” and Kian- Woon Kwok, “The Social Architect: Goh Keng Swee,” 
both in Peng Er Lam and Kevin Tan, eds., Lee’s Lieutenants: Singapore’s Old Guard 
(St. Leonards, N.S.W.: Allen & Unwin, 1999). My wife worked for a Singaporean 
think tank headed by Goh Keng Swee in the early 1990s, and I can personally testify 
to his brilliance. Even after Goh’s retirement from politics, Lee Kuan Yew met him 
once a week to bounce ideas off him.
101. Daniel Goleman, “What Makes a Leader?” in On Leadership (Boston: Har-
vard Business Review Press, 2011), pp. 1, 3, 17. See also Daniel Goleman, Richard 
Boyatzis, and Annie McKee, Primal Leadership: Realizing the Power of Emotional In-
telligence (Boston: Harvard Business School Press, 2002).

228 
Notes to Chapter 2  
102. Here I use the term social skills more broadly to refer to what Goleman calls 
“emotional intelligence.”
103. A recent study found that people performed better on tests measuring empa-
thy, social perception, and emotional intelligence after reading literary fiction (David 
Comer Kidd and Emanuele Castano, “Reading Literary Fiction Improves Theory of 
Mind,” Science, 18 Oct. 2013, pp. 377–380), which may be a case for testing for knowl-
edge of literary fiction on public service exams.
104. At a minimum, knowledge of another language is necessary to communicate 
with members of the minority groups who may not be fluent in the national language: 
hence, candidates for public service in Xinjiang are now required to be bilingual. 
“Xinjiang Government Job Candidates Required to Be Bilingual,” Xinhua, 1 May 
2010.
105. Robert Goffee and Gareth Jones, “Why Should Anyone Be Led by You?” in 
On Leadership, p. 85.
106. I do not mean to deny that good performance may also be indicative of other 
qualities required of good leaders in a modernizing and largely peaceful political 
meritocracy, such as intellectual ability and virtue, but perhaps the link is clearer in 
the case of emotional intelligence, which is necessary to effectively cooperate with 
people and hence get things done.
107. Qian Mu, Guoshi xinlun [New Studies of Chinese History] (Taipei: Dongda 
Publishing, 2004), p. 249. Qian does not emphasize the downside: local magnates 
hijacked the dynasty and caused the severest systemic crisis of imperial rule in its 
history.
108. Again, the norm in Chinese imperial history, with the exception of jinshi 
examinations in the Song dynasty, is that examination success needed to be followed 
by further evaluations for promotion to high government posts.
109. I say “relatively straightforward” because even good performance in business 
is not so clear. For example, an investment bank like Goldman Sachs tends to distrib-
ute its highest rewards to bankers and traders who contribute in measurable ways to 
the profitability of the firm, as one would expect. But its employees within the “Fed-
eration”—lawyers, accountants, and others who perform supportive but necessary 
functions for the bank—are rewarded on less tangible criteria, such as the ability to 
manage people in harmonious ways.
110. Hongbin Li and Li- An Zhou, “Political Turnover and Economic Perfor-
mance: The Incentive Role of Personnel Control in China,” Journal of Public Eco-
nomics 89 (2005): 1743–1762. This article concludes that the likelihood of promotion 
of provincial leaders increases with their economic performance, hence supporting 
“the hypothesis that the Chinese economy is run in such a way that provincial leaders 
act like middle managers of a large corporation” (pp. 1760–1761).
111. On the causal link between the promotion mechanism for officials mainly 
based on economic growth and the outcome of economic growth, see Qiao Kunyuan, 
“Wo guo guanyuan jinsheng jinbiaosai jizhi de zai kaocha: Lai zi sheng, shi liang ji 
zhengfu de zhengju” [A Reexamination of the Mechanism for Competitive Promo-

 
Notes to Chapter 2  
229
tion in China: Evidence from Provincial and Municipal Governments,” Caijing yan-
jiu 39, no. 4 (Apr. 2013): 123–133; Zhou Li’an, “Zhongguo difang guanyuan de jin-
sheng jinbiaosai moshi yanjiu” [Research on Model of Competitive Promotion of 
Local Chinese Officials], Jingji yanjiu 7 (2007): 36–50; and David J. Bulman, 
“Promotion- Based Incentives for Growth: Evidence from the County Level in Jiangsu 
and Anhui,” paper presented at the Association for Asian Studies Annual Conference, 
San Diego, Mar. 2013.
112. http://www.globalissues.org/article/4/poverty-around-the-world#WorldBanks
PovertyEstimatesRevised.
113. Ouyang Jing, “ ‘Guanxi’ ruhe, yuanhe yingxiang jiceng guanyuan jinsheng” 
[How Personal Relations Influence the Promotion of Grassroots Officials in a Differ-
entiated Model Association], Gansu xingzheng xueyuan xuebao 1 (2012): 4–14. One 
can surmise that “drinking ability” (jiuliang) is a key mediating variable: good drink-
ing ability is often viewed favorably by local officials (I can say from personal experi-
ence that local government officials often inquire about one’s drinking ability at 
mealtime), which can improve relations with peers and superiors, which can, in turn, 
positively influence prospects for promotion. This hypothesis—admittedly hard to 
test—could also help to explain why men, on the (arguable) assumption that typically 
their drinking ability is superior to women’s, find it easier to be get promoted at the 
local level. The discrimination affecting women at lower stages of their career does 
not continue once they reach the rank of mayor—see Pierre F. Landry, Decentralized 
Authoritarianism in China: The Communist Party’s Control of Local Elites in the Post- 
Mao Era (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2008), p. 108—perhaps (at least 
partly) because higher- ranking cadres do not have the time for long drinking sessions 
with colleagues.
114. See Victor Shih, Christopher Adolf, and Mingxing Liu, “Getting Ahead in 
the Communist Party: Explaining the Advancements of Central Committee Mem-
bers in China,” American Political Science Review 106 (Feb. 2012): 166–187; Ma 
Liang, “Guanyuan jinsheng jili yu zhengfu jixiao mubiao shezhi: Zhongguo shengji 
mianban shuju de shizheng yanjiu” [Promotion Incentives of Government Officials 
and Government Performance Target- Setting: An Empirical Analysis of Provincial 
Panel Data in China], Gonggong guanli xuebao 10, no. 2 (Apr. 2013): 28–39; and Ciqi 
Mei, “Bringing the Politics Back In: Political Incentives and Policy Distortion in 
China,” PhD dissertation, University of Maryland, College Park, 2009, ch. 2, p. 83. At 
the very highest level, however—the Politburo Standing Committee—age and institu-
tional rules had the greatest influence in deciding the appointment of leaders in 2012. 
Candidates’ patron–client ties with senior leaders also played a role (but not always in 
a positive direction), and powerful family background either did not matter or had 
negative effects on the chances of being promoted to the highest level. Jinghan Zeng, 
“What Matters Most in Selecting Top Chinese Leaders,” Journal of Chinese Political 
Science 18 (2013): 223–239. Moreover, the criteria for assessment of public officials 
tend to become more complex at higher levels—the case for the promotion of officials 
solely based on economic performance is even weaker at higher levels of govern-

230 
Notes to Chapter 2  
ment—so it may not be a bad thing that promotion based on economic performance 
matters less at higher levels of government.
115. Russell Leigh Moses, “China’s Big Challenge: Dissension in the Communist 
Party Ranks,” Wall Street Journal (China real- time blog), 8 July 2014. That said, 
democratic societies with a Confucian heritage fare even worse: results of a large- 
scale survey of civil servants in seven countries show that 55.9 percent of respondents 
in mainland China agreed that their departments uphold merit principles in hiring as 
against only 35 percent in South Korea and 35.3 percent in Taiwan. Ora- orn Poocha-
roen and Alex Brillantes, “Meritocracy in Asia Pacific: Status, Issues, and Chal-
lenges,” Review of Public Personnel Administration 33 (Apr. 2013): 148. The culture of 
guanxi (relations) rather than the political system is perhaps a key underlying factor 
explaining lapses from meritocracy in the government.
116. See John P. Burns, “The CCP’s Nomenklatura System as a Leadership Selec-
tion System: An Evaluation,” in The Chinese Communist Party in Reform, ed. Kjeld 
Erik Brodsgaard and Zheng Yongnian (London: Routledge, 2006), p. 39; and Landry, 
Decentralized Authoritarianism in China, esp. ch. 3 (on the promotion of mayors).
117. See, e.g., Tao Ran, Lu Xi, Su Fubing, and Wang Hui, “Diqu jingzheng geju 
yanbian xia de zhongguo zhuangui: Caizheng jili he fazhan moshi fansi” [China’s 
Transition under Evolving Patterns of Regional Competition: Reflections on Finan-
cial Incentives and China’s Development Model], Jingji yanjiu 7 (2009): 21–33.
118. “China to Curb Cars, Coal and Steel to Eliminate Heavily Polluted Days in 
Decade,” Star World, 12 Sept. 2013.
119. Tan Haojun, “Zhongguo ‘xincheng’ bian ‘kongcheng.’ Pigu shui lai ca?” 
[“New City” Becomes “Empty City”: Who Will Deal with It?], Lianhe zaobao, 13 Sept. 
2013, p. 24. For a map of “ghost cities” in China, see http://english.caixin.com/2014 
–10–17/100739980.html.
120. Hou Zanhua, “Lun zhuanbian jingji fazhan fangshi de zhengzhi dongli—Ji 
yu difang zhengfu dongli queshi de shijiao” [An Analysis of the Political Motivation 
for the Transformation of Economic Development—from the Perspective of the Lack 
of Motivation in the Local Government], Yunnan shehui kexue 4 (2012): 61–65.
121. Alex Wang, “The Search for Sustainable Legitimacy: Environmental Law 
and Bureaucracy in China,” Harvard Environmental Law Review 37 (2013): 365–440.
122. Qiao, “Wo guo guanyuan jinsheng jinbiaosai jizhi de zai kaocha: Lai zi 
sheng, shi liang ji zhengfu de zhengju” [A Reexamination of the Mechanism for 
Competitive Promotion in China: Evidence from Provincial and Municipal Govern-
ments], p. 132. Li Yonggang and Guan Yue suggest replacing “competing for higher 
GDP” with “competition for harmony” as the standard for rewarding public officials, 
but without specifying how to measure harmony. Li Yonggang and Guan Yue, “Di-
fang guanyuan jingzheng de zhengzhi jinbiaosai moxing ji qi youhua” [The Model 
for Competitive Promotion of Local Officials and Its Optimization], Jiangsu xing-
zheng xueyuanbao 2, no. 56 (2011): 73–78. For ideas about how to measure harmony, 
see appendix 1 at http://press.princeton.edu/titles/10418.html.
123. Goleman, “What Makes a Leader?” p. 8. That said, culture may also matter: 

 
Notes to Chapter 2  
231
in Japan, wise reasoning (what I call social skills), including taking into account the 
perspectives of others, recognizing that events can unfold in different ways, recogniz-
ing the limits of one’s own knowledge, and searching for compromise, increased with 
age among Americans but not among Japanese (who scored at a high level regardless 
of their age). I. Grossman, M. Karasawa, S. Izumi, J. Na, M. Varnum, S. Kitayama, 
and R. Nisbett, “Aging and Wisdom: Culture Matters,” Psychological Science 23, no. 
10 (2012): 1059–1066.
124. Stephen S. Hall, Wisdom: From Philosophy to Neuroscience (New York: Vin-
tage Books, 2010), pp. 228–229.
125. Cited in ibid., p. 255. For more evidence that men (in the case of this study) 
become emotionally attuned as they grow older, see also George E. Vaillant, Tri-
umphs of Experience: The Men of the Harvard Grant Study (Cambridge, Mass.: Har-
vard University Press, 2012).
126. The implication that young people should be barred from high- level political 
posts does not sound so reactionary if one is reminded of the fanaticism of youth- led 
political movements, from German and Italian fascists to the Red Guards of the Cul-
tural Revolution. Such youth movements may have been manipulated by more el-
derly political leaders, but they were often led by young people: as Walter Laqueur 
notes, “In 1933, Adolf Hitler was in his forties, but his closest followers were all very 
young: Joseph Goebbels was 36; Heinrich Himmler, head of the terror machine, was 
33; his deputy, Reinhard Heydrich, 29, and Adolf Eichmann, the engineer of the Ho-
locaust, a mere 27.” Laqueur, “The Weimar Union: Europe, Back to the 30s,” New 
Republic, 2 Aug. 2012, p. 16.
127. Hall, Wisdom, p. 228. Fluid intelligence, or the ability to solve novel, abstract 
problems that make relatively little use of real- world information, begins to decline in 
the early twenties and continues to decline thereafter (hence, mathematicians and 
others who work with symbolic, abstract materials for which they must invent novel 
solutions often do their best work before age thirty). Richard E. Nisbett, Intelligence 
and How to Get It: Why Schools and Cultures Count (New York: Norton, 2009), pp. 
7–10. Bilingualism has been shown to postpone dementia by approximately five years 
(E. Bialystok, F.I.M. Craik, M.A. Binns, L. Ossher, and M. Freedman, “Effects of Bi-
lingualism on the Age of Onset and Progression of MCI and AD: Evidence from Ex-
ecutive Function Tests,” Neuropsychology 28, no. 2 [2014]: 290), so perhaps bilingual 
political leaders should be allowed to retire a few years later, other things being equal.
128. Arguably, the U.S. founding fathers also established a good model of setting 
age limits for political positions on the assumption that wisdom increases with age: 
according to the U.S. Constitution, a person must be at least thirty- five to be president 
or vice- president (given shorter life expectancy in the eighteenth century, the equiva-
lent today would be about fifty), thirty to be a senator, and twenty- five to be a congres-
sional representative. The principle that age requirements should increase with the 
importance of the political position is a good one, though I surmise it would be diffi-
cult to argue for such requirements in contemporary American society, given the 
dominance of a populist, anti- elitist ethos and the celebration of youthful ways of life.

232 
Notes to Chapter 2  
129. Susan Shirk, “Age of China’s New Leaders May Have Been Key to Their Se-
lection,” China File, 15 Nov. 2012.
130. Boris Groysberg and Katherine Connolly, “Great Leaders Who Make the 
Mix Work,” Harvard Business Review, Sept. 2013, p. 72. Insights from brain research 
may help to explain gender differences in decision making: “Men’s brains have ap-
proximately 6.5 times more gray matter than women’s and women’s brains have ap-
proximately 10 times more white matter than men’s. Because gray matter character-
izes information processing centers and white matter facilitates the connections 
among those centers, scientists theorize that those differences might explain why 
men tend to excel in tasks that depend on sheer processing while women show rela-
tive strength in tasks that call for assimilating and integrating disparate pieces of in-
formation. What’s more, the cord connecting the left and right lobes is 10 percent 
thicker, on average, in female brains. And women have wider peripheral vision than 
men do.” Cathy Benko and Bill Pelster, “How Women Decide,” Harvard Business 
Review, Sept. 2013, p. 80.
131. Therese Huston, “Are Women Better Decision Makers?” New York Times, 17 
Oct. 2014.
132. Zenger Folkman, “A Study in Leadership: Women Do It Better Than Men,” 
2012 (http://www.zfco.com/media/articles/ZFCo.WP.WomenBetterThanMen.033012 
.pdf). The study is discussed in “Women in the Workplace: A Research Roundup,” 
Harvard Business Review, Sept. 2013, p. 89. See also Nicholas D. Kristof, “Twitter, 
Women and Power,” New York Times, 25 Oct. 2013.
133. Quoted in Groysberg and Connolly, “Great Leaders Who Make the Mix 
Work,” p. 73.
134. I do not know of any systematic comparisons of the performance of male and 
female political leaders, but studies in other fields bear on the question: Brad Barber 
and Terrance Odean gained access to the trading activity in more than thirty- five thou-
sand households and found that men not only trade more than women but do so from 
a false faith in their own financial judgment (see Lewis, Boomerang, p. 37). Michael 
Lewis draws on this finding to note that “one of the distinctive traits of Iceland’s [finan-
cial] disaster . . . is how little women had to do with it” (ibid.). In 2009, the nearly all- 
male Independence Party was voted out of power and replaced by the mostly female 
Social Democrats, led by Johanna Sigurdardottir, Iceland’s first female prime minister 
and the world’s first openly gay head of state (she is married to another woman).
135. Hu Shuli, “Changing Realities for Asian Women Leaders,” Global Asia 6, no. 
3 (Fall 2011): 17. Hu Shuli is the (female) editor- in- chief of the influential Caixin 
Media group, where more than 60 percent of the newsroom staff are women (ibid., p. 
18). See also Frank N. Pieke, The Good Communist: Elite Training and State Building 
in Today’s China (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2009), pp. 152–153. For a 
more optimistic picture of how China’s women fare globally in terms of political 
power, see Li Yunhe, “Zhongguo funu diwei shijie paiming lingxian” [China’s Lead-
ing Position in the World Rankings for Women], Renmin wang, 8 Mar. 2012 (http://
bbs1.people.com.cn/postDetail.do?boardId=2&treeView=1&view=2&id=117538704).

 
Notes to Chapter 2  
233
136. The same holds true, I regret to say, in Chinese academia. My female PhD 
students have a harder time finding academic jobs than my male students do, and 
male professors are often strikingly open that the “motherhood penalty” is the main 
reason. Given that most female professors are bound by law to have only one child 
(not to mention the fact that Chinese grandparents often help with child- rearing), the 
bias against female applicants makes even less sense than elsewhere.
137. Shelly J. Correll, “Minimizing the Motherhood Penalty: What Works, What 
Doesn’t and Why?” paper presented at conference on “Gender & Work: Challenging 
Conventional Wisdom,” Harvard Business School, 28 Feb.–1 Mar. 2013 (http://www 
.hbs.edu/faculty/conferences/2013-w50-research-symposium/Documents/correll.pdf). 
The study is discussed in “Women in the Workplace: A Research Roundup,” Harvard 
Business Review, Sept. 2013, p. 88.
138. David Arkless, “The Secret to Asia’s Long- Term Prosperity? Improving Roles 
for Women at Work,” Global Asia 6, no. 3 (Fall 2011): 14.
139. Again, the practice is often the opposite of what it’s supposed to be. For ex-
ample, women are less likely to be recruited to the foreign ministry even if they score 
as well as men on written examinations because it is felt that men can do better at 
dealing with male diplomats and political leaders in patriarchal Arab and African 
countries. In other words, Chinese women are penalized because of patriarchal preju-
dices elsewhere.
140. An obvious point, perhaps, but it is striking how little of the (English- 
language) literature on leadership has focused on ethics. Deborah L. Rhode, “Intro-
duction,” in Moral Leadership: The Theory and Practice of Power, Judgment and Policy 
(San Francisco: John Wiley & Sons, 2006), p. 5. The very idea of moral expertise 
hasn’t been much discussed in contemporary Anglophone philosophical literature 
(Justin Tiwald, “On Treating Political Authorities as Moral Experts: Deliberative Au-
tonomy from a Confucian Point of View,” unpublished manuscript), so the question 
of what it would mean for political authorities to have superior morality hasn’t been 
much of a subject of academic debate (again, in Anglophone circles; it has been the 
subject of debate in the Confucian tradition, although the Anglophone debates about 
political Confucianism tend to be about the relationship between Confucianism and 
democracy or political equality).
141. A. N. Wilson, Hitler (New York: Basic Books, 2012).
142. M. E. Thomas, “Confessions of a Sociopath,” Psychology Today, May/June 
2011, pp. 52–60.
143. For more nuanced interpretations of Han Fei’s thought, see Paul R. Goldin, 
ed., Dao Companion to the Philosophy of Han Fei (Dordrecht: Springer, 2013); and 
the articles in the special issue “Legalist Philosophy of Han Fei,” Journal of Chinese 
Philosophy 38, no. 1 (Mar. 2011).
144. Some Confucian thinkers argue that the commitment to tian xia (the whole 
world) means that political rulers should be more concerned with the fate of the 
whole world than the fate of one country (e.g., Gan Chunsong, Chonghui Wangdao: 
Rujia yu shijie zhixu [A Return to the Way of the Humane Authority: Confucianism 

234 
Notes to Chapter 2  
and the World Order] [Shanghai: Huadong shifan daxue chubanshe, 2012]), whereas 
others argue that the idea of graded love justifies special commitment to a country 
(see my essay “Reconciling Confucianism and Nationalism,” forthcoming in the Jour-
nal of Chinese Philosophy). At a minimum, Confucians agree that rulers should not 
seek the bad of any group of people: hence the theory that the ruler should seek the 
good of people, even if some deserve special treatment, rules out Nazi- like racist theo-
ries that some people ought to be exterminated.
145. My own Confucian- inspired view is that the people have a fundamental in-
terest in leading harmonious lives, and hence the government ought to prioritize so-
cial harmony (see appendix 1 at http://press.princeton.edu/titles/10418.html). For an-
other Confucian- inspired theory, see Ruiping Fan, “Confucian Meritocracy for 
Contemporary China,” in The East Asian Challenge for Democracy. But the broad 
idea that the purpose of government is to promote the good of the people is compati-
ble with both views as well as many other more specific theories about the purposes of 
government (for a similar point, see Brennan, The Ethics of Voting, pp. 117–118).
146. In contrast to “Legalists,” Confucians argue that governments should lead 
first and foremost by virtue and ritual (or what many today call “soft power”), not 
harsh laws and punishments (see the Analects 2.3). But more pragmatic Confucian 
thinkers such as Xunzi argued that harsh punishments and immoral means are some-
times required in politics.
147. For a modern- day Confucian- inspired defense of the “service conception of 
political authority”—the point of political authority is to serve the ruled and the politi-
cal rights attached to this authority are justified by the contribution they make to the 
betterment of people’s lives—see Chan, Confucian Perfectionism, ch. 1.
148. Although the well- being of the governed was not a major concern for Legal-
ist thinkers, a charitable interpreter could argue that Legalists stressed the need for 
laws that provide order because stability benefits the people. See Henrique Schneider, 
“Legalism: Chinese- Style Constitutionalism?” Journal of Chinese Philosophy 38, no. 
1 (Mar. 2011): esp. 50–59.
149. As a first- year student in middle school, Mao wrote an essay praising the 
harsh ruling system of Legalism (http://www.worldfuturefund.org/wffmaster/Reading 
/China/Mao%200n%20Shang%20Yang.htm) and he (in)famously compared himself 
to Qin Shihuang in 1958. Zhengyuan Fu, Autocratic Tradition and Chinese Politics 
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1993), p. 187.
150. Immanuel Kant, “Perpetual Peace,” in Kant: Political Writings, ed. Hans 
Reiss and trans. H. B. Nisbet (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1991), p. 112.
151. See Chan, Confucian Perfectionism, p. 86.
152. Although studies show that highly extroverted U.S. presidents are perceived 
as more effective, a recent study (from the business world) suggests that in certain sit-
uations an introvert may make the better boss. Adam M. Grant, Francesca Gino, and 
David A. Hoffman, “The Hidden Advantages of Quiet Bosses,” Harvard Business Re-
view, Dec. 2010, p. 28.
153. This is not to deny that there were also critics of verbal fluency in Western 

 
Notes to Chapter 2  
235
societies: Montaigne, for example, deliberately kept his speeches brief and his anec-
dotes concise on the grounds that slowness opened the way to wisdom and sound 
judgment, and his open admission of memory failings “was a direct challenge to the 
Renaissance ideal of oratory and rhetoric” (Sarah Bakewell, How to Live or A Life of 
Montaigne in One Question and Twenty Attempts at an Answer [New York: Other 
Press, 2010], p. 70). On the Renaissance ideal of the perfect orator, see Baldassare 
Castiglione, The Book of the Courtier, trans. Sir Thomas Hoby, introduction by Walter 
Raleigh (London: David Nutt, 1900, orig. pub. 1561), esp. pp. lxii, 368–377.
154. Jin Li, Cultural Foundations of Learning: East and West (Cambridge: Cam-
bridge University Press, 2012), p. 297; I have also drawn on pp. 281 and 282.
155. Ibid., p. 296. The military strategist and statesman Zhuge Liang (181–234) 
may be an exception in ancient times (perhaps oratorical skills matter more for leaders 
who need to inspire their troops). Singapore’s Lee Kuan Yew may be an exception in 
modern times, but he was educated in law at Cambridge and is eloquent primarily in 
English, and he also happens to be the leading political voice in favor of political 
meritocracy over democracy. In mainland China today, it is more common to see 
news reports of political leaders (including very top leaders) assiduously taking notes 
than giving speeches (think of the contrast with Western politicians!).
156. Albert Galvany argues that China’s cultural aversion to eloquent speech 
started during the Warring States period, when eloquence was a legitimate means of 
ensuring one’s promotion. Galvany, “Sly Mouths and Silver Tongues: The Dynamics 
of Psychological Persuasion in Ancient China,” Extrême- Orient, Extrême- Occident 34 
(2012): 15–41. This aversion focuses on eloquent speech as a means of self- marketing, 
which is precisely the main usage of eloquent speech in electoral democracies.
157. Cited in Bol, Neo- Confucianism in History, pp. 47–48. For a similar defense 
of the classics as the ultimate source of moral wisdom from the Song dynasty, see the 
passage cited in Chaffee, The Thorny Gates of Learning in Sung China, pp. 4–5. An-
other defense of the examination system as a way of testing for morality is the argu-
ment that a person’s handwriting reveals his or her moral quality (see, e.g., the Tang 
dynasty passage cited in Xiao and Li, “China’s Meritocratic Examinations and the 
Ideal of Virtuous Talents,” p. 344.). I leave aside this argument because it is somewhat 
out of date: today, many people use computers to write and it is no longer so common 
(unfortunately, perhaps) to express one’s personality and feelings via handwriting.
158. See Xiao and Li, “China’s Meritocratic Examinations and the Ideal of Virtu-
ous Talents,” p. 354.
159. Cited in Joseph Chan, “Political Meritocracy and Meritorious Rule: A Con-
fucian Perspective,” in The East Asian Challenge for Democracy, p. 45.
160. Cited in Xiao and Li, “China’s Meritocratic Examinations and the Ideal of 
Virtuous Talents,” p. 350.
161. Tan Fuxuan, “Xin xingshi xia jiaqiang ganbu de de kaohe pingjia wenti yan-
jiu” [Research on Strengthening Moral Evaluation in the Selection of Cadres under 
New Conditions], Xiandai rencai 6 (2010) (http://www.cnki.com.cn/Article/CJFD 
Total-XDRC201006014.htm). The new regulations on the selection and appointment 

236 
Notes to Chapter 2  
of cadres do specify that virtue should come before ability (Dangzheng lingdao ganbu 
xuanba renyong tiaoli [Regulations on the Selection and Appointment of Cadres of 
the CCP], 2014–1- 15, 2.2; and for regional experiments with increased emphasis on 
virtue in the selection of young cadres, see “Xuanba nianqing ganbu, yan le!” [On the 
More Rigorous Selection of Young Cadres], Zhongguo qingnian bao, 22 Aug. 2014), 
but it remains unclear how virtue is to be assessed and measured.
162. Plus, there is no reason to be bound by earlier definitions of what counts as 
the classics. Zhu Xi chose the Zhongyong [Doctrine of the Mean] as one of the four 
Confucian classics that were used to test potential public officials from the Yuan dy-
nasty onward, but he may have been motivated to select this relatively metaphysical 
text to counter the challenge of Buddhism. Today, it might make more sense to select 
a text—such as the Yueji [Record of Music] in the Liji [Book of Rites]—that more di-
rectly discusses ways of achieving a harmonious society using the arts without exten-
sive discussion of contestable metaphysical foundations.
163. See, e.g., Jiang Qing, “Xianneng zhengzhi de zhidu jiagou: ‘Rujiao xian-
zheng’ dui minzhuxianzheng de chaoyue yu xina” [The System and Structure of Po-
litical Meritocracy: How Confucian Constitutionalism Transcends and Learns from 
Democratic Politics], paper presented at conference “Quanguo zhengzhi ruxue he 
xiandai shijie taolun” [Political Confucianism and Its Contemporary Significance in 
China and the World], Tsinghua University, 27–28 Oct. 2012.
164. Criminals are attracted to elective office not just because it offers opportuni-
ties for corruption but also because it provides immunity from prosecution (Collier, 
Wars, Guns, and Votes, p. 27). In India, 162 out of 543 members of the lower house 
have criminal records, but the Supreme Court recently ruled that sitting MPs will 
henceforth be disqualified upon conviction in serious criminal cases (http://www.ft 
.com/intl/cms/s/0/4ac6d8dc-e966–11e2–9f11–00144feabdc0.html#axzz2fP71DZ3F). 
In Ukraine, the leader of the Meritocratic Party told me that part of his mission is to 
improve the quality of political leaders by disqualifying criminals from politics (inter-
view with Igor Shevchenko, World Economic Forum [summer] meeting, Dalian, 
China, Sept. 2011).
165. Li, Cultural Foundations of Learning, p. 38.
166. Interview with Chu Fumei, vice- mayor of Qufu, 21 June 2014 (Qufu is 
known as the home of Confucian culture and the city has been selected by the central 
government as a special economic and cultural zone). In the Han dynasty, the over-
emphasis on filial piety as a prerequisite for office caused the explosion of faked filial 
behavior to the point of self- destruction. Étienne Balázs, Chinese Civilization and 
Bureaucracy: Variations on a Theme, trans. H. M. Wright; ed. Arthur F. Wright (New 
Haven, Conn.: Yale University Press, 1967). But the idea today is more to deselect 
those who have clearly violated the minimal conditions of filial piety (e.g., if parents 
are asked about the virtue of their child during the candidate selection process and 
the parents have bad things to say, the candidate is deselected), not to reward public 
officials for exceptional filial behavior.
167. Zhou Qi, “Political Systems, Rights, and Values” [Dialogue with Andrew J. 

 
Notes to Chapter 2  
237
Nathan], in Debating China: The U.S.–China Relationship in Ten Conversations, ed. 
Nina Hachigan (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2014), pp. 59–60. Such points are 
often made in informal conversations with Chinese intellectuals with full access to 
information about the facts of the case(s), but they are rarely articulated in public both 
because it is politically sensitive to openly argue with imprisoned dissidents and be-
cause fellow intellectuals find it distasteful to criticize dissidents who cannot defend 
themselves while they are in jail. One important reason that the views of dissidents do 
not resonate much with Chinese intellectuals is that dissidents often make highly 
controversial totalizing critiques of Chinese culture and CCP history all the while 
idealizing electoral democracies in the West. That said, many independent Chinese 
intellectuals think dissidents should be allowed to express their views, particularly if 
there is no attempt to organize an alternative to one- party rule.
168. Tsinghua students in the party sometimes serve poor rural communities for a 
year after they graduate. Even if a mixture of motives may be in play (e.g., being seen 
to be good can help career prospects), the fact that they are willing to help disadvan-
taged people under uncomfortable conditions is a good thing, and being exposed to 
poverty and hardship can help to increase understanding and sympathy for the plight 
of the disadvantaged.
169. Chris Buckley, “China to Loosen Its One- Child Policy,” New York Times, 15 
Nov. 2013.
170. Xi Jinping interview in 2000, translated by Carsten Boyer Thøgersen and 
Susanne Posborg (http://nias.ku.dk/news/interview-2000-china%E2%80%99s-vice 
-president-xi-jinping-translated-western-language-first-time). In March 2014, in the 
midst of one of Beijing’s notorious pollution alerts, President Xi made an “impromptu” 
visit to a local neighborhood in Beijing and talked to locals without wearing a pollu-
tion mask, a clear symbol of his willingness to experience personal harm in order to 
show solidarity with suffering locals.
171. See Bruce J. Dickson, “Who Wants to Be a Communist? Career Incentives 
and Mobilized Loyalty in China,” China Quarterly 217 (Mar. 2014). But once they 
join, the process designed to improve their other- regarding outlook may not be en-
tirely ineffective: Dickson also found that CCP members are more likely to hold 
higher standards of citizenship than non–party members, and are more likely to dem-
onstrate their citizenship by donating time and money to various causes and by voting 
in local People’s Congress elections. It is noteworthy that private entrepreneurs prefer 
to hire party members, all else being equal, because many employers reportedly see 
party membership as indicating that an individual has already passed a screening 
process and will be a more dependable employee (ibid.).
172. Cited in Chan, “Political Meritocracy and Meritorious Rule,” 46.
173. Ibid., pp. 47–48.
174. Ibid., p. 53n61. See also Chan, Confucian Perfectionism, ch. 4.
175. One might add that including senior journalists as the group of selectors 
makes less sense in mainland China if the aim is to empower selectors with personal 
knowledge of the moral character of candidates: unlike in Hong Kong, journalists in 

238 
Notes to Chapter 2  
mainland China rarely have prolonged interaction with political officials in different 
settings.
176. Even the moral character of children can be assessed by such means: the 
Cyrus Tang Compassionate Heart Scholarship is given to Chinese middle and high 
school students who demonstrate commitment to virtues such as filial piety and will-
ingness to help others, and the scholarship recipients (one per class) are selected 
through anonymous voting by fellow students in each class (http://www.tangfound 
ation.org/index.php?option=com_content&view=article&id=20&Itemid=39&site=C
TF&sub=2).
177. The Singaporean Army works relatively well as a meritocratic institution be-
cause peer ratings are given the most weight in promotion decisions, based (at least 
partly) on moral character. (In 1918, the U.S. Army first implemented a rigorous peer- 
rating system designed to favor advancement by merit rather than by prejudice, family 
influence, or political string- pulling; see Kett, Merit, pp. 8–9.) In politics, however, 
the Singapore government relies on the “helicopter” system, borrowed from Shell 
Corporation, which gives most weight to the assessments of superiors. Interview with 
George Yeo at the Institute of Policy Studies, Singapore, 5 Sept. 2013.
178. To screen out fear of retaliation, assessments of moral character should be 
done anonymously.
179. Cary Huang, “Party Polls 370 Members on Choice of Top Leaders,” South 
China Morning Posts, 8 June 2012. The practice of peer decision making at the top is 
more comprehensive in the sense that there is no clear distinction between assess-
ments of intellectual ability, social skills, and moral character (or virtue). In this chap-
ter, I am arguing that peer ratings should be used as the main mode of assessment for 
moral character; ideally, assessments of intellectual ability and social skills should rely 
on other modes of assessment (see sections 2 and 3), and the decision to promote or 
not should be based on a sum of the distinctive modes of assessment for each 
dimension.
180. He Baogang, “An Empirical Theory of Hybrid Legitimacy System in China,” 
paper presented at workshop on “East Asian Perspectives on Political Legitimacy,” 
University of Hong Kong, 18–19 Aug. 2011.
181. See section 3. For a fictitious (and hugely popular) book by a former public 
official that recounts (and satirizes) the culture of loyalty to superiors, see Wang Xiao-
fang, The Civil Servant’s Notebook, trans. Eric Abrahamsen (Melbourne: Viking, 
2012).
182. To counteract unnecessary attachment to the status quo by national leaders, 
the government established the China Executive Leadership Academy in Pudong 
(Shanghai), which promotes innovation in managerial thinking and research to en-
able the party to meet the changing governance requirements of the market transition 
and economic globalization while preserving the party’s rule. Gregory T. Chin, “In-
novation and Preservation: Remaking China’s National Leadership Training System,” 
China Quarterly 205 (Mar. 2011): 18–39. But such institutions won’t be sufficient 
without reform of the evaluation process for the promotion of cadres.

 
Notes to Chapter 3  
239
183. One way of dealing with this problem—implemented in imperial China, but 
not in today’s political system—is to penalize superiors who recommend public offi-
cials who turn out to be corrupt or ineffective.
184. Again, I have in mind political meritocracies that value leaders with good 
track records of performance at lower levels of government, which may require the 
type of social skills exhibited by leaders of large corporations. In democracies, the 
type of social skills required of stage actors who need to deliver the same speech night 
after night with equal passion may be more important.
Chapter 3 
What’s Wrong with Political Meritocracy
1. To be more precise, it would be outlandish from a Confucian perspective to 
expect that political officials should be deprived of family members, not just for prac-
tical reasons but also because morality is learned and practiced within the family and 
then extended to non–family members. In the Ottoman Empire, however, the sultans 
took children, selected for their talents and intelligence, from subject Christian fami-
lies, and those judged most able were trained to be leading administrators (McCarthy, 
The Ottoman Turks, p. 110). The practice was partly justified by the “Platonic” idea 
that a child stripped of family would become an “enemy to their family and depen-
dents” (Imber, The Ottoman Empire, p. 124) and wholly committed to serving the 
empire, but it didn’t always work as planned: “those who became Muslim often kept 
their language and maybe even their allegiance, some returning to their region of 
birth as governors, others commanding in their native tongues, and many trying to 
help family members back in their homeland” (Barkey, Empire of Difference, p. 124).
2. Allan Bloom, “Interpretive Essay,” in The Republic of Plato, trans. Allan Bloom, 
2nd ed. (New York: Basic Books, 1991), p. 380. But perhaps Plato’s view about appoint-
ing rulers without families as a way of combating corruption is not as crazy as it 
seems. Wang Qishan heads the Central Commission for Discipline Inspection of the 
Communist Party of China (the party’s top anticorruption watchdog; he is also one of 
the seven members of the ruling Standing Committee of the Politburo), and the fact 
that Wang does not have any children has been cited as a reason that he has been 
more serious about cracking down on corruption than other political leaders who 
often have wealthy children. Wu Di, “Zhongguo fanfu ke yi lao yong yi” [Dealing 
with Corruption in China Once and for All], Lianhe zaobao, 28 Oct. 2013.
3. Michael Young, “Introduction to the Transaction Edition,” in The Rise of the 
Meritocracy (New Brunswick, N.J.: Transaction, 1994), p. xvi. Young does not distin-
guish clearly between economic meritocracy (people should be rewarded according 
to their productive capabilities) and political meritocracy (the political system should 
aim to select and promote leaders with superior ability and virtue). My book is a de-
fense of political meritocracy, not economic meritocracy.
4. I do not mean to imply that there are no other problems associated with politi-
cal meritocracy. For example, it could be argued that Chinese- style political meri-

240 
Notes to Chapter 3  
tocracy is supported by a high- pressure, ultracompetitive educational system that 
makes people, especially secondary- school students preparing for university en-
trance examinations, extremely unhappy. But this kind of educational system is also 
characteristic of some democratic political systems, such as that in South Korea, so 
the “blame” cannot be put on political meritocracy per se. Moreover, it is possible 
(and, arguably, desirable) to reform the educational system in China so that it allows 
for a more diverse expression of human qualities without undermining political 
meritocracy.
5. A recent issue of the French periodical Books reviews all the counterarguments 
against democracy and suggests that none of them undermine the argument for de-
mocracy that bad rulers can be changed by the people at election time. See the intro-
duction to “Pourquoi Voter?” [Why Vote?], Books 31 (Apr. 2012): 24, 42.
6. See Gong Ting and Wu Muluan, “Wo guo 2000–2009 nian fubai anli yanjiu 
baogao: Jiyu 2800 yu ge baodao anli de fenxi” [Research Report on China’s Corrup-
tion Cases between 2000 and 2009: An Empirical Analysis of 2800 Cases], Shehuixue 
yanjiu 4 (2012): 204–220; Qianwei Wu, “Reorientation and Prospect of China’s Com-
bat against Corruption,” Crime, Law and Social Change 49, no. 2 (Mar. 2008): 86–88; 
Andrew Wedeman, “Win, Lose, or Draw? China’s Quarter Century War on Corrup-
tion,” Crime, Law and Social Change 49, no. 1 (Feb. 2008): 7–26; Melanie Manion, 
Corruption by Design: Building Clean Government in Mainland China and Hong 
Kong (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 2004), ch. 3. In any case, official 
statistics are unreliable and it is difficult to determine the extent of corruption with 
any precision.
7. “Xi Jinping’s Anti- Corruption Crusade,” Riskadvisory, 5 Mar. 2013 (http://news 
.riskadvisory.net/index.php/2013/03/xi-jinpings-anti-corruption-crusade/). Such wor-
ries have been expressed by political leaders in the past: for example, the former presi-
dent Hu Jintao warned that corruption “could prove fatal to the party, and even cause 
the collapse of the party and the fall of the state,” and his predecessor Jiang Zemin 
said that “corruption is the cancer in the body of the party and the state. If we let it be, 
our party, our political power and our socialist modernization cause will be doomed” 
(cited in Ren Jianming and Du Zhizhou, “Institutionalized Corruption: Power Over-
concentration of the First- in- Command in China,” Crime, Law and Social Change 
49, no. 1 [Feb. 2008]: 47). But the campaign against corruption since President Xi as-
sumed power seems to be much more systematic than previous campaigns (Andrew 
Browne, “In China, Purge Precedes Economic Rebirth,” Wall Street Journal, 9 Dec. 
2014). According to one political observer who is not normally prone to upbeat takes 
on Chinese politics, “what is strikingly different about the current campaign is the 
apparent lack of political opportunism. Where previous leaders employed anticorrup-
tion as just another strategy to decapitate political opponents, there’s no such pattern 
under Xi” (Russell Leigh Moses, “Why China’s Current Anti- Corruption Campaign 
Is Different,” http://blogs.wsj.com/chinarealtime/2013/05/30/why-chinas-current-anti 
-corruption-campaign-is-different/?mod=WSJBlog&mod=chinablog). Another differ-
ence is that more higher- level leaders are being taken down, including (for the first 

 
Notes to Chapter 3  
241
time) a recently retired Politburo Standing Committee member, Zhou Yongkang; in 
the past, lower- ranking officials were more likely to be punished for corruption by the 
center, whereas occupants of executive posts such as vice- mayors and vice- governors 
were more likely to be removed for mistakes or accidents. Liang Qiao, “For Harmony 
and How Not to Get Promoted: The Downgraded Chinese Regional Leaders,” Jour-
nal of Chinese Political Science 19 (2013): 206–207. I can testify from personal experi-
ence that the anticorruption campaign is reaching down to all levels of society: for the 
first time, my department at Tsinghua University canceled the annual talent show of 
teachers and students in an effort to eliminate all activities that could be (mis)per-
ceived as a misuse of funds. This example also points to a common complaint against 
the current anticorruption campaign: that it has gone too far in a “Legalist” direction, 
targeting not just corrupt officials and activities that lead to corruption but also mor-
ally legitimate social gatherings that are important for forging social bonds and pro-
viding work motivation for public officials, thus hurting the productivity of officials 
and needlessly tarnishing the public’s view of the government and the party. Gao Yu 
and Wang Heyan, “How the Hammer Falls as China Nails Corruption,” CaixinOn-
line, 24 July 2014 (http://english.caixin.com/2014–07–24/100708615.html).
8. http://www.transparency.org/cpi2012/results. Moreover, it can be argued that 
corruption in China is less harmful than corruption in India. David Pilling writes, 
summarizing his interview with Jagdish Bhagwati: “A crucial difference between the 
two countries is the type of corruption they have. India’s is classic ‘rent- seeking,’ 
where people jostle to grab a cut of existing wealth. ‘The Chinese have what I [Bhag-
wati] call profit- sharing corruption’: the Communist Party puts a straw in the milk-
shake so ‘they have an interest in having the milkshake grow larger.’ ” David Pilling, 
“Lunch with the FT: Jagdish Bhagwati,” Financial Times, 17 Apr. 2014. Moreover, 
there may be less “petty corruption” (payoffs to police, customs officers, etc.) in China 
than in India and Indonesia. Yan Sun and Michael Johnson also argue that China’s 
closed political system means that there is less corruption at the top: “In India acces-
sible elites and economic pressures growing out of scarcity sustain corruption and 
weaken accountability, in political and bureaucratic arenas at all levels. Closed politi-
cal and autonomous elites, along with vigorous economic growth, may shield the top 
levels of China’s regime from the worst corruption pressures, shifting the emphasis to 
political and bureaucratic processes at lower levels.” Yan Sun and Michael Johnston, 
“Does Democracy Check Corruption? Insights from China and India,” Comparative 
Politics 42, no. 1 (Oct. 2009): 15.
9. One reason is that political corruption under President Suharto was largely 
limited to Suharto’s family. Democratization opened the way to “hundreds of little 
Suhartos” (cited in Eric X. Li, “Saints or Thieves, Corruption and the Chinese Di-
lemma,” http://www.scmp.com/comment/insight-opinion/article/1296158/no-how-book 
-west-can-curb-corruption-china). A high- ranking Golkar official links corruption 
more directly with democracy: “In Indonesia, democracy is identical to money poli-
tics. . . . If there is no money, people will not vote for us” (Norimitsu Onishi, “Law-
makers Sow Disillusion in Indonesia,” New York Times, 16 Oct. 2010). The chief jus-

242 
Notes to Chapter 3  
tice of the Constitutional Court has recently been arrested, which is a reminder that 
institutions independent of political rulers cannot safeguard against corruption if they 
themselves are corrupt (“Top Drama,” Sunday Post [Jakarta], 6 Oct. 2013).
10. William Overholt, “Is Xi Jinping’s Fight against Corruption for Real? A China 
File Conversation,” 26 June 2013 (http://www.chinafile.com/xi-jinping-s-fight-against 
-corruption-real). Indicators of clean government suggest that people in Taiwan doubt 
the probity of their public officials, especially elected politicians and political appoin-
tees, leading Yu et al. to conclude that the democratic transformation has damaged 
government integrity. Chilik Yu, Chun- Ming Chen, Lung- Teng Hu, and Wen- Jong 
Huang, “Evolving Perceptions of Government Integrity and Changing Anticorrup-
tion Measures in Taiwan,” in Preventing Corruption in Asia: Institutional Design and 
Policy Capacity, ed. Ting Gong and Stephen K. Ma (London: Routledge, 2009), pp. 
189–205.
11. Sun and Johnston, “Does Democracy Check Corruption?” pp. 2, 15–16.
12. Randall Peerenboom, China Modernizes: Threat to the West or Model for the 
Rest? (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2008).
13. Bin Dong and Benno Torgler, “Causes of Corruption: Evidence from China,” 
China Economic Review 26 (2013): 152–169. Another study, however, found that 
higher levels of education and wealth can worsen local corruption if fiscal decentral-
ization increases the size of government without adequate anticorruption mecha-
nisms. Pan Chunyang, He Lixin, and Yuan Congshuai, “Caizheng fenquan yu 
guanyuan fubai: Jiyu 1999–2007 nian zhongguo shengji mianban shuju de shizheng 
yanjiu” [Fiscal Decentralization and the Corruption of Cadres: An Empirical Study 
Based on China’s Provincial Data from 1997 to 2007], Dangdai caijing 3, no. 316 
(2011): 38–46.
14. The claim here is that increased GDP per capita tends to minimize corrup-
tion, not eliminate it. I regret to report that the political (democratic) system of my 
hometown, Montreal, is probably at least as corrupt as city- level politics in (relatively 
poor) Chinese cities: in July 2013, Mayor Michael Applebaum, who ran on a promise 
to tackle corruption, was arrested on corruption- related charges (http://www.theglobe 
andmail.com/news/national/montreal-mayor-michael-applebaum-arrested 
/article12595439/).
15. Another reason to worry is the impact corruption has on the economy. Al-
though corruption has been justified on the grounds that it can act as a lubricant to 
motivate the bureaucracy to get things done and facilitate commercial exchanges, re-
cent research shows that counties with a higher degree of anticorruption measures 
tend to have higher income as measured by county- level per capita GDP (Yinping 
Wu and Jiangnan Zu, “Corruption, Anti- corruption, and Inter- county Income Dis-
parity in China,” Social Science Journal 48 [2011]: 435–448), and that years of office 
selling in Heilongjiang hindered economic development (Jiangnan Zhu, “Why Are 
Offices for Sale in China? A Case Study of the Office- Selling Chain in Heilong-
jiang,” Asian Survey 48, no. 4 [July/Aug. 2008]: 575–576). High levels of corruption 
also negatively affect government expenditure, and hence negatively affect spending 

 
Notes to Chapter 3  
243
for social welfare (Guo Jie, Yang Jie, and Cheng Xu, “Diqu fubai zhili yu zhengfu 
zhichu guimo: Jiyu shengji mianban shuju de kongjian jiliang fenxi” [The Regula-
tion of Local Corruption and the Scale of Government: A Spatial Economic Analysis 
Based on Provincial Panel Data], Jingji shehui tizhi bijiao 1 [2013]: 196–204). Cheng 
Li and Ryan McElveen predict that in the future a decline in official corruption will 
help the economy because tax dollars previously used to fund unsanctioned pur-
chases can be returned to public coffers and spent on improved infrastructure and 
public services. Moreover, Xi’s anticorruption campaign will increase his political 
capital, thus allowing him to implement deeper economic reforms that will induce 
greater confidence in China’s economy (Li and McElveen, “Debunking Misconcep-
tions about Xi’s Anti- Corruption Campaign,” China–U.S. Focus, 17 July 2014).
16. Yan Sun, Corruption and Market in Contemporary China (Ithaca, N.Y.: Cor-
nell University Press, 2004).
17. For a more positive evaluation of Bo Xilai and his legacy, see Yuezhi Zhao, 
“The Struggle for Socialism in China: The Bo Xilai Saga and Beyond,” Monthly Re-
view 64, no. 5 (Oct. 2012): 1–17.
18. The Financial Times also published a long exposé on “The Family Fortunes of 
Beijing’s New Few” (11 July 2012), including a detailed chart of the business interests 
of China’s most powerful leaders and their wealthy relatives, but for some reason the 
government has not “punished” the FT by blocking its website.
19. To be more precise, in a two- party democratic system a ruling political party 
that is perceived to be corrupt may worry about being voted out of power, but the 
same party will have another opportunity to gain power the following election (espe-
cially if the voters come to realize that the alternative party is just as corrupt). In a 
political meritocracy, the whole political system is threatened by corruption and if it 
collapses, the ruling party is less likely to have another opportunity to gain power.
20. Yao Zhongqiu, “Tian ren zhi ji de zhi dao: Guangchuan Dongzi ‘Tian ren san 
ce’ yi shu” [The Way of Governing the Relationship between Heaven and Man: Ex-
planatory Comments on Dong Zhongshu’s “Three Answers to Governance between 
Heaven and Man”], Zhengzhi sixiang shi 3, no. 11 (2012): 1–33.
21. The seventeenth- century Confucian critic Huang Zongxi proposed to institu-
tionalize criticism of the emperor by means of an annual session that would compel 
the emperor to respond to the policy questions of the rector of the highest educational 
institution in the land. Huang’s suggestion was too radical for his day, but the contem-
porary Confucian thinker Jiang Qing has proposed reviving a similar proposal in 
contemporary China (see chapter 1, note 137). For a discussion of a Southern Song 
treatise on the Zhou Li that argued for placing constitutional limits on both ministe-
rial tyranny and monarchical autocracy, see Jaeyoon Song, “The Zhou Li and Consti-
tutionalism: A Southern Song Political Theory,” Journal of Chinese Philosophy 36, no. 
3 (Sept. 2009): 424–438. For a proposal to revive ancient remonstrating institutions 
and independent academies as checks on government power, see Baogang He, “Con-
fucian Deliberation: The Persistence of Authoritarian Deliberation in China,” paper 
presented at the “International Conference on Confucianism, Democracy, and Con-

244 
Notes to Chapter 3  
stitutionalism: Global and East Asian Perspectives,” National Taiwan University, 
14–15 June 2013.
22. See the discussion in chapter 2, section 2.
23. Miyazaki, China’s Examination Hell, p. 78.
24. Cited in Kuhn, The Age of Confucian Rule, p. 44.
25. For proposals on modern- day versions of the court historian and the censor, 
both inspired by institutions designed to curb the power of the ruler in Choson dy-
nasty Korea, see Hahm Chaihark, “Constitutionalism, Confucian Civic Virtue, and 
Ritual Propriety,” and Jongryn Mo, “The Challenge of Accountability: Implications 
of the Censorate,” both in Confucianism for the Modern World, ed. Daniel A. Bell and 
Hahm Chaibong (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2003).
26. For an argument that emperors often exercised de facto political power in a 
wide range of social, economic, and political affairs with generally bad consequences 
for human dignity, see Liu Zehua, “Wangquanzhuyi: Zhongguo sixiang wenhua de 
lishi dingwei” [Monarchism: A Historical Orientation of Chinese Intellectual Cul-
ture], Tianjin shehui kexue 3 (1998): 59–62 (for an English translation, see Yuri Pines, 
unpublished manuscript). In the case of Emperor Wanli, however, he “realize[d] that 
he was less the Ruler of All Men than a prisoner of the Forbidden City. His power was 
basically negative” (Huang, 1587, a Year of No Significance, p. 93). But Wanli’s “nega-
tive” power had terrible consequences: he withdrew from active duty, and his passive 
resistance contributed to the collapse of the whole political system.
27. Fukuyama, The Origins of Political Order, pp. 313–314. For another example, 
see Orville Shell and John Delury, Wealth and Power: China’s Long March to the 
Twenty- First Century (London: Little, Brown, 2013), p. 64.
28. Pines, The Everlasting Empire, p. 170.
29. Hon S. Chan and Jie Gao, “Old Wine in New Bottles: A County- Level Case 
Study of Anti- Corruption Reform in the People’s Republic of China,” Crime, Law 
and Social Change 49, no. 2 (Mar. 2008): 115–116.
30. James T. Areddy, “China’s Cadres Balk at Showing the Money,” Wall Street 
Journal, 1 Aug. 2013, p. A4.
31. For some evidence that online anticorruption campaigns weaken trust in gov-
ernment (helping to explain the government’s aversion to such campaigns), see 
Cheng Tongshun and Zhang Wenjun, “Wangluo fanfu tisheng zhengzhi xinren de 
luoji pipan” [Criticism of the Argument That Online Anti- Corruption Campaigns 
Strengthen Trust in Government], Lilun yu gaige 4 (2013).
32. That said, it is possible, as Francis Fukuyama puts it in the second volume of 
his magnum opus on political order, that the Chinese political system could “produce 
a charismatic leader who exploited populist passions and built a personal following 
that upset all of the consensual understandings that have characterized post- Mao 
leadership.” Fukuyama, Political Order and Political Decay: From the Industrial Revo-
lution to the Globalization of Democracy (New York: Farrar, Straus and Giroux, 2014), 
pp. 383–384. If Xi Jinping contrives to hold on to the presidency after two terms in the 

 
Notes to Chapter 3  
245
Standing Committee of the Politburo—a highly unlikely event, in my view—then I 
will retract my claim that the traditional one bad emperor problem has been solved.
33. Eric X. Li, “The Life of the Party: The Post- Democratic Future Begins in 
China,” Foreign Affairs 92, no. 1 (Jan./Feb. 2013).
34. According to a Pew survey on Chinese attitudes in 2012, half of the respon-
dents said corrupt officials are a major problem, up from 39 percent in 2008 (http://
www.pewglobal.org/2012/10/16/growing-concerns-in-china-about-inequality-corrup 
tion/). Thirty- two percent also say this about corrupt businesspeople, also up 11 points 
from 2008.
35. Qin Ailing, “Zhongjiwei biange” [Reform of the Central Commission for 
Discipline Inspection], Nanfeng chuang 2, nos. 13–26 (2014): 46–48; Zheng Yong-
nian, “Fighting Corruption and China’s Second Political Revolution,” United Morn-
ing News, 12 Aug. 2014; Eric X. Li, “Party of the Century: How China Is Reorganiz-
ing for the Future,” Foreign Affairs, 10 Jan. 2014 (http://www.foreignaffairs.com 
/articles/140645/eric-x-li/party-of-the-century).
36. Huang Jing, “Touxi Zhongguo fubai” [Analyzing China’s Corruption] (http://
www.21ccom.net/articles/zgyj/xzmj/article_201005079088.html).
37. Keane, The Life and Death of Democracy, p. xxvii.
38. The Xi Jinping administration has cracked down on independent whistleblow-
ers and has opened an official website for people to report abuses of power (see http://
www.ccdi.gov.cn). To be fair, there is a need to prevent false accusations without 
proper investigations, but better laws to protect whistleblowers would do more good 
than harm (Yang Tao, “Baohu jubaoren, hexin zai yu guifan gong quanli” [Protect 
Whistleblowers, the Key Lies in Regulating Public Power], Beijing qingnian bao, 17 
Apr. 2014).
39. Jun Ma and Xing Ni, “Toward a Clean Government in China: Does the Bud-
get Reform Provide a Hope?” Crime, Law and Social Change 49, no. 2 (Mar. 2008): 
135–136.
40. “Disclosing Officials’ Assets,” China Daily, 13 Dec. 2012, p. 8.
41. The city- state of ancient Venice, governed by 2 percent of the population, 
minimized “family corruption” by performing an audit at the end of a ruler’s tenure, 
and if a financial discrepancy was discovered the ruler’s children were penalized. 
Such measures are not in the cards in China now—if only because of an informal 
understanding over the past couple of decades that the talented children of political 
families would go into politics and the rest into business; hence such families are 
likely to fight to the death measures forcing disclosure of family assets. But when po-
litical families realize that extravagant wealth accumulation by family members 
threatens the legitimacy of the whole regime, as happened in Suharto’s Indonesia, 
family asset disclosure may be considered in the future. Another problem is that fam-
ily members often move wealth abroad and it is difficult for the Chinese government 
to keep track of such wealth, but—an encouraging sign—China’s so- called naked of-
ficials, those who have moved their spouses, children, and assets overseas while they 

246 
Notes to Chapter 3  
remain at home, will not be considered for promotion (Yimou Lee, “China Cracks 
Cozy Offshore Code of Perks,” New York Times, 28 Jan. 2014). In another encouraging 
sign, China and Australia are now cooperating to track down and seize the posses-
sions of Chinese citizens who live in Australia and are suspected of fraud (“China 
Media Welcomes Foreign Anti- Corruption Cooperation,” BBC News, 21 Oct. 2014).
42. For a discussion of the Hong Kong model and what can be learned from it, see 
Melanie Manion, Corruption by Design, esp. chs. 2 and 6.
43. Stanley Lubman, “What China Needs to Do to Really Put Clamps on Cor-
ruption,” China Real Time Report, 2 Apr. 2013. The government seems to be moving 
along these lines: at the Third Plenum, it proposed establishing local- level judicial 
agencies with sources of funding independent of local governments. Li Da, “San 
zhong quan hui gaige neirong baoguang” [An Exposure of the Contents of the Re-
form of the Third Plenum], Xin jiyuan zhoukan, 30 Sept. 2013.
44. Yan Sun, “Cadre Recruitment and Corruption: What Goes Wrong?” Crime, 
Law and Social Change 49, no. 1 (Feb. 2008): 61–79.
45. Huang, 1587, a Year of No Significance, p. 76. In modern China, candidates 
would first need to pass local- level exams to determine basic intellectual ability and 
appointments could be made by lot depending on the number of positions available. 
Not only would this process eliminate corruption (and sexism, guanxi, and nepotism) 
from the process, but also the “losers” would not feel as resentful, given that chance 
would decide the outcome. Promotion to higher levels would then depend on 
performance.
46. But there are limits to transparency: when the British government published 
the salaries of civil servants, it led to such an uproar that the government reverted to 
the earlier practice of secrecy (Ethos 12 [June 2013]: 13).
47. Gong and Wu, “Wo guo 2000–2009 nian fubai anli yanjiu baogao” [A Re-
search Report on China’s Corruption Cases between 2000–2009].
48. Francesco Sisci, “Xi Cuts CEO Cloth for Bruising Battle,” Sinograph, 2 July 
2013.
49. Zheng Yongnian, “Fighting Corruption and China’s Second Political Revolu-
tion,” United Morning News, 12 Aug. 2014.
50. Kilkon Ko and Cuifen Weng, “Structural Changes in Chinese Corruption,” 
China Quarterly 211 (Sept. 2012): 718–740. Chinese- style corruption does not always 
(or even usually) take the form of direct cash payments. I was told of one practice at a 
fancy Cantonese restaurant in Beijing. Government officials are invited by business 
executives for dinner. The dinner is ridiculously overpriced (about ten times what it 
should cost), and the restaurant passes “gifts” (e.g. very expensive tea sets) to the payer, 
and these “gifts” are then passed to the government official. Hence, the functional 
equivalent of a bribe has been passed to the official, but with plausible deniability on 
all sides.
51. The legal barrier between wealth and power began to break down in the Ming 
dynasty: merchants were allowed to take public service exams, and transference of 
merchant wealth into educational resources for a classical education for their sons 

 
Notes to Chapter 3  
247
became de rigueur for merchants hoping to enter the literati via exams and affinal 
relationships. But wealth alone did not suffice until the mid to late Qing, when lower 
degrees were sold to pay for military campaigns and many who had failed their exams 
could thereby purchase local degrees and cash in on that for local appointments. 
Upper juren (provincial) and jinshi (capital) degrees, however, remained immune to 
this commercialization of the degree market. (This note draws on an email sent by 
Benjamin Elman.)
52. Zhang Lu, “Shichang zhuangui yu fubai moshi de bianqian” [Market Transi-
tion and the Changing Forms of Corruption], Wenhua zongheng, June 2013, p. 54.
53. Dong and Torgler, “Causes of Corruption,” p. 165.
54. For some hopeful signs, see “Will a New Round of Reforms Shake Up State 
Firms?” Week in China (HSBC weekly newsletter), 25 July 2014.
55. Ko and Wong, “Structural Changes in Chinese Corruption,” p. 737.
56. As Eric X. Li notes, “Seventy- seven percent of Americans say elected officials 
are influenced by financial contributors vs. 19 percent say they are led by the best in-
terests of the country (Gallup); 50 percent of Americans say elections are for sale vs. 37 
percent believe they are won by the best candidates (Gallup); 70 percent of Americans 
say the political system is controlled by special interests and not responsive to the 
country’s real needs (Newsweek poll); and 93 percent of Americans say politicians do 
special favors for campaign contributors (ABC News and Washington Post Poll).” Li, 
“Saints or Thieves.”
57. Zhang, “Shichang zhuangui yu fubai moshi de bianqian,” p. 54.
58. Li Yongzhong of the China Academy of Supervision and Discipline Inspec-
tion has proposed that amnesty be granted to officials who come clean. Zhang Wei-
ying of the Guanghua School of Management agrees since, if it works, an amnesty 
might rescue the party.
59. Michelle FlorCruz, “China’s High- Ranking Officials and Businessmen Sala-
ries Still Too High for Critics,” International Business Times, 29 Apr. 2013.
60. Li, “Saints or Thieves”; Huang, 1587, a Year of No Significance, pp. 13, 89, 90.
61. I leave aside the cynical view—often expressed in informal conversations with 
journalists and political critics—that the government deliberately keeps salaries low to 
discourage rebellion in the bureaucracy. The logic is that low salaries force public 
officials to turn to corruption, and rebels within the bureaucracy can be purged on 
the grounds of immorality if need be. I do not know of any evidence to support such 
cynical speculations either in imperial China or now.
62. Cited in Wolfgang Drechsler, “Wang Anshi and the Origins of Modern Public 
Management in Song Dynasty China,” Public Money and Management 33, no. 4 
(Sept. 2013): 353–360.
63. This section draws on Wong, “Political Meritocracy in Singapore.”
64. Jeffrey Chua, Larry Kamener, and Michael Shanahan, “The Making of a Tal-
ent Magnet: Lessons from Singapore’s Public Service,” Boston Consulting Group, 
May 2012, p. 7. The authors add that a “competitive level of pay in itself isn’t sufficient 
to motivate great performance. So the public service relies on highly variable pay—

248 
Notes to Chapter 3  
worth up to 45 percent of total compensation at senior management levels—to reward 
employees whose actions lead to desired outcomes. Variable pay hinges on both the 
overall economic situation of the country and on the individual’s performance.” In 
my experience working at a public university (the National University of Singapore) in 
the early 1990s, however, only the overall economic situation of the country counted: 
my salary varied in accordance with the growth rate of Singapore, not my academic 
output.
65. Cited in Wong, “Political Meritocracy in Singapore,” pp. 293–294.
66. Tan, “Meritocracy and Political Liberalization in Singapore,” p. 316.
67. Cited in Wong, “Political Meritocracy in Singapore,” p. 294.
68. See “Cong guanfeng zhengzhi dao zhili nengli xiandaihua: Fang Qinghua 
daxue gonggong guanli xueyuan yuanzhang, jiaoshou Xue Lan” [From Bureaucratic 
Control to Modernized Governance Capability: Interview with Tsinghua University 
Dean and Professor Xue Lan], Renmin luntan wang, 5 May 2014 (http://politics.rmlt 
.com.cn/2014/0505/265090.shtml). Another problem that leads to corruption—easier 
to rectify, perhaps—is that different salaries are paid for the same position. Tang Zhi-
jun, Xiang Guocheng, Shen Ying, “Jinsheng jinbiaosai yu difang zhengfu guanyuan 
fubai wenti de yanjiu” [Research on the Competitive Promotion and the Problem of 
Corruption of Local Officials], Shanghai jingji yanjiu 4 (2013): 13.
69. Liu Xin, “Rang gongwuyuan de gongzi huigui shichang” [Let the Salaries of 
Public Servants Be Set by the Market], 21 Shiji jingji baodao, 20 Jan. 2014, p. 6.
70. That said, there is an advantage to payments in kind: the total compensation 
is less transparent, and hence public officials are less likely to envy others who may 
make more in hidden wealth. So perhaps the challenge is to strive for certain forms of 
payments in kind that are not viewed as corrupt. In the business world, there are also 
limits to transparency: stock market reports issued every three months made the mar-
kets more volatile than reports issued once a year.
71. Without paying attention to the other factors that cause corruption, increasing 
salaries of public servants can be ineffective and even counterproductive: see Ting 
Gong and Alfred M. Wu, “Does Increased Civil Service Pay Deter Corruption? Evi-
dence from China,” Review of Public Personnel Administration 32 (2012): 192–204; 
and Luis A. Sosa, “Wages and Other Determinants of Corruption,” Review of Devel-
opment Economics 8, no. 4 (Nov. 2004): 597–605.
72. Russell Hardin, “Morals for Public Officials,” in Moral Leadership, p. 115.
73. Ting Gong and Jianming Ren, “Hard Rules and Soft Constraints: Regulating 
Conflict of Interest in China,” Journal of Contemporary China 22, no. 79 (2013): 17.
74. Clinton Rossiter, The American Presidency, 2nd ed. (New York: Time Inc., 
1963), p. 65 (cited in Sabl, Ruling Passions, pp. 51–52).
75. Zhang Shai, “Qiangli kongzhi yu jingshen yueshu: Zhengzhi lunli jiaodu de 
zhongguo fangfu kunjing yu fangfu lujing” [Controlling by Power and Restraining by 
Spirit: The Predicament of Preventing Corruption in China and the Way of Prevent-
ing Corruption Considered from the Perspective of Political Ethics], Lunli yu gaige 3 
(2013): 37–40.

 
Notes to Chapter 3  
249
76. Kwame Anthony Appiah, The Honor Code: How Moral Revolutions Happen 
(New York: Norton, 2010), p. 209.
77. Ibid., ch. 2. The analogy with corruption is not perfect: it is easier to observe 
(and hence crack down on) footbinding than corruption.
78. “President Xi Promises to Shake Off GDP Obsession in Promoting Officials” 
(http://news.xinhuanet.com/English/china/2013–06/29/c_132497892.htm).
79. Such politically sensitive claims are made by mainland Chinese scholars in 
academic publications (see, e.g., Zhang, “Qiangli kongzhi yu jingshen yueshu” [Con-
trolling by Power and Restraining by Spirit], pp. 39–40), but they are rarely articulated 
in the more popular media.
80. One famous example is Liu Shaoqi’s 1939 text “How to Be a Good Com-
munist,” with its emphasis on self- cultivation (for an English translation, see http:// 
www.marxists.org/reference/archive/liu-shaoqi/1939/how-to-be/). The “Maoist” self- 
criticism sessions being revived by Xi Jinping similarly owe more to Confucianism 
than to Marxism (Yu Zeyuan, “Xi Jinping dudao guanyuan xianghu jieduan” [Xi Jin-
ping Supervises Mutual Self- Criticism Sessions], Lianhe zaobao, 9 Sept. 2013).
81. See, e.g., Chen Lai, Kongfuzi yu xiandai shijie [Confucius and the Modern 
World] (Beijing: Peking University Press, 2011); and Jiang, A Confucian Constitu-
tional Order. Even Singapore, notorious for its “Legalist” reliance on high salaries and 
harsh punishments to curb corrupt behavior, recognizes the need for moral education 
in Confucian classics (Ye Xingqiang, “Yong ‘Dizigui’ jiao hao nide haizi” [Use 
“Dizigui” to Educate Your Children in Ethical Behavior], Lianhe zaobao, 3 Sept. 
2013).
82. Benjamin Kang Lim and Ben Blanchard, “Xi Jinping Hopes Traditional 
Faiths Can Fill Moral Void in China: Sources,” Reuters, 29 Sept. 2013; “Xi Jinping 
canjia Anhui daibiaotuan shenyi shi qiangdiao: Zuofeng jianshi yongyuan zai lu 
shang” [Xi Jinping Stresses to Anhui Delegates: Building a New Way of Doing Things 
Is Continuous Work], 9 Mar. 2014 (http://news.xinhuanet.com/politics/2014–03/09 
/c_119680052.htm).
83. The argument here is not that replacing communism with Confucianism is 
sufficient to eliminate corruption; rather, my point is that ethical training can be 
helpful in curtailing corruption (if it is combined with other means) and Confucian 
ethics has more to contribute in that respect than the Marxist tradition. One study has 
shown that ethical training in Baltic countries can have an effect in curbing corrup-
tion of civil servants, though it needs to be combined with punishment for corrupt 
officials (Lars Johannsen and Karin Hilmer Pedersen, “How to Combat Corruption: 
Assessing Anti- Corruption Measures from a Civil Servant’s Perspective,” Administra-
tive Culture 13, no. 2 [2012]: 130–146). In the case of Indonesia, ethical traditions may 
influence the extent of corruption: the predominantly Hindu island of Bali is alleged 
to be less corrupt than other parts of the country and an important reason may be re-
lated to the Hindu idea of karma: sins in this life influence the form of reincarnation 
in the next life (in contrast, other religions such as Islam and Catholicism provide 
various means for cleansing oneself of sins in this life).

250 
Notes to Chapter 3  
84. Quoted in Wong, “Political Meritocracy in Singapore,” pp. 299–300.
85. This case is discussed in ibid., pp. 300–302.
86. Tan, “Meritocracy and Political Liberalization in Singapore.”
87. Young, The Rise of the Meritocracy, p. 97.
88. Lee Hsien Loong, “To Listen, Labour and Lead: Building a Better Singapore 
Together,” Ethos 12 (June 2013): 11.
89. Maurice Bernard, La méritocratie française: Les élites française. Essai critique 
(Paris: L’Harmattan, 2010), vol. 1, p. 112.
90. Marie- Laure Delorme, Les allées du pouvoir (Paris: Seuil, 2011), p. 11.
91. Ibid., p. 116.
92. Ibid., p. 281. However, a recent exposé (bitter but entertaining) by an ENA 
graduate denounces the system as rewarding ultracompetitive careerists and con-
formists who learn little about ethics and how to solve practical administrative prob-
lems (Olivier Saby, Promotion Ubu roi: Mes 27 mois sur les bancs de l’ENA [Paris: 
Flammarion, 2012]). For a more positive account of the practical training at the ENA, 
see Jean- Benoît Nadeau and Julie Barlow, Sixty Million Frenchmen Can’t Be Wrong 
(Why We Love France but Not the French) (Naperville, Ill.: Sourcebooks, 2003), pp. 
194–195.
93. Delorme, Les allées du pouvoir, pp. 120, 265, 272. See also Bernard, La mérito-
cratie française, vol. 1, p. 110. And those who do come from less privileged back-
grounds often experience culture shock and suffer from various forms of social dis-
crimination at the ENA: see Jules Naudet, Entrer dans l’élite: Parcours de réussite en 
France, aux États- Unis et en Inde [Entering the Elite: Paths to Success in France, the 
United States and India] (Paris: Presses Universitaires de France, 2012), pp. 201–202.
94. Steven Erlanger, “Top French Schools, Asked to Diversify, Fear for Stan-
dards,” New York Times, 30 June 2010.
95. Quoted in Delorme, Les allées du pouvoir, p. 265 (my translations unless indi-
cated otherwise).
96. Similar arguments have been made about the likely consequences of class- 
based political elitism in the United States: elites live lives separate from the rest and 
thus have trouble making good decisions even when they want to. Ignorant of the 
challenges that the poor and the middle class face and separated from the conse-
quence of their actions, elites are susceptible to making policies that seem reasonable 
but which on- the- ground experience would expose as ineffectual. For example, the 
evacuation of New Orleans before Hurricane Katrina did not succeed because many 
New Orleanians had nowhere to go, no money to get there, and no cars to escape—
facts that should have been known to political leaders (http://www.theamericancon 
servative.com/articles/tyranny-of-merit/).
97. In the United Kingdom, leaders are also chosen from a very narrow class of 
people: see Ferdinand Mount, The New Few, or A Very British Oligarchy: Power and 
Inequality in Britain Now (New York: Simon and Schuster, 2012).
98. In the United States, the voting behavior of political representatives tends to 
mirror their class allegiances: see Larry M. Bartels, Unequal Democracy: The Political 

 
Notes to Chapter 3  
251
Economy of the New Gilded Age (Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press, 2008). 
See also the discussion in chapter 1, section 2.
99. Delorme, Les allées du pouvoir, p. 278.
100. Cited in ibid., p. 14.
101. At least partly as a result of the declining political importance of the ENA, 
the number of yearly ENA applicants has dropped from a high of about fifteen thou-
sand in the early 1990s to less than one thousand (Nadeau and Barlow, Sixty Million 
Frenchmen Can’t Be Wrong, pp. 202–203).
102. See Hong Yiting, “Baorong de jingyingzhuyi?” [Inclusive Elitism?], Lianhe 
zaobao, 29 Sept. 2013; and “Setting Course for a More Equal Society,” Straits Times, 
19 Aug. 2013.
103. The net worth of China’s wealthy political elite (not counting the wealth of 
family members) has far surpassed that of the United States: the collective net worth 
of the richest seventy members of China’s legislature rose to $89.8 billion in 2011, 
compared to the $7.5 billion net worth of all 660 top officials in the three major 
branches of the U.S. government (http://www.businessweek.com/articles/2012–03–01 
/the-chinese-communist-partys-capitalist-elite).
104. The proportion of workers and farmers has decreased in society at large, but 
the decrease of workers and farmers in the party, particularly at the higher echelons of 
political power, has been much steeper: for example, the proportion of workers and 
farmers in the National People’s Congress fell by about two- thirds between 1975 and 
2003, even though workers and farmers still constitute more than half of the popula-
tion. Wang Shaoguang, “Is the Way of the Humane Authority a Good Thing? An 
Assessment of Confucian Constitutionalism,” in Jiang, A Confucian Constitutional 
Order, pp. 150–151.
105. Needless to say, such problems are not unique to China: in the United States, 
South Korea, and Singapore, for example, wealthy parents spend exorbitant sums on 
tutors and prep courses and draw on social connections to give their children an edge 
in the competition for prestigious schools and universities.
106. In China, the situation is almost the reverse: students from relatively wealthy 
cities with prestigious universities (such as Beijing and Shanghai) can be admitted to 
the universities in their “home” cities with fewer points on the national examinations 
than candidates from outside. In response, leading Chinese universities have imple-
mented proposals to admit more students from poor, rural regions with lower scores 
on national university examinations, but vested interests block more substantial re-
form (Wang Hongyi, “Fudan University Works to Attract Rural Students,” China 
Daily, 24 Feb. 2014).
107. In France, some elite universities rejected changes to their admissions proce-
dures to take in more students from disadvantaged backgrounds (Ben Hall, “France’s 
Famed Meritocracy Endangered by Grandes Écoles,” Financial Times, 9/10 Jan. 
2010), though Sciences Po has famously stood out with its efforts to admit more stu-
dents from disadvantaged backgrounds (Cecilia Gabizon and Raphael Gibour, “Sci-
ences Po: De plus en plus de lycéens venus de ZEP” [Sciences Po: More and More 

252 
Notes to Chapter 3  
Students from Secondary Schools in Disadvantaged Regions], Le Figaro, 25 July 
2012).
108. In the case of public service examinations, however, there may be explicit 
discrimination against minority groups such as the Muslim, Turkic- speaking Uighurs 
(Andrew Jacobs, “Uighurs in China Say Bias Is Growing,” New York Times, 7 Oct. 
2013).
109. Jinghan Zeng, “Institutionalization of the Authoritarian Leadership in 
China: A Power Succession System with Chinese Characteristics?” Contemporary 
Politics 20, no. 3 (2014): 304.
110. One possibility is to reserve spots on the Central Committee and the Polit-
buro for members of religious minorities. But the CCP would have to abandon offi-
cial atheism (an idea that comes from an imported Marxist Western ideology; Confu-
cians, in contrast, do not have much to say about the afterlife, but they do not dismiss 
it as a possibility). Another possibility would be to establish a House of Cultural Con-
tinuity composed of leaders of diverse religions with a long historical presence in 
China (including Confucianism, Tibetan Buddhism, Islam, and Christianity) as pro-
posed by Jiang Qing (see his book A Confucian Constitutional Order). In principle, it 
would not be too difficult to reform the Chinese People’s Political Consultative Con-
ference (CPPCC) into this kind of institution, but the CPPCC would need to have 
more formal power in the political system to be viewed as more legitimate by the 
groups represented in the institution.
111. For an argument that dealing with poverty requires understanding of the 
daily decisions facing the poor, see Abhijit Banerjee and Esther Duflo, Poor Econom-
ics: A Radical Rethinking of the Way to Fight Global Poverty (New York: Public Af-
fairs, 2012). Note that there are other forms of disadvantage besides material poverty 
(such as being deprived of key family relations), and the deliberations about what it 
means to be disadvantaged also need to include substantial input from disadvantaged 
sectors of the population. See Jonathan Wolff and Avner de- Shalit, Disadvantage 
(Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2007).
112. A second- best option would be to send candidates from privileged back-
grounds on leadership tracks for extended periods of training in disadvantaged parts 
of the country (or abroad) to sensitize them to the needs of the disadvantaged (see 
chapter 2, section 4). Of course, the period would need to be finite (say, one year), in 
contrast to the Cultural Revolution, when youths from cities were sent to poor rural 
areas without hope of ever returning.
113. Michael Young’s (satirical) argument for meritocracy involves weakening 
family structures in order to equalize opportunities in the meritocratic race to the top 
(Young, The Rise of Meritocracy, ch. 1). From a profamily standpoint, the state can 
implement measures such as high inheritance tax rates (as in Japan) that serve to 
equalize opportunities for future generations without substantially weakening family 
structures.
114. A Marxist may respond that the very existence of such an elite wouldn’t mat-
ter as much in a condition of relative economic equality, but it would still be impor-

 
Notes to Chapter 3  
253
tant for the elite to be able and public spirited in order to implement effective policies 
in both domestic and foreign affairs.
115. Bernard, La méritocratie française, vol. 2, pp. 12, 102, 104, 105, 108–110.
116. Zhu, “Why Are Offices for Sale in China?” p. 577. See also chapter 2, sec-
tion 3.
117. Pines, “Between Merit and Pedigree,” p. 191.
118. Email sent by Yuri Pines, 13 Oct. 2013.
119. Mill’s argument that we need freedom of speech to expose wrongdoing and 
put forward new and better ideas for policy making was also articulated by traditional 
Confucian thinkers (e.g., in the Analects 13.15, Confucius says that the following 
sentence—“if a ruler’s policies are not good and no one opposes them”—can lead to 
the ruin of a country). Such sayings were not mere theory: in the Tang and the North-
ern Song, perhaps the most vibrant dynasties in Chinese imperial history, there was 
substantial space for political criticism; in Confucian- influenced Korea during the 
Choson dynasty, the ruler’s advisors were encouraged to drink alcohol before meet-
ings so they’d have more courage to raise critical points. In early 2013, contemporary 
Confucian thinkers (courageously) signed a petition supported with quotations from 
earlier thinkers criticizing the crackdown on the liberal weekly Southern Weekend 
(http://www.confucius2000.com/admin/list.asp?id=5519). That said, there may still be 
key differences between Confucian and liberal approaches to freedom of speech: for 
example, Confucians might argue for a paternalistic approach to freedom of the press 
that would justify both freedom to criticize mistakes and state funding for media that 
report on issues likely to be neglected by market- funded media, such as coverage of 
the Special Olympics meant to increase sensitivity toward disabled people in society 
at large (see the preface to the new edition of my book China’s New Confucianism). 
There may also be a Confucian case for state- subsidized news media that attempt to 
convey and justify state policy in as balanced a manner as possible, so long as there is 
also room for privately funded media outlets.
120. John Stuart Mill, “On Liberty,” in Three Essays (Oxford: Oxford University 
Press, 1975), pp. 83, 88, 89.
121. This proposal may sound radical in the Chinese government—why would 
the government, which is concerned with political stability, agree to freedom of 
speech simply in order to open political opportunities for a few outliers?—but there is 
already substantial freedom of speech helpful for identifying some potential leaders 
outside the official track. According to the first large- scale, multiple- source analysis of 
China’s censorship program, the censors allow a great deal of substantive criticism of 
the state and its policies, and censorship appears to be aimed at collective action by 
silencing comments that represent, reinforce, or spur social mobilization, regardless 
of content. Gary King, Jennifer Pan, and Margaret E. Roberts, “How Censorship Al-
lows Government Criticism but Silences Collective Expression,” American Political 
Science Review 107, no. 10 (May 2013): 326–343. Nonetheless, I can testify from my 
own experience that many censored works do not aim for any collective action (even 
this book—a defense of the overall system!—is likely to be censored in its Chinese 

254 
Notes to Chapter 3  
translation). Moreover, the issue of how to assess new and different forms of merit may 
require some social mobilization to show that the new forms of assessing merit have 
desirable social impacts. And there may be some naturally cautious types who prefer 
to keep quiet simply because the seemingly arbitrary boundaries of the censorship 
regime induce an element of fear, however irrational. Thus, a relaxation of censorship 
and clarification of the boundaries would allow the government to identify more in-
novative people and social groups from diverse walks of life to put forward ideas in a 
constructive way and show that they have desirable social impact. Such voices need 
not threaten political stability because they will rely on moral power above all else 
and the government can still prohibit speech aimed at toppling the regime (see also 
chapter 4, section 3).
122. This is not to deny that there is some de facto experimentation at the state 
level in federal systems such as the United States (e.g., regarding legalization of mari-
juana, gay marriage, and health care reform), but local experiments are not driven by 
a conscious desire to experiment by the central- level (federal) government and they 
cannot be generalized to the whole country by central- level decisions that contravene 
constitutionally assigned state powers.
123. Systematic experimentation was institutionalized for the first time under 
Deng’s rule, but experimentation below the national level was also carried out in im-
perial China (see concluding thoughts).
124. Ann Florini, Hairong Lai, and Yeling Tan, China Experiments: From Local 
Innovation to National Reform (Washington, D.C.: Brookings Institution Press, 2012), 
pp. 4–5.
125. Ibid., p. 158. See also Baogang He and Mark E. Warren, “Authoritarian De-
liberation: The Deliberative Turn in Chinese Political Development,” Perspectives on 
Politics 9, no. 2 (June 2011): 269–289; Ma Jun, “Accountability without Elections,” in 
China 3.0, ed. Mark Leonard (London: European Council on Foreign Relations, 
2012); and concluding thoughts, section 2.
126. The government is experimenting with new ways of assessing merit—see 
chapter 2, section 3, and concluding thoughts, section 2—but the system is still far too 
rigid. As it stands, the same bureaucratic hierarchies are used in all public institu-
tions, no matter how different their functions and character (monks in temples, aca-
demics in universities, and government officials are all ranked according to the same 
official categories!). And within the government, it may be possible and desirable to 
experiment with different tracks for civil servants and political officials.
127. Jean- Marc Coicaud, “Legitimacy, across Borders and over Time,” in Fault 
Lines of International Legitimacy, ed. Hilary Charlesworth and Jean- Marc Coicaud 
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2010), p. 17.
128. From a normative viewpoint, it is also worth asking if the people are morally 
justified in thinking that the government is morally justified. In the case of closed re-
gimes, such as North Korea, that seem to rely almost exclusively on propaganda and 
coercion, we have good reasons for thinking that apparent support for the regime may 
not be justified, and we can safely predict that the regime would collapse if the coun-

 
Notes to Chapter 3  
255
try opened up and the people were made aware of (desirable) political alternatives in 
the rest of the world. In the case of China, however, the government is relatively open 
to the rest of the world (notwithstanding censorship), millions of Chinese study and 
travel abroad and return to China without changed political beliefs, and reliable opin-
ion polls consistently show support for the regime (see below); hence I will not pursue 
the possibility that Chinese suffer from a collective form of “false consciousness.” 
What I can say with confidence is that many Chinese academics are educated abroad 
and/or have full access to information through various means; they are no more 
“brainwashed” than American academics, and probably less so than “average” Ameri-
cans exposed to (manipulated by?) mainstream media in the United States.
129. Philippe C. Schmitter, “What Is Political Legitimacy and How Can It Be 
Acquired? Lessons from a Deviant Case,” in Reviving Legitimacy: Lessons for and 
from China, ed. Deng Zhenglai and Sujian Guo (Lanham, Md.: Lexington Books, 
2011), p. 27.
130. Why did East Asian countries with a Confucian heritage (other than China) 
adopt “Western- style” democracy in the form of one person, one vote and a multi-
party competitive system? I will not pursue this question in this book, other than to 
note that military, economic, and moral pressure from the United States played a role. 
In the case of China, such pressure matters less because the country has the eco-
nomic and military clout as well as the cultural confidence to resist foreign interfer-
ence and affirm its own political model.
131. Wang, “Is the Way of the Humane Authority a Good Thing?” pp. 142–143.
132. Ibid., p. 144.
133. Shi Tianjian, “China: Democratic Values Supporting an Authoritarian Sys-
tem,” in How East Asians View Democracy, p. 210. It is important, however, to distin-
guish between support for particular politicians and the current character of political 
institutions, on the one hand, and support for the underlying constitutional system, 
on the other. In Taiwan, for example, fragile regime legitimacy coexists with strong 
support for electoral democracy as a mechanism to choose political leaders (Min- Hua 
Huang, “Polarized Politics, Regime Evaluation and Democratic Legitimacy in Tai-
wan,” paper presented at workshop on “East Asian Perspectives on Political Legiti-
macy,” University of Hong Kong, 18–19 Aug. 2011). Similarly, in the United States a 
majority of people oppose the current character of the U.S. House of Representatives 
but (I would surmise) an even larger majority support the constitutional system. In 
China, by contrast, there may be strong support for the central government but 
weaker support for the constitutional system as a whole. In that basic sense, the con-
stitutional systems in Taiwan and the United States are more legitimate, and hence 
more stable, than the Chinese system.
134. Tom Phillips, “Migrant Workers Clash with Police in China’s Industrial 
Heartland,” The Telegraph, 27 June 2012.
135. “180,000 Protests in 2010: China’s Spending on Internal Policing Outstrips 
Defense Budget,” Bloomberg News, 6 Mar. 2011.

256 
Notes to Chapter 3  
136. Tony Saich, “Chinese Governance Seen through the People’s Eyes,” East 
Asia Forum, 24 July 2011.
137. He, “An Empirical Theory of Hybrid Legitimacy System in China.”
138. Tianjian Shi and Lu Jie, “Cultural Impacts on People’s Understanding of 
Democracy,” paper presented at the 2010 American Political Science Association An-
nual Meeting, Washington, D.C., 1–5 Sept., p. 10. See also Tianjian Shi, The Cul-
tural Logic of Politics in Mainland China and Taiwan (New York: Cambridge Univer-
sity Press, 2014), ch. 7. It is not just “ordinary Chinese” who hold this view. In spring 
2011, I taught an “Introduction to Political Philosophy” course at Tsinghua University 
with about thirty- five students who are supposed to be members of the educated elite. 
Halfway through the course—after I had taught J. S. Mill and Rawls—I asked the 
students if the best definition of democracy should be “government for the people, by 
the people, or of the people.” A large majority chose “government for the people,” and 
“by the people” came in last place.
139. Doh Chull Shin argues (based on the findings of the Asian Barometer Sur-
vey) that the majority of East Asians in other states with a Confucian legacy also tend 
to be attached to “paternalistic meritocracy,” prioritize economic well- being over 
freedom, and define democracy in substantive (rather than procedural) terms. Doh, 
Confucianism and Democratization in East Asia, ch. 9. Also based on empirical find-
ings, Yun- han Chu, Yu- tzung Chang, and Wen- Chin Wu show that citizens in East 
Asian states with a Confucian heritage believe that the integrity of political officials, 
law- abiding government, and fair treatment of the people are sufficient to legitimize 
the regime without the standard fixtures of liberal democracies that emphasize input 
legitimacy in terms of popular accountability and electoral procedures (“Sources of 
Regime Legitimacy in Confucian Societies,” paper presented at the conference on 
“Confucianism, Democracy, and Constitutionalism: Global and East Asian Perspec-
tives,” National Taiwan University, 14–15 June 2013). The idea that electoral democ-
racy is the foundation of political legitimacy has been questioned in the Western po-
litical context as well. Bo Rothstein argues that there is scant evidence for the claim 
that electoral democracy underpins legitimacy even in the successful and stable Nor-
dic democracies. Instead of input legitimacy, “the main sources of political legitimacy 
are situated on the output side of the political system and have to do with the quality 
of government. It is the absence of corruption, discrimination, and similar violations 
of the principle of impartiality in exercising political power that serves to create politi-
cal legitimacy” (Rothstein, “Creating Political Legitimacy: Electoral Government 
Versus Quality of Government,” American Behavioral Scientist 53 [2009]: 325).
140. Shi, “China: Democratic Values Supporting an Authoritarian System,” p. 
216.
141. Quoted in John Makeham, Lost Soul: “Confucianism” in Contemporary Chi-
nese Academic Discourse (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Asia Center, 2008), 
p. 262. See also Tang Wenming, “Gu jin zhengjiao hejie zhi zhengzhao yu qianjing—
xiaoyi guojia bowuguan men qian kongzi xiang de li yu yi” [The Prospect and Mean-

 
Notes to Chapter 3  
257
ing of Reconciling Politics and Education in the Past and the Present—A Brief Analy-
sis of the Erecting and the Removal of the Confucius Statue in Front of the National 
Museum], Rujia youbao, 10 June 2011.
142. See Cui Zhiyuan, “Partial Intimations of the Coming Whole: The Chong-
qing Experiment in Light of the Theories of Henry George, James Meade, and Anto-
nio Gramsci,” Modern China 37, no. 6 (2011): 646–660.
143. Allen Carlson, “Reimagining the Frontier: Patterns of Sinicization and the 
Emergence of New Thinking about China’s Territorial Periphery,” paper presented at 
the Civilizations and Sinicization Workshop, Beijing University, 25–26 Mar. 2011, pp. 
3–4.
144. Quoted in Orville Shell, “China: Humiliation and the Olympics,” New York 
Review of Books, 14 Aug. 2008.
145. On the importance of “humiliation” as a motivating force in Chinese politics 
since the mid- nineteenth century, see Schell and Delury, Wealth and Power.
146. Zheng Wang, Never Forget National Humiliation: Historical Memory in Chi-
nese Politics and Foreign Relations (New York: Columbia University Press, 2012).
147. Cited in Robert L. Kuhn, How China’s Leaders Think: The Inside Story of 
China’s Past, Current and Future Leaders (Singapore: John Wiley & Sons, 2011), p. 4.
148. It’s also worth asking if there is a nonresentful form of nationalism, given that 
nationalism often emphasizes the greatness of one’s nation by way of comparison with 
others. But there are differences: less resentful forms of nationalism do not emphasize 
stories of suffering at the hands of other nations, and nations can take pride in charac-
teristics—say, a language—that are not meant to be better than characteristics in 
other nations (simply different). And to the extent the nation is viewed as “great,” its 
people can take pride in contributions to human civilization that others can enjoy, 
just as foreign visitors can enjoy national treasures displayed in national museums, 
and the main point is not to keep score in national competitions about greatness.
149. Tang Wenming, “Cong Rujia zhengjiu minzuzhuyi” [Rescuing Nationalism 
by Confucianism], Wenhua zongheng 5 (Oct. 2011) (http://www.21bcr.com/a/zhuan 
__ti/bitan_rujiayuminzuzhuyi/2011/1027/3196.html).
150. The analogy is imperfect and in reality one cannot leave aside moral con-
cerns. The Thatcher government did not suffer immediate economic costs because 
its war with Argentina was not widely perceived as unjust by other economically 
dominant powers. But if China launches a war that is widely perceived to be unjust by 
other dominant economic powers, the economic costs will be so high as to potentially 
undermine the regime, even in the short term.
151. Again, there are precedents in Chinese history. The Manchu emperor Qian-
long gained the support of the Han Chinese and more legitimacy for the empire by 
commissioning a book (Qinding shengchao xunjie zhuchen lu [Records of the Royal 
Officials Who Sacrificed Themselves for the Previous Dynasty]) that documents a list 
of morally admirable generals and politicians who fervently opposed Qianlong’s fore-
fathers in wars during the late Ming dynasty.

258 
Notes to Chapter 3  
152. On the distinction between “hard” and “soft” nationalism, see my comment: 
http://www.csmonitor.com/Commentary/Global-Viewpoint/2013/0204/Soft-nationalism 
-is-good-for-China.
153. Jyrki Kallio, “Tradition in Chinese Politics,” in FIFA Report (Helsinki: Finn-
ish Institute of International Affairs, 2011), p. 1.
154. See Jiang, A Confucian Constitutional Order. Jiang is careful to point out, 
however, that Confucianism’s embrace of nationalism is a short- term response to a 
historical situation (the threat faced by Chinese culture); the Confucian ideal of 
wangdao (the way of the humane authority) is meant to be a universal ideal, not tied 
to any particular nation (Jiang Qing, Xinxi leida, 21 Apr. 2011, http://info.whb.cn 
/xxld/view/10080). See also Kang Xiaoguang, Dangdai Zhongguo dalu: Wenhua 
minzuzhuyi yundong yanjiu [Contemporary Mainland China: Research on the Move-
ment of Cultural Nationalism] (Singapore: World Scientific Publishing Co., 2008); 
and Kang’s article “Rujia xianzheng lun gang” [A Sketch of the Theory of Confucian 
Constitutionalism] on this Confucian website: http://www.21ccom.net/articles/zgyj 
/xzmj/article_2011053036449.html.
155. Also, there may be legitimate worries that the official promotion of Confu-
cianism, even desirable interpretations of Confucianism that leave much room for 
respect for (if not celebration of) minority views, will increase tensions with restive 
minorities because Confucianism will be (mis)perceived as an exclusively Han proj-
ect rather than an effort to promote universal (Confucian) values. One way of dealing 
with this problem is to promote desirable interpretations of Confucian values without 
the Confucian label.
156. http://sinosphere.blogs.nytimes.com/2013/10/18/full-text-of-the-oxford 
-consensus-2013/ (I have modified the translation on this website).
157. Baogang Guo, China’s Quest for Political Legitimacy: The New Equity- 
Enhancing Politics (Lanham, Md.: Lexington Books, 2010), pp. 7–12. In contrast, the 
idea that the government has a moral obligation to alleviate poverty has fairly recent 
roots in the West: Samuel Fleischacker traces the development of this view from the 
eighteenth century on (Fleischacker, A Short History of Distributive Justice [Cam-
bridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 2005]). Although earlier thinkers such as Ar-
istotle and Machiavelli favored regimes that minimized conflict between rich and 
poor, their concern was political stability, not the alleviation of poverty.
158. Here and elsewhere, I have modified the translations in The Analects of Con-
fucius: A Philosophical Translation, trans. Roger T. Ames and Henry Rosemont Jr. 
(New York: Ballantine Books, 1998).
159. Tianjian Shi and Lu Jie claim that the aim of the minben doctrine (the Con-
fucian idea that the government should promote the welfare of the people) is to “keep 
the rulers in power” (Shi and Lu, “The Shadow of Confucianism,” Journal of Democ-
racy 21, no. 4 [Oct. 2010]: 125), but such an interpretation owes more to Legalist ideas 
about government (and perhaps is meant to be an interpretation of the motivation of 
political leaders) than to Confucian ethics. Confucians emphasize that the moral aim 
of government is to benefit the people, not rulers (see chapter 2, section 4).

 
Notes to Chapter 3  
259
160. Here and elsewhere, I have modified the translations in Mencius, vol. 1–2, 
trans. D. C. Lau (Hong Kong: Chinese University Press, 1984).
161. Yanqi Tong, “Morality, Benevolence, and Responsibility: Regime Legitimacy 
in China from Past to Present,” in Reviving Legitimacy: Lessons for and from China, 
ed. Deng Zhenglai and Sujian Guo (Lanham, Md.: Lexington Books, 2011), p. 200.
162. R. Bin Wong, “Confucian Agendas for Material and Ideological Control  
in Modern China,” in Culture and State in Chinese History, ed. Theodore Huters,  
R. Bin Wong, and Pauline Yu (Stanford, Calif.: Stanford University Press, 1997), p. 307.
163. Tong, “Morality, Benevolence, and Responsibility,” p. 204.
164. The “right to food” is not anachronistic here because it is a right in the mod-
ern sense of a legally enforceable norm.
165. To be fair, Mao embarked on similar market- oriented reforms in the 1950s 
and in 1961–1963, but they were smaller in scale and less open to the outside world.
166. http://www.globalissues.org/article/4/poverty-around-the-world#WorldBanks
PovertyEstimatesRevised.
167. As suggested earlier in this chapter, if perceptions are manufactured due to 
censorship and propaganda, then we can question whether support for the state is 
morally justified. But social media has led to a much more open society and it is 
harder to cover up disasters now than in the recent past.
168. Wang Shaoguang, “Why Is State Effectiveness Essential for Democracy? 
Asian Examples,” in Contemporary Chinese Political Thought: Debates and Perspec-
tives, ed. Fred Dallmayr and Zhao Tingyang (Lexington: University Press of Ken-
tucky, 2012). Wang argues that since an effective state is a prerequisite for democracy, 
such institutionalized participation should not be accompanied by the enfeeblement 
of state power.
169. From a normative point of view, Confucianism would also justify more pop-
ular participation once economic needs are met. According to the early Confucians, 
the first task of government is the elimination of poverty, but after that it must turn to 
the education of the people, meaning the provision of the conditions for the ethical 
and intellectual development of the people. Given the Confucian premise that 
human self- realization involves serving the community, it follows that as many people 
as possible should be given the opportunity to realize that goal. In practice, it would 
mean more opportunities to participate in politics in a public- spirited way. At higher 
levels of economic development, in other words, it becomes harder to justify exclu-
sion of the people from politics (see Sungmoon Kim, “To Become a Confucian 
Democratic Citizen: Against Meritocratic Elitism,” British Journal of Political Science 
43, no. 3 [July 2013]: 579–599). Still, it doesn’t follow that Confucians would seek to 
justify the right to equal political participation in the form of one person, one vote. 
Even in an ideal society as portrayed in the Record of Rites, there will still be a distinc-
tion between exemplary persons (junzi) who seek justice and petty persons (xiao ren) 
who narrowly pursue their own self- interest, and the political system should still be 
designed with the aim of selecting and promoting junzi. In fact, the political reality 
may be even worse than Confucians anticipated. As discussed in chapter 1 (section 1), 

260 
Notes to Chapter 3  
most people suffer from cognitive and emotional biases that get in the way of the 
pursuit of self- interest, even in rich, industrialized societies like the United States. So 
it’s enough of a challenge to become a xiao ren, never mind striving to be a junzi!
170. Doh, Confucianism and Democratization in East Asia, p. 322.
171. Shi and Lu, “Cultural Impacts on People’s Understanding of Democracy,” p. 
10.
172. Shi, The Cultural Logic of Politics in Mainland China and Taiwan, ch. 4. 
Government manipulation may be part of the reason for the growing attachment to 
Confucian political values, but China’s recent economic rise is perhaps even more 
important: on the one hand, with economic might comes cultural pride; on the other 
hand, modernization leads to worries about excessive individualism that needs to be 
countered (in the minds of many Chinese intellectuals and educators) by traditional 
ethics that value social responsibility. So the revival of “Confucianism” might have 
happened even without government encouragement.
173. See the introduction and Han Fangming, “Cong zui re men ‘zhengzhi kepu-
pian’ kan guoji zhengzhi yingxiao” [Looking at the Selling of Politics from the Per-
spective of a Popular “Political Cartoon”], Lianhe zaobao, 22 Oct. 2013.
174. Ho- fung Hung, Protest with Chinese Characteristics: Demonstrations, Riots, 
and Petitions in the Mid- Qing Dynasty (New York: Columbia University Press, 2011).
175. Ho- fung Hung, “Confucianism and Political Dissent in China,” East Asia 
Forum, 26 July 2011, http://www.eastasiaforum.org/2011/07/26/confucianism-and 
-political-dissent-in-china/. See also Du Lun, “ ‘Ren xue hefaxing sixiang’ gaiyao jiqi 
xianshi yiyi” [Outline of the Practical Meaning of “The Theory of a Legitimate Hu-
mane Government”], in Rujia de dangdai shiming [The Contemporary Mission of 
Confucianism] (Beijing: Jiuzhou Press, 2010), p. 315.
176. The problem is “deep” because it can fatally undermine a regime if politi-
cally ambitious people feel totally shut out from the system and resort to overthrow of 
the system as the only alternative. Consider the case of Mao Zedong, clearly a tal-
ented and ambitious person who wanted to do something big for his country even as a 
young man. Before he led the CCP, Mao worked as an assistant to Peking University 
librarian Li Dazhao (an early Chinese communist) between 1918 and 1919 (Stuart 
Schram, Mao Tse- Tung [London: Simon & Schuster, 1966], pp. 48–49). At the univer-
sity, Mao was widely snubbed due to his rural Hunanese accent and lowly position, 
and he developed a lifelong aversion to intellectuals working within a system that did 
not recognize and reward his political potential. No doubt other factors were at play, 
but history could have taken a different turn if Mao had been identified as a potential 
leader by reformist Confucian and liberal intellectuals at Peking University.
177. See chapter 2, section 2.
178. A recent headline in a Chinese- language newspaper in Singapore empha-
sizes this point: “Wei min fuwu bu dang” [To Serve the Public without Entering the 
Party], Lianhe zaobao, 21 Aug. 2013.
179. Such programs are more likely to be effective in a society with a relatively 
paternalistic political culture (such as China). Even then, however, the programs 

 
Notes to Chapter 4  
261
must generate true emotions. Two of the most widely watched shows in China—the 
yearly celebration of the Spring Festival (Chunwan) and the weekly talent search 
(Zhongguo mengxiang xiu)—combine humor and touching stories to show the social 
value of representatives of various social groups.
180. To repeat, political leaders are supposed to be above average in terms of intel-
lectual ability, social skills, and virtue, but they need not be at the top of the scale on 
any one dimension (see chapter 2, end).
181. A cynic inspired by the thought of Michel Foucault may want to add that 
there are many sources of power in society—in families, schools, workplaces, hospi-
tals, prisons, etc.—and if ambitious people can realize their power- hungry desires in 
other social spheres, they may worry less about making it to the top of the political 
power pyramid.
Chapter 4 
Three Models of Democratic Meritocracy
1. The myth, according to Plato, should persuade not just the people, but the rul-
ers themselves. He recognizes that it would be a challenge for the Guardians to per-
suade themselves in the first generation, but “it might succeed with the second and 
later generations” (The Republic, trans. Desmond Lee [Harmondsworth: Penguin, 
1974], 415d). One wonders whether Kim Jong- un, the young Supreme Leader of 
North Korea, believes that he has inherited the quasi- divine qualities of his grandfa-
ther or is motivated purely by cynicism.
2. Aristotle, The Politics, trans. Ernest Barker (London: Oxford University Press, 
1958), 1294b.
3. But see Yves Sintomer, Petite histore de l’expérimentation démocratique: Tirage 
au sort et politique d’Athènes à nos jours [A Short History of Democratic Experimenta-
tion: Selection by Lot from Athens to the Present] (Paris: La Découverte, 2011). Sin-
tomer argues that modern methods of statistical sampling allow for a truly representa-
tive sample of the population to rule if selected by lot (in contrast to ancient Athens); 
hence, contemporary democracies can and should be further democratized by sys-
tematic use of lots for selecting political officials. But Sintomer does not go so far as to 
argue that political leaders should be selected by lottery rather than by vote; at most, 
randomly selected officials can advise democratically elected leaders. John P. McCor-
mick argues for a political institution at the top that combines lottery and election 
(“Contain the Wealthy and Patrol the Magistrates: Restoring Elite Accountability to 
Popular Government,” American Political Science Review 100, no. 2 [May 2006]: 
147–163), though his proposals may not be realistic (see chapter 1, section 2). Wang 
Shaoguang argues for the use of lots in the Chinese context, but he does not directly 
say that central- level political leaders should be selected by such means (Wang Shao-
guang, Minzhu si jiang [Four Lectures about Democracy] [Beijing: Sanlian shudian, 
2008]).
4. I do not mean to imply that voter ignorance directly explains Hitler’s rise to 

262 
Notes to Chapter 4  
power—Sheri Berman argues that it was facilitated by weak political institutionaliza-
tion and an active civil society that provided a critical training ground for Nazi cadres 
(Sheri Berman, “Civil Society and the Collapse of the Weimar Republic,” World Poli-
tics 49, no. 3 [1997]: 401–429)—but electoral democracy allowed Hitler’s rise, which 
arguably could have been prevented by meritocratic mechanisms such as exams 
meant to test voters’ competence.
5. See chapter 1, section 1.
6. Caplan, The Myth of the Rational Voter.
7. Brennan, The Ethics of Voting.
8. John Stuart Mill, Three Essays (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1975), pp. 277, 
276.
9. Ibid., pp. 282, 286. Mill also argued for the idea that civil servants entrusted 
with the task of drafting legislation should be selected by meritocratic means such as 
examinations. In modern parliamentary systems (and, to a lesser extent, U.S.- style 
presidential systems), meritocratically selected civil servants are supposed to imple-
ment the decisions of democratically elected politicians, but they are not supposed to 
exercise their own moral judgment in a wide array of political affairs. In practice, 
however, civil servants supposedly bound by rules of strict neutrality and impartiality 
often exercise political power. More pertinently, defenders of political meritocracy 
such as J. S. Mill would object to the idea that democracy should always trump meri-
tocracy: meritocratic considerations should also influence the selection of political 
decision makers (see my introduction to The East Asian Challenge for Democracy).
10. Lee Kuan Yew floated his proposal in an interview with Fareed Zakaria, “Cul-
ture Is Destiny: A Conversation with Lee Kuan Yew,” Foreign Affairs 73, no. 2 (Mar./
Apr. 1994): 109–126. On disenchantment with Singapore- style meritocracy, see the 
articles by Wong and Tan in The East Asian Challenge for Democracy.
11. Mill, Three Essays, p. 285.
12. Richard Arneson, “Democratic Rights at National and Workplace Levels,” in 
The Idea of Democracy, ed. David Copp, Jean Hampton, and John Roemer (Cam-
bridge: Cambridge University Press, 1993), p. 137.
13. One possibility—not likely to be rejected by the voters themselves—is to ask 
voters whether they are well informed about a topic, and if they answer “yes,” their 
vote can be weighted more than ordinary votes. But this procedure would reward 
those who hold irrational or overconfident views of their own abilities and penalize 
the (minority of?) realistic voters (one is reminded of the joke that 80 percent of peo-
ple think they are above average).
14. In Thailand, supporters of the relatively educated and affluent “yellow shirts” 
have floated the idea of extra votes for educated people, but the measure has been op-
posed, not surprisingly, but the more populist “red shirts.”
15. Caplan, The Myth of the Rational Voter, pp. 197–198.
16. One possibility, put forward by Elena Ziliotti, would be to test voters on party 
platforms that cover more ground. This proposal can be institutionalized in ways re-
spectful of underlying democratic values (http://www.huffingtonpost.com/daniel-a 

 
Notes to Chapter 4  
263
-bell/voter-test-europe-china_b_4776362.html) but it still faces the problem that vot-
ers are not likely to agree to proposals that qualify their right to an equal vote. Another 
practical issue is that not all parties publish platforms (as in Israel) and it might be a 
challenge to get them to do so, especially if they are already a popular party.
17. Mill, Three Essays, p. 286.
18. Sun Yat- sen, Prescriptions for Saving China: Selected Writings of Sun Yat- sen, 
ed. Julie Lee Wei, Ramon H. Myers, and Donald G. Gillin; trans. Julie Lee Wei, E- su 
Zen, and Linda Chao (Stanford, Calif.: Hoover Institution Press, 1994), pp. 49–50 (I 
have modified the translation).
19. The same problems would affect a modified version of Sun’s proposal—asking 
politicians to take exams before running for office—because popular leaders might 
not be willing to take exams set by an independent branch of government and citizens 
might object to a system that excluded popular leaders who did not take the exams. 
Similar problems would affect any proposal to impose qualifications on those run-
ning for office, such as a record of public experience: the most popular leaders might 
not fall into the relevant category and hence those elected might lack democratic le-
gitimacy in a system that is supposed to be democratic.
20. See Olivia Leboyer, Élite et libéralisme (Paris: CNRS Editions, 2012), p. 203.
21. Friedrich A. von Hayek, Law, Legislation, and Liberty, vol. 3, The Political 
Order of a Free People (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1981), pp. 111, 113.
22. See chapter 1.
23. See, e.g., Jeremy Waldron, “The Core of the Case against Judicial Review,” 
Yale Law Journal 115 (2006): 1346–1406.
24. See John Darnton, “Labor Peers into the Lords’ Future,” International Herald 
Tribune, 22 Apr. 1996.
25. See John F. Burns, “Cracks in British Governing Coalition as House of Lords 
Overhaul Falls Apart,” International Herald Tribune, 6 Aug. 2012.
26. Martin Wolf, “Why Reform of House of Lords Is a Botch,” Financial Times, 1 
Mar. 2012. For a similar argument on behalf of the (appointed) Canadian senate, see 
Mel Cappe, “In Defense of an Appointed Senate,” Globe and Mail, 17 June 2003.
27. See chapter 1.
28. See chapter 3, section 3. For discussion of a more recent political survey, see 
Shi Yan, “Diaocha Zhongguoren yan zhong de minzhu” [A Survey of the Way Chi-
nese People Look at Democracy], Nanfang zhoumo, 2 May 2013.
29. This section draws on my introduction to Jiang, A Confucian Constitutional 
Order.
30. See the critical comments by Joseph Chan, Bai Tongdong, and Li Chenyang 
in Jiang, A Confucian Constitutional Order.
31. Rawls made famous systematic argumentation on behalf of such a strategy for 
seeking consensus in politics, but the strategy itself is older. For example, the drafters 
of the 1948 UN Universal Declaration of Human Rights (including the Confucian 
philosopher P. C. Chang) allowed for disagreement about foundations as a way of 
seeking consensus on human rights.

264 
Notes to Chapter 4  
32. Jiang’s proposal also includes an argument for distributing some seats on the 
basis of functional constituencies, like the practice in Hong Kong’s Legislative Coun-
cil (Legco); for a critique of functional constituencies, see chapter 1, section 4.
33. Doh, Confucianism and Democratization in East Asia, pp. 119–123; and Doh, 
“How East Asians View Democracy: A Confucian Perspective,” in The East Asian 
Challenge for Democracy. These political surveys, however, pose a stark choice be-
tween democratic elections and meritocratic selection; had the respondents been 
asked to choose, say, between a pure democratic system with all political leaders cho-
sen by competitive elections and a hybrid system with central- level leaders selected 
and promoted on the basis of their ability and virtue and lower- level leaders chosen by 
competitive elections, there might have been more support for the latter.
34. It is worth asking why the right to an equal vote has come to be seen as the 
modern political equivalent of a sacred religious practice. Partly, there are cultural 
reasons: in countries with a Christian heritage, the idea that we are equal in the eyes 
of God has come to mean that we are equal in the eyes of government, which trans-
lates into one person, one vote. But the same thing has happened in countries with 
predominantly non- Christian cultures, so the Christian context can’t be the main 
explanation. A key factor, in my view, is that the process of voting is psychologically 
empowering—as I vote, I feel that the act means that I have a say in deciding who ex-
ercises power in my political community—however irrational it may be to hold this 
belief (see chapter 1 for more detailed discussion). And few want to be disempowered 
once one person, one vote has been institutionalized: those “downgraded” will be 
viewed as “losers” and will object to the change. Such considerations do not apply in 
a country such as China without elections to choose top leaders, where people gener-
ally support political meritocracy, and where the government generally performs well 
compared to democratic regimes at similar levels of economic development. But if 
China moves toward electoral democracy at the top, political preferences in favor of 
one person, one vote will probably change rapidly regardless of whether they ought to.
35. In one extreme case, Perry Link wrote a letter to the New York Times claiming 
that Jiang Qing’s constitutional proposal “would be nothing more than new clothes 
for today’s authoritarianism. There is nothing in it that the Politburo Standing Com-
mittee in Beijing would not like, except, perhaps for the headache of trying to imple-
ment such an awkward plan and defend it before public opinion” (“How to Govern 
China,” New York Times, 13 July 2012). This response is way off base—it is true that 
liberal- minded political critics in mainland China often object to Jiang’s arguments 
against democracy, but Jiang’s proposals cannot even be published or discussed in 
mainland China’s leading media outlets because his proposals are such a radical chal-
lenge to the political status quo (disclosure: Link responded to a New York Times op- 
ed I coauthored with Jiang Qing).
36. See Berggruen and Gardels, Intelligent Governance for the 21st Century, ch. 5; 
and the essays by Bai and Chan in The East Asian Challenge for Democracy.
37. Conversely, it can be argued that political meritocracy works least well in 
small communities. At the local level, political leaders are often expected to show 

 
Notes to Chapter 4  
265
more empathetic and direct concern with the personal plight of ordinary citizens: for 
example, a taxi driver in Singapore told me that he appreciated the fact that a repre-
sentative for the (opposition) Workers’ Party came to his father’s funeral and that’s why 
he voted for the Workers’ Party in the 2011 election (the ruling PAP lost the district, 
and George Yeo, perhaps the most talented leader of his generation, lost his seat in 
parliament). Consequently, political leaders in Singapore will need to spend more 
time shaking hands and talking to people in coffeeshops if they are to retain power, 
and they will have less time to study and learn about key issues affecting the whole 
country and the rest of the world. (In a large country like China, there is, needless to 
say, no expectation that Xi Jinping and other top party leaders will attend the funerals 
of ordinary citizens.) Besides the fact that Singapore’s attempt to graft a political meri-
tocracy onto a Westminster- style parliamentary system may not be sustainable, Singa-
pore’s tiny size is another reason to doubt the long- term prospects of political meritoc-
racy in that country.
38. See Bai, “A Confucian Version of the Hybrid Regime,” pp. 61–62. The Chi-
nese thinker Kang Youwei, who surveyed and compared constitutional systems from 
around the world in the early twentieth century, also argued that a participatory form 
of democracy works best in small communities such as Switzerland, whereas a more 
centralized form of political rule is more appropriate in a big country like China. 
Zhang Yongle, Jiu bang xin zao, 1911–1917 [The Remaking of an Old Country, 
1911–1917] (Beijing: Beijing daxue chubanshe, 2011), p. 118.
39. In contrast, the U.S. founding father James Madison famously argued that 
large republics are superior to small political communities on the grounds that they 
will be led by representatives “whose wisdom may best discern the true interest of 
their country” and because diverse factions reduce the likelihood that any one faction 
can systematically dominate the political process and oppress other groups (http://
www.constitution.org/fed/federa10.htm; for discussion, see Cass R. Sunstein, “The 
Enlarged Republic—Then and Now,” New York Review of Books, 26 Mar. 2009, http://
www.nybooks.com/articles/archives/2009/mar/26/the-enlarged-republicthen-and 
-now/). Had Madison been witness to today’s United States, he would likely have been 
disappointed by the quality of political leaders as well as the relative ease with which 
well- funded factions ensure that the political system systematically works in their in-
terest (see chapter 1, sections 1 and 2).
40. Media report mentioned in Yawei Liu et al., China Elections and Governance 
Review 1, no. 1 (Feb. 2009).
41. See Ethan Leib and He Baogang, eds., The Search for Deliberative Democracy 
in China (New York: Palgrave Macmillan, 2010).
42. See concluding thoughts, section 2, for more detailed discussion.
43. Lack of support for national- level electoral democracy can be inferred from 
widespread support for “guardianship discourse” in mainland China. One study 
showed that the majority of farmers who participate in village elections do not support 
direct elections even at the township level. Gunter Schubert, “Village Elections, Citi-
zenship and Regime Legitimacy in Contemporary Rural China,” in Regime Legiti-

266 
Notes to Chapter 4  
macy in Contemporary China: Institutional Change and Stability, ed. Thomas He-
berer and Gunter Schubert (London: Routledge, 2009), p. 67. One survey of seven 
hundred local officials who had attended a provincial training program in 2004 found 
that 67 percent of the cadres supported popular elections for village leaders, 41 per-
cent for county heads, 13 percent for provincial governors, and just 9 percent for Chi-
na’s president. John L. Thornton, “The Prospects for Democracy in China,” Foreign 
Affairs 87, no. 1 (Jan./Feb. 2008): 20. In Hong Kong, limited experience with electoral 
democracy has helped to generate widespread demand for one person, one vote at the 
level of Hong Kong’s Special Administrative Region, but the demand for electoral 
democracy does not seem to go much beyond that.
44. The main purpose of village elections is to clean out incompetent and corrupt 
cadres, not to challenge the political system with CCP as the ruling party (see Kevin 
J. O’Brien and Lianjiang Li, “Accommodating ‘Democracy’ in a One- Party State: In-
troducing Village Elections in China,” China Quarterly 162 [June 2000]: 488–489), 
but it’s worth asking why local elections have not led to a feeling of empowerment that 
could have the (unintended by party leaders) consequence of widespread demand for 
electoral democracy at higher levels. At the local level (in China and elsewhere), poli-
tics is easily captured by small groups—party branches (in the case of China), clans, 
capitalists, religious organizations, and criminal gangs—which makes it easier to “fix” 
outcomes, hence limiting genuine political competition and the psychological feel-
ing of empowerment generated by the act of voting in truly competitive elections. 
Robert A. Pastor and Qingshan Tan, “The Meaning of China’s Village Elections,” 
China Quarterly 162 (June 2000): 509; see also Kevin J. O’Brien and Rongbin Han, 
“Path to Democracy? Assessing Village Elections in China,” Journal of Contemporary 
China 18, no. 60 (June 2009): esp. 368–369; and K. S. Louie, “Village Self- Governance 
and Democracy in China: An Evaluation,” Democratization 8, no. 4 (Winter 2001): 
147–148. On the other hand, local- level democracy may generate a particular kind of 
empowerment that is not easily felt at higher levels of government: (1) the farmers who 
objected to the idea of direct township elections explained that they did not know the 
township government personnel (i.e., they only care about voting for people they 
know), and (2) local- level voters derive feelings of dignity not just through elections, 
but also through being treated on a personal level as respected citizens by responsive 
cadres (Schubert, “Village Elections, Citizenship and Regime Legitimacy in Con-
temporary Rural China,” pp. 67, 69). Empowerment that is the result of face- to- face 
interaction is not possible to generate at higher levels of government, a fact that serves 
to limit the desire to extend elections from the local to higher levels.
45. I don’t think it’s too controversial to assert that it would not be wise for a young 
academic striving to get a job and tenure in a political science department of a major 
Western university to argue that (1) meaningful (and desirable) political reform is pos-
sible without electoral democracy at higher levels of government, and (2) China has 
(at least partly) enacted such reforms over the past couple of decades. That said, phi-
losophers and legal theorists who more directly assess normative issues seem to take 
seriously such arguments: see, e.g., Stephen C. Angle, “Decent Democratic Central-

 
Notes to Chapter 4  
267
ism,” Political Theory 33, no. 4 (Aug. 2005): 518–546; Andrew Stark, “Charting a 
Democratic Future in China,” Dissent, Summer 2012, pp. 18–24; Larry Cata Backer, 
“From Constitution to Constitutionalism: A Global Framework for Legitimate Power 
Systems,” Penn State Law Review 113, no. 3 (2008): esp. 173–174; and Backer, “A Con-
stitutional Court for China within the Chinese Communist Party: Scientific Devel-
opment and a Reconsideration of the Institutional Role of the CCP,” Suffolk Univer-
sity Law Review 43, no. 3 (2010): 593–624. Such views are also expressed by political 
thinkers who need not fear retaliation by guardians of disciplinary orthodoxy: see, 
e.g., Berggruen and Gardels, Intelligent Governance for the 21st Century; John Nais-
bitt and Doris Naisbitt, China’s Megatrends: The 8 Pillars of a New Society (New York: 
Harper Business, 2010), esp. pillar 2; Eric X. Li, “The Life of the Party”; Zhang Wei-
wei, “China’s New Political Discourse,” New Perspectives Quarterly, Fall 2012, http://
onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/j.1540–5842.2012.01340.x/pdf; and Martin Jacques, 
“How Will China Change the Political Map?” Transatlantic Academy, Mar. 2013,  
pp. 1–6.
46. See chapters 2 and 3, as well as concluding thoughts.
47. See Hu Angang, “Is China More Democratic Than the U.S.?” Huffington 
Post, 12 May 2014.
48. See James Fallows, “Obama Explained,” The Atlantic, Mar. 2012.
49. This is not to say that CCP leaders have a direct incentive to take into account 
the interests of the unborn and people living outside the state. My argument is that 
they are less constrained than democratically elected leaders who worry about the re-
sults of the next election, but CCP leaders may face their own constraints, such as the 
need to consider the interests of their “factions” and political protégés. To overcome 
these constraints, the political selection and recruitment mechanism should be de-
signed to reward those who adopt longer- term outlooks that consider the interests of 
all those affected by the policies (for example, giving extra points to local officials who 
consider the environmental consequences of economic growth, as Li Yuanchao tried 
to do when he was party secretary of Jiangsu province). At the highest level of govern-
ment, perhaps an institution or a spot on the Standing Committee of the Politburo 
should be allocated for political leaders whose main responsibility is to argue for the 
interests of the unborn, ancestors, and people living outside the state, and even ani-
mals (for an argument that the interests of animals should be represented in the politi-
cal process, see Donaldson and Kymlicka, Zoopolis). For further discussion, see chap-
ters 2 and 3.
50. J. A. Chandler, “Civil Service in the United States,” in The Civil Service in 
Liberal Democracies: An Introductory Survey, ed. J. E. Kindom (London: Routledge, 
1990), p. 166.
51. In the United States, only 3 percent of university graduates view the civil ser-
vice as their top career choice, compared to 76.4 percent in mainland China (Cary 
Huang, “Deleted Xinhua Report Gives Rare Insight into China Corruption,” South 
China Morning Post, 30 Nov. 2014). A recent conversation with a young recipient of a 
Rhodes scholarship (perhaps the most prestigious scholarship in the American educa-

268 
Notes to Chapter 4  
tional system, designed to choose future leaders) is revealing. She expressed interest 
in international affairs, and I suggested that she can join the U.S. State Department, 
but she said that she had been warned that it is hard for people of ambition and talent 
to succeed in that setting.
52. At a panel of CEOs of leading corporations at the annual meeting of the 
World Economic Forum in Davos, 2012, the panelists argued that more talent finds 
its way to the political top in China than in any other country.
53. Again, democracy refers here to the idea that political leaders should be cho-
sen by the people. Values and practices meant to improve the policy- making process 
often labeled as “democratic,” such as public consultation and deliberative polling, 
can and should be used by meritocratically selected leaders to improve the policy- 
making process. Moreover, democratic procedures such as voting and competition 
between candidates can be employed as mechanisms for evaluating public officials 
being considered for promotion (see concluding thoughts, sections 1 and 2), but in a 
vertical democratic meritocracy, the further up the chain of political command, the 
less influence the public has on the promotion process.
54. See He, “An Empirical Theory of Hybrid Legitimacy System in China”; and 
Hsiao- wen Lee, “Public Opinion in China,” Policy Paper series, China Studies Cen-
ter, University of Sydney, Oct. 2012.
55. Cheng Li, “The End of the CCP’s Resilient Authoritarianism: A Tripartite 
Assessment of Shifting Power in China,” China Quarterly 211 (Sept. 2012): 595–623; 
Wang Hui, “Helmut Schmidt: ‘I Would Not Sell Democracy to the Chinese’—Part I,” 
World Post, 1 Apr. 2014.
56. Of course, the CCP could call an election when it’s popular, and it may win 
the election and perhaps subsequent elections: as Dan Slater and Joseph Wong show 
by drawing on the cases of Taiwan, South Korea, and Indonesia, ruling parties can 
concede democratization and continue to thrive if they concede from positions of 
strength (Slater and Wong, “The Strength to Concede: Ruling Parties and Democra-
tization in Developmental Asia,” Perspectives on Politics 11, no. 3 [Sept. 2013]: 717–
733). But my point is that the meritocratic political system will be wrecked: the ruling 
party can’t be assured of victory in future elections and it will have to change from an 
organization that grooms leaders over decades and plans for the long term to a party 
that devotes most of its time and resources to appealing to the desires of the electorate 
and devising strategies for winning the next election. Another possibility is that the 
CCP could adopt a “Russian- style” democracy, with civil liberties curtailed and the 
mainstream media heavily stacked in favor of the ruling party, but even going this 
route would force the CCP to substantially cut back on its long- term focus in favor of 
concern with the next electoral cycle.
57. I use scare quotes both because (1) one person, one vote has spread to non- 
Western countries, and (2) the idea that multiparty competition is a necessary condi-
tion of a functioning democracy is a relatively recent phenomenon in the West. The 
founding fathers of the United States endorsed the idea that political leaders should be 
chosen by means of the voting process but they intended the government to be nonpar-

 
Notes to Chapter 4  
269
tisan: George Washington famously warned of the “baneful effects of the spirit of 
party” in his Farewell Address of 1792 (http://en.wikisource.org/wiki/Washington%27s 
_Farewell_Address#20). Democratic theorists such as Jean- Jacques Rousseau and 
John Stuart Mill argued against political parties on the grounds that they cause divi-
siveness and undermine commitment to the common good. In Western countries, 
however, a consensus emerged in the post–World War II era that democracy involves 
both one person, one vote and multiparty competition, with the exception that efforts 
have been made to outlaw parties that threaten the whole democratic system (such as 
the Nazis in Germany). Nonpartisan democracies are possible in states with small 
populations such as Nauru (http://www.dfat.gov.au/geo/nauru/nauru_brief.html), ter-
ritorial governments such as American Samoa and Nunavut, and municipal govern-
ments such as Toronto, but democracy in large national states today includes both one 
person, one vote and multiparty competition.
58. The film has been criticized for neglecting the role of political organizing and 
mobilizing by the “No” side (Larry Rohter, “One Prism on the Undoing of Pinochet: 
Oscar- Nominated ‘No’ Stirring Debate in Chile,” New York Times, 8 Feb. 2013), and I 
do not mean to imply that lighthearted marketing techniques were sufficient for 
victory.
59. See, e.g., Minxin Pei in http://www.theatlantic.com/international/archive 
/2012/07/now-online-china-and-democracy-debate-with-minxin-pei-and-eric-li 
/260102/.
60. As it stands, the government is overly concerned about its legitimacy and takes 
measures that needlessly undermine its support. For example, my then- colleague and 
friend Shi Tianjian (who was also a professor at Duke University) and I were both 
disturbed by the document named Charter 2008 that engaged in a polemical critique 
of CCP history and called for competitive electoral democracy in China. Tianjian 
suggested that I write up my thoughts and have it circulated within the party (he said 
it would be more effective if the critique came from a foreigner). I wrote a sharp cri-
tique of the Charter and argued that the government should not intervene and instead 
let independent intellectuals openly debate and criticize the Charter. Tianjian said 
we should keep the memo private and he asked a well- connected friend to have it 
distributed within the higher echelons of the party. Unfortunately, we never received 
a response (I can tell this story because Tianjian passed away at a tragically young age 
in 2010, so I do not have to worry about retaliation against him). A few months later 
the government arrested Liu Xiaobo, a key person behind the manifesto, and sen-
tenced him to an unusually harsh eleven- year jail term (Liu was subsequently awarded 
the Nobel Peace Prize). I decided not to publicly release my critique of the Charter 
because I do not want to criticize the ideas of somebody who cannot defend himself 
while he is in jail (once he is released and has freedom of political speech, I’ll be 
happy to do so). It’s worth asking what would have been the reaction of a political 
meritocracy with more democratic legitimacy of the sort provided by a referendum in 
favor of the China model. For one thing, the government would not have to worry as 
much about a document calling for electoral democracy at the top because it could 

270 
Notes to Chapter 4  
show that the political system has majority support. In a more open political environ-
ment, independent intellectuals could criticize such documents, and calls for elec-
toral democracy would not gain much support in the court of public opinion. Of 
course, the line must be drawn at the point that social forces seek to mobilize political 
support for a multiparty competitive system and electoral democracy at the top: the 
government should specify clear penalties for such actions (supporters of the Charter 
2008 claim that the Chinese constitution allows for electoral democracy at the top; if 
that’s the case, the constitution needs to be changed).
61. From personal experience I can vouch that the debates prior to the referenda 
on Quebec independence in 1980 and 1995 were both deeper and broader than the 
political debates prior to regular provincial elections. Needless to say, such referenda 
need to be carried out in a relatively free atmosphere with time for deliberation (in 
contrast to, say, the referendum on Crimean independence on 16 March 2014, which 
was carried out on a few days’ notice under the watchful eyes of Russian troops).
62. There is a paradox in the sense that the need for a referendum endorsing the 
political system becomes more acute as the system comes under greater political chal-
lenge. So the government would have to choose a propitious moment for calling such 
a referendum, perhaps just as it’s enjoying a high level of support (and shortly before 
an expected drop in support).
63. “Uganda Backs Multi- Party Return,” BBC News, 1 Aug. 2005.
64. What if the CCP does not respect the terms of the referendum within this 
period? Social critics could make their case and the government would lose whatever 
legitimacy it had gained via the referendum (the government could also imprison or 
silence its critics, thus further undermining its legitimacy). The assumption is that 
the concern for legitimacy (and hence, political stability) would provide a strong in-
centive for the CCP to respect the terms of the referendum. And the people hold the 
ultimate trump card in the sense that they can rebel against the government, as they 
did in imperial Chinese history when rulers appeared to have lost the “mandate of 
heaven.” Such rebellions are costly and bloody, but they can also do some good if they 
overthrow a thoroughly unjust government: as Yuri Pines puts it, “Rebellions can be 
interpreted as a peculiar (and very costly) readjustment system, a kind of bloody popu-
lar ‘election,’ which determined what family would rule for another dynastic cycle, 
corrected certain wrongs, allowed the influx of new blood into the government appa-
ratus, and thus contributed toward the improvement of the empire’s functioning” 
(Pines, The Everlasting Empire, p. 161).
65. A liberal democrat might reply that it’s unfair to bind future generations to a 
vote held by their parents. But such an objection owes much to an individualistic view 
of the self and may not resonate as deeply in a culture with a family- oriented view of 
the self as tightly bound to ancestors and descendants. Just to give one concrete ex-
ample of how these different views of the self affect social behavior and expectations: 
in the West, it is widely understood that a child becomes independent at the age of 
eighteen or so, and ties with parents become optional from then on; in China, the ties 

 
Notes to Concluding Thoughts 
271
that bind parents and children are meant to generate a lifetime of obligations and re-
sponsibilities and there is no “age of maturity” at which point they become optional.
Concluding Thoughts
1. See Minglu Chen and David S. G. Goodman, “The China Model: One Coun-
try, Six Authors,” Journal of Contemporary China 21, no. 73 (Jan. 2011): 171.
2. To be more precise, such accounts of the China model are more common in 
the foreign press and academic publications. Within mainland China, accounts of 
the China model are generally more positive (and more nuanced): see Pan Wei, ed., 
Zhongguo moshi: Jiedu renmin gongheguo de 60 nian [China Model: Explaining Sixty 
Years of the People’s Republic] (Beijing: Zhongyang bianyi chubanshe, 2009).
3. Suisheng Zhao, “The China Model: Can It Replace the Western Model of 
Modernization?” Journal of Contemporary China 19, no. 65 (June 2010): 420–422.
4. Barry Naughton, “China’s Distinctive System: Can It Be a Model for Others?” 
Journal of Contemporary China 19, no. 65 (June 2010): 445.
5. Qiu Feng has argued that there are other possible standards for evaluating 
China’s political progress (or regress) within a framework of vertical democratic meri-
tocracy, such as meritocracy at the top, democracy in the middle, and meritocracy at 
the bottom. Local communities can draw on traditional forms of elite selection with-
out divisive and expensive elections, whereas there may be a good case for competi-
tive elections at the level of cities (“Comment on Political Meritocracy and Democ-
racy” [in Chinese], Unirule Institute of Economics, Beijing, 9 June 2014). Other 
possibilities include a model with meritocracy at the top, democracy in the middle, 
and experimentation at the bottom. I leave aside such possibilities for both theoretical 
and political reasons (the best case for democracy can be made at the local level, tra-
ditional forms of elite selection at the local level in China have more often than not 
been destroyed by political upheaval in the twentieth century, and the costs of chang-
ing the current China model are likely to outweigh the benefits).
6. Jaeyoon Song, “Redefining Good Government: Shifting Paradigms in Song 
Dynasty (960–1279) Discourse on Fengjian,” T’oung Pao 97 (2011): 338. See also Bol, 
Neo- Confucianism in History.
7. This paragraph draws on Louie, “Village Self- Governance and Democracy in 
China,” pp. 136–141.
8. O’Brien and Han, “Path to Democracy?” pp. 359–360.
9. Jude Howell, “Prospects for Village Self- Governance in China,” Journal of 
Peasant Studies 55, no. 3 (1998): 87–93.
10. Victor Cunrui Xiong, Emperor Yang of the Sui Dynasty: His Life, Times, and 
Legacy (Albany: State University of New York Press, 2006).
11. Sebastian Heilmann, “From Local Experiments to National Policy: The Ori-
gins of China’s Distinctive Policy Process,” China Journal 59 (Jan. 2008): 10. My dis-
cussion of the second plank draws from this article. See also Heilmann, “Policy Mak-

272 
Notes to Concluding Thoughts 
ing through Experimentation: The Formation of a Distinctive Policy Process,” in 
Mao’s Invisible Hand: The Political Foundations of Adaptive Governance in China, ed. 
Sebastian Heilmann and Elizabeth Perry (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University 
Asia Center, 2011).
12. Sebastian Heilmann, “Policy Experimentation in China’s Economic Rise,” 
Studies in Comparative International Development 43 (2008): 23.
13. The special economic zones have historical precedents and also show the 
Chinese government’s creative adaptation and reinterpretation of the past: the zones 
are similar to the treaty cities from the colonial period in the sense that “both are de-
marcated areas where different rules apply, with a concentration of activity as a result. 
The greatest difference is that the Chinese themselves set the conditions in the post- 
1978 economic zones, rather than governments in Paris, London, Berlin, or Moscow” 
(Michiel Hulshof and Daan Roggeveen, How the City Moved to Mr. Sun: China’s 
New Megacities [Amsterdam: SUN, 2011], p. 92).
14. Wu Hao and Wen Tianli, “Zhongguo difang zhengce shiyanshi gaige de 
youshi yu juxianxing” [The Advantages and Limitations of China’s Experimental 
Reforms with Local Policy], Shehui kexue zhanxian 10 (2012): 37–45. For an argument 
that experimental approach to risk detection has advantages compared to the practice 
in Western countries, where most policies have been imposed universally and simul-
taneously, see Jingyi Zhang, “Practice- Based Risk Detection,” mimeo, Shanghai Jiao-
tong University, 2012. For a favorable comparison of China’s approach to experimen-
tal reform with India’s more rigid model, see Zheng Yongnian, “Zhongguo tizhi 
changxin jingyan de xianshi qishi” [The Real Inspiration of China’s System of Cre-
ative Experimentation], Lianhe zaobao, 3 Sept. 2013.
15. Florini, Lai, and Tan, China Experiments, p. 5.
16. Heilmann, “Policy Experimentation in China’s Economic Rise,” pp. 8–9.
17. Daniel A. Bell, “What China Can Teach Europe,” New York Times, 8 Jan. 
2012.
18. Florini, Lai, and Tan, China Experiments, p. 6; Micklethwait and Wooldridge, 
The Fourth Revolution, p. 158.
19. Tom Miller and Warren Lu, “Better Governance through Kung- Fu,” Gavekal 
Dragonomics China Research, 14 Feb. 2014, p. 3.
20. Gabriel Wildau, “Small Chinese Cities Steer Away from GDP as Measure of 
Success,” Financial Times, 13 Aug. 2014.
21. In addition, Bo Rothstein argues that China’s relative success at delivering 
high growth and public services (compared to other countries with similarly low 
rankings on rule of law and corruption indexes) can be explained by a cadre organi-
zation that relies on public officials committed to implementing policy doctrine from 
above but with the ability and discretion to use different tools and skills depending on 
local circumstances. Rothstein, “The Chinese Paradox of High Growth and Low 
Quality of Government: The Cadre Organization meets Max Weber,” forthcoming 
in Governance.

 
Notes to Concluding Thoughts 
273
22. Heilmann, “Policy Experimentation in China’s Economic Rise,” p. 5 (citing 
D. F. Pile on India).
23. To be more precise, Chinese scholars have written more extensively on the 
CCP experience with experimentation both before the revolution and in the reform 
era (see Zheng Wenhuan, “Difang shidian yu guojia zhengce: Yi xin nongbao wei li” 
[Local Experimentation and National Policy: Using the Rural Pension Policy as an 
Example], Zhongguo xingzheng guanli 2 [2013]: 16–20; and the footnotes to Heil-
mann’s article “From Local Experiments to National Policy”), but English- language 
research on Chinese governance has tended to focus more on village elections. This 
scholarly bias can be explained by the following factors: (1) the Chinese government 
encourages foreign researchers to monitor and write about elections; (2) it is easier to 
produce quantifiable academic output by researching elections; and (3) foreign re-
searchers have an ideological bias in favor of the view that only electoral democracy 
counts as substantial political reform.
24. See also Xiangdong Gu, Louise T. Higgins, Lixiang Weng, and Xiaoye Holt, 
“Civil Service Leadership Selection in China: Historical Evolution and Current Sta-
tus,” Journal of Chinese Human Resource Management 3, no. 1 (2012): 67–78.
25. Frank N. Pieke, The Good Communist: Elite Training and State Building in 
Today’s China (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2009), p. 1.
26. In the 1980s, party membership was not viewed as particularly prestigious and 
many students at leading universities shied away from it, but today there is a rigorous 
process for admission to party membership and membership is actively sought by 
most high- performing students. For a more detailed account of the CCP’s strategy for 
recruiting new members and the application process for college students, see Dick-
son, “Who Wants to Be a Communist?”
27. In 2013, there were more than 1.19 million exam takers, with an average suc-
cess rate of 1 out of 57 (He Hui, “You geng duo gongping jihui ‘Guokao re’ cai hui 
jiang wen” [The “Fever over National Public Service Examinations” Will Cool Down 
Only with More Equal Opportunities], Huanqiu shibao, 25 Nov. 2013). In 2014, how-
ever, there was a substantial drop- off in the number of test takers, allegedly due to cuts 
in benefits such as low- cost healthcare and housing and the high- profile anticorrup-
tion crackdown, which has choked off the flow of gray income (Patti Waldmeir, “A 
Game Change in Public Service,” Financial Times, 16 Apr. 2014; Gao Bo, “Civil 
Service Exam Hit Amid Graft Crackdown,” China Daily, 25–26 Oct. 2014). It may 
not be a bad thing if recent changes filter out test- takers with more materialistic moti-
vation, though the problem of low salaries for public officials still needs to be resolved 
(see chapter 3, section 1).
28. Prior to the establishment of examinations, cadres were recruited via the na-
tional assignment of jobs for university and polytechnic graduates, the placement of 
army soldiers transferred to civilian work, and recommendation from workers, farm-
ers, and other social groups. Su Yutang, ed. Guojia gongwuyuan zhidu jianghua [The 
Discourse on the State Civil Service System] (Beijing: Labor and Personnel Publish-
ing House, 1989), p. 109.

274 
Notes to Concluding Thoughts 
29. Xiaowei Zhang, Elite Dualism and Leadership Selection in China (London: 
Routledge/Curzon, 2004), esp. chs. 5–6.
30. Xiao and Li, “China’s Meritocratic Examinations and the Ideal of Virtuous 
Talents,” pp. 348–349. A report titled “Advance along the Road of Socialism with 
Chinese Characteristics,” delivered to the Thirteenth National Congress of the CCP 
on 25 Oct. 1987 by Zhao Ziyang, proposed dividing public officials into political of-
ficials and professional public servants (People’s Republic of China Yearbook [Beijing: 
PRC Yearbook Ltd; Hong Kong: N.C.N. Limited, 1988/89]), but this recommenda-
tion was not implemented. The aim of Zhao’s report was to establish a more 
“Western- style” meritocratic civil service, but had the recommendation for a strict 
division between civil servants and political officials been implemented, the result 
might have been less meritocracy in the political system because political officials 
might not have had to go through the examination system that was established in the 
early 1990s.
31. Zheng Yongnian and Chen Gang, “Intra- Party Democracy in Practice: Ballot-
ing for City Leaders in Jiangsu,” in China: Development and Governance, ed. Wang 
Gungwu and Zheng Yongnian (Singapore: World Scientific, 2013), pp. 22–23. See 
also Pieke, The Good Communist, ch. 6; and for an early account of the organization 
of China’s administrative sector, see Yan Huai, Zhonggong zhengzhi jiegou yu 
minzhuhua lungang [The CCP’s Political Structure and an Outline for China’s De-
mocratization] (Taipei: Mainland Commission of Taiwan’s Executive Council, 1991).
32. Eighty percent of the survey work for the CCP is carried out by Horizons, 
China’s largest private polling company (interview with Yuan Yue, CEO of Horizons, 
Beijing, 7 Mar. 2014). Horizons uses scientific methods to canvass the views of the 
public and relevant stakeholders that bear on the assessment of candidates being con-
sidered for promotion (e.g., ex- cons are interviewed in order to assess the performance 
of prison wardens).
33. Provisional Regulation on the Promotion and Demotion of State Public Ser-
vants, art. 7 (in John P. Burns et al., eds., “Provisional Chinese Public Service Regula-
tions,” in Chinese Law and Government (New York: M. E. Sharpe, 1990), p. 10.
34. Li, “The Life of the Party.” See also Zhang Weiwei, “Meritocracy Versus De-
mocracy,” New York Times, 10–11 Nov. 2012. The point here is not that experience 
makes for smarter or more virtuous leaders: President Obama seems to be at the top of 
the scale in both categories. But experience helps the political leader avoid beginner’s 
mistakes, provides a kind of background knowledge that improves the political judg-
ment necessary for sound decision making (especially in response to new and unex-
pected crises that require quick decisions), and tests for the social skills necessary for 
effective persuasion of people and the implementation of political proposals (see 
chapter 2, section 3). It is highly unlikely that a loner such as Obama—with a disdain 
for politics that alienates both his ideological foes and members of his own party, 
negatively affecting his capacity to manage issues at home and abroad (see Carl 
Hulse, Jeremy W. Peters, and Michael D. Shear, “Obama Is Seen as Frustrating His 
Own Party,” New York Times, 18 Aug. 2014)—could have made it through a Chinese- 

 
Notes to Concluding Thoughts 
275
style meritocratic process that requires a high level of social skills. It could be argued 
that the former Chinese president Hu Jintao similarly lacked social skills, but the 
Chinese leadership is collective and depends less on the qualities of one leader (i.e., 
the political system won’t be paralyzed if any one leader falls short on one of the at-
tributes necessary for effective leadership).
35. Reasons include: (1) the lack of transparency of the selection and promotion 
process, and (2) an ideological bias (especially by foreign scholars) that views talk of 
meritocracy as a mere façade for continued authoritarian rule, hence not “real” politi-
cal reform.
36. Zheng and Chen, “Intra- Party Democracy in Practice,” p. 22.
37. Wu Ji and Wei Yunheng, “Take Away the ‘Iron Armchair,’ and Bring Up Good 
Cadres—Report on the Reform of the Personnel System for Cadres in Liaoning Prov-
ince,” Liaowang 24 (11 June 1990): 104.
38. Cited in Kuhn, How China’s Leaders Think, p. 479.
39. O’Brien and Han, “Path to Democracy?” p. 367.
40. Ibid., pp. 367–376. See also Liu Mingxing, Zhongguo nongcun caizheng tizhi 
gaige yu jiceng zhili jiegou bianqian [China’s Rural Fiscal System Reform and Struc-
tural Change of Local Governance] (Beijing: People’s Daily Press, 2013), ch. 6.
41. Louie, “Village Self- Governance and Democracy in China,” pp. 147–148.
42. Xin Sun, Travis J. Warner, Dali L. Yang, and Mingxing Liu, “Patterns of Au-
thority and Governance in Rural China: Who’s in Charge? Why?” Journal of Contem-
porary China 22, no. 83 (2013): 733–754.
43. Shuna Wang and Yang Yao, “Grassroots Democracy and Local Governance: 
Evidence from Rural China,” World Development 35, no. 10 (2007): 1637–1638, 1647.
44. Lily L. Tsai, Accountability without Democracy: Solidary Groups and Public 
Goods Provision in Rural China (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2007), p. 
253.
45. Howell, “Prospects for Village Self- Governance in China,” p. 107; O’Brien 
and Han, “Path to Democracy?” p. 375.
46. I do not mean to imply that decision making by deliberative polling should be 
carried out at higher levels of government where political experience matters more 
than at local levels and decisions often need to be made either more slowly, involving 
years of political persuasion, or more rapidly, in response to national and global crises. 
Plus, leaders at higher levels of government in political meritocracies derive substan-
tial legitimacy by being viewed as having performed well on ultracompetitive tests 
and trials over the course of several decades, which is not true of local- level leaders.
47. He and Warren, “Authoritarian Deliberation,” p. 277.
48. Xia Ming, “Innovations in China’s Local Governance,” in China: Develop-
ment and Governance.
49. Heilmann, “From Local Experiments to National Policy,” p. 28.
50. Ibid., p. 27.
51. For example, the municipality of Chengdu aims to reduce the income gap 
between urban and rural residents by improving the surrounding countryside rather 

276 
Notes to Concluding Thoughts 
than encouraging large- scale migration to the city, but such policies are not likely to 
work in Chongqing’s harsh terrain or the arid parts of northern China.
52. To promote controversial political reforms, however, provincial elites need to 
rely on a close factional relationship with the general secretary who acts as their pa-
tron. Wen- Hsuan Tsai and Nicola Dean, “Experimentation under Hierarchy in Local 
Conditions: Cases of Political Reform in Guangdong and Sichuan, China,” China 
Quarterly 218 (June 2014): 356.
53. Shell and Delury, Wealth and Power, p. 65.
54. O’Brien and Li, “Accommodating ‘Democracy’ in a One- Party State,” p. 467.
55. I use scare quotes because although such experiments include democratic 
practices such as elections, online consultation, and opinion polling, they are con-
strained by meritocratic selection procedures such as nomination by the party. As 
Zheng Yongnian and Chen Gang comment, “The Party’s long- term goal is still meri-
tocracy rather than democracy” (Zheng and Chen, “Intra- Party Democracy in Prac-
tice,” p. 21). One might add that “intraparty democracy” is not meant to undermine 
the status of the CCP as the ruling party. Hu Wei, “Minzhu zhengzhi fazhan de 
Zhongguo daolu: Dangnei minzhu moshi de xuanze” [China’s Road to Democratic 
Political Development: Choosing the Model of Intraparty Democracy], Kexue shehui-
zhuyi 1 (2010): 14–23).
56. Kuhn, How China’s Leaders Think, pp. xix, 483. Li was promoted to head of 
the Organization Department in 2007, and as the senior leader responsible for party 
and government promotions he himself had more power to replicate experiments in 
the assessment of cadres. On the growing importance of online consultation in the 
policy- making process, see Steven J. Balla and Zhou Liao, “Online Consultation Citi-
zen Feedback in Chinese Policymaking,” Journal of Current Chinese Affairs 3 (2013): 
101–120.
57. For official websites, see http://www.eco-city.gov.cn/ (Chinese government, in 
Chinese) and http://www.tianjinecocity.gov.sg/ (Singapore government, in English).
58. Ho Ai Li, “Growing Pains for Tianjin Eco- City, Straits Times, 13 Oct. 2013.
59. In 2009, I had breakfast with a government official from Tianjin at the World 
Economic Forum meeting in Dalian. He was severely critical of Dalian and ex-
plained to me that Tianjin could host a similar meeting at lower cost. As it turns out, 
both cities upgraded their infrastructure and it was decided to alternate World Eco-
nomic Forum (summer) meetings between Dalian and Tianjin on a yearly basis.
60. Hong Kong’s legal and political structure is a British legacy, but the Chinese 
government agreed to sustain the Hong Kong way of life for fifty years (until 2047), so 
in that sense Hong Kong can be viewed as an experiment.
61. http://www.rfa.org/english/news/tibet/allowed-06262013180033.html.
62. See Zhang Yongle, “Zhongguo de xianneng zhengzhi ji qi minzhu zheng-
dang xing” [China’s Political Meritocracy and Its Democratic Legitimacy], comment 
presented at workshop on democracy and meritocracy, Sungkyunkwan University, 
Seoul, 30 May 2014; and Xiao Jianzhong, “Lingdao ganbu xuanba yu xieshang 
minzhu” [Cadre Selection and Deliberative Democracy], Guancha yu sikao 4 (2014): 

 
Notes to Concluding Thoughts 
277
33–34. This paragraph also draws on discussions with two Chinese public officials 
who prefer to remain anonymous.
63. Let me speculate: there might have been more continuity in efforts to stan-
dardize the promotion evaluation process by means of voting and examinations had 
Li Yuanchao been promoted to the Standing Committee of the Politburo rather than 
the less powerful post of vice- president. Still, it is worth noting that change of leader-
ship at the top takes place every ten years in China and there is more continuity than 
in electoral democracies that change ruling parties every few years, so the shifts in 
policy are typically less drastic (and arbitrary) than in electoral democracies.
64. Heilmann, “Policy Experimentation in China’s Economic Rise,” p. 19.
65. Such an independent commission could also recommend experimentation in 
hitherto taboo areas that relatively cautious political leaders may be reluctant to push 
forward. For example, the commission could recommend an experiment that elimi-
nates barriers against same- sex marriage in a part of the country—say, Shanghai—that 
is relatively tolerant of the public expression of homosexuality. The success of the ex-
periment would depend not just on the public reaction, but also on the results of so-
cial scientific studies, the experience of other countries, and lessons from China’s 
own history. If the expert commission concludes that same- sex marriage helps the 
people involved without substantially undermining family and social harmony, the 
commission could publicize the results and political leaders would have the moral 
authority to extend the experiments to other parts of the country. That said, not all 
sensitive experiments can be carried out and evaluated in a fully transparent way. For 
example, an experiment in ideological reform might generate too much opposition 
from high- level political leaders and retired cadres, and hence might need to be car-
ried out away from public view in the initial period, with the hope that key political 
leaders could be brought on board once the experiment had proven popular in a par-
ticular locale without generating too much political opposition.
66. For additional suggestions meant to improve the scaling up of local experi-
ments, see Zheng Yongnian, “Zhongguo ruhe yingde xin yi bo kaifang zhengce” 
[How Can China Succeed at the Next Wave of Open Policies?], Lianhe zaobao, 12 
Nov. 2013; and Florini, Lai, and Tan, China Experiments, pp. 177–179.
67. Articles in the leading media outlets of English- speaking countries (more like 
comments masquerading as news reports) routinely point to the political rise of 
princelings as a way of “proving” that the Chinese political system is not meritocratic 
(see, e.g., Edward Wong, “Family Ties and Hobnobbing Trump Merit at China 
Helm,” New York Times, 17 Nov. 2012). The problem with such reports is not that they 
are false but rather that they are biased in the sense that they draw broader political 
conclusions from isolated examples. When they do draw on social scientific research, 
they make use of negative articles in English- speaking journals and ignore the more 
balanced or positive accounts of actually existing political meritocracy in English and 
Chinese academic journals. And some books about Chinese politics written by jour-
nalists—see, e.g., Richard McGregor, The Party: The Secret World of China’s Com-
munist Rulers (London: Penguin, 2010)—make hardly any use of English- language 

278 
Notes to Concluding Thoughts 
academic articles on Chinese politics and no use at all of Chinese- language academic 
articles; if academics can draw on newspaper articles, why can’t journalists draw on 
academic articles? When leading media outlets publish comments largely in favor of 
actually existing meritocracy, they may be followed by critiques (for example, Eric X. 
Li’s article “The Life of the Party: The Post- Democratic Future Begins in China,” in 
the Jan./Feb. 2013 issue of Foreign Affairs, is followed by Huang Yasheng’s rebuttal 
 titled “Democratize or Die: Why China’s Communists Face Reform or Revolution”;  
it is highly unusual for Foreign Affairs to publish a rebuttal to an article in the  
same issue). These complaints aside, I am grateful to leading media outlets that have 
published my own contributions on the topic (and for the friendship of many 
journalists).
68. Even in a fully meritocratic system, however, there might still be a dispropor-
tionately large number of political leaders from families with political backgrounds. 
The reason is that such backgrounds help provide opportunities to learn the social 
skills necessary for persuading others and for effectively implementing policy propos-
als (see chapter 2, section 3). For example, Singapore’s prime minister Lee Hsien 
Loong probably dined and conversed with high- level political leaders at a young age 
by virtue of the fact that he is the son of Singapore’s founding father Lee Kuan Yew. 
As a result, he would have learned how best to engage with such leaders without feel-
ing overly self- conscious, and thus is more likely to have developed the social skills 
required of a political leader than others with similar levels of intelligence and virtue 
but without such illustrious family backgrounds.
69. In 1982, Chen Yun appointed Li Rui, a former secretary of Mao Zedong, as 
head of a bureau “dealing with cadres which should be run by outstanding young 
people” (Dang de zuzhi gongzuo wenxian xuanbian [Collection on the Party’s Organi-
zational Work], ed. Central Organization Department [Beijing: CCP School Publish-
ing House, 1986], p. 232). This “Young Cadres Bureau,” mainly composed of the 
children of high- ranking cadres, was considered a reformist and heretical wing within 
the conservative bastion of the Central Organization Department at the time.
70. See the Provisional Regulation on the Avoidance System of the State Admin-
istrative Personnel, in General Office of the State Council of the People’s Republic of 
China, ed., Guowuyuan gongbao [Bulletin of the State Council], Beijing, no. 5 (1991): 
162–163.
71. I say “blatant” because one of the (unintended?) consequences of the regula-
tions preventing political nepotism is that relatives of political officials often went into 
business and drew on informal political connections to enrich themselves.
72. Joseph Fewsmith, “Inner- Party Democracy: Development and Limitations,” 
China Leadership Monitor, no. 31, p. 9 (http://www.cerium.ca/IMG/pdf/Fewsmith 
_Inner-party_democracy.pdf).
73. Pieke, The Good Communist, pp. 161–162.
74. China has exported its model of special economic zones (SEZs) to Nigeria, 
Ethiopia, and Mauritius: “These African SEZs represent a Chinese development 
plan, initiated by the Chinese government, executed by Chinese companies and 

 
Notes to Concluding Thoughts 
279
planned by Chinese urbanists—but on African soil.” Michiel Hulshof and Daan Rog-
geveen, “Lekki, the Next African Shenzhen?” Chengshi Zhongguo: Zhongguoshi zao-
cheng zai Feizhou 63, no. 3 (2014): 88. Such SEZs can be sustained even with political 
changes in democratic contexts so long as all sides benefit economically, but it is more 
difficult to sustain more ambitious experiments in political reform without stable 
meritocracies: for example, the president of Madagascar was intrigued by Paul 
Romer’s idea of a charter city (an economic zone founded on the land of a poor coun-
try but governed with the legal and political system of a rich country) but the plan 
ended when he was ousted in a coup (Adam Davidson, “Who Wants to Buy Hondu-
ras?” New York Times, 8 May 2012).
75. Small countries can still experiment with new forms of government—political 
experimentation was common in the city- states of ancient Greece, including the fa-
mous democratic reforms that Athens pursued between the sixth and third centuries 
bce (Rebecca Newberger Goldstein, Plato at the Googleplex: Why Philosophy Won’t 
Go Away [New York: Pantheon Books, 2014], p. 152)—but experimentation in smaller 
political units under the control of a relatively powerful central government assumes 
the context of a large country.
76. As a method of revolutionary transformation, experimentation was exported 
to Vietnam: the 1953–1956 land reform in North Vietnam was designed by a team of 
experienced cadres and initiated by small- scale “experimental waves,” including the 
initial establishment of “experimental points” and “typical models” before scaling up 
reforms in a phased manner, depending on the success of the experimental units and 
local circumstances. Vietnamese policy makers have again made use of the experi-
mental point methodology since the 1980s for the purpose of promoting economic 
reform (Heilmann, “From Local Experiments to National Policy,” p. 12). Vietnam 
also relies on the experimental method to pursue political reform and may offer les-
sons to China in this respect (John Ruwitch, “Vietnam Political Reform Experiments 
Move Up a Notch,” Reuters, 29 Sept. 2010).
77. In a large- scale survey of civil servants, only 11.6 percent of respondents in the 
United States agreed that civil servants should pass civil service examinations, as 
against more than 80 percent in six East Asian countries saying there is a need to do 
so, “probably due to the influence of the Confucian examination model from the 
past.” Poocharoen and Brillantes, “Meritocracy in the Asia Pacific,” p. 150.
78. Such efforts are already taking place on an ad hoc basis—for example, govern-
ment officials from countries in Asia, Africa, and Latin America undergo training at 
the China National School of Administration, and African government employees 
are given scholarships for training at Chinese universities (Michiel Hulshof and Daan 
Roggeveen, “Black in China: The New Soft Power Approach,” Chengshi Zhongguo 
63, no. 3 [2014]: 104)—but there is a need for more systematic efforts to promote po-
litical meritocracy outside of China.
79. Pan Wei, “Western System Versus Chinese System,” University of Notting-
ham, China Policy Institute, Briefing Series, no. 61, July 2010.
80. The view that the CCP is really “Communist” may be more prevalent in the 

280 
Notes to Concluding Thoughts 
United States, where politicians routinely use the word Communist to demonize the 
Chinese political system. A name change that drops the word Communist may there-
fore increase China’s soft power abroad (or at least reduce fear of its political system).
81. The CCP is “Leninist” in the sense that the party is vertically organized and is 
supreme over the state apparatus (Steve Tsang, “Consultative Leninism: China’s New 
Political Framework,” Journal of Contemporary China 18, no. 62 (2009): 865–880), but 
it lacks the other key features of a Leninist party—the idea that class conflict is the 
motor of history, leadership by the proletariat, a commitment to the ideal of commu-
nism at home, and support for the revolutionary overthrow of capitalist regimes 
abroad. And the days of Leninist- style political mobilization are long gone because 
the party must be more sensitive to public opinion; the CCP can mobilize around 
causes (such as efforts to combat corruption) if there is already substantial social de-
mand, but it can no longer mobilize people around harebrained schemes (such as the 
Great Leap Forward) that radically conflict with what people need and want (and 
with what independent scholars and scientists regard as sensible policy). Moreover, 
republics had a constitutional right to withdraw from the union in Soviet- style Lenin-
ism; regions in China, no matter how autonomous, do not have a right to withdraw 
from the country. Last but not least, the key features of the China model—democracy 
at the bottom, experimentation in the middle, and meritocracy at the top—were not 
key features of the Soviet political system.
82. On the differences between the CCP and political parties in the West, see 
Zheng Yongnian, The Chinese Communist Party as Organizational Emperor: Culture, 
Reproduction and Transformation (London: Routledge, 2010), pp. 16–17.
83. On the frequent use of the term democracy (minzhu) in official Chinese politi-
cal discourse, see Bo Zhiyue, China’s Elite Politics: Governance and Democratization 
(Hackensack, N.J.: World Scientific, 2010), p. 390. By “democratic characteristics” I 
mean not just local- level electoral democracy and “intraparty democracy,” but also 
the National People’s Congress. See Pu Xingzu, “Yi renda minzhu wei zhongdian 
jixu tuijin Zhongguo minzhu zhengzhi de fazhan” [Continuously Carrying Forward 
the Development of Democracy Politics in China by Focusing on the National Peo-
ple’s Congress], Fudan xuebao (shehui kexue) 5 (2005): 129–134.
84. B. L. McCormick, “China’s Leninist Parliament and Public Sphere: A Com-
parative Analysis,” in China after Socialism: In the Footsteps of Eastern Europe or East 
Asia?, ed. B. L. McCormick and J. Unger (Armonk, N.Y.: M. E. Sharpe, 1996), pp. 
29–53.
85. It’s worth asking why the CCP persists in using an obsolete name to describe 
itself. One reason is that it fears losing legitimacy if it changes its name, but improv-
ing the China model in practice should take care of that problem. Another reason is 
that revolutionary heroes who fought for the establishment of a great country are at-
tached to the old name. This book is dedicated to my Chinese parents- in- law, who 
met in North Korea during the Korean War. My father- in- law first joined the CCP at 
the age of fifteen and fought in three wars with the CCP. Although he never rose high 
in the ranks and suffered much during political campaigns (including a year in soli-

 
Notes to Concluding Thoughts 
281
tary confinement during the Cultural Revolution), he never lost faith in the leader-
ship of the CCP. My father- in- law is open- minded and intellectually curious, but I do 
not think he could tolerate a change in the name of the CCP. As a filial son- in- law, I 
do not want him to be upset. Hence, my own view is that the CCP should not change 
its name until the generation of revolutionary heroes, sadly, departs from this world.


Selected Bibliography
Albritton, Robert B., and Thawilwadee Bureekul. “Developing Democracy under a 
New Constitution in Thailand.” In How East Asians View Democracy, ed. Yun- Han 
Chu, Larry Diamond, Andrew J. Nathan, and Doh Chull Shin. New York: Colum-
bia University Press, 2008.
Angle, Stephen C. “Decent Democratic Centralism.” Political Theory 33, no. 4 (Aug. 
2005).
Appiah, Kwame Anthony. The Honor Code: How Moral Revolutions Happen. New 
York: Norton, 2010.
Aristotle. The Politics, trans. Ernest Barker. London: Oxford University Press, 1958.
Arkless, David. “The Secret to Asia’s Long- Term Prosperity? Improving Roles for 
Women at Work.” Global Asia 6, no. 3 (Fall 2011).
Arneson, Richard. “Democratic Rights at National and Workplace Levels.” In The Idea 
of Democracy, ed. David Copp, Jean Hampton, and John Roemer. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press, 1993.
Backer, Larry Cata. “A Constitutional Court for China within the Chinese Commu-
nist Party: Scientific Development and a Reconsideration of the Institutional Role 
of the CCP.” Suffolk University Law Review 43, no. 3 (2010).
———. “From Constitution to Constitutionalism: A Global Framework for Legiti-
mate Power Systems.” Penn State Law Review 113, no. 3 (2008).
Bai, Tongdong. China: The Political Philosophy of the Middle Kingdom. London: Zed 
Books, 2012.
———. “A Confucian Version of Hybrid Regime: How Does It Work, and Why Is It 
Superior?” In The East Asian Challenge for Democracy, ed. Daniel A. Bell and 
Chenyang Li. New York: Cambridge University Press, 2013.
Bakewell, Sarah. How to Live or A Life of Montaigne in One Question and Twenty At-
tempts at an Answer. New York: Other Press, 2010.
Balázs, Étienne. Chinese Civilization and Bureaucracy: Variations on a Theme, trans. 
H. M. Wright; ed. Arthur F. Wright. New Haven, Conn.: Yale University Press, 
1967.
Balla, Steven J., and Zhou Liao. “Online Consultation and Citizen Feedback in Chi-
nese Policymaking.” Journal of Current Chinese Affairs 3 (2013).
Banerjee, Abhijit, and Esther Duflo. Poor Economics: A Radical Rethinking of the Way 
to Fight Global Poverty. New York: Public Affairs, 2012.
Barkey, Karen. Empire of Difference: The Ottomans in Comparative Perspective. Cam-
bridge: Cambridge University Press, 2008.

284 
Selected Bibliography 
Bartels, Larry M. Unequal Democracy: The Political Economy of the New Gilded Age 
Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press, 2008.
Bauer, Joanne, and Daniel A. Bell, eds. The East Asian Challenge for Human Rights. 
New York: Cambridge University Press, 1999.
Bell, Daniel. “The Old War: After Ideology, Corruption.” New Republic, 23 and 30 
Aug. 1993.
———. “On Meritocracy and Equality.” National Affairs 29 (Fall 1972).
Bellah, Robert, Richard Madsen, William Sullivan, and Ann Swidler. Habits of the 
Heart. Berkeley: University of California Press, 1985.
Benko, Cathy, and Bill Pelster. “How Women Decide.” Harvard Business Review, Sept. 
2013.
Bergère, Marie- Claire. Chine: Le nouveau capitalisme d’État. Paris: Fayard, 2013.
Berggruen, Nicolas, and Nathan Gardels. Intelligent Governance for the 21st Century: 
A Middle Way between West and East. Cambridge: Polity Press, 2012.
———. “Political Meritocracy and Direct Democracy: A Hybrid Experiment in Cali-
fornia.” In The East Asian Challenge for Democracy, ed. Daniel A. Bell and 
Chenyang Li. New York: Cambridge University Press, 2013.
Berman, Sheri. “Civil Society and the Collapse of the Weimar Republic.” World Poli-
tics 49, no. 3 (1997).
Bernard, Maurice. La méritocratie française: Les élites française. Essai critique, 2 vols. 
Paris: L’Harmattan, 2010.
Bialystok, E., F.I.M. Craik, M. A. Binns, L. Ossher, and M. Freedman. “Effects of Bi-
lingualism on the Age of Onset and Progression of MCI and AD: Evidence from 
Executive Function Tests.” Neuropsychology 28, no. 2 (2014).
Bloom, Allan. “Interpretive Essay.” In The Republic of Plato, trans. Allan Bloom. 2nd 
ed. New York: Basic Books, 1991.
Bo, Zhiyue. China’s Elite Politics: Governance and Democratization. Hackensack, 
N.J.: World Scientific, 2010.
Bol, Peter K. Neo- Confucianism in History. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Asia 
Center, 2008.
Brennan, Jason. The Ethics of Voting. Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press, 
2011.
———. “Political Liberty: Who Needs It?” Social Philosophy and Policy 29, no. 1 (2012).
———. “The Right to a Competent Electorate.” Philosophical Quarterly 61, no. 245 
(2011).
Brunell, Thomas L. “Ideological Representation and Competitive Congressional 
Elections.” Electoral Studies 28, no. 3 (Sept. 2009).
Bulman, David J. “Promotion- Based Incentives for Growth: Evidence from the County 
Level in Jiangsu and Anhui.” Paper presented at the Association for Asian Studies 
Annual Conference, San Diego, Mar. 2013.
Burns, John P. “The CCP’s Nomenklatura System as a Leadership Selection System: 
An Evaluation.” In The Chinese Communist Party in Reform, ed. Kjeld Erik Brods-
gaard and Zheng Yongnian. London: Routledge, 2006.

 
Selected Bibliography 
285
Burns, John P., and Wang Xiaoqi. “Civil Service Reform in China: Impacts on Civil 
Servants’ Behavior.” China Quarterly 201 (Mar. 2010).
Burns, John P., et al., eds. “Provisional Chinese Public Service Regulations.” In Chi-
nese Law and Government. New York: M. E. Sharpe, 1990.
Caplan, Bryan. The Myth of the Rational Voter: Why Democracies Choose Bad Policies. 
Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press, 2007.
Carlson, Allen. “Reimagining the Frontier: Patters of Sinicization and the Emergence 
of New Thinking about China’s Territorial Periphery.” Paper presented at the Civi-
lizations and Sinicization Workshop, Beijing University, 25–26 Mar. 2011.
Carr, Nicholas. The Shallows: What the Internet Is Doing to Our Brains. New York: 
Norton, 2011.
Castiglione, Baldassare. The Book of the Courtier, trans. Sir Thomas Hoby, introduc-
tion by Walter Raleigh. London: David Nutt, 1900 [orig. pub. 1561].
CCP Central Committee et al. Zhongyang jiguan jiqi zhishu jigou 2013 niandu kaoshi 
luyong gongwuyuan gonggong kemu kaoshi dagang [2013 National Public Service 
Examination Syllabus for Central- Level Organs and Direct Subordinate Organiza-
tions]. http://bm.scs.gov.cn/2013/UserControl/download/2013zkjz.rar.
Chaffee, John W. The Thorny Gates of Learning in Sung China, new ed. Albany: State 
University of New York Press, 1995.
Chaihark, Hahm. “Constitutionalism, Confucian Civic Virtue, and Ritual Propriety.” 
In Confucianism for the Modern World, ed. Daniel A. Bell and Hahm Chaibong. 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2003.
Chan, Hon S., and Jie Gao. “Old Wine in New Bottles: A County- Level Case Study of 
Anti- Corruption Reform in the People’s Republic of China.” Crime, Law and So-
cial Change 49, no. 2 (Mar. 2008).
Chan, Joseph. Confucian Perfectionism: A Political Philosophy for Modern Times. 
Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press, 2014.
———. “Political Meritocracy and Meritorious Rule: A Confucian Perspective.” In 
The East Asian Challenge for Democracy, ed. Daniel A. Bell and Chenyang Li. New 
York: Cambridge University Press, 2013.
Chandler, J. A. “Civil Service in the United States.” In The Civil Service in Liberal 
Democracies: An Introductory Survey, ed. J. E. Kindom. London: Routledge, 
1990.
Chen, Albert H. Y. “Mediation, Litigation, and Justice: Confucian Reflections in a 
Modern Liberal Society.” In Confucianism for the Modern World, ed. Daniel A. Bell 
and Hahm Chaibong. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2003.
Chen, Guoping. “Mingdai guanyuan kaohe zhidu shulun” [On the Assessment Sys-
tem of Public Officials in the Ming Dynasty], Zhongguo zhengfayuan xuebao 1 
(1993).
Chen, Lai. Kongfuzi yu xiandai shijie [Confucius and the Modern World]. Beijing: 
Peking University Press, 2011.
Chen, Minglu, and David S. G. Goodman. “The China Model: One Country, Six 
Authors.” Journal of Contemporary China 21, no. 73 (Jan. 2011).

286 
Selected Bibliography 
Cheng, Chung- ying, et al. Special issue: “Legalist Philosophy of Han Fei.” Journal of 
Chinese Philosophy 8, no. 1 (Mar. 2013).
Cheng, Tongshun, and Zhang Wenjun. “Wangluo fanfu tisheng zhengzhi xinren de 
luoji pipan” [Criticism of the Argument That Online Anti- Corruption Campaigns 
Strengthen Trust in Government]. Lilun yu gaige 4 (2013).
Ch’ien, Mu [Qian Mu]. Traditional Government in Imperial China: A Critical Analy-
sis, trans. Chu- tu Hsueh and George O. Totten. Hong Kong: Chinese University 
Press, 1982.
Chin, Gregory T. “Innovation and Preservation: Remaking China’s National Leader-
ship Training System.” China Quarterly 205 (Mar. 2011).
Cho, Il Yun. “Democratic Instability: Democratic Consolidation, National Identity 
and Security Dynamics in East Asia.” Foreign Policy Analysis 8, no. 2 (Apr. 2012).
Christiano, Thomas. “An Instrumental Argument for a Human Right to Democracy.” 
Philosophy and Public Affairs 39, no. 2 (2011).
Chu, Hsi. Learning to Be a Sage, trans. Daniel K. Gardner. Berkeley: University of 
California Press, 1990.
Chu, Yun- han, Yu- tzung Chang, and Wen- Chin Wu. “Sources of Regime Legitimacy 
in Confucian Societies.” Paper presented at the conference on “Confucianism, De-
mocracy, and Constitutionalism: Global and East Asian Perspectives,” National 
Taiwan University, 14–15 June 2013.
Chua, Jeffrey, Larry Kamener, and Michael Shanahan. “The Making of a Talent Mag-
net: Lessons from Singapore’s Public Service.” Boston Consulting Group, May 
2012.
Coicaud, Jean- Marc. “Legitimacy, across Borders and over Time.” In Fault Lines of 
International Legitimacy, ed. Hilary Charlesworth and Jean- Marc Coicaud. Cam-
bridge: Cambridge University Press, 2010.
Collier, Paul. Wars, Guns, and Votes: Democracy in Dangerous Places. London: Vin-
tage, 2010).
Collins, Harry, and Robert Evans. Rethinking Expertise. Chicago: University of Chi-
cago Press, 2009.
Confucius. The Analects of Confucius: A Philosophical Translation, trans. Roger T. 
Ames and Henry Rosemont Jr. New York: Ballantine Books, 1998.
Correll, Shelly J. “Minimizing the Motherhood Penalty: What Works, What Doesn’t 
and Why?” Paper presented at conference on “Gender & Work: Challenging Con-
ventional Wisdom,” Harvard Business School, 28 Feb.–1 Mar. 2013. http://www 
.hbs.edu/faculty/conferences/2013-w50-research-symposium/Documents/correll 
.pdf.
Cui, Zhiyuan. “Partial Intimations of the Coming Whole: The Chongqing Experi-
ment in Light of the Theories of Henry George, James Meade, and Antonio 
Gramsci.” Modern China 37, no. 6 (2011).
Cummins, Denise D. Good Thinking: Seven Powerful Ideas That Influence the Way We 
Think. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2012.
Delman, Jørgen. “China’s ‘Radicalism at the Center’: Regime Legitimation through 

 
Selected Bibliography 
287
Climate Politics and Climate Governance.” Journal of Chinese Political Science 16, 
no. 2 (June 2011).
Delorme, Marie- Laure. Les allées du pouvoir. Paris: Seuil, 2011.
De Weerdt, Hilde. Competition over Content: Negotiating Standards for the Civil Ser-
vice Examinations in Imperial China (1127–1279). Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard 
University Asia Center, 2007.
Dickson, Bruce J. “Who Wants to Be a Communist? Career Incentives and Mobilized 
Loyalty in China.” China Quarterly 217 (Mar. 2014).
Dobbs, David. “Appendix: A Geek Manifesto for America.” In Mark Henderson, The 
Geek Manifesto: Why Science Matters. London: Corgi Books, 2012.
Dodson, Bill. China Fast Forward: The Technologies, Green Industries and Innovations 
Driving the Mainland’s Future. Singapore: John Wiley & Sons, 2012.
Doh, Chull Shin. Confucianism and Democratization in East Asia. Cambridge: Cam-
bridge University Press, 2011.
———. “How East Asians View Democracy: A Confucian Perspective.” In The East 
Asian Challenge for Democracy, ed. Daniel A. Bell and Chenyang Li. New York: 
Cambridge University Press, 2013.
Donaldson, Sue, and Will Kymlicka. Zoopolis: A Political Theory of Animal Rights. 
Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2011.
Dong, Bin, and Benno Torgler. “Causes of Corruption: Evidence from China.” China 
Economic Review 26 (2013).
Doshi, Tilak, and Peter Coclanis. “The Economic Architect: Goh Keng Swee.” In 
Lee’s Lieutenants: Singapore’s Old Guard, ed. Peng Er Lam and Kevin Tan. St. 
Leonards, N.S.W.: Allen & Unwin, 1999.
Drechsler, Wolfgang. “Wang Anshi and the Origins of Modern Public Management in 
Song Dynasty China.” Public Money and Management 33, no. 4 (Sept. 2013).
Du, Lun. “ ‘Renxue hefaxing sixiang’ gaiyao jiqi xianshi yiyi” [Outline and the Practi-
cal Meaning of “The Theory of a Legitimate Humane Government”]. Paper pre-
sented at “The Fifth Congress of the International Confucian Association, Beijing, 
23–26 Sept. 2009. In Guoji ruxue yanjiu, China (2010).
Elman, Benjamin A. Civil Examinations and Meritocracy in Late Imperial China. 
Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 2013.
———. A Cultural History of Civil Examinations in Late Imperial China. Berkeley: 
University of California Press, 2000.
———. “A Society in Motion: Unexpected Consequences of Political Meritocracy in 
Late Imperial China, 1400–1900.” In The East Asian Challenge for Democracy, ed. 
Daniel A. Bell and Chenyang Li. New York: Cambridge University Press, 2013.
Fan, Ruiping. “Confucian Meritocracy for Contemporary China.” In The East Asian 
Challenge for Democracy, ed. Daniel A. Bell and Chenyang Li. New York: Cam-
bridge University Press, 2013.
Fewsmith, Joseph. “Inner- Party Democracy: Development and Limitations.” China 
Leadership Monitor, no. 31 (Winter 2010). http://media.hoover.org/sites/default/files 
/documents/CLM31JF.pdf.

288 
Selected Bibliography 
Flaum, Sander A., and Jonathon A. Flaum, with Mechele Flaum. The 100- Mile Walk: 
A Father and a Son Find the Essence of Leadership. New York: American Manage-
ment Association, 2006.
Fleischacker, Samuel. A Short History of Distributive Justice. Cambridge, Mass.: Har-
vard University Press, 2005.
Florini, Ann, Hairong Lai, and Yeling Tan. China Experiments: From Local Innovation 
to National Reform. Washington, D.C.: Brookings Institution Press, 2012.
Frenkiel, Émilie. Parler politique en Chine: Les intellectuels chinois pour ou contre la 
démocratie [Talking about Politics in China: Chinese Intellectuals for or against 
Democracy]. Paris: Presses Universitaires de France, 2014.
Fu, Zhengyuan. Autocratic Tradition and Chinese Politics. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press, 1993.
Fukuyama, Francis. The Origins of Political Order: From Prehuman Times to the French 
Revolution. New York: Farrar, Straus, and Giroux, 2011.
———. Political Order and Political Decay: From the Industrial Revolution to the Glo-
balization of Democracy. New York: Farrar, Straus, and Giroux, 2014.
Gallagher, Kelly Sims, and Qi Ye. “Climate and Clean Energy.” In Debating China: 
The U.S.–China Relationship in Ten Conversations. Oxford: Oxford University 
Press, 2014.
Galvany, Albert. “Sly Mouths and Silver Tongues: The Dynamics of Psychological 
Persuasion in Ancient China.” Extrême- Orient, Extrême- Occident 34 (2012).
Gan, Chunsong. Chonghui Wangdao: Rujia yu shijie zhixu [A Return to the Way of 
the Humane Authority: Confucianism and the World Order]. Shanghai: Huadong 
shifan daxue chubanshe, 2012.
Gao, Minzheng. “Zhongguoshi minzhu ye shi ge hao dongxi—You ‘Minzhu shi ge 
hao dongxi’ yinfa de ji dian sikao” [Chinese- Style Democracy Is Also a Good 
Thing—A Few Thoughts Sparked by “Democracy Is a Good Thing”]. Tansuo yu 
zhengming 11 (2013).
General Office of the State Council of the People’s Republic of China, ed. Guowuyuan 
gongbao [Bulletin of the State Council], Beijing, no. 5 (1991).
Gilens, Martin, and Benjamin I. Page. “Testing Theories of American Politics: Elites, 
Interest Groups, and Average Citizens.” Perspectives on Politics 12, no. 3 (Sept. 
2014).
Goffee, Robert, and Gareth Jones. “Why Should Anyone Be Led by You?” In On Lead-
ership. Boston: Harvard Business Review Press, 2011.
Goldin, Claudia, and Laurence F. Katz. The Race between Education and Technology. 
Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 2010.
Goldin, Paul R., ed. Dao Companion to the Philosophy of Han Fei. Dordrecht: 
Springer, 2013.
Goldstein, Rebecca Newberger. Plato at the Googleplex: Why Philosophy Won’t Go 
Away. New York: Pantheon Books, 2014.
Goleman, Daniel. “What Makes a Leader?” In On Leadership. Boston: Harvard Busi-
ness Review Press, 2011.

 
Selected Bibliography 
289
Goleman, Daniel, Richard Boyatzis, and Annie McKee. Primal Leadership: Realizing 
the Power of Emotional Intelligence. Boston: Harvard Business School Press, 2002.
Gong, Ting, and Jianming Ren. “Hard Rules and Soft Constraints: Regulating Con-
flict of Interest in China.” Journal of Contemporary China 22, no. 79 (2013).
Gong, Ting, and Alfred M. Wu. “Does Increased Civil Service Pay Deter Corruption? 
Evidence from China.” Review of Public Personnel Administration 32 (2012).
Gong, Ting, and Wu Muluan. “Wo guo 2000–2009 nian fubai anli yanjiu baogao: Jiyu 
2800 yu ge baodao anli de fenxi” [Research Report on China’s Corruption Cases 
between 2000 and 2009: An Empirical Analysis of 2800 Cases]. Shehuixue yanjiu 4 
(2012).
Graffin, Dennis. “Reinventing China: Pseudobureaucracy in the Early Southern Dy-
nasties.” In State and Society in Early Medieval China, ed. Albert Dien. Stanford, 
Calif.: Stanford University Press, 1990.
Grant, Adam M., Francesca Gino, and David A. Hoffman. “The Hidden Advantages 
of Quiet Bosses.” Harvard Business Review, Dec. 2010.
Green, Jeffrey Edward. The Eyes of the People: Democracy in an Age of Spectatorship. 
Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2011.
Greenspan, Alan. The Map and the Territory: Risk, Human Nature, and the Future of 
Forecasting. New York: Penguin, 2013.
Grossman, I., M. Karasawa, S. Izumi, J. Na, M. Varnum, S. Kitayama, and R. Nisbett. 
“Aging and Wisdom: Culture Matters.” Psychological Science 23, no. 10 (2012).
Groysberg, Boris. Chasing Stars: The Myth of Talent and the Portability of Performance. 
Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press, 2010.
Groysberg, Boris, and Katherine Connolly. “Great Leaders Who Make the Mix Work.” 
Harvard Business Review, Sept. 2013.
Gu, Xiangdong, Louise T. Higgins, Lixiang Weng, and Xiaoye Holt. “Civil Service 
Leadership Selection in China: Historical Evolution and Current Status.” Journal 
of Chinese Human Resource Management 3, no. 1 (2012).
Guo, Baogang. China’s Quest for Political Legitimacy: The New Equity- Enhancing 
Politics. Lanham, Md.: Lexington Books, 2010.
Guo, Jie, Yang Jie, and Cheng Xu. “Diqu fubai zhili yu zhengfu zhichu guimo: Jiyu 
shengji mianban shuju de kongjian jiliang fenxi” [The Regulation of Local Corrup-
tion and the Scale of Government: A Spatial Economic Analysis Based on Provin-
cial Panel Data]. Jingji shehui tizhi bijiao 1 (2013).
Gürpinar, Doğan. Ottoman Imperial Diplomacy: A Political, Social and Cultural His-
tory. London: I. B. Tauris, 2014.
Gutmann, Amy, and Dennis Thompson. Democracy and Disagreement. Cambridge, 
Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1998.
Hacker, Jacob S., and Paul Pierson. Winner- Take- All Politics: How Washington Made 
the Rich Richer—and Turned Its Back on the Middle Class. New York: Simon and 
Schuster, 2010.
Hall, Stephen S. Wisdom: From Philosophy to Neuroscience. New York: Vintage Books, 
2010.

290 
Selected Bibliography 
Han, Fook Kwang, Warren Fernandez, and Sumiko Tan. Lee Kuan Yew: The Man and 
His Ideas. Singapore: Times Editions, 1998.
Hardin, Russell. “Morals for Public Officials.” In Moral Leadership: The Theory and 
Practice of Power, Judgment and Policy. San Francisco: John Wiley & Sons, 2006.
Hayek, Friedrich A. von. Law, Legislation, and Liberty, vol. 3, The Political Order of a 
Free People. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1981.
Hayes, Christopher. Twilight of the Elites: America after Meritocracy. New York: 
Crown, 2012.
He, Baogang. “Confucian Deliberation: The Persistence of Authoritarian Deliberation 
in China.” Paper presented at the “International Conference on Confucianism, 
Democracy, and Constitutionalism: Global and East Asian Perspectives,” National 
Taiwan University, 14–15 June 2013. 
———. “An Empirical Theory of Hybrid Legitimacy System in China.” Paper pre-
sented at workshop on “East Asian Perspectives on Political Legitimacy,” University 
of Hong Kong, 18–19 Aug. 2011.
He, Baogang, and Mark E. Warren. “Authoritarian Deliberation: The Deliberative 
Turn in Chinese Political Development.” Perspectives on Politics 9, no. 2 (June 
2011).
Hegel, G.W.F. Elements of the Philosophy of Right, trans. H. B. Nisbet. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press, 1991.
Heilmann, Sebastian. “From Local Experiments to National Policy: The Origins of 
China’s Distinctive Policy Process.” China Journal 59 (Jan. 2008).
———. “Policy Experimentation in China’s Economic Rise.” Studies in Comparative 
International Development 43 (2008).
———. “Policy Making through Experimentation: The Formation of a Distinctive 
Policy Process.” In Mao’s Invisible Hand: The Political Foundations of Adaptive Gov-
ernance in China, ed. Sebastian Heilmann and Elizabeth Perry. Cambridge, Mass.: 
Harvard University Asia Center, 2011.
Henderson, Mark. The Geek Manifesto: Why Science Matters. London: Corgi Books, 
2012.
Henrich, Joseph, Steven J. Heine, and Ara Norenzayan. “The Weirdest People in the 
World?” Behavioral and Brain Sciences 33 (2010).
Herbert, Penelope A. Examine the Honest, Appraise the Able: Contemporary Assess-
ments of Civil Service Selection in Early T’ang China. Canberra: Faculty of Asian 
Studies, Australian National University Press, 1988.
Horowitz, Michael C., and Philip E. Tetlock. “Trending Upward: How the Intelli-
gence Community Can Better See into the Future.” Foreign Policy, 6 Sept. 2012.
Hou, Zanhua. “Lun zhuanbian jingji fazhan fangshi de zhengzhi dongli—Ji yu difang 
zhengfu dongli queshi de shijiao” [An Analysis of the Political Motivation for the 
Transformation of Economic Development—From the Perspective of the Lack of 
Motivation in the Local Government], Yunnan shehui kexue 4 (2012).
Howell, Jude. “Prospects for Village Self- Governance in China.” Journal of Peasant 
Studies 55, no. 3 (1998).

 
Selected Bibliography 
291
Hu, Shuli. “Changing Realities for Asian Women Leaders.” Global Asia 6, no. 3 (Fall 
2011).
Hu, Wei. “Minzhu zhengzhi fazhan de Zhongguo daolu: Dangnei minzhu moshi de 
xuanze” [China’s Road to Democratic Political Development: Choosing the Model 
of Intraparty Democracy]. Kexue shehuizhuyi 1 (2010).
Huang, Min- Hua. “Polarized Politics, Regime Evaluation and Democratic Legitimacy 
in Taiwan.” Paper presented at workshop on “East Asian Perspectives on Political 
Legitimacy,” University of Hong Kong, 18–19 Aug. 2011.
Huang, Ray. 1587, a Year of No Significance: The Ming Dynasty in Decline. New 
Haven, Conn.: Yale University Press, 1981.
Huang, Yasheng. “Democratize or Die: Why China’s Communists Face Reform or 
Revolution.” Foreign Affairs 92, no. 1 (Jan./Feb. 2013).
Huang, Zongxi. Waiting for the Dawn: A Plan for the Prince, trans. Wm. Theodore de 
Bary. New York: Columbia University Press, 1993.
Hulshof, Michiel, and Daan Roggeveen. “Black in China: The New Soft Power Ap-
proach.” Chengshi Zhongguo 63, no. 3 (2014).
———. How the City Moved to Mr. Sun: China’s New Megacities. Amsterdam: SUN, 
2011.
———. “Lekki, the Next African Shenzhen?” Chengshi Zhongguo: Zhongguoshi zao-
cheng zai Feizhou 63, no. 3 (2014).
Hung, Ho- fung. “Confucianism and Political Dissent in China.” East Asia Forum, 26 
July 2011.
———. Protest with Chinese Characteristics: Demonstrations, Riots, and Petitions in 
the Mid- Qing Dynasty. New York: Columbia University Press, 2011.
Huntington, Samuel P. Political Order in Changing Societies, new ed. New Haven, 
Conn.: Yale University Press, 2006.
Ignatieff, Michael. Fire and Ashes: Success and Failure in Politics. Cambridge, Mass.: 
Harvard University Press, 2013.
Imber, Colin. The Ottoman Empire, 2nd ed. Houndmills: Palgrave Macmillan, 2009.
Ip, Po- Keung. “Harmony as Happiness? Social Harmony in Two Chinese Societies.” 
Social Indicators Research, 117, no. 3 (2014).
Jacques, Martin. “How China Will Change the Global Political Map.” Transatlantic 
Academy, Mar. 2013.
Jiang, Qing. A Confucian Constitutional Order: How China’s Ancient Past Can Shape 
Its Political Future, ed. Daniel A. Bell and Fan Ruiping; trans. Edmund Ryden. 
Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press, 2012.
———. “Xianneng zhengzhi de zhidu jiagou: “Rujiao xianzheng” dui minzhuxian-
zheng de chaoyue yu xina” [The System and Structure of Political Meritocracy: 
How Confucian Constitutionalism Transcends and Learns from Democratic Poli-
tics]. Paper presented at conference “Quanguo zhengzhi ruxue he xiandai shijie 
taolun” [Political Confucianism and Its Contemporary Significance in China and 
the World], Tsinghua University, 27–28 Oct. 2012.
Johannsen, Lars, and Karin Hilmer Pedersen. “How to Combat Corruption: Assessing 

292 
Selected Bibliography 
Anti- Corruption Measures from a Civil Servant’s Perspective.” Administrative Cul-
ture 13, no. 2 (2012).
Joppke, Christian. “The Evolution of Alien Rights in the United States, Germany, and 
the European Union.” In Citizenship Today, ed. T. Alexander Aleinikoff and Doug-
las Klusmeyer. Washington, D.C.: Carnegie Endowment for International Peace, 
2001.
Kahn, Paul W. Putting Liberalism in Its Place. Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University 
Press, 2005.
Kahneman, Daniel. Thinking, Fast and Slow. London: Penguin, 2011.
Kallio, Jyrki. “Tradition in Chinese Politics.” In FIFA Report. Helsinki: Finnish Insti-
tute of International Affairs, 2011.
Kane, John, and Haig Patapan. The Democratic Leader: How Democracy Defines, Em-
powers, and Limits Its Leaders. New York: Oxford University Press, 2012.
Kang, Xiaoguang. Dangdai Zhongguo dalu: Wenhua minzuzhuyi yundong yanjiu 
[Contemporary Mainland China: Research on the Movement of Cultural Nation-
alism]. Singapore: World Scientific Publishing Co., 2008.
Kant, Immanuel. “Perpetual Peace.” In Kant: Political Writings, ed. Hans Reiss; trans. 
H. B. Nisbet. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1991.
Keane, John. The Life and Death of Democracy. London: Simon and Schuster, 2009.
Kelly, Jamie Terence. Framing Democracy: A Behavioral Approach to Democratic The-
ory. Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press, 2012.
Kett, Joseph F. Merit: The History of a Founding Ideal from the American Revolution to 
the 21st Century. Ithaca, N.Y.: Cornell University Press, 2013.
Keyssar, Alexander. The Right to Vote: The Contested History of Democracy in the 
United States. New York: Basic Books, 2009.
Kidd, David Comer, and Emanuele Castano. “Reading Literary Fiction Improves 
Theory of Mind.” Science, 18 Oct. 2013.
Kim, Dae Jung. “Is Culture Destiny? The Myth of Asian’s Anti- Democratic Values.” 
Foreign Affairs 73, no. 6 (Nov./Dec. 1994).
Kim, Sungmoon. “To Become a Confucian Democratic Citizen: Against Meritocratic 
Elitism.” British Journal of Political Science 43, no. 3 (July 2013).
King, Gary, Jennifer Pan, and Margaret E. Roberts. “How Censorship Allows Govern-
ment Criticism but Silences Collective Expression.” American Political Science Re-
view 107, no. 10 (May 2013).
Ko, Kilkon, and Cuifen Weng. “Structural Changes in Chinese Corruption.” China 
Quarterly 211 (Sept. 2012).
Kuhn, Dieter. The Age of Confucian Rule: The Song Transformation of China. Cam-
bridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 2009.
Kuhn, Robert L. How China’s Leaders Think: The Inside Story of China’s Past, Current 
and Future Leaders. Singapore: John Wiley & Sons, 2011.
Kupchan, Charles A. “The Democratic Malaise.” Foreign Affairs 91, no. 1 (Jan./Feb. 
2012).
Kwok, Kian- Woon. “The Social Architect: Goh Keng Swee.” In Lee’s Lieutenants: Sin-

 
Selected Bibliography 
293
gapore’s Old Guard, ed. Peng Er Lam and Kevin Tan. St. Leonards, N.S.W.: Allen 
& Unwin, 1999.
Lam, Peng Er. “The Voters Speak: Voices, Choices and Implications.” In Voting in 
Change: Politics of Singapore’s 2011 General Election, ed. Kevin Y. L. Tan and Ter-
ence Lee. Singapore: Ethos Books, 2011.
Landry, Pierre F. Decentralized Authoritarianism in China: The Communist Party’s 
Control of Local Elites in the Post- Mao Era. Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press, 2008.
Laqueur, Walter. “The Weimar Union: Europe, Back to the 30s.” New Republic, 2 
Aug. 2012.
Leboyer, Olivia. Élite et libéralisme. Paris: CNRS Éditions, 2012.
Lee, Edwin. Singapore: The Unexpected Nation. Singapore: ISEAS, 2008.
Lee, Hsiao- wen. “Public Opinion in China.” Policy Paper Series, no. 1, China Studies 
Center, University of Sydney, Oct. 2012.
Lee, Hsien Loong. “To Listen, Labour and Lead: Building a Better Singapore To-
gether.” Ethos 12 (June 2013).
Lee, Kuan Yew. From Third World to First: The Singapore Story, 1965–2000. New York: 
Harper, 2000.
Lee, Kuan Yew, and Fareed Zakaria. “Culture Is Destiny: A Conversation with Lee 
Kuan Yew.” Foreign Affairs 73, no. 2 (Mar./Apr. 1994).
Leib, Ethan, and He Baogang, eds. The Search for Deliberative Democracy in China. 
New York: Palgrave Macmillan, 2010.
Levine, Ari. Divided by a Common Language: Factional Conflict in Late Northern 
Song China. Honolulu: University of Hawai’i Press, 2008.
Lewis, Michael. The Big Short. London: Penguin, 2010.
———. Boomerang: The Biggest Bust. London: Penguin, 2011.
Li, Cheng. “The End of the CCP’s Resilient Authoritarianism: A Tripartite Assessment 
of Shifting Power in China.” China Quarterly 211 (Sept. 2012).
Li, Eric X. “The Life of the Party: The Post- Democratic Future Begins in China.” 
Foreign Affairs 92, no. 1 (Jan./Feb. 2013).
———. “Party of the Century: How China Is Reorganizing for the Future.” Foreign 
Affairs, 10 Jan. 2014.
Li, Hongbin, and Li- An Zhou. “Political Turnover and Economic Performance: The 
Incentive Role of Personnel Control in China.” Journal of Public Economics 89 
(2005).
Li, Jin. Cultural Foundations of Learning: East and West. Cambridge: Cambridge Uni-
versity Press, 2012.
Li, Yonggang, and Guan Yue. “Difang guanyuan jingzheng de zhengzhi jinbiaosai 
moxing ji qi youhua” [The Model for Competitive Promotion of Local Officials 
and Its Optimization]. Jiangsu xingzheng xueyuanbao 2, no. 56 (2011).
Liu, Haifeng. “Influence of China’s Imperial Examinations on Japan, Korea, and Viet-
nam.” Frontiers of Philosophy in China 2, no. 4 (Oct. 2007).
———. “Kejuzhi dui xifang kaoshi zhidu yingxiang xintan” [A New Exploration of the 

294 
Selected Bibliography 
Influence of the Imperial Examination System on Western Examination Systems]. 
Zhongguo shehui kexue 5 (2001).
Liu, Haifeng. “Kejuzhi yu xianneng zhiguo chuantong” [The Imperial Examination 
System and the Tradition of Building a Meritocratic State]. Paper presented at con-
ference “Quanguo zhengzhi ruxue he xiandai shijie taolun” [Political Confucian-
ism and Its Contemporary Significance in China and the World], Tsinghua Univer-
sity, 27–28 Oct. 2012.
Liu, Mingxing. Zhongguo nongcun caizheng tizhi gaige yu jiceng zhili jiegou bianqian 
[China’s Rural Fiscal System Reform and Structural Change of Local Governance]. 
Beijing: People’s Daily Press, 2013.
Liu, Yawei, et al. China Elections and Governance Review 1, no. 1 (Feb. 2009). http://
www.cartercenter.org/resources/pdfs/peace/china/CEG-review-issue1.pdf.
Liu, Zehua. “Wangquanzhuyi: Zhongguo sixiang wenhua de lishi dingwei” [Monar-
chism: A Historical Orientation of Chinese Intellectual Culture]. Tianjin shehui 
kexue 3 (1998).
Louie, K. S. “Village Self- Governance and Democracy in China: An Evaluation.” De-
mocratization 8, no. 4 (Winter 2001).
Loveband, Anne. “Positioning the Product: Indonesian Migrant Women Workers in 
Contemporary Taiwan.” Working Papers Series, no. 43, City University of Hong 
Kong, Apr. 2003.
Lui, Adam Yuen- Chung. “Syllabus of the Provincial Examination (Hsiang- shih) under 
the Early Ch’ing (1644–1795).” Modern Asian Studies (Cambridge University 
Press) 8, no. 3 (1974).
Ma, Jun. “Accountability without Elections.” In China 3.0, ed. Mark Leonard. Lon-
don: European Council on Foreign Relations, 2012. http://ecfr.eu/page/-/ECFR66 
_CHINA_30_final.pdf.
Ma, Jun, and Xing Ni. “Toward a Clean Government in China: Does the Budget Re-
form Provide a Hope?” Crime, Law and Social Change 49, no. 2 (Mar. 2008).
Ma, Liang. “Guanyuan jinsheng jili yu zhengfu jixiao mubiao shezhi: Zhongguo 
shengji mianban shuju de shizheng yanjiu” [Promotion Incentives of Government 
Officials and Government Performance Target- Setting: An Empirical Analysis of 
Provincial Panel Data in China]. Gonggong guanli xuebao 10, no. 2 (Apr. 2013).
Ma, Ling. “Daiyizhi dui minzhu de fenjie: Minzhu xuanju, minzhu juece he minzhu 
jiandu” [An Analysis of Representative Democracy: Democratic Elections, Demo-
cratic Decision- Making, and Democratic Supervision]. Zhanlue yu guanli 5, no. 6 
(2012).
Macedo, Stephen. “Meritocratic Democracy: Learning from the American Constitu-
tion.” In The East Asian Challenge for Democracy, ed. Daniel A. Bell and Chenyang 
Li. New York: Cambridge University Press, 2013.
Makeham, John. Lost Soul: “Confucianism” in Contemporary Chinese Academic Dis-
course. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Asia Center, 2008.
Manion, Melanie. Corruption by Design: Building Clean Government in Mainland 
China and Hong Kong. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 2004.

 
Selected Bibliography 
295
Mann, Michael. The Dark Side of Democracy: Explaining Ethnic Cleansing. Cam-
bridge: Cambridge University Press, 2005.
Mbiti, John. “ ‘Ancestors’ (Ancestral Spirits) as Aspects of African Ontology and Gene-
alogy.” Paper presented at the Chinese/African Philosophy Colloquium, Shanghai 
Jiaotong University, 10–12 May 2013.
McCarthy, Justin. The Ottoman Turks. London: Longman, 1997.
McCormick, B. L. “China’s Leninist Parliament and Public Sphere: A Comparative 
Analysis.” In China after Socialism: In the Footsteps of Eastern Europe or East Asia?, 
ed. B. L. McCormick and J. Unger. Armonk, N.Y.: M. E. Sharpe, 1996.
McCormick, John P. “Contain the Wealthy and Patrol the Magistrates: Restoring Elite 
Accountability to Popular Government.” American Political Science Review 100, no. 
2 (May 2006).
———. Machiavellian Democracy. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2011.
McGregor, Richard. The Party: The Secret World of China’s Communist Rulers. Lon-
don: Penguin, 2010.
Mei, Ciqi. “Bringing the Politics Back In: Political Incentives and Policy Distortion in 
China.” Ph.D dissertation, University of Maryland, College Park, 2009.
Mencius. Mencius, vols. 1–2, trans. D. C. Lau. Hong Kong: Chinese University Press, 
1984.
Micklethwait, John, and Adrian Wooldridge. The Fourth Revolution: The Global Race 
to Reinvent the State. New York: Penguin, 2014.
Mill, John Stuart. “Considerations on Representative Government” [orig. pub. 1861]. 
In Collected Works of John Stuart Mill, ed. J. M. Robson. Toronto: University of 
Toronto Press, 1977.
———. “On Liberty.” In Three Essays. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1975.
Miller, Richard. “How Does Political Equality Matter? Mencius Meets Walt Whit-
man.” Paper presented at the “Philosophy and Public Policy” Colloquium, Wuhan 
University, 22–23 Mar. 2014.
Miller, Tom, and Warren Lu. “Better Governance through Kung- Fu.” Gavekal Drago-
nomics China Research, 14 Feb. 2014.
Miyazaki, Ichisada. China’s Examination Hell: The Civil Service Examinations of Im-
perial China, trans. Conrad Schirokauer. New Haven, Conn.: Yale University Press, 
1976.
Mo, Jongryn. “The Challenge of Accountability: Implications of the Censorate.” In 
Confucianism for the Modern World, ed. Daniel A. Bell and Hahm Chaibong. 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2003.
Mount, Ferdinand. The New Few, or A Very British Oligarchy: Power and Inequality in 
Britain Now. New York: Simon and Schuster, 2012.
Mulgan, Tim. Ethics for a Broken World: Imagining Philosophy after Catastrophe. 
Montreal: McGill–Queen’s University Press, 2011.
Mutz, Diana. Hearing the Other Side: Deliberative versus Participatory Democracy. 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2006.

296 
Selected Bibliography 
Nadeau, Jean- Benoît, and Julie Barlow. Sixty Million Frenchmen Can’t Be Wrong 
(Why We Love France but Not the French). Naperville, Ill.: Sourcebooks, 2003.
Nair, Chandran. Consumptionomics: Asia’s Role in Reshaping Capitalism and Saving 
the Planet. Oxford: Infinite Ideas Limited, 2011.
Naisbitt, John, and Doris Naisbitt. China’s Megatrends: The 8 Pillars of a New Society. 
New York: Harper Business, 2010.
Naudet, Jules. Entrer dans l’élite: Parcours de réussite en France, aux États- Unis et en 
Inde [Entering the Elite: Paths to Success in France, the United States, and India]. 
Paris: Presses Universitaires de France, 2012.
Naughton, Barry. “China’s Distinctive System: Can It Be a Model for Others?” Journal 
of Contemporary China 19, no. 65 (June 2010).
Nisbett, Richard E. Intelligence and How to Get It: Why Schools and Cultures Count. 
New York: Norton, 2009.
Noah, Timothy. The Great Divergence: America’s Growing Inequality Crisis and What 
We Can Do about It. New York: Bloomsbury Press, 2012.
Noblo, Michael A., et al. “Who Wants to Deliberate—and Why?” Faculty Research 
Working Paper Series, Kennedy School, Harvard University, Sept. 2009.
Nussbaum, Martha C. Not for Profit: Why Democracy Needs the Humanities. Princeton, 
N.J.: Princeton University Press, 2010.
O’Brien, Kevin J., and Rongbin Han. “Path to Democracy? Assessing Village Elections 
in China.” Journal of Contemporary China 18, no. 60 (June 2009).
O’Brien, Kevin J., and Lianjiang Li. “Accommodating ‘Democracy’ in a One- Party 
State: Introducing Village Elections in China.” China Quarterly 162 (June 2000).
Ober, Josiah. “Democracy’s Wisdom: An Aristotelian Middle Way for Collective Judg-
ment.” American Political Science Review 107, no. 1 (Feb. 2013).
———. Political Dissent in Democratic Athens: Intellectual Critics of Popular Rule. 
Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press, 1998.
Organization Department of the CCP Central Committee, ed. Dang de zuzhi gong-
zuo wenxian xuanbian [Collection on the Party’s Organizational Work]. Beijing: 
CCP School Publishing House, 1986.
Ouyang, Jing. “ ‘Guanxi’ ruhe, yuanhe yingxiang jiceng guanyuan jinsheng” [How 
Personal Relations Influence the Promotion of Grassroots Officials in a Differenti-
ated Model Association]. Gansu xingzheng xueyuan xuebao 1 (2012).
Pan, Chunyang, He Lixin, and Yuan Congshuai. “Caizheng fenquan yu guanyuan 
fubai: Jiyu 1999–2007 nian zhongguo shengji mianban shuju de shizheng yanjiu” 
[Fiscal Decentralization and the Corruption of Cadres: An Empirical Study Based 
on China’s Provincial Data from 1997 to 2007]. Dangdai caijing 3, no. 316 (2011).
Pan, Wei. “Western System Versus Chinese System.” University of Nottingham, China 
Policy Institute, Briefing Series, no. 61, July 2010.
———, ed. Zhongguo moshi: Jiedu renmin gongheguo de 60 nian [China Model: Ex-
plaining Sixty Years of the People’s Republic]. Beijing: Zhongyang bianyi chuban-
she, 2009.

 
Selected Bibliography 
297
Pastor, Robert A., and Qingshan Tan. “The Meaning of China’s Village Elections.” 
China Quarterly 162 (June 2000).
Peerenboom, Randall. China Modernizes: Threat to the West or Model for the Rest? 
Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2008.
Pettit, Philip. “Meritocratic Representation.” In The East Asian Challenge for Democ-
racy: Political Meritocracy in Comparative Perspective, ed. Daniel A. Bell and 
Chenyang Li. New York: Cambridge University Press, 2013.
Pieke, Frank N. The Good Communist: Elite Training and State Building in Today’s 
China. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2009.
Piketty, Thomas. Capital in the Twenty- First Century, trans. Arthur Goldhammer. 
Cambridge, Mass.: Belknap Press, 2014.
Pines, Yuri. “Between Merit and Pedigree: Evolution of the Concept of ‘Elevating the 
Worthy’ in Pre- imperial China.” In The East Asian Challenge for Democracy, ed. 
Daniel A. Bell and Chenyang Li. New York: Cambridge University Press, 2013.
———. The Everlasting Empire: The Political Culture of Ancient China and Its Impe-
rial Legacy. Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press, 2012.
Plato. The Republic, trans. Desmond Lee. Harmondsworth: Penguin, 1974.
Poocharoen, Ora- orn, and Alex Brillantes. “Meritocracy in Asia Pacific: Status, Issues, 
and Challenges.” Review of Public Personnel Administration 33 (Apr. 2013).
Powell, Jonathan. The New Machiavelli: How to Wield Power in the Modern World. 
London: Vintage Books, 2010.
Pu, Xingzu. “Yi renda minzhu wei zhongdian jixu tuijin Zhongguo minzhu zhengzhi 
de fazhan” [Continuously Carrying Forward the Development of Democracy Poli-
tics in China by Focusing on the National People’s Congress]. Fudan xuebao (she-
hui kexue) 5 (2005).
Qian, Mu. Guoshi xinlun [New Studies of Chinese History]. Taipei: Dongda Publish-
ing, 2004.
Qiao, Kunyuan. “Wo guo guanyuan jinsheng jinbiaosai jizhi de zai kaocha: Lai zi 
sheng, shi liang ji zhengfu de zhengju” [A Reexamination of the Mechanism for 
Competitive Promotion in China: Evidence from Provincial and Municipal Gov-
ernments]. Caijing yanjiu 39, no. 4 (Apr. 2013).
Qiao, Liang. “For Harmony and How Not to Get Promoted: The Downgraded Chi-
nese Regional Leaders.” Journal of Chinese Political Science 19 (2013).
Qin, Ailing. “Zhongjiwei biange” [Reform of the Central Commission for Discipline 
Inspection]. Nanfeng chuang 4 (13–26 Feb. 2014).
Quah, Jon S. T. Combating Corruption Singapore- Style: Lessons for Other Asian Coun-
tries. Maryland Series in Contemporary Asian Studies, no. 2. Baltimore: School of 
Law, University of Maryland, 2007.
Ramo, Joshua Cooper. The Age of the Unthinkable: Why the New World Disorder Con-
stantly Surprises Us. New York: Back Bay Books, 2009.
Rawls, John. A Theory of Justice. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1972.
Rejali, Darius. Torture and Democracy. Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press, 
2007.

298 
Selected Bibliography 
Ren, Jianming, and Du Zhizhou. “Institutionalized Corruption: Power Overconcen-
tration of the First- in- Command in China.” Crime, Law and Social Change 49, no. 
1 (Feb. 2008).
Ren, Jiantao. “Jiazhi yinni yu zhishi niuqu: Liu meiguo zhengzhixue boshi dui minzhu 
de juchi” [Hidden Values and Distortion of Knowledge: The Rejection of Democ-
racy by Chinese Scholars Who Have Received Ph.D.s in Political Science in the 
United States]. Zhanlue yu guanli 1 (2012).
Rhode, Deborah L. “Introduction.” In Moral Leadership: The Theory and Practice of 
Power, Judgment and Policy. San Francisco: John Wiley & Sons, 2006.
Risse, Mathias. “Arguing for Majority Rule.” Journal of Political Philosophy 12, no. 1 
(2004).
———. On Global Justice. Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press, 2012.
———. “The Virtuous Group—Foundations for the ‘Argument from the Wisdom of 
the Multitude.’ ” Canadian Journal of Philosophy 31, no. 1 (Mar. 2001).
Rossiter, Clinton. The American Presidency, 2nd ed. New York: Time Inc., 1963.
Rothstein, Bo. “Creating Political Legitimacy: Electoral Government Versus Quality 
of Government.” American Behavioral Scientist 53 (2009).
Runciman, David. The Confidence Trap: A History of Democracy in Crisis from World 
War I to the Present. Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press, 2013.
Sabl, Andrew. Ruling Passions: Political Offices and Democratic Ethics. Princeton, 
N.J.: Princeton University Press, 2002.
Saby, Olivier. Promotion Ubu roi: Mes 27 mois sur les bancs de l’ENA. Paris: Flam-
marion, 2012.
Sagar, Rahul. “Presaging the Moderns: Demosthenes’ Critique of Popular Govern-
ment.” Journal of Politics 71, no. 4 (Oct. 2009).
Saint Gregory the Great. The Book of Pastoral Rule, trans. George E. Demacopoulos. 
Crestwood, N.Y.: St. Vladimir’s Seminary Press, 2007.
Schak, David C. “The Development of Civility in Taiwan.” Pacific Affairs 82, no. 3 
(Fall 2009).
Schmitter, Philippe C. “Reflections on Political Meritocracy: Its Manipulation and 
Transformation.” In The East Asian Challenge for Democracy, ed. Daniel A. Bell 
and Chenyang Li. New York: Cambridge University Press, 2013.
———. “What Is Political Legitimacy and How Can It Be Acquired? Lessons from a 
Deviant Case.” In Reviving Legitimacy: Lessons for and from China, ed. Deng 
Zhenglai and Sujian Guo. Lanham, Md.: Lexington Books, 2011.
Schneider, Henrique. “Legalism: Chinese- Style Constitutionalism?” Journal of Chi-
nese Philosophy 38, no. 1 (Mar. 2011).
Schram, Stuart. Mao Tse- Tung. London: Simon & Schuster, 1966.
Schubert, Gunter. “Village Elections, Citizenship and Regime Legitimacy in Con-
temporary Rural China.” In Regime Legitimacy in Contemporary China: Institu-
tional Change and Stability, ed. Thomas Heberer and Gunter Schubert. London: 
Routledge, 2009.

 
Selected Bibliography 
299
Schwab, Klaus, Lee Howell, et al. Global Risks 2012, 7th ed. Geneva: World Eco-
nomic Forum, 2012.
Sen, Amartya. Democracy as Freedom. New York: Anchor, 1999.
Shell, Orville. “China: Humiliation and the Olympics.” New York Review of Books, 14 
Aug. 2008.
Shell, Orville, and John Delury. Wealth and Power: China’s Long March to the Twenty- 
First Century. London: Little, Brown, 2013.
Sheng, Hong. Jingjixue jingshen [The Spirit of Economics]. Guangzhou: Guangdong 
Jingji, 1999.
Shi, Tianjian. “China: Democratic Values Supporting an Authoritarian System.” In 
How East Asians View Democracy, ed. Yun- Han Chu, Larry Diamond, Andrew J. 
Nathan, and Doh Chull Shin. New York: Columbia University Press, 2008.
———. The Cultural Logic of Politics in Mainland China and Taiwan. New York: 
Cambridge University Press, 2015.
Shi, Tianjian, and Lu Jie. “Cultural Impacts on People’s Understanding of Democ-
racy.” Paper presented at the 2010 American Political Science Association Annual 
Meeting, Washington, D.C., 1–5 Sept.
———. “The Shadow of Confucianism.” Journal of Democracy 21, no. 4 (Oct. 2010).
Shih, Victor, Christopher Adolf, and Mingxing Liu. “Getting Ahead in the Commu-
nist Party: Explaining the Advancements of Central Committee Members in 
China.” American Political Science Review 106 (Feb. 2012).
Shu, Hede, Yu Minzhong, et al. Qinding Shengchao Xunjie Zhuchen Lu [Records of 
the Royal Officials Who Sacrificed Themselves for the Previous Dynasty]. Shang-
hai: Shanghai guji chubanshe, 1987.
Shue, Vivienne. “China: Transition Postponed?” Problems of Communism 41, nos. 1–2 
(Jan.–Apr. 1992).
Sintomer, Yves. Petite histoire de l’expérimentation démocratique: Tirage au sort et poli-
tique d’Athènes à nos jours [A Short History of Democratic Experimentation: Selec-
tion by Lot from Athens to the Present]. Paris: La Découverte, 2011.
Slater, Dan, and Joseph Wong. “The Strength to Concede: Ruling Parties and Democ-
ratization in Developmental Asia.” Perspectives on Politics 11, no. 3 (Sept. 2013).
Slingerland, Edward. Trying Not to Try: The Art and Science of Spontaneity. New York: 
Crown, 2014.
Smith, Richard J. The I Ching: A Biography. Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University 
Press, 2012.
Song, Jaeyoon. “Redefining Good Government: Shifting Paradigms in Song Dynasty 
(960–1279) Discourse on Fengjian.” T’oung Pao 97 (2011).
———. “The Zhou Li and Constitutionalism: A Southern Song Political Theory.” 
Journal of Chinese Philosophy 36, no. 3 (Sept. 2009).
Sosa, Luis A. “Wages and Other Determinants of Corruption.” Review of Development 
Economics 8, no. 4 (Nov. 2004).
Spence, Jonathan D. Return to Dragon Mountain: Memories of a Late Qing Man. 
New York: Penguin, 2007.

300 
Selected Bibliography 
Stark, Andrew. “Charting a Democratic Future in China.” Dissent, Summer 2012.
Stone, Richard. “Climate Talks Still at Impasse, China Buffs Its Green Reputation.” 
Science, 15 Oct. 2010.
Su, Yutang, ed. Guojia gongwuyuan zhidu jianghua [The Discourse on the State Civil 
Service System]. Beijing: Labor and Personnel Publishing House, 1989.
Sun, Xin, Travis J. Warner, Dali L. Yang, and Mingxing Liu. “Patterns of Authority and 
Governance in Rural China: Who’s in Charge? Why?” Journal of Contemporary 
China 22, no. 83 (Sept. 2013).
Sun, Yan. “Cadre Recruitment and Corruption: What Goes Wrong?” Crime, Law and 
Social Change 49, no. 1 (Mar. 2008).
———. Corruption and Market in Contemporary China. Ithaca, N.Y.: Cornell Univer-
sity Press, 2004.
Sun, Yan, and Michael Johnston. “Does Democracy Check Corruption? Insights from 
China and India.” Comparative Politics 42, no. 1 (Oct. 2009).
Sun, Yat- sen. Prescriptions for Saving China: Selected Writings of Sun Yat- sen, ed. Julie 
Lee Wei, Ramon H. Myers, and Donald G. Gillin; trans. Julie Lee Wei, E- su Zen, 
and Linda Chao. Stanford, Calif.: Hoover Institution Press, 1994.
Sunstein, Cass R. “The Enlarged Republic—Then and Now.” New York Review of 
Books, 26 Mar. 2009.
Tan, Eugene K. B. “Re- engaging Chineseness: Political, Economic and Cultural Im-
peratives of Nation- Building in Singapore.” China Quarterly 175 (Sept. 2003).
Tan, Fuxian. “Xin xingshi xia jiaqiang ganbu de de kaohe pingjia wenti yanjiu” [Re-
search on Strengthening Moral Evaluation in the Selection of Cadres under New 
Conditions]. Xiandai rencai 6 (2010).
Tan, Kenneth Paul. “Meritocracy and Political Liberalization in Singapore.” In The 
East Asian Challenge for Democracy, ed. Daniel A. Bell and Chenyang Li. New 
York: Cambridge University Press, 2013.
Tan, Kevin Y. L., and Lam Peng Er, eds. Managing Political Change in Singapore: The 
Elected Presidency. London: Routledge, 1997.
Tan, Kevin Y. L., and Terence Lee, eds. Voting in Change: Politics of Singapore’s 2011 
General Election. Singapore: Ethos Books, 2011.
Tan, Sek- loong. “Realizing Political Meritocracy: Lessons from Business.” Paper pre-
pared for the Center for International and Comparative Political Philosophy, Tsing-
hua University, 20 July 2011.
Tang, Wenming. “Cong Rujia zhengjiu minzuzhuyi” [Rescuing Nationalism by Con-
fucianism]. Wenhua zongheng 5 (Oct. 2011).
Tang, Zhijun, Xiang Guocheng, and Shen Ying. “Jinsheng jinbiaosai yu difang 
zhengfu guanyuan fubai wenti de yanjiu” [Research on the Competitive Promotion 
and the Problem of Corruption of Local Officials]. Shanghai Jingji Yanjiu 4 (2013).
Tao, Ran, Lu Xi, Su Fubing, and Wang Hui. “Diqu jingzheng geju yanbian xia de 
zhongguo zhuangui: Caizheng jili he fazhan moshi fansi” [China’s Transition 
under Evolving Patterns of Regional Competition: Reflections on Financial Incen-
tives and China’s Development Model]. Jingji yanjiu 7 (2009).

 
Selected Bibliography 
301
Tetlock, Philip E. Expert Political Judgment: How Good Is It? How Can We Know? 
Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press, 2005.
Thomas, M. E. “Confessions of a Sociopath.” Psychology Today, May/June 2011.
Thomas, Paul. Performance Measurement, Reporting, Obstacles and Accountability: 
Recent Trends and Future Directions. Canberra: ANU E Press, 2006.
Thornton, John L. “The Prospects for Democracy in China.” Foreign Affairs 87, no. 1 
(Jan./Feb. 2008).
Tichy, Noel M., and Stratford Sherman. Control Your Destiny or Someone Else Will. 
New York: Random House, 1994.
Tong, Yanqi. “Morality, Benevolence, and Responsibility: Regime Legitimacy in 
China from Past to Present.” In Reviving Legitimacy: Lessons for and from China, 
ed. Deng Zhenglai and Sujian Guo. Lanham, Md.: Lexington Books, 2011.
Tsai, Lily L. Accountability without Democracy: Solidary Groups and Public Goods 
Provision in Rural China. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2007.
Tsai, Wen- Hsuan, and Nicola Dean. “Experimentation under Hierarchy in Local 
Conditions: Cases of Political Reform in Guangdong and Sichuan, China.” China 
Quarterly 218 (June 2014).
Tsang, Steve. “Consultative Leninism: China’s New Political Framework.” Journal of 
Contemporary China 18, no. 62 (2009).
UN General Assembly. “The Universal Declaration of Human Rights.” 1948. http://
www.un.org/en/documents/udhr/.
Vaillant, George E. Triumphs of Experience: The Men of the Harvard Grant Study. 
Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 2012.
Waal, Frans de. The Bonobo and the Atheist: In Search of Humanism among the Pri-
mates. New York: Norton, 2013.
Waldron, Jeremy. “The Core of the Case against Judicial Review.” Yale Law Journal 
115 (2006).
Wang, Alex. “The Search for Sustainable Legitimacy: Environmental Law and Bu-
reaucracy in China,” Harvard Environmental Law Review 37 (2013).
Wang, Guoliang. “Rujia xianneng zhengzhi sixiang yu Zhongguo xianneng tuiju 
zhidu de fazhan” [The Political Theory of Confucian Meritocracy and the Devel-
opment of a Meritocratic Recommendation System in China]. Wenshizhe 3, no. 
336 (2013).
Wang, Shaoguang. “Is the Way of the Humane Authority a Good Thing? An Assess-
ment of Confucian Constitutionalism.” In Jiang Qing, A Confucian Constitutional 
Order: How China’s Ancient Past Can Shape Its Political Future, ed. Daniel A. Bell 
and Ruiping Fan. Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press, 2013.
———. Minzhu si jiang [Four Lectures about Democracy]. Beijing: Sanlian shudian, 
2008.
———. “Why Is State Effectiveness Essential for Democracy? Asian Examples.” In 
Contemporary Chinese Political Thought: Debates and Perspectives, ed. Fred Dall-
mayr and Zhao Tingyang. Lexington: University Press of Kentucky, 2012.

302 
Selected Bibliography 
Wang, Shuna, and Yang Yao. “Grassroots Democracy and Local Governance: Evi-
dence from Rural China.” World Development 35, no. 10 (2007).
Wang, Tao. “Recharging China’s Electric Vehicle Policy.” Carnegie–Tsinghua Center 
for Global Policy, 2013. http://carnegieendowment.org/files/china_electric_vehicles 
.pdf.
Wang, Xiaofang. The Civil Servant’s Notebook, trans. Eric Abrahamsen. Melbourne: 
Viking, 2012.
Wang, Zheng. Never Forget National Humiliation: Historical Memory in Chinese Poli-
tics and Foreign Relations. New York: Columbia University Press, 2012.
Wedeman, Andrew. “Win, Lose, or Draw? China’s Quarter Century War on Corrup-
tion.” Crime, Law and Social Change 49, no. 1 (Feb. 2008).
Wei, Xiaohong, and Li Qingyuan. “The Confucian Value of Harmony and Its Influ-
ence on Chinese Social Interaction.” Cross- Cultural Communication 9 (2013).
Whyte, Martin King. “Soaring Income Gaps: China in Comparative Perspective.” 
Daedalus 143, no. 2 (Spring 2014).
Wilkinson, Richard G. The Impact of Inequality: How to Make Sick Societies Healthier. 
New York: New Press, 2005.
Wilkinson, Richard G., and Kate Pickett. The Spirit Level: Why Equal Societies Almost 
Always Do Better. London: Allen Lane, 2009.
Wilson, A. N. Hitler. New York: Basic Books, 2012.
Wiredu, Kwasi. “Democracy by Consensus: Some Conceptual Considerations.” Philo-
sophical Papers 30, no. 3 (Nov. 2001).
Wolff, Jonathan, and Avner de- Shalit. Disadvantage. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 
2007.
Wong, Benjamin. “Political Meritocracy in Singapore: Lessons from the PAP Govern-
ment.” In The East Asian Challenge for Democracy, ed. Daniel A. Bell and 
Chenyang Li. New York: Cambridge University Press, 2013.
Wong, Benjamin, and Xunming Huang. “Political Legitimacy in Singapore.” Politics 
and Policy 38, no. 3 (2010).
Wong, R. Bin. “Confucian Agendas for Material and Ideological Control in Modern 
China.” In Culture and State in Chinese History, ed. Theodore Huters, R. Bin 
Wong, and Pauline Yu. Stanford, Calif.: Stanford University Press, 1997.
Woodside, Alexander. Lost Modernities: China, Vietnam, Korea, and the Hazards of 
World History. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 2006.
Wu, Hao, and Wen Tianli. “Zhongguo difang zhengce shiyanshi gaige de youshi yu 
juxianxing” [The Advantages and Limitations of China’s Experimental Reforms 
with Local Policy]. Shehui kexue zhanxian 10 (2012).
Wu, Ji, and Wei Yunheng. “Take Away the ‘Iron Armchair,’ and Bring Up Good Cad-
res—Report on the Reform of the Personnel System for Cadres in Liaoning Prov-
ince.” Liaowang 24 (11 June 1990).
Wu, Jingzi. The Scholars, trans. Yang Xianyi and Gladys Yang. New York: Columbia 
University Press, 1992.

 
Selected Bibliography 
303
Wu, Qianwei. “Reorientation and Prospect of China’s Combat against Corruption.” 
Crime, Law and Social Change 49, no. 2 (Mar. 2008).
Wu, Yinping, and Jiangnan Zu. “Corruption, Anti- corruption, and Inter- county In-
come Disparity in China.” Social Science Journal 48 (2011).
Wurster, Stefan. “Comparing Ecological Sustainability in Autocracies and Democra-
cies.” Contemporary Politics 19, no. 1 (2013).
Xia, Ming. “Innovations in China’s Local Governance.” In China: Development and 
Governance, ed. Wang Gungwu and Zheng Yongnian. Singapore: World Scientific, 
2013.
Xiao, Hong, and Chenyang Li. “China’s Meritocratic Examinations and the Ideal of 
Virtuous Talents.” In The East Asian Challenge for Democracy, ed. Daniel A. Bell 
and Chenyang Li. New York: Cambridge University Press, 2013.
Xiao, Jianzhong. “Lingdao ganbu xuanba yu xieshang minzhu” [Cadre Selection and 
Deliberative Democracy]. Guancha yu sikao 4 (2014).
Xinhua News Agency, ed. People’s Republic of China Yearbook. Beijing: PRC Yearbook 
Ltd.; Hong Kong: N.C.N. Limited, 1988/89.
Xiong, Victor Cunrui. Emperor Yang of the Sui Dynasty: His Life, Times, and Legacy. 
Albany: State University of New York Press, 2006.
Yan, Cang. “Xinjiapo moshi de xingcheng yu chixu” [The Formation and Continu-
ance of the Singapore Model]. Wenhua zongheng, Apr. 2013.
Yan, Huai. Zhonggong zhengzhi jiegou yu minzhuhua lungang [The CCP’s Political 
Structure and an Outline for China’s Democratization]. Taipei: Mainland Com-
mission of Taiwan’s Executive Council, 1991.
Yao, Zhongqiu. “Tian ren zhi ji de zhi dao: Guangchuan Dongzi ‘Tian ren san ce’ yi 
shu” [The Way of Governing the Relationship between Heaven and Man: Explana-
tory Comments on Dong Zhongshu’s “Three Answers to Governance between 
Heaven and Man”]. Zhengzhi sixiang shi 3, no. 11 (2012).
Young, Michael. “Introduction to the Transaction Edition.” In The Rise of the Meritoc-
racy. New Brunswick, N.J.: Transaction, 1994.
———. The Rise of the Meritocracy. London: Thames and Hudson, 1958.
Yu, Chilik, Chun- Ming Chen, Lung- Teng Hu, and Wen- Jong Huang. “Evolving Per-
ceptions of Government Integrity and Changing Anticorruption Measures in Tai-
wan.” In Preventing Corruption in Asia: Institutional Design and Policy Capacity, 
ed. Ting Gong and Stephen K. Ma. London: Routledge, 2009.
Yu, Chongsheng. “Cha’e xuanju: Zhongguoshi minzhu de yingran zhi lu” [Multi- 
Candidate Elections: A Necessary Way for Chinese- Style Democracy]. Tansuo yu 
zhengming 5, no. 271 (2012).
Yu, Keping. Democracy Is a Good Thing. Washington, D.C.: Brookings Institution 
Press, 2009.
Zakaria, Fareed. “Can America Be Fixed? The New Crisis of Democracy.” Foreign 
Affairs 92, no. 1 (Jan./Feb. 2013).
Zeng, Jinghan. “Institutionalization of the Authoritarian Leadership in China: A 

304 
Selected Bibliography 
Power Succession System with Chinese Characteristics?” Contemporary Politics 20, 
no. 3 (2014).
———. “What Matters Most in Selecting Top Chinese Leaders.” Journal of Chinese 
Political Science 18 (2013).
Zhang, Jingyi. “Practice- Based Risk Detection.” Mimeo, Shanghai Jiaotong University, 
2012.
Zhang, Joy Y., and Michael Barr. Green Politics in China: Environmental Governance 
and State–Society Relations. London: Pluto Press, 2013.
Zhang, Lawrence Lok Cheung. “Power for a Price: Office Purchase, Elite Families, 
and Status Maintenance in Qing China.” Ph.D. dissertation, Harvard University, 
2010.
Zhang, Lu. “Shichang zhuangui yu fubai moshi de bianqian” [Market Transition and 
the Changing Forms of Corruption]. Wenhua zongheng, June 2013.
Zhang, Shai. “Qiangli kongzhi yu jingshen yueshu: Zhengzhi lunli jiaodu de zhong-
guo fangfu kunjing yu fangfu lujing” [Controlling by Power and Restraining by 
Spirit: The Predicament of Preventing Corruption in China and the Way of Pre-
venting Corruption Considered from the Perspective of Political Ethics]. Lilun yu 
gaige 3 (2013).
Zhang, Weiwei. “China’s New Political Discourse.” New Perspectives Quarterly, Fall 
2012.
Zhang, Xiaowei. Elite Dualism and Leadership Selection in China. London: Rout-
ledge/Curzon, 2004.
Zhang, Yongle. Jiu bang xin zao, 1911–1917 [The Remaking of an Old Country, 
1911–1917]. Beijing: Beijing daxue chubanshe, 2011.
———. “Zhongguo de xianneng zhengzhi ji qi minzhu zhengdangxing” [China’s Po-
litical Meritocracy and Its Democratic Legitimacy]. Comment presented at work-
shop on democracy and meritocracy, Sungkyunkwan University, Seoul, 30 May 
2014.
Zhao, Suisheng. “The China Model: Can It Replace the Western Model of Modern-
ization?” Journal of Contemporary China 19, no. 65 (June 2010).
Zhao, Yuezhi. “The Struggle for Socialism in China: The Bo Xilai Saga and Beyond.” 
Monthly Review 64, no. 5 (Oct. 2012).
Zheng, Wenhuan. “Difang shidian yu guojia zhengce: Yi xin nongbao wei li” [Local 
Experimentation and National Policy: Using the Rural Pension Policy as an Ex-
ample]. Zhongguo xingzheng guanli 2 (2013).
Zheng, Yongnian. The Chinese Communist Party as Organizational Emperor: Culture, 
Reproduction and Transformation. London: Routledge, 2010.
Zheng, Yongnian, and Chen Gang. “Intra- Party Democracy in Practice: Balloting for 
City Leaders in Jiangsu.” In China: Development and Governance, ed. Wang 
Gungwu and Zheng Yongnian. Singapore: World Scientific, 2013.
Zhou, Li’an. “Zhongguo difang guanyuan de jinsheng jinbiaosai moshi yanjiu” [Re-
search on Model of Competitive Promotion of Local Chinese Officials]. Jingji yan-
jiu 7 (2007).

 
Selected Bibliography 
305
Zhou, Qi. “Political Systems, Rights, and Values” [Dialogue with Andrew J. Nathan]. 
In Debating China: The U.S.–China Relationship in Ten Conversations, ed. Nina 
Hachigan. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2014.
Zhu, Jiangnan. “Why Are Offices for Sale in China? A Case Study of the Office- Selling 
Chain in Heilongjiang.” Asian Survey 48, no. 4 (July/Aug. 2008).


Index
Acemoglu, Daron, 39
Adams, John, 66
Allende, Salvador, 175
American Bar Association, 25
American Samoa, 268–69n57
Analects (Confucius), 142, 143, 208n75, 
253n119
Andersen, Stephen O., 53
animals, 211–12n122, 217n168, 267n49
Appiah, Kwame Anthony, 123
Applebaum, Michael, 242n14
Argentina, 141, 257n150
Aristotle, 21, 22, 26, 36, 153, 168, 
258n157
Asian Barometer Survey, 137, 256n139
Asian financial crisis (1997), 145
“Asian values” debate, 63–64
Aung San Suu Kyi, 104
Australia, 49, 245–46n41
Bai Tongdong, 23, 167
Bali, 249n83
Balladur, Edouard, 128
Baltic countries, 249n83
Bangladesh, 213n135
Barber, Brad, 232n134
Bell, Daniel (1919–2011), 2, 199n2
Berggruen, Nicolas, 49, 167, 
200–201n16
Berlusconi, Silvio, 71
Berman, Sheri, 261–62n4
Bernanke, Ben, 5–6
Bhagwati, Jagdish, 241n8
bilingualism, 92, 228n104, 231n127
Blair, Tony, 161, 227n98
Blanchard- Fields, Fredda, 96
Bloom, Allan, 111
Bloomberg, Michael, 71
Bloomberg News, 114
Bo Xilai, 114, 120
Book of Changes, 164
Book of Pastoral Rule (Gregory), 69
Boston Consulting Group, 121
Boucault, Bernard, 129
Brennan, Jason, 23–24, 26, 30, 206n45, 
207n66, 208n71
Buffett, Warren, 209n95
Bush, George W., 25
cadres: attitudes of, to multi- level elec-
tions, 265–66n43; children of, 84, 
193, 277n67, 278n69; and Confu-
cianism, 124, 142; corruption among, 
116–17; evaluation of, 53, 95, 184–
85, 187, 192, 235–36n161, 238n182, 
276n56; expected adherence to Marx-
ism of, 123–24; female, 98–99, 194, 
222n47, 229n113, 233n139; and 
local- level elections, 169, 181, 
266n44; from minority groups, 131; 
political training of, 45, 187, 
238n182; promotion of, 93–95, 132–
33, 170–71, 172, 186–87, 192, 194, 
228n110; selection criteria for, 78, 
185–86, 235–36n161, 273n28. See 
also civil servants; public officials/ser-
vants (in China)
Caixin Media, 232n135
California, 28
Canada, 216n158, 221n40, 270n61
Caplan, Bryan, 25, 153, 156
Catholic Church, 69, 249n83
Chan, Joseph, 105–6, 167, 203–4n19
Chang, P. C. (Peng Chun), 263n31
Chang Yu- tzung, 256n139
Chen Gang, 276n55
Chen Shui- bian, 48
Chen Yun, 278n69

308 
 Index 
Chengdu, 275–76n51
Chiang Ching- kuo, 113
Chiang Kai- shek, 140
Chile, 175
China: ancestor worship in, 211–
12n122; attitudes to democracy in, 
15–16, 138, 147, 256n138; corruption 
in, 104–5, 112, 113–21, 122–23, 173, 
192, 194; economic innovation in, 
203n16; as a harmonious society, 60–
61, 216n160, 217–18n179; impor-
tance of historical knowledge in, 92; 
income inequality in, 43, 173, 
211n112, 275–76n51; journalists in, 
237–38n175; local- level democracy 
in, 168–69, 180–82, 189–90, 191, 
195, 265–66nn43–44, 273n23; minor-
ity groups in, 192, 197, 252nn108 and 
110, 258n155; as a multiparty state, 
200n13; nationalism in, 139–42; pro-
motion of political meritocracy by, 
196–97, 279n78; public- sector salaries 
in, 120, 122, 273n27; religion in, 
252n110; Singapore as model for, 35–
36, 67, 80, 208–9n83; special eco-
nomic zones in, 184, 272n13, 278–
79n74; state- owned enterprises in, 
71–72, 118, 173, 211n120; support for 
“guardianship discourse” in, 138, 147, 
162, 265n43; support for the regime 
in, 254–55n128, 255n133; university 
entrance examinations in, 87, 185, 
224–25n68, 227n95, 239–40n4; West-
ern media reports on, 277–78n67; 
women in, 98–99, 194, 233nn136 
and 139. See also cadres; Chinese 
Communist Party (CCP); Confucian-
ism; imperial examination system; 
public officials/servants (in China); 
public service examinations
China Academy of Supervision and Dis-
cipline Inspection, 247n58
“China and the Catholic Church” (Yeo), 
69
China Can Say No, 141
China Executive Leadership Academy, 
238n182
China Experiments (Florini, Lai, and 
Tan), 134–35
China Modernizes (Peerenboom), 113
China National School of Administra-
tion, 279n78
Chinese Communist Party (CCP): ad-
herence to Marxism in, 123–24, 139; 
antinepotism mechanisms in, 193–94, 
229n114, 278n71; censorship prac-
tices of, 253–54n121, 259n167; col-
lective leadership of, 96–97, 116, 
274–75n34; compared to the Catho-
lic Church, 69; and Confucianism, 
123–24, 142; constraints on decision- 
making in, 267n49; and corruption, 
114, 116–17; democracy within, 138, 
191, 276n55; and economic gover-
nance, 43, 179–80; environmental re-
cord and policy of, 52–54, 94, 173, 
184–85, 214–15n149, 215n150; and 
land reform guidelines, 183; legiti-
macy of, 53–54, 86, 112, 136, 137–42, 
176–77, 270n64; membership in, 
185, 273nn27–28; meritocratic appa-
ratus of, 3–4, 36, 67, 93–95, 169, 
170–71, 185–87; name of, 197–98, 
279–80n80, 280–81n85; official athe-
ism of, 252n110; and one- child pol-
icy, 104, 233n136; peer rating system 
in, 107; and policy experimentation, 
182–85, 190–93, 195, 273n23, 
276n56, 277n65; political training 
program of, 45; and poverty allevia-
tion, 93–94, 145, 173, 222n45; pro-
motion procedures in, 93–95, 131, 
132–33, 186, 192, 228nn110–11, 
229–30n114; propaganda by, 1–2, 
259n167; reform proposals for, 61, 
175–76; social diversity within, 131–
32, 133, 149–50; and split with 
Kuomintang, 157; standards of citi-
zenship in, 104, 237n171; structure 
of, 280n81; and treatment of political 
dissent, 173, 197, 236–37n167, 269–
70n60; and village committees, 189. 
See also cadres; public officials/ser-
vants (in China)

 
 Index 
309
Chirac, Jacques, 128, 129
Cho Il Yun, 212n123
Christianity, 64, 69, 164, 252n110
Christiano, Thomas, 212n124
Chu Yun- han, 256n139
Churchill, Winston, 18, 204n23
citizenship, 21, 22, 36, 46–50, 212n124. 
See also voters
civil servants: assessment of, by merit, 
230n115, 254n126; corruption of, 
249n83; in democratic meritocracies, 
167; as distinguished from politicians, 
4, 75–76, 159, 200n6; in political 
meritocracies, 4, 126; salaries of, 121–
22, 247–48n64; on same track as poli-
ticians, 78, 128, 186, 221n40, 
254n126; selection of, by examina-
tion, 83, 159, 196, 262n9, 279n77; in 
service to politicians, 4, 20. See also 
cadres; public officials/servants
Civil Service College (Singapore), 
221n40
civil service examinations. See imperial 
examination system; public service 
examinations
Cixi, Empress Dowager, 191
climate change, 25, 28, 49, 52–54, 163, 
214–215n149, 215n155
Clinton, Bill, 90
cognitive biases: in beliefs about eco-
nomics, 25, 206n47; education to 
overcome, 29–30; the framing effect, 
29; and genetics, 207n65; optimism 
bias, 27–28, 206n47; overconfidence, 
24, 262n13; partisan bias, 206n45; in 
political leadership training, 88; vot-
ing and, 24, 259–60n169
Coicaud, Jean- Marc, 136
Collier, Paul, 19
Confucianism: and anticorruption 
mechanisms, 114, 115, 249n83; and 
the author, 10, 12; as China’s main-
stream political tradition, 100, 
258n155, 260n172; in Chinese na-
tionalism, 142, 258n154; and com-
mitment to tian xia, 233–34n144; and 
distinction between junzi and xiao 
ren, 32–33, 208n75, 259–60n169; in 
examinations for political leadership, 
81, 89, 103; freedom of speech in, 
253n119; harmony as a value in, 55–
57, 234n145; ideas about education 
in, 182; in Jiang Qing’s tricameral 
legislature, 164, 165, 252n110; judg-
ing “worthiness” in, 65, 105; minben 
doctrine in, 258n159; and political 
meritocracy, 147, 151; in political 
training, 50–51, 124; seniority as a 
value in, 95–96; in Singapore, 32; 
view of verbal fluency in, 101–2, 
235n156; and “way of the humane 
authority,” 163–64, 258n154. See also 
Neo-Confucianism
Confucius Institute, 142
Considerations on Representative Govern-
ment (Mill), 154–57
Copé, Jean- François, 130
corruption: amnesty for, 247n58; Chi-
nese attitudes to, 245n34; Chinese- 
style, 246n50; and democracy, 113, 
241n9; and ethical training, 249n83; 
in India vs. in China, 241n8; and lev-
els of education and wealth, 242n13; 
and political meritocracy, 112–21; 
and public- sector salaries, 248nn70–
71; suggestions for combating, 8, 104, 
114–24, 239n2; as threat to CCP, 
240n7
Cultural Revolution, 110, 183, 185, 
211n121, 231n126, 252n113, 
280–81n85
Cummins, Denise D., 216–17n167
Da Yu, 144
Dalian, 276n59
De Bary, William Theodore, 50
de Gaulle, Charles, 127
deliberative polling, 42, 190, 268n53, 
275n46
Delman, Jørgen, 214n149
democracy: arguments defending, 17–
18, 111, 240n5; Athenian, 22, 23, 
152, 279n75; Chinese attitudes to-
ward, 15–16, 138, 147, 256n138; and 

310 
 Index 
democracy (cont.)
“consumer culture” politics, 49; and  
corruption, 113, 241n9; and environ-
mental sustainability, 215n155; and in-
tergenerational equity, 49–54; and le-
gitimacy, 54, 151, 161–62, 162–63, 
256n139; local- level, 168–69, 171–72, 
180–82, 188–90; lottery method in, 
152–53, 261n3; and multiparty politics, 
58–59, 268–69n57; and national iden-
tity, 46, 212n123; and ossification of 
the political hierarchy, 130; policy ex-
perimentation in, 196, 279n75; in poor 
countries, 15, 19–20; and science, 25–
26, 28; and size of polity, 168, 265n38, 
268–69n57; and social and economic 
energy, 203n16; and socially skilled 
leadership, 92, 239n184; and special 
interest lobbying, 173; substantive vs. 
procedural, 6, 18, 147, 162, 256n139; 
tyranny of competitive individualists 
in, 7, 54–58; tyranny of the majority in, 
7, 21–31, 37, 163; tyranny of the minor-
ity in, 7, 36–42, 46; tyranny of the vot-
ing community in, 7, 46–50, 163, 173. 
See also elections; liberal democracies; 
one person, one vote; voters
Democracy in America (Tocqueville), 37
Democracy Is a Good Thing (Yu Keping), 
15–16
democratic meritocracy: horizontal 
models, 157–68; Jiang Qing’s pro-
posal for, 162–68; leadership qualities 
suited to, 239n184; Sun Yat- sen’s pro-
posal for, 157–59; three models, 9, 
152; vertical models, 168–75, 194–95, 
271n5
Deng Xiaoping, 144–45, 183, 191, 
254n123
Deng Zihui, 183
Dewey, John, 182
Dickson, Bruce J., 237n171
Doctrine of the Mean (Zhongyong), 123, 
236n162
Dodson, Bill, 214n143
Doh Chull Shin, 147, 219n10, 256n139
Donaldson, Sue, 211–12n122
Eastern Han dynasty, 50, 81
École Nationale d’Administration 
(ENA), 127–29, 250nn92–93
The Economist, 43
education: and cognitive biases, 29–30; 
high- pressure, 239–40n4; and income 
inequality, 45; and university en-
trance, 87, 185, 224–25n68, 227n95, 
239–40n4; for voting, 22, 58
Eichmann, Adolf, 231n126
elections: in Athenian democracy, 152–
53; from Confucian viewpoint, 203–
4n19; and consolidation of elite 
power, 42, 190; as hallmark of de-
mocracy, 218n182; inefficacy of, 40, 
42; at local level, 195–96; as one- 
size- fits- all solution, 171; polarizing 
effect of, 54–55; value of, 188–89;  
vs. referenda, 176–77, 270nn61–62. 
See also democracy; one person,  
one vote
Elman, Benjamin, 84
Engels, Friedrich, 129
Erdoğan, Recep Tayyip, 221–22n44
Estlund, David, 26
The Ethics of Voting (Brennan), 30
Ethiopia, 278–79n74
examinations. See imperial examination 
system; public service examinations
experimentation, policy, 134–35, 182–
85, 190–93
Fabius, Laurent, 128
Falklands War, 141, 257n150
Fang Lizhi, 201n4
Financial Times, 242–43n18
Flaum, Sander A., 227n99
Fleischacker, Samuel, 258n157
Ford, Rob, 88
Foreign Affairs, 277–78n67
Foshan city, 184
Foucault, Michel, 261n181
France, 47, 48, 127–29, 130, 132, 
216n164
Francis, Pope, 69
freedom of speech, 134, 174, 191, 
253nn119 and 121

 
 Index 
311
Friesen, Amanda, 207n65
Fukuyama, Francis, 15, 115–16, 136, 
223n61, 244n32
future generations: basic rights of, 
213n135; and democracy, 215n155; 
and economic policies, 155–56, 
213n130, 252n113; and environmen-
tal governance, 19, 49–50, 163; indi-
vidualistic vs. family- oriented views 
on, 270–71n65; political representa-
tion for, 50–54, 165–66, 167, 171, 
172–73, 213n134; and tyranny of the 
voting community, 7, 46, 49, 153
Galvany, Albert, 235n156
Gardels, Nathan, 49, 167, 200–201n16
Germany, 46, 48, 153, 231n126
Giscard d’Estaing, Valéry, 128
Glenn, John, 219n21
Global Times, 141
Goebbels, Joseph, 231n126
Goh Chok Tong, 121–22
Goh Keng Swee, 227n100
Goleman, Daniel, 91, 228n102
Gorbachev, Mikhail, 175
Great Leap Forward, 110, 183, 280n81
Greece, 49, 213n129
Greenspan, Alan, 205n38
Gregory I, Pope, 69
Guan Yue, 230n122
Guangdong province, 118, 191
Guanghua School of Management, 
247n58
Guangxi province, 181
Guangzhou, 191
Hacker, Jacob S., 38, 40
Han dynasty, 93, 114, 236n166
Han Fei, 100
Han Wudi, Emperor, 81, 100
Hariede, Dag, 213n134
Harmony Index, 10, 217–18n179
Havel, Vaclav, 104
Hayek, Friedrich, 160
He Baogang, 138
Hegel, Georg Wilhelm Friedrich, 59
Heilongjiang province, 242–43n15
Hellman, Sebastian, 183
Henderson, Mark, 28
Heydrich, Reinhard, 231n126
Himmler, Heinrich, 231n126
Hitler, Adolf, 99, 231n126, 261–62n4
Hollande, François, 128
Holmes, Oliver Wendell, 90
Hong Kong: anticorruption mechanisms 
in, 117; attitudes to harmony in, 56; 
demands for democracy in, 265–
66n43; foreign domestic workers in, 
47–48; Legislative Council of, 59–60, 
264n32; mass protests in, 210n104; as 
a policy experiment, 191, 276n60; 
small size of, 105–6
Hong Xiuquan, 225n72
Horizons (polling firm), 274n32
House of Lords, 161
Hu Jintao, 107, 191, 240n7, 274–75n34
Hu Shuli, 232n135
Huang Yasheng, 277–78n67
Huang Zongxi, 50–51, 243n21
human rights, 46–47, 63, 202n11, 263n31
Human Rights Watch, 48
Hung Ho- fung, 148
Hungary, 213n134
Huntington, Samuel P., 15
Iceland, 232n134
Ignatieff, Michael, 221n44
imperial examination system: barring of 
merchants from, 246–47n51; criti-
cisms of, 102–3, 149, 222n51; and the 
granting of official positions, 222n54, 
223nn58 and 61, 228n108; in Japan, 
223n57; longevity of, 16, 65; as meri-
tocratic mechanism, 65–66, 81–89; 
reform proposals for, 51; and testing 
for virtue, 235n157. See also public 
service examinations
income inequality: in China, 43, 173, 
211n112, 275–76n51; in Singapore, 
43–44, 65, 122, 211n112; in the 
United States, 38–42, 44–45, 209n94, 
210n102, 211n112
India: as comparison for China, 20; cor-
ruption in, 112, 241n8; decentraliza-

312 
 Index 
India (cont.)
tion in, 190; levels of nutrition in, 19, 
204n27; policy experimentation in, 
185; politicians with criminal records 
in, 103, 236n164
Indonesia, 20, 112, 241nn8–9, 245–
46n41, 249n83, 268n56
Institute for Governance and Sustain-
able Development, 53
Iran, 165
Islam, 249n83, 252n110
Israel, 47, 262–63n16
Japan: as a democracy, 101, 137, 166, 
212n123; inheritance tax rates in, 
252n113; national debt of, 49; and re-
lations with China, 141; sense of 
community in, 44; social skill levels 
in, 230–31n123; use of examination 
system in, 223n57
Jefferson, Thomas, 66
Jenkins, Roy, 227n98
Jiang Qing: and call for official embrace 
of Confucianism, 142; and call for re-
vival of imperial question period, 
213–14n137, 243–44n21; on Confu-
cianism and nationalism, 258n154; 
proposal for tricameral legislature by, 
162–68, 252n110, 264n32; on repre-
sentation for dead ancestors, 211–
12n122; responses to, 264n35; on 
state’s adherence to Marxism- 
Leninism, 139
Jiang Zemin, 211n120, 240n7
Jiangsu province, 191
John Paul II, Pope, 175
Johnson, Michael, 241n8
Jospin, Lionel, 128
Juppé, Alain, 128
Kahneman, Daniel, 24, 28, 206n47
Kallio, Jyrki, 141
Kang Xiaoguang, 142
Kang Youwei, 265n38
Kangxi, Emperor, 226n92
Kant, Immanuel, 101
Katrina, Hurricane, 250n96
Kelly, Jamie Terence, 29
Kett, Joseph F., 199n3
Kim Dae Jung, 64
Kim Jong- un, 261n1
Korea, 82, 253n119. See also North 
Korea; South Korea
Korean War, 140, 280–81n85
Ksiazkiewicz, Aleksander, 207n65
Kuomintang (KMT), 114, 140, 157, 
158–59, 182
Kupchan, Charles A., 38
Kymlicka, Will, 211–12n122
Laqueur, Walter, 231n126
Law, Legislation, and Liberty (Hayek), 
160
Le Pen, Marine, 130
Lee Hsien Loong, 32–33, 80, 127, 
208n75, 278n68
Lee Kuan Yew: on “Asian values,” 63; 
eugenics- based policies of, 172; father 
of Lee Hsien Loong, 278n68; on the 
importance of intellect, 80; on meri-
tocracy in Singapore, 32; oratorical 
skills of, 235n155; on promoting the 
English language, 34; and proposal 
for plural voting system, 155–56; reli-
ance of, on advisors, 90, 227n100; 
and tone of discourse, 127
Lee Teng- hui, 113
Legalism, 65, 100, 122–23, 226n92, 
234nn146, 148, and 150, 240–41n7, 
258n159
legitimacy: of the CCP, 53–54, 112, 
142, 174, 175–77; Confucian 
sources of, 163–64; and corruption, 
112, 113–14, 119, 148, 245n41; def-
initions of, 136, 162, 163; and de-
mocracy, 54, 151, 161–62, 162–63, 
256n139; and democratic meritoc-
racy, 159, 164–65, 166, 177; and 
fairness, 26; of the Hong Kong legis-
lature, 59; input vs. output, 
256n139; and nationalism, 140–42; 
and performance, 143–46, 258n157; 
and political meritocracy, 9, 136–
39, 146–50, 152, 159, 174, 275n46; 

 
 Index 
313
and the public service examination 
system, 86; Weber’s three sources of, 
75
Lenin, Vladimir Il’ich, 139, 197
Leninism, and the CCP, 197, 280n81
Lewis, Michael, 232n134
Li, Eric X., 187, 247n56, 277–78n67
Li Cheng, 242–43n15
Li Dazhao, 260n176
Li Hongzhang, 191
Li Jin, 101
Li Keqiang, 107
Li Rui, 278n69
Li Yonggang, 230n122
Li Yongzhong, 247n58
Li Yuanchao, 94, 170–71, 191, 192, 
267n49, 276n56, 277n63
Liang Shuming, 182
liberal democracies: anticorruption 
monitoring by, 117; as “end of his-
tory,” 136, 166; meritocratic institu-
tions within, 4, 20, 66–67; protec-
tion of minorities within, 21–22, 
205n37
Liji (Record of Rites), 147, 236n162, 
259–60n169
Link, Perry, 264n35
Liu Xiaobo, 15, 104, 269–70n60
Locke, John, 162
Lu (state), 163–64
Lü Gongzhu, 115
Lu Jie, 138, 147, 258n159
Lu Zhi, 103, 105
Ma Ling, 16
Machiavelli, Niccolò, 42, 258n157
Madagascar, 278–79n74
Madison, James, 265n39
Mandela, Nelson, 104
Mann, Michael, 21–22
Mao Zedong: charismatic authority of, 
137; on the Chinese people’s defi-
ance of foreign powers, 140; former 
secretary of, 278n69; indifference of, 
to political meritocracy, 197; as mod-
ern “emperor,” 116; ostracism of, 
260n176; and policy experiments, 
183, 259n165; and praise for Legalist 
methods, 100, 234n149
Marx, Karl: attitude to meritocracy of, 
197; and call for “dictatorship of the 
proletariat,” 42; on capitalism, 5, 145; 
and ideal of “higher communist” soci-
ety, 146–47; silence of, on ethics, 124; 
on transcending class background, 
129; and the U.S. Constitution, 25
Marxism: and advocacy of revolution, 
211n114; and attitude toward elites, 
252n114; CCP’s adherence to, 123–
24, 139, 142, 252n110; experiments 
with, 42; in French education system, 
132; and neglect of leadership quali-
ties, 89, 249n83; usefulness of, for po-
litical leaders, 226n92
Mauritius, 278–79n74
McCormick, John P., 42, 261n3
McElveen, Ryan, 242–43n15
Mencius, 57, 86, 125, 143, 148–49
merit: in American political history, 
199n3, in Confucian thought, 65–66; 
different kinds of, 64–65, 133–35, 
150; as discredited ideal, 111, 199n3; 
and freedom of speech, 134, 253–
54n121; and meritocracy, 32, 81, 111, 
160; in military organizations, 
238n177; overly narrow notions of, 
35, 90, 132; and real- world hiring 
practices, 230n115; as tested in exam-
inations, 81–82, 224n66; vs. seniority, 
95. See also virtue
meritocracy, critiques of, 5–6, 111–12. 
See also democratic meritocracy; po-
litical meritocracy
MetLife, 73
Micklethwait, John, 220n27
Mill, John Stuart: and argument against 
political parties, 59, 268–69n57; and 
argument for freedom of speech, 134, 
253n119; defense of democracy by, 
29; on inequalities in voters, 154–55; 
and support for political meritocracy, 
66, 262n9; on the tyranny of the ma-
jority, 21
Miller, Richard, 204n21

314 
 Index 
Ming dynasty: corruption during, 120; 
end of, 225n79, 244n26; evaluation of 
officials in, 78; examination system 
during, 82, 83, 85, 87, 134, 224n67, 
246–47n51; grain reserves in, 144; 
 heroes of, 257n151
Ming Taizu, Emperor, 115
minorities, 21–22, 131, 160, 192, 197, 
252n108
Monetary Authority of Singapore, 43
Montaigne, Michel de, 234–35n153
Montesquieu, Charles de Secondat, 
Baron de, 168
Montreal, 210n104, 242n14
Mulgan, Tim, 49
Nanyang Technological University, 
208–9n83
Napolitano, Janet, 202n10
Nathan, S. R., 52
National Endowment for Democracy, 197
National University of Singapore, 
247–48n64
nationalism, 139–42, 257n148, 258n154
nation- states, 16–17, 22, 46, 75
Nauru, 268–69n57
Nazism, 46, 153, 231n126, 261–62n4
Neo- Confucianism, 82, 180, 225n76. 
See also Confucianism
Nepal, 98–99
Netherlands, 48
New Orleans, 250n96
New York City, 216n159
New York Times, 114, 264n35
Ngiam Tong Dow, 126
Nigeria, 278–79n74
Nixon, Richard M., 71
No (film), 175, 269n58
Noah, Timothy, 41
North Korea, 132, 151, 254–55n128, 
261n1, 280–81n85
Norway, 213n134
Nunavut, 268–69n57
Nussbaum, Martha, 58
Obama, Barack: beginner’s mistakes by, 
172, 274–75n34; China policy of, 28–
29; and climate change, 53; demo-
cratic election of, 1; and income in-
equality, 41, 45; prepresidential 
experience of, 187; salary of, 120
Occupy movement, 210n102
Odean, Terrance, 232n134
The 100- Mile Walk (Flaum and Flaum), 
70–71, 227n99
one person, one vote: alternatives to, 31–
36, 42–46, 50–54, 58–61, 154–57, 
262n13; in democratic meritocracies, 
167, 174; in East Asia, 166; as engen-
dering multiparty politics, 59; as ex-
pression of political equality, 16–17, 
203n15; and political legitimacy, 159, 
160–61; quasi- sacred status of, 6, 14, 
43, 264n34; as violating the right to 
competent rule, 30–31; and Western 
theories of meritocracy, 66–67. See 
also democracy; elections; voters
Ottoman Empire, 224n66, 239n1
Palin, Sarah, 88
Pan Wei, 197
Peace and Development Forum, 170
Peerenboom, Randall, 113
Peking University, 227n95, 260n176
Peng Zhen, 191
People’s Action Party (PAP), 32, 33–34, 
35, 122
Philippines, 137
Pierson, Paul, 38, 40
Piketty, Thomas, 210n102
Pilling, David, 241n8
Pines, Yuri, 65, 116, 133, 270n64
Pinochet, Augusto, 175
Plato, 21, 66, 110–11, 125, 151, 239n2, 
261n1
political leadership: and age, 95–97, 
229n114, 230–31n123, 231n126; and 
bilingualism, 92, 228n104, 231n127; 
and criminality, 103–4, 236n164; ed-
ucation and training of, 33, 34, 45–
46, 50–51; examinations for, 81–89, 
158–59, 263n19; and experience, 16; 
and gender, 97–99; important quali-
ties in, 8, 75–77, 107–9; intellectual 

 
 Index 
315
ability and, 79–89; and intro- /extro-
version, 234n152; oratorical skills 
and, 99, 101–2, 234–35n153; social 
skills and, 89–99; and virtue, 99–109, 
233n140; vs. business leadership, 70–
75, 91, 93, 98, 220n34; vs. military 
leadership, 77, 79; vs. spiritual leader-
ship, 69–70; and Weber’s idea of the 
civil servant, 77–78
political meritocracy: and capitalism, 43; 
in China, 65–66, 81, 195, 200–
201n16; Chinese term for, 200n7; 
and conflict with electoral democ-
racy, 172–73; and corruption, 112–25, 
194, 243n19; defined, 4, 6; and elit-
ism, 35, 126–27; and freedom of 
speech, 134; key problems with, 8–9, 
110–50; and legitimacy, 8–9, 113, 
136–50, 174, 194, 275n46; and ossifi-
cation, 125–35, 194; and peer review, 
105–7, 238nn177 and 179; and politi-
cal training, 46; and size of polity, 
264–65n37; and testing for merit, 81–
89, 92–93; vs. economic meritocracy, 
4–5, 239n3; in Western political the-
ory, 66
Political Order in Changing Societies 
(Huntington), 15
“Politics as a Vocation” (Weber), 75–79
Powell, Jonathan, 227n98
public officials/servants (in China): and 
anticorruption mechanisms, 117–19, 
122–24, 240–41n7; combating favorit-
ism among, 239n183; combining civil 
service and politics, 4, 274n30; im-
portance of historical knowledge to, 
92; judging the performance of, 184–
85; judging the social skills of, 95–96, 
230n122; judging the virtue of, 103–
7, 236n166; and policy experimenta-
tion, 191–94; requirements for pro-
motion of, 169–70, 186–87, 229– 
30n114, 268n53; salaries of, 120–21, 
122, 247n61, 248n70, 273n27; selec-
tion by examination of, 65–66, 81–87, 
89, 103, 188; selection by other meth-
ods of, 226n85; standards of citizen-
ship among, 104–5; success at policy 
implementation by, 272n21. See also 
cadres; civil servants
public service examinations: and candi-
dates’ virtue, 103; class background 
and, 84–85; criticism of, 149; experi-
mental beginnings of, 188; form and 
examples of, 225–26n84, 226n87; and 
legitimacy, 86; as a limit on access to 
power, 87, 88, 193; and minority can-
didates, 252n108; need for more study 
on, 227n94; number of candidates 
for, 273n27; as part of selection pro-
cess, 78, 185–86, 192; in selection of 
top officials, 170–71; suggestions for, 
92–93, 228n103, 246n45. See also im-
perial examination system
Putin, Vladimir, 200n12
Qatar, 113
Qian Mu, 93
Qianlong, Emperor, 257
Qin dynasty, 100, 133
Qin Shihuang, Emperor, 100, 234n149
Qing dynasty: antigovernment protests 
during, 148; examination system in, 
82, 83, 85, 87, 223n58, 224n67, 
225n72; grain reserves during, 144; 
Han Chinese support for, 257n151; 
social diversity in government during, 
133–34
Qinghai province, 192
Qiu Feng, 271n5
Quechua peoples, 56
Qufu city, 104, 124, 236n166
Rather, Dan, 54
Rawls, John, 5, 38, 165, 263n31
Reagan, Ronald, 226n86
Record of Rites (Liji), 147, 236n162, 
259–60n169
referendum, against electoral democ-
racy, 175–77
Rejali, Darius, 46–47
representation: as alternative to multi-
party politics, 59; of animals and dead 
ancestors, 211–12n122, 267n49; of 

316 
 Index 
representation (cont.)
future generations, 50–54, 165–66, 
167, 171, 172–73, 213n134; at local 
level, 169; of socially diverse groups, 
130–32, 135; of women, 113
The Republic (Plato), 21, 66, 110–11, 
239n2
The Rise of the Meritocracy (Young), 
111–12, 127, 132
Rocard, Michel, 128
Romer, Paul, 278–79n74
Romney, Mitt, 71
Roosevelt, Franklin Delano, 90–91
Rothstein, Bo, 256n139, 272n21
Rousseau, Jean- Jacques, 168, 268–69n57
Runciman, David, 209n85
Russia, 200n12
Saich, Tony, 138
Sarkozy, Nicolas, 128, 130
SARS epidemic (2003), 193
Scandinavia, 205n31, 213n134, 
216n164, 256n139
Schak, David C., 218n180
Schmitter, Philippe, 220–21n37
Sen, Amartya, 18
Shang dynasty, 164
Shang Yang, 79
Shell Corporation, 238n177
Shenzhen Special Economic Zone, 184
Shenzong, Emperor, 115
Shi Tianjian, 138, 147, 258n159, 
269–70n60
Sichuan province, 187, 192
Sigurdardottir, Johanna, 232n134
Singapore: and the “Asian values” de-
bate, 63–64; Confucian ideals in, 32–
33; constraints on democracy in, 31–
32, 52; corruption in, 113, 117; 
distinction between civil servants and 
politicians in, 221n40; economic co-
operation with China of, 191; eco-
nomic success of, 18–19, 33, 203n16; 
elected presidency of, 7, 51–52; elit-
ism in, 126–27, 130–31, 156; and fi-
nancial regulation, 43; foreign domes-
tic workers in, 47–48; income 
inequality in, 43–44, 65, 122, 
211n112; military of, 238n177; as 
model for China, 35–36, 67, 80, 208–
9n83; moral education in, 249n81; 
political and economic meritocracy 
in, 3, 32–35, 64, 90, 208n80, 218n5, 
264–65n37; public- sector salaries in, 
121–22, 247–48n64; small size of, 
196, 205n31, 264–65n37. See also 
Lee Hsien Loong; Lee Kuan Yew
Sintomer, Yves, 261n3
Slater, Dan, 268n56
slaves, 22, 23
social mobility, 39–40
sociopaths, 99–100
Song dynasty: examination system dur-
ing, 82, 84, 85, 103, 222n54, 223n61, 
228n108; government salaries during, 
121; Northern, 83, 253n119
South Korea: anticorruption efforts in, 
119, 120; civil servants in, 230n115; 
as a democracy, 101, 137, 166, 
212n123, 219n10; education system 
of, 239–40n4; transition to democracy 
of, 268n56
Southern Weekend (Nanfang Zhoumo), 
253n119
Soviet Union, 140, 166, 175, 200n12
Spring and Autumn Annals, 163
Suharto, 241n9, 245–46n41
Sui dynasty, 81, 182
Sun Yan, 114, 241n6
Sun Yat- sen, 157–58, 263n19
Sweden, 44
Switzerland, 265n38
Taiping Rebellion, 225n72
Taiwan: civil servants in, 230n115; cor-
ruption in, 112–13, 242n10; as a de-
mocracy, 101, 137, 212n123, 
218n180; meritocracy in, 157–59; 
nonvoters in, 48; political legitimacy 
in, 255n133; relations with China of, 
141, 145; transition to democracy of, 
268n56
Taizu, Emperor, 83
Tan, Kenneth Paul, 35

 
 Index 
317
Tan Sek- loong, 220n23
Tang dynasty, 81, 85, 102, 119, 253n119
Thailand, 30, 54, 203n17, 262n14
Thaksin Shinawatra, 71
Thatcher, Margaret, 141, 257n150
Tiananmen Square protests and crack-
down (1989), 114, 117, 136, 140, 181
Tianjin, 276n59
Tianjin eco- city, 191
Tibet, 173
Tibetan Buddhism, 164, 252n110
Tocqueville, Alexis de, 37, 55, 66, 
203n16
Tong Yanqi, 144
Toronto, 88, 268–69n57
torture, 47, 212n124
Transparency International, 112
Trump, Donald, 71
Tsinghua University, 237n168, 
240–41n7
2008 Beijing Olympics, 142
2007–2008 financial crisis, 38, 39–40, 
41, 97, 145
Ubuntu, 56
Uganda, 177
Ukraine, 103, 236n164
United Arab Emirates, 113
United Kingdom, 141, 161, 221n40, 
246n46, 250n97
United Nations, 63
United States: aging and wisdom in, 
230–31n123, 231n128; bureaucracy 
in, 173, 196, 267–68n51, 279n77; 
China policy of, 28–29; and climate 
change, 53, 215n154; as comparison 
with China, 20; Constitution of, 25, 
27, 37, 231n128; corruption in, 113, 
123; economic vibrancy of, 203n16; 
founding fathers of, 36–37, 66, 
231n128; government shutdown of, 
148; income inequality in, 38–42, 
44–45, 209n94, 210n102, 211n112; 
individualism vs. communitarianism 
in, 216n164; influence of money in, 
119, 247n56, 265n39; irrational pol-
icy making in, 28–29, 36; mainstream 
media in, 254–55n128; and merit, 
199n3; military engagements of, 
204n28; national debt of, 49; policy 
experimentation in, 254n122; politi-
cal legitimacy in, 255n133; postwar 
hegemony of, 17; promotion of de-
mocracy abroad by, 197, 255n130; re-
form proposals for, 42–43; social and 
political segregation in, 44–45, 55, 
206n45, 250nn96 and 98; social mo-
bility in, 39–40; Sun Yat- sen on, 158; 
use of torture by, 47; voter ignorance 
and irrationality in, 25–26, 39–40, 
153, 259–60n169
U.S. Army, 238n177
Venice, 245–46n41
Vietnam, 19, 82, 195, 196, 279n76
Villepin, Dominique de, 128
virtue: assessing and testing for, 87–88, 
159, 192, 218n5, 235–36n161, 
236n166, 238n176; in citizenship, 21, 
27; and collective wisdom, 26; and 
the emperor, 86–87, 115; in leader-
ship, 65, 69–70, 70–71, 75–79, 99–
105, 234n146, 261n180; in nonpoliti-
cal social contributors, 149; peer 
reviews of, 105–8; in political meri-
tocracy, 2, 6, 65–67, 113, 218n5; po-
litical training for, 172; and voters, 
155. See also merit
voters: accountability of, 58; age limits 
on, 31; competency tests for, 7, 30–
31, 156–57, 261–62n4; ignorance of, 
22, 23–30, 39–40, 101, 153, 166, 
261–62n4; and nonvoters, 46–50, 51, 
153–54, 165–66, 173, 211–12n122; 
political tutelage for, 158. See also 
cognitive biases; democracy; elec-
tions; future generations; one person, 
one vote
Wang Anshi, 87, 121
Wang Ji, 84
Wang Qishan, 239n2
Wang Shaoguang, 137, 146, 259n168, 
261n3

318 
 Index 
Wanli, Emperor, 118, 225n79, 244n26
Warring States period, 125, 133, 
235n156
Washington, George, 268–69n57
Weber, Max, 75–79, 136, 221n38, 
223n61
Welch, Jack, 71, 73
Wen Jiabao, 120
Wenchuan earthquake (2008), 145
Wenling township, 190
Wenzhou rail crash (2011), 145
Whyte, Martin King, 44
Wilkinson, Richard, 41
Wiredu, Kwasi, 58–59, 60, 217n176
Wolf, Martin, 161–62
women: brain structure of, 232n130; 
in China, 8, 173, 194, 229n113, 
233nn136 and 139; exclusion of, 
from Athenian democracy, 22; 
leadership skills of, 97–98; and 
“motherhood penalty,” 98, 
233n136; Plato on, 125; and uni-
versal suffrage, 154
Wong, Joseph, 268n56
Wong, R. Bin, 144
Wooldridge, Adrian, 220n27
Workers’ Party, 264–65n37
World Bank, 94
World Economic Forum, 70, 276n59
World Trade Organization, 211n120
Wu Wen- Chin, 256n139
Wu Zetian, Empress, 115
Wurster, Stefan, 215n155
Xi Jinping: anticorruption efforts by, 112, 
240–41n7, 242–43n15; and the “bad 
emperor” problem, 244–45n32; on 
Confucianism, 124; efforts of, to seem 
authentic, 69, 237n170; family back-
ground of, 193; on Marxism, 123–24; 
on motivations for public service, 
105; nationalist rhetoric of, 140–41; 
and pledges to curb carbon emissions, 
53; salary of, 120; selection of, as pres-
ident, 1, 107; and treatment of whis-
tleblowers, 245n38
Xia dynasty, 144, 164
Xinjiang, 173, 228n104
Xunzi, 57, 86, 125, 211n115, 216n166, 
225n78, 234n146
Ye Shi, 226n90
Yeo, George, 69, 219n20, 264–65n37
Yes, Minister (television show), 200n6
Young, Michael, 111–12, 127, 132, 
200n7, 239n3, 252n113
Yu Chilik, 242n10
Yu Chongqing, 16
Yu Keping, 15–16
Yuan dynasty, 82, 236n162
Yueji, 236n162
Zhang, Lawrence Lok Cheung, 223n58
Zhang Dai, 87–88
Zhang Lu, 119
Zhang Weiying, 247n58
Zhao Ziyang, 274n30
Zhejiang province, 190
Zheng Yongnian, 118, 276n55
Zhongyong (Doctrine of the Mean), 123, 
236n162
Zhou dynasty, 164
Zhou Yongkang, 114, 240–41n7
Zhu Rongji, 211n120
Zhu Xi, 81, 102–3, 180, 222n51, 
236n162
Zhuge Liang, 235n155
Ziliotti, Elena, 262–63n16

