
This page intentionally left blank

The Selﬁsh Meme
A Critical Reassessment
Culture is a unique and fascinating aspect of the human species.
How did it emerge and how does it develop? Richard Dawkins has
suggested that culture evolves and that memes are the cultural repli-
cators, subject to variation and selection in just the same way as genes
are in the biological world. In this sense human culture is the product
of a mindless evolutionary algorithm. Does this imply, as some have
argued, that we are mere meme machines and that the conscious self
is an illusion?
Kate Distin’s highly readable and accessible book extends and
strengthens Dawkins’s theory and presents for the ﬁrst time a fully
developed and workable concept of cultural DNA. She argues that
culture’s development can be seen both as the result of memetic evo-
lution and as the product of human creativity. Memetic evolution
is perfectly compatible with the view of humans as conscious and
intelligent.
This book should ﬁnd a wide readership amongst philosophers,
psychologists and sociologists, and it will also interest many nonaca-
demic readers.
Kate Distin is an independent scholar.


The Selﬁsh Meme
A Critical Reassessment
KATE DISTIN

  
Cambridge, New York, Melbourne, Madrid, Cape Town, Singapore, São Paulo
Cambridge University Press
The Edinburgh Building, Cambridge  , UK
First published in print format 
-    ----
-    ----
-    ----
© Kate Distin 2005
Information on this title: www.cambridge.org/9780521844529
This book is in copyright. Subject to statutory exception and to the provision of
relevant collective licensing agreements, no reproduction of any part may take place
without the written permission of Cambridge University Press.
-    ---
-    ---
-    ---
Cambridge University Press has no responsibility for the persistence or accuracy of
s for external or third-party internet websites referred to in this book, and does not
guarantee that any content on such websites is, or will remain, accurate or appropriate.
Published in the United States of America by Cambridge University Press, New York
www.cambridge.org
hardback
paperback
paperback
eBook (NetLibrary)
eBook (NetLibrary)
hardback

Contents
1
Introduction
page 1
2
The Meme Hypothesis
6
3
Cultural DNA
18
4
The Replication of Complex Culture
39
5
Variation
48
6
Selection
57
7
The Story So Far
68
8
The Human Mind: Meme Complex with a Virus?
72
9
The Meme’s Eye View
92
10
Early Cultural Evolution
116
11
Memetic DNA
142
12
Memes and the Mind
168
13
Science, Religion and Society: What Can Memes Tell Us?
185
14
Conclusions
197
Acknowledgements
209
Notes
211
Bibliography
217
Index
225
v


1
Introduction
Shortly after we were married, my husband made me a mandolin. The
body is built from rosewood and the bridge hand carved from ebony.
Wood can be bent if you heat it, but he had no bending iron – so he
curved the sides by rocking them over some hair curling tongs, clamped
to the kitchen table.
I had wanted a mandolin since I was a child – for almost as long as I
had been playing the violin. The two instruments have the same intervals
between their strings, and it seemed to me that it must be easier to rest
something across your lap, plucking at notes whose positions were marked
out for you by frets, than to contort the whole of your upper body into the
violinist’s masochistic stance, attempting simultaneously to create notes
on a standard scale with your left hand and to tame two feet of bow
with your right. I already understood what instructions the notes on a
stave were trying to give my ﬁngers, and had lately been charmed by the
mandolin music of Vivaldi and Oysterband. (I was na¨ıve, as it happens.
The mandolin does have all these advantages, but it also – as the ﬁngers
of my left hand will testify – has strings like cheese wire.)
My husband found the design in a woodworking magazine, tucked in
amongst the usual advertisements and feature articles. An engineer by
training, he had inherited both skills and tools from his father and grand-
father. When the plans let him down, he spent some time thinking about
the physics of the processes involved, learnt a bit about concert pitch,
and then calculated the appropriate fret spacings from ﬁrst principles.
We read up on the mandolin’s origins: where was it ﬁrst invented, what
sorts of music had people played on it, and for how many years? We were
drawn into a study of the history of music, and debated over late-night
1

2
The Selﬁsh Meme
bottles of wine whether its conventions were discovered or invented. By
a pleasing coincidence, the hot novel of the year was Captain Corelli’s
Mandolin.
My mandolin is thus the end product of a trail of culture that stretches
back across centuries and continents. Its creation was dependent on
woodworking techniques and tools, on the development of stringed in-
struments and musical conventions, on the physics and mathematics of
sound, and on the modern world of magazine articles and advertise-
ments. As it grew, we were pointed in the directions of its historical and
geographical origins, and our attention was drawn to philosophical and
scientiﬁc theories about its music. It has links to a vast range of cultural
areas, all of which are more like icebergs than mountains, their manifest
modern complexities resting on unseen millennia of previous human
thought and activity.
Richard Dawkins has said that “most of what is unusual about man
can be summed up in one word: ‘culture’.”1 Culture is not humans’
only distinguishing feature, but it is one unique and fascinating aspect
of our species. In this context, “culture” is not intended to be either a
description of a narrow range of purely artistic pursuits or a synonym
for society. “A society refers to an actual group of people and how they
order their social relations. A culture . . . refers to a body of socially trans-
mitted information”2 – the full spectrum of ideas, concepts and skills
that is available to us in society. It includes science and mathematics,
carpentry and engineering designs, literature and viticulture, systems of
musical notation, advertisements and philosophical theories – in short,
the collective product of human activities and thought.
How did this body of knowledge and methods emerge? How does
it now continue to develop? This book defends the theory that culture
evolves, and that memes provide the mechanism for that evolution.
“Evolution” is usually taken to apply only in the biological world, re-
ferring to the theory developed by Charles Darwin and others in the
nineteenth century to account for the origin of species. In the twenti-
eth century, Richard Dawkins and others pointed out that the core of
Darwinian theory is actually rather sparse. Its essential elements are sim-
ply replication, variation and selection. If these requirements are met
then evolution seems bound to happen. If organisms reproduce, passing
their characteristics almost (but not always quite) accurately on to the
next generation, and if their environment does not supply them with
unlimited resources for their survival, then they will evolve: there will be
a struggle for survival, and those organisms will be preserved whose traits

Introduction
3
are best ﬁtted to the given environment. It is the business of science to
investigate the actual pattern of development in our natural world, but
at a more theoretical level Darwin’s theory outlines a process that is in-
evitable once all of its elements are in place. Dawkins has suggested that
this not only is true in biology but would also be the case in any other
environment where all of those key elements were to be found – including
culture.
The suggestion that evolution is not restricted to biology but may also
take place in culture is appealing if hardly original. A metaphorical pic-
ture is often painted of ideas and theories “evolving” through time, but
can it ever with justiﬁcation be taken literally? That is, does Darwinism
illustrate a process that can also be observed in culture? There are various
versions of cultural evolutionary theory on the market, and this book ex-
plores what I see as the most compelling: the hypothesis that the units of
cultural selection are elements, which Dawkins calls “memes”, that share
the important properties of genes.
The biggest danger for this hypothesis is the risk of its collapsing into
the trivial assertion that some ideas survive whilst others disappear. Ob-
viously cultures change, ideas spread and technology develops, but what
do we gain by claiming that this is all due to memetic evolution? What
does the meme hypothesis contribute to our understanding which other
theories of cultural change do not?
One way of responding to this challenge is to take a very practical
approach, and seek out areas of culture to which meme theory can fruit-
fully be applied. Most other books on memes have tended to follow this
line, and have developed memetic explanations of phenomena such as
religion, language and the size of the human brain. The best way of de-
fending the meme hypothesis, from this perspective, is to show that it
can provide useful accounts of developments in such key cultural areas.
This is an approach in the best traditions of scientiﬁc experiment, using
observation to conﬁrm or falsify novel theories. Given a hypothesis about
how culture develops, practical observations about what actually happens
in human culture will surely provide a good method of testing its validity.
On the other hand, it is notoriously difﬁcult to ensure that we take an
objective view of the evidence when we are seeking to conﬁrm a favoured
hypothesis. Indeed, it is sometimes possible to present very different ex-
planations of the same observations, each of which makes perfect sense
from the perspective of a given hypothesis, but only one of which can be
true. The history of science is littered with theories that once convinced
the brightest of contemporary intellects, and our adversarial justice

4
The Selﬁsh Meme
system also bears testimony to the potential for weaving different stories
from the same body of evidence.
Behind that evidence, however, lies the truth, and there must surely
be a more direct approach to its discovery. Rather than testing the prac-
tical implications of a novel theory, an alternative is to focus ﬁrst on
its underlying structure: to examine whether it could be true, is internally
coherent and forms a solid basis for any empirical applications. Inevitably
such investigations will have to take into account some observations of
the phenomena that the theory purports to explain, but the focus will
be on testing its structural foundations before trying to use it as a tool for
scientiﬁc enquiry. It is this approach which I favour.
In the case of culture, for example, the question is not so much
whether development in its various areas can be characterized as memetic
as whether the meme hypothesis is true. According to Dawkins, culture
evolves in the same way as biology – but in which ways, exactly, are the two
processes “the same”? What would replication, variation or selection be in
relation to culture? Is culture really made up of discrete units? To what
extent can other concepts from genetics be transferred to memetics –
concepts like vehicle and phenotype, virus and allele? Where are memes to
be found, and what is the memetic equivalent of DNA?
Satisfactory answers to such questions will inevitably contribute to
our understanding of cultural development. For example, if culture is a
unique feature of humans, then meme theory should be able to explain
what has enabled us to develop such a feature when nonhuman animals
have not. Indeed, since other animals surely do pass on information and
skills to each other, it should include an account of what is special about
the “memes” that purportedly make up human culture. Supported by
such theoretical investigations, it should of course be possible for meme
theory to provide an account of how ideas change and develop in partic-
ular cultural areas like science and religion. Even more fundamentally,
it should enable us to explore the relationship between memes and the
human mind: do they create us, do we create them – or is there, as some
would claim, no real difference between “us” and “them”?
This last question is obviously of huge signiﬁcance for how we hu-
mans see ourselves. Some of the best-known names in the ﬁeld – in
particular Daniel Dennett and Susan Blackmore – believe that meme
theory will completely overturn our traditional notions of responsibil-
ity, creativity and intentionality, just as many have taken the Darwinian
revolution in biology to have overturned traditional notions of a cre-
ator God. On their view what we call our minds, with all their apparent

Introduction
5
powers of thought, decision making and invention, are actually para-
sitic meme complexes, our sense of control over which is illusory. If our
mental and cultural lives are the results of a mindless evolutionary al-
gorithm, they argue, then how can we claim an autonomous identity as
independent “selves”, with freedom and control over what goes on in
those lives?
Despite the apparent power of this argument and the persuasiveness
of its authors, my own conclusion – freely reached after many hours of
genuinely creative thought and non-illusory choices – is that memetic
evolution is quite consistent with a world of intentional, conscious and
responsible free agents. And if it weren’t, then common sense dictates
that I should exercise my free will and reject meme theory in preference
to dispensing with mind, conscience and autonomy. Fortunately, however,
neither option is necessary, as this book will show.

2
The Meme Hypothesis
Richard Dawkins ﬁrst proposed his version of cultural evolutionary theory
in his 1976 book, The Selﬁsh Gene. The main thrust of that book was a
defence of the gene as the unit of biological selection and the organism
as a “survival machine” for its genes. Towards the end, however, he added
his view that culture also evolves and that “memes” are the units of cultural
selection.
The key to Dawkins’s idea is that Darwinian evolution is a particular
instance of a process that we might also expect to ﬁnd in other areas. It
will be helpful, therefore, to begin with a swift review of Charles Darwin’s
theory of descent, before explaining how the meme hypothesis emerges
from it. Having characterized Dawkins’s own view of what has come to be
termed “memetics”, I then brieﬂy defend its adoption against the alter-
native research programme of sociobiology. There is also in this chapter
an important clariﬁcation of the relation between genes and memes.
These introductory discussions provide history and context for the more
detailed investigations of subsequent chapters.
Genetic Evolution
Natural Selection
In the early nineteenth century, the problem of the origin of species was
so far from being solved that Darwin referred to it as the “mystery of
mysteries”. He worked on his own solution for more than two decades,
until in 1859 The Origin of Species brought together a vast mass of previously
isolated facts, all of which ﬁtted into place when seen in the light of his
theory of descent.
6

The Meme Hypothesis
7
Darwin was famously inspired by Malthus to see that all organisms
are engaged in a perpetual struggle for existence, due to the pressure
of population on the available resources. Beginning with the facts that
organisms in a species vary and that those variations are passed on to
their offspring, he saw in addition that human beings have used this
to their advantage by artiﬁcially selecting animals and plants with the
most useful variations. He argued that, since organic variations useful to
man have occurred, it seems likely that in thousands of generations some
variations useful to each organism would also have occurred. If so, then
because of the ongoing struggle for existence, any individual with such
an advantage would have had the best chance of survival and procreation,
and any injurious variation would lead to the destruction of its owner –
with the result that those organisms are naturally selected which have the
optimum ﬁt to conditions of existence. Later, in The Descent of Man (1871),
Darwin added that humans are subject to this evolutionary process just
like any other animals. His view was that our unique mental features would
one day be explicable by natural selection, which could also account for
human social and ethical behaviour.
Genetics
Today, gene theory tells us that natural selection consists in the differen-
tial survival of replicators – things that make copies of themselves. In the
struggle for existence, replicators with “longevity, fecundity, and copying
ﬁdelity”1 will have a better chance of survival than others, and it is now
widely accepted that in biology those replicators are genes. A preliminary
sketch of gene theory, based largely on Richard Dawkins’s account, will
thus provide a useful backdrop to his meme hypothesis.
As a starting point, familiarity with a little vocabulary from the lan-
guage of genetics would be helpful: jargon in its best sense is useful both
as shorthand and as a conceptual tool. Although this is not the point to
digress into the technical details of genetic replication – this book is after
all written by a philosopher rather than a cellular biologist – gene theory
does provide the background to memetics, and it will often prove fruitful
to explore the analogy between the two. Thus: a gene “stores” the informa-
tion that it replicates in deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) – that is to say that
the gene occupies a particular locus (place) on a chromosome (a structure
within a cell nucleus), and the chromosome is composed of DNA; the
gene may also have alleles, which are alternative forms of it in the popula-
tion, occupying the same locus on that chromosome and controlling the
same sorts of things as it does (e.g., eye colour) – its phenotypic effects.

8
The Selﬁsh Meme
The story goes that in the “primeval soup” the competition for re-
sources and space meant that the ancestors of genes fared best if they
had some means of protection. Over time, the protective mechanisms
that they developed evolved into more complex “survival machines” – in
our case, the human body. Although genes are the units of reproduc-
tion, their existence within these “survival machines”, or vehicles, means
that they are selected indirectly: their differential survival rates depend
on their phenotypic effects. So long as they replicate accurately, their ef-
fects will also be passed on to the next generation, but when genes do not
make exact copies their effects will vary too, and individuals will survive or
be eliminated as a result of such (un)favourable variations. Continuous,
gradual changes of this sort will result, through successive generations,
in new species and types.
Another signiﬁcant feature of evolution, as Dawkins sees it, is the na-
ture of the replicators. Famously, he refers to genes as “selﬁsh”. By this
he means that each behaves in such a way as to increase its own welfare
at the expense of other genes in the gene pool. Successful adaptations
will result in its longer life, say, or increased fecundity. He certainly does
not mean to imply that genes are consciously seeking their own replica-
tion, but simply that they cannot survive if they are inefﬁcient at self-
replication.
Why Accept Gene Theory?
At the time that The Origin was published, Darwin’s ideas were highly con-
troversial in a way that they are not, amongst scientists, today. Nonetheless,
even then emergent theses in palaeontology, biology and geology were all
contributing to an intellectual climate which was more receptive to the
novel idea that species might change over time, and Darwin capitalized
on this by collecting a mass of evidence in support of his theory. When
Mendel’s gene hypothesis came to light, it seemed to be Darwin’s ﬁnal
vindication, for it provided a mechanism for evolution.
Today the explanatory success of neo-Darwinism is undeniable. Seeing
things from the genes’ point of view allows us to explain all sorts of superﬁ-
cially puzzling phenomena. A well-known example is biological altruism,
when members of a species behave in ways that beneﬁt other individu-
als at their own expense: the individual’s behaviour may be detrimental
to his own survival, but it promotes the survival of close members of his
species – members who (because they are relatives, or just very much like

The Meme Hypothesis
9
him) share many of his genes. Thus his behaviour is “altruistic” at the
individual, but “selﬁsh” at the genetic, level.*
This is a speciﬁc instance of explanatory success. In general, the point
is that the survival of a species depends upon the preservation of its mem-
bers’ strengths. The existence of genes – units of transmission, to future
generations, of the beneﬁcial characteristics of the present generation –
makes this possible. In particular, Mendel’s theory of divisible and recom-
binable pairs of alleles provides the variation upon which selection can
act. Not only via the recombination of genetic information, but also by
its mutation (since genes’ copying ﬁdelity is not always exact), the gene
pool varies, and selection ensures that advantageous variations are pre-
served. Hence, over enormous time spans, nature’s immense variety can
be explained. Such explanatory power justiﬁes our acceptance of gene
theory. Long before the identiﬁcation of their physical basis in DNA there
were very good reasons to believe in genes’ existence, for they provide
the basic material of selection.
The Meme Hypothesis
This, then, is the background to the meme hypothesis, which extrapolates
from the Darwinian theory of biological evolution to apply the concept
of selection more generally. As Dawkins puts it, “Darwinism is too big a
theory to be conﬁned to the narrow context of the gene”:2 its essential
feature isthedifferentialsurvival ofreplicators –anyreplicators.Whatever
the type of replicator involved, Dawkins conjectures, its variation under
conditions of restricted resources would lead to a form of evolution.
There is a process at work here, whose function should in theory be
unaffected by the medium upon which it is based. Just as the same sum
can be performed by hand, on a calculator or on one of any number of
computer spreadsheet programs, so Dawkins wonders whether the same
evolutionary algorithm might be able to operate on a range of different
units of selection.
His suggestion is attractive because it seems to strike a happy bal-
ance between the extremists who would bring everything under a pat-
tern of development that mimics biological evolution, and those who
prefer to restrict the concept purely to biology. Dawkins rejects such a
* I am talking here about biological altruism, rather than altruism as we might understand
it in everyday speech: the genetic impartiality of religious doctrines such as “love thy
neighbour” is arguably inexplicable at this level.

10
The Selﬁsh Meme
restriction as artiﬁcial, but nor does he tie himself to a particular pattern
of development; rather, he extracts the signiﬁcant features of evolution-
ary theory, and extends their domain of inﬂuence.
In particular he turns his attention to culture, which he sees as the dis-
tinctive feature of the human species. Cultural transmission does occur in
species other than man, but not to the same vast extent. In humans alone,
Dawkins hypothesizes another example of the process that Darwinism
illustrates, in this case involving cultural replicators. These replicators
he calls “memes”, and he postulates a new form of selection such that
“once the genes have provided their survival machines with brains that
are capable of rapid imitation, the memes will automatically take over.”3
Dawkins deﬁnes a meme as “a unit of cultural inheritance, hypothesized
as analogous to the particulate gene, and as naturally selected in virtue
of its phenotypic consequences on its own survival and replication in the
cultural environment”.4
As examples of memes, he suggests ideas, catch-phrases, tunes (or
snatches of tunes), fashions and skills.† As with genes, the constituents
of success will be long life, fecundity and accuracy of replication; for
individual copies, fecundity is the most important factor. The element of
competition necessary for any selection to take place is introduced by the
brain’s limited attention: in order to dominate, a meme must distract the
brain’s attention from other memes. Success in this matter will depend
upon the structure of the brain, as well as on the stability of the meme and
its “penetrance in the cultural environment”.5 The latter will depend on
psychological appeal, and according to Dawkins this means (as for genes)
that coadapted complexes – that is, evolutionarily stable sets of memes –
will occur. Selection will favour those memes capable of exploiting the
current cultural environment, which obviously includes other memes also
trying to be selected. As sets of memes cooperate, new ones will ﬁnd it
more difﬁcult to penetrate the environment later: the complex provides
protection against invasion. The compatibility rule will apply particularly
in areas such as theories of science. For other types of memes different
criteria will apply – “catchiness” for tunes, for example.
Dawkins emphasizes that their success will not depend on the
(dis)advantages they produce for the genotypes that produced the brains
† In this section I provide an overview of meme theory as Dawkins himself has outlined
it. Obviously there are areas here which other memeticists would ﬁnd controversial, but
as a preliminary sketch of the hypothesis I think it most appropriate to stick with its
originator’s views.

The Meme Hypothesis
11
they inhabit. Memes, like genes, are selﬁsh: their success depends on the
advantages they confer on themselves. In the struggle for brains’ attention
they must in some way be “better” than their rivals, but this need have
nothing to do with the effects they have on the genetic success of their
possessors. Although the needs of genes and memes may often coincide
(a meme will not last long if it causes its possessor to die before she can
transmit it, for example), they may sometimes be in complete opposition:
Dawkins uses the example of a meme for celibacy to illustrate this
possibility.
He says that a meme will, like a gene, be successful “by proxy”: via its
phenotypic effects. The meme itself is a “unit of information residing in
a brain”,6 and its phenotypic effects are the external consequences of
that piece of information. Words, skills and music are “the outward and
visible (audible, etc.) manifestations of the memes within the brain”,7
which are transmitted between individuals via their sense organs, leaving
on the recipient’s brain a (not necessarily exact) copy that it is free to
transmit again. Dawkins notices that a gene’s phenotypic effects take two
forms: the use it makes of the cellular apparatus to make copies of itself;
and the effects it has on the external world, which inﬂuence its survival
chances. He says that memes also have two types of effect. The ﬁrst is
the use of their possessors’ communication and imitation skills in order
to replicate. The second, as for genes, consists in the effects they have
on the world, which inﬂuence their survival chances. The success of this
second type of effect will (for both kinds of replicator) depend on the
current environment, a crucial part of which will be the existing pool of
replicators.
The Gene-Meme Analogy
Notice that, although “memetic” evolution may for convenience be re-
ferred to as “analogous to” genetic evolution, this should not be taken to
imply that memetics is theoretically dependent on genetics. Whilst it is
true that in the chronological order of theoretical development memetic
evolution has been inspired by the theory of genetic evolution, this is not
the order of explanatory dependence. Rather, both are examples of a
more abstract, generally applicable theory of the evolution of replicators
under conditions of competition.
In fact the use of the term “analogy”, in this context, deserves some
closer attention. Usually this term implies that at least one side of the
comparison is fairly well developed – we talk about electric “current”, for

12
The Selﬁsh Meme
instance, because water ﬂow is familiar to us – and an analogy would not
be of any use if this were not the case.
A different sort of scientiﬁc comparison can be made between subjects
like gravity and electrostatic force: here a new student can easily see the
similarity between the two laws below without being familiar with either
ﬁeld:
Newton’s law of universal gravitation:
Coulomb’s law:
“The force between two masses is
directly proportional to the product
of their masses and inversely
proportional to the square of their
separation.”
“The force between two point
charges is directly proportional to
the product of their charges and
inversely proportional to the square
of their separation.”
The relationship between memetics and genetics is best understood
as a combination of these alternatives. A meme is not, strictly speaking,
an analogue of a gene: rather, since both are replicators, a meme is a
different token of the same type of entity as a gene. (The type-token dis-
tinction is a handy conceptual tool, of which I make fairly frequent use. A
token is any “particular specimen of any general class. All these specimens
may be described as the several tokens of that single type.”)8 Similarly,
cultural evolution is a different example of the same type of process as
neo-Darwinism, rather than a simple analogue of it. This means that the
two processes have the same description at a sufﬁciently functional, ab-
stract level.
Nonetheless, because we are already familiar with genetics, we can
use it to illuminate memetics. In other words, although the particular
details of biological evolution may not carry over into cultural evolution,
it seems reasonable to exploit our knowledge of neo-Darwinism as a guide
to what the essential elements of cultural evolution might be. This sort of
comparison between two phenomena is far from unique in science, where
it is quite common to ﬁnd different tokens of the same type of process
realized within different media (e.g., wave properties such as diffraction,
interference and refraction may all be observed in water waves as well as
in electromagnetic and sound waves). “Comparison of two examples is
a good way to locate what is most important”; it helps in “pruning away
content and leaving essentials”.9
Why Accept the Meme Hypothesis?
Returning now to Dawkins’s original hypothesis, the question arises what
are the prima facie grounds for accepting it. This section explains why

The Meme Hypothesis
13
the memetic research programme looks promising, and for consistency
it follows Charles Darwin’s method of defence for his own evolutionary
theory.
The starting point for Darwin’s line of thought was that variations occur
within the traits of a species, and that they are passed on to the offspring of
the organisms that so vary. Variation seems to be a good starting place for
a theory of cultural evolution, too. There are often marked differences
amongst the knowledge and practices of those who would claim to have
the same concept, skill or idea, and it is possible to trace the extent of
such variation to the point where two people at either extreme of it would
deny that they have the same idea at all.
As an example, take the ability to play the piano: some people are
talented sight readers, others play from music but are hopeless sight
readers, others struggle to read music but improvise well, and others play
only by ear. Along this spectrum of players there will be people whose
abilities are almost the same – those who can all read music but some
of whom are better sight readers than others, for instance. If, though,
we compare those at opposite ends of the spectrum, all of whom would
describe themselves as pianists, then we can see that their abilities are
so different that they might more accurately be classiﬁed into separate
categories, such as concert pianists and jazz improvisers.
Are such variations passed on to offspring? Clearly, “offspring” does
not here refer to biological but to cultural descendants – and it seems
obvious that the variations are transmitted. If my piano teacher is a con-
cert pianist then he will teach me to read music, with an emphasis on
the repetitive practice of pieces that I have ﬁrst sight-read; if he is a jazz
pianist then he will teach me the techniques of improvisation and how
to play by ear. Just as the variations that you inherit from your biological
parents may develop differently in you, depending on the nature of your
environment, so the variations that you acquire from your cultural prede-
cessors (who might be your teachers, people whose books you have read,
musicians whose style you have imitated, etc.) may develop differently
in the context of your mind and environment. What matters from the
point of view of evolution, however, is that those variations are replicated
in you.
In culture as in biology, then, variations exist and are passed on to
the next “generation”. The next strand in Darwin’s argument came from
Malthus’s theory of a population which increases much faster than its
limited resources. From this, Darwin extracted the idea of the struggle for
existence, which is another important structural feature of evolutionary

14
The Selﬁsh Meme
theory. Does the cultural “population” also increase at a swifter rate than
its resources?
The answer to this must depend on the deﬁnitions of a cultural popu-
lation, and of the nature of its resources. The contenders for membership
of the cultural population are controversial amongst memeticists, but I
think that it can be stated without raising too many hackles that they are
almost innumerable: ideas, concepts, skills, concertos, fashions, ways of
building houses, farming methods, . . . These are all aspects of the cultural
world that might potentially be passed on from one possessor of them
to another. Therefore their resources must be human beings’ attention.
It seems obvious that culture and ideas develop and change at a much
faster rate than that of biological evolution, and that the attention of
each human brain is limited. In order to maintain some sort of grip on
day-to-day reality we have to choose between the skills, theories and so on
to which we might direct our efforts and which we might keep available
in memory. It is just not possible for us to keep up with every available
area of knowledge and skill. Thus it appears that the cultural population
does increase faster than its resources.
From the transmission of variations and the struggle for existence,
Darwin derived the idea of natural selection: in the struggle for the
resources of a limited environment, those organisms with slightly ad-
vantageous variations will have a better chance of survival and replica-
tion, whereas those whose variations are at all deleterious will ﬁnd their
survival threatened. There is no great difﬁculty for cultural evolution
with this stage of Darwin’s argument, for it consists merely in deduc-
ing the consequences of the previous stages (though, as noted above,
those consequences will be played out a far greater pace than is the
case in biology). A form of selection must occur in minds and culture,
and we should expect to see the preservation of those ideas and skills
with the best ﬁt to their environment, and the extinction of those with-
out. At ﬁrst glance, therefore, the meme hypothesis does hold some
promise.
Sociobiology
This initial survey has raised the hope that a theory of cultural evolu-
tion can be developed along the same lines as the theory of biological
evolution – but perhaps we should not forget that Darwin himself would
have disagreed with such a project, since he believed that human be-
haviour can be attributed to just the same laws of descent as that of

The Meme Hypothesis
15
other species. Accordingly, some would argue that sociobiology is more
appropriate than memetics as a means of studying human society. The
aim of this discipline is, according to Edward Wilson – one of its found-
ing fathers – “to show how social groups adapt to the environment by
evolution”.10 That human society is greatly inﬂuenced by its genetic her-
itage Wilson does not doubt. The “accumulated evidence” for this, he
describes as “decisive”.
Now, there is nothing very interesting about the claim that broad, gen-
eral aspects of social behaviour will, if advantageous, be selected: the point
of society is to protect its members’ genes and encourage their propaga-
tion, so behaviour or attitudes that tend to preserve social structures will
(amongst social organisms) be favoured. The interesting question is what
level of social detail our genes control – and I would argue that there is so
much variation amongst cultures that it is highly implausible that many
of the speciﬁc details should be genetically controlled.
The truth is, rather, that natural selection generally obliterates the
heritable variation of the traits that it favours: as a result of being
favoured, they become ﬁxed throughout the population, and thereafter
any variation amongst the relevant phenotypic effects must be explained
environmentally.11 Moreover, there is no reason to believe that the hu-
man brain of one or even two thousand years ago was dissimilar to ours;
yet there is an enormous disparity between modern culture and that of
previous millennia. This pace of change is much too rapid to be picked
up at the level of genes, so if evolutionary theory is to be applied to
such changes, then it will be more appropriate to bring it to bear on
behaviour and the mind than on neural architecture and its genetic
code.
Sociobiology asserts that the organic origin of the human capacity
for culture ensures that “however it may work in detail, culture will usu-
ally enhance genetic ﬁtness”12 – and it is certainly true that our gen-
eral capacity for culture could not have evolved had it not initially been
adaptively advantageous: the early development of the mind and of cul-
ture must have provided us with a mechanism to ensure that more of
the successful cultural traits were beneﬁcial than were harmful to us,
because we still exist. It seems likely, in any case, that an advanced ca-
pacity for learning would have increased ﬁtness. On the other hand, this
does not imply that each particular cultural trait will increase ﬁtness,
and must also be distinguished from the claim that there will still, today,
be a general correlation between cultural habits’ popularity and their
helpfulness to us. Today the rate of cultural development is so great that

16
The Selﬁsh Meme
most such developments will be neutral with respect to our biological
survival.
Furthermore, a distinction should be drawn between the true fact that
all human behaviour will fall within the potential range permitted by our
genetic code, and the extrapolation from this to the invalid deduction
that where there is adaptive behaviour there is always a genetic basis for it.
Such a suggestion is undermined by the quite striking difference between
the rates at which the physical and the cultural worlds change. Think, for
example, of the development of the computer: its adaptive advantage is
immeasurable, but it would be ridiculous to assert that the human genetic
code has changed to accommodate it.
Clearly, the memetic project would be damaged if it turned out that
the human mind is wholly innate. Conversely, sociobiology would be seri-
ously undermined by the conﬁrmation of the tabula rasa hypothesis that
the mind is, at birth, a blank surface upon which experience writes. Since
neither of these extremes is likely to be wholly true, the important ques-
tion is, as mentioned, where we should draw the line between genetic and
environmental (i.e., cultural) control over behaviour. The closer this line
is to the “innate” extreme, the more signiﬁcant will be some of the claims
of sociobiology; the closer it is to the “cultural” extreme, the less plausible
they will be. The discussion in this section implies that the development
of the human mind is not so heavily genetically determined that the role
left for culture is trivial, and therefore that cultural evolutionary theory
will provide a complement, rather than a rival, to much of the account
that sociobiology provides of human thinking and behaviour.
Towards an Adequate Theory of Cultural Evolution
This chapter has provided the beginnings of an argument to suggest
that the evolutionary processes – replication, selection and variation –
are present in culture, but an adequate theory of cultural evolution de-
pends also on our ability to isolate the aspects of each process which are
most signiﬁcant in that realm. Memeticists claim that there are elements
of culture which vary, are copied and selected, but this claim is – even
when supported by observation and argument – much too vague to sat-
isfy. We need to look deeper than this, investigating the ways in which
cultural information is preserved; the mechanisms that enable such com-
plex information to be replicated; the causes and limits of the variations
that arise; the factors that inﬂuence selection amongst these variations.

The Meme Hypothesis
17
Only then will it be possible to build a proper account of how culture
evolves.
Chapters 3–6 examine each of these evolutionary processes in turn,
demonstrating that all can be observed in culture as well as in biol-
ogy, and making use of the genetic analogy to extract the key features
of each.

3
Cultural DNA
The most basic element in evolution, whether biological or cultural, is
replication. There are two steps involved in replication: the preservation
of the information that is copied, and the means by which it is transmitted.
This chapter asks in what form cultural information might be preserved.
In evolution of any form, what evolves is essentially information. Genes
are a means of preserving biological information, and the format that
they use is DNA. We know where to look for the units of biological selec-
tion (within organisms) and we know what form that information takes
(DNA). In culture, however, things are not yet so obvious, and this is a
real stumbling block for many who ﬁrst encounter the meme hypothesis.
It is all very well to suggest that culture “evolves” via memes, just as biol-
ogy does via genes, but where exactly are these memes to be found and –
most fundamentally – what are they?
The second half of this book looks in detail at the problem of memes’
location, but this chapter concentrates on the issue of memes’ under-
lying basis. Just as the course of genetic evolution has been shaped
by its ultimate reliance on DNA, so the course of cultural evolution
must ultimately be dependent on the nature of the information that
is being selected. There was a time when Mendel’s gene hypothesis was
undermined by the absence of any real understanding of how hered-
ity worked. It was not until Watson and Crick had revealed heredity’s
chemical basis, with the discovery of DNA’s molecular structure, that
genetics really took off. Similarly, until we can give an account of how
cultural heredity works, the ediﬁce of memetics will inevitably be weak-
ened by this gap in its foundations. What, then, is the cultural equivalent
of DNA?
18

Cultural DNA
19
Information and Its Effects
We can learn a lot about the nature of replicators by studying their most
familiar incarnation, DNA. It is crucial to note that DNA preserves in-
formation between generations in a particular way. First, and most fun-
damentally, the information must be preserved in a form that allows it
to be replicated. Secondly, since genes are selected via their phenotypic
effects, the information must also be preserved in a form that enables
its effects to be activated in a variety of contexts and situations. If the
information cannot exert its phenotypic effects – or if the circumstances
in which it can do so are too tightly restricted – then it will be unavailable
for selection.
Since memes are replicators it is reasonable to expect that their con-
tent, too, must be preserved in a particular way. Like genes, the most
fundamental requirement must be that their information is preserved in
a form that allows it to be copied. Similarly, memes’ information must also
be preserved in such a form that it potentially has a phenotypic effect,
via which it can be selected.
What does this mean in practice? Much information will have a severely
restricted impact on the meme pool, owing to its limited effects on the
world. The reasons for such limitations are varied. For example, the
Spanish that I learned many years ago, for exam purposes, has now all
but disappeared from my memory, since its potential effects (enabling me
to communicate with other Spanish speakers, or to read Spanish text)
are not able to operate when I am surrounded by monolingual English
speakers and choose not to buy any books written in Spanish. That in-
formation, in the context of my particular mind and environment, has
therefore very little effect on the world. Other representational content
may not have much potential in any context: a poorly written novel, which
neither stirs the heart nor stimulates the mind of the reader, will strug-
gle to survive in the competition for our attention. There may be some
mileage in being associated with a successful replicator (i.e., being selected
as a side effect of a replicator with useful effects), but in general a meme
demands content that has an executive role, in (potentially) producing
a phenotypic effect.
From this it is apparent that there is a clear distinction between a repli-
cator’s content and its effects on the world: memes must be about the things
that they affect, just as DNA can be said to carry information about the phe-
notypic effects that genes control. The key question for memetics, then,
is this: in what form might units of cultural information be preserved, so

20
The Selﬁsh Meme
that the content of those units can both be maintained between genera-
tions and at the same time be able to produce the relevant effects on the
world? DNA does it for genes: what is the equivalent for memes?
Representational Content: The DNA of Culture
This chapter introduces the thesis that memes – the units of cultural
information – should be speciﬁed by their representational content. What
exactly does this mean? At one level the answer is straightforward: it sim-
ply means that, as representations of a portion of information, memes can
be said to have a certain content. “Representation” is not a word that oc-
curs frequently in the vocabulary of most people, but philosophers do
not mean anything very complicated by it. Human minds are furnished
with all sorts of mental states and events, including thoughts and feelings,
attitudes and opinions, memories and skills; a “representation” is simply
some piece of our mental furniture which carries information about the
world. For example, a thought that “the object on my desk is a book” is
a mental representation of a bit of the world (i.e. that book). So “rep-
resentational content” refers to the information that is included in the
content of our representations.
The complications arise when we start to ask how we know exactly
what information is included in any given mental representation. In the
example given, exactly which bits of information about the book are
included in my representation of it: the fact that it can be read, that it is
a paperback, that it is a dictionary, or what?
Philosophers’ various responses to this problem are known as “theo-
ries of content”. There is as yet no consensus on which of these theo-
ries is correct, but the resolution of this debate is of key importance to
memetics. It is representational content, I shall argue, which accounts for
the mechanisms of memetic heredity and for memes’ power over their
phenotypic effects, in the same way that the nature of DNA accounts
for the mechanisms of genetic heredity and for genes’ power over their
phenotypic effects. Moreover, it is a meme’s basis in representational con-
tent which enables it to carry information of the depth and complexity
that we ﬁnd in modern human culture, and to interact with the other
memes in its environment. An adequate theory of representational con-
tent is as important for memes as an understanding of DNA is to genetics.
Such a theory must be able to determine both which sorts of represen-
tations count as memes, and how we can specify the content of those
that do.

Cultural DNA
21
Thus it is the task of the remainder of this chapter to extract, from
philosophers’ musings on this subject, the factors most relevant to memet-
ics. In this sense it is a more philosophically “technical” chapter than the
rest of the book, but the effort is worth it to clarify such an important
issue. It is only fair that I should draw the attention of nonphilosophers
to the controversial nature of some of what follows – in that the details
pertain to a theory of content which would not be endorsed by every
philosopher in this active area of debate. Nonetheless, the conclusions
that I reach are not totally dependent on my preferred theory of con-
tent, which may be treated by those philosophers who disagree with it as
merely illustrative of the fact that an adequate account can be given of
how representational content (“memetic DNA”) preserves information
between generations in the appropriate way.
Representational Content – a Technical Interlude
When scientists were searching for the chemical basis of genetic heredity,
their focus was on this question: given that our bodies do preserve infor-
mation from generation to generation, how is that information physically
realized, and how can we ascertain which information is contained in
which bits of the physical structure? There is an analogous question for
philosophers who want to know how the content of our mental represen-
tations is ﬁxed: given that we humans do carry mental representations
of the physical world (as well as abstract concepts, etc.), how do we ob-
tain the information that they contain, and how can we ascertain which
information is contained in which representations?
Simple Indicator Theory
I return, as a discussion example, to my representation of the book on
my desk and the question how its content is determined. In other words,
how do we know for certain which bits of information about that book
are contained in my representation of it?
One answer is that the content of any belief is determined by the state
of affairs that causes it, or that it reliably indicates. So the content of my
“book” belief is determined by the book itself, with whatever properties it
actually has – and indeed this accords well with common sense. Not many
people would naturally fall to questioning themselves too deeply about
the content of their mental representations, but many would share the
intuition, once this issue has been raised, that the content of their beliefs
must be determined by the bits of the world that trigger the beliefs in

22
The Selﬁsh Meme
the ﬁrst place. To put it simply, I believe that there is a book on my desk,
because there is a book on my desk. In philosophy this view is known as
the simple indicator theory of content.1
In a bit more detail, it goes as follows. Organisms have certain percep-
tual abilities. I, for example, can see the book on my desk. When I do so,
something happens in my brain which indicates to me that this object has
been perceived: a sort of mental “ﬂag” is raised. More formally, this ﬂag
is called a natural internal indicator: it indicates that something has been
perceived; it is internal because it’s inside my brain; and it is natural in
the sense that it happens purely as a result of my innate nervous system –
I cannot choose whether or not to perceive the objects in front of me,
and have no conscious control over what goes on in my brain when I do.
This particular ﬂag, then, is my natural internal indicator that a book has
been seen.
Now, according to simple indicator theory, whenever I see a certain
object – in this case a book – the same mental ﬂag is raised in my brain;
and this is a different ﬂag from the one that is raised when I see Joan, or
an apple. In this sense the “ﬂags” carry information about the external
situations that most reliably cause them to be raised. I know that what I
have just seen is a book, and not a piece of fruit, because the ﬂag that was
raised in my brain is the one that reliably indicates the fact that I have
just seen a book, and not the one that is raised whenever I see an apple.
Obviously it is very useful for me to have information about certain
objects, and in lots of cases it will be equally useful for that information
to prime me to behave in a certain way: greeting the object (Joan) rather
than trying to eat it (the apple), for instance. So my mental ﬂags are
part of a causal chain, in which their being raised is the effect of relevant
perceptual input, and is subsequently the cause of appropriate behaviours.
Thus the proponents of simple indicator theory conclude that the con-
tent of our beliefs is ﬁxed in the following way: beliefs are those natural,
internal indicators which have become representations with the func-
tion of controlling a certain behaviour, because of the information they
carry about external situations, and in order that the behaviour may be
produced whenever that situation occurs. To put this in terms of our
example: the book ﬂag is a representation whose function is to control
various responses (the mental response “that’s a book,” the physical be-
haviour of picking it up to read it, etc.) because of the information that
it carries about the external situation (i.e., because this ﬂag gets raised
whenever I see that type of object), and in order that the same responses
may be produced whenever I see a book. So the information that is carried

Cultural DNA
23
by this book-representation is determined by my past observations of
books.
The Disjunctive Problem
Common sense, of course, is not always the best guide to reality, and the
most notorious difﬁculty with such an account is known as the disjunctive
problem.2 The central claim of simple indicator theory is that the content
of a belief is ﬁxed during a learning period and determined by that which
most reliably causes the belief. The disjunctive problem is that “there
are many equally good ways of describing the conditions under which a
particular representational state has been selected.”3 To put this another
way, simple indicator theory says that the content of a belief is determined
by whatever reliably causes it – but the difﬁculty lies in establishing what
was the most reliable cause.
Problems arise, in particular, when a mental ﬂag is raised by the per-
ception of something that is – to the person or creature involved –
indistinguishable from that which usually causes it to be raised. Perhaps
the object on my desk is not a book in the conventional sense, but rather
a box that has been designed to look very much like a book: when the
“book” is opened, it reveals a hollow centre for storing valuables in a place
where burglars would not usually think of looking. When I glance at this
object, it looks so similar to a book that the “book” ﬂag is raised in my
brain. Do I now have a correct or incorrect representation of the object
on my desk?
Common sense at ﬁrst dictates that my representation is obviously in-
correct. What I see on my desk is not a book, but a book-shaped box. But
wait. Whether my representation is true or false will be determined by
the match between the object that triggered it and the representation’s
content – which, according to simple indicator theory, is determined by
whatever reliably causes it. Well, book-shaped boxes reliably cause this
particular representation, just as ordinary books do. (Otherwise, such
boxes would be pretty pointless and rather unmarketable.) In which case
my representation is reliably caused, not by books per se, but by books-
or-similar-looking-objects. This implies that what I have is a correct rep-
resentation of a book-or-similar-looking-object, rather than an incorrect
representation of a book.
Things look simpler if (as I believe to be the case) we can be sure that
I have never in my life before seen one of these book-boxes, so that every
previous time the relevant ﬂag has been raised in my brain its cause has
been an actual book. The most reliable cause of my representation is,

24
The Selﬁsh Meme
then, an ordinary book, and it seems sensible to say that, this ﬁrst time I
come across a fake book, when it triggers the same ﬂag my representation
of it is just incorrect. Amongst other reasons, it is clear that this particular
ﬂag triggers behaviour that is quite inappropriate in response to a book-
box (which cannot be read).
Yet what if I’m wrong in thinking that I’ve never seen one of these
book-boxes before? What if in fact I have seen several of them, without
realising it, and without even knowing that such an object exists? If this
is the case, then I have a representation of certain objects in my envi-
ronment, which is reliably triggered by both actual and fake books. So
simple indicator theory would have to say that the representation’s con-
tent is something like books-or-similar-looking-objects. Equally clearly,
however, if I opened a book-box in the hope of reading it then I would be
disappointed, and indeed would no doubt say that I had made a mistake
(formed an incorrect representation).
It is at this point that many ﬁne minds, unused to the sorts of thought
experiment that fascinate philosophers, begin to ﬁnd such discussions
vertiginous. This particular example is brought to a standstill by the fact
that of course you could ask me how I was representing the object on
my desk; indeed, my very choice of words (“book” vs. “paperback” vs.
“booklike object”) would give you more than a small clue to the content
of my representation.
The question behind the example, however, moves on. How is the
content of a representation ﬁxed, if not simply by that which most reliably
causes it? In our search for the answer, we cannot yet forget about the
disjunctive problem.
The Philosophers’ Frog
The classical philosophical illustration of the disjunctive problem centres
around a frog, who can perceive small black things (sbt’s), but whose
visual system is not sophisticated enough to be able to distinguish between
different types of sbt: many of the sbt’s in the vicinity happen to be ﬂies,
which are nutritious for the frog; but some (such as wind-blown grit,
which the frog cannot distinguish from ﬂies) are not.
The frog, then, has a natural indicator of sbt’s. According to simple
indicator theory, if ﬂies are the most reliable causes of the indicator’s
being triggered, then that indicator carries information about the pres-
ence of ﬂies. If, in addition, the frog is rewarded for ﬂicking out its tongue
whenever ﬂies are present, then it will be useful for that indicator to be

Cultural DNA
25
linked with the frog’s tongue-ﬂicking behaviour. Thus a representation
will develop, with control over the relevant behaviour, and its content will
be something approximating “ﬂy”.
Of course the problems arise because the indicator in question is not
triggered only by ﬂies, but also by every other sbt that the frog cannot
distinguish from ﬂies – even though some of these objects may not even
be nutritious for the frog. So what happens on those occasions when the
indicator is triggered by a different sbt? If all other sbt’s in the vicinity are
different but (from the frog’s point of view) indistinguishable from ﬂies,
then how is it possible to tell whether what happens on these occasions is
an incorrect representation of the sbt as a ﬂy, or a correct representation of
the sbt as a ﬂy-or-other-sbt? To put it very crudely, when the frog ﬂicks its
tongue out in response to wind-blown grit, how can we tell whether what
the frog “thinks” is wrong (“ﬂy”) or right (“ﬂy-or-something-similar”)?
Thus it begins to look as if the content of a representation cannot be
determined quite as straightforwardly as simple indicator theory would
claim. Situations like mine and the frog’s show how hard it can be to
characterize the most reliable cause of a representation, and this implies
that there are many equally good ways of assigning content to it.
Ben’s Lucky Mistake
Nonetheless, it is surely important not to become bogged down in ar-
cane examples of the sort that hardly ever crop up in reality. Surely the
vast majority of our mental representations are created as the result of
encounters with a particular sort of object – a book, an apple, a person
or whatever – and not as the result of encounters with a mixture of that
object and objects indistinguishable from it.
This may be true, but unfortunately does not help very much, as my
next example will show. It illustrates the case of representations that might
be described as “lucky mistakes”. In such cases, a ﬂag is raised by some-
thing different (but indistinguishable) from what usually raises it, but –
unlike when the frog catches some grit – the behaviour that it triggers is
fortuitously appropriate.
Suppose that a wasp ﬂies into a room where there is a small child
who has never before encountered one. Ben has, however, seen bees
many times before, and the wasp now triggers the representation that
he has previously had whenever bees have ﬂown into the room. That
representation was created as a result only of previous encounters with
bees, since this is the ﬁrst time that Ben has seen a wasp. As a result
of his beliefs about those sorts of insects, Ben will believe that this one

26
The Selﬁsh Meme
might sting him, avoid antagonising it, and do his best to let it back
into the garden. Unlike my response to the book-box (which would be
inappropriate: any attempt to read it would fail), Ben’s response to this
insect is quite appropriate.
My intuition about Ben is that, rather than a correct representation (of
a bee-type insect, for instance), he has made a lucky mistake (thinking it
is actually a bee). As it happens, for the purposes of his behaviour, it did
not matter whether it was a wasp or one of the things whose properties
were actually responsible for his representation. In both cases he should
want to act as he did. Indeed, he can quite happily go on through his
life representing all such insects in the same way, for in functional terms
this will lead him to successful behaviour in relation to them. In reality,
however, Ben has made a mistake: wasps are biologically different from
the other things with which he is co-representing them. If a more knowl-
edgeable person had been with him at the time, then she might have
pointed out the difference but advocated that he adopt the same strategy
with both insects. It just does not seem relevant that for Ben’s purposes at
the time it did not matter whether the insect was a wasp or a bee, since he
should have wanted to be rid of either one. No matter that both insects
fulﬁlled the same purpose in his life (causing him to represent them in
a certain way, and therefore to avoid them); what does seem relevant is
that he assigned the wrong identity to the wasp. Wasps are not bees.
Such examples show that even in cases where it seems obvious how
to describe the most reliable original cause of a belief (“bees” – because
Ben had encountered no other such insects during the learning period),
future events might lead us to question our descriptions (was it after
all “bees”, or was it “black and yellow buzzing insects”, or was it some-
thing else?). Following hard on the heels of the frog’s problems with
sbt’s, Ben’s encounters with hymenopterans present a serious challenge
to simple indicator theory. Does this mean that we have come no closer to
an explanation of how the content of representations – even quite simple
ones like Ben’s and the frog’s – are ﬁxed?
Types of Property
Fortunately not. Rather, what we can learn from such examples is that we
need to look in more detail at the objects that trigger our representations,
to discover which of their properties are relevant. In other words, instead
of thinking of a representation as containing information about partic-
ular objects or events, it will prove more useful to try to specify exactly
which aspects of those objects or events are included in its content. All

Cultural DNA
27
objects have a collection of properties – size, shape, colour, and so on –
and only some of those properties will be responsible for triggering our
representations of them. If we can identify these properties, then we can
begin to specify the content of each representation and hence to dis-
cern which objects or events are (in)correctly represented, when they
trigger it.
It will be helpful, in particular, to distinguish between two sorts of
property: the functionally relevant properties of what is represented, and
its causally relevant properties. Batesian mimicry neatly illustrates the
difference between the two.
In Batesian mimicry, a harmless species is protected from predators
by its resemblance to a harmful species. The venomous coral snake, for
example, is mimicked by several other snake species, such as the harm-
less milk and king snakes. The coral snake has distinctive alternating
yellow, red and black bands, and predators soon learn to avoid snakes
with that appearance. Snakes which resemble the coral snake will ben-
eﬁt from this avoidance behaviour, even if they are themselves wholly
harmless.
We can call the coral snake’s venom a functionally relevant property
of that snake. Its venom is the reason why, in the ﬁrst place, predators
learn to avoid the coral snake. Its appearance, on the other hand, we can
term a causally relevant property. It is this which, in the future, will cause
predators to avoid snakes which share that appearance.
Looking back at the wasp that ﬂew into the room earlier, we can see that
the functionally most relevant property of such insects is the knowledge
that they sting: this is the reason why Ben’s representation of them has
gained control over his avoidance of them. In contrast, what is causally
relevant to present or future encounters with them is their appearance:
that is what now triggers the controlling representation.
This distinction is useful because it will help us, later in the chapter,
to identify the properties that form part of any given representation’s
content. If, as I claim, representational content provides the mechanism
for memetic evolution, then it is essential to be able to specify how that
content is ﬁxed in our representations (just as gene theory needs to know
how genetic information is ﬁxed in DNA). Replicators preserve and copy
speciﬁc portions of information, and an adequate theory of the mech-
anism that enables them to do this should also tell us how to identify
precisely which bits are carried in each replicator. In the case of memes,
this means pinpointing the exact content of any given representation,
and this will be determined partly by the various properties of the object

28
The Selﬁsh Meme
or situation being represented; so the ability to pinpoint its relevant prop-
erties is crucial.
Yet this is not the only factor that will determine representational con-
tent. Content is ﬁxed, in addition, by the capabilities and history of the
organism doing the representing.
Different Sorts of Representation
It is reasonable to assume that not all representations will have the same
level of complexity. We know from experience that our own representa-
tions can be constructed in more detail as time goes on. At ﬁrst a familiar
face is just that; then it might be associated with a name; and as we come
to know that person better, extra layers of information are added – so
that when she walks into the room today, the representation that she
triggers is much more complex than it was last year. Equally, an expert
in any ﬁeld will have more complex representations of the concepts and
entities within that area than the majority of lay people: contrast a civil
engineer’s mental representation of a road with that possessed by most
of the rest of us.
So it is fair to say that I have some simple and some complex
representations; and that of the representations that I share with Beth
some of mine are simpler and others more complex than hers. From
this we can see that representational complexity varies, not only between
individual members of a species, but also within those individuals. How
much more, then, must it differ from species to species, since different
sorts of organisms are capable of such varying levels of comprehension
of their surroundings (contrast an eagle’s eyesight with a bat’s hearing
and a primate’s social awareness).
If we are to discover not only how representational content is speciﬁed
but also which sorts of mental representation might count as memes, then
we need to gain an understanding of the different sorts of representation
that can be formed – and to achieve this, we need to explore some of the
ways in which they are formed.
Nonassociative Learning: Representations as “Switches”
Representations are formed, on the whole, to link a behaviour with the
perception of a particular object or event. At the most basic level, such
links are formed via a process known as nonassociative learning, in which
learned behaviour is simply the result of exposure to a stimulus.
One example of this sort of learning is “imprinting” in young ani-
mals, who very quickly learn to recognize and be attracted to members

Cultural DNA
29
of their own species, simply through exposure to their presence at an
early enough age. Indeed they will become equally attached to a surro-
gate if it is presented at the right time: it is not unusual to come across
stories in the press of orphaned chicks becoming attached to a family
dog, and this is the process at work here. Habituation by much simpler
organisms, like sea snails, is another instance of the same sort of process:
these animals usually withdraw their respiratory organs when poked, but
if exposed to repeated stimulation then they become habituated and stop
withdrawing.4
The key in all such cases is that an inherited tendency is given direction
by exposure to a stimulus. Returning to our frog, its reaction to sbt’s
seems also to be an (imaginary) example of nonassociative learning: it has
evolved such that early exposure to whizzing sbt’s sets up a link between
them and the tongue’s response.
Thus the frog, like the sea snail in the real world, exhibits under the
relevant stimulus a type of behaviour that might be described as “on/off”:
either the sea snail withdraws or it does not; either the frog ﬂicks out its
tongue or it does not. There is, though, one key difference between
the two examples. The sea snail’s behaviour is controlled directly by the
stimulus, but in the frog’s case there is an intermediate step, whereby
the behaviour is controlled by a representation that is triggered by the
stimulus. Under these circumstances, the representation can helpfully be
seen as playing the role of a switch that turns the behaviour on or off.
Clearly such a representation has a very low level of complexity.
Internal Properties
Returning to Ben’s behaviour when the wasp ﬂew into the room, it may
be that this, too, can be viewed as “on/off”: perhaps it consists simply in
his keeping away from the insect, so that if he sees such an insect then
he avoids it, whereas if he sees a black, ﬂy-like creature then he doesn’t
bother. If this is so, then it is fair to describe his representation, too, as
just a switch that controls his behaviour.
Alternatively, his behaviour may be more complex: he may avoid the
insect, but also think to himself “there’s a bee” or just “there’s one of them
again”. In this case his representation is clearly more complex than our
imaginary frog’s. Not only are certain of the insect’s properties (appear-
ance, sting, etc.) relevant to Ben’s representation, but so is something
that is going on inside Ben’s mind. His avoidance behaviour is triggered
by an external stimulus, but his thought is about its identity, and this is
an internal property. That is, the thought (“there’s one of them again”)

30
The Selﬁsh Meme
relates this present perception to previous encounters with similar insects:
it links one internal representation with other, earlier ones. Ben’s repre-
sentation is thus involved in a relatively complex system, in which other
representations may affect the role that it plays in controlling behaviour.
Internal Properties and Lucky Mistakes
It is internal properties, such as identity, which provide the key to under-
standing cases of “lucky mistakes”. Whereas some representations simply
play the role of a switch in turning a given behaviour on or off, the content
of others includes not only the external properties of that which stimu-
lates them, but also internal properties such as identity. Consequently,
if we want to discover whether a representation has been triggered cor-
rectly in such cases, then we need to look not only at the stimulus and
resultant behaviour but also at the representation itself.
If the role of a representation in controlling behaviour is simply that
of a switch, then it seems right to say that the representation has been
“tripped” correctly if it results in appropriate behaviour and not other-
wise. This is because the only thing that we need to take into consideration
in answering this question is whether the correct stimulus-behaviour link
has been made.*
If, on the other hand, the representation’s role is more sophisticated,
then we cannot rely on the appropriateness of the resultant behaviour
to reveal whether the representation was also appropriate. Going back
to Ben and his wasp, for instance, it may be that the resultant behaviour
(avoidance) is fortuitously appropriate, but that the representation itself
is incorrect (because he has assigned the wrong identity to the insect).
This is because its accuracy is determined not only by the appropriateness
of the link between stimulus and behaviour but also by certain internal
properties. There are links not only between this representation, an exter-
nal stimulus and a given behaviour, but also between this representation
and other representations – and to determine its accuracy, we need to
check the appropriateness of all of its links, internal as well as external.
It is by now clear that the content of more complex representations is
determined not only by the properties of the external objects that they
represent (and we have broken these down into “functional” and “causal”
* Obviously things are not quite as straightforward as this implies: the disjunctive problem
reveals complications in determining whether the representation was tripped by an ap-
propriate stimulus, but the point is that the only links to be checked are between the
stimulus, the representation and the resultant behaviour.

Cultural DNA
31
properties) but also by any internal links that the organism has formed
between those representations and others. Since most human represen-
tations are obviously of this more complex sort, these conclusions will
prove vital to establishing the nature of the representational content that
forms the basis of memes.
Indeterminate Content?
Armed with the distinctions between “switches” and more complex rep-
resentations, and between different sorts of property (causally vs. func-
tionally relevant), it should now be possible to begin to track down the
content of any given representation.
It makes sense to begin with the simplest sort, such as the frog’s, which
are formed by an innate response to stimulus exposure. Let’s take just one
of the ﬂies’ properties, and investigate how we can tell whether or not it is
included in the frog’s representation of the ambient sbt’s. The property
of being food seems to be a good candidate for investigation, since this
is the key reason why the frog’s tongue-ﬂicking behaviour has become
linked to its representation of that sort of object. In this sense, then, food
is a functionally relevant property of the ﬂies, and this would seem to imply
that it must be included in the content of the frog’s representation.
Again, however, things are not so straightforward as they might at ﬁrst
appear. Suppose that, once the representation is set up, the proportion
of nutritious sbt’s in the area changes (say because pellet shooting begins
to take place in the area, and the frog cannot distinguish whizzing pellets
from whizzing ﬂies): whereas the majority of sbt’s used to be ﬂies, now
most of the objects that the frog catches are indigestible. The frog’s prob-
lem is that it still cannot distinguish visually between the two, and persists
in catching all sbt’s: its representation, which was formed originally as a
result of exposure to ﬂies, is now triggered largely by pellets. How, then,
can we say with certainty which properties are included in that represen-
tation’s content? Although food was a functionally relevant property of
the objects that it initially indicated, now the representation is triggered
mostly by objects that are not food items.
Technically, what the frog cannot do is modify its reaction to things
with the same causally relevant properties, in response to a change in their
functionally relevant properties. In other words, even when almost no sbt’s
are frog food, still it continues to catch everything with the relevant ap-
pearance. The frog’s representation was set up to link its tongue-ﬂicking
behaviour with its perception of sbt’s because of their nutritional value
at the time. The problem is that the representation is now ﬁxed in its

32
The Selﬁsh Meme
brain: it does not have the learning ability to alter it in response to a
change in the stimuli.
This means that it is impossible for us to ﬁnd out whether or not “food”
is part of the frog’s representation. One could argue that it must be, be-
cause ﬂies’ nutritional value is the very reason why the representation
exists in the ﬁrst place. On this view, the frog is making a mistake when-
ever it catches a pellet. Equally plausibly, one could respond that it cannot
be, because the frog behaves in exactly the same way, whether or not most
of the ambient sbt’s are nutritious. On this view its representation was set
up to indicate things with the relevant appearance, and it does so cor-
rectly whenever a pellet whizzes past; it’s just that the frog doesn’t beneﬁt
in those cases. It is not possible to resolve the debate between these two
points of view, however, because there would be no detectable difference
in the frog’s behaviour, no matter which were true. In a controlled ex-
periment, in which sbt’s of varying nutritional value were whizzed past
and the frog’s reactions monitored, it would respond to all of them in
the same way. According to one viewpoint it would be making a mistake
every time it responded to a pellet, and according to the other it would
not – but observation would not tell us which was the case.
Of course it may be possible to test whether any of the stimulus’s
causally relevant properties is included in the representation: by whizzing
different sizes, shapes and colours of object past the frog at different
speeds, for example, we could observe which sorts of object elicit its
tongue-ﬂicking response, and in this way compile a partial list of the
properties that comprise its representation. On the other hand, this still
leaves open the question which of the functionally relevant properties
should be included in that list, and to this extent a complete description
of the frog’s representation will remain elusive.
One solution may be to say that any functionally relevant properties
are potentially elements of the representation’s content. The ﬂy’s “food”
property, for example, is potentially an element of the representation’s
content, because it was functionally relevant to the formation of that
representation – but I would suggest that we need to ask a further ques-
tion to determine whether it is actually included in that content. The
further question is this: is the representing organism able, once the rep-
resentation has been established, to modify its behaviour in response to
a detectable variation in that property? Unless the organism is capable
of such behavioural ﬂexibility, then it is just not possible to list with cer-
tainty the contents of its representations. The frog continues to catch
every sbt, even when circumstances change to the extent that hardly any

Cultural DNA
33
sbt’s provide it with food, and thus it is impossible to test whether or not
“food” forms part of the frog’s representation.
Far from tracking down the content of the frog’s representation, there-
fore, the considerations in this section have revealed that simple repre-
sentations of this sort may well have content which is to a certain extent
indeterminate. What else, then, will be needed in order to determine
with precision the content of a representation?
Associative Learning
In order to change its behaviour in response to such a stimulus change,
the frog would need to be able to engage in associative learning. This
differs from nonassociative learning in that it depends on the experience
of an association or relationship between events rather than simply on
stimulus exposure. A classic example is Pavlovian conditioning, typiﬁed
by the experiments in which Pavlov’s dogs would drool at the ringing
of a bell because they had learnt to associate its sound with impending
food. The sound of a bell ringing had no intrinsic properties that would
beneﬁt the dogs (unlike the ﬂies whizzing past our frog), but they learnt
to associate its sound with something that did beneﬁt them: food. What
they developed, then, was a response to an association between events
(ringing bell and the arrival of food), rather than simply to an event itself
(the arrival of food).
Learning of this sort removes the problem of indeterminate represen-
tational content for the following reason. Representations, in such cases,
have been formed because of the animal’s awareness of the link between
stimulus and reward, which means that if there is variation in that reward
then the animal can modify its response accordingly. If food stopped ar-
riving whenever a bell was rung, for instance, then the dogs would lose
their salivating response to the bell. To put this more formally: if there is
no change in the causally relevant properties of the stimulus (it maintains
its sound, appearance or whatever), but nonetheless there is a detectable
difference in the functionally relevant property (i.e., the reward), then
that change would break the creature’s association between stimulus and
reward, leading to an observable behavioural change.
The difference between this and the more “switch”-like situation of
the frog, is that here the external links (between stimulus, representa-
tion and behaviour) are not the only sort. The dog could not engage
in associative learning unless it were aware of the link between bell and
food – or in other words if there were not also internal links between its
representations. It is these internal links which will enable us to establish

34
The Selﬁsh Meme
whether any given property of the stimulus forms part of the dog’s rep-
resentation – for we can change the association between the stimulus
and the property that is under scrutiny, and observe what effect (if any)
this has on behaviour. If the animal’s response alters, then clearly that
property must form part of its representation. If there is no behavioural
change (in a creature which is capable of making such a change), then
we can say that the property is irrelevant to its representation. The key
point is that, so long as an organism can modify its behaviour in response
to variation in a given property, we can determine whether that property
forms part of its representation.
The Story So Far
Representational content has been hypothesized as the cultural DNA –
yet if there are various levels of representation, not all of which are even
determinate in terms of their content, then what can representational
content tell us about memes?
Darwin’s theory of natural selection needed a mechanism via which
information about physical characteristics could be copied from one gen-
eration to the next. Mendel’s genes provided the answer, and with the
discovery of their basis in DNA scientists were able to account for the
preservation and replication of that information, its control over pheno-
typic effects and its capacity to exert that control in a variety of contexts.
The theory of cultural evolution, too, needs a mechanism via which cul-
tural information can be preserved in a way that enables it to be replicated
and to exert control over its effects in a variety of contexts.
This chapter has shown that there are different sorts of mental rep-
resentation, with some being more complex than others. In particular,
some representations play a role much like a switch, linking an organ-
ism’s perception of a given stimulus to behaviour that is appropriate as
a response. Others are more complex, and have not only these exter-
nal links to perceptions and behaviour but also internal links to other
representations – and the content of any given representation will be
determined by all of these links.
This means that it may be impossible to specify completely the content
of one of the simpler sorts of representation. On the one hand we can
alter the properties that we surmise are causally relevant to that represen-
tation, and deduce from our observations of any resultant behavioural
changes whether or not those properties form part of the representa-
tion’s content (perhaps the frog does not respond to ambient whizzing

Cultural DNA
35
black things over a certain size, for instance). On the other hand, if the or-
ganism is incapable of responding to changes in the stimuli’s functionally
relevant properties because it is limited to nonassociative learning meth-
ods, then there will be no behavioural changes to observe. A complete
list of properties included in the representation’s content will therefore
remain elusive.
With regard to the more complex representations, however, we should
in principle be able to complete the list. The internal links between the
organism’s representations will enable it to partake in associative learn-
ing: to respond not only to new stimuli but also to the associations that it
makes between those stimuli and other events or entities. It will thus be
possible to determine which properties make up the representation, by
changing both the stimulus (e.g., bell) and its associations (e.g., food):
if the organism is able to respond to these changes, then we can begin to
track down the content of its representations.
Representational Content: The DNA of Culture
Thus we can see that the content of a representation includes those
causally and functionally relevant properties to which an organism can
adapt its responses. Representational content, on this view, is determined
by an interaction between the relevant properties of that which is rep-
resented and the learning capacities of the organism involved. Some
organisms are able to represent the world around them, even though
they are essentially stupid and preprogrammed, and even though it may
not be possible to specify exactly what the representation’s content is in
each particular case. Their representations would obviously not count as
memes.
There are two reasons for this. First, if the content of their representa-
tions (or in other words the information that they carry) is indeterminate,
then those representations do not have one of the most crucial aspects
of any unit of selection: the capacity to keep information intact from
generation to generation.
Secondly, even if they did have determinacy of content, then this in
itself would not be enough to establish their status as memes. Evolution
demands not only the preservation of information but also its replication.
Even if an organism had the sort of behavioural ﬂexibility and learning ca-
pacity that enabled it to develop representations with a fully determinate
content, still there would be a further question to ask: is the organism able
to modify its behaviour in response not only to changes in the stimulus

36
The Selﬁsh Meme
and its associations, but also to variations in other organisms’ behaviour?
If not, then the sophistication of its representations will count for very
little: there is no replicative mechanism available to them, and therefore
they are not memes. Their content, depending only on that particular
organism’s nervous system, will have no collective causal history.
This three-stage process (Is there any content? Is it determinate? Is it
replicable?) for determining the content and status of a representation
has turned to some extent on the differences between individual learn-
ing methods. Additionally, when discussing the mechanisms of memetic
replication, not only individual but also social learning methods will be
at issue. To be capable of copying and retaining memetic information,
an organism needs the capacity to adapt its behaviour and its representa-
tions in response to observations of others’ reactions – to be able, in other
words, to engage in certain types of social learning. The question which
types of social learning are adequate to the task of memetic replication
is discussed later, in Chapter 9.
So: some organisms are capable of forming representations whose
content is determined by a combination of the relevant properties of
that which is represented, and the organism’s own individual and social
learning capacities. Such organisms are able, in other words, both to pre-
serve information and to transmit it between themselves. What else is
needed for the content of their representations to play the role of cul-
tural DNA? Information is useless unless it can be implemented: cultural
heredity depends on memes’ ability to preserve and copy information
which can then be put into effect. Representational content must, therefore,
be able to account for the actions and reactions that stem from it, if we
are to believe that it constitutes cultural DNA.
Fortunately, this is exactly what representational content does best.
Representations are formed when behaviour is modiﬁed in response to
a stimulus: in other words, representations are speciﬁcally those bits of
our mental furniture which control behaviour as a response to incoming
information – exactly what meme theory demands. The content of those
representations is determined by the properties of the stimulus which
are causally or functionally relevant, and to which the organism is able to
modify its behaviour. The relevant behaviour then occurs because of the
content of the representation that controls it – or in other words it is the
representation’s content that determines which effect it controls.
In particular, when it comes to the sorts of complex representations
that might count as memes, their content depends on their playing a cer-
tain type of role in controlling behaviour: they must be able to affect and

Cultural DNA
37
be coordinated by other representations – otherwise internal properties
(e.g., identity) lose their signiﬁcance. This explains how representational
content is able to account for memes’ general applicability: a representa-
tion is bound to have a wide range of applications, since the way that its
content is determined depends upon its ability to interact with other rep-
resentations, and be modiﬁed in response to changes in them. In other
words, a meme will be generally applicable because of the nature of its
content.
Conclusions
This chapter began with a challenge to memetics: how does cultural
heredity work? One possible answer to this question – and I make no
claims to be culture’s Watson or Crick, but simply to have demonstrated
that it is possible to give an answer – is that representational content is
the cultural equivalent of DNA. It is important to be able to spec-
ify what memes are, because a crucial element of evolutionary theory
is replicators’ independence from the effects that they control. The job
of replicators is to preserve information in a way that enables it both to
be replicated and to produce its effects – and this chapter has shown how
representational content allows memes to fulﬁl that role.
This is despite the fact that not all representations will count as memes.
Some are more complex than others, and in the case of the simpler ones
it may not even be possible to give a complete account of their content.
If a representation merely plays the role of a “switch” that turns certain
behaviour on/off at the perception of a given stimulus, then the only
ways of checking the content of that representation will be to examine
the behavioural results of varying the stimulus. If an organism cannot
respond to changes in the functionally relevant properties of the stimulus,
then it will not be possible to ascertain whether those properties are part
of the representation.
In the case of more complex representations, however, which have
links not only externally to perceptions and behaviour but also internally
to other representations, the resultant behavioural ﬂexibility will enable
us to track down their content more completely. It will be possible to test
all of the links, by altering the associations that the organism encounters
and observing the effects on its behaviour.
Only representations with this determinacy of content can count as
memes, since a crucial aspect of any replicator is the preservation of given
information. Such determinacy will depend as much on the organism’s

38
The Selﬁsh Meme
faculty for individual learning – to form links between its various rep-
resentations – as on the properties of that which is represented. These
internal links will, moreover, prove crucial to our understanding of the
difference between the simple cultural inheritance that might be found
in other species, or in our ancestors, and the fully ﬂedged memetic evo-
lution that is found only in modern human culture.
In addition, representations must be replicable if they are to count as
memes, and this too will depend partly on the organism’s abilities – in this
case on its capacity for social learning (explored in later chapters). Finally,
memes must be able to exert their effects if they wish to be selected, and
the nature of representational content, as explored in this chapter, will
enable them to do just that.
This chapter has strayed quite deeply into the territory of philosoph-
ical analysis, whose sometimes arduous terrain has nonetheless held, I
hope, some allure. Things become a little easier from now on, because
we have reached a point from where the rest of meme theory can ad-
vance without any further need for the apparatus of quite such technical
discussions. It was important, though, to begin with an account of how
memetic information can be preserved between generations, for without
this the meme hypothesis is baseless.

4
The Replication of Complex Culture
In order to replicate, memes need to be able to pass on as well as to pre-
serve their content. The key question here is not so much which copying
mechanisms support the spread of memetic information, as how any such
mechanism can support the immense complexity of human culture. Any
account of cultural development must include an explanation of what
has enabled this complexity to increase and persist. If memes are the
units of cultural evolution, then their replication methods must be able
to sustain the enormous breadth and depth of information that has built
up over the millennia, and meme theory must be able to account for
how this happens. Following a brief look at the ways in which cultural
information spreads, the bulk of this chapter is therefore given over to
an examination of the key features of the replication of complexity, in-
vestigating how it might work in principle as well as how it is played out
in practice, in culture as in nature.
How Is Cultural Information Copied?
Imitation seems to be one of the most obvious methods by which cultural
information spreads: I might learn a skill from one person by observing
her actions, or pick up the musical style of another by listening to his
recitals. In addition, however, there is often an intentional element in
our learning. We are constantly engaged in a process of deliberate com-
munication with each other, and this is surely the most frequent method
of cultural replication. I can gain new ideas and skills from you in or-
dinary conversation, and it will be apparent that I have acquired some
39

40
The Selﬁsh Meme
novel information when it has an effect on my behaviour, opinions or
future conversation.
An even more deliberate form of copying information is, of course,
formal teaching, and teachers employ a variety of teaching methods.
It is fashionable to bemoan the loss of the skill of rote learning – and
a sound grasp of any subject is of course dependent on the acquisi-
tion of a certain amount of basic knowledge – but the best teaching
does not impart information for pupils to regurgitate parrot fashion,
but rather transmits an understanding of methods or principles. The
aim of a mathematics lesson, for example, is not to ensure that pupils
memorize the solutions of particular problems but rather to teach them
how to solve any new problems that they encounter. In order to achieve
this, they must acquire a generally applicable concept or method; the
particular solutions are then the effects of having acquired that general
method.
In other words, the content of what is learnt is generally applicable and
has executive effect in producing particular solutions, artefacts and so
on. All of this is consistent with the claim that teaching and other means
of communicating are forms of meme transmission. Moreover, as with
the analogous process of gene transmission, the copies will not always
be exact, and the idea or skill in question may change in some way en
route. The results of such a mutation might be the alteration of the words
of a popular song, a gradual change in the way that dry stone walls are
built, or the potentially disastrous alteration of a chemical formula. The
essence of the process, however, is that the pupil or listener acquires a
representation of the relevant information.
I should mention that the content of this section is a lot more con-
troversial than it might at ﬁrst appear. Imitation, for instance, is not so
much an obvious, basic process of meme transmission as a source of great
controversy within memetics. Some commentators (most notably, Susan
Blackmore)1 have in recent years claimed that imitation is the only form
of learning via which meme acquisition can truly take place, and such
claims have given rise to much heated debate, within memetics, about
the nature of imitation and its capacity for meme transmission. I shall
delve into this debate, which is clearly of some signiﬁcance, in Chapter 9.
For now I want merely to acknowledge that there is a debate to be had –
that whilst it is obvious that culture spreads from person to person, it is
far from obvious either how that happens, or whether its methods count
as memetic.

The Replication of Complex Culture
41
The Replication of Complexity
In a way, though, the debate about how meme transmission might operate
in practice is of secondary importance for memetics. The key question
is rather what are the essential features of any successful method of
replication – the features that will be apparent in every instance, whether
it be from nature or culture.
One of the most astonishing aspects of both realms is the enormous
complexity that has developed over time. Any convincing theory of cul-
tural evolution must therefore be able to explain – in the way that genetics
does for the natural world – how such complexity can be replicated in a
way that preserves its content from generation to generation.
It is well known that complex replication will always be more success-
ful if the complexity involved is hierarchical. This fact has been neatly
illustrated by Herbert Simon,2 in a parable which suggests “a general
functional reason why complex organization of any kind, biological or
artiﬁcial, tends to be organized in nested hierarchies of repeated sub-
units”.3 It goes roughly as follows.
Each of two watchmakers has to assemble watches from a thousand
component parts. He has, in effect, to replicate an established complex
form. Tempus assembles his watches piece by piece, and they are so con-
structed that if he pauses or drops an unﬁnished watch then he has to
start again from scratch. Hora, on the other hand, makes subassemblies
of ten parts each, then subassemblies of ten of these, and ﬁnally a whole
watch from ten of those, so if he is interrupted then he loses only a small
part of his work. As a result, Hora can assemble his watches in a fraction
of the time that it takes Tempus: according to Simon’s analysis, if there
is a chance of say one in a hundred that either watchmaker will be inter-
rupted while adding a part to his assembly, then Tempus can be expected
to take four thousand times as long as Hora to assemble a watch. Although
in fact the statistics of expectation show that the correct relationship is
more like two thousand times as long,4 Simon’s key point still holds: the
Hora style of building gives a better time scale, greater stability and resis-
tance to shock, and a greater amenability to repair and improvement –
and it is clearly hierarchical.
Dawkins not only agrees with, but has gone on to develop Simon’s
hierarchical argument,5 “concluding that the evolution of statistically
‘improbable assemblies proceeds more rapidly if there is a succession of
intermediate stable sub-assemblies. Since the argument can be applied

42
The Selﬁsh Meme
to each sub-assembly, it follows that highly complex systems which exist
in the world are likely to have a hierarchical architecture’.”6
The signiﬁcance of assemblies* for the natural world is that the form
of an organism must be structurally stable and, among complex forms,
assemblies are the ones that have had time to develop. In particular, as-
semblies are needed to organize the replication of successful characteristics
between generations. If characteristics were allowed to vary within sub-
systems (such as temperature control, digestion, etc.), then any amount
of unsatisfactory combinations might occur. If, on the other hand, whole
subsystems are replicated, then structurally stable complex forms will be
able to develop. There are patterns of dependence within an assembly
even though the individual constituent units may have been of no use if
they were replicated independently.
Replication, in other words, will be most efﬁcient if it builds on what
already exists rather than starting afresh each time. An important impli-
cation of this message is that the most successful sort of replication will
be particulate: if the constituent parts of what is replicated were to blend,
then the end product would be a conglomerate rather than an assembly.
The units of an assembly must be what Arthur Koestler7 has described as
“self-assertive”: each maintains its own individuality within the assembly.
On the other hand each must also be compatible with the others in the
assembly, otherwise the result would be unstable: as part of a larger sys-
tem, towards whose future and stability they tend to “work”, the units in
an assembly must (in Koestler’s terms again) be “integrative” as well as
self-assertive. The replication of complexity, in its reliance on assemblies,
is therefore dependent on the existence of dual-natured units, which
are able to retain their individual identities whilst operating as part of a
complex.
In order to achieve such a complex, Koestler also highlights the fact
that the units must be governed by certain functional and constructive
rules. The structure, stability and behaviour of an assembly can be under-
stood as the result of a set of invariant rules, although variation will be
allowed in the “strategies” that are actually employed – just as in chess,
for example, there are invariant rules that govern how each piece may
move, but the actual moves or strategies employed during a particular
game will be variable. So the assembly’s rules govern which function
or structure can be followed, and the strategy determines which will be
followed.
* Dawkins’s term comes with less baggage than the alternative, “hierarchy”.

The Replication of Complex Culture
43
These two features – the self-assertive/integrative tendencies of units
within assemblies, and the rules/strategy compromise of their overall
organisation – enable the content of complex assemblies to be replicated
with relative ﬁdelity between generations.
Genetic Replication
This rather abstract account of the replication of complexity can be ob-
served, in practice, in the behaviour of genes. It is clear, for example,
that genes have the requisite dual nature. Dawkins called them “self-
ish” because they have the effect of promoting their own welfare at the
expense of other genes in the pool and, more generally, they show self-
assertive tendencies by the simple fact that they retain their particulate-
ness throughout replication. On the other hand, genes have a better
chance of surviving if they form coadapted complexes, and in particular
they have tended to “band together” in survival machines to maximize
future preservation: a clear display of integrative tendencies.
We may also look at the rules which govern the replication that gives
rise to their assemblies. A gene’s function and structure are ﬁxed, but
exactly how it does function will depend upon its environment. So, for
example, the invariant rule of a gene for blue eyes is that the only effect
it can have is on iris colour; but (being recessive) it will only have that
effect in practice if it is passed on to an individual in which there is no
“brown eyes” allele. Although governed by a strict rule, then, a gene’s
actual behaviour may vary.
It is not only the genes’ phenotypic effects that are governed in this
way: their interactions with each other also vary within strict boundaries.
The creation of a sperm or ovum is governed inﬂexibly by the rule of
“crossing over”: parts of each paternal chromosome interchange with ex-
actly corresponding parts of each maternal chromosome. Nonetheless,
what actually happens during each instance of crossing over is so ﬂexible
within this rule that each created sperm or ovum is practically unique.
Although the genes involved in this creative process are acting in accor-
dance with an inﬂexible canon of behaviour, the end result is different
on every occasion.
Memetic Replication
If genetic transmission is subject to assembling constraints – and hav-
ing argued that such constraints will be true of any successful method of

44
The Selﬁsh Meme
complex replication – it is now time to ask whether memes do not also
operate within organized assemblies. If not, then the onus is on meme
theory to explain how culture has managed to evolve such complexity, so
swiftly. Notice that there is no suggestion that assemblies are an essential
feature of any sort of replication: rather, where there is evidence of com-
plexity within an evolutionary system, we should expect that complexity
to be the result of assembling constraints.
Consider, ﬁrst, whether memes might have a dual nature of the sort de-
scribed. With regard to their self-assertion, it is clear that memes must, if
they are truly units of cultural selection, share genes’ resistance to blend-
ing. Unfortunately for memes, this is as yet one of their more controversial
aspects – but later in the book I shall defend the view that they are, indeed,
particulate, arguing in chapter 11 that memes may be distinguished from
each other in the same way as Mendel originally distinguished genes.
Memes are also integrative, however. I have already noted that a new
meme will have a greater chance of penetrating the existing meme pool
if it is consistent with the others in that environment. For instance, the
“earth is ﬂat” meme is, in a modern context, much less fecund and
long lived than in some previous centuries. In order to survive, memes –
like genes – form coadapted complexes which display their integrative
tendencies.
It is of course important to acknowledge that there is a difference
between the acquisition of information and the acceptance of that infor-
mation into one’s network of beliefs. There is a sense in which the “ﬂat
earth” meme is still pretty successful today: plenty of people know that it
is possible to believe that the earth is ﬂat, even though they themselves
do not subscribe to that belief. In this way it is perhaps analogous to a
recessive gene, whose DNA we possess and are able to pass on to our chil-
dren but which exerts no effect on our bodies or behaviour. Similarly,
we are capable of passing on information that persists in our memories,
even when we don’t assent to it, but it will have little or no effect on
our thoughts or behaviour. Just because I understand what it means to
believe that the earth is ﬂat, I neither subscribe to a conspiracy theory
about the origins of satellite pictures of the earth nor have any doubt that
it is possible to circumnavigate the globe.
Nonetheless, it remains the case that memes are integrative in the sense
that they do best when they ﬁt in with the others around them. There are
two reasons for this. First, novel ideas that accord with accepted theories
are more likely to be remembered than those which do not: I happen to
have retained the ﬂat earth meme, but there are plenty of other bits of

The Replication of Complex Culture
45
information that I have forgotten because I deemed them invalid, or have
lost because they are not called for in my present environment. Secondly,
information is more likely to be replicated if it is absorbed into a network
of accepted ideas or is useful in the context of much-used skills: we tend
to pass things on more when we approve of them than when we do not.
Unlike genes, which we receive as a job lot from our parents – so it does
not matter whether they are recessive, and unable to exert their effects
in some contexts – memes are copied on an ongoing basis throughout
our lives. Being recessive is therefore more damaging for their prospects
than it is for genes’.
So memes may be described as both self-assertive and integrative. Are
they also governed by ﬁxed rules – regarding their phenotypic effects,
for instance – within which particular variations may be observed?
Consider as an example the “ability to read piano music” meme.
Its phenotypic effect will, indeed, vary according to the environment
(whether there is a keyboard and/or sheet music present) and to the rest
of that person’s meme pool (whether he also has the “ability to play the
piano” meme). Nonetheless that meme will, given the suitable physical
and memetic environment, have a ﬁxed phenotypic effect: its possessor
will be able to translate the written music into its physical expression on
a piano. So it is also governed by the requisite ﬁxed rule.
In such ways assembling constraints may explain the dynamics of meme
transmission. Simon’s parable demonstrated that complex replication via
assemblies will be the most successful, and this should apply as much to
memetic as to genetic units of replication. The discussion of cultural
replication has remained a little abstract so far, but we can see the pro-
cess at work in practice, in an area like science. If scientists rejected the
whole of a thesis every time a contradictory result occurred, then no sub-
stantial theories of the natural world would ever have time to develop.
Instead, scientists build on their existing knowledge: they replicate whole
subtheories as parts of new hypotheses. They add to their present knowl-
edge, collate it, discover its consequences, and in time a more complex
thesis emerges. Sometimes (cf. Kuhn’s revolutions) theories become ex-
tinct and the evolutionary process has to begin again. Memes compete
continuously for the scientists’ attention, and if they are to survive then
they must ﬁt into the functionally organized assembly of existing theories.
Hence this assembling replication goes a long way towards explaining the
dynamics of meme reception and retention. Memes will be acquired and
retained if they are compatible with the existing assembly of knowledge
(representational content) of the recipient.

46
The Selﬁsh Meme
It seems almost trivial to assert that we build on our existing knowledge,
that it would be much harder to learn something entirely from scratch
(contrast the effort needed by a complete novice in order to learn to
play the mandolin with the relative ease with which a violin player would
acquire that skill), and that what we already know affects both how and
what we newly learn. Nonetheless, such mundane observations serve to
support the hypothesis that memetic replication is a process of assembly.
There will, of course, be differences between the methods of gene
transmission and those used by memes. In particular, genes are forced
to replicate the whole assembly at once, but we are able gradually to
acquire the contents of our mental assembly. Both sorts of transmission
are, however, constrained by rules: a meme must, in order to be acquired,
be able to slot into the established assembly just as much as any gene must,
in order to be transmitted, ﬁt into the assembly which is being replicated
as a whole. With memes the process resembles the construction of a jigsaw,
whereas with genes it is more like taking a photograph, but the essence of
both procedures is the same: both sorts of replicator must maintain their
particulateness whilst submitting to the assembly’s rules of behaviour and
construction.
Memes Versus Genes
The previous sections have shown how both genes and memes engage
in the most successful methods of complex replication: processes of as-
sembly that have their basis in dual-natured, variant-rule-following units.
Since complexity is undoubtedly to be found within minds and cultures,
we are justiﬁed in arguing that the essence of memetic replication must
be a process of assembling representational content. Via teaching, com-
munication, imitation and other forms of social learning such as gossip
and normfollowing, the complexity of the cultural realm has been con-
structed over time, and the advancing complexity has been accelerated
by the assembling constraints that govern the replication involved.
If the assembling constraints have accelerated the development of
complexity for memes, however, then this raises questions about the dif-
ference in speed between evolution in the biological and cultural realms:
if both depend on a similar process of replicating complexity, then why
should memes have evolved so much faster than genes?
One answer is that the difference in time span between the two is
less to do with the principles of replication involved than with the phys-
ical processes of each. Both rely on the assembling processes on which

The Replication of Complex Culture
47
the replication of any type of complexity depends, so the principles in-
volved are the same in each case. The underlying processes, however, are
crucially different from each other: simply, a gene depends on its posses-
sor reaching sexual maturity in order to be replicated, whereas a meme
can be replicated again almost as soon as it has been copied. Since its
replication rate is so much faster than that of genes, its evolution can be
correspondingly faster, too.
Yet it is interesting to note that this difference between the two types
of replicator does not apply across the board: “viruses and bacteria repro-
duce themselves much more rapidly than the vast majority of memes,”8
and there are of course memes that are copied very slowly, too – such
as traditions that are limited to a particular family and thus copied only
once per generation, at the same rate as that family’s genes. It is also
worth pointing out the distinction between rates of reproduction and rates
of evolution, since it is not inevitable that these should be linked: if errors
in the copying process are rare, then even the speediest rates of replica-
tion will not give rise to great evolutionary change; if errors are frequent,
then even slow reproduction can lead to relatively fast rates of change.
On the whole, though, it is clear that our memes are able to replicate
much more swiftly than our genes, and that this goes some way towards
explaining the furious speed at which culture has developed, relative to
the natural world.
Conclusions
Memetic replication, then, must be dependent on the same sorts of assem-
bling constraints as those involved in genetic replication, for it has been
shown (by Simon, Dawkins and Koestler, amongst others) that such con-
straints are the most successful methods by which complexity can be repli-
cated. This structured way of copying units of information (preserved in
representational content) may therefore be seen to underlie the every-
day cultural processes of communication, teaching and imitation. An
explanation is thus provided for both the speed of cultural transmission
and the expansion (rather than replacement) of its content over time.
This chapter and the previous one have revealed how memetics can
account for the preservation and replication of complex cultural infor-
mation. Yet the content of culture is not static but constantly changing: in
order to evolve, there must be variation as well as replication in culture.

5
Variation
Few copying processes are accurate enough to rule out the possibility of
error. This chapter addresses the questions how and why cultural infor-
mation varies as it spreads, and whether there are any limitations on the
changes that can occur. In particular, it focuses on two of the possible
causes of variation – mutation and recombination – and on the vexed
issue of memetic alleles.
Innovation and Genes
For genes, variation occurs in two ways: mutation and recombination. Mu-
tations are sudden changes in organisms’ characteristics, resulting typi-
cally from alterations in the structure of genes or chromosomes, which
have the potential to be passed on to offspring. Recombination occurs
when genetic material of different origins is mixed together: you have two
alleles of each gene, and your offspring will receive only one of them, to-
gether with one from their other parent; they may therefore exhibit traits
not seen in either of you (e.g., two brown-eyed parents might produce a
blue-eyed child).
Nevertheless, there are limits on the innovation that genes can pro-
duce by either method. Why is this? There are obvious limitations on pos-
sible recombinations, in that alleles have to correspond and the possible
recombinations are, though rich, ﬁnite with respect to any given gene
pool. Popularly, however, genetic mutation is referred to as “random”,
with the unspoken implication that just about anything is possible. In
fact, unless used with care, this term may easily lead to confusion. The
important sense in which genetic mutation is random is that it entails “no
48

Variation
49
general bias towards bodily improvement”:1 evolution’s tendency towards
improvement stems solely from natural selection. Nonetheless, this lack
of bias does not mean that all changes are equally likely, and there are
several senses in which genetic mutation is not random.
It is simply untrue to say that any change is equally likely, if by this it is
meant that mutation will produce any event that selection might possibly
favour. There is bias in favour of some changes and against others. In the
ﬁrst place, genes have varying mutation rates: some are more likely to
miscopy than are others, and these rates of change may also be increased
by external mutagens. There is also a bias involved in the direction of
mutation, with some directions being more likely than others. Then,
even once genetic mutations do occur, their consequences on bodies are
restricted by existing embryology (recall that replication is subject to the
restrictions of assembling constraints). Dawkins asks why, for example,
birds’ wings have developed in the way that they have, rather than in
the style popularly attributed to angels. His reply is that, even though
it would have been useful for birds to maintain a free set of forelimbs,
“there may not be anything in the embryology of backs that lends itself to
‘sprouting’ angel wings. Genes can mutate till they are blue in the face,
but no mammal will ever sprout wings like an angel unless mammalian
embryological processes are susceptible to this kind of change.”2
Such details apply to genes in particular. More generally, it should
be noted that “random” is a context-dependent term, used to indicate
that its subject is free from a speciﬁc form of causal control. If it is used
independently of that context, without specifying from which kind of
control a process is free, then the term becomes confusing and perhaps
even meaningless. A process may be random with respect to one form of
control but not to another. For instance, if you were asked to choose ten
people “at random” from the street where I live, then it so happens that
your sample could be fairly random with respect to age, sex and income –
but could not be at all random with respect to colour (since all the street’s
residents are white). Or, if I asked you to pick a card “at random” from a
pack that is scattered face down on a table, then I would really mean that
it should be random with respect to its value and suit: it would not matter
if you had a bias towards cards near the edge of the table, or towards
cards that were partially hidden under others.
The best sense to make of “random”, as applied to genetic mutation,
is that it is not intrinsically biased towards increased ﬁtness (on the con-
trary, most mutation is probably fatal). This, though, is not equivalent
to the claim that all changes are equally likely, which would imply that

50
The Selﬁsh Meme
genetic mutations somehow fall outside the realm of induction. In fact,
the mutations that can occur are limited by the nature of what already
exists – most signiﬁcantly, by genes’ mutation rates and by embryology. In
addition, genetic recombination is constrained by the fact that genes may
only cross over with corresponding alleles. Finally, the variations available
to selection are the ones that are permitted by previously evolved devel-
opmental processes.
Innovation and Memes: Mutation
Returning now to the subject of memes – and although it would obvi-
ously be inappropriate to try to extrapolate from the detailed structural
ways in which genetic variation occurs to the ways in which memetic vari-
ation might occur – it does seem that mutation and recombination are
also widely observable in culture. In the absence of any other immediate
candidates for the same role, their study will therefore provide a use-
ful springboard for the investigation of memetic variation. I begin with
mutation.
It has become clear that one of the most important elements of muta-
tion is its randomness with respect to ﬁtness – but that the restrictions on
that randomness are also important. In this chapter I consider examples
which demonstrate that such restrictions also apply to the elements of our
culture which might be characterized as memes. These situations show
how a memetic account of culture can explain why some cultural traits
are more likely than others to mutate; how their mutation rate may be
inﬂuenced by external events; why some directions of mutation are more
likely than others; and how the processes by which cultural information
produces effects on the world (or in the language of memes “is translated
into the phenotype”) will also limit the mutations that are able to occur
in practice.
In the light of the genetic considerations I have outlined, we should
expect memetic mutation to display no intrinsic bias towards increased
ﬁtness – and indeed it is the case that the mistakes made in learning or car-
rying out cultural activities display no intrinsic bias towards improvement.
Imagine, for instance, that you are learning how to make chocolate chip
cookies. If you are tired and not paying much attention, then you might
mix in an ounce of salt instead of sugar. If you do not check your stocks
of ingredients before you start, then you might ﬁnd that you haven’t
enough dark chocolate and end up using a mixture of dark and white
chocolate chips in the cookies. An ounce of salt would render the cookies

Variation
51
inedible, and this mutation would not last long; certainly it would not be
replicated (this is not to say that it will never happen again, but of course
repetition is not the same as replication – and the ghastly results of its
ﬁrst occurrence will make it far less likely to happen a second time). If,
however, you use a mixture of chocolates, then you may even prefer the
resultant cookies, and in this case the mutation may be replicated and
even established as your normal practice (as well as that of your children,
or of anyone else whom you teach to bake). Neither mutation appears to
be intrinsically more likely: in practice, its likelihood will depend on the
environment – on the similarity between the ingredients’ containers, for
instance, or the level of your baking experience.
Like genes’, then, we should expect that memes’ mutation rates may
be inﬂuenced by events external to themselves. Moreover, since culture is
so vast and diverse, it is reasonable to expect that the intrinsic tendency to-
wards mutation will also vary from meme to meme. A brief consideration
of what actually goes on in culture reveals that this is indeed the case. The
stability of well-established, successful cake recipes, for instance, can be
contrasted with the frequent changes in fashionable clothing. Similarly,
some directions of mutation are more likely than others: you are more
likely to replace sugar with salt than with ﬂour; next season’s fashions are
less likely to resemble last season’s than to differ from them.
Finally, in the genetic case we saw that mutations were limited by the
process of translation from genes to phenotypic effects. Is this the case for
culture: can there, in other words, be copying errors (memetic mutations)
that are unable to produce variation at the practical (phenotypic) level?
This is in fact the most signiﬁcant way in which variation might be limited,
and is clearly to be observed in culture. An architect can draw gravity-
defying buildings until he is blue in the face, but he will not be able
to have them built; a composer can write music for the violin involving
notes lower than its bottom G (198 Hz), but no properly tuned violin
will be able to produce that music. There are limits to which of memes’
mutations will be available to selection – limits which depend as much on
the previously evolved memetic environment as on the laws of nature –
and this can be seen in the gulf that sometimes divides brainwaves from
their implementation.
Memetic Innovation as a Mental Process
All of these examples appear at ﬁrst sight to be uncontroversial, but
there is an obvious objection to the claim that cultural variation displays

52
The Selﬁsh Meme
no intrinsic bias towards ﬁtness. Unlike genetic mutation, which is an
essentially mindless process, cultural changes may be directed by inten-
tional human decisions – and this must surely make them more biased
towards ﬁtness than their genetic counterparts. Whereas genetic varia-
tion is so broad that “it relies primarily on massive parallelism rather than
strategy,” in culture it seems that “variations are generated strategically,”3
rather than randomly, and will build on what has gone before.
One response to this criticism is to claim that any apparent dichotomy
between “parallelism” for genes and “strategy” for memes is illusory. On
this view, memes depend on human minds for reproduction, innovation
and selection, and any “bias” towards ﬁtness is simply the consequence
of human minds’ ability to think swiftly through the alternatives before
coming up with a particular variation. Thus memes do generate similar
proportions of useless and useful variations as genes, and memetic vari-
ation often is a process of parallelism rather than strategy – it’s just a
parallelism generated by an astonishingly swift, internal and frequently
unconscious mental process.
I think that there is a lot of truth in this response, but nonetheless
it does not quite succeed in turning aside the original objection, which
touches on an issue of great controversy within memetics: the relation-
ship between memes and the human mind. In particular, is our intelligent
consciousness a problem for the claim that culture develops via an uncon-
scious evolutionary algorithm? Or indeed – as some would claim – is the
problem actually the other way around, with meme theory undermining
our old assumptions about our identity as intelligent and autonomous
persons? This debate would involve rather a detour from our present
concern with memetic variation, but I return to it in more detail in
Chapter 12. For now, sufﬁce it to say my contention remains that a
memetic account of culture is at the very least consistent with observations
of how mutations occur when cultural information is copied.
Innovation and Memes: Recombination
If we anticipate that memetic innovation may also be due to recombina-
tion, then what does that lead us to expect to observe in culture? If it is
true that cultural changes can be sometimes be characterized as memetic
recombination, then we should be looking for instances when cultural in-
novation – either at the individual level (when a person learns something
new) or at a social level (when genuine novelties are discovered or cre-
ated) – results from the collision between existing knowledge and skills.

Variation
53
Certainly, teachers make use of this technique in order to convey infor-
mation to their pupils. A good teacher will start from the point that her
pupils have already reached: she will try to bring their existing knowledge
into a novel environment, which may bring out previously unsuspected
implications of holding that knowledge, or even facilitate the acquisi-
tion of new facts and skills. The result of bringing old ways of thought
to a fresh situation is to force their recombination, and this in turn pro-
duces new ways of thought and new knowledge. In History, for example,
a teacher might start by exploring students’ existing knowledge about
human relationships and how people tend to react in certain situations;
if she next draws their attention to the historical events they have studied
so far, then, by using this as a novel context for their understanding of hu-
man interactions, she will be able to help the pupils to explain and even
predict the events that followed. Just as meme theory would forecast, a
truly useful way of leading someone to new information is to provide the
opportunity for the recombination of aspects of his existing knowledge.
The same technique can enable pupils to learn from, as well as about the
facts that they are studying. Teachers of Religious Education know that
this method is far more effective than simply delivering the bald facts:
you can inform pupils that Christians believe that Jesus taught important
lessons in parables, have them investigate the content and discover the
possible meaning of some particular parables; or you can do all that and
then encourage them to reconvey the same meaning in a more mod-
ern story – and they cannot achieve this without truly understanding
that meaning, from which they can take away valuable lessons for them-
selves. This need not be proselytizing by the back door. Students who
do not wish to take on board the Christian message can, nonetheless,
learn other lessons from studying the parables, none of which need be
explicitly stated by the teacher: the aim of good RE is to give the pupils
opportunities to take away from the subject what is appropriate to their
individual situations, rather than to impart the teacher’s own moral or
social views. Thus each pupil might well learn something different from
the same lesson: all have brought different experiences and knowledge
to the lesson, and that (as predicted by meme theory) will shape their
responses to what they hear.
Nor should it make much difference whether a person is led to such
recombinations by the guiding hand of a teacher, or by mulling things
over in his private thoughts: perhaps a new external environment pro-
vokes a novel way of looking at existing knowledge or of tackling a familiar
task; or perhaps meandering trains of thought bring about the collision.

54
The Selﬁsh Meme
Either way, the results could be the same as if the pupil had been guided
to the new environment by his teacher. Existing elements of his knowl-
edge, which had previously been inactive, will be stimulated. Putting it
in terms of memetics, the forced recombination of his existing memes
will reveal which of them is relevant to the novel situation, and thus new
memes may be acquired.
Philosophers’ “thought experiments” (in which the imagination is ex-
ercised in a controlled fashion in order to examine theoretical implica-
tions or to explore conceptual boundaries) seem to be especially perti-
nent to this picture,4 since their very purpose is to enable us to access or
re-represent familiar information. In other words, reconceptualization or
re-representation may helpfully be seen as an example of recombinative
innovation in memes.
Memes and Their Alleles
What of the recombinative restrictions that were noted in the genetic
picture? Not just any old bits of the parent chromosomes change places:
they have to correspond exactly, in that a gene’s alleles must all control
the same phenotypic effect. Many memeticists assume that there will be
no such corresponding restriction in the cultural world, for there is no
such thing as a memetic allele. In my opinion this assumption is wrong. A
replicator’s alleles are at least partly deﬁned by the phenotypic effect that
they control: that is what makes them alleles of that particular replicator,
providing variety amongst the effects that it controls. I see no problem
with the claim that there may be a variety of alternatives to any partic-
ular cultural trait, just as there are variety of alternatives to genetically
controlled traits like eye colour and height.
Such memetic alleles will have effects that correspond to the meme in
question: you could replace the meme for a fence with one for a hedge
but not with one for a bike; and you could replace the meme for a bike
with one for a tricycle but not with one for a hedge. As Liane Gabora
puts it, “When considering the problem of having to get out of your
car every day to open to garage door, you would not think about doilies
or existentialism, but concepts related to the problem”5 – and this is
explained by the fact that neither a doily nor existentialism is an allele
for a method of opening garage doors.
Nonetheless, there is a theoretical – rather than merely observational –
objection to the concept of memetic alleles, which has been put forward
by Dan Sperber. He argues that it is a mistake to try to abstract common

Variation
55
properties from a group of cultural tokens, calling that abstract
description a “meme” and the alternative concrete versions its “alleles”.
When studying cultural phenomena like myths, for example, he says that
it is more useful to concentrate on “the many public and mental versions
and their causal chains”,6 than to seek to abstract one canonical version
from the similar myths that occur across different cultures. He points out
that the myth’s canonical version would not actually exist anywhere, any
more than the abstract version of a cross-cultural concept like “marriage”
can actually be found in any one of the cultures where similar practices are
observed. So how can the abstract representation be of use in explaining
the cultural facts that we are trying to study? In his opinion, the tempta-
tion to put groups of cultural phenomena under one label (a meme and
its alleles) stems from a tendency to “exaggerate the similarity of cultural
tokens”.7
My own view is that the stark choice presented by Sperber, between an
abstract representation and concrete cultural tokens, is a false dichotomy.
What is it that makes m1 a token of the same meme as m2? They are both
m-ish memes, on my account, because both are alleles of the same meme –
and surely there is no more harm in attempting to give an abstract deﬁ-
nition of the “typical” content of m-ish memes than in trying to identify
the sorts of genes that appear at a particular locus on a chromosome. Al-
though no one has the abstract property “eye colour”, still that is a good
approximation of the sorts of alleles that appear at a certain genetic locus,
and the abstract deﬁnition will help you to identify the relevant alleles. It
helps you to link a group of genes with the correct range of phenotypic
effects. Similarly, although neither the canonical version of a myth, nor
marriage as characterized in an abstract deﬁnition will be instantiated
in any culture, still those abstractions can serve a useful purpose: the
canonical version of a myth does help you to ﬁnd the alleles of that sort
of myth, and the abstract deﬁnition of marriage will help you to identify
which practices will ﬁt into that category.
I suspect that the problem arises because of a temptation to label
the abstract representation “the meme”, and its concrete versions “the
alleles”, mistakenly seeking a default or master copy of a meme, in a way
that we don’t for genes. Rather, there may be many alternative versions of
a portion of cultural information, producing a variety of versions of the
effects that it controls – just as there may be many alternative versions of
a portion of chromosomal material, producing a variety of versions of the
effects that it controls. The link between all of these versions (in either
case, cultural or biological) is that all control the same phenotypic effect,

56
The Selﬁsh Meme
which can usefully be identiﬁed with the help of what Sperber would call
an “abstract synthetic version”8 of the relevant information.
One signiﬁcant difference from the genetic situation should, however,
be noted. In language, as Steven Pinker9 has pointed out, the possibil-
ities of innovation due to recombination are much greater than they
could ever be in DNA, since there is no determinate message length –
no ﬁxed number of chromosomes. The question whether memes might
be realized in language has not yet been addressed, but memes are dis-
crete representations, so whatever their basis, it may well be described
as one of Pinker’s “discrete combinatorial systems” (i.e., a system that is
rule governed, containing a ﬁnite number of recombinable discrete ele-
ments). Since this is so, recombination may be a more signiﬁcant method
of memetic innovation than it is for genes.
Too Much Variation?
One ﬁnal issue regarding the subject of memetic variation concerns the
problems that this area of cultural evolution might create for meme the-
ory in general. The philosopher Daniel Dennett10 has asked whether
“one of the hallmarks of cultural evolution and transmission [is] the ex-
traordinarily high rate of mutation and recombination”, pointing out that
“evolution goes haywire”11 when mutation rates are too high. Fortunately
for meme theory, he does not comment on whether he regards the rate of
memetic variation as high in relation to the rate of memetic replication, which
is the relevant question – and it has already been noted (by Dennett as
well as myself and others) that memetic evolution is in general a much
swifter process all round than its biological counterpart.
Conclusions
Processes that might usefully be characterized as memetic mutation and
the recombination of memetic alleles can, it has been demonstrated,
be observed in the growth and change of human culture. Indeed, such a
characterization provides a useful perspective on these processes, explain-
ing to some extent what is going on behind the apparent unpredictability
of mistakes, alterations and novelties that pepper our everyday lives.

6
Selection
Evolution depends on selection as much as on replication and innovation:
if all novelties had an equal chance of success then there would be no
gradual development, in culture any more than in nature. The infor-
mation that is preserved and copied in cultural traits must, in order for
evolution to occur, be subject to some sort of struggle for survival. Putting
this another way, meme theory needs some sort of criterion of memetic
“ﬁtness” – something that ideas and skills have in common, in virtue of
which their relative success rates can be subject to systematic study – for
without this it breaks down into the trivial statement that out of many
new ideas and skills some survive whilst others do not.
Glancing back to the natural world, we know that the general ﬁtness
criterion for genes is the inﬂuence they have on an organism’s longevity
and fertility – its ability to ﬁnd food and sex – and that this will be affected
not only by the genes that it possesses but also by the rest of the gene pool
and the external environment.
So what is the general ﬁtness criterion for the cultural population of
traditions, ideas, tunes and designs? It makes sense to say that, as for genes,
memetic success will depend on three separate factors: the content of the
meme itself; the way in which it ﬁts with other memes; and the external
environment – the minds and surroundings of the people whose attention
it is trying to attain. There is a struggle for existence because a vast array
of memes is competing for the limited resource of human attention, and
therefore the ﬁtness of any given meme will be inﬂuenced chieﬂy by
its ability to gain and retain attention. Gaining someone’s attention is
a means of replicating itself (cf. sex), and retaining that attention is a
means of prolonging its survival (cf. food).
57

58
The Selﬁsh Meme
Notice that “attention” in this context need not involve a possessor’s
constant active awareness of the meme. We are obviously not aware in
this way of “hard copies” of information, such as that printed in books,
but nonetheless their preservation ensures their ongoing potential to
grab someone’s attention, and thereby provides an efﬁcient method of
survival.
Having identiﬁed this very general ﬁtness criterion for culture, we can
now move on to more focused questions about particular memes. How
can an individual meme, given the speciﬁc demands of its environment,
ensure greater access to its means of reproduction and survival (i.e., gain-
ing and retaining attention)? Obviously the answer to this question, given
in terms of the interaction between the meme’s environment and its phe-
notypic effects, will vary widely between cultural contexts. If the meme is
a scientiﬁc theory then it must enjoy some degree of explanatory success,
must not contradict existing theories but must also accord with the avail-
able perceptual evidence; if it is a melody or a picture then it must be
aesthetically pleasing, and the conditions that this entails may be deter-
mined by time or place; if it is a recipe then it must result in good tasting,
nontoxic things to eat, and again decisions about the former may differ
between cultures.
Between the two extremes, of the general truth that the successful
memes will be the ones that gain and retain lots of people’s attention,
and the particular facts about how individual memes can do that in widely
differing cultural areas, there must also be general factors that affect
memes’ ﬁtness across particular cultural areas: memes may be “locally
relevant, and hence culturally successful, in part for universal reasons”.1
What are the most signiﬁcant factors at work in cultural selection?
Factors in Memetic Selection
The previous chapter’s discussion of “recessive” memes forms an impor-
tant backdrop to the discussion of cultural ﬁtness. There the difference
was noted between acquiring information and taking it on board: we all
possess a fair amount of knowledge about beliefs and theories to which we
ourselves do not subscribe. Such information can be characterized as re-
cessive, in that we are capable of passing it on to others, but it has little or
no effect on our thoughts or behaviour. It is therefore doubly hampered
in the struggle for survival, being less likely either to be remembered or
to be replicated, even if we do remember it, than information that we
accept as valid. In the discussion that follows, therefore, the assumption

Selection
59
is largely that the success of a meme is bound up with its acceptance by
those who acquire it – but it should be noted throughout that this is not
always the case, and that some memes may grab a great deal of attention
purely as a result of their novel or shocking content, even though their
possessors do not for one minute believe them. Examples might include
outrageous urban myths, or bizarre-sounding scientiﬁc theories to which
previous generations subscribed, both of which can sometimes survive
on the back of their novelty value.
The Memetic Environment
Bearing this in mind, we return now to the general factors affecting
memetic ﬁtness. One of the most signiﬁcant aspects of any meme’s en-
vironment will be the other memes that are present in that culture, and
this is the factor that will often dominate the fate of novel memes in par-
ticular. In order to be accepted, an idea has (usually) to be compatible
with those already in existence – which means that selection will favour
memes that are capable of exploiting the current cultural environment.
The result will be coadapted meme complexes which bestow further ben-
eﬁts on their members in addition to the initial privilege of admission:
as the complexes grow in size and strength, they will become more dif-
ﬁcult to penetrate, providing protection against invading, contradictory
ideas. This is analogous to the complexes of coadapted genes to be found
within particular species, and typically we should expect to ﬁnd protec-
tive meme complexes within speciﬁc cultures. It also reﬂects a fact to
which the previous chapter pointed: that the direction of evolution will
be dependent upon what already happens to exist. For speciﬁc novel
replicators – both genes and memes – this will mean that their success
or failure will be partly determined by the prior existence of other repli-
cators in their area. “Much as the evolution of rabbits created ecological
niches for species that eat them and parasitize them, the invention of
cars created cultural niches for gas stations, seat belts, and garage door
openers.”2
Novel genes that are incompatible with existing genes will be destroyed
because they cause the destruction of their mutual “survival machine”.
For memes, however, the effect on the human organism is not so drastic:
if someone favours a novel meme over those of her existing memes with
which it is incompatible, then the chances of this resulting in her death
are low. On the other hand, there may be social advantages in her sticking
with her existing memes, since people who bend to the prevailing Zeitgeist,
and are reluctant to resist popular opinion, often do best socially. There

60
The Selﬁsh Meme
are other advantages, too: the tendency to favour what exists over nov-
elties creates a positive feedback loop with the tendency to build stable
complexes.
One reason for this may be that the amount of effort already invested
in acquiring a meme will have been entirely wasted if, whenever an al-
ternative is encountered, the original stands as great a chance of being
rejected as the novel competitor. Rather, as soon as someone has decided
that one meme is worthy of his prolonged attention, a tendency to favour
it would be advantageous: instead of assuming (I don’t mean consciously)
that a new meme is as likely to be the correct choice as the old one, it
is much more efﬁcient for him to work on the unconscious assumption
that his existing memes would not have been acquired were they not
worthy of his attention. He should only acquire a novel meme if it ei-
ther is compatible with the old ones or has obvious enough advantages
over them to compensate for his previous investment. Such a tendency to
build on what already exists would lead to stable meme assemblies, and
at that point any incoming meme which contradicts one of the assem-
bly’s elements faces even greater opposition. Rejecting the existing meme
now entails rejecting the whole assembly; conversely, the incoming meme
now needs to have obvious advantages over a whole complex of existing
memes. Thus the very existence of the assembly increases the advantage
of sticking with the existing memes, and that process in turn builds up the
assembly.
Another reason for conservatism may simply be that any meme which
is invasively strong enough to secure attention in the ﬁrst place already
enjoys a certain amount of success. Presumably if it can gain attention
over existing memes (which are also relatively successful), then it will also
be able to retain attention over most newcomers.
On the other hand, this will depend on the amount of attention that
it has gained, as compared with the amount that the newcomer is poten-
tially able to gain. In other words, the ﬁtness of a novel meme for an
existing assembled complex will depend not only on the memes that are
already within the complex but also on the commitment with which those
memes are held. A new meme that contradicts an idea which is not so fun-
damental to the assembly – one that is not too deeply entrenched – has a
better chance of success than a novelty that is in conﬂict with a “keystone”
meme. Memetic ﬁtness depends on the ability to gain and retain atten-
tion, and it will be much harder for a meme to do this if it contradicts
existing, deeply entrenched alternatives. A meme that demands I turn
my back on a belief or skill that I hold dear or have learned to trust will

Selection
61
not easily persuade me that it is worthy of my prolonged attention. There
is more on this later in the chapter.
The Physical Environment
So in the struggle for existence memes are selected via their phenotypic
effects, which must be compatible with (i.e., able to penetrate) the exist-
ing meme assembly in its cultural “area”. Yet this is not the whole story.
Memes’ success is not simply a matter of their effects’ compatibility with
the existing cultural environment: they must also be anchored to reality by
according with the perceptual evidence. The reason why the “ﬂat earth”
meme would not succeed today is not just that it is incompatible with
existing theory but also that it is contradicted by the best available evidence.
No matter how much potential a meme has for longevity and fecundity,
this will never be realized in some physical environments. The meme for
riding a bicycle to work will be seen as much more attention worthy in the
calm ﬂatlands of Cambridge than amongst the weather-beaten gradients
of the Yorkshire Dales; the fashion meme for miniskirts in Siberia, or
for Aran sweaters in Florida, is not likely to retain much attention. The
importance of the physical environment for memetic ﬁtness is apparent
in almost every cultural area. Like genes, memes do not succeed or fail
per se. As a gene is dependent on a coadapted gene complex for pro-
tection, and on surroundings that are kind to the phenotypic effects it
produces, so a meme needs a receptive cultural environment and an
external world that accords with its effects. Without these conditions, it
will never have the chance to be fecund.
The Genetic Environment
If memes’ success can be determined by their memetic and physical en-
vironments, then what of their genetic surroundings: is memetic ﬁtness
ever determined by human biology? A previous section on sociobiology
(Chapter 2) rejected the suggestion that Darwinism could account for
the diverse details of culture, chieﬂy on the grounds that the rate of cul-
tural change just could not be picked up at the genetic level. On these
grounds, we should expect that the broad facts about social structure
will be such as to raise our biological ﬁtness, but that the majority of
uniquely human traits will be determined by the constraints of cultural
ﬁtness. Nonetheless, it would be odd if our biological ancestry did not
exert some inﬂuence on our culture – if only to the basic extent that, for
instance, the meme for binding the whole of the Oxford English Dictio-
nary into one huge, unmanageable volume would be doomed to failure

62
The Selﬁsh Meme
because we are not physically large enough to handle it. More than this,
we should expect our biology to have some inﬂuence on what we deem
worthy of prolonged attention. A theory that entirely removed behaviour
from genetic control would not be very plausible.
It may well be, for instance, that the human genotype will provide in-
nate biases or parameters for change which sometimes constrain the par-
ticular sequences of memetic acquisition and evolution. Thus, although
the primary criterion for a cultural replicator must be its compatibility
with the existing culture, still there will be occasions when its success or
failure will be affected by the biological nature of its possessors. So, for
example, whilst it is true to say that the popularity of ﬁlms will reﬂect the
culture in which they are shown (big hits in the United States may ﬂop
in the United Kingdom), it will also be the case that their reception is af-
fected by cross-cultural, biological factors (e.g., the appeal of love stories,
action adventures, or ﬁlms about large-eyed, deep-foreheaded creatures
such as ET). Memetic ﬁtness criteria are, then, sometimes determined by
our genotype. This is not to say that, even in these instances, memes’ ef-
fects on our biological survival will determine their ﬁtness (note that what
we were selected to prefer in the distant past may not now even affect,
never mind raise our biological ﬁtness). It is merely to point out that
memes’ own success rates will sometimes be inﬂuenced by our biological
nature.
Human Psychology
An important factor in our biology is, of course, our psychology. Indeed,
some would go so far as to say that the nature of the mind (as opposed to
the nature of a meme’s own content) is the prime factor in determining
a meme’s success or failure,3 and others that there is an even closer
connection between memes and psychology than this: that at least some
emotions are memes, and that in some forms of social interaction those
memes can be copied between different people.4 Empathy, for instance,
might be a form of memetic transmission of emotions: you feel sad when
you read in the newspaper about strangers’ tragedies, because you can
empathize with their situation; you feel, for a brief time, the same emotions
as they do. Another case of emotions as memes might be the transference
of feelings between toddlers or teenagers and their parents, when the
child’s strong emotions are picked up and carried by their parents (or
indeed vice versa). So, for example, a parent feels confused and at the
end of her tether when dealing with a wilful two-year-old, because she is
unconsciously picking up the confusion and panic of which the child’s
tantrum is a display.

Selection
63
According to my own characterization of cultural evolution, however,
emotions do not ﬁt into the category of memes, for the key reason that
they are non-representational. If memes are representations of cultural
information then emotions are not memes, for our feelings do not carry
information about anything, unlike our thoughts. Our feelings are of
course provoked by situations, and indeed a standard therapeutic ques-
tion regarding our emotions is, “What’s that about?” – but the meaning
behind that question is not, “What information is represented by your
anger (or tears, or whatever)?” but rather, “What lies behind the strength
of your feelings about this?” or, “What is causing you to feel like this?”
The situation is somewhat confused by the loose way in which we often
talk. It is not uncommon for people to say something like “I feel that our
relationshipis over”, where despite beginning with “I feel”, such sentences
express a thought rather than a feeling – as demonstrated by the fact that
the underlying emotions are actually left unsaid by such statements; does
the speaker feel sad about the end of the relationship, or angry, relieved
or what? Such imprecise language is not, however, an accurate guide to
the true state of affairs: there is a real distinction between thoughts and
feelings, and therapists are trained to raise their clients’ awareness of this
difference, so that they can gain clarity about the emotions that underlie
their statements.5
Emotions, then, do not carry information: they are not memes but
potential reactions to memes – as well, of course, as more direct reactions
to situations, people, memories, thoughts and so on. The emotions that a
meme tends to provoke might help in its selection, as when we are stirred
or touched by a piece of literature, art or music, which we consequently
retain in our memories and/or recommend to others. The feelings pro-
voked may even be almost invariant between the people who encounter it,
but even so what is being copied in such cases is not the emotion, but the
content of the piece (to which the emotion is a reaction). Returning to
the example of empathy, it is on this account the result of our imagining
ourselves in the relevant situation, and responding to it in the same way
as the person who is actually undergoing that experience: we are not so
much copying their feelings as reinventing them for ourselves. Similarly,
parents whose emotions mirror their offspring’s anger or confusion are
not imitating those feelings, but rather misattributing their source.
Yet human psychology obviously is a crucial factor in directing meme
selection. Human minds process and ﬁlter certain types of knowledge
differently from others, and memetic success or failure will be affected
by this as well as by other environmental factors. An individual may be
more likely to accept a particular meme, for instance, if it is shared by

64
The Selﬁsh Meme
someone whom he admires, or if it has been adopted by the majority of his
social group. We trust certain sources of information – our parents when
we are small, or people whom we accept as experts in a ﬁeld of which we
ourselves are rather ignorant – and are more likely to accept information
when it comes from these sources, even if our own understanding of
it remains rather hazy. Unlike facts about the natural world, which we
automatically and stringently test for consistency with each other, we may
subject facts about more complex things like science or religion to less
stringent testing. If some seem inconsistent with others then we are open
to the possibility that it is our understanding, rather than the concepts
involved, which are at fault. (The lay person’s knowledge of physics, for
example, may include the fact that tables are made up of many whizzing
atoms – with a tacit mental footnote “whatever atoms are”.) It is this
which enables us to accept unclear or mysterious claims on the basis of
trusted authority: we may check out their consistency with our assumption
about the trustworthiness of that authority rather than with other facts
or external evidence.6
It is therefore clear that human psychology is of some relevance to
memes’ relative success rates: “every individual differs in his or her sus-
ceptibility to adopting particular memes depending on genotype, devel-
opment, individual experience and social environment, and this suscep-
tibility is not itself exclusively the product of past meme adoption.”7 The
direction of cultural evolution will be inﬂuenced by the characteristics of
both memes themselves and the human mind – and Chapter 12 explores
in more detail the nature of the interaction between the two.
Memetic Content
It is interesting to make the distinction between the environmental inﬂu-
ences (whether cultural, physical or biological) on memetic success, and
the ways in which the meme’s own content might inﬂuence its survival
and replication rate. The content of genes, for example, carries an inbuilt
means of ensuring success: you cannot acquire a gene without acquiring
also the instructions to replicate it, for a vital part of DNA’s function is
to make copies of itself. In what ways might memes’ content affect their
ﬁtness?
On the whole, memetic replication techniques seem less aggressive
than DNA’s: few memes carry instructions for their own replication. Yet
what if a meme did contain, as part of its content, the instruction to make
copies of it, so that part of its executive effect were its own replication? It
would have a built-in advantage over memes that have to rely on the usual

Selection
65
processes of imitation and communication to make copies of themselves –
not because it was automatically more able to gain (or even retain) our
attention, but because it would have guaranteed its replication whenever
it was acquired.
In some cases memes do seem to have achieved this: Dawkins has
referred to religions as “duplicate me” programmes (see Chapter 8 for
discussion of his suggestion), and it is certainly true of many religions
that they have an evangelical element. Of course it begs the question of
their truth to say that they are acquired (i.e., accepted as true) by so many
people simply because “replicate me” is part of their content: it may be
that “replicate me” is part of their content because they make true claims
about matters that carry such weight with us. There are, though, less
controversial examples to be found. Consider for instance the folk-song
tradition, which contains as a vital element of its content the claim that
the songs are important parts of our heritage, and should therefore be
preserved by one generation for the next. The possession of some political
views (usually the more extreme versions) also entails the demand that
they should be held by all.
So, although memes are usually less aggressive than genes, it appears
that some do include the instruction to make copies of themselves. Why,
given that they have this innate advantage, have such memes not swamped
the meme pool? The answer is twofold. First, even if you acquire a meme
that inclines you to replicate it, your success in so doing will depend on the
rest of the meme pool – and if that is unreceptive to your meme then your
attempts to make copies of it will fail. Secondly, and as a corollary to this,
a meme’s possession of the “duplicate me” factor will not automatically
imply that it can thereby bypass normal rationality. Flat-earthers could
be as evangelical as they liked; in the twenty-ﬁrst century the “ﬂat-earth”
meme would have little success.* The mere fact that a meme has “replicate
me” as part of its content does not mean that it is not worth replicating –
but nor will it automatically increase a meme’s ability to grab and keep
our attention. Thus the external and intermemetic context of any meme
will still be the most signiﬁcant factor in its selection, just as it is for genes.
Relative Fitness
It has been suggested, however, that there is a signiﬁcant difference be-
tween genes and memes when it comes to the relationship between their
* Although see Chapter 5’s discussion of recessive memes for a corollary to this statement.

66
The Selﬁsh Meme
content and environment. Genetic success is intimately related to the
actual ﬁt of genes’ phenotypic effects to their physical environment,
whereas in some cases a meme’s success may be guaranteed by the perceived
ﬁt of its effects to the environment.8 What this means is that, whereas a
gene must succeed or fail in virtue of the effects that it actually exerts, a
meme may succeed even if it does not have the effect popularly attributed
to it, or even if the idea that it represents is not true.
Thus, for example, someone might build a car in a particular shape
because he thinks that it will increase the car’s speed, even though in
fact it will not – and that car may sell well because the public shares his
misconception, thus perpetuating the meme. Or a political party may be
voted back into power on the strength of the claims that it makes about its
achievements in reducing taxation – and supported even by those people
who are actually paying more taxes overall, without realising it. Memetic
success, unlike genetic success, is not necessarily linked to reality.
In fact this apparent distinction between the two realms of selection
may more helpfully be viewed as an interesting parallel. Again it will
prove fruitful to explore the biological case in a little more detail ﬁrst.
In nature, a feature will be selected because of its ﬁt to the actual world,
so of course the ﬁtness itself must also be actual. Since forward planning
is not possible in nature, biological ﬁtness must always be determined
by the organism’s immediate needs. Even if a characteristic might be
helpful to a species in the long run, the only factor that will determine its
success will be its immediate effect on the organism’s ability to gain food
or sex – and this will depend not only on the current environment (what
does the organism need, and what resources are available?), but also on
the existing gene pool (with whose members any novel genes will have
to compete). Genetic ﬁtness is, in other words, a relative concept: what
gives a selectional advantage in one particular time and setting would not
necessarily have done so in different circumstances.
In culture, a parallel story can be told. Features will often be selected
because of their ﬁt to the mental world, which may itself be hypothetical
(i.e., not linked to reality). Since absolute knowledge is not possible
for humans, cultural ﬁtness must always be determined by our current
perception of appropriateness. Even if a new idea or design might prove
truer or more useful in the long run, the only factor that will determine its
success will be its immediate ability to gain and retain attention – and this
will depend on both the current environment (what do people currently
perceive as appropriate and desirable?) and the existing meme pool (with
whose members any novel memes will have to compete). Like genetic

Selection
67
ﬁtness, then, memetic ﬁtness is a relative concept: what gives a selec-
tional advantage in one particular time and setting would not necessarily
have done so in different circumstances. In both cases the ﬁt of a replica-
tor’s content to its environment is relative to what already exists – either
in the replicator pool or in the environment – and is not absolute.
Conclusions
A meme’s own content may, then, be a fairly arbitrary factor in deter-
mining its success: its fortune in the struggle for survival will always be
relative to context. As memes struggle to gain and retain the attention
of human minds, their success or failure is in this sense inﬂuenced more
by the environment than by their own content. Novel memes must be ﬁt
for the existing body of culture, for the physical environment and for the
dictates of human biology and psychology, in order to stand a chance of
being copied accurately or enduringly.

7
The Story So Far
Memetics must be able to provide a convincing account of how the three
essential elements of evolutionary theory – selection, variation and repli-
cation – work in culture. The preceding four chapters have taken on this
challenge but have in the process raised a variety of questions on which
the credibility of meme theory is equally dependent.
Selection
“Selection” means that some replicators are favoured, survive and prop-
agate, while others fail and become extinct. Genes are selected via their
phenotypic effects, and the evidence for such selection is therefore to
be sought at the level of the phenotype. Nor is it hard to ﬁnd. An abun-
dance of extant and extinct species – living organisms, creatures that have
been wiped out within living memory, and fossil records – all contribute
towards the plausibility of natural selection in biology.
If memes, like genes, are selected via their phenotypic effects, then
it is at the phenotypic level that we must search for the evidence for
their selection, too. Again, there is plenty of evidence for selection in
culture: theories, tunes and methods that are popular at present; ideas
that have been rejected within living memory; written records of the
theories, fashions, skills and music of past generations, all demonstrate
the differential survival of certain areas of culture.
The previous chapter’s discussion provides, in addition, some theoret-
ical insight into the selectional pressures on memes: the limited capacity
and attention span of human brains; assembling compatibility pressures;
a variety of constraints speciﬁc to the different cultural areas; the physical,
68

The Story So Far
69
genetic, memetic and psychological environment; to a certain extent the
content of the memes themselves. Most signiﬁcantly, it emerged that
memetic selection will depend on memes’ respective abilities to gain
and retain our attention in the current context: ﬁtness is always a relative
concept.
In the struggle to be selected most memes do not, unlike genes, auto-
matically come with instructions for their own replication, but Richard
Dawkins has raised the possibility that at least some cultural elements do
arrive so equipped. These he has labelled “viruses of the mind”, and the
next chapter discusses this claim – a discussion whose implications will
reveal much about the true nature of memes.
Replication
A second evolutionary process is replication. Genes replicate via meio-
sis or mitosis, which preserves the information of their constituent
DNA. They have very different properties from those of their “survival
machines”: genes exist and function in their own right, distinct from the
phenotypic results via which they are selected, which exist and function
at a more composite level of the evolutionary assembly.
Memes, too, have been characterized as existing and functioning au-
tonomously, and I have claimed that they owe their distinct properties
to the representational content in which they consist. That content must
be preserved in such a form as to be available for activation – it must
constantly have the potential to give phenotypic results – but, like a gene,
it may be recessive and sometimes produce no such results. The results
that it does produce must be generally applicable in a variety of contexts.
An adequate theory of representational content can explain how memes
are able to fulﬁl these roles, in the same way that a proper understand-
ing of DNA revealed the mechanisms of genetic heredity. Memes have
their basis in representational content, just as genes have theirs in DNA.
This addresses the question of what memes are, but a theme that recurs
throughout the remainder of this book is the question of where memes
are to be found. In other words, how is their representational content
physically realized?
It is obvious that a key feature of memetic content must be its
replicability; without this property no representation could be a meme.
In practice, the transmission of memetic content will be facilitated by
such standard cultural methods as imitation, teaching and everyday com-
munication. There will be constraints, however, upon which sorts of

70
The Selﬁsh Meme
transmission methods will be able to support memetic replication, since
none will sufﬁce which cannot account for the exponential growth of cul-
tural complexity – and any replication of complex information depends
on a process of hierarchical assembly.
Memetic replication must, in addition, be dependent on the human
ability for social learning, and Chapter 4 raised questions about the types
of social learning that can support memetic replication. In particular,
there is a dispute within memetics about the signiﬁcance of imitation for
cultural evolution. More fundamentally than this, there is a debate to
be had about whether the transmission of cultural information involves
replication, as such, at all. Again these crucial questions are tackled in the
second half of this book.
Variation
The third aspect of evolution is variation, and in Chapter 5 I argued that
mutation and recombination – the methods of genetic variation – also
provide a good account of the ways in which cultural variations might
arise. Memetic mutations will be subject to certain biases and limitations,
determined by what already exists and its assembled organization. The
recombination of memetic alleles may well be the more usual method by
which cultural variations arise, and I defended the view that memes do,
indeed, have alleles.
An outstanding issue, however, is the fundamental question whether
cultural change is really facilitated by particulate units of selection, in the
way that biological developments are. I shall argue that it is.
Memes and the Mind
A recurring theme throughout almost all of these areas of discussion
has been the question of the relationship between memes and the mind.
Memes are selected by virtue of their ﬁt to the cultural environment: what
part do humans play in directing their selection? If memes are preserved
as representational content, then where does that content stem from,
and where is it stored? If memes are transmitted via a variety of means of
communication, then to what extent are human agents necessary and/or
sufﬁcient elements of these copying processes? Memes must vary if cul-
tural evolution is to happen: is this a passive event, or are humans actively
involved in it?

The Story So Far
71
According to some of the most respected and vocal memeticists, such
questions are not worth answering; the reality is that there is no signiﬁcant
distinction between memes and the human mind. Others would rather
reject the meme hypothesis altogether than allow it such free reign over
our theories of mind. It is time to set this book in its own cultural context,
by investigating some other writers’ views of memes.

8
The Human Mind: Meme Complex with a Virus?
Since Richard Dawkins ﬁrst proposed his meme theory in 1976 there
have been a number of attempts to develop and defend it, as well as
some rather misplaced criticisms.1 In this chapter and the next, I ex-
plore several such commentaries. Chapter 9 focuses largely on the issue
of imitation, as discussed by Susan Blackmore, Dan Sperber, Robert Boyd
and Peter J. Richerson. Here I examine two of the best-known applica-
tions of memetics: Dawkins’s own attempt to embrace viruses within the
cultural side of the analogy, and Daniel Dennett’s claim – one of the
most signiﬁcant that has been made for the potency of meme theory –
that memetics can explain the emergence of human consciousness.
Richard Dawkins
Richard Dawkins has speculated about the extent to which a certain type
of cultural replicator might be seen more as the analogue of a virus than
of a gene.2 Famously, as an example of this sort of replicator he uses
religion, and concludes that it “is best understood as an infectious dis-
ease of the mind”.3 This analysis he uses to add weight to his already
well-publicized conviction that truth is incompatible with religion, for
it implies that large sections of the human race are even now devot-
ing themselves, not to the service of God, but to the propagation of
a virus. Since Dawkins regards biological evolution as an alternative to
God, it is perhaps not surprising that he should also use his theory of
cultural evolution to explain away religious belief. This section inves-
tigates whether his arguments constitute a valid application of meme
theory.
72

The Human Mind: Meme Complex with a Virus?
73
Good Memes Versus Mental Viruses
Dawkins starts with a discussion of the nature of physical viruses, and de-
scribes them simply as “Duplicate Me” programs written in the language
of the DNA code. Their advent was “inevitable” once the cellular machin-
ery for DNA replication had developed, for such an apparatus provides
the perfect niche for subversive parasites which hijack genes’ replicative
machinery in order to make copies of themselves. Thus Dawkins con-
trasts viral with genetic methods of survival. Both use the same means of
replication, but genes produce it and viruses hijack it: genes’ replicative
success depends on their producing beneﬁcial effects on their possessors’
chances of survival and reproduction, whereas viruses’ replicative success
depends merely on their ensuring that they are replicated. (Compare the
fact that a robin’s successful procreation depends on its providing a safe
environment for its chicks, in which they are continually fed; a cuckoo’s
depends merely on ensuring that its chicks enter such an environment.)
Raising the possibility of cultural viruses, Dawkins says that our brains,
with their naturally selected openness to memes, also provide an envi-
ronment that is ripe for parasitic exploitation.
If we accept Dawkins’s hypothesis, then in what way should we expect
“mental viruses” to differ from memes? To uphold the biological analogy,
we should expect mental viruses to succeed by parasitizing the normal
process of cultural replication, in order to make copies of themselves.
We should expect the sorts of ideas that are viral rather than memetic
to be successful not because of any replicative advantage they hold over
other ideas (are better predictors or more aesthetically pleasing, etc.),
but merely because they have found some way of ensuring that they are
transmitted. Putting this another way, whether a given replicator is a virus
or a meme will be determined by its method of replication (“normal” or
parasitic), rather than by its content.
Dawkins begins by explaining the properties that make a medium vul-
nerable to parasitic exploitation: its (almost) accurate replicative powers,
and a willingness to obey the instructions that it is replicating. The human
brain, he argues, has just these properties. He points out that, in addi-
tion, the mind of a child is especially susceptible to parasitic exploitation:
it needs to be receptive to new ideas, in order to soak up a whole culture
and language.
In this context, Dawkins ﬁrst introduces the idea that religion is just
such a virus of the mind, able to manipulate the thought processes of
its victim, although that victim will be unaware of being so manipulated.
Later he adds that the religion virus incorporates certain features that

74
The Selﬁsh Meme
make sure that it sticks and spreads. It includes, for example, the ideas
that faith (which Dawkins characterizes as belief without evidence) is a
virtue, and that even if you lose your faith, you should teach it to your
children in order to give them the choice of believing or not. “Religious
doctrines survive because they are told to children at a susceptible age
and the children therefore see to it, when they grow up, that their own
children are told the same thing.”4
Dawkins contrasts such “viruses” with “good” memes. He says that we
should be careful not to apply the viral analogy to all ideas and all aspects
of culture: some are more like “good genes” than self-serving, “Duplicate
Me” viruses. Indeed, “Great ideas and great music spread, not because
they embody instructions, slavishly carried out, but because they are great.
The works of Darwin and Bach are not viruses.”5 Equally, although sci-
entiﬁc ideas might seem to spread epidemiologically, in fact they spread
“because people evaluate them, recommend them and pass them on”.6
Science: Meme or Virus?
In such statements, Dawkins comes perilously close to labelling only those
things of which he approves, as “great” and nonviral. Admittedly Bach’s
music is enduringly popular, but at the moment there are other forms
of music that are statistically more popular. Is this because of their viral
nature, or because they too are intrinsically “great”? It may be that their
fans would argue for the latter, whilst the rest of us would tend to go with
the former idea – and the evidence either way would be highly speculative.
Perhaps the ideas that Dawkins would – often in conjunction with most
of the rest of us – wish to label “great”, are actually just the ones that are
most compatible with our own time, culture and available evidence. Ideas
that are successful but not so apparently intrinsically valuable appear to
us to be pointlessly self-replicating, but may be in the future (or have
been in the past) labelled “great”. More generally, it may be that the
ones that are enduringly regarded as “great” are simply the ones that
are compatible with the sorts of features that do not alter much between
generations.
I don’t want to push this thought too far, however, being reluctant to
characterize as purely subjective either scientiﬁc theories or scientists’
choices between them; but on the other hand Dawkins’ characterization
of the dissemination of scientiﬁc ideas – as spreading successfully purely
as a result of accuracy and greatness – rather begs the question. It fails to
account for great ideas that lie dormant for many years (e.g., Mendelian

The Human Mind: Meme Complex with a Virus?
75
genetics), and for the spread of ideas that only seem to be great at a
particular time (e.g., Lamarckian evolution). Moreover, the acceptance of
scientiﬁc theses is, like religion, highly dependent on context, historical
as well as geographical.
The idea of scientiﬁc theories as parasites has, in fact, been worked
out in a particularly lucid account of scientiﬁc progress given by Douglas
Shrader, who claims that “saying that a theory has gained general accep-
tance is similar to saying that a parasitic infection has reached epidemic
proportions.”7 A detailed exposition of Shrader’s account would not add
much here, but his theory does underline the fact that the application
of cultural evolutionary theories to scientiﬁc progress is, at the very least,
open to interpretation. Dawkins’s view of scientiﬁc theories as “good”
memes, which may be contrasted with the viruses of religion, is far from
being the only option.
Parasites Versus “Bad” Replicators
The crucial point, though, is that Dawkins’s meme/virus distinction dis-
plays a misunderstanding of his own theory. The meme hypothesis ﬁrst
appeared in The Selﬁsh Gene, the central theorem of which was that the
gene is the unit of selection, and also “the basic unit of selﬁshness”:8
genes act so as to increase their own chances of survival and replication,
and any selectional beneﬁts that they confer on their survival machines
(the human body, in our case), are almost incidental.
Following on from that thesis, memes were also hypothesized to be
“selﬁsh”: Dawkins said that “selection favours memes that exploit their
cultural environment to their own advantage.”9 Yet if this is the case,
then how can the difference between memes and mental viruses rest
on the question whether the replicator in question is a “good” one? In
fact, neither gene nor meme theory has anything to say about the intrinsic
value (i.e., “goodness”) of the information that its replicators carry. As has
been emphasized before, ﬁtness is a relative concept – so we cannot just
dismiss as viral those ideas whose content we see as harmful or pointless.
Even for genes, it is not relevant that (usually) the virus is bad and the
gene good for the individual who acquires it: both are replicators, and
the distinction between them is a developmental one, a point which is
emphasized by the existence of crippling and life-threatening diseases
which result from the possession of a harmful gene or gene complex. The
replicator-virus distinction rests on the method of replication involved,
not on the content of what is replicated.

76
The Selﬁsh Meme
Viruses: A Biological Detail
Dawkins also seems, in his discussion of mental viruses, to have misinter-
preted the very essence of the gene-meme comparison. A detail-to-detail
analogy is not appropriate between genetics and memetics, and indeed
the meme hypothesis loses much of its credibility as soon as one tries to
claim that every feature of genetics can be carried over to culture. The
point of the meme hypothesis is that if the essential features of Darwinism
can be found in the cultural realm, then we should expect to see a new
type of evolution taking place there. The speciﬁcs of how the new type of
evolution will develop, however, need not parallel those of its predecessor,
biological evolution.
It is obvious that viruses, as parasites on the biological evolutionary sys-
tem, are not essential features of it. The essential features are replication,
variation and selection, and genes lie at the hub of this process in the bi-
ological world. The fact that viruses also exist, taking advantage of genes’
hard work, is something that has happened as a side effect rather than
as a crucial element of the evolutionary system which has allowed those
parasites to prosper. If there were no viruses, then evolution would still
have happened (just as is the case for any other species or creature), in a
way that it would not if there were no natural selection, for example. The
question therefore arises whether Dawkins can salvage the virus–good
replicator distinction in the cultural evolutionary system, by speculating
that viruses happen to be a speciﬁc development that has been paralleled
in it. I shall show that this is wholly implausible, as the key distinction
between genes and viruses just does not arise in culture.
As emphasised, genes replicate by generating organisms, whereas
viruses replicate by hijacking those gene-built organisms. The success
of both sorts of replicator is affected by the effects that they produce, but
genes do and viruses do not rely on creating the replicative mechanisms
by which they produce their phenotypic effects. Genes do and viruses do
not generate survival machines.
I shall argue that memes are more like viruses than genes, in that
they do not generate their own survival machines. In contrast to genes –
which, in conjunction with an appropriate environment, generate sur-
vival machines that may be “hijacked” by biological viruses – memes do
not create the replicative mechanisms by which they produce their phe-
notypic effects, and thus there is nothing for a purported mental virus to
hijack. If this is true, then there is no genuine analogue for viruses in cul-
ture (memes are only “more like viruses than genes” in that they do not

The Human Mind: Meme Complex with a Virus?
77
generate survival machines – not in that they are the hijackers of some
other system). Rather, Dawkins has made the mistake of overextending
his meme hypothesis in an attempt to embrace what is an inessential de-
tail of biological evolution. In the following section, I begin to make the
case for this claim.
Daniel Dennett
Daniel Dennett’s version of memetics is both radical in nature and cru-
cial to his theory of consciousness. He defends the hypothesis that human
“consciousness is itself a huge complex of memes (or more exactly, meme
effects in brains)”.10 This is an ambitious claim for meme theory and
one which, if true, would greatly increase its force and status. To reject
Dennett’s assertion that a conscious mind is the effect of memes colonis-
ing a brain is to give up a compelling pointer towards the signiﬁcance
and plausibility of the meme hypothesis. Apart from anything else, it is
to abandon a strong and apparently attractive claim about the location of
the units of cultural selection.
An initial reason for doubt about Dennett’s thesis is that he provides
little defence for his account of memes. Its pivotal position in his work
appears rather to derive entirely from his citation of Dawkins’s original
hypothesis. More importantly, Dennett’s interpretation of this original hy-
pothesis is often questionable.11 There are two strands to the source of his
major error concerning the relation between memes and consciousness,
and both stem from his apparent misunderstanding of a fundamental el-
ement of the gene-meme analogy. The resolution of these errors reveals
that his explanation of consciousness, as the product of memes, is not as
convincing as it might at ﬁrst appear.
Dennett claims that consciousness developed from simple commu-
nication skills when our ancestors learned how to talk to themselves.
The advantages that this conferred meant that the “virtuosos” amongst
them were selected, and swiftly developed the art of talking to themselves
silently. Habits of communication evolved as the cooperative (and there-
fore successful) members of the community learnt to share the “good
tricks” they discovered by this primitive version of thought. “Once our
brains have built the entrance and exit pathways for the vehicles of lan-
guage,” says Dennett, “they swiftly become parasitized (and I mean that
literally, as we shall see) by entities that have evolved to thrive in just such a
niche: memes.”12 Our brains, equipped with the capacity to communicate

78
The Selﬁsh Meme
with themselves and each other, provide shelter and transmission media
for these new replicators: “The haven all memes depend on reaching is
the human mind.”13
Yet, this passage continues, “the ‘independent’ mind struggling to pro-
tect itself from alien and dangerous memes is a myth,” for “a human mind
is itself an artifact created when memes restructure a human brain in or-
der to make it a better habitat for memes.” The essence of Dennett’s
account, then, is that memes ﬁnd a haven in the human brain, where
the human mind is a combination of their effects. In contrast to genes,
which exist within organisms and have their effects primarily on those
organisms, memes exist externally and have their effects on the internal
structure of human brains.
Confusion Number One: Where Do Memes Come From?
One area of confusion, in this part of Dennett’s account of memes, is that
he fails to explain where memes might have emerged from, in order to
parasitize our ancestors’ brains as soon as they had developed language.
Did they have had some sort of independent existence before their arrival
in the haven of the human brain? Even today the same question arises:
if the human mind really is the creation of memes, which are formative
constituents of it in the same way that genes are formative constituents
of the human body, then where could such replicators originate? (This
assertion, as noted, forms the tacit basis for Dawkins’s purported meme-
virus distinction; if false, then it will also negate that distinction.)
Dennett does make one attempt to explain the origin of memes, but
unfortunately it is not very illuminating. His suggestion, that memes “de-
pend at least indirectly on one or more of their vehicles’ spending at least
a brief, pupal stage in a remarkable sort of meme nest: a human mind”,14
is rather puzzling in view of the examples of meme vehicles which he
offers a couple of pages previously: “pictures, books, sayings . . . Tools and
buildings and other inventions”.15 In what sense might any of these ex-
amples be capable of “spending . . . a brief, pupal stage in . . . a human
mind”? This confusion about the nature of meme vehicles will emerge as
a key weakness in Dennett’s account.
Vocabulary
It will be useful to begin by clarifying a couple of important deﬁnitions.
Phenotypic effects result from a combination of genes and their environ-
ment. To oversimplify: if someone has a gene “for” blue eyes then, given

The Human Mind: Meme Complex with a Virus?
79
the right environmental input (nourishment, etc.), the phenotypic effect
of that gene would be his blue eyes.
The roughly synonymous terms survival machine and vehicle were in-
troduced by Dawkins to refer to any protection and propagation system
for genes which houses them, is produced when they band together and
whose attributes are determined by them; they are also the means via
which their constituent genes can make copies of themselves. We, for
example, are characterized as the survival machines or vehicles for our
genes. More recently, some people have begun to use a third term, inter-
actor, for the same concept.
Confusion Number Two: Vehicles Versus Phenotypic Effects
In Dennett’s version of the gene-meme analogy, he notes that genes are
“carried by gene-vehicles (organisms) in which they tend to produce
characteristic effects (‘phenotypic effects’) by which their fates are, in
the long run, determined”. With this picture he compares memes: they
are “carried by meme-vehicles, namely pictures, books, sayings . . . Tools
and buildings and other inventions are also meme vehicles. A wagon with
spoked wheels carries . . . the brilliant idea of a wagon with spoked wheels
from mind to mind. . . . The fate of memes . . . depends on the selective
forces that act directly on the physical vehicles that embody them.”16
From this passage it is clear that he distinguishes for genes, but not for
memes, between their vehicles and their phenotypic effects. In the case
of genes, he separates their vehicles from their effects on those vehicles,
and states that genes are selected by virtue of their effects. In the case of
memes, however, he conﬂates the two and claims that memes are selected
by virtue of the vehicles themselves.
He is not normally so pessimistic about the gene-meme analogy, and
in this case it seems to be due to his lack of clarity about the nature of
replicators’ vehicles. In particular, he appears to have been confused by
a too literal interpretation of the “vehicle” metaphor – and indeed this
is the reason why many memeticists now prefer the term “interactor”.
For Dawkins a “vehicle” (or interactor) is something that houses and
protects replicators, enabling them to make further copies of themselves.
Genes build interactors as survival machines: they are protection systems
which enhance their chances of surviving for long enough to replicate
themselves, and indeed incorporate the mechanisms (sexual organs, etc.)
for that replication. For Dawkins, then, interactors do house replicators,
but the prime purpose for this is so that they can carry information from
one generation to the next.

80
The Selﬁsh Meme
Dennett, however, appears to be using the term “vehicle” in its more
conventional sense (i.e., in the sense in which a car or bus is a vehicle),
simply to indicate anything that carries genes or memes around. Because
he appears to ignore the fact that interactors are built by the replicators
that they carry, it is easy for him to forget that the purpose of these
vehicles is to make further copies of the replicators – not simply to carry
them around for as long as they happen to survive.
It is worth stressing this point. Recall that interactors are the means by
which replicators make copies of themselves, whereas phenotypic effects
are the detailed ways in which those vehicles are “tweaked”. This means
that phenotypic effects are only produced by replicators: my brown eyes
are the product of my genes. In contrast, interactors are both produced
by and the source of replicators: the interactor of which my brown eyes
are part (me) is both the product of my genes, and the source of half of
my children’s genes.
When it comes to memes, however, Dennett appears to regard some
things as meme interactors, which are actually their phenotypic effects –
and it is easy to see how this confusion might lead to the claim that
artefacts can be the source of memes. Mandolins, for example, are the
phenotypic effects of the mandolin meme – but as soon as you call them
meme interactors, instead, then the implication is that they are also the
source of that meme. At this stage it is a short step to the view of conscious-
ness as being shaped by the memes that spring from such purported
sources. The reality is that, whilst the mandolin meme will be selected via
the success or failure of mandolins, it cannot be replicated by them alone.
Confusion Number Three: Representation Versus That Which Is Represented
Here it is important to recall that memes must be generally applicable
concepts: in mathematics, for example, when I acquire a new meme it en-
dows me with the ability to solve any example of a given type of problem;
I do not merely acquire the memory of how to solve those already en-
countered. When it comes to human artefacts, this distinction is crucial.
It is the design or blueprint for an artefact which contains generally ap-
plicable information about the construction of that type of object. The
artefact itself does not contain any such information – and this is as true
of the artefacts that Dennett cites as examples of meme vehicles (tools
and buildings), as of any other. That crucial information is represented
in the blueprint or design from which artefacts result.
Now, it is the job of interactors both to protect and to provide the
copying mechanism for the information contained in the replicators that

The Human Mind: Meme Complex with a Virus?
81
produce them. Clearly no interactor could fulﬁl this role unless it con-
tained some representation of the relevant information – and the crux of
my argument against Dennett will be that artefacts do not do this: a bridge
contains no representation of its design, nor a mandolin of the concept
of that instrument. The confusion of meme vehicles with meme effects is
essentially a failure to distinguish between a representation and the thing
that it represents.
Dennett is not alone, it should be noted, in believing that artefacts can
incorporate memes. Susan Blackmore characterizes memes as “instruc-
tions embedded in human brains, or in artefacts such as books, pictures,
bridges or steam trains.”17 Rosaria Conte shares my view of a meme as “a
symbolic representation of any state of affairs”,18 but then goes on to say
that an artefact can incorporate a meme, even if its content is not easy to
decode.
So why do I disagree? To ﬁnd the answer, we need to begin by taking
a closer look at what it means to say that a certain characteristic (eye
colour, neck length, etc.) is the result of a gene (or gene complex) for
that feature. One of the things that it means is that there is (or has
been in the past) variation amongst the genes that control this feature.
As Dawkins puts it, “Unless natural selection has genetic variation to act
upon, it cannot give rise to evolutionary change. It follows that where
you ﬁnd Darwinian adaptation there must have been genetic variation in
the character concerned.”19 This means, further, that the content of any
given gene for that characteristic will be partly deﬁned by its differences
from the alternative genes for the same feature – its alleles. A signiﬁcant
fact about the gene for blue eyes, for instance, is that it is an alternative
to the gene for brown eyes. The same thing will be true of any replicator:
its content will be partly dependent on the differences between itself and
its alleles.
Now, if you show me a token of a spoked wheel and ask me to “build
another one of these”, then – unless I am already familiar with other
wheels – I shall have no reference against which to judge which of the
artefact’s features will be essential elements of the copy. In order to com-
ply with your wishes, I have to know that this artefact belongs to the
general category “wheel”, with all that this implies about its function,
and so on, and in addition I must be aware of the signiﬁcant ways in
which this type of wheel differs from others. In other words, it is not
the wheel but my mind that carries the salient information. In order for
me to be able to replicate the meme for an artefact, I need already to
possess a wealth of information about that type of artefact – information

82
The Selﬁsh Meme
that will enable me to extract a generalized concept from this particular
item.
The difference between this situation and the situation in which you
show me a blueprint for the wheel is that the blueprint tells me what are
the essential elements of the concept. The blueprint is a representation
of a spoked wheel, carrying generalized information about that type of
artefact; the wheel itself is merely a particular token effect of the informa-
tion that is represented in the blueprint. An artefact like a wheel cannot
be a meme interactor, for it is not able to facilitate the replication of a
meme. In order for the meme to be copied, not only does an artefact
need to come into contact with a human mind: the mind also needs to
create afresh the relevant information, by extracting salient general fea-
tures from this particular artefact – and it cannot do this without the help
of existing knowledge which it, not the artefact, brings to the situation.
(In this sense, then, the meme is not being replicated at all; see Chapter 9
for expansion of this point.) Representations, and not artefacts, realize
generalized information – and artefacts can persist long after the infor-
mation that gave rise to them has disappeared.
Unfortunately for Dennett, the result of his labelling memes’ effects as
their vehicles is that he does regard things like mandolins as the sources
of the memes for them – and once the cause of memes has been placed in
the external world like this, it is an easy step to the view of consciousness
as their internal effect.
To recapitulate: Dennett confuses memes’ effects with their interac-
tors. In reality, selection acts on replicators’ phenotypic effects, but replica-
tion happens via their interactors (in many cases the two overlap, but not
always). Dennett refers to phenotypic effects, which are actually the prod-
uct of memes, in terms that imply that they are also the source of those
memes: their interactors. An artefact cannot (usually) fulﬁl the role that
he assigns to it – that of an interactor – since it contains no representation
of the information to be copied. In particular, it carries no information
about the differences between itself and other artefacts within its general
category. Consequently, Dennett is mistaken in thinking that artefacts are
the sources of memes rather than their effects. Conversely, therefore, he
must be equally mistaken in thinking that the mind is the effect of memes
rather than their source.
Dawkins and Dennett
Earlier in the chapter, Dawkins’s virus–“good” meme distinction was
rejected. The reasoning behind this rejection has become clearer in

The Human Mind: Meme Complex with a Virus?
83
the discussion of Dennett, whose ambitious account of memes has been
criticized as problematic and undefended. Artefacts cannot be meme
vehicles – but without an independent external location, memes are de-
pendent on minds, and cannot be responsible for building minds in the
way that genes build bodies. Of course someone might argue that memes
were able to build my mind because their residence in other minds gives
them an existence independent of me, but this just takes the question
backwards in time: what was the independent external location from
which memes colonized our ancestors’ minds in the ﬁrst place? Without
entering the realms of science ﬁction, it seems that denying the possibil-
ity of artefacts as meme vehicles effectively rules out the possibility that
memes have an external existence, independent of human minds.
Yet if they do not, then we are left with the fact that memes cannot
be the formative constituents of the human mind in the way that genes
are the formative constituents of our bodies. This, in turn, rules out the
coherence of the concept of mental viruses, which are left with no “nor-
mal” formative process to parasitize. Even though it seems obvious that
the mind cannot develop its full potential without the stimulus of culture,
this is a far cry from the claim that memes create the mind.
Memes and the Mind
An alternative view is that we are born with the potential for a mind (as
part of the brain’s neonatal structure: i.e., the product of our genotype),
and this is developed via interaction with our environment, a signiﬁcant
element of which is cultural. Replicators must always interact with an en-
vironment in order to produce their phenotypic effects, but what I am
suggesting is a sea change in our view of memes’ role in the creation
of the human mind. Rather than as replicators which are its formative
constituents, I regard memes as part of the environment that contributes
to the formation of the mind. To caricature the situation: although it is
fair to say that “genes plus environment equals body”, the true picture is
not so much “memes plus environment equals mind”, as “body plus envi-
ronment equals mind”, where memes are part of the latter environment.
This may seem to be at odds with the main force of the meme
hypothesis: that there is truly a new form of evolution going on in culture.
Surely if I admit that the mind is ultimately the product of our genotype,
and add that memes are ultimately dependent on the mind, then I am
implicitly admitting that memetic evolution is ultimately dependent on
genetic evolution. Fortunately, this is not the case. Even though DNA
could not have evolved without the prior existence of carbon, and in this

84
The Selﬁsh Meme
sense it was the existence of carbon which set the scene for the emer-
gence of the organic world, nonetheless it is still true to say that DNA is
the source of the biosphere, and that if we want to ﬁnd out about biol-
ogy then this is the level at which we need to investigate. Similarly, then,
even though the human mind could not have evolved without the prior
existence of DNA, and in this sense it was the existence of DNA which
set the scene for the emergence of culture, nonetheless it is still true to
say that the mind is the source of culture, and that if we want to ﬁnd
out about culture then this is the level at which we need to investigate. It
is always interesting to study the relation between different levels of en-
quiry (chemistry, biology, psychology, etc.), but this does not mean that
investigations at one level can be reduced to investigation at another.
The question of the relation between memes and the mind is, as men-
tioned previously, one on whose answer memeticists are sharply divided,
and there is no implication that at this stage I have done anything other
than brieﬂy state my own position. The justiﬁcation for that position is
developed throughout the rest of the book.
Where Are Memes?
The failure of Dennett’s hypothesis is in a way a shame for meme the-
ory, since his view would have given memetics a formidable corollary:
the explanation of the emergence of consciousness. Moreover, having
rejected the claim that memes are exclusively external representations,
with effects on the internal structures of the human brain, the theory of
cultural evolution has been left with no place for its units of selection –
or even for their phenotypic effects. In fact the situation looks rather
confused: artefacts are denied vehicle status, but other external objects
(such as blueprints) seem to have been accepted. It is time to address the
question of memes’ location.
On the surface, it seems that things are more straightforward for genes.
They are found within survival machines, on which their phenotypic ef-
fects are exercised to their replicative (dis)advantage. In reality, however,
the situation in biology is rather more complicated than the previous
sentence would indicate, and the remainder of this chapter explores the
relationship between genes and their effects. The implications of that
discussion, for memes, will draw together various strands from the pre-
ceding chapters, concluding that in terms of memetic location there is no
signiﬁcant distinction between copies that are found internally, in the hu-
man mind, and those in external stores of information like libraries and

The Human Mind: Meme Complex with a Virus?
85
the Internet – but that in order for a meme to be available to selection,
active copies of it must exist.
The Extended Phenotype: Genes
Dawkins is perhaps best known for his theory of the selﬁsh gene, but
his next book, The Extended Phenotype,20 presented a hypothesis that took
an equally radical perspective on biological evolution. Like the selﬁsh
gene, the extended phenotype is a theory that can usefully be applied to
memes as well as to genes. A careful comparison of its implications for
culture and biology will elucidate both memes’ location and the relations
between memes, the mind and culture.
“The doctrine of the extended phenotype is that the phenotypic effect
of a gene (genetic replicator) is best seen as an effect upon the world
at large, and only incidentally upon the individual organism – or any
other vehicle – in which it happens to sit.”21 Genes’ phenotypic effects
can “include functionally important consequences of gene differences,
outside the bodies in which the genes sit”.22 On this view, the concept
of a “phenotype” should be extended to include not only those effects
which genes exercise upon their own survival machines, but also those
which are exercised on the world at large. Beavers’ genes, for example,
build both beavers and dams, and spiders’ genes build both spiders and
webs: both sorts of effect are likely to inﬂuence the success of the genes
that produce them, regardless of their location.
More than this, genes may have effects not only on some inanimate
part of the organism’s environment, but even on another organism. One
example is the effect that a parasite has on its host: Dawkins considers re-
ports that snails infected by trematode parasites, or “ﬂukes”, have thicker
shells than their uninfected counterparts. “From the point of view of snail
genetics, this aspect of shell variation is under ‘environmental’ control –
the ﬂuke is part of the environment of the snail – but from the point of
view of ﬂuke genetics it might well be under genetic control: it might,
indeed, be an evolved adaptation of the ﬂuke.”23 This is because the op-
timum shell thickness is not likely to be the same for ﬂukes as for snails:
whereas snails value reproduction as well as survival, ﬂukes merely want
the snails to survive; therefore a ﬂuke will beneﬁt from a very thick snail
shell, even if the resources that go into building it are taken from those
needed to maintain the snail’s reproductive potential.
So the phenotypic effects of genes may occur in the genes’ “own” or-
ganism, in the environment or even in a different organism. Via all of

86
The Selﬁsh Meme
these media, the genes facilitate their own survival and replication. The
following view of genes and organisms results: “The integrated multicel-
lular organism is a phenomenon which has emerged as a result of natural
selection on primitively independent selﬁsh replicators. It has paid repli-
cators to behave gregariously. The phenotypic power by which they ensure
their survival is in principle extended and unbounded. In practice the
organism has arisen as a partially bounded local concentration, a shared
knot of replicator power.”24
Organisms, then, are the shared effects of particularly intimate group-
ings of genes, the results of natural selection’s “preference” for gregarious
replicators. Organisms merely happen, because of this intimate grouping,
to provide partial boundaries for the extent of genes’ phenotypic effects.
In answer to the question why the groupings should have occurred at
all, Dawkins replies that, since successful replicators are the ones whose
effects depend on the presence of other replicators that also happen
to be common (and therefore successful), the world tends to become
populated by mutually compatible sets of successful replicators. In prin-
ciple, though, there are no such boundaries: the whole of the natural
world is the product of interactions between the phenotypic effects of its
constituent genes.
The Extended Phenotype: Dennett
Before moving on to investigate the application of this theory to memet-
ics, I want to take another brief look at Daniel Dennett’s vision of the
mind as a meme complex. Although I have been critical of this hypoth-
esis, it should be noted that Dennett enlists the extended phenotype in
its support. Since I, too, think that Dawkins’s second major claim about
evolution has much to add to his ﬁrst, perhaps it is time to review my
earlier opinion of Dennett’s arguments.
Recall Dennett’s version of meme theory: he says that although we like
to think of ourselves as creating, manipulating and controlling our ideas,
“even if this is our ideal, we know that it is seldom if ever the reality, even
with the most masterful and creative minds.”25 We do not manipulate or
control our memes: rather we are our memes; they are the creators of
our consciousness. In this sense there is no battle between “us” and our
“invading memes” any more than there is between our bodies and our
genes.
In order to argue that memes have created us, not vice versa, Dennett
makes reference to the concept of the extended phenotype. Just as that

The Human Mind: Meme Complex with a Virus?
87
thesis tells us that webs and dams are a part of their creators’ phenotypes,
so Dennett believes it to imply that humans’ illusory sense of self is “a
biological product”,26 spun by the brain as automatically as a spider’s
web is spun by the spider. The human phenotype – which Dennett deﬁnes
as “the individual organism considered as a functional whole”27 – does
not comprise the body alone, but can be extended to include a “vast
protective network of memes”.28
The Mind: Product of Genes or Memes?
The problem with this claim stems from Dennett’s incorrect deﬁnition
of a phenotype as “the individual organism considered as a functional
whole”. In reality, a phenotype is “the bodily manifestation of a gene,
the effect that a gene, in comparison with its alleles, has on the body,
via development”.29 Although we do sometimes refer to an organism as
a phenotype, this is loose terminology. The key to the deﬁnition of a
phenotype is that it is caused by genes, as a result of their interactions with
the environment. Yet if the mind is a meme complex (Dennett’s ﬁrst
claim) then memes are its formative constituents, and it cannot be part of
the human phenotype (Dennett’s second claim), for if it were then genes
would be its formative constituents.
Whilst it is true that there will always be two factors in ontogeny – the
replicators and the environment – only one of them can exert what Elliott
Sober30 calls the “positive main effect”. Which of the factors deserves that
title becomes apparent if we imagine alternately holding one constant
and varying the other: the positive main effect is the factor on whose
variation or constancy the developmental outcome depends. This rather
abstract concept becomes clearer when seen in practice.
According to Dennett’s ﬁrst claim, the mind is a meme complex, so
memes must be the positive main effect – the most inﬂuential factor –
in its creation. Thus if it were possible to subject two individuals with
differing genotypes to identical memetic exposure, then they would de-
velop roughly identical minds; conversely, if the genotype were identical
but the memetic input varied, then their minds would greatly differ. The
development of the mind, according to this claim, depends primarily on
the memes to which an individual is exposed.
According to Dennett’s second claim, however, the mind is a part of the
human phenotype, and genes must therefore be the positive main effect –
the most inﬂuential factor – in its creation. Thus if it were possible to
subject two individuals with differing genotypes to identical memetic ex-
posure, then they would develop different minds, whereas if the genotype

88
The Selﬁsh Meme
were identical but the memetic input varied then they would develop
roughly identical minds. The development of the mind, according to
this claim, depends primarily on the genes that an individual possesses.
The consequences of the two claims are obviously incompatible. Iden-
tical twins, separated at birth and exposed to very different memes,
would end up with roughly similar minds according to one of Dennett’s
claims, but very different minds according to the other. He cannot have
it both ways.
The Extended Phenotype: Memes
Dawkins’s theory of the extended phenotype can, nonetheless, usefully
be applied to memes. The essential feature of his theory is that there
are in principle no restrictions on the reach of a replicator’s phenotypic
effects. Although genes are to be found in the organisms that they build,
their effects are not limited to those organisms but may also be found in
the environment and in other organisms. So we have a three-component
picture: genetic information is stored in DNA; it controls the construction
of a protective vehicle; it may produce effects both inside and outside that
vehicle. The doctrine of the extended phenotype (the third component
of the picture) seems surprising because it involves genes having effects
on things that they have not built.
This distinction is not relevant to memes, though, since they do not
have the second component of the picture: they do not construct survival
machines. They do, though, share the genetic distinction between infor-
mation storage and its effects – and another way to express the theory of
genes’ extended phenotype is to say that there is in principle no limit to
the places where genes’ effects may be found, regardless of the fact that
the genetic information itself is “stored” internally. So the question posed
for memes, by the theory of the extended phenotype, is where we might
ﬁnd their effects: in the mind of their possessor, in the environment or
in other minds?
As a starting point, it seems obvious that the acquisition of novel con-
cepts or skills will affect our ways of thought and behaviour. In other
words, it is clear that novel memes do have internal effects on the minds of
the people who possess them. Similarly, the phenotypic effects of memes
on the environment are plain to see: bridges, forms of poetry, meth-
ods of central heating, models of the double helix, and so on. What of
the purported effects on other people’s minds (i.e., not on the meme’s
“possessor”)?

The Human Mind: Meme Complex with a Virus?
89
Consider the meme for arguments based on reductio ad absurdum:
Emma leads Amanda on through a maze of her own opinions, ensur-
ing that she agrees with every step made, until eventually the ridiculous
conclusion that results is revealed. Both Amanda and any onlookers may,
because the combination of her opinions appears to lead logically to a
ridiculous conclusion, come to reject what they judge to be the culprit
opinion. In this way, Emma’s possession of the reductio meme has the
effect that Amanda’s actions will protect and propagate some of the rest
of Emma’s memes, even at the expense of (one or more of) Amanda’s
own.
This, though, is merely a particular example of the more general phe-
nomenon of manipulation: one person’s actions leading to another’s
unsuspecting cooperation. Such behaviour can frequently be observed,
especially in the ﬁeld of advertising where, for example, if I exploit your
desire to look fashionable, and persuade you that my brand of clothing is
the coolest, then you will wear clothes with my brand name plastered all
over them. At no further cost to me, your action spreads the meme for
wearing my brand everywhere you go – and you have paid me to do the
bulk of my advertising.
There are abundant cases of manipulation of one person (or many)
by another, with the result that the manipulated spread the memes of
the manipulator. The abuse of one’s position of authority in one area
(e.g., science), in order to promote an opinion about another (e.g., re-
ligion), is a further example. Similarly, there is plenty of evidence of
memes’ phenotypic effects both in their possessors and in the inanimate
world: the memetic phenotype may be found in both the internal and
the external worlds. So what does this tell us about the location of memes
themselves?
The Result
According to the theory of the extended phenotype, it tells us pre-
cisely nothing, for it implies that whether memes are realized inter-
nally or externally they can have effects in both worlds. This leaves
open the possibility that there might be some external memetic realiza-
tions, as well as some internal copies. Memes, as representations, may
be found both within human minds and outside them, in information
stores like books and blueprints. If this is the case, then what is the re-
lationship between such external representations and our internal brain
structures: are the external realizations merely passive effects of what

90
The Selﬁsh Meme
goes on in our minds, or do they play a more active role in memetic
replication?
On the one hand it is clear that if there were only external meme
stores, then memes could no longer be disseminated. Even if, for exam-
ple, there are hundreds of copies of a particular theory, stored in libraries
all over the world, that theory will have no effect if nobody ever reads it.
Similarly, though, the information retained in a human memory may re-
main inactive for long periods of time. On the other hand, if there were
only minds and no external RSs in which information could more perma-
nently be stored, then memetic replication would lose much of its present
stability.
The most helpful picture of memetic location may, then, be roughly de-
scribed as follows: there is no signiﬁcant distinction to be drawn between
the human mind and external information stores such as libraries and
the Internet, but in order for a meme to be available to selection, active
copies of it must exist. If the human mind is not universal, but is devel-
oped via interaction with existing culture, then external representations
play an essential role in memetic replication. The internal brain struc-
tures are, though, the ultimate source of the external representations.
Thus a combination of both sorts of meme store has led to a massive ca-
pacity for information dissemination and copying stability, which would
have been impossible via only one of the storage methods. What matters
for both is that the realizations should be of an appropriate kind.
This picture ties in with the view of the capacity to gain and retain
attention as the best measure of memetic ﬁtness. If a meme is to be
replicated, then it must be able to grab our attention: at times when
only passive copies of it persist, it is not able to do this and is therefore
not at all fecund. On the other hand, if a meme is to persist then it
must be able to retain our attention, and passive copies of it are the
most efﬁcient way of ensuring its prolonged existence. This extension
of memes’ phenotype is also reminiscent of Clark’s view that “much of
what we commonly identify as our mental capacities may . . . turn out to
be properties of the wider extended systems of which human brains are
just one (important) part.”31
What, then, can we conclude about memes’ location? Both memes and
their effects are to be found inside the human mind as well as outside
it, but this is not to say that the two phenomena are indistinguishable:
memes are realized in systems of representation, and their effects are
not. Cultural evolution depends on the distinction between the two, just

The Human Mind: Meme Complex with a Virus?
91
as natural selection is ultimately dependent on the existence of discrete
biological replicators. In both culture and biology this leads us to ask
from where the replicators could have emerged – how evolution could
have started in the ﬁrst place – and I turn to this question in Chapter 10.
Before that, however, I want to continue with the task of setting my own
views within their cultural context, by examining the work of some other
well-known memeticists.

9
The Meme’s Eye View
One of the most celebrated commentaries on the meme hypothesis has
been provided by the psychologist Susan Blackmore in her 1999 book
The Meme Machine. Blackmore, like Dawkins and Dennett, accepts that
the distinction between virus and replicator is as valid in culture as in
biology. Like Dennett, too, she believes that the mind is a meme com-
plex. It is impossible to untangle this mistake from various other strands of
Blackmore’s thesis – just as it remains inextricably linked with Dennett’s
confused perception of vehicles and phenotypes, and with Dawkins’s er-
roneous overextension of the virus-replicator distinction – and thus I
shall challenge the elements of Blackmore’s thought which lead her to
share Dennett’s view. In particular she focuses on the issue of imitation, to
which she assigns enormous signiﬁcance. Other commentators like Dan
Sperber, Robert Boyd and Peter J. Richerson have vehemently disagreed
with her analysis, and this chapter also considers their views in the light
of what Blackmore has to say.
Copy-the-Product Versus Copy-the-Instructions
I return ﬁrst to the thorny issue of memes and their effects, which
Blackmore acknowledges as an area of confusion when applied to culture.
The confusion arises, she says, because of the desire to make an inappro-
priately close analogy between genes and memes. In the case of memes,
she believes that it may be better to abandon altogether the attempt to
distinguish sharply between replicators and their effects. Rather, she in-
troduces the concepts of “copy-the-instructions” and “copy-the-product”,
as a more useful distinction to draw between types of memetic process.
92

The Meme’s Eye View
93
Sometimes, she says, we acquire new information by working back-
wards from what someone else has produced: for instance, we might
watch someone making soup, and later do the same ourselves. In this
case we have copied-the-product. At other times, though, we acquire our
information more directly, as when we follow a written recipe for making
soup. Here we have copied-the-instructions. In cases of copy-the-product,
variations will persist if introduced by the individual who is being copied:
I shall copy any mistakes made by the soup maker, just as I shall copy her
actions when she follows the recipe faithfully. When instructions are be-
ing followed, however, it will not matter if I see someone alter the recipe
when she is making soup; when it comes to my turn to make the soup I
shall still follow what is written down in the original, and her alteration
will therefore not persist.
This, says Blackmore, is a useful way of looking at what goes on when
memes are copied, whereas it is both unrealistic and unhelpful to raise the
question which elements of the cultural world are replicators and which
their effects. In conclusion, then, she rejects the concept of phenotypic
effect as it applies to memes, saying that she “cannot give it a clear and
unambiguous meaning”.1
Nonetheless, it is possible to give it such a meaning, and consequently
to retain the concept of phenotypic effects within the meme hypoth-
esis. From this perspective we can sketch an alternative view of the
distinction that Blackmore characterizes as “copy-the-product vs. copy-
the-instructions”, and the strength of this alternative interpretation will
be demonstrated by both its obvious utility and the coherence of the
explanations that it generates.
Not Copying the Product
The previous chapter asked whether artefacts can be meme vehicles, and
criticized Dennett’s opinion that they can fulﬁl this role. It suggested
that there may in fact be no real replication going on when someone
extracts information from an artefact: rather, there is a sense in which he
is recreating the information for himself. It is now time to explore this
point further, as it is closely related to cases which Blackmore describes
as “copy-the-product”.
Broadly speaking, there are three ways in which I can create an artefact,
whether soup or a mandolin: I can work from an idea that I have invented
myself; I can work from instructions that someone else has prepared; or
I can copy a product that someone else has created. The ﬁrst two pro-
cesses are relatively unproblematic, but difﬁculties arise in the third case

94
The Selﬁsh Meme
because I have been given no instructions. Adequately compiled instruc-
tions – in the form of engineering plans, a soup recipe, or whatever –
contain two types of information: instructions about how to make the
end product and information about what its essential features are. An
artefact, on the other hand, contains no information about which of its
features are accidental or aesthetic, and which are essential to its func-
tion. If I wanted to make a copy of a wooden spoked wheel, for example,
then no matter how closely I examined it, there would be no means
of my telling whether it was important that the wood’s grain ran along
the length of the spokes rather than across them – or whether that was
just the work of a particularly meticulous craftsman. There is, then, in-
formation in a blueprint which is just not present in the object that it
describes.
Now you might, of course, already possess some of that missing infor-
mation yourself. As an experienced cook, it might be immediately appar-
ent to you which are the unique features of that particular soup recipe;
as a trained engineer, the importance of grain direction for strength may
seem to you blindingly obvious. If you had enough of the missing infor-
mation, then you could probably copy the product: this is what happens
all the time in manufacturing industry, where competitors’ products are
routinely analysed and dissected for comparison and inspiration. The
point, however, is that in these cases – which Dennett would see as arte-
facts fulﬁlling the role of meme vehicles, and Blackmore would describe
as copy-the-product – the relevant information has been brought by you,
rather than gleaned from the artefact. It is not possible to generate, from
an end product, information about which of its features are relevant or
signiﬁcant: if you want to copy that product, then you need either to
have access to its plans, or to bring to the situation the information that
you would otherwise have gathered from the plans. If you do the lat-
ter then you have obviously not copied that information, for you already
had it.
Even if you made an exact copy of the product, correct grain direction
and all – simply by mindlessly reproducing everything that you observe,
without knowing its signiﬁcance – still you would not have gained a copy
of the relevant information. You may, in so doing, produce a set of instruc-
tions for repeating the product-copying process, but this would not be a
copy of the original information: again, it would be information that you
had originated, in the process of copying the product. It would include
your own inferences about which features are signiﬁcant, but this is not
the same as a copy of the original information about signiﬁcance. The

The Meme’s Eye View
95
inferences that different people would make in the same circumstances
may be extremely varied, since each of them would bring to the situation
his own range of experience and level of deductive skills.
Thus, it is arguable that if I learn to make soup by watching someone
else (i.e., copy-the-product) then I am not truly copying the information
from her at all, but rather am re-creating it for myself. Unlike when I read
the recipe, which contains a representation of the relevant information,
my own soup making will be guided by my inferences from what she is
doing to the instructions that she was following – not by the instructions
themselves.
Memes and Their Effects
The key to the problem is that, just as a spoked wheel is the phenotypic
effect of a meme for that concept, so the actions involved in following
a recipe, together with the soup itself, are the phenotypic effects of the
information contained in that recipe. “Copying-the-instructions” is, on
this view, a truly replicative process, via which I acquire a meme (however
brieﬂy: it may be that I only ever make this soup once) by coming into
contact with an existing copy of it. What Blackmore calls “copying-the-
product”, on the other hand, is not really a copying process at all, since
here I acquire information by a process of inference from phenotypic
effects to memetic content, using information that I already possess: any
new representations that I form as a result of this process do not come
from anyone else.
Blackmore’s distinction between copying-the-product and copying-
the-instructions therefore presents no challenge at all to a cultural dis-
tinction between replicator and effect. Rather, it is an alternative way of
viewing the same phenomena, and one which (by calling both processes
a type of copying) manages to obscure what is really going on. The dis-
tinction between a meme and its effects remains valid and useful.
Memetic “Drive”
Fortunately for Blackmore, her distinction between copying-the-product
and copying-the-instructions is really a corollary to her version of memet-
ics. More fundamental to it are the concepts of imitation and memetic
“drive”. She assigns great signiﬁcance to imitation as the copying mech-
anism on which cultural evolution depends; indeed she would restrict
memetic replication to imitation, saying that other forms of learning are
not adequate to the task. The next section will look in more detail at this

96
The Selﬁsh Meme
claim; here I focus on the related concept of memetic drive, a process via
which memes are said to change the environment for genes.
Blackmore begins by pointing out (uncontroversially) the genetic
advantage to our ancestors of being able to imitate others’ useful be-
haviour. As a result, she says, those who were best at imitating – “meme
fountains”2 – would have had a particular advantage, and thus their genes
would have spread. In these circumstances, in addition, others would tend
to “copy meme fountains and their popular memes”, and hence the meme
fountains will acquire “improved power and status”. They will therefore
succeed both genetically and memetically – and more than this, “If there
are genes for imitating the best imitators, these genes will also spread in
the gene pool.”
As the tendency to imitate proliferates, and people become “better at
imitating the successful memes”, so culture will expand and memetic evo-
lution will begin to result from competition between varieties of cultural
traits. But then genetic survival comes to depend on the ability to discrim-
inate between genetically useful and genetically damaging memes. So it
turns out that the successful memes “change the environment in which
genes are selected. In this way, memes force genes to create a brain that
is capable of selecting from the currently successful memes.”
Memetic drive is thus a phenomenon whereby “successful memes
spread. They then change the environment in which genes are selected.
The consequence is a brain that is better designed for spreading those
particular memes.”3 The brain becomes, in other words, rather like an im-
mune system “for recognizing which memes are useful and which not”.4
Meme Fountains
A minor point here is that there are problems with the concept of meme
fountains. In particular, it is implausible that there should be “genes for
imitating the best imitators”. If imitation is, as seems likely, an innate
human characteristic, then clearly there must at some stage have been
variation amongst the genes that controlled how we imitated, how well we
imitated and probably also what we chose to imitate – but it is not obvious
how our genes could control whom we chose imitate.
Indeed, this idea merits further exploration, for it is not even clear
exactly what it would mean to “imitate the best imitators”. The trouble is
that the “best imitators” will not necessarily be a ﬁxed group of people,
since different cultural trends will favour the innate abilities of different
individuals: technological developments will be more easily picked up
by one sort of person, intellectual or aesthetic novelties by another. It is

The Meme’s Eye View
97
unlikely in the extreme that there could be genes for imitating people
who are the best technological imitators, other genes for imitating the
best intellectual imitators, and still others for imitating people who most
quickly pick up new musical ideas – and that these separate groups of
genes could then be selected swiftly enough to keep up with the relevant
cultural developments. All of these changes – both the developments
within a particular cultural area and a society’s general shift of focus to a
different cultural area – will happen much too quickly to be picked up at
the genetic level.
It may be that the idea of meme fountains seems to makes sense be-
cause at one level it almost expresses a truism. That is, people will (because
they want to gain status) tend to copy the most popular behaviours –
and the people who already engage in those behaviours must be those
who were able to pick them up most quickly in the ﬁrst place. It certainly
is plausible, for example, that there should be genes for being the best
imitators of technological or musical novelties – and that these might
give their possessors a social advantage at times when cultural evolution
is favouring those areas. At any given time, then, there will be a certain
group of people who (because they ﬁnd it very easy to pick up the current
cultural novelties) are those whose behaviour is most often copied: in any
chain of imitation it is of course the case that some people are nearer the
beginning than the end, and it is plausible that genetic make-up will help
to determine one’s place in the chain. This group, though, will be a shift-
ing rather than a ﬁxed collection of people, and the genetically favoured
trait will be the tendency to imitate the currently popular behaviour (which
by deﬁnition has already been adopted by a group of people, otherwise
it would not be called “popular”), rather than to imitate the particular
people in whom it can be observed.
Religion as an Example of Memetic Drive
Despite this niggle, the idea of meme fountains is arguably not crucial to
the idea of memetic drive, and I return now to the core of Blackmore’s
hypothesis. The concept of memetic drive plays a key role in her expla-
nations of a variety of phenomena, including the development of the
human brain and the origins of language and religion. Here I consider
her analysis of religion, as an example of the use to which she puts this
concept, and as a means of exploring its validity.
Blackmore claims that “when we look at religions from a meme’s eye
view we can understand why they have been so successful.”5 Her idea is
that religions are memes, and that as a result of the power and status

98
The Selﬁsh Meme
that accompanied their religious behaviour, the most religious people
may have been the most successful in ﬁnding mates. In this environment
memetic drive would ensure that genes for religious behaviour – especially
genes for “the kind of religious behaviour best suited to” the religion of
the time6 – would also ﬂourish.
How would this have worked? In other words, how exactly could reli-
gious memes have driven our genetic evolution? Blackmore’s suggestion
is that a spectacular coincidence, such as an apparently answered rain
dance or supposedly miraculous cure, would bring enhanced power and
status to the individuals involved. Other people would then copy the
apparently successful behaviour (with some variations), in the hope of
gaining some of that power and status for themselves. The people whose
variations were the most ﬂamboyant, or coincided the most often with the
desired outcome, would not only see their memes succeeding as a result
(i.e., their versions would be the ones that most other people chose to
copy), but would also attain a genetic (i.e., sexual) advantage, as a result
of their increased power and status. Consequently, any genes that were
involved in the control of those particular versions – for example, genes
that gave individuals an advantage in ﬂamboyant dancing – would spread
throughout that culture. The cumulative effect of these processes would
be a brain genetically tailored to the acquisition and imitation of religious
memes.
Problems for Memetic Drive
I am unconvinced by Blackmore’s exploration of memetic drive, for two
key reasons. First, the speed at which memes evolve makes it implausible
that speciﬁc memetic developments could act as selection pressure on
genes: memetic changes will usually be far too swift to be picked up
at the level of genes. “Depending on population size and the intensity
of selection, the speciﬁc adaptive demands imposed by the environment
must remain unchanged over hundreds or even thousands of generations
in order to produce the level of gene replacement necessary to cause a
new trait to become a regular feature of a species.”7 This means that a
population would have to maintain a roughly invariant form of religion
for millennia in order for genetic selection to catch up.
Leading on from this point, and perhaps more signiﬁcantly, it should
be noted that natural selection never could catch up, unless there were
genetic variation for the relevant traits. Of course memetic variations will
sometimes provide their bearers with genetic advantages: think of the
meme for rejecting contraception, which will be genetically advantageous

The Meme’s Eye View
99
so long as there is sufﬁcient food for all resultant children; conversely,
the meme for contraception can itself be genetically helpful when used
to keep the population within the limits of its resources. This does not
mean, however, that there will be any level of genetic control over the
advantageous memes – and the problem for Blackmore is that, if there
is no genetic variation between those who do and those who do not
subscribe to the relevant memes, then there is nothing on which natural
selection can work.
Returning to her example, this means that only if there are genes
for religious behaviour, and variation amongst them, can those genes
be selected. If not, then although the people who subscribe to religious
memes may succeed genetically, the genes that come to prevail in the
population as a result need have nothing to do with religion. They will
simply reﬂect whatever other genes happen to make up the genotypes of
the successful individuals.
When studying any evolutionary process, Blackmore recalls Dennett’s
urging us “always to ask cui bono? or who beneﬁts? and the answer is the
replicators”8 – but it is important to remember that there are two aspects
to this question, of which the translation “who beneﬁts?” is only one.
The Concise Oxford Dictionary highlights both elements, in its deﬁnition
of cui bono? as raising the “question of who stood to gain (and therefore
was likely to be responsible)”.9 The problem is that the two elements of
this deﬁnition can sometimes be in conﬂict: the answer to the question
which sort of replicator is likely to be responsible for an evolutionary
development does not always follow in a straightforward way from the
answer to the question which sort is likely to gain from it. Thus, identifying
the beneﬁciaries of a process does not necessarily identify the controllers.
The genes of people who reject contraception will in certain circumstances
beneﬁt, for instance, from the meme that is responsible for that idea – but
this tells us nothing about whether those people also have genes which
make them tend to accept that meme. If not, then there will be no link
at all between the genes that beneﬁt from the use of contraception, and
the meme that is responsible for that idea.
Similarly, the genes of religious people may in certain circumstances
beneﬁt from the memes that are responsible for their ideas and practices –
but this tells us nothing about whether those people also have genes with
any degree of control over their religion. It may well be that this is another
example of memetic responsibility for traits which bring beneﬁt to genes
that are wholly unrelated to those traits. It is irrelevant that genes for
certain religious behaviours could beneﬁt from the genetic success of

100
The Selﬁsh Meme
individuals who subscribe to the memes for those behaviours: if such
genes do not exist, then they obviously can neither beneﬁt from, nor
be responsible for the success of those individuals. Even if they do exist,
moreover, the rate of change in the memes that control the same sorts
of traits may override any possibility of selection amongst those genes.
In summary, then, Blackmore claims that “the memes that succeed
in memetic competition change the environment in which genes are
selected, giving an advantage to genes which help a person imitate the
currently successful memes – whatever those memes happen to be.”10 I
have questioned the link between “the currently successful memes” and
the “genes which help a person imitate” them, on two grounds: there
may be no such genes; and even if there are, the changes in the relevant
memes will usually be much too swift to be picked up at the genetic level.
For these reasons, the concept of memetic drive seems to me to be deeply
ﬂawed.
Imitation
At the root of Blackmore’s concept of memetic drive is her theory that
memetic transmission must work via imitation, because “only imitation is
capable of sustaining a true evolutionary process.” It is time to examine
this claim in more detail.
Blackmore maintains the unique signiﬁcance of imitation for memetic
transmission, because she says that it is the only form of social learning
in which true replication takes place. There are, of course, many types
of social learning, and like other observers Blackmore notes the distinc-
tion between merely reproducing behaviour and truly replicating it. In
what is known as “stimulus enhancement” or “local enhancement”, for
example, the attention of one animal is directed by the behaviour of an-
other towards a location or object in the environment, and as a result
it then behaves in a similar way to the animal that it observed. A typical
instance of this sort of learning is the behaviour of blue tits and other
small garden birds in Britain, which peck at the tops of bottles of milk left
on doorsteps. It is well documented that they do this because they have
seen other birds doing the same thing. Yet there is no true replication of
behaviour here, says Blackmore, because although one individual bird
ends up with similar behaviour to another, “the behaviour is not copied”:
rather, an existing behaviour is reproduced in a novel environment. The
blue tit could already peck for food, and has simply learned that here is
another arena in which that behaviour will be fruitful.

The Meme’s Eye View
101
In contrast to such behavioural reproduction, behaviour is truly repli-
cated when, “by observation of another individual performing an act, an
animal is able to reproduce the same motor pattern”11 – a motor pattern
which ithadnot previously produced. In order to do this, adds Blackmore,
the animals must be able to imitate, and thus “without imitation there is
no replicator and no new evolutionary process.”12
Now, the distinction between the reproduction and replication of be-
haviours is widely accepted, but the conclusion that Blackmore draws
from it is not. It will be helpful, therefore, to look more closely at what is
involved in imitation.
What Is “Imitation”?
The ﬁrst point revealed by a closer inspection of Blackmore’s account
is that it seems, at times, to confuse imitation with replication. Of course
there can be no evolution without replication, but Blackmore’s claim
is that in culture there can be no evolution without imitation. Having
argued (fairly uncontroversially) that not all forms of learning will count
as true replication, she appears simply to assume that imitation is the
only form that will. In reality, a distinction between the reproduction
and the replication of behaviour tells us nothing about which learning
methods will support replication. Many forms of learning or passing on
information could facilitate evolution, if they involved replication – and
Blackmore seems to be in danger of deﬁning them out of the picture, with
her statement that imitation is the only form of learning that involves
true replication. What about the information that we gain from reading
or being taught, for instance? Blackmore would say that teaching, reading
and writing are just different forms of imitation, but these processes are
so much more sophisticated than the imitation that is involved when a
baby waves back at his mother, for example, that I am surprised by her
insistence that we stick to just one word to cover all sorts of memetic
transmission methods.
It may be, as Henry Plotkin has claimed, that in Blackmore’s work “the
notion of imitation has been expanded beyond the point of meaning.”13
In reality, says Plotkin, “different psychological mechanisms” are at the
base of “the imitation of a motor act, the acquisition of a native language,
and learning one’s culture-speciﬁc social constructs.”14 These are not all
instances of the same type of process.
In particular, he draws attention15 to two different sorts of memes.
The ﬁrst category comprises memes that are “informationally narrow
in scope”: these are short-lived, situation-speciﬁc memes, such as the

102
The Selﬁsh Meme
knowledge that a particular restaurant is good, or the lyrics to a currently
popular song. Memes of the second sort are made up of “higher order
memories and knowledge structures”, and are “of much wider scope in-
formationally, and of much greater longevity, with transmission normally
restricted to just once in a lifetime”. Overarching concepts like restaurants
and songs, on which the situation speciﬁc memes are based, would fall into
this category. Such higher order memes “are also closely interwoven with
others”16 – think of interdependent concepts like shop and money – and
their transmission “is smeared out over a considerable period of time, yet
the replication achieved is probably just as accurate as is an imitated mo-
tor act”. In Plotkin’s view, such higher order memes “are not acquired by
imitation but by a complex process of construction and integration” – and
it seems obvious that this is indeed the case. Once our attention has been
drawn to these sorts of memes, it becomes obvious how poverty-stricken is
a theory which would restrict memetic replication to imitation. “Nowhere
is Occam’s Razor more misplaced than in a science of culture.”17
Does Culture Replicate At All?
Yet if imitation alone is not adequate to the task of memetic replica-
tion, then clearly more needs to be said about the processes that are
involved. At the other extreme from Blackmore, writers such as Dan Sper-
ber, Robert Boyd and Peter J. Richerson have challenged the idea that
cultural information is truly replicated at all. They accede to her distinc-
tion between the reproduction and replication of behaviours, but would
use it against the meme hypothesis, maintaining that the process at work
in culture is almost always reproduction rather than replication: “most
cultural items are ‘re-produced’ in the sense that they are produced again
and again – with, of course, a causal link between all these productions –
but are not reproduced in the sense of being copied from one another.”18
If this is the case, then the game is up for memetics, for whatever
one thinks about Blackmore’s claim that imitation is the key to cultural
replication, it is certain that cultural evolution does depend on some sort
of replication taking place. Does her emphasis on imitation stand up
to the criticisms that Sperber, Boyd and Richerson level at it, or is the
opposite true – that there is no such thing as cultural replication?
Dan Sperber
Dan Sperber presents a threefold argument for denying that most cultural
information is truly replicated. The ﬁrst reason why cultural transmission

The Meme’s Eye View
103
is mistakenly seen as a process of replication is, he says, that memeticists
are overattached to the biological analogy, in which replication is the
norm and mutation an accident. Sperber believes that in culture, by con-
trast, the mutation rate is so high that “the very possibility of cumulative
effects of selection is open to question.”19
This challenge was answered in chapter 5: the crucial point is not
whether memetic variation rates are high per se, but whether they are
too high in relation to the rate of memetic replication – a process which
is itself much swifter than its biological counterpart. More than this, it
may be that Sperber has himself displayed an overattachment to the bio-
logical analogy, by focusing too closely on the genetic variation that arises
through mutation. Mutations may indeed be rare in relation to the rate
of genetic replication, but the variation that arises through recombination
is not. Indeed, sexual reproduction results in the recombination of ge-
netic material every time that it is replicated, and yet genetic content is
still replicated “well enough to undergo effective selection”.20 The lesson
is that we cannot tell whether evolution is undermined by a high rate of
variation without reference to facts about replication rates and the means
by which that variation arises.
The second reason why Sperber denies that cultural information is
truly replicated is that he rejects what he sees as a mistaken tendency in the
social sciences to idealize away the individual differences amongst cultural
representations. He agrees that it is possible to represent, in a prototypical
manner, the partly common content of a chain of sufﬁciently content-
similar representations. The problem, he says, is that it then becomes
tempting to see all the individual concrete representations as having the
same content, with negligible variations – that is, as (imperfect) replicas
of each other. Again this is a point that came up in Chapter 5: there,
in the course of discussing memetic alleles, I showed that a meme-based
perspective can account for all of the phenomena that he identiﬁes.
Sperber’s third argument is that representations are not replicated in
the process of cultural transmission, but transformed. He says that another
damaging tendency in the social sciences is to see communication as a
process of encoding and decoding information, in which the same in-
formation is copied from one mind to another – but that in truth what
happens when representations are transmitted is that “human brains use
all the information they are presented with not to copy or synthesize
it, but as more or less relevant evidence with which to construct repre-
sentations of their own.”21 Information is transformed in the processes
of remembering and communicating, not “copied” as such: it is either

104
The Selﬁsh Meme
“inferred” (when implicit) or “comprehended, a process that involves a
mix of decoding and inference” – and in either case, “information pro-
vided by the stimulus is complemented with information already available
in the system.”22 Thus any coincidence between the information in your
mind and the information in mine is due not to any intrinsic properties
of the information itself but to the ways in which our minds work.
In developing this argument, Sperber goes further than simply pre-
senting arguments against cultural replication. Given the concerns of
writers like Plotkin, who asks whether imitation is the only alternative to
the reproduction of behaviour, it becomes likely that there will be more
than one process by which true cultural replication can take place. If
so, then how are we to determine whether any given process of cultural
transmission really counts as replication? Sperber suggests a test to which
such processes can be submitted, which will determine the answer to this
question. The problem, he says, is that most cases of cultural transmission
will fail it.
Sperber’s Test for Replication
Sperber’s test consists in “three minimal conditions for true replication”:
if B is a replication of A, then B must be “caused by A”, must be “similar in
relevant respects to A”, and must “inherit from A the properties that make
it relevantly similar to A”.23 Thus not everything that is passed on from
one person to another will count as an instance of replication: infectious
laughter, for example, passed along a line of giggling schoolchildren,
will not, since it fulﬁls only the ﬁrst two conditions and not the third.
Balbir’s laughter is caused by Sukdev’s, and sounds rather like it – but that
similarity is not caused by Sukdev’s laughter. Rather, both children already
had their own laughs before this situation arose: when Sukdev’s laugh
triggers Balbir’s, any similarities between their laughs are due simply to
both sounds being what we would call “a laugh”. Although Balbir’s laugh
is triggered by Sukdev’s, there is no causal link between its properties
and those of Sukdev’s laugh: it does not, in other words, inherit from
Sukdev’s laugh that which makes them similar.
Dawkins’s Test for Replication
Sperber offers his three conditions for replication as an alternative to the
test suggested by Richard Dawkins,24 who says that replication is present
whenever an intelligent observer cannot discover the approximate origi-
nal order of a chain of causally linked items, as illustrated in the example
that follows.

The Meme’s Eye View
105
If I ask someone to memorize a picture that I have drawn and then
to produce a copy of it, and then I ask another to do the same with
the picture that the ﬁrst one produces, and so on down a line of ten
people, then there will be one of two possible outcomes. If the origi-
nal “picture” was a fairly random scribble, then each person in the line
would really try to memorize the drawing of the previous participant, al-
though there would probably be a fair degree of difference in the results.
It would be possible, if the pictures were lined up in order, to follow the
trail of alterations between participants’ drawings. If the picture were,
instead, something recognisable like a ﬁve-pointed star, then each per-
son would simply try to produce her own drawing of a ﬁve-pointed star,
rather than to reproduce an exact replica of the previous participant’s
version of that picture (wobbles, inaccuracies and all). If these pictures
were lined up in order, then there would be no trail of alterations to fol-
low, because any variations would not be based on the previous person’s
drawing.
If I then shufﬂed the eleven pictures and asked someone to try to put
them back into the order in which they were produced, it would obviously
be easier in the ﬁrst case than in the second: this, Dawkins would say, is
because copying the star does and copying the scribble does not involve
a process of true replication. Whereas the people trying to copy my ran-
dom scribble were attempting to produce a copy of the drawing itself
(i.e., bit by bit, with no understanding of its underlying structure), those
copying the star were unconsciously attempting to follow an instruction –
“draw a ﬁve-pointed star” – and that information was effectively replicated
by each participant. Dawkins argues that the question whether a sequence
of products could be accurately reordered by an intelligent observer is
therefore a good test of whether the replication of information was in-
volved in the copying process.
Sperber Versus Dawkins
Sperber, however, undermines Dawkins’s test with examples of sequences
that would pass it, but which clearly do not involve replication. He points
out, for instance, that infectious laughter would pass Dawkins’s test –
in that someone listening to a jumbled-up recording of the children
would be unable to reorder their bursts of laughter – but that laughter
is obviously not being replicated along the line of children. He insists
that, for true replication, his third condition (the inheritance from the
previous generation of the relevant properties) is also necessary.

106
The Selﬁsh Meme
I ﬁnd Sperber’s counterexamples persuasive, and would suggest that
his criterion has an added advantage over Dawkins’s: it can distinguish
between chains of replications that are related to each other in different
ways.
It could distinguish, for instance – where Dawkins’s could not –
between the case in which each participant was asked to copy the pre-
vious participant’s star, and a case in which each used the same source,
being given my original drawing of a scribble rather than the previous
participant’s copy. In neither case would an intelligent observer be able
to reorder the drawings, and therefore Dawkins’s test would categorize
each as a case of true replication, without revealing that two very different
patterns of copying were involved. Sperber’s test would pick up this differ-
ence, though, because there is such a different sequence of inheritance
in each. The sixth participant’s drawing, for example, is a copy of the ﬁfth
person’s in one case (where each was given the previous person’s star),
and of mine in the other (where each was given my scribble). The par-
ticipants’ drawings have inherited from a different source, in each case,
the properties that make them relevantly similar to my original drawing,
and the sequence of replication is therefore different.
Sperber’s test would also reveal the difference between each of these
sequences and a third one in which each of ten people was asked to
draw a star (i.e., given the instruction rather than a drawing to copy),
and coincidentally all chose to draw one with ﬁve points without lifting
pen from paper. Here again Sperber’s test would show that this sequence
involved a different causal chain from the others, whereas Dawkins’s test
would not be able to distinguish this collection from the others, but
would simply reveal that none of the three sequences could be put back
in order.
Back to Sperber
Having proposed his test for true replication, Sperber denies that most
instances of cultural transmission will pass it. When people communicate,
the desired result is, undoubtedly, a similarity in content between the in-
formation in the speaker’s mind and the resulting information in the
listener’s mind. The problem, he says, is that even when such similarity
is achieved, the listener’s information does not derive from the incom-
ing information the properties that make them relevantly similar. Any
similarities are due, not to any intrinsic properties of the information
itself, but rather to a “constructive cognitive process”25 in the listener’s
mind.

The Meme’s Eye View
107
Sperber’s Test: A Problem for Memes?
Clearly Sperber is right to emphasize the fact that information is not
always copied directly from its source: we humans are pretty good at at-
taining information, even from fairly limited resources. In particular he
points to the process of language acquisition, in which grammar is not
“present to be copied” by infants, but rather is inferred from incoming
data using a “genetically determined preparedness”.26 I would go even
further than that, adding that we have a genetically determined prepared-
ness to be good at copying and extracting information from limited data
of all forms, not just language. It is in the implication of this claim that I
would differ from him: couldn’t such innate mechanisms be the means by
which information is replicated, rather than an alternative to replication?
Sperber says that “For memetics to be a reasonable research pro-
gramme, it should be the case that copying, and differential success in
causing the multiplication of copies, overwhelmingly plays the major role
in shaping all or at least most of the contents of culture.”27 To a certain
extent I would agree with this – but only if it is acknowledged that copying
cannot simplistically be equated with imitation. The problem is that I sus-
pect that his arguments are aimed largely at a rather narrow conception
of copying, perhaps limited to something like “observational learning”.
He asserts, for example, that “evolved domain-speciﬁc psychological dis-
positions, if there are any, should be at most a relatively minor factor” in
any process of true replication: in other words, instructions are not really
copied if the similarity of original and subsequent is due more to the ways
in which the observer’s brain interprets what he sees, than to the nature
of the original instructions.
Yet how can I disagree with this? Having accepted Sperber’s test for
replication, of which the last sentence of the previous paragraph is just
a particular application, it would at ﬁrst glance seem contrary for me
to differ from him now that its results are inconvenient for memetics.
Indeed, more than accepting his test, I support his view that human
brains use incoming information “as more or less relevant evidence with
which to construct representations of their own”. So how can I continue to
maintain that human culture depends on a constant process of memetic
replication?
My claim is that the information in your brain can derive from the in-
formation in mine the properties that make them relevantly similar, as
a result of being copied via a replicative machinery that includes evolved
psychological mechanisms. Such mechanisms can be seen as just one ele-
ment of the meme-transmission process: inbuilt error-correction systems

108
The Selﬁsh Meme
that help us to receive memes with a fair degree of accuracy, hence fa-
cilitating memetic evolution. Even if we rely on such systems in order
to receive information, this does not mean that the information so re-
ceived does not really come from another person. We have not invented
it ourselves; it has still come from someone else. A helpful analogy may be
drawn here with the process of translation between two public languages:
when I read a passage written in French, and have to interpret and re-
constitute it in order to understand it in English, still the information
that ends up in my brain has come from the passage that I was reading:
I haven’t invented it just because I had to translate in order to receive it.
Thus I can agree with Sperber that replication has not truly taken
place unless my information derives from yours the properties that make
them relevantly similar; agree too that it is wrong to assume that “in
general, the output of a process of transmission is wholly determined
by the inputs accepted or chosen by the receiving organism”28 – and
yet disagree that these facts undermine the cultural replication that is
necessary for memetic evolution to take place. Of course we should expect
that the processes of cultural replication will be complex in nature, for
the information being copied is at times incredibly complex. A relatively
simple process like imitation cannot be expected to do the job in all cases:
you don’t have to overemphasize imitation in order to be a memeticist.
Robert Boyd and Peter J. Richerson
Nonetheless, more arguments have been ranged against the view that
cultural information is really replicated. Where Sperber focuses on the
origins of any similarities between the information in people’s brains,
Robert Boyd and Peter J. Richerson argue that often those similarities
will, in any case, be few and far between.
Although sympathetic to an evolutionary view of culture, Boyd
and Richerson deny that cultural evolution depends upon selection
amongst replicators, claiming that memes cannot explain the evolution-
ary changes that occur within culture. The reason is that ideas are not sim-
ply “copied and transmitted intact from one brain to another”.29 Rather,
someone will observe a behaviour in another person, and then induce
the information necessary to produce the same behaviour – and the in-
formation thus induced need not be the same as that in the originator’s
brain. As a result, “the replicator model captures only part of cultural
evolution”, because cultural change is also shaped by “genetic, cultural,
or developmental differences among people”.30

The Meme’s Eye View
109
Replication Versus Inference
In practice, this means that different information can often be inferred
from the same overt behaviour, depending on our own cultural back-
ground. Boyd and Richerson give the example of a parent and child who
both use the same pronunciation for a certain phoneme (e.g., the “wh”
sound in “what”, “where”, etc.), which superﬁcially seems to imply that
the child has a copy of the parental representation of that sound. In fact,
in Boyd and Richerson’s example, each has a different mental repre-
sentation of it: the parent has altered his pronunciation since his own
childhood (because he has moved to an area where a different pronunci-
ation predominates), whilst the child shares that pronunciation because
it is the only one that she has ever heard. Their representations were
therefore formed in quite different ways, and an apparently obvious case
of replication turns out not to be an instance of reproduced information
at all.
Boyd and Richerson point out that this is not an isolated example; that
cultural changes are often the result of information being induced from
other people’s behaviour – a process that is dependent on the psychology
and background of the inducer, and which can therefore result in a
different set of information in her brain from that in the brains of the
people whose behaviour she originally observed. Boyd and Richerson
conclude that the information represented in her brain is not, therefore,
a replication of that in the brains of the people she copied, because the
two sets of representations have different content.
Indeed, this seems to be a fair assessment of the situation in their
particular example, which illustrates the fact that the same observations
can lead to the formation of different representations. This fact is not
enough, however, to demonstrate that the representations thus formed
are not replicators (just that they are not, in this case, tokens of the same
replicator).
It is unproblematically the case that two different replicators can give
rise to the same behaviour, or phenotypic effect, and that we need to
know the history of the replicators in question before we can discover
whether they are truly the same as each other. Observation of their ef-
fects is not enough. This is as true for genes as for memes. For instance,
Edward and Elizabeth might both have brown eyes, although Edward has
blue/brown alleles and Elizabeth has brown/brown alleles (blue alleles
being recessive); each has the same phenotypic expression, although they
have different replicators. Moreover, even if both had the same replica-
tors, this alone would not tell us that they were related to each other: for

110
The Selﬁsh Meme
that, we should need to learn more about their history. Similarly, the
parent and child in Boyd and Richerson’s example may display the same
pronunciation without sharing the same representational content, and
indeed there is a sense in which the child has not so much copied her
parent’s representation as invented her own – but this does not in itself
comprise evidence against the memetic view of culture. The only thing
that this example shows is that parent and child do not in this instance
share the same replicator – not that there is no such thing as a cultural
replicator.
Replication Versus “Averaging”
The point of this parent-child example, though, can be generalized in
a way that presents a more serious challenge to memetics. Boyd and
Richerson assert that cultural change can be (indeed, is often) shaped
by things other than the nature of the cultural information itself. They
claim that memes are inadequate to explain the evolution of culture,
because the changes that accumulate towards that evolution are more
often the results of differences amongst people than of the nature of the
cultural information itself. Cultural evolution, in other words, is directed
by population processes rather than by discrete cultural replicators.
Now, there is a sense in which my own view simply offers a different per-
spective on the same facts. I would characterize population processes –
that is, the differences between people within a population – as part of
the memetic environment: they are one element of the selection pres-
sures acting on memes (as discussed in Chapter 6), rather than a problem
for the meme hypothesis. Moreover, I would emphasize that not all cul-
tural change depends on observational learning, in which information
is inferred from observations of its effects, as in Boyd and Richerson’s
example. We can also attain information more directly, through teach-
ing and other forms of linguistic communication, in which cases indi-
vidual idiosyncrasies have less of a mutating effect on the information
transmitted.
But Boyd and Richerson, too, would take their claims a stage fur-
ther, maintaining that memes are not only insufﬁcient to explain cultural
evolution; they are also unnecessary. Sticking with the example of linguis-
tic information, they raise the question how children will choose which
pronunciation to adopt, in a population where there is variation across
a particular phoneme (e.g., the “a” in “bath”). Imagine, for instance, the
situation of children with Yorkshire parents, who attend a nursery where
the staff include people from London, Devon and South Africa. How do

The Meme’s Eye View
111
these children settle upon an accent of their own? Perhaps they select
an adult and copy his particular pronunciation, in which case they have
replicated his particular mental “rule”. Or perhaps they average out what
they hear across the population, and adopt the rule of an average pronun-
ciation – in which case, say Boyd and Richerson, there is no replicator,
because no mental rule is transferred faithfully from one brain to an-
other. The latter possibility leads them to claim that a key question for
those who would defend memetics is, “When a child has the chance to
copy the behaviour of several different people, does she choose a single
model for a given, discrete cultural attribute? Or, does she average, or in
some other way combine, the attributes of alternative models?”31
This is an interesting question, but I do not agree that its answer will
prove of great signiﬁcance for the meme hypothesis. As before, Boyd and
Richardson have offered a different perspective on the same facts, rather
than presenting a devastating challenge to memes. From a memetic per-
spective, the “averaging” rule (if it exists) is simply one of the inﬂuences
on how memes are transmitted – in this case an inﬂuence that usually
counts against ﬁdelity by introducing variation on almost every copying
occasion. Nevertheless, from this point of view it is simply not true that
the same information has not been transmitted: rather, what has been
transmitted is a novel allele of the same replicator. The information in this
case is a representation of a phoneme, and phonemes may be articulated
in different ways within a population whilst still being regarded as iden-
tical by native speakers. This means that any of the phoneme’s variants
(known as allophones) may be used without affecting the meaning of
what is said. In the example outlined, a mental rule could be replicated
just as well via the “averaging” as by the more straightforward method.
The only difference would be that “averaging” transmits a different allo-
phone of the phoneme being copied, and in memetic terms this would
be described as the replication of a different allele of the same meme.
Furthermore, the “averaging” rule could only work in a way that is
actually dependent on replication: how else could the children “average”
the incoming information, if it were not ﬁrst copied into their brains?
Indeed, “averaging” is a process that compares very closely to the recom-
bination of particulate genes. The children, on this view, receive copies of
a variety of alleles of a certain meme, and by a process of recombination
arrive at their own chosen version. Indeed, it might even be said that
they acquire all of the alleles, only one of which becomes dominant and
hence is able to exercise a phenotypic effect on their pronunciation. On
this view the others are recessive in those individuals: they are aware of

112
The Selﬁsh Meme
their existence as mutually replaceable alternatives to their own ways of
talking, but those alternatives have no effect on their vocal behaviour.
Conclusions
Boyd and Richerson have claimed that replicators cannot account for evo-
lutionary changes in culture, because cultural information is not repli-
cated as such but instead is often inferred from observations of other
people’s behaviour – which leads in many cases to the creation of differ-
ent information in the brains of those involved. Indeed, they say that at
least some of the ways in which cultural information is transmitted (e.g.,
“averaging” the variants in the surrounding population) actually prohibit
the faithful replication of discrete cultural attributes. Memes cannot ex-
plain the changes that occur in these cases, because they are the results
of differences amongst people, rather than of the nature of the cultural
information itself.
There is, as mentioned, a sense in which Boyd and Richerson are
merely looking from a different perspective at the same facts as meme
theory purports to explain. More than this, their emphasis on population
thinking could provide a useful foil to some other theorists’ tendency
to overstress memes’ autonomy. Nevertheless, their examples and argu-
ments do not present a valid challenge to memetics, which actually pre-
dicts that there will be variation amongst versions (alleles) of particular
pieces of cultural information (memes). Nor is any challenge to memet-
ics presented by the facts that cultural information can mutate during
the transmission process, and that different mental representations can
lead to the same overt behaviour. The differences amongst the human
population provide an important inﬂuence on the accuracy and speed
of memetic transmission, but Boyd and Richerson have overstressed the
signiﬁcance for memetics of population pressures on cultural change.
Imitation: A Recap
Blackmore has drawn attention to the distinction between the repro-
duction of behaviour and genuine imitation. Her claim is that imitation
forms the basis for all memetic replication, but writers like Plotkin have
challenged her belief that imitation is the only alternative to behavioural
reproduction. Some forms of information transmission are so much more
complex than what we normally intend by “imitation” that the question
arises what is involved in informational replication. Sperber has proposed
a threefold test for “true” replication, and says that on the whole the

The Meme’s Eye View
113
transmission of cultural information does not pass. It fails his test because,
when cultural information is reproduced, the copy does not inherit from
the original the properties that make them relevantly similar. The similari-
ties, says Sperber, are due more to the ways in which human psychological
systems have evolved than to the intrinsic properties of the information.
Sperber’s “test” for replication is valid and useful, but I have provided
an alternative interpretation of what happens in culture. There the copy
does, in my view, inherit from the original the properties that make them
relevantly similar. Our evolved psychological systems are simply the mech-
anism via which it inherits those properties. Indeed, this is analogous
to the situation in biology, where genetic information is replicated via
evolved reproductive systems. My genes inherit from my parents’ genes
the properties that make them relevantly similar, but they depended on
a mechanism in order to do so.
Of course any copying process demands a mechanism of some sort,
and I have no intention of brushing the real issue under the carpet by a
clever use of apparently analogous phrases. There are two key questions
here, with regard to culture. First, has any information been replicated?
Secondly, if information is copied, then – as Sperber has so rightly high-
lighted – the key issue is from where does the mechanism produce that
information: from the original, or from somewhere else?
Sometimes, in cases which Blackmore would call copying-the-product,
no information is replicated at all. A process is followed with no real
understanding, and the result is a product but not the information
(Blackmore’s “instructions”) on which the original product was based.
Going back to the example of the scribble and the star, it is clear that the
people trying to reproduce the scribble were engaged in this sort of pro-
cess, whereas those trying to reproduce the star were, rather, following
implicit instructions. What is interesting about this example, however,
is that in neither case is any information actually copied – and this is re-
vealed by Sperber’s question about the source of the similarities between
the original and the copy. From where do the copies of the star inherit
their similarities to my original? The copies are based, as Dawkins says,
on the (probably unconscious) instruction: “Draw a ﬁve-pointed star.”
Their similarities to my original are therefore due to information that
the participants bring to the situation, rather than to my drawing per se.
These people see a drawing of that sort of star and bring to it their existing
knowledge, on the basis of which they produce a copy.
In the case of my genes, however, their similarities to my parents’
are based on nothing other than the properties of those parental genes.

114
The Selﬁsh Meme
The reproductive mechanisms involved simply copy what is there already,
without the need to interpret or add to the information that is stored in
the relevant bits of DNA.
So what of cultural information? Clearly information as well as prod-
ucts are reproduced in culture, but from where do the later represen-
tations inherit their similarities to the originals? From where, in other
words, do the underlying mechanisms (our evolved psychological sys-
tems) produce that information?
Sperber, Boyd and Richerson have emphasized the processes of inter-
pretation and translation that are involved whenever cultural informa-
tion is reproduced, but even if we accept this point of view it still leaves
open the question of the source of the information being interpreted
and translated. In cases like the earlier example of a trained engineer
trying to copy a novel product, for example, Sperber is right to claim that
the relevant information comes from the knowledge which he brings to
the product and not from the product itself. Inference and decoding are
necessary because (as discussed in Chapter 8) the product itself does not
contain the necessary information. True replication has not taken place,
therefore, because such cases do not pass Sperber’s test.
There are myriad other cases, however, in which we derive information
much more directly. If I read an article about the work of a charity with
which I was previously unacquainted, then of course there is a mental
process involved: I must be able to decode the written word; to understand
the concepts involved; perhaps in some cases to look up the meanings
of unfamiliar words in a dictionary; to infer the meaning of any unclear
passages; to disentangle any agenda on the part of the writer from the
true worth of the cause, and so on. Still, though, the information that I
gain as a result of my reading does come from the article. I do not bring
it to the situation. How could I, when before that moment I had never
heard of that charity or its work?
If I am trying to learn how to play a new piece of violin music, then
again there are mechanisms involved: I must know how to decode the
musical notation; understand how that notation relates to the range of
possible things I could do with a violin; have the relevant practical skills,
and so on. Nonetheless, this collection of existing knowledge and skills
is simply a mechanism via which I can acquire the new information that
is contained in the sheet music. Comparable processes of interpretation
and comprehension take place whenever I hear someone speaking, or
observe someone using sign language. In all such cases the resultant
copies derive from the originals the properties that make them relevantly

The Meme’s Eye View
115
similar, and the processes involved are mechanisms via which those similar-
ities replicate, rather than the sources of those similarities. Blackmore may
well have overemphasised the role of imitation in cultural replication, but
this does not imply that there is no such thing as cultural replication.
Memes and the Mind
One of the issues that this debate throws up is the vexed question of
the relation between memes and the mind. On the one hand Blackmore
would claim that imitation is the key to cultural replication, and on the
other writers like Sperber argue that it is the human mind that produces
most of the similarities between cultural representations, rather than any
intrinsic properties of the representations themselves. If I have trodden
a convincing line between Blackmore’s somewhat simplistic reliance on
imitation and Sperber’s rather drastic rejection of any form of replication,
then what does that tell us about how active the human mind is in the
process of cultural replication? Are memes effectively self-replicators, or
are they more like “bits of replicable information”32 which depend on
the mind for their processing?
The view that has emerged from the preceding chapters is that the
human mind develops as a result of acquiring memes, and many of its
activities are then dictated by its memes – but that the memes themselves
cannot function independently of minds, and are always initially created
by a mind. Modern humans, on this story, are born with a degree of
mindedness, and this is exploited by existing memes to the extent that
the fully ﬂedged mind may, itself, create new memes.
The problem with this version of events is that, so far at least, more
questions are raised than answered by it. If the early basis of our mind
is part of our (genetic) phenotype – a product of our brain’s neonatal
structure – then it must have certain features which account for the emer-
gence of memes. What are they, and how did they evolve? If we accept
that other species also engage in some form of culture, then what is so
special about ours, and why are we not able to share it with them?

10
Early Cultural Evolution
Evolution cannot create something out of nothing, and it is time to ask
where memes came from in the ﬁrst place. What must the minds of
our ancestors have been like, in order to account for the emergence of
memetic culture, and what might the early evolution of memes have been
like?
The Emergence of Genes
It will be useful to look ﬁrst at the signiﬁcant elements of the emergence
of physical life on our planet. Before the emergence of replicators, there
was physical material in abundance but no consistent or complex orga-
nisation. In addition to the plethora of simple matter, there were also var-
ious energy sources (e.g., the ultraviolet rays from the sun, or lightning).
This energy stimulated the combination of simple matter into more com-
plex forms. The forms that persisted would, of course, be those that were
stable.
There are several theories about the type of matter that was involved in
this primeval combination. Here I stick with the standard “soup” hypoth-
esis which claims that the initial material consisted of organic molecules,
but in fact it is irrelevant to the gene thesis which of the options is actually
true. The important element of any such theory is that the most signiﬁ-
cant occurrence was the appearance of a stable form that was also able to
make copies of itself. By “stable” it is meant that a particular combination
of molecules will persist, if it occurs at all. If it is unstable, then it will
not last for long. The result will be that some molecules (those whose
combination is stable) will appear to “attract” each other. It should be
116

Early Cultural Evolution
117
noted at this point what a long shot is any such union. The molecules
involved may collide any number of times without bonding: it is only if
they collide in exactly the right place at the right time that bonding will
occur.
Dawkins1 invites us to consider what would happen if one of the sta-
ble combinations that occurred consisted of molecules which were at-
tracted to their own kind. If just one molecule with this property should
bond with, and then (perhaps because of some external inﬂuence) split
from, another of its own kind, then nothing remarkable has happened. If,
though, several different molecules, each of which is able to form a stable
union with others of its own kind, were to come together in a particular
order, then when those component molecules attracted others of their
own kinds, those others would automatically arrange themselves in the
same order as the original. Then, continues Dawkins, if the larger form
were to split apart (if that combination were self-catalysing, say) then the
original combination would, in effect, have created a copy of itself.
It does not matter whether the details of such speculation are wrong.
What does matter is that, however it occurred, the formation of replicators
would mean that the previously randomly populated matter would rapidly
be ﬁlled with copies of the replicators (simply because they are making
copies of themselves, whereas other forms are one-offs), and so the repli-
cators would soon have to compete for space. Some of them would be
less accurate than others, and mistakes would of course be cumulative:
the ones that made poor copies of themselves would soon cease to exist.
Some would be less fecund than others and these would swiftly become
a minority. Some combinations would be less stable, hence shorter lived
than others, and these would also (unless they were considerably more
fecund) become less numerous. The result of such variation, together
with the limited space, would be competition between the replicators
and the dominance of the most fecund, long-lived and accurate amongst
them.
Copying errors that resulted in a higher degree of stability, or in ways
of decreasing the stability of a different type of replicator, would have
been preserved. At least some of the combinations would become more
and more complex, and those whose form provided them with some sort
of protection would be at a further advantage. Some chemical combi-
nations may have had the effect of destabilizing “rival” combinations;
some may have been able to incorporate less complex combinations
into themselves; some may have been able to “protect themselves, either
chemically, or by building a physical wall of protein around themselves”.2

118
The Selﬁsh Meme
Overall, then, the level of complexity increased through time, and the
“process of improvement was cumulative”.3 In particular the methods of
protection would have become more elaborate, and this eventually led
to the variety and complexity of today’s organic matter.
(Although Dawkins sometimes speaks as if it were inevitable, notice
that it seems merely to be a matter of historical fact, supported by ge-
ological evidence, that complexity has increased over time, rather than
the result of any law of nature. Indeed, it may be that our perception
of the tendency towards increased complexity is based more on a sub-
conscious belief in a Great Chain of Being than on any facts about the
natural world – for it is surely the case that, once replicators were up and
running, the simpler organisms continued to do rather well. Indeed, in
terms of both quantity and evolutionary stability, protozoa seem to be
vastly more successful than humans.)
The descendants of some such primitive replicators are our genes.
Their protection devices, or “survival machines”, are our cells and the
bodies they inhabit. Even before this level of complexity was reached,
though, the replicators had evolved to the point where the physical prop-
erties and organizational structure of their constituent chemicals pro-
duced a variety of external (structural and behavioural) effects: a “pro-
tective coat”,4 and so on. Each new generation of (accurately copied)
replicators had the same effects that their “parents” had produced, since
what they had in common with their “parent” replicators was the fact that
both controlled the same effects. To put this another way: once the repli-
cators had achieved a certain level of chemical complexity, they began
to embody information about certain types of structure and behaviour –
information with executive control over the relevant external features –
and it was this information that was copied when they replicated.
Culture’s “Primeval Soup”
I return now to the story of cultural evolution, which I take up at the point
where our brains had already developed at least the sorts of capacities
that we now observe in the higher apes. There is of course an unresolved
debate amongst evolutionary theorists about the sequence and rate of
development of the human brain, but it would be inappropriate for me
to join in with this: I am not an evolutionary biologist; my interest lies
in the question of cultural evolution, whose pace of change is much too
rapid to be picked up at the level of genes. For my purposes, it does not
matter whether the explosion in brain size occurred before, during or

Early Cultural Evolution
119
after (i.e., as cause, concomitant or effect of) the initial emergence of
cultural replicators.
The starting point, in keeping with the biological story, should have
been a plethora of simple mental material. Yet it is not so easy, in the case
of the mental, to see in what this might consist. “Material” is not, in fact,
a helpful word in this context, since it has overtones of the mysterious
“immaterial substance” of the Cartesian soul. It may be better to talk
of our ancestors’ mental activity, although it should be borne in mind
that this term is intended to include their potential activity given their
abilities, as well as their actual activity at any one time. If it is, as most
would concur, acceptable to refer to the kinds of things that go on in the
brains of the higher mammals as mental activity, then the brains of our
primitive ancestors would also have provided a world of simple mental
activity.
So the elements in the primeval mental “soup” consisted in primitive
mental activities. The next step in the physical story was the emergence,
under stimulus, of stable forms and thus of a higher degree of complexity,
without which replicators could not have evolved. In order for cultural
replicators to develop, an increasing degree of complexity and stability
would have been needed in that realm, too.
Although we ought not search in the cultural realm for analogues
of the ﬁner details of the physical story, if a plausible parallel may be
drawn between the two then it should not automatically be ignored. It
may be that the development of complex stability in the cultural realm
did develop along lines parallel to those along which it ran in the physical
realm. If so, then the story told below may be true as well as illustrative.
Recall, though, that the physical story itself is necessarily speculative,
so it may be that neither is strictly accurate. In both cases, the point
is that evolution could not get going without some mechanism for the
emergence of complex stability, and so we have to be able to tell some
plausible story about that mechanism. If, one day, we are able to discover
what the true story is, then so much the better, but for the moment what
matters is that some story can be told – and since one of the plausible
stories in the cultural realm parallels one of the plausible stories in the
physical realm, those two stories have an added attraction and have been
used here.
The stable union of two behaviours will obviously involve something
very different from that of two molecules. In the case of the behaviours,
which are functional rather than spatial in nature, it must mean that
they form a union in time rather than space, and I take this to be a

120
The Selﬁsh Meme
cause-effect relationship. Just as, when the orientation is right, the prop-
erties of one molecule cause another token of its molecular type to be next
to it (spatial relationship), so in the right circumstances we should expect
the properties of one behavioural token to cause another to happen just
after it (temporal relationship).
As an example, a common observation amongst modern animals is
that rewarded actions are repeated whilst those that are punished are
not: such behaviour is said to be governed by the “law of effect”. Now,
if B sees A engaged in some behaviour that is rewarded, and B himself
is already capable of the behaviour, then he is likely to mimic A so that
he too will be rewarded. This is the sort of social learning (“stimulus”
or “local” enhancement) that Blackmore and others would describe as
the “reproduction” of behaviour. One instance is the behaviour of a blue
tit which pecks at a milk bottle top because it has seen other blue tits
doing the same thing, as discussed in Chapter 9. Such learning is certainly
observed amongst today’s animals, and the assumption of its availability to
early hominids is thus unproblematic (remember that I am not claiming
to offer a full account of their evolution, but am taking up the story at
quite a late stage).
Such a process may be redescribed as follows. Two creatures are both
capable of a certain behaviour – behaviour which, as it happens, falls
under the law of effect. When one of the creatures manifests its ability in
the relevant behaviour, the other creature is moved to do the same. Or,
to put it another way: two mental activities have come into contact with
each other in just the right circumstances, and the manifestation of one
has followed – been temporally “connected” to – the manifestation of the
other. This gives rise to the appearance of “attraction” between the two
tokens of that behaviour, just as it does when two tokens of a molecule
become spatially connected.
It is also in keeping with the molecular analogy that neither of these
behaviours is, in these circumstances, a genuine replicator: this reﬂects
Blackmore’s description of such learning as “reproduction” rather than
genuine “replication”. (Similarly, when molecule m1 joins with and later
breaks away from molecule m2, it is obvious that m1 has not created another
token of an m molecule.) If the shorthand “behaviour” is used, then it
does seem that A’s behaviour has created another token of its type: when
B sees A, he repeats A’s behaviour. If, on the other hand, we use the
more accurate “mental ability that gives rise to behaviour”, then it can
be seen that A’s token has merely, when manifest in the presence of B’s,
led to B’s also being manifest in behaviour. A and B both already possess

Early Cultural Evolution
121
the relevant mental ability, and therefore A’s token of its behavioural
manifestation does not need to create another. When (via A’s behaviour)
it comes into contact with B, it simply “attracts” B’s own token of its type
(causes it to be manifest soon after A’s).
It might seem obvious at this point that, since many modern mammals
are capable of (at least limited forms of) this sort of behaviour, there
is nothing here that could account for the emergence of the uniquely
human phenomena of memes. On the other hand, the fact that the pri-
mordial chemicals may still be found today does not imply that some of
the original combinations of them did not develop into genes.
Behavioural Patterns
The difference between the chemical combinations that evolved and
those that did not lies in the effects produced by the particular formations:
the effect of the ones that were composed of “self-attracting” molecules
was that they made copies of themselves. One of the important features of
the physical story is that, in the replicable patterns of molecules, the union
between the building-block molecules is more stable than the union be-
tween each of them and other tokens of its own type – this is why they
maintain their union with each other, whilst breaking apart from the
“copy”.
In the mental world, the “building block” molecules are replaced by
mental activities that give rise to the reproduction of (or apparent at-
traction between) certain behaviours. Now, are there circumstances in
which – just as in the physical story such molecules can form stable unions
with each other – tokens of these types of mental activity might come to-
gether in just the right order at just the right time, so as to form stably
bonded behavioural patterns? And if such patterns were formed, of be-
haviours which naturally give rise to their own repetition, then would
those patterns analogously begin to make copies of themselves? Clearly,
this can only happen if the organisms involved are capable of both im-
posing some sort of organizational structure on their own actions and
learning such patterns from each other.
The difference between low-level copying and this more complex sort
of learning has been untangled by the psychologists Richard Byrne and
Anne Russon.5 In a discussion of different levels of imitation, they distin-
guish between “copying the organizational structure of behaviour” and
“copying the surface form of behaviour”. Copying the “surface form” of
behaviour is the lower-level activity, in which the ﬁne details of particular

122
The Selﬁsh Meme
actions are imitated. Infants do this all the time when they attempt to re-
produce things they have seen their parents do, like mop up spilt drinks
or build a brick tower. In order to go further and copy the “organiza-
tional structure” of another’s behaviour, an organism must be able to
arrange its existing behaviours into new (and potentially complex) pat-
terns. The component actions within those patterns may well vary from
individual to individual, being developed via trial and error; but the over-
all structure of the behavioural pattern must be ﬁxed if it is to count as
this sort of imitation. At this level, an organism is copying “the structural
organization of a complex process (including the sequence of stages,
subroutine structure, and bimanual co-ordination), by observation of
the behaviour of another individual, while furnishing the exact details
of actions by individual learning”.6
Byrne and Russon characterize their approach to imitation as “hier-
archical”, and indeed it is reminiscent of Chapter 4’s discussions of the
assembling constraints on complex replication. In particular, it echoes
Koestler’s claim that a set of invariant rules will account for the structure
and stability of complex assemblies of information or behaviour, with
variation allowed in the “strategies” that are actually employed (to illus-
trate, I used the example of chess, where the rules are ﬁxed but what
happens during any one game will vary considerably). The replication
of complexity always depends on such a hierarchical structure. Thus my
suggestion that memetic replication was preceded by the emergence of
stable behavioural patterns (analogously to the early days of pregenetic
replication) is strongly supported by Byrne and Russon’s thesis. They say,
in effect, that the ability to copy such a pattern relies on the ability to
pick out which of its elements are ﬁxed “rules” and which are variable
“strategies” – in other words, to impose a hierarchical structure on the
complexity being copied. Thus the early replication of simple behavioural
patterns would, since it is a hierarchical process, involve exactly the fea-
ture that would best support the future replication of complex informa-
tion (memes).
There is also a link between this understanding of how behavioural pat-
terns are learnt, and Terence Deacon’s claim7 (discussed in more detail
in the next chapter) that a vital feature of modern human infants’ minds
is the ability to see structure beyond the details of natural languages. If the
capacity to learn organized patterns of behaviour depends on being able
to pick out a pattern’s general structure from the details of its particular
instantiations, then again this is highly signiﬁcant for memetic evolu-
tion. It means that the early replication of simple behavioural patterns

Early Cultural Evolution
123
necessarily involved a feature that would later facilitate the replication of
much more complex information.
In summary, it appears that the capacity to organize one’s behaviour
into patterns, and to learn those patterns from others, is a hierarchical
process that depends on the ability to pick out the structure of a pattern’s
organization. Even when it operates at a fairly primitive level, therefore,
such a process has the potential to support the replication of much more
complex and abstract representations, should such representations be
available to the creatures involved.
An Example
My claim, then, is that in the primordial mental “soup” of our ancestors’
mental activities, a proportion of those activities would have had the
crucial property of “attracting” other tokens of their own type – and that,
given the right stimuli, patterns of such activities might have begun to
form.
In support of this claim, it will be helpful to explore an example of
some “self-attracting” behaviours which, if they were to come together
in just the right place at just the right time, would form a stable pattern
of activity. Once more, of course, I am not suggesting that my example
is a true picture of the emergence of the ﬁrst cultural replicators: the
less so in this instance, since it concerns particular instances rather than
general patterns of behaviour. Particular instances can, though, be used
to illuminate general truths, and in this case I hope that some light may
be shed, by a ﬁctitious example of the way in which mental replication
could have begun, on the general truths about that process as it was ac-
tually initiated. The story offered will have no pretensions to being an
account of the origin of memes, but will nonetheless be useful in provid-
ing a consistent illustration to which I can refer throughout this chapter’s
discussions.
An appropriate example would revolve around two distinct types of
behaviour, each of which involves mental activity and is “self-attracting”.
For the ﬁrst, I have chosen the use (well documented in modern pri-
mates) of a stick to “dip” ants out of their nests so they may be eaten. This
behaviour is learnt rather than genetically hard-wired, and displays clear
signs of mental activity (ﬁnding the ants’ nest, ﬁnding a stick, controlling
the digits to manipulate the stick, etc.). The second is the much simpler
act of stripping the leaves from a bush, in order to eat them. This, I as-
sume, is also a learnt rather than a genetically blueprinted ability. Both

124
The Selﬁsh Meme
are also likely to be “self-attracting”: if A ﬁnds an ants’ nest and is seen
to be obtaining food from it, then, in the right circumstances, B would
soon join in. Similarly, if A is seen to be feasting from a particular bush,
then B is likely to join him.
The “right circumstances” are important, however. Just as, in the physi-
cal case, for a molecule to bond with another it must be oriented in exactly
the right way at exactly the right time, so in this case A’s behaviour must
take place in the “right” circumstances if its “self-attracting” properties
are to be realized. In particular, B must be in the vicinity, aware of A’s
activity, hungry, and already capable of the activity involved. In such cir-
cumstances there is nothing mysterious about the “self-attracting” prop-
erty of such behaviours: it is largely a product of the fact that they are
rewarding. Nor is there anything mysterious about the stable pattern that
might be formed from the combination of such behaviours, which would
obviously be the act of stripping leaves from a twig in order to eat them,
and then the use of the twig for ant dipping.
Innate Prerequisites for Primitive Replicators
Yet if an organism is capable of copying not only the simple activities of its
conspeciﬁcs, but also the organization of their more complex behaviours,
then why shouldn’t we say that it is acquiring cultural replicators (albeit
fairly primitive ones) – and if so, then why don’t we just call them memes?
I think that it does mean that such behaviours are the results of prim-
itive cultural replicators – but I don’t call them memes because there
is a crucial distinction between the two sorts of replicator, which I ex-
pound in later sections of this chapter. Nonetheless, it is worth asking
what were the mental capacities which enabled our ancestors to partici-
pate in even such a basic process of cultural replication – for it was this
existing process which provided the foundations for the development of
memes. What were the innate prerequisites for the emergence of the sim-
ple replicators on which memetic evolution was inevitably dependent? I
shall not pretend to offer a comprehensive description of homo’s mental
life, but do need to specify the elements that would have been necessary
in order for replication to arise.
It is reasonable to assume, throughout the following discussion, that
the capabilities of modern-day primates are a good pointer towards the
abilities of our ancestors at the time that their minds were emerging.
This is not to make the mistake of thinking we are descended from our
closest living relatives, the chimpanzees: we and chimps have a common

Early Cultural Evolution
125
ancestor, but it is very likely that chimps are as different as we are from
the creature that preceded the fork in our lineages.* Nonetheless, that
fork is relatively recent, and it seems likely that if our mind-developing
ancestors were relatively big brained and socially organized, then their
abilities may be reﬂected in those of chimps. “We must beware of equating
chimpanzee cognitive capacities with those of all African apes, including
the ones of ﬁve million years ago. Cautiously, however, I suggest that we
can say that large-brained apes that live socially complex lives are likely to
develop a chimpanzee level of consciousness.”8 Putting this another way:
if there are basic faculties that human babies share with chimps, then it
seems likely that the “intermediate” ancestors would also have had them.
The most obvious prerequisite for copying is an awareness of one’s own
activities. Few people would be willing to characterize modern primates as
having “consciousness” in the human sense, but there is evidence – both
anecdotal and experimental – that at least some of the higher primates
are aware of their own activities. Gallup’s controversial “mirror test”9 is
one example: chimps, once familiarized with a mirror, have a red spot
marked on their head – shown the mirror anew, they (and orang-utans,
but not gorillas) touch the red spot on their own head, demonstrating
that they recognize the image as their own.
Perhaps the most convincing demonstration of the fact that some pri-
mates are aware of both their own and their companions’ activities, how-
ever, can be found in the documentation of deception. Although mostly
anecdotal, there is widespread agreement amongst primatologists that
both apes and some species of Old World monkeys (e.g., baboons) have
frequently been observed to partake in “such tactics as concealment, dis-
traction, the creation of misleading indications of intent, and manipula-
tion of innocent bystanders”.10 In one simple instance, a male chimp who
was about to engage in a confrontation with another “was baring his teeth
in a fear grin”, and then he pulled “his lips over his teeth, wiping out the
fear-grin. He did it several times. In mutual intimidation between males,
it makes sense to hide signs of nervousness. That’s what [he] seemed to
be doing.”11 There are many more instances that could be quoted; what
* Moreover, as Steven Pinker has pointed out in The Language Instinct (1994: 342–9), our
assumed “closeness” to chimps and gorillas is largely the result of extinction: if some of
the intermediate species (i.e., the hominids that came before modern man but after the
time when our line forked from chimps) had survived, then the chimps would not seem
to be so remarkably close to us. Conversely, if all other apes were extinct then maybe
monkeys would be the creatures that were chosen so arbitrarily to be the focus of our
research.

126
The Selﬁsh Meme
matters about them all is that, in order to practise deception, an agent
must have a fairly clear picture of both his own and the deceived crea-
ture’s intentions and activities. Both capacities are necessary conditions
for the emergence of mental replicators, since it would be impossible for
A to copy C unless he were aware of both C’s and his own actions.
Nonetheless, it should be noted that the evidence from primate de-
ception is open to interpretation, and it may plausibly be argued that it
demonstrates an awareness only of others’ actions and perceptions, not
of their intentions. Thus “Whiten (1993) points out that there is as yet
no experimental evidence for false-belief attribution in primates.” If it is
adequate, for the purposes of tactical deception, to be “adept at control-
ling what is perceptually available to conspeciﬁcs”,12 then primates will
be able to practise such deception even if they have little awareness of
others’ beliefs or intentions. Without an awareness of the actions and per-
ceptions of herself and the deceived, however, it is certain that a deceiver
could not practise her art – and equally certain that mental replicators
could not emerge. The extent to which A would need some sort of theory
of mind in order to mimic C may be open to question, but his need to be
aware of what both are doing and perceiving is not.
Clearly, though, these capacities alone are not sufﬁcient for replica-
tion. In order to be able to copy C, A must not only be aware of C’s
behaviour and his, but also be able to link the two – and in order for
this to happen, there must be what is known as cross-modal sensory
integration: the capacity to make sense of information from different
sensory modalities (sight, sound, touch, etc.). Is there evidence to sug-
gest that this ability is innate in either humans or primates? Classically,
the debate has been ﬂanked by Piaget, who claimed that cross-modal
integration is not innate but achieved during development, and Bower,
who said that early perception is supramodal (i.e., “the sense modality
of the inﬂow is disregarded”)13 and development renders the senses dis-
tinct. Current evidence suggests that neither hypothesis is quite right, but
that both human and primate neonates are capable of primitive cross-
modal integration, and that development enhances it in humans but not
in primates.
The classic experiment14 involves two types of dummy (paciﬁer), one
smooth and one nubbed. Human neonates were found to be capable of
matching a visually perceived shape to that which they had previously
explored tactually, which indicated that (at least a certain type of) cross-
modal integration was available without having to be learnt. Similar ex-
periments on infant macaques15 gave corresponding results. Cross-modal

Early Cultural Evolution
127
abilities were observed during the course of the latter experiments in
infants as young as eight days old (roughly equivalent to month-old hu-
mans). Such experiments suggest that both human and some primate
neonates are “capable of using and storing surprisingly abstract infor-
mation about objects in their world. This information must be abstract
enough, at least, to allow recognition of objects across changes in size
and modality of perception”.16
If such abilities are now innate in humans and – perhaps more relevant
to the current project – in primates, then it seems plausible that our
ancestors would have had them too. So A is aware of his own and of C’s
activities, and is capable of integrating them across their differing sensory
modalities. Yet why should he do this? Unless he has some limited form
of means-ends reasoning – the ability to manipulate representations of
non-actual states of affairs – then there is no reason why he should bother
to link C’s activities with his own potential ones. Is there any reason to
suppose that he may have such an ability? Once more, the capacity for
deception can be invoked, since it provides a clear demonstration of this
ability. Unless he were able to consider the consequences of his actions
then it is not obvious how a creature could put to use his knowledge of
his own and his companion’s activities.
There is still a missing element. A can recognize and match his own
activities to C’s, and his imagination will allow him to “try out” the rel-
evant behaviour for himself. Yet, if it is successful, then he has also to
remember it: he needs, in addition to the other abilities speciﬁed, a long-
term memory for facts. This, too, can be seen in modern primates, where
it is demonstrated most clearly in their capacity for complex social in-
teractions. Much of a primate’s life is spent in nurturing his own and
assessing his rivals’ alliances: “If alliance networks were permanent struc-
tures within a troop, it would be difﬁcult enough for individuals to cope
with their intricate connections. But they are by no means permanent.
Always looking to their own best interests, and to the interests of their
closest relatives, individuals may sometimes ﬁnd it advantageous to break
existing alliances and form new ones, perhaps even with previous rivals.
Troop members therefore ﬁnd themselves in the midst of changing pat-
terns of alliances, demanding yet keener social intelligence to be able to
play the changing game of social chess.”17 In order to keep track of the
shifting pattern of “friendships”, each primate has to have a long-term
memory in which to store facts about who is allied with whom.
In conclusion, then, the prerequisites for the emergence of mental
replicators are likely to have been (at least limited forms of): an awareness

128
The Selﬁsh Meme
of the creature’s own and her companions’ activities and perceptions; the
ability to link the two; a degree of means-ends reasoning to tell her why
she should want to link them; and the capacity to remember the sequence
of events that consequently occurred. Hierarchical considerations indi-
cate that there would be severe limitations on the content of what could
be replicated, unless the creatures involved were also capable of copy-
ing the organizational structure of behaviour: they would need sufﬁcient
means-ends reasoning to enable them to pick out the signiﬁcant features
of a sequence of activities (to see the point of what they observe); and suf-
ﬁcient memory power to keep those features in mind when reproducing
the sequence themselves.
It is plausible that homo should have possessed these capacities, since
all are demonstrable in modern primates as well as humans. This is not,
of course, to say that this list should be regarded as a comprehensive
summary of the emergent minds of our ancestors; it is merely to claim
that it comprises the most signiﬁcant aspects of the necessary conditions
that their mental abilities must have met in order for primitive mental
replicators to emerge.
What Is Special About Memes?
Yet if I have been successful in sketching the sorts of capacities that crea-
tures would need to engage in cultural replication, then surely I have in
the process undermined the memetic project. It is usually taken to be
a corollary of the meme hypothesis that memes are a uniquely human
phenomenon – but if both early hominids and some modern primates
are able to construct replicable patterns of “self-attracting” behaviours,
then what is so special about human culture? To rescue memetics, I need
to be able to explain both how memes may be distinguished from other
types of cultural replicator, and how humans can be distinguished from
other types of replicating creature.
In Chapter 3 I argued that, just as genes are based in DNA, so memes
have their basis in representational content. In the course of that discus-
sion, it emerged that there are different sorts of representation: some are
so simple that their content may even be indeterminate; others are more
complex, and their content is partially determined by the internal links
that are formed between them and other representations. Now I should
like to add a third level of representation: those whose internal links
enable them to represent, not external objects or events, but other repre-
sentations. These, philosophers would call meta-representations. It is at

Early Cultural Evolution
129
the level of meta-representation, I would argue, that memetic replication
emerges.
A creature that is capable of copying a pattern of behaviour must
have some sort of representation of how to perform those behaviours.
There must even be internal links between some of its representations
(e.g., between its representation of how to strip leaves from a bush and
its representation of how to dip for ants), which enable it to produce a
constant pattern of behaviour. What it need not have is any understanding
of the point of what it is doing. It is quite possible, for example, that a
primate engaged in the leaf-stripping/ant-dipping pattern of behaviour
has no more understanding of why the ant dipping should follow the leaf
stripping than a parrot has of the meaning of the words that it utters.
If so, then this primate’s behaviour is “complex” only in the sense that
it entails a whole series of activities: although there may be more mental
processes involved in its representation of the behavioural pattern than
in its representations of the pattern’s component activities, essentially the
same sorts of mental process are involved in each case.
In order to understand the point of its behavioural pattern, the crea-
ture would need to be able to think about what it is doing – and in order
to do this, it would need to be able to form a representation of that
behavioural pattern. I don’t mean a representation of how to perform
the behavioural pattern (it already has this), but a representation of the
pattern itself. There is a certain structure to its representation of how to
perform that pattern, and it is this which the creature needs to recog-
nize, if it is to be able to reﬂect on its own actions. Only then could it
begin to understand that the crucial link between the separate elements
of the pattern is the creation of an ant dipper. Only then, in fact, could
it form the concept of an ant dipper – a concept that will emerge from
its meta-representation of the behavioural pattern.
The distinctive feature of memetic replicators, then, is this abstract
conceptual quality, which comes from the human ability to meta-
represent. Only once we could meta-represent was it possible to manip-
ulate and reﬂect on our representations independently of their original
context. I would strongly argue that primates do not have this ability. “In
this connection the classical experiments of Madame Kohts of Moscow
were illuminating. Some of the apes observed by her used sticks as levers,
for digging up hidden objects or for extending the reach of their arms.
Her chimpanzee would pull a loose board from a case and use it, but if
the case’s surface was unbroken he could not see a possible stick in it.”18
These apes must have had a representation of how to use a stick as a

130
The Selﬁsh Meme
lever, but they were unable to reﬂect on that representation: they could
not meta-represent the more abstract concept of a lever as an independent
object, transferable between contexts and activities.
Indeed, to what extent their “concept” of a stick is accurately to be de-
scribed as a concept is open to debate. Although they had a perceptual
grasp on a stick as an object in their environment, and the imagina-
tive ability to make use of it in certain contexts, this is not usually all
that is meant when we say that a creature has a concept of something:
a concept is more than a discriminatory, context-dependent ability. It is
a more abstract representation, universalized rather than task speciﬁc,
available for use in many different contexts. It is, in other words, a meta-
representation.
In order to distinguish clearly between the two types of concept, I
shall from this point refer to representational concepts as notions, and
reserve concept for meta-representational concepts. My claim, then, is
that it is these more abstract concepts that were crucial for the emer-
gence of memes. Only once a creature can meta-represent (give labels to
its representations, and manipulate those labels in its mind) can it lift
its representations out of their original context and use them in another
arena.
Yet non-human animals do not seem to have made this leap, despite
the fact that at least some are able to copy each other – to engage in
primitive mental replication. What enabled our ancestors to begin to
meta-represent, in the process unleashing the power of memes?
Innate Prerequisites for Concepts
Brain Size
The most obvious difference between human and nonhuman primates
lies in the size of our brains: it is estimated that even the earliest homo had
a higher encephalisation quotient† (EQ) than modern apes. It is arguable
that this was the result of a cycle of positive feedback, triggered when
hominids expanded their diet to include meat as a regular rather than
occasional foodstuff. As Dawkins puts it: “In the mammals as a whole, car-
nivores typically have a slightly higher EQ than the herbivores upon which
they prey.”19 Throughout evolutionary history, the successful species have
been those with the optimum trade-off between their beneﬁcial features,
† An animal’s encephalisation quotient is the ratio of its actual brain size to the expected
brain size for an animal of that size.

Early Cultural Evolution
131
given the resources available – and the general message about brain size
seems to be that any species will have as big a brain as it can afford. This
means that if a species needs its energy to escape predators or to chase
prey, then it will be a waste of that energy to spend too much of it on
the brain. Conversely, the brain is so powerful and useful that if a species
has a stable environment and plentiful supply of nourishment, then its
members’ brains will continue to grow.
Now, early homo was bipedal, with free forelimbs that terminated in
hands. He was already able, because of this, “to thrive where an ape could
not live”,20 and later he took advantage of the evolutionary opportunity
afforded by this potential for technology and started on an embryonic
form of the hunter-gatherer lifestyle. “But evolution is rarely simple cause
and effect. There are many variables in the uncertain mix: the climate,
the local geography, a species’ evolutionary heritage, the nature of other
species in the community, and a measure of pure chance.”21 Probably the
best we can say about early homo is that a combination of such variables,
including the stable environment and plentiful food supply afforded by
his relative ﬁtness to the new climate, meant that there was no need for
a trade-off between brain expansion and other adaptations.
The question for memes is whether the “great encephalization” would
have been enough to enable our ancestors to begin to meta-represent.
Perhaps the “spare” brain power was all that was needed for this new
cognitive capacity. Alternatively, it may be that a radical divergence was
needed from the neural architecture of their ancestors before hominids
were capable of forming representations of their own internal represen-
tations. My guess would be that the emergence of the ability was closely
allied (again, I don’t really want to become embroiled in the debate about
whether this was as cause, concomitant or effect) with the explosion of
brain power, rather than with some novel cognitive architecture. This
is because, in order for memes to take off as they obviously have done,
the vital facility has to have been practically universal – otherwise, the
emergence of fully ﬂedged concepts in one of our ancestors would have
had little to no effect on his contemporaries. A concept cannot replicate
if none of the surrounding organisms is receptive to it: household pets
do not develop a humanlike capacity for culture simply as a result of
exposure to it, for they are not appropriately receptive.
My search for the origins of memes is not, however, dependent on
a parallel search for the neural architecture that facilitated their emer-
gence. I want to know what mental abilities enabled our ancestors to begin
to meta-represent when their primate cousins could not – and this is a

132
The Selﬁsh Meme
quite separate issue from the question what neural structures and func-
tions underlay such abilities.
Comparing Representations
The most crucial facility for this purpose is the ability to make links be-
tween one’s representations. Yet I have already argued that any creature
capable of associative learning must be able to do this, so what is there
here to facilitate the emergence of meta-representation? The vital next
step is for those links to be freed from the representations which initially
triggered their formation – and this depends on the ability to compare
one’s representations. Only then will it be possible to form representa-
tions of the links between them.
Concepts (of the fully ﬂedged, meta-representational sort) play a much
wider causal role than that played by notions. Since notions’ effects are
restricted to a particular context, their causal roles (i.e., the range of
things that can cause them and which they in turn can affect) are bound
to be limited. Thus our hominid’s representation of the stick that he uses
for ant dipping may properly be called a notion of a stick: it is triggered
by the sight of a stick (either on the ground, or in a bush as revealed by
leaf stripping), and in the right circumstances it will have control over
his ant-dipping behaviour; but that’s it. Concepts, in contrast, have a
more extended causal role, whereby they may be triggered by a variety of
stimuli, and can control a variety of actions. Had the hominid the concept
of a stick as an ant dipper, then its causal role would be freed from the
original context, and he might for example actively set out to create an ant
dipper by stripping leaves (even if he doesn’t intend to eat the leaves),
or take his ant dipper with him in search of termites.
Now, the hominid could not have learned this behavioural pattern in
the ﬁrst place without the ability to link his representations of how to strip
leaves and dip for ants. What he needs now, in order to form a concept
of an ant dipper, is to compare his representations and “see” what they
have in common: to form a representation, in other words, of the link
that he has already made between the two. He needs to recognize the
fact that the two activities are linked by the stick (or more accurately its
dipper properties – being long, thin, etc.), and in so doing he will free his
representation of that object from its original context as a bridge between
two other representations.
Indeed, the establishment of a concept will always initially be a com-
parative process: we need to be able to compare our notions, in order
to abstract their important common features from the various contexts.

Early Cultural Evolution
133
This is reminiscent of the fact that an important part of any replicator’s
content is determined by the differences between itself and its alleles. What
we humans can do is to see those differences, and to form representations
of them – and as soon as a creature can compare its representations with
each other, its mental life loses its dependence on the external world.
A creature whose representations are tied to a limited range of exter-
nal stimuli and actions cannot manipulate those representations in a
different context from that limited range. A creature whose represen-
tations have been freed from those bonds, however, may manipulate its
concepts quite independently of their original contexts. No longer do
its representations depend on external stimulation: representations of
links between representations can be triggered by the original represen-
tations themselves, whether or not the creature ﬁnds itself in their usual
context.
Meta-Representation Today
My claim that the emergence of concepts is always a comparative pro-
cess gains credence from a consideration of how meta-representational
concepts emerge, even today. Few people have any clear recollection of
the way in which they ﬁrst grasped concepts such as “sheep”, “tree” and
other basic elements of our understanding of our surroundings. We can,
though, be clearer about our more recent acquisition of more complex
concepts such as “cantilever”, or “harmonic minor scale”. They appear
to be acquired in two steps: at ﬁrst the notion will be a peripheral part
of a theory or activity, the bulk of which is familiar. The reason why it is
peripheral is that our understanding and use of it is wholly context de-
pendent. We are not able to speak of that entity outside the circumstances
in which we usually encounter it, for our interaction with it depends on
our interaction with its context. As an example, consider the concept of
a cantilever. Many people have seen the Forth Bridge; plenty of women
wear a bra; in most of our houses there are shelves. A cantilever is there-
fore a structure familiar to most, yet without some additional stimulus
many people will never acquire its concept (meta-representation).
The second step – the step that will disentangle the relevant word or en-
tity from its usual circumstances – will be the combination (in varying pro-
portions) of its familiarity, and an appropriate stimulus. The more often
we encounter a novel subject, the more of its features we shall appreciate;
if there is, in addition, an appropriate stimulus (e.g., a pressing need, or
some form of hint), then eventually we shall be able to compare our indi-
vidual representations and extricate their common features. In the case

134
The Selﬁsh Meme
of the cantilever, the stimulus might simply be a deﬁnition, encountered
in a book or conversation. It might, though, take the form of a practi-
cal need: if a person is building something, and trying to ﬁnd a way of
supporting a structure within it, then this might prompt her to consider
the form of similar structures with which she is already familiar. If she
abstracted from those structures the common, signiﬁcant feature that it
is ﬁxed at one end only, then she could apply it on her own construction,
away from its usual context.
As another illustration, think of a novice violinist who is able quite
competently to play several major scales, as well as the arpeggios of C and
G major. If she is asked to play the arpeggio of D major, then she will not
initially know what to do. In order to produce it, she will have to think
about the arpeggios she knows, in an attempt to ascertain their common
features. Once she has abstracted the rule governing the sequence of
intervals in an arpeggio, she will be able to apply that rule to the new
situation: now she should be able to produce the arpeggio of D major,
and indeed of any other key for which she is asked.
Clearly, the sorts of concepts that ﬁrst emerged would not have had
anything like the complexity of arpeggios or cantilevers, but it is not
implausible that they should have been acquired by a process which was
in essence similar to that described. The subject of the concept moved,
in other words, from context dependency to abstraction as a result of our
being stimulated to compare the common features of various familiar
notions.
Thus the key element in the emergence of concepts was the facility
for internal comparison of representations, without which it is impos-
sible to discern their common (functionally relevant) features. A vital
consequence of this would be the ability to abstract information from
incoming representations as well as from the environment – and this
faculty would have been useful enough for selection to favour those of
our ancestors who were not only able, but also tended to represent and
to compare representations. (Indeed, this view is supported by observa-
tions of variation in modern humans’ tendency to make internal mental
links, and the fact that a bias towards this tendency is a key character-
istic of gifted individuals.)22 It would thus have provided an efﬁcient
basis for the emergence of the new form of evolution – and combined
with the sorts of mental abilities that have been postulated as the pre-
cursors of replicating notions, this would have enabled our ancestors to
develop communicable, manipulable, memorable and widely applicable
representations: i.e., replicating concepts, or memes.

Early Cultural Evolution
135
Which Replicators Count as Memes?
The implication of this chapter has been that a clear distinction can be
drawn between primitive cultural replicators and the memes that pervade
our culture today. Other primates, including our ancestors, do clearly
engage in some sort of cultural replication, but if humans alone engage
in meta-representation then we ought to reserve the term “meme” for this
specialized type of cultural replicator. Yet obviously this view of memes,
as replicating meta-representations, is not the only way of characterizing
them. Susan Blackmore would argue that memes’ distinguishing feature
is not that they are a particular sort of cultural replicator, but that they are
replicators at all. She is clear that some copying methods do and others do
not involve true replication – and that only imitation can support memetic
evolution. This section defends my hypothesis against her challenge, and
clariﬁes the place of memes in human culture today.
Imitation Again
Blackmore points up the difference between the reproduction in a novel
context of behaviours of which the copier is already capable, and the
genuine imitation of novel behaviours. She uses the case of a blue tit,
learning to peck milk bottle tops, as an example of the reproduction of
behaviour: in her view the blue tit has not acquired a meme because it
has not really imitated anything. This is in contrast to my view that the
question whether the blue tit has acquired a meme will be resolved not by
a study of the method of information transmission (was it really imitated
or just reproduced?) but by an examination of the information itself (was
it a meta-representation?).
Blackmore would concur that learning is involved here: the blue tit
has learnt where to seek food, even though it has not learnt how to do
anything. Now, it is not immediately obvious to me that information about
location cannot constitute a meme: compare “you can get food if you
peck these objects,” with “you can get food if you shop here.” Surely
the relevant question is not whether a new skill has been acquired – as
opposed to merely new information about where or when to apply an
existing skill – but whether the information acquired is of the right sort
to constitute a meme. I would argue that the blue tit cannot engage
in memetic replication unless it is able to develop context-independent
meta-representations.
In the blue tit’s case, its understanding of milk bottles is arguably
untestable. There would be no observable difference between two birds,

136
The Selﬁsh Meme
one of which was simply engaging in associative learning and the other of
which had genuinely acquired a novel concept. The problem in the case
of this example is that it is hard to know what it would mean for a bird to
have a concept of a milk bottle that is “transferable between contexts”: in
what other context could a milk bottle be of interest to a bird, other than
the one in which it contains milk that the bird can reach by pecking? And
without a separate context in which to “test” the birds, there is no way of
discovering their true understanding of the situation.
In any case, although it is at least hypothetically possible for the bird
to have formed a concept of the milk bottle, in all probability Blackmore
is right to say that blue tits do not engage in memetic replication. The
reason for this, however, is that they are unable to form complex, context-
independent representations; it is not that no new skill has been acquired.
The question whether memetic replication is involved in a particular
instance of social learning will not be answered so much by analysing
the method of information transmission (reproduction or imitation), as
by looking at the content of what is transmitted (notion or concept).
Different Levels of Imitation
If the crucial distinguishing factor in memetic replication were simply
the method of transmission (imitation or not), then we should expect to
see a clear cut-off between imitation and other forms of social learning,
but in fact this not the case. The blue tits provide a hypothetical example
in which a creature’s observable actions may be interpreted in two quite
distinct ways. Blackmore is right to say that what has been learnt is not a
novel behaviour but simply information about a new situation in which
existing behaviour will produce rewards – but she is mistaken to think that
this alone can tell us what has really gone on in the blue tit’s brain. There
is no way of telling by behavioural observation whether the information
has been represented in a limited notional form, or whether it constitutes
a more complex, context-independent concept. The blue tit has not im-
itated a novel behaviour, but (hypothetically) it may nevertheless have
acquired a meme.
In Byrne and Russon’s distinction between different levels of imitation
(“copying the organizational structure of behaviour versus copying the
surface form of behaviour”),23 as in my characterization of memes, the
differences are determined by the content of what is imitated. Whereas
copying the surface form of behaviour involves a relatively mindless im-
itation of each individual detail, it is not possible to copy an activity’s
organizational structure without the ability to think a bit more deeply

Early Cultural Evolution
137
about what is going on: to distinguish between the ﬁxed “rules” and vari-
able “strategies” of that behavioural pattern.
What I have introduced, with my emphasis on meta-representation, is
a third level of understanding: the capacity to recognize what has been
imitated. It is this which gives rise to a representation, not only of how
to perform the behavioural pattern, but of the pattern itself: a meta-
representation of what has been imitated. What is signiﬁcant to the de-
bate about how to characterize memes is that the three separate sorts of
process – imitating the details of individual actions, copying the struc-
ture of a more complex behavioural pattern, and meta-representing that
structure – can operate at different levels within any given behavioural
structure.
If Janet wishes to learn how to change a car wheel then she can ab-
sorb that information in a variety of ways. There are several stages to
the procedure – jacking up the car, removing the old wheel, ﬁtting the
new one, and so on – and within each stage there is a collection of de-
tailed actions to perform. Watching and learning from Neil at her local
garage, Janet might simply copy each of his detailed actions without any
real understanding of what is going on. When reproducing them herself
later, minor variations will almost inevitably be introduced, and if she has
failed to grasp the point of each bit of the routine then her deviations
from Neil’s method may be disastrous. She might, for instance, have ob-
served that Neil tightened the bolts progressively in a star pattern, but
not understood that this mattered: if she simply tightens each bolt fully,
in turn, then damage could result.
Janet might, on the other hand, have copied the structure of Neil’s
actions, so that the changes she introduces will stand less chance of being
dangerous or damaging. In this case, she has picked out the important
elements of the process, and any variations that she produces will be
insigniﬁcant as far as the end result is concerned. So, for example, Neil
may have pushed his metal tool box under the car before fully removing
the old wheel (so that if the jack slipped then the car would fall onto the
box rather than the ground, and it would still be possible to reinsert
the jack), and Janet might put the new wheel into that space instead –
fulﬁlling the same purpose in a different way.
At a third level of understanding, Janet might both have copied the
structure of Neil’s actions, and thought a bit about that structure – and
then the variations that she introduces may even be improvements. Neil
may have tightened the bolts with an impact wrench, which indicates
that for him the question what tool is used for this purpose is a strategic

138
The Selﬁsh Meme
detail: what matters (the “rule”) is that the bolts are tightened to a point
where the wheel is securely attached; it must not be under-tightened.
If Janet later reﬂects on the procedure that she has learnt, then she
may come to wonder whether it is possible to cause any damage by over-
tightening the bolts – which indeed it is. A better method than Neil’s
would be to tighten them only so far, before ﬁnishing off with a torque
wrench. Now, if Janet introduces this variation then she will have made a
change in the very structure of the wheel-changing process. Whereas the
structure that she learnt from Neil included the rule “don’t leave the bolts
too loose”, the structure that now governs Janet’s behaviour includes the
rule “make sure the bolts are neither too loose nor too tight.”
An interesting fact has emerged from this example about the sorts of
variations that will be introduced, depending on the level at which imi-
tation has taken place. If Janet manages accurately to copy the structure
of Neil’s actions, but does not take the time to reﬂect on what she has
learnt, then any variations that she introduces will involve only the rel-
atively trivial “strategies” that intersperse the more signiﬁcant “rules” of
the process. If, on the other hand, she simply imitates Neil’s detailed ac-
tions, then her failure to distinguish between rules and strategies might
lead her to make a signiﬁcant mistake, because she does not realize which
bits of the process are structurally important: her variations might occur
in either the detail or the structure of the process. This is also true of the
situation where she both copies the structure of the behaviour and forms
a meta-representation of that structure: here again her variations might
occur in either the detail or the structure of the process – but in this case
any structural variations will be deliberate and considered, and may even
be improvements on the original.
Our leaf-stripping, ant-dipping hominids may also, of course, have a
variety of levels of comprehension of their actions. It is perfectly possible
that, although A has really grasped the concept of a stick as dipper, B’s
imitation of A is relatively mindless, copying the “motor action details”24
rather than their functional arrangement – or even copying the structure
of A’s behaviour without the ability to reﬂect on it. In neither of these
cases would B have acquired a concept at all: his behaviour would still
be context dependent (having stripped leaves from a twig, he now has
a tendency to break it off and search for an ant’s nest) even though it
has gained in complexity. The move to conceptual, structure-level com-
prehension is not an additional learning task but rather a matter of in-
sight, involving “a recoding of previously available but unlinked bits of
information”.25

Early Cultural Evolution
139
Memes and Modern Human Culture
If imitation is, as Blackmore would have it, the key to memetic transmis-
sion, then the signiﬁcance rests on this level of imitation (the push to
conceptual understanding) and not on whether a new skill is acquired
as opposed to a new context for that skill. New skills – even ones that
seem quite complex – can be acquired via the mindless reconstruction of
detailed motor actions, or even the relatively mindless reconstruction of
structured behavioural patterns. If human culture consisted in nothing
more than this, then it would hardly merit memetic study. It is only when
a true understanding is formed of a process’s structure that context-free
concepts are acquired. A’s new concept of a dipper will be transferable to
other situations in which it might be useful, whereas B’s notion is limited
to the original sequence of leaf stripping followed by ant dipping.
It is interesting, too, that more complex combinations of the differ-
ent levels of understanding are possible. The learner might grasp the
signiﬁcance of some bits of the procedure but not of others, so that at
some levels she has a proper structural comprehension of what she is
doing, but at others her actions are simply mindless repetitions. One of
the implications of this fact is that not all cultural replication in modern
human society will necessarily be memetic, just because the distinguish-
ing feature of human culture is that some of it is. My argument is that
the distinctively human form of culture, which may be called memetic,
emerged on the back of the ability to meta-represent – but this does not
entail that all elements of human culture are memetic. Humans are still
capable of the mindless repetition of detailed actions, and of the almost
equally mindless repetition of structured behaviours; it is just that we are
also capable of much more.
The Beginnings of Memetic Evolution
It is this “much more” which explains why human culture has exploded
in a way that no other organism has achieved. If your thoughts are ﬁrmly
attached to your behaviour and environment then there is not a lot of
scope for their expansion. If, however, you can free your representations
from their external ties, then suddenly there is a whole new arena for
their evolution.
Given the capacity to meta-represent the internal links between their
representations, the mental activity of our ancestors would rapidly have
been taken over by the new replicating concepts – just as in chemistry
the primeval soup was soon taken over by the new physical replicators. In

140
The Selﬁsh Meme
the physical case the replicators increased in numbers, but not in equal
proportions: some chemical combinations had greater copying ﬁdelity,
fecundity or longevity, and were therefore more successful than others.
The ultimately limited space, combined with this variation, led to com-
petition between the different types of replicators – and this would also
be likely to happen in the case of mental replicators. Some combinations
of activities would have been more complex than others, and these may
not have been transmitted as accurately as the simpler ones. Some ac-
tivities would only have been appropriate in very speciﬁc circumstances,
and these would necessarily have been less “fecund” than others: they
would only have been transmitted to the few other creatures to whom
they were useful. Still other activities may have been so brief, and so little
different from their primitive components, that they did not have time
to be transmitted before they were ﬁnished.
As with physical replicators, the environment would have had a signiﬁ-
cant effect on the success of the various cultural replicators. A peripatetic
population, for example, would provide a more conducive environment
for an inaccurate replicator than would a static population: in a never
changing environment, a behavioural pattern that alters in transmission
could soon become inappropriate for the surroundings, but in a shifting
environment the pattern’s mutation may well be more appropriate for
the new surroundings than was the original.
Still, variation without limited resources does not make for selection.
What restriction would there have been on the “resources” available to
the new replicators as they became more numerous? There are a variety
of answers to this question, some more controversial than others. Those
who think that language is a prerequisite for thought might want to say
that the initial emergence of thought would have been limited until lan-
guage had developed to a certain level. Advocates of the theory that the
brain expanded as a result of the emergence of culture would claim that
initially the brain itself would impose an upper limit on the complexity
and range of new ideas that could be grasped. It is certainly interesting to
speculate about the positive feedback that may have occurred between ho-
minid brain size and the tool use that was facilitated by abstract concepts:
it has already been noted that carnivores tend to have larger brains than
herbivores; once homo had learnt to conceptualize a primitive “blade”,
and thence to strike a sharp stone ﬂake from a rock surface, he became
able to acquire meat from even the toughest-skinned animals. It is tempt-
ing to infer that a positive feedback “loop” would thus have been set up
between tool use and brain size.

Early Cultural Evolution
141
Such conjectures are, however, hotly disputed by other scientists, and
I should certainly not want to rest a hypothesis on them. Instead, it is sim-
pler to say that the restrictions on the number of early cultural replicators
would have stemmed from the fact that even in the most intelligent mod-
ern animal the brain’s attention is limited, and no concept will succeed
if it holds no interest for its recipients. This restriction on the number of
new replicators that could persist, together with their variety, would have
ensured that the replicators evolved.
Conclusions
This chapter has explored one version of the story of memetic origins.
From the “primeval soup” of primitive mental activities, given the right
stimulation, there emerged the ﬁrst cultural replicators – the ancestors of
memes. Modern memetic evolution could not begin, however, until our
own ancestors were capable of manipulating – and of course copying –
the right sort of mental representations. However memetic information
is transmitted between individuals, the important thing is that it should
be represented in such a form that those who acquire it can manipulate
it freely, without being tied to a particular context. Many organisms can
represent the world around them, but memes are representations with
a particular nature: as complex, context-independent concepts, they de-
pended for their emergence on the development of unique mental ca-
pacities. The participants in memetic evolution needed to be able to
compare incoming information with their existing knowledge, to ﬁt it in
with their existing skills, and if necessary to rerepresent it in a different
format – and the mere fact of its being transmitted via imitation cannot
guarantee this. Meta-representation is the key.
Clearly this argument is founded on Chapter 3’s contention that
memes have their basis in representational content, but thus far little
has been said about what form that content takes. How, in practice, is it
realized? In the next chapter, I return to the search for cultural DNA.

11
Memetic DNA
In biology, what matters for evolution is that genes are able to retain (i.e.,
realize) information, which they can then carry to the next generation,
where they then enable it to produce results. Genes are a method of storing
information in such a way that it can be replicated and put to good use;
the effects that it has must be possible in a variety of surroundings. To
look at this another way, genes may be seen as representations, in DNA, of
the phenotypic features that they control. All species use the same system
of representation: DNA.
If we are to pursue the analogy with the biological world, then we
should expect to ﬁnd that what matters for cultural evolution is that
memes are able to retain information, which they can carry to the next
cultural generation, where they enable it to produce results. Memes are
a method of storing information in such a way that it can be replicated
and put to good use in a range of situations. To look at this another way,
memes may be seen as representations of the phenotypic features that
they control. The questions now arise what representational system (RS)
they use, and in particular whether it is always the same system, as is the
case in biology.
Words
I turn ﬁrst to language which, in the picture of culture that has been
painted so far, has been assigned no particular role. It would be worrying
for meme theory if language really had no part to play in it, since language
is one of the most signiﬁcant elements in our cultural lives. A vigorous
debate surrounds the questionwhether languageis the medium or merely
142

Memetic DNA
143
the communicator of thought, but few would deny that at least some
thoughts are dependent on it. Putting this even less controversially, it is
clear that language use ﬁlls a large part of most people’s lives, and plays
at least some role in their cognitive development. A theory of cultural
evolution that misses out language will have quite a large hole in it.
Memes as Words?
It seems fortuitous, then, that languages – and words in particular – pro-
vide one of the most tempting answers to the question what form memes’
RS takes. Words are certainly able to realize information, to carry it be-
tween people and to have an effect on them. Moreover, their apparent
evolution has been noted by several commentators. An illustrative exam-
ple is provided by the following passage from Richard Dawkins:1
Languages clearly evolve in that they show trends, they diverge, and as the cen-
turies go by after their divergence they become more and more mutually unin-
telligible. The numerous islands of the paciﬁc provide a beautiful workshop for
the study of language evolution. The languages of different islands clearly resem-
ble each other, and their differences can be measured precisely by the numbers
of words that differ between them, a measure that is closely analogous to the
molecular taxonomic measures. . . . Difference between languages, measured in
numbers of divergent words, can be plotted on a graph against distance between
islands, measured in miles, and it turns out that the points on the graph fall on a
curve whose precise mathematical shape tells us something about rates of diffu-
sion from island to island. Words travelled by canoe, island-hopping at intervals
proportional to the degree of remoteness of the islands concerned. Within any
one island words change at a steady rate, in very much the same way as genes
occasionally mutate. Any island, if completely isolated, would exhibit some evo-
lutionary change in its language as time went by, and hence some divergence
from the languages of other islands. Islands that are near each other obviously
have a higher rate of word ﬂow between them, via canoe, than islands that are
far from each other. Their languages also have a more recent common ancestor
than the languages of islands that are far apart. These phenomena, which ex-
plain the observed pattern of resemblances between near and distant islands, are
closely analogous to the facts about ﬁnches on different islands of the Gal´apagos
Archipelago which originally inspired Charles Darwin. Genes island-hop in the
bodies of birds, just as words island-hop in canoes.
The mere fact that languages change over time is obviously not going
to be enough to convince us that language should be given the same
role in culture as DNA plays in biology, but here Dawkins notes an addi-
tional analogy. In biology it is possible to compare the same molecular
sequences as they occur in different animals, to see how different they
are: since each gene or protein has its own mutation rate, the molecular

144
The Selﬁsh Meme
data – that is, the number of differences – can (given certain assump-
tions) provide a measure of how long it is since the separate species had a
common ancestor. Dawkins points out the analogy between such molecu-
lar taxonomic measures for species and taxonomic measures of language
in terms of word differences.
There’s More to Language Than Words
There is, however, a potential weakness in this analogy. The reason why
molecular taxonomy is appropriate in biology, is that DNA is something
that all species have in common. The difference between the molecules
of separate species’ DNA is measured on the assumption that all of those
species have not only some but the same genetic medium in common.
Assuming that the analogy will work at all, then, it will certainly only work
for different cultures that use a language which is common to all with the
exception of a few words. Unfortunately, this is rarely the case. Although
language use is obviously something that all cultures have in common,
each individual language is not. It may be, therefore, that the differences
between cultures’ particular languages are so great as to render implau-
sible the hypothesis that words form the basis of memes.
Apart from anything else it would be wrong to assume, on the basis of
Dawkins’s example, that language differences can always be appropriately
measured by counting word differences. Although his example is very
speciﬁcally about languages that differ only in this respect, as soon as
broader cases are introduced (the difference between Latin and Italian,
for example) the assumption breaks down. To argue otherwise would be
a false extrapolation from the gene-meme analogy: although molecular
differences might provide an appropriate measure of species differences,
there is much more to take into consideration about languages than the
words in their vocabulary. The combinations and ordering of those words,
and the rules that govern them, are two signiﬁcant factors which spring
immediately to mind.2
Words and Their Meanings
Moreover, there seems often to be a worrying mismatch between the con-
tent and the linguistic expression of memes – a mismatch that appears, at
ﬁrst glance, to be incompatible with the suggestion that memetic content
might be realized in words. Not only is there a variation amongst lan-
guages between cultures, but even within one small country like England
there are different words for the same concept (think of interchangeable
pairs such as: lorry and wagon; sofa and settee; pudding and dessert), and

Memetic DNA
145
conversely the same word may have different meanings: terms such as
bank, run and leaves are polysemous in this way. There are other words
whose meaning, though ﬁxed for the moment, has altered over time:
an example is “artiﬁce”, which used to refer to craftsmanship but is now
more commonly used to refer to cleverness or even deception. There
are even words, known as contronyms, which are their own antonyms: an
example is “cleave”, which can mean both “adhere” and “separate”.
Closer inspection reveals that not all of these cases pose a problem
for the memes-as-words hypothesis. When it comes to interchangeable
words, for instance, there would be no difﬁculty in claiming that memes
sometimes have multiple realizations, giving rise to synonyms. Moreover,
synonyms surely present a problem for the claim that there is a meme for
every word, rather than for the hypothesis that there is a word for every
meme.
Nonetheless, this does not eliminate the problem of ambiguity, which
arises when a particular word has a variety of functions, depending on
its context. This must be a genuine difﬁculty for the memes-as-words hy-
pothesis, for it strongly implies that being a particular word does not ﬁx
the function and content of a meme. Of course we can use context to
determine which role a word is playing: although two memes can be real-
ized by the same word (e.g., bank), we should know which of the memes it
is realizing at any given time, by taking into account the context. Indeed,
it has been emphasized already that context is important to memes – but
any adequate memetic medium must enable the content of a meme to
be determined by the interaction between its underlying structure and
its environment, rather than being ﬁxed by its environment alone.
How Powerful Are Words?
Such a medium must also enable a meme to exercise control over the
phenotypic effects that it represents – and words alone cannot do this. The
mere fact that I understand a word is not enough to ensure the execution
of the associated meme’s phenotypic effects. The word “suicide” provides
a clear illustration of this point (see Chapter 13 for further discussion of
the suicide meme). A person may perfectly understand the meaning of
that word, and may even be going through an extremely bad patch in his
life, but these two facts in themselves would not necessarily be enough for
him to think of killing himself. In other words, despite his understanding
of the word, and despite the fact that the external circumstances are
apparently conducive to his participating in the action described by the
word, still he may not even consider so doing.

146
The Selﬁsh Meme
Of course, this emphasizes once more the importance of memetic
context: he may not feel suicidal because of the nature of what he has
accepted into the rest of his meme complex (e.g., he may believe the
statements that things normally do get better as time goes on; that sui-
cide leads inevitably to eternal separation from God; that even a bad life
is better than death, etc.). Nonetheless, it also emphasizes the fact that
the exercise of a meme’s phenotypic effects depends on more than the
possession in one’s lexicon of a given word or phrase. In order for a
meme to be able to exert its executive effect, its possessor must not only
understand the concept involved: she must also accept that concept into
her mental assembly. I understand perfectly well the concept of the tooth
fairy, but I do not subscribe to the belief in such a being, which thus plays
no executive role in the control of my behaviour.
Memes as Words – or Language?
The freedom that languages exercise in linking words to concepts; the
part that human minds play in accepting or rejecting the concepts that
words do carry; and the fact that words are not the sole constituents of
natural language, all contribute to the rejection of the hypothesis that
memes are realized in words per se.
It is possible to see the root of all these problems in the question
what is a word? Is it a spelled unit or a phonetic unit? Is it individuated
by lexical entry (so that at the deepest level there are no polysemous
words – though still there would be natural language ambiguities)? Are
there any words at all in linguistic systems such as sign language? What of
other representational systems? Would the hypothesis that words realize
memes help at all to resolve the issue whether memes are internally or
externally realized? Questions such as these reveal the fact that words are
too restrictive for the role of memetic realizers: we need to look further
abroad and take into account the whole linguistic system of which they
are elements.
Thus language may yet play a signiﬁcant role in the realization of
memes. Vocabulary is not the only signiﬁcant factor for native speakers
of any given language: they rely also on the internalisation of sets of
standard formation rules. If we accept the importance of such rules (and
can ignore for the moment the debate about their content), then instead
of concentrating on particular natural languages and their vocabulary
perhaps our search for the memetic medium should lead us next to
examine language use at a more general level.

Memetic DNA
147
Language: A Representational System
In fact, I would go further and argue that language itself is too narrow
to play the role of cultural DNA. Rather, the answer lies in our general
capacity for representation, of which language is merely a particular (if ubiq-
uitous) example. Natural languages are powerful systems of representa-
tion, but so are systems of musical notation, of mathematical symbolism,
of sign languages,* of reading methods for the blind, and of secret cod-
ing. According to my theory, such systems can be seen as the languages
of different cultures: of the musical and mathematical cultures, and so
on. Whichever of these systems has the necessary properties (of realizing
information, transmitting it and producing effects from it), that system is
capable of realizing memes. The memetic analogue of DNA is, then, the
capacity to represent in the stipulated way, or the use of such a system of
representation. That is what underlies all cultures, and that is what this
chapter sets out to explore.
The danger with this reply to the question of how memes are realized,
is that it may seem to be too vague. Of course cultural change should
be expected to have its basis in the aspects of culture that have some
measure of permanence, and systems of representation are just those
things that do provide durability for ideas, designs and tunes. But what is
there in the suggestion that RSs are crucial to cultural evolution to imply
that there also exists a distinct unit of cultural inheritance and selection,
with characteristics such that it deserves to be compared to a gene? In
order to answer this question it will be helpful ﬁrst to discuss the nature
of any RS that purports to fulﬁl this vital role in culture, before turning
to the issue of whether its constitutive representations may realistically
be characterized as “memes”.
Representational Systems
Terence Deacon3 draws our attention to three different ways of repre-
senting information. We can use icons, which resemble that which they
represent: a road sign depicting a man digging or a car skidding is iconic,
as is the picture of a printer on my word processor’s toolbar. We can use
indices, which are correlated with that which they represent: the position
of the fuel gauge indicates the level of diesel in my car. Finally, we can use
symbols, which represent via social convention or established code, rather
than by resembling or being straightforwardly correlated with that which
* In fact it can be argued that at least some of these are natural languages.

148
The Selﬁsh Meme
they represent. An ichthus (ﬁsh) on someone’s car symbolizes his Chris-
tian faith, and a treble clef symbolizes a particular convention about which
notes are represented at each position on the musical stave.
The special feature of symbols, as opposed to icons or indices, is that
their content depends on relationships between themselves, not just on
correlations between each one and an object or idea. Because there
is no straightforward relationship between a symbol and that which it
represents, a symbolic representation depends for its meaning – hence
for its effects – on its context within an overall RS. Only in virtue of
their context within that system will changes in the sequence or make-
up of words within a language, or in the order or position of notes on
a stave, change the meaning and hence the phenotypic effects of the
language or music involved. A series of black dots arranged on ﬁve par-
allel lines does not have any intrinsic meaning, and the fact that one of
those dots is moved from the bottom to the top line has no meaning –
hence no effect – outside the context of a particular system of musical
notation.
There are two important consequences of this interdependence be-
tween symbols. The ﬁrst is that a “logically complete system of relation-
ships among the set of symbol tokens must be learned before the symbolic
association between any one symbol token and an object can even be
determined”.4 In other words, it is impossible to work out what a symbol
represents, if you do not already understand the RS of which that symbol
is part. The second consequence is that symbols can represent each other,
as well as things in the world. For instance, the phrase “the ﬁfth letter of
the alphabet” is a string of symbols representing another symbol, “e”. It
is, in other words, a meta-representation.
Back to Genes
At ﬁrst glance, when we consider cultural RSs like language or musical
notation, it seems implausible that they should be analogous to DNA. One
of the key features of DNA is that it is common to all species, but there
are many different systems of representation in use in human cultures.
How, then, can the two be examples of the same phenomenon?
The key to the answer to this question lies in the fact that, in the bio-
logical world, when an organism is created it has already been endowed
with all the genes that it is ever going to have. Its parents have, in ef-
fect, given it representations of particular pieces of information, which
will then have their characteristic effects on its ontogeny. In other words,
organisms are born with a set of representations: an RS.

Memetic DNA
149
The meaning of each genetic representation is determined by the
sequence and relative proportions of the four nucleotides which are
the building blocks of DNA. None of the nucleotides has any intrinsic
“meaning”: indeed, three of them may also be found in RNA (ribonu-
cleic acid) – a different system again – and ultimately, of course, all are
composed of elements that may be found all over the physical world. The
meaning of any particular sequence of nucleotides, or of any mutation in
that sequence, is absolutely dependent on its context within the genetic
system. Only mutations that occur within the limits of the DNA system
(the inversion of a piece of chromosome, perhaps) will be meaningful
and effective within that system. Were it possible for a mutation to oc-
cur which was meaningless within that system, then it would not be able
to exercise any external control and might even result in the system’s
destruction.
Thus it is obvious that within organisms, which are endowed at con-
ception with a particular RS, only the content of that RS can evolve. The
same information will always be represented in the same way – within the
given system. The copying method that is employed by the genetic system
entails that genes need structural replication in order to replicate at all.
Memetic RSs
Minds are not created in this way: a mind can go on acquiring new infor-
mation all through its life. The reason why it can do this, on my theory,
is that it has the ability to represent: to acquire and then transmit ideas.
A neonate organism possesses a set of (genetic) representations, but a
neonate mind has the ability to acquire them. We are all susceptible to
cultural input and, in addition to our ability to abstract information from
the environment, given enough stimulus we are also able to learn how to
represent that information in a powerful and replicable form.
Deacon5 supports this view of humans as a symbolic species, and won-
ders what it might be about the mind of a child which opens the early
learning window that is so crucial for language acquisition. His rather
surprising response is to point up young children’s poverty of short-term
memory and concentration. He argues that this may actually be an ad-
vantage when it comes to language acquisition: it gives infants a head
start by enabling them to see the structural skeleton of language’s rules,
before ﬂeshing it out with details of individual word meanings. I would
add that this coincides with what is needed to decode any RS: one needs
ﬁrst to look for the structural features beyond the details, before adding
the details and complexity later. (Though notice that this obviously only

150
The Selﬁsh Meme
works for creatures that can represent: poverty of memory and concen-
tration clearly doesn’t provide a language-learning advantage to guinea
pigs or goldﬁsh.)
Extending Deacon’s idea to other areas of learning – since my own
claim is that our representational abilities are not limited to language
alone – it is interesting to note some of the nonlinguistic evidence in
its favour. The claim that human infants focus on overarching structures
rather than on ﬁne details is supported by observations in nonlanguage
areas such as the development of perceptual skills. From a very early age –
often prelanguage – children can recognize a whole range of different ob-
jects as falling within one category. Having grasped the concept of “cat”,
for example (and even if they cannot yet say the word, indicating their
recognition, instead, with a consistent noise like “iaow”), they will be able
to pick out not only real cats but also soft toys, cartoons and the most
sketchy of drawings or stylized ornaments as cats. Clearly their recog-
nition revolves around certain key features which they have extracted
from that type of object, rather than the ﬁner details of each token cat,
which often differ widely (a smooth marble ornament vs. furry soft toy,
etc.). As Deacon puts it, we humans “cannot help but see the world in
symbolic categorical terms, dividing it up according to opposed features,
and organizing our lives according to themes and narratives”.6
Given this innate capacity to represent – to abstract information from
the environment and realize it in a different, more concrete form – a
mind can develop. Its “ontogeny” will not be the result of an interaction
between a given set of representations and the environment but rather a
continuous process of interaction between its innate learning capacities
and an environment that is ﬁlled with myriad representations, as well as
much that can be represented.
Different RSs
Since the mind has this general ability to represent information (rather
than just a particular set of representations), it is not restricted to the
use of any one RS. Because it is able to abstract information not only
from the environment but also from the representational form in which
it is encountered, the mind can adopt new systems of representation as
well as new representations within an existing system. This means that
evolution can take place in both the content and the system of mental
representations, making it not at all surprising that many different RSs
have developed in culture, whereas only one is prevalent in biology. It is
merely a consequence of the different natures of the two spheres.

Memetic DNA
151
What will determine the “choice” of RS for a particular area of culture?
Clearly, as in any area of evolution, whatever develops will be limited by
what went before, as well as by external context. There is an element of
arbitrariness about the development of any area of evolution. In biology,
for instance, there is an arbitrariness about the universal code that is used
for constructing organisms from DNA: “there is no functional reason why
a given codon should code for one amino acid rather than another.”7
(Indeed, this fact increases the plausibility of the hypothesis that all life
has a common ancestor, since if the code were the only one functionally
possible, then it would be used universally even if the organic world were
not all interrelated.) We should not be surprised, then, to see in the variety
amongst cultural RSs an element of arbitrariness rather than functional
adaptation.
As has been emphasized previously, evolutionary theories provide only
relative information, so we should not expect memetics to be able to tell
us whether the RS used in any particular cultural area is the best for
the job in absolute terms. Indeed, in some cases (such as the notation
for differential calculus in mathematics) there may even be more than
one RS available for the same job. Nonetheless we should expect each,
in its speciﬁc area of culture, to display superiority over those that are
used in other areas – and this is indeed apparent. The natural language
RSs that have evolved for our usual, everyday needs, although facilitating
simple, urgent communication (“Stop!”), also enable us to develop and
communicate very complex thoughts. Alternatively, if the desired effect
is musical then we use a much more concise RS, which can display all
the information about a note’s length, pitch and dynamics in one sym-
bol – and this certainly serves its purpose better than natural languages
would. The same can be said for RSs such as engineering drawings and
mathematical symbolism.
Notice, too, that care needs to be taken in discussing the evolution
of the various RSs, not to imply that we started with a desired effect and
worked towards the best RS for its production. Rather, just as cultural
content has evolved over the years, so has the form in which it is realized.
Although in the case of biology it is only content that has evolved, and not
the system in which it is realized, this does not show that biological and
cultural RSs are not really instances of the same phenomenon. For both,
what matters is that the information is realized in a form that facilitates its
preservation, replication and empowerment: an appropriate RS. For nei-
ther does it matter which RS is involved, so long as it has the right prop-
erties. Despite their diversity, and the consequent need for translation

152
The Selﬁsh Meme
between them, systems of representation like language, musical notation
and numerals are the cultural equivalent of biology’s RS, DNA.
Meta-Representation Again
The previous section attributed the evolution of different cultural RSs
to the human ability to represent (as opposed to being endowed with
a particular limited set of representations) – but of course this is not
enough in itself. Plenty of species can do that, and there are few to which
we should want to attribute any meaningful amount of culture. In reality,
we are able to learn and develop new RSs, to compare them with each
other and even to choose which we use on any given occasion, because we
can meta-represent. It is this which enables us to abstract information from
the representational form in which we encounter it. It is this, too, which
accounts for the ways in which our noninnate concepts have increased so
furiously, and our thought processes acquired such powerful machinery.
The Signiﬁcance of Non-Linguistic RSs
As a starting point, it is clear that the very existence of different cultural
RSs is enough to give a powerful boost to the numbers of noninnate
concepts that are available to humans. Consider, for instance, the fact
that nobody could have had a thought about the map of Spain until
systems of mapmaking had been developed. As another example, before
the thirteenth century, when musical notation of the form used today
began to be developed, nobody could have had a thought about a stave,
let alone have composed music using it. Such particular examples could
more generally be expressed as the fact that nobody can have a thought
about a component of an RS until the RS itself has been developed. This is
because outside the context of a given system of representation the marks
or conventions used within that system are meaningless: they carry no
intrinsic meaning, but gain their signiﬁcance from their position within
the system. Thus the development of a new RS brings with it the potential
for the emergence of a whole host of related concepts.
Another signiﬁcant fact about the various cultural RSs is that they
make it possible to represent the same information in different ways. At
the most basic level, it is of course feasible to do so within a given RS:
within the English language, for instance, we can use different words,
such as “pair” and “brace”, to represent the same idea. There is more
scope, however, to represent the same information in different ways, if you
begin to employ a variety of RSs: for example, “two” (English language),

Memetic DNA
153
“II” (Roman numeral), “2” (base 10), “10” (base 2). It is obvious that
language holds the greatest potential for alternative ways of representing
other RSs’ representations – but it is important not to allow this fact to
obscure the importance of those alternative, specialized RSs.
As an illustration, consider the expression “o’clock”. Until the late
seventeenth century, that term referred “to the sounding of the bell at
the hour – all the Germanic, Latinate and Celtic cognates of English
clock mean ‘bell’”.8 Why? Because before that time, clocks were not in
common use – and until they were, there was no RS that involved a round
clock face with two hands representing the time of day. So not until the
late seventeenth century could someone have had a thought about this
symbol: . As soon as that thought was available, it was also expressible
in a natural language: in the case of English, it would be expressed as
“three o’clock”, where “of the clock” now referred to a clock rather than
to a bell’s chime. Nonetheless, without the clock-face RS the linguistic
version would have no meaning at all, as demonstrated by the fact that
a French speaker could not acquire the “three o’clock” concept, even if
I translated it into his language, unless he ﬁrst acquired the appropriate
RS. The words “il est trois heures” would have no meaning to him unless
he understood the horological system upon which that phrase depends
for its context.
The problem is that the ubiquitous use of language can make it harder
to see the signiﬁcance of the alternative, specialized RSs on which many
of our concepts depend for their coherence. Natural languages have such
a huge potential for representing other RSs’ representations that they are
capable of expressing almost every concept that originates in a specialist
RS – and when we express such concepts linguistically, it can mask their
dependence on the original RS. This in turn obscures the fact that it was
the development of that RS which facilitated our capacity for those sorts
of concept in the ﬁrst place.
Yet this ability to move between RSs – to contemplate and select the way
in which information is represented – is hugely important for memes. As is
shown in the following section, it is only once we take into account nonlin-
guistic RSs like systems of mathematical or musical notation, the conven-
tions of map making or horology, that the power of meta-representation
really begins to emerge.
Comparing RSs
It is of course possible to meta-represent within natural languages: “Why
should people ﬁnd it so hard to spell ‘Distin’?” is a sentence in which a

154
The Selﬁsh Meme
question is asked, in English, about an English word. (Indeed in talking
about that English sentence I am meta-representing it, also in English.)
Not only this, but language is also the RS with the most potential for
meta-representation: some systems, like musical notation, have limited
potential for this level of representation, whereas in natural languages
it is as easy to express a meta-representation (“the ﬁrst letter of my sur-
name”) as a representation (“D”). The ubiquity of natural language is no
accident; it is without a doubt the most powerful and adaptable RS that
we humans have developed. My point is simply that it is when we begin
to see meta-representation in the light of alternative, nonlinguistic RSs
that its signiﬁcance is most clearly illuminated.
One of the key features of meta-representational cognition is that it
enables us to think about how we are representing a given piece of infor-
mation. Indeed, it is often the contrast with an alternative system which
will enable someone to see the crucial feature of his existing RS. In math-
ematics, for example, there is more than one way to represent a number:
our traditional decimal system is one way, and the binary system that com-
puters use is another. It is probable, however, that most people will not
step outside our system and understand that place value is more impor-
tant than the form of the individual numerals (each of which represents
how many 1s, 10s, 100s, 1000s, and so on, are in a given number), until
they are shown an alternative such as binary (where each numeral tells us
how many 1s, 2s, 4s, 8s, etc., make up a number). Such examples demon-
strate that we develop not only the content of our thoughts but also our
capacity for thought when we begin to compare different RSs with each
other: to meta-represent. Just as the previous chapter suggested, it is the
human capacity for meta-representation which is the key to the evolution
of our cognition and creativity.
Given this capacity, it is unsurprising that a variety of cultural RSs have
emerged. Once you can think about how information is represented, it is
inevitable that you should begin to develop alternative systems, seeking
RSs that are more suited to whichever sort of information is involved.
At the heart of human culture lies our ability to meta-represent. The
cultural equivalent of DNA – that which all cultures have in common,
which enables them to evolve and even to replicate – is not one, but a
whole range of systems of representation.
Robert Aunger
I should note that Robert Aunger would strongly disagree with this claim.
In his book The Electric Meme,9 Aunger argues that replication must always

Memetic DNA
155
be speciﬁc to one kind of physical substrate, since its aim is “to make sure
only one kind of product comes out at the end”.10 He denies that “repli-
cators can migrate from one form to another without consequence,”11
pointing out that the inﬂuences which a replicator can wield are highly
dependent on the medium in which it is realized. Information, on this
view, cannot pass unscathed between media such as books, brains, audio-
tapes and computers: true replication involves “structural equivalence”12
in the inﬂuences exerted by source and copy.
Clearly there is a fundamental discrepancy between Aunger’s view of
memes and mine: he believes that memetics would be scuppered by the
claim that memes can successfully be represented in a variety of different
media, whereas I would claim that the development of different RSs has
been crucial to the evolution of human culture. Now, of course “repre-
sentational system” cannot simplistically be equated with “medium”. The
same RS can be used in a variety of media (it is possible to use the En-
glish language in thought, writing, typing and speech), and conversely
the same medium can realize a variety of RSs (it is possible to use pen
and paper as a medium for the Hebrew language, for mathematical no-
tation and for engineering drawings). Yet similar lines of reasoning can
nonetheless be applied to both media and RSs, since it will often be the
case that a change in one involves a change in the other. Thus Aunger’s
attack on the view that memes can be realized in a variety of media is
also an attack on my sort of memetics – and the important points that he
highlights in the course of this attack are as signiﬁcant for my version of
meme theory as for anyone else’s.
Firstly, Aunger is right to emphasize that the medium in which informa-
tion is stored has “a tremendous impact on the dynamics of evolution”,13
although he goes too far, I would argue, in inferring that replication must
therefore always be “speciﬁc to one substrate”.14 The story of Little Red
Riding Hood is a popular example amongst memeticists, and I do hold
the line, contra Aunger, that it is possible to copy this tale from spoken
French to written English, then to scan it from paper into a computer’s
memory, copy it thence to a CD, and so on. I would maintain that each
of these versions really does represent the same information – but that
the potential effects of that information will be facilitated or curtailed by
the medium in which it is realized at any given time. It has already been
noted that context will affect the results that stem from any replicator,
and it is obvious that a crucial part of its context will be the medium in
which the replicator is realized.
What does this mean in practice? At an obvious level, the spoken ver-
sion would hold the attention of a monolingual French child in the way

156
The Selﬁsh Meme
that the written English could not; but more fundamentally than this,
each version plays a nontransferable role in a particular network of causal
links. Aunger speciﬁes that replicators should not be “deﬁned as similar”
unless they do “the same kind of job in the same kind of context” as
each other,15 and clearly the different versions of the tale do not fulﬁl his
condition, since the contexts vary so widely. As a result of the medium in
which it is realized, each version is preserved, accessed and experienced
in quite different ways from all the others, and each exerts a unique
range of inﬂuences. Yet I would challenge Aunger’s assertion that this
proves that each is not really a copy of the same information as all the
others – that the same information cannot be realized in different me-
dia. The content of a meme is at least partly deﬁned by the phenotypic
effects that it controls, but it must never be forgotten that its content is
independent of those effects: the fact that they may be implemented to
different extents in different media does not mean that the content itself
has been lost. Aunger is right to emphasize the importance of medium
for evolutionary dynamics, but wrong to infer that replication cannot,
therefore, take place across media. Changes in memetic medium are not
insigniﬁcant – but neither are they impossible.
The second important point to come out of Aunger’s analysis is that
choice of medium affects not only the potential inﬂuence of memetic
information but also its content. In maintaining that it is possible to pre-
serve the same information in a variety of media, I do not wish to turn a
blind eye to the difﬁculties that are intrinsic in such a process. Choice of
medium will inevitably limit information’s content, just as choice of RS
does: there is a vast difference in quality of sound between audiotape, CD
and vinyl music recordings, and the English adopt words like “schaden-
freude” precisely because there is no equivalent in our language.
This means that information may well be lost in the course of changes
between media, just as it may be in translations between RSs. What it
does not mean, however, is that the essential elements of that informa-
tion may not legitimately be considered to have been realized across the
range of media and RSs in which it has been represented. Just because a
CD represents an analogue sound wave via a stream of digital numbers
(different RS and different medium), we do not say that it is not really
a recording of the music which those numbers represent – although we
may well say that it does not sound as good as it might have done, had it
been recorded on a good vinyl record.
Nor does it mean that information will necessarily be lost in the course of
media change. If I want a bit of technical detail to ﬂesh out a philosophical
example, then I might e-mail a question to my husband, in the hope that

Memetic DNA
157
he may mull it over in his lunch hour at work. His response will ﬁrst be
formulated in his brain, thence transferred to type on a computer screen
before being transmitted electronically to my own computer, possibly
printed out on to paper, and ﬁnally read by me. If he has expressed him-
self clearly enough, then the information that is represented in my brain
at the end of this process will be the same information as was represented in
his at the beginning of it. The ways in which I can use that information, my
understanding and application of it will all serve to verify this fact: it will
be identical to his in content and effects, unaltered by its journey through
brain, computer and page. To put it even more simply: Calum remem-
bers the ﬁrst line of a poem; Calum writes it down; Luke reads it and
memorizes it; Luke writes it down. . . . In what sense is the replication
in this sequence undermined by the media changes that it involves?
Nonetheless, it would be foolish to deny the signiﬁcance of medium for
representation – and indeed this has been highlighted by my hypothesis
that in different areas of culture different RSs have evolved, the better
to facilitate representation in each arena. I would argue that the same is
true of the development of different cultural media. In both cases, the
development of a range of representational options supports the view that
the choice amongst them is signiﬁcant, and that movement between them
may be risky. Nobody would deny this. What it does not support, however,
is the view that choice amongst them is illusory and movement between
them impossible. The ultimate test, of course, would be for the ﬁnal move
in any chain of replication to be a return to the original medium: is the
resultant representation identical to the original? If so, then it seems to
me unproblematic to call the process by which that point was reached
“replication”.
Thus I can still claim that memes can be preserved and copied in a
variety of cultural RSs (as well as across a range of different media). What
matters for evolution is that the RSs have the right properties. Amongst
those properties is one that is highly signiﬁcant but has not yet been
examined in any close detail, which is that the representations within
each must be particulate. This is crucial, because if not, then individual
cultural representations cannot realistically be characterized as “memes”.
Particulate Memes
It was the great achievement of Gregor Mendel to show that hereditary units can
be treated in practice as indivisible and independent particles. Nowadays we know
that this is a little too simple. Even a cistron is occasionally divisible and any two
genes on the same chromosome are not wholly independent. What I [Dawkins]
have done is to deﬁne a gene as a unit which, to a high degree, approaches the ideal

158
The Selﬁsh Meme
of indivisible particulateness. A gene is not indivisible, but it is seldom divided. It
is either deﬁnitely present or deﬁnitely absent in the body of any given individual.
A gene travels intact from grandparent to grandchild, passing straight through
the intermediate generation without being merged with other genes. If genes
continually blended with each other, natural selection as we now understand it
would be impossible.16
Is there any good reason for supposing that cultural representations,
too, might be distinct units of selection, playing the role in culture that
genes fulﬁl in nature? Fortunately for memetics, the answer is “yes”. In
fact, there is just the same evidence in favour of this supposition as Mendel
had for conjecturing the existence of genes: observation of their pheno-
typic effects.
Mendel’s famous experiments on peas demonstrated that the char-
acteristics inherited by one generation from the previous one are not
blended with each other but may be regarded as indivisible. As Dawkins
points out, any given gene is either present or absent in any given or-
ganism. There is nothing in between. The evidence for its presence or
absence may be provided, today, by molecular analysis. Alternatively, it
may be demonstrated as it originally was by Mendel, by observing the pres-
ence or absence of its phenotypic effects (though this observation may
take several generations, e.g., in the case of recessive genes). Although
knowledge of the brain is not yet advanced enough for neural exami-
nation to reveal the presence or absence of any given idea or skill, the
external observation of its effects is an alternative that is certainly available
in culture, as it was in biology. What does such observation tell us?
It tells us that there do indeed exist units of information whose “all
or nothing” presence or absence may be discerned in the mind of an
individual. This is not to say that a particular skill or idea will be manifest in
exactly the same way in everyone who possesses it, for memes’ phenotypic
effects, like genes’, will vary according to their environment and context.
It is rather to claim that there exists, as Dawkins puts it, “an essential
basis of the idea which is held in common by all brains that understand
[it] . . . The differences in the ways that people represent [it] . . . are then,
by deﬁnition, not part of [it].”17
What Does Common Sense Dictate?
Yet this discreteness has been challenged by many of memetics’ critics.
Maurice Bloch, for example, has asserted that “In reality, culture simply
does not normally divide up into naturally discernible bits.”18 He says
that it is almost impossible to specify what elements form each meme,

Memetic DNA
159
and that it does not help to introduce the concept of meme complexes,
because memeticists are “no more able to establish boundaries around
these memeplexes than around the constituent memes.”
In opposition to this claim, I would argue that “in reality” we can and
do talk about people having skill x, understanding theory y or knowing
tune z, meaning by this that they are in possession of a particular amount
and type of information, without which they would not have x, y or z. They
are able to pass on x, y or z to other people, and to do so in such a way
that, even if the recipient manifests it differently, she too will have a copy
of x, y or z that she can pass on to others. In each recipient it runs the risk
of embellishment, corruption or diminishment, but this is no different
from the risk that each gene runs of mutation during replication. The
important point, though, is that we do not acquire information and skills
in an indistinct, amalgamated form: we acquire discernibly separate units
that are individually available for discrete retransmission.
Perhaps the best example of this process in action can be seen in
the existence of dictionaries, whose very purpose is to collate and store
concepts’ content in a form that displays their essential basis. By deﬁning
a concept, the dictionary tells us what information we will know once
we have acquired it; it also allows us to see the mistakes, omissions and
augmentations in our own versions of it; and as dictionaries are updated
we can trace the concept’s evolution, when some of the variations come
into dominance. Of course dictionaries are not the only stores of memes:
they merely provide a helpful illustration of the discreteness of cultural
representations.
Information and Actions
But Bloch has a more theoretical reason why this discreteness is implausi-
ble. He says that cultural knowledge is largely “inseparable from action”:19
the information that it carries is only partly “intellectual in character”,
and should not be characterized as a “library of propositions” which can
be transmitted in discrete units.
Fortunately, as with many of the criticisms that have been considered
throughout this book, it is possible both to accept this viewpoint and to
continue to support meme theory. From the perspective of memetics,
it is unsurprising that cultural information should be inseparable from
action, for an integral part of memes is their executive role in produc-
ing phenotypic effects. Nevertheless, the information itself can still be
transmitted in discrete chunks, even if there is some superﬁcial blending
between the actions that stem from it.

160
The Selﬁsh Meme
For example, someone who is able both to read music and to play
the violin may appear at ﬁrst sight to have blended these skills into one
complex action when she does both simultaneously. It becomes clear
that she has a set of separate, discrete skills, however, when she moves
between different contexts: in church she can follow the music when
singing hymns (even if her voice has not been trained to produce the
notes accurately); given a mandolin she could both read the music and
match the information to the appropriate positions of her ﬁngers on the
instrument (although her right hand would struggle); given a viola she
could both read the music and handle the instrument and bow appropri-
ately (although her left hand would struggle). Thus, although her skills
are apparently blended when she plays the violin, still they can be used
separately in other contexts. The close links between information and
action need not, then, present a problem for the thesis that information
is transmitted in discrete units.
Translation Versus Transformation
Yet Bloch wields a further argument against the particulateness of memes.
Echoing Sperber’s claim that straightforward copying cannot account for
meme transmission, Bloch contends that any novel trait which an indi-
vidual accepts must inevitably be modiﬁed so as to be coherent within
its new context. In the transmission of culture, “Nothing is passed on;
rather, a communication link is established which then requires an act
of re-creation on the part of the receiver.”20 Copying cultural traits relies
on “active psychological processes occurring in people”21 – not “trans-
mission between passive receptors” – and the resultant act of re-creation
totally transforms the “original stimulus and integrates it into a different
mental universe so that it loses its identity and speciﬁcity”. How, whilst un-
dergoing such a process of transformation, could memes maintain their
particulateness?
There are two separate issues here. First there is the question how
active our minds are when engaged in copying and retaining cultural
information – an issue which has been raised several times already, and
which will be addressed fully in Chapter 12. Secondly, there is the claim
that information is so altered by the re-creation that is inevitably involved
in cultural transmission that it cannot realistically be characterized as
unitary – and there are several reasons why this view is unnecessarily
pessimistic.
One reason is that, “contrary to what we were all taught in high school,
genes are nothing like beads on a string. So both memes and genes are

Memetic DNA
161
likely to have comparably complex structures.”22 Against this background
it is unsurprising to ﬁnd that memes sometimes appear to have blended –
just as it would be easy to suppose, fallaciously, that the skin colour of a
mixed-race child is the result of genetic blending. Just as in the child’s
case appearances are deceiving, so the appearance of memetic blending
proves nothing very much. Human communication may involve some
translation and interpretation, but this does not entail that it inevitably
involves radical transformation.
As noted above in the example of the violinist, context is of course
important in determining the behaviour that will result from a particular
skill or piece of knowledge, and in some contexts it will not be possible
for any results to be effected (e.g., when the violinist is driving her car).
Bloch has pointed up the additional fact that context is just as important
for transmission as it is for the production of behavioural effects, and no
one could disagree with that: all good teachers know that information is
best communicated when related to pupils’ existing knowledge and life
experiences. Putting this another way, information must be represented
in a common language before it can be transmitted. But none of this
entails that translation must always involve transformation. Indeed the
very point of a good translation is to represent the same information
in a different system. Similarly, its integration into a “different mental
universe” will not inevitably alter the essential character of a portion of
information. There is a real sense in which the violinist has the same
skill as her violin teacher, despite their very different personalities and
backgrounds. There is a real sense, too, in which memes can defensibly
be regarded as discrete units of cultural selection.
Chomsky’s Language Acquisition Device
My contention remains, then, that cultural evolution is based in a vari-
ety of representational systems. I have answered the objections that the
elements of cultural RSs are not particulate, and that replication can-
not possibly take place across media boundaries, but a pressing concern
remains: is language really no more signiﬁcant than any other cultural RS?
The hugely inﬂuential American linguist Noam Chomsky has famously
put forward the theory that language – or at least a “language acquisition
device” – is innate: it is uniquely signiﬁcant for humans, and has evolved
along certain rigidly deﬁned pathways. Is Chomsky’s picture of human
mental development an obstacle to my intention to bring a huge variety
of RSs under the umbrella of “cultural languages”?

162
The Selﬁsh Meme
The Uniformity of Language
Chomsky’s thesis is based on observations of the ways in which children
acquire language, and in particular on the fact that infants within a lin-
guistic community are not explicitly taught language, but pick it up from
an extremely impoverished input whose content will vary enormously
between individuals. Despite the apparent inadequacy of the input, chil-
dren acquire intricate linguistic abilities with remarkable speed. Despite
the variation amongst the input, their resulting language is (in all im-
portant respects) uniform. The only plausible explanation of these facts,
say Chomsky and his followers, is that our early language acquisition is
instinctive.
This innateness explains not only the speed and ease with which we
pick up language, but also the uniformity: “Scope and limits are inti-
mately related . . . the fact that there are many imaginable languages that
we could not develop through the exercise of the language faculty is a
consequence of the innate endowment that made it possible for us to
attain our knowledge of English or some other human language.”23 In
other words, given limited English input, our language instinct will en-
able us easily and swiftly to produce English output, and only English
output. In providing us with a way to systematize the input, it also limits
us to that way.
A further consequence of our being so limited is that there will be no
fundamental differences between any of the natural languages. Experi-
ential differences will of course lead to minor variations, but it is only a
matter of degree between the cross-dialect and the cross-lingual differ-
ences, not a matter of type. This is comparable to the differences that
will arise in your genetically determined body size, depending on the
nutrition and exercise you receive as an infant.
Nonuniform Nonlinguistic RSs
Given this claim about the essential similarity between all natural lan-
guages, how much of a problem is raised by Chomsky’s language instinct
hypothesis for my insistence that we take into account non-linguistic RSs?
It must raise some difﬁculties, for clearly there are fundamental differ-
ences between culture’s nonlinguistic RSs, never mind between them
and language.
The different numerical systems within mathematics again provide a
good example here. Consider, for instance, the medieval Arabs’ introduc-
tion of zero into the counting system: nobody could deny that this was a
signiﬁcant departure from all that had gone before; indeed zero has been

Memetic DNA
163
described as “possibly the most signiﬁcant mathematical ﬁgure of all”.24
Moreover, in the Arabic counting system the forms of the individual car-
dinals (0, 1, 2, . . . ) are less important than the place-value convention on
which it is based – a convention which in itself is, without doubt, a genuine
novelty in the method of representing numbers. It enables ten symbols
to be used to represent an inﬁnity of numbers, and is the reason why
the Arabic system is so much more convenient than Roman numerals –
an unwieldy system that depended on the form of the numerals involved
(I, V, X, . . . ) and the rules for replacing one with another. The place-value
convention really comes into its own in the conversion between different
bases, to which I have alluded, which relies on the fundamental concept
that successive digits represent successive powers of the base. In the bi-
nary system, for instance, there are only two alternative symbols (1 and
0), and their position is all that determines which number is represented
by a combination of them.
It is clear, then, that there are genuine differences between RSs, even
when they are used to represent the same cultural (in this case mathe-
matical) information: the Roman and Arabic systems differ not only in
the most obvious surface features (the number eight looks like this – 8 –
in one system, and like this – VIII – in the other), but also in their most
fundamental, underlying conventions. If we are permitted to characterize
these nonverbal RSs as cultural “languages”, then how does this square
with Chomsky’s theory? He says that “the human language faculty will
never grow anything but one of the possible human languages, a nar-
rowly constrained set,” where the constraints are due to that faculty’s
“roughly comparable rule systems of highly speciﬁc structure”.25 Yet if we
take into account the many nonverbal cultural RSs which play varyingly
important parts in our communicative and cognitive lives, then we can
see a vast diversity of rules and conventions displayed across them.
The Meta-Representation Device
As I have emphasized, I do not wish to underplay the signiﬁcance of
language. Chomsky’s language instinct is now widely (though not univer-
sally) accepted, and brings a host of linguistic facts under one explanatory
umbrella. What I should like to do, then, is not to reject Chomsky’s the-
ory but to broaden its implications. In summary, my own hypothesis is
that natural language is so important for humans that an “instinct” for
its development did indeed evolve – but that with that instinct came an
equally signiﬁcant ability: the capacity for meta-representation. The irony

164
The Selﬁsh Meme
here was that, although this capacity had evolved as part of the language
instinct, its emergence freed humans to represent in all sorts of non-
linguistic ways, thereby to weave a complex cultural web of mental and
material artefacts.
Clearly, this hypothesis needs to be unpacked and defended. As a start-
ing point, I should reemphasize the fact that I am persuaded by Chomsky
both that there is an innate element to language acquisition and about
the primacy of language amongst human RSs. Nor would I wish to chal-
lenge his claim that natural languages are constrained by a universal
grammar, “the biological endowment that determines the general struc-
ture of the language faculty”.26 Human infants have an innate and highly
speciﬁc “rule system”, which gives them advance knowledge of the sort of
grammar that will govern whichever language they experience. This has
the double advantage of boosting children’s ease and speed of language
acquisition, and of ensuring that human languages develop along lines
that are universally comprehensible.
So how can the many nonlinguistic cultural RSs – whose rules and
structures are so very diverse – spring from the same faculty that gives
us natural language? The answer lies in the fact that there is more to
language acquisition than the universal grammar. In order to learn a
language humans need a whole range of mental abilities. We must be able,
for a start, to represent: to abstract information from the environment,
and to realize that information in a manipulable, memorable and widely
applicable format. We also need to be able to abstract information from
an incoming RS, so that exposure to a sample of representations enables
us to acquire the RS of which they are tokens. In order to do this, we need
to be able to compare our representations and abstract their common
features: to meta-represent. Clearly it would help if we not only are able
to represent and to compare representations, but also tend to do this. It
would also help if we tend to assume that incoming representations are
subject to rules.
The plasticity of the infant brain is important, too. The more causal
connections are laid down in the brain, the more they constrain sub-
sequent reaction to and acquisition of novel representations and RSs,
especially given our hypothesized tendency to compare our represen-
tations. As an infant, the brain is free from such constraints and open
to inﬂuence: children need to be especially receptive, for they have so
much to learn in such a short time. Moreover, as Deacon has pointed out,
the mental capacities of young children have some features that appear
to put them at a disadvantage – an underdeveloped short-term memory

Memetic DNA
165
and poor concentration skills – but which may actually be an advantage
in language acquisition. Rather than becoming bogged down in the com-
plexity of the language around them, infants of necessity look ﬁrst at the
structural skeleton of linguistic rules, ﬂeshing out the details later as their
brains mature – and this is just what is needed for the effective decoding
of any novel RS, since representations do not make sense without the RS
within which they are embedded.
The latter fact also helps to ensure that children’s language acquisition
is not only swift but in addition remarkably uniform compared with their
varied linguistic input. When children try to make sense of the language
with which they are constantly bombarded (either directly or overheard),
there are tight constraints on the way in which they can succeed: English
input does not make sense unless you work out the rules that govern it.
Of course this does not have to be a conscious process (compare the fact
that I can play any harmonic minor scale you ask of me, on the piano,
with much more speed than I would be able to verbalize the series of
intervals that govern such scales), but nonetheless if humans have an
innate tendency to compare incoming representations, and to assume
that they are rule-governed, then children’s success in coming up with
the correct rules for their native language is unsurprising. So long as we
tend to compare our representations, and to look for commonalities
amongst them, then we will tend to discover the commonalities not only
in their content (i.e., their meaning) but also in the rules that govern
them.
When it comes to linguistic RSs, human infants have an additional ad-
vantage in their innate knowledge of the rules of the universal grammar.
It would be impossible for us to learn language without the assistance of
this biologically determined structure. Crucially, however, the preceding
paragraphs have emphasized the fact that it would be equally impossi-
ble if we could not meta-represent. This matters because once we could
meta-represent we could use that ability to develop other, nonlinguis-
tic RSs: as soon as you can think and talk about representations (rather
than just about that which is represented), then you can begin to change
their RS. You can use your capacity to meta-represent in order to think
about your current methods of representation and how they might be
altered and improved; you can use it to choose how to represent novel
information; it can help you to interpret and learn a novel RS. In short,
the “language instinct” package contains a variety of mental abilities, in-
cluding one (meta-representation) that also facilitates the emergence of
nonlinguistic RSs.

166
The Selﬁsh Meme
Yet how, if these alternative RSs are supported by the abilities that
comprise our language acquisition device, is it possible that they are not
subject to its structural rules? Chomsky points out that ability and con-
straint are two sides of the same coin: the fact that it is the universal
grammar which enables us to acquire language means, conversely, that
we can only acquire languages that conform to that biologically endowed
structure; “there are many imaginable languages that we could not de-
velop through the exercise of the language faculty”.27 Again, I have no
quarrel with this claim – but the price of liberation is paid for nonlin-
guistic RSs in a different currency: one in which lack of ability and lack of
constraint are two sides of the same coin. The fact that it is not the uni-
versal grammar which enables us to acquire the alternative RSs means,
conversely, that those systems need not be subject to its constraints.
It is, however, interesting to note that the universal grammar appears
to exercise a dictator’s control over every oral RS: every natural language.
We should always beware of equating limitations in our imagination with
limitations in reality, but I cannot think of a single alternative RS which
does not depend in some way on the support of material artefacts: math-
ematical and musical notation are written systems; systems of horology
appear on artefacts like clock faces; semaphore needs ﬂags; and so on. It
seems that, once our language has been acquired with the help of uni-
versal grammar, it can be used as a meta-representational system for the
development of unconstrained alternative RSs – but that those other RSs
will need additional, physical support to get off the ground.
Language, on this view, is so important that we have evolved an innate
structure for its acquisition, a side effect of which has been the ability to
develop alternative, nonlinguistic RSs. Yet those alternative RSs cannot
be realized in speech, which has been developed for the communication
of languages which follow the rules of universal grammar. RSs that are
independent of those rules cannot be supported by a system which relies
on the rules for its coherence. This is true even though we can of course
ﬁnd ways to express nonlinguistic representations in language: “starting
on middle C, play the notes C, C, G, G, A, A, G,” for instance, or “multiply
two by three, and then add four.” Although our meta-representational
capacity allows us to translate information from nonlinguistic RSs into
language, as in these examples, it is a struggle to communicate that in-
formation if we are restricted to speech alone.
In other words, we can usually ﬁnd ways to represent the information
in language, but it is harder to realize those representations in the pri-
mary medium of language (speech). All representations need a medium

Memetic DNA
167
in which they can be preserved and manipulated, but my suggestion is
that our minds struggle to manipulate nonlinguistic representations in
the medium of speech – and that this is because language use is con-
strained by the rules of the universal grammar. The language acquisition
device may contain an element that enables us to develop nonlinguistic
RSs, but it will not then support the realization of those RSs in its native
medium. That is why we rely on artefactual assistance (such as pen and
paper) for their realization and manipulation.
Conclusions
This chapter has argued that the memetic equivalent of DNA is not one,
but many cultural systems of representation. Unlike organisms and their
DNA, we are not endowed at birth with one ﬁxed RS, but have the ca-
pacity to learn and develop many varied systems. Language has primacy
amongst them in that it alone is the result of a biological endowment
which also facilitates its communication through speech. Crucially, how-
ever, it is also the result of the human capacity for meta-representation,
and it is this which facilitates the development of alternative RSs. These
nonlinguistic systems, whose rules and structures are incredibly diverse,
must be realized in a medium which is not subject to the constraints of
universal grammar.
I have defended this hypothesis against the charges that true replica-
tion is not possible across media, and that cultural information is not
genuinely particulate. Conversely, I have suggested that it is supported
by its compatibility with the most widely accepted theory of language,
Chomsky’s language acquisition device.
There have been echoes, throughout these discussions, of a now famil-
iar issue. If the development of cultural RSs depends on our biological
endowment (e.g., our innate knowledge of language rules and ability
to meta-represent), so that our acquisition of memes is tightly interwo-
ven with the development of our minds, then what is the relationship
between the two? How independent are memes of the mind? The next
chapter asks to what extent cultural evolution is driven by our own mental
faculties, rather than by the memes which are its units of replication.

12
Memes and the Mind
It is time to explore in more detail the relation between memes and the
mind. In the case of genes and the body, the relationship is one between
a survival machine and the replicators that are its formative constituents.
This is a reciprocal relationship, in which the body is built (and in some
ways acts) in accordance with a genetic blueprint, and the genes are se-
lected via their phenotypic effects, which in combination produce an
individual organism. To what extent is the relationship between memes
and the mind an analogous one? Are memes self-replicators, or are they
more like passive pieces of information, wholly dependent on human
minds for their activation – much as genes depend on the cellular appa-
ratus to make copies of themselves?
The nature of the memes-mind relationship has been a recurring issue
throughout the discussions so far. The Dennett-Blackmore hypothesis is
that there is in reality no distinction between the two. An alternative
view is that a signiﬁcant part of our mental architecture is determined
by our genotype, with cultural input making only a superﬁcial impact
on our mental capacities. My own thesis has been that our innate (i.e.,
endowed by our genes) mental potential is developed by interacting with
our environment – a crucial element of which is memetic. This is not
to deny the novelty and autonomy of cultural evolution as a genuinely
different process from Darwinian selection in the natural world; it is
simply to acknowledge that the mind’s evolution is ultimately dependent
on its genetic roots.
168

Memes and the Mind
169
Beliefs as Memes?
The main threat to my proposition comes from theorists such as Dennett
and Blackmore, who argue that the self is a vast complex of memes:
humans should be seen as “the clever imitation machine taking part in
this new evolutionary process, rather than a conscious entity who can
stand outside of it and direct it”.1 That this thesis sounds bizarre and
unappealing is not sufﬁcient grounds for its dismissal. Indeed, one of
the reasons why we ﬁnd such an idea hard to accept, says Blackmore, is
that memes are incredibly good at deceiving us (of course she doesn’t
mean that they do this consciously): they can gain a huge advantage by
becoming closely associated with our idea of “self”. She asks us to imagine
two memes, one which represents an idea and the other a belief in that
idea: in the memetic struggle for survival, she suggests, the belief is bound
to be selected over the idea. Beliefs will gain the advantage because we
tend to defend them and try to persuade others to share them, whilst at
the same time – by being expressed as “my belief” – they encourage our
conviction “that there is a real self at the centre of it all.”2
There are several reasons why I am not persuaded by this particular be-
lief of Blackmore’s. Firstly, beliefs are not memes, but responses to memes.
Even when someone is doing her best to persuade you to share her be-
liefs, the most she can do is to present information to you in a format
which she hopes will encourage you to adopt her own approach to it. We
are all familiar with at least some of the beliefs that our friends hold dear,
on subjects like politics, religion and child rearing, yet each of us holds
a variety of attitudes to those beliefs: some we also hold dear, some we
reject totally, and on others we retain an open mind.
A term from philosophy, “propositional attitudes”, is illuminating here.
Given a proposition, such as “it will rain today,” I can hold a range of
attitudes towards it: I can hope that it will rain today, or believe that it will
rain today, or be in one of any number of mental states in relation to that
proposition; those mental states are my “propositional attitudes”. Now,
this is a concept shrouded in some philosophical controversy, which I
could not hope to disperse here – but nonetheless it emphasises the
fact that we react in various ways to the information with which we are
presented. Belief is simply one of those possible reactions.
Moreover, on closer inspection it is clear that Blackmore’s reference
to beliefs as memes actually begs the question in favour of her main
hypothesis: only if (as she claims) the self is a meme-complex can mental
states such as beliefs and desires count as memes. If, on the other hand,

170
The Selﬁsh Meme
there is a genuine distinction between memes and the minds with which
they interact, then beliefs will more accurately be seen as mental states
than as the information to which those states pertain. The self, on this
view, is a conscious entity which responds to incoming information in a
variety of ways, both cognitively and emotionally. Cultural information,
then, is something separate from the agents who process it. If this is the
case, then belief is one of the ways in which agents can respond to that
information, rather than another piece of information to be replicated.
Blackmore can only contradict this (categorising beliefs as memes) if
she has already demonstrated that there is no real distinction between
minds and the information that they process – that our minds are simply
a conglomerate of absorbed cultural information, and consciousness an
illusion. Such a claim is of course hardly uncontroversial: many people
would ﬁnd it hard to be convinced by any theory of mind that has as a
result her contention that “there is no ‘I’ who ‘holds’ the opinions.”3
The Mind as a Muscle
In contrast, Rosaria Conte claims that the view of the mind as meme
complex “arises from an insufﬁcient understanding of the autonomy of
(memetic) agents”.4 For Conte, “replication is the responsibility of the
memetic agent,” and “memes do not have to be clever; rather, meme
receivers or interpreters do.”5
Yet this still leaves open the question of how memes interact with their
receivers. If the mind is neither created by memes nor simply a complex
of memes – if a mind is something that possesses, rather than being
composed of, concepts – then how does it develop the “cleverness” that
it needs to deal with cultural complexities? There is certainly a sense in
which minds are concept-dependent, in that they will not fully develop
until they acquire some concepts.
In order to reconcile these facts, it is helpful to notice that if a mind
cannot develop without acquiring some concepts, and yet it consistently
does so develop, then there must be an innate ability to acquire concepts.
In other words, there must be some innate mentality before the concepts
are acquired, as discussed in previous chapters. If this is the case, then
memes are not formative constituents of the mind in the same way that
genes build the body, but rather are part of the environment that allows
the mind to develop.
This suggestion can be illustrated by analogy with the development of
a muscle. Infants have the basis of and potential for strong muscles, but

Memes and the Mind
171
in a form that is by no means fully developed. Once a muscle begins to
be used, however, it soon strengthens and develops its potential. In this
sense, exercise “creates” the strong muscle; but conversely the exercise
could not have occurred in the ﬁrst place without the existing basis of a
weaker muscle.
Similarly, in the mental activity of a newborn child there is the basis of
and potential for a fully ﬂedged mind. As soon as this is put to use and
begins to acquire concepts (both from its contemporaries and as a result
of its own discoveries about its surroundings), it begins to develop that
potential. Thus the concepts that it acquires “create” the mind only in
the sense that exercise “creates” muscles: the mind itself does not merely
consist of a complex of concepts, but rather develops as a result of its
interaction with them. Furthermore, the concepts themselves would not
have existed in the ﬁrst place if there were no prior existence of some
mental activity.
The difference, of course, between a muscle and the mind is that in
the case of a muscle the only exercise that can strengthen it is that which
stems from itself. The mind, on the other hand, may be developed by
concepts that spring from sources external to itself: from other minds.
This is due to the nature of memes as cultural replicators, transmissible
between different people’s minds in a way that exercise is obviously not
transmissible between different people’s muscles. Nor do the physical
muscles develop as a result of instructions delivered by anything outside
the body of which they are part, whereas mental development happens
as a result of the executive power of the replicators acquired.
The Parable of the Sower
Yet this distinction between instructions and effects touches on another
unresolved issue: to what extent do we have choices and control over
our responses to incoming information and experiences? In rejecting
the view of the mind as a meme complex, I do not mean to sweep under
the carpet the question of how much control we really have over our
reactions to novel memes.
A concept from counselling may be helpful in formulating a response.
Some therapists talk about the “scripts” that we are given by our families,
which are the messages that we receive from those around us when we are
very young, and which we each interpret in different ways. They inﬂuence
our beliefs about the sorts of people we are, about the ways in which it
is normal to behave, and about what “life plans” we ought to follow. The

172
The Selﬁsh Meme
problem is that “although the life script we write so early is highly in-
ﬂuential, it remains largely outside our awareness.”6 In response to this,
good counsellors try to decrease the “scripted” elements of their own re-
actions, by working to expand the parts of themselves of which they are
aware and over which they consequently have more control; in this way
they are more able to help their clients to do the same.
For example, if someone was brought up in a household where nega-
tive emotions like fear or anger were suppressed, then her script may well
include the unconscious assumption that it is wrong to be open about
such feelings, and her responses to a person who does display these feel-
ings may include an automatic attempt to soothe them away. Unless she
becomes aware of this assumption, she will not be able to make choices
about whether to retain or reject it. Once it is uncovered, she can then
choose to modify her responses, and rather than trying to avoid negative
emotions she may feel more able to acknowledge and cope with others’
strong feelings.
Clearly our responses will sometimes be “scripted” by our innate per-
sonality traits as well as by early environmental inﬂuences, and this raises
the possibility that the boundary between the innate and cultural aspects
of our scripts may not be as clear-cut as it at ﬁrst appears. It raises the
possibility, too, that our cultural inﬂuences are more disparate than I
have so far acknowledged. In particular, there may be a real difference
between two sorts of cultural input. Some will be part of our “script”, and
thus fulﬁl a role rather like that which Dennett and Blackmore envisage:
the information that we have absorbed in the past will form the basis for
our reactions to that which we encounter in the future, and there will be
no clear distinction between our “selves” and the memes that we have so
deeply absorbed. There will, on the other hand, be other cultural input
over which we do make conscious choices, of which we are aware, and
which we do deal with more “actively” – although the fact that counsellors
and their clients are often engaged in work to uncover and transform
the “scripted” elements of their behavioural responses suggests that this
distinction may itself be rather hazy.
Still, this discussion highlights the fact that it does make sense to talk
about the distinction between “us” and “memes”: just because we can-
not always accurately distinguish our “selves” from the mouldings of our
backgrounds and experiences, it does not mean that there is no such dis-
tinction to be made. Although some of our responses are unconsciously
directed by memes absorbed in the past, we do have a large amount of
control over our responses to much incoming information.

Memes and the Mind
173
On this view, consciousness cannot be explained as a meme machine,
but rather the memes-mind relationship was more accurately portrayed
two thousand years ago, in the parable of the sower.7 In that parable, a
farmer sows seeds in a variety of soils, with differing outcomes: the seed
on the path is quickly eaten by birds; the plants that grow from seed
sown on rocky places are soon scorched by the sun; the plants that grow
amongst thorns are soon choked; but the seed that falls on good soil grows
strongly, multiplying many times over. The message is clear: different
people (and even the same person at different times and stages of her
life) will respond to the same information in very different ways. Incoming
information – the seeds of the parable – will be understood, remembered,
acted upon and then passed on to others with varying degrees of accuracy
and enthusiasm, depending on its recipient’s mind – the soil.
Of course the “type of soil” will be determined to a certain extent by the
recipient’s innate personality, and by his past experiences and cultural
background. The potential within the “seeds” will be realized in different
ways, depending on both his genotype and his current memotype. Yet
the inﬂuences that these exert will not wholly determine the outcome.
Unlike the much stronger claim that the mind is a meme complex, my
thesis is that the choices we make about incoming data will be inﬂuenced
by our existing memes – not that those choices are illusory.
Directed Evolution?
Yet the question remains how two apparently incompatible claims can be
reconciled: on the one hand I am claiming that the mind is conscious, and
our sense of self is based on reality, but on the other hand I support the
theory that the cultural realm develops via an unconscious evolutionary
algorithm. This echoes a point raised in Chapter 5, about whether the
direction of memetic variation has (like the direction of genetic variation)
no bias towards increased ﬁtness, or whether it is directed by intentional
human decisions.
Dennett and Blackmore reconcile these two claims by the simple expe-
dient of rejecting one of them: they deny that the mind really has inten-
tionality and consciousness. An alternative response is to claim that the
direction of memetic variation is both unbiased towards increased ﬁtness,
and directed by intentional human decisions. How can this be possible?
In the following sections I use an example from the development of
engineering designs to demonstrate how two levels of description –
intentional and mindless – can apply to the same process, and thus how

174
The Selﬁsh Meme
the two can be reconciled. Consciousness does not have to be character-
ized as a meme complex for it to be plausible that memes participate in
a genuinely autonomous evolutionary process.
Engineering Design Methods
Engineering design methods8 underpin one area of cultural change in
which there is apparently no question that developments depend on hu-
man creativity and purposeful intelligence. The implication is that tech-
nological “evolution” is a mere metaphor; but is this really the case? This
section explores the methods that are involved in engineering design – a
process which the engineer Ken Wallace characterizes as “converting an
idea or market need into the detailed information from which a product,
process or system can be made”.9
Wallace emphasizes the need for a systematic approach to design. In-
tuition, inventiveness and insight all play their part in what is, after all,
a very human activity – but they are supported and enhanced by a dis-
ciplined methodology. Once the initial demand for a product has been
perceived, the question arises how to meet it. As a general strategy for
problem solving, it is useful to reduce complexity by splitting the over-
all challenge into manageable subproblems, to be tackled independently
(though in context – solutions to individual problems will inﬂuence each
other), and then combined. This approach is evident in each of the four
stages into which Wallace breaks down the design process.
The ﬁrst stage begins with market research, to discover a gap in a
range of products. The example that I shall use throughout this section,
in order to root Wallace’s rather abstract exposition in reality, concerns a
gap in the Brazilian vehicle market. Consider a situation in which several
small businessmen and farmers in Brazil need a small goods vehicle in
order to transport their products and tools – but no suitable vehicle is
currently available.
Importantly, there will be no one “correct” plug for this hole in the
market: design problems are by their nature open-ended, although some
solutions will of course be better than others. The best way to begin to
achieve an acceptable solution is to deﬁne the task in a clear “problem
statement”. What Wallace calls “divergent thinking” (i.e., an open mind)
will be used in preparing this statement: information is gathered from a
variety of sources, and considerations raised from disciplines other than
the one particularly relevant branch of engineering. A solution-neutral
statement of the problem can then be formulated, in order to identify the

Memes and the Mind
175
true needs without making assumptions about how they should be met.
In the case of the present example, a ﬁrst version might be something
like: “to provide transport for small amounts of goods over poor quality
roads”. Here it is not possible to be much more solution-neutral than
this: such a problem would only be addressed by a car manufacturer, and
therefore certain criteria are unavoidable (the new vehicle will use roads,
will not ﬂy, etc.).
After this, “convergent” thinking will be used to elaborate the target
speciﬁcation: the designer needs to limit the search ﬁeld by detailing
the precise requirements and constraints. Relevant considerations will
be function, safety, economics and time scales. With the resources avail-
able, compromises often have to be made in later stages of the design, and
one way of focusing on the best compromise is to have identiﬁed require-
ments, at an earlier stage, as “demands” or “wishes”. Demands provide
criteria for selection: they must be fulﬁlled, or the solution scrapped (e.g.,
meeting the relevant government regulations). Wishes provide criteria
for evaluation: they are desirable but not essential (e.g., exceeding the
regulations).
Having clariﬁed the task, the second stage is conceptual design: gen-
erating concepts with the potential to meet the requirements. Solution
principles will be created for all the subfunctions of the product (e.g.,
vehicle type, engine), and studied to see which can be combined with
each other. Ideas will be generated via brainstorming, the study of ex-
isting devices, and in addition “useful ideas can be obtained from the
study of natural systems.”10 Here, once again, divergent thinking will be
used – this time to generate as many ideas as possible. Going back to
the example, there is already so much established (no car manufacturer
starts from scratch) that there are limited options for innovation. Typical
choices will be between a pick-up or van, and whether or not it should be
based on an existing vehicle.
Following this, convergent thinking will come back into play, as the
best solution is selected. The “pass” criteria detailed in the target spec-
iﬁcation will be used to evaluate the possible solutions. Combinations
of subfunctions will be scrapped if they fail to meet a demand, and the
remainder evaluated against the wishes (weighted according to impor-
tance), with a view to determining which will “provide the maximum
competitive advantage”.11 Notice that here, as at any stage of the design
process, cost analysis may override engineering considerations.
Following the ﬁrst two stages of the process, the selected solution must
be presented to other people in a way that convinces them to move it

176
The Selﬁsh Meme
to the next stages. This third stage is known as embodiment design, in
which the concepts undergo a structured development. In the case of
vehicle design, layout drawings and clay models, etcetera, will help to
reveal which concepts won’t work in practice. Again there will be a trade-
off between the divergent thinking needed to suggest possible ways of
meeting the target speciﬁcations (e.g., choices between different engine
sizes or suspension layouts, front/rear wheel drive, etc.), and the conver-
gent thinking needed to select between the possibilities that do meet the
demands, on the basis of the wishes that each meets.
The ﬁnal stage is detail design: speciﬁcation of the shape, dimensions,
materials and tolerances of each component. Again these will be eval-
uated against the target speciﬁcations – in a vehicle’s case, by testing
prototypes and using computer aided engineering (CAE). Thus it can be
seen that at this stage, as in all the others, the design process is iterative.
There are feedback loops between evaluation and details, perhaps even
going back to the embodiment stage, if deeper problems arise.
In summary, then, the design process – which seems prima facie to
be the harnessing of imagination to practicality – is underpinned by a
methodology that is iterative and in many senses even mindless. It moves
from a perceived demand, through clariﬁcation of the problem in a
solution-neutral statement, and the generation and initial selection of
concepts with the potential to meet the requirements, to a structured
development and detail design of the end product. At each stage of the
process selections will be made between possible solutions, according to
the demands and wishes laid down in the target speciﬁcations. An option
may be rejected when it is still an idea (“How about a pick-up truck?”),
whilst it is being developed as part of the embodiment design (“Perhaps
a 1.3 litre engine will give us the power we need”), or even when it has
reached the ﬁnal stage of detail design (“Let’s try the engine from our
existing pick-up in the prototype”). It may be rejected on the basis of eco-
nomic as well as engineering considerations. If at any point it seems that
the end result will not be viable, then losses will be cut and the project
abandoned.
“Design Evolution”
It is clear that there are analogies between this design process and bi-
ological evolution. For instance, depending on the “pass” criteria laid
down in the problem statement, a design evolves via an iterative process
of divergent and convergent thinking in the next three stages – and this

Memes and the Mind
177
is analogous to the way in which, depending on the ﬁtness criteria that
are laid down by the environment, a species evolves via natural selection.
Such analogies are interesting to explore, and give the sort of intellec-
tual satisfaction that is the result of discovering any familiar pattern in an
apparently different ﬁeld. To what extent, though, is it justiﬁable to pur-
sue the “design evolution” hypothesis? Is it helpful to talk of engineering
designs “evolving”, as though that process really did mimic the evolution
in the natural world? In order to discover whether Darwinism illustrates
a process that is also displayed in engineering, I need to know whether
I can meaningfully apply to this area the key elements that have been
worked out for the meme hypothesis in other cultural ﬁelds.
Possible examples of design memes might be the concept of a can-
tilever, the idea of using concrete as a road surface, the design of the
“whale-tail” on a Porsche 911, or a particular way of using a CAE package.
The signiﬁcant fact about any of these examples is that the meme is the
information contained in the blueprint for a design, rather than the end
product itself. Just as in biology we refer to genes “for” bodily features
(e.g. blue vs. brown eyes), so in engineering we might speak of design
memes “for” artefacts’ features (e.g., torsion bar vs. leaf spring suspen-
sion). The 911’s whale-tail, for instance, is the end product of a successful
design meme “for” a whale-tail.
Notice that, although design evolution may for convenience be re-
ferred to as “analogous to” genetic evolution, as in any area of memetics
this should not be taken to imply that the former is theoretically de-
pendent on the latter. Rather, both are examples of a more abstract,
generally applicable theory of the evolution of replicators under con-
ditions of competition. The two processes have the same description at
a sufﬁciently functional, abstract level. Nonetheless, because we are al-
ready familiar with genetics, we can use it to illuminate what we might
call “design memetics”. In other words, although we should not expect
the particular details of biological evolution to carry over into design evo-
lution, it seems reasonable to exploit our knowledge of neo-Darwinism
as a guide to what the essential elements of design evolution might be.
Design memes have in common with genes the fact that both embody
information which is replicated, varied and selected, producing a form
of evolution that is observable in their phenotypic effects.
Yet of course this does not answer the question whether there are
any grounds for accepting the hypothesis of design evolution. Are there
aspects of engineering design that can realistically be characterized as
replication, variation and selection?

178
The Selﬁsh Meme
It is uncontentious to suggest that there is variation amongst the de-
signs that engineers produce. Even within the same model of a car,
for example, there will be several choices to be made by the potential
customer: type of fuel, size of engine, colour, extras and so on. Moreover,
as part of the design process, engineers use divergent thinking in order to
produce as many options as possible in their search for a solution. Thus
variation is apparent not only in the end products, but also in the concepts
that arise in the design process. In fact, the open-ended nature of design
problems ensures that there will always be variety amongst the solutions
proposed.
Recall that in nature variation occurs through the mutation and re-
combination of genes. Recombinations are limited by the need for alleles
to correspond, resulting in a range of possible recombinations that is lim-
ited, though rich, with respect to any given gene pool. Genetic mutation
is random with respect to increased ﬁtness, although the mutations that
can occur are limited by the nature of what already exists – for example,
by genes’ mutation rates and by embryology.
Clearly, mutations in engineering concepts are also “random” – not in
the sense that they spring, as if by magic, into the engineer’s mind, but in
that they are random with respect to their “ﬁtness” for the target speciﬁ-
cation. If this weren’t the case, then an engineer would be able to latch on
to the appropriate solutions straight away, without the time-consuming
and costly business of testing them at the embodiment and detail design
stages. Moreover, just as the consequences of genes’ mutations are lim-
ited by the relevant embryology, so the effects of design mutations will be
limited by the processes of translation into reality. An engineer employed
by a major car manufacturer will be restricted in the innovations that he
can incorporate in his designs by the existing manufacturing practices of
that company. For instance, in the case of most major car manufacturers
he can design ﬁbreglass vehicles until he is blue in the face, but he will
not be able to have them built. Clearly, too, recombinations of existing
engineering concepts may be responsible for a new overall design – and
just as genes must correspond with the alleles that they replace, so an ex-
isting concept may only be replaced by one that controls the same aspect
of reality (trivially: the engineer may replace his vehicle’s small engine
with a larger engine, but not with a spare wheel).
Given that there is variation amongst these purported design memes,
are there methods of transmitting them which might be regarded as
replication? There are two aspects of replication: the preservation and
the transmission of information. Engineering designs are preserved in

Memes and the Mind
179
the forms of blueprints, of prototypes, of CAE models and even of ideas
in the minds of individual engineers. Such representations of informa-
tion must fulﬁl various conditions if they are to count as replicators: they
must, for instance, be able to interact with other such representations,
and to exert some form of control over their environment. They are
transmitted by being taught, mimicked, communicated, learnt . . . all of
the usual processes of cultural transmission. There is nothing controver-
sial here. Designs are replicated in the minds of the general public via
advertising, and in somewhat more detail in the minds of other engineers
via blueprints, and so on.
Perhaps more controversially, designs need to be particulate if they are
to count as replicators and be subject to evolutionary change. If replica-
tors blended with each other, then evolution by selection would be impos-
sible. Once more paralleling memes in any other area, the hypothesized
design memes can largely be counted as discrete on the same grounds
that Mendel decided that the factors controlling his pea-plants’ charac-
teristics were independent and indivisible: observation of their effects,
which are either present or absent. Each time it is replicated, an aspect of
design runs the risk of embellishment, corruption or diminishment, but
this is no different from the risk that each gene runs of mutation during
replication. With reference to cultural evolution, engineering seems to
be an area in which it is especially easy to observe the deﬁnite presence
or absence, in an artefact, of any given design. A car either has or has not
air bags, drum brakes, front wheel drive, for instance.
Evolution needs not only replication and variation, but the replication
of variations, to offspring. Clearly, “offspring” does not here refer to bio-
logical but to cultural descendants – and equally clearly the variations are
so transmitted. A young designer will be inﬂuenced in his practices, and
restricted in his starting points, by the company that he joins. Further-
more, just as the variations that you inherit from your biological parents
may develop differently in you, depending on the nature of your environ-
ment, so the variations that you acquire from your cultural predecessors
(such as more experienced engineers, or lecturers) may develop differ-
ently in the context of your mind and environment. A safety engineer
who hears about a novel innovation may decide, after analysis, that it
does not improve the vehicle’s crashworthiness – but still he is aware of
its existence and able to retransmit that information. (If he tells me that
this particular idea doesn’t work, then he also tells me that it exists.) What
matters, from the point of view of evolution, is simply that variations are
replicated.

180
The Selﬁsh Meme
In design as in biology, then, variations exist and are passed on to the
next “generation”. In order for evolution to occur, the third factor that
design needs is selection. What is it that a design meme needs in order
to be successful? It will be popular and long-lived if it meets the various
criteria laid down by the humans who want to make use of it. In other
words, like any other meme it ultimately depends upon human beings’
attention. Without this, no effort will be put into moving it from the
conceptual to the embodiment and detail design stages – or even if it
does make it so far, the consumers at whom it is aimed will not select it
from the many alternatives at their disposal.
Design memes’ competition for attention seems to be a consequence
of the open-ended nature of design problems. A design will be long-
lasting and widespread only if it succeeds in capturing the attention of
enough people, to the extent that they regard it not only as a worthwhile
focus for their money, time and effort, but also as a more worthwhile
focus of attention than its rivals. Factors that come into play in their
decision may include its compatibility with existing features of their lives
(from garage size to self-image); the relative importance of those existing
artefacts, opinions or practices; and the external environment. Artefacts’
capacity to survive and be replicated is affected by their efﬁciency (or at
least their perceived efﬁciency) in fulﬁlling their intended use.
The “ﬁtness” constraints that are imposed on any particular design
will be laid down by the initial problem statement, which speciﬁes the
conditions that a design must meet if it is to succeed in the practical and
commercial worlds. Convergent thinking will then play the part of selec-
tion, as the engineers choose between their possible solutions. Demands
may be compared with “life or death” criteria in the biological world, and
wishes with the conditions that will determine an organism’s quality of
life: it will not live without meeting the demands; it will do better or worse
than its rivals as a result of the “wishes” that it fulﬁls. Moreover, just as the
engineer’s ideas may never see fruition if they are overruled by considera-
tions from other disciplines (e.g., economics), so a genetic mutation may
fail to be translated to the phenotype as a result of embryological restric-
tions. In particular, recall the emphasis that is placed again and again by
writers on biological evolution, on the fact that natural selection is never
forward-planning: if a mutation is harmful now, then that organism may
die before procreating, and the mutation will never be selected (even if in
the long run it may have been helpful). Similarly, if at any stage a design
doesn’t meet its budget requirements, then everything stops (even if in
the long run it would have been the best engineered design).

Memes and the Mind
181
So it seems that there is competition between design memes for the
limited resource of human attention. Added to their variation and repli-
cation, this will ensure that a form of evolution is played out in engi-
neering design. At a far greater pace than genes, design memes vary, are
replicated and selected – and thus they evolve. The preservation of those
designs with the best ﬁt to their environment, and the extinction of those
without, should be expected.
Evolution and Design Reconciled
Human design methods, then, are evolutionary. Ideas and designs are
reproduced, vary and are selected according to the relevant criteria, and
the result is a panoramic variety of increasingly complex human arte-
facts. The culmination of this process is now being attempted in research
establishments around the world: can artefacts be designed to display
intelligence or even consciousness?
Thus the preceding account of the design of human artefacts pro-
vides a working, observable example of the compatibility of evolution
with design – not just in principle, but in practice. Human design can
be described in one of two ways. In intentional, psychological terms, the
new front end for the model “xyz” car was designed by Chris because he
wanted to make the “xyz” more crashworthy in frontal impact, he wanted
to keep his job, and so on. This provides an answer to the “why?” ques-
tions that might be asked about the novel design. The “how?” questions,
though, are answered rather differently. The new front end was designed
using the four-stage process described, through which novel designs for
that part of the car were tested against the “pass” criteria laid down in
the problem statement. One of them was selected from the variety of
proposed solutions, and the end result is a front end that is intellectually
descended from, though a signiﬁcant evolutionary improvement upon,
the existing design.
For the claim that much of this process is mindless, it does not matter
that the evolution of design memes is dependent on human minds. This is
simply because thoughts and other representative media (e.g., language,
blueprints) are the province of memes. Without the active stimulation
of human minds, design memes may ﬁnd safe havens in these media
(in libraries, perhaps), but will neither replicate nor evolve. This is no
different from the fact that genes are the units of biological selection,
but depend on interaction with the environment and the mechanisms of
embryology, in order to replicate and evolve.

182
The Selﬁsh Meme
It would appear, therefore, that there is no contradiction at all between
the following two statements:
(a)The front end has evolved so as to fulﬁl the “pass” criteria laid
down in the problem statement. That evolution may be described
as mechanical: given the problem statement, an iterative process
of selection determined which design will be chosen from the sug-
gested options.
(b)Chris’s purposes in creating his design are not reducible to any of
the following: the problem statement; a description (no matter how
detailed) of the means by which the front end was either designed
or built; a description (no matter how detailed) of the front end
itself. We have to seek out Chris himself, if we want to discover his
purposes.
Thus it seems clear that evidence for memetic evolution is not the same
thing as evidence against the human mind.
Different Points of View
Yet it should be noted that Dennett and Blackmore are not alone in
their stance on this matter. Others have agreed that we must “reject the
notion that some ‘central executive self’ can pick and choose among the
memes, and refer instead to the sorts of ﬁlters (cf. Dennett, 1995) which
memes and genes have constructed”.12 The author of this quotation, Nick
Rose, adds even more bluntly that “if variation among memes is somehow
directed by consciousness towards some goal then it is not a Darwinian
process.”13
The latter comment was a response to the suggestion that the artiﬁcial
selection of domestic animals could be seen as a process inexplicable
“without reference to selves, goals and intentions”.14 I would argue that
it is, rather, a process which can be used to illuminate the crucial issue
of the different “points of view” of the elements involved in evolutionary
processes. In artiﬁcial selection, the “selves, goals and intentions” of the
humans involved are – from the genes’ point of view – simply one aspect
of the environmental pressures on them. From our point of view this
process is inexplicable without reference to our goals, hopes and fears;
but from the genes’ point of view this situation is no different from any
other. They replicate, they vary and some ﬁt better to the environment
than others. The fact that humans are shaping that environment does
not undermine the essentially Darwinian process that is unfolding.

Memes and the Mind
183
Similarly, from the memes’ point of view the conscious direction of
human minds might be seen simply as a part of the machinery of the
cultural evolutionary process.
The distinction between this outlook and the Dennett-Blackmore hy-
pothesis is that I acknowledge the validity of three different points of view:
genes’, memes’ and ours. From the genes’ point of view, they are strug-
gling for survival in an environment that consists in a variety of elements:
other genes; external factors such as the physical world and other ge-
netically built “survival machines”; the environmental changes that have
been effected by humans and their memes. From the memes’ point of
view the environment consists in other memes; external factors such as
the physical world and the existing cultural environment; genes; and our
minds. From our point of view the environment consists in memes; genes;
other people; our physical and cultural surroundings – and the existence
of our point of view need not affect the Darwinian nature of what is going
on from the perspective of either genes or memes.
On this theory, Dawkins is right to claim that “we have the power to defy
the selﬁsh genes of our birth and, if necessary, the selﬁsh memes of our
indoctrination. . . . We, alone on earth, can rebel against the tyranny of
the selﬁsh replicators.”15 Genetics is concerned with the development of
nature, and memetics with the development of culture. The development
of human individuals is a separate topic for both realms, even though our
development is of course dependent on the existence and support of both
underlying evolutionary mechanisms. Just as atoms underpin all that is
physical, but from the perspective of the interactions between medium-
sized physical objects are not what matters, so genes underpin all that
is biological but from the perspective of the interactions between their
survival machines are not what matters, and memes underpin all that is
cultural but from the perspective of the interactions between minds are
not what matters. In each case there is a unifying foundation, but also
another, emergent level of description that is not only equally valid but
in some contexts by far the more useful.
Conclusion
Memes, then, are separate from the mind, which is neither composed of
a meme complex nor built by memes in the way that genes build their
survival machines. Rather, the mind has a certain innate potential which
develops as a result of interaction with its environment, both physical
and cultural. Some of what it takes in will indeed be absorbed so deeply

184
The Selﬁsh Meme
that it could accurately be described as a part of that individual, forming
a ﬁlter for future cultural input (counsellors sometimes refer to this as
a “script”). Nonetheless, we retain a degree of choice and ﬂexibility in
our reactions to many of the experiences and memes that we encounter,
as is shown when siblings form surprisingly incompatible memories of
incidents and themes from their shared childhood.
The consciousness and intentionality that is being claimed for our
mental lives is, however, quite reconcilable with the essentially mindless
process played out in any evolutionary algorithm, whether its medium be
biological or cultural. In many areas of science different levels of descrip-
tion can be applied to the same phenomenon, and it is no different here.
The world can be seen through physical, chemical, biological, cultural
or psychological lenses, and the mindlessness of the cultural evolution-
ary algorithm need no more undermine our identity as conscious selves
than does the mindlessness of the physical or chemical descriptions of
our interactions.

13
Science, Religion and Society: What Can Memes
Tell Us?
Having tested the structural foundations of memetics, there may now be
further beneﬁts to be gained by looking at some of its more practical
applications. This chapter aims to deepen our understanding of memet-
ics, as well as of science and religion, by examining those cultural areas
through its lens.
Science
There are many cultural areas in which knowledge and skills are passed
on and develop between “generations”, but perhaps the most notable is
science. How does it look, from the perspective of meme theory?
The most obvious starting point is the emergence of novel theories.
Innovation, according to meme theory, is due to two factors: recombi-
nation and mutation. In recombination, existing memes are appropri-
ately recombined in new situations, creating new ways of thought and
novel effects, perhaps as the result of previously recessive memes’ “effects”
being revealed in the reshufﬂe. This sort of memetic innovation is seen,
in science, in the process of extrapolation from existing results to a
novel theory. Existing theses are reshufﬂed – perhaps in the light of new
evidence – and this may lead to unforeseen consequences, or even to a
fresh hypothesis.
This process cannot, however, account for the “eureka!” phenomenon,
where the hypothesis was not itself the direct outcome of previous results.
Such instances appear to be more in keeping with the mutational element
in memetic variation. If this is so, and the mutation of memes is a good
model for scientiﬁc innovation, then what does it predict about the nature
185

186
The Selﬁsh Meme
of such innovation? First, it must lead us to expect that new theories
are as likely to be false as true, and as likely to be incompatible with
existing evidence and thought as not, since the most important aspect of
memetic mutation is its randomness: the fact that it has no intrinsic bias
towards increased ﬁtness. Clearly, this expectation has been met. Just as
many genetic variations actually decrease ﬁtness, so a large proportion of
“eureka!”–type shrieks are followed more or less closely by expletives: the
new idea does not have the explanatory or predictive success necessary
for the survival of scientiﬁc hypotheses, or it is rejected as incompatible
with contemporary beliefs.
It has been noted, however, that there are restrictions on mutations’
randomness: it is not true that any convenient mutation might occur.
Which memes do mutate, and in what way, will be constrained by their
content, by their environment and by the existing “embryology”. To put
this in terms of scientiﬁc theories, their development will be constrained
by their subject matter, by the best available evidence and by the conse-
quences of existing thought in that area. None of these observations is
particularly original, but they should lead us to look at the development
of science in a different way. There is a popular view that the progress
(even if slowly and not very directly) of scientiﬁc thought towards the
truth will be constrained only by the limits that technology imposes on
the best available evidence. In contrast, meme theory implies that some
of the most signiﬁcant restrictions on scientiﬁc progress will stem more
from the existence of whichever theories, evidence or methods there are
already, than from their accuracy and suitability.
Indeed this provides a neat account of the historical success of theories
which we now view as farcical (consider phlogiston’s “negative mass”, for
example). It does not seem likely that our intellectual predecessors were
less intelligent than us; the deﬁciencies that we now see in their theses
must, therefore, also have been available to them. According to memetics
the reason why these problems come to light now, although they did not
do so earlier, is that the meme which prevailed at any particular time
was the available meme that was then most compatible with the rest of
the meme pool. Indeed, it would not have been so successful if that were
not the case. Now, on the other hand, many of the past’s memes are
not compatible with the existing meme pool, and we see problems with
them as a result of their conﬂict with prevailing ideas (including the latest
available empirical evidence).
In this context it is worth remembering that, like genetics, memetics is
simply a theory about the transmission and development of information.

Science, Religion: What Can Memes Tell Us?
187
It accounts for the relation between that information and its external
consequences, but says nothing about its intrinsic value. Biological ﬁt-
ness is a relative concept: allele a may be selected rather than b, but this
does not tell us whether a is really an efﬁcient method of survival and
propagation. For the answer to that question we have to appeal to the-
ories other than neo-Darwinism (engineering, for instance). Similarly,
if idea x is selected rather than y, then this tells us nothing about the
truth, elegance or other values of x. For that information, we have to
appeal to other theories (aesthetics, for instance, or truth criteria). In
science as in other areas of culture, then, we should expect the successful
(i.e., long-lived and fecund) ideas to be the ones that are more ﬁt than
their contemporaries for the current cultural environment (i.e., better
tested, more compatible, etc.); we should not expect this relative success
automatically to be a reﬂection of their accuracy.
On the other hand, the existing cultural environment will tend to
increase in “volume” over time: unless no historical records are kept,
knowledge acquisition is a cumulative process. So although it is true that
if the existing theories are wrong then it will be hard to escape their
legacy, it is equally true that if they are (even approximately) right then
they should act as a springboard to deeper knowledge. Dependence on
the existing meme pool – and, as for any type of evolution, on chance
and error to provide at least some of the mutations – does not, therefore,
have to be grounds for total pessimism about the possibility of progress.
When scientiﬁc progress does occur, many would agree that it is truly
evolutionary – in the sense that it takes the form of a pattern emerg-
ing from conﬂicts between individual theories. This point is made by
Shrader,1 who also comments that such progress is unlikely ever to be a
process of strictly rational consideration of the evidence and alternatives.
There is so much published each year, in every academic discipline, that
no scientist can hope to read even just the well-researched articles. As
emphasized throughout this book, then, a novel theory will have to ﬁnd
some way of grabbing the relevant scientists’ attention: if it is perceived
as irrelevant or too far-out, then it will simply be ignored. This also high-
lights Shrader’s point that most (accepted) discoveries are made in the
context of a continuing tradition: if they really were as completely radical
as they are sometimes portrayed in the history and philosophy of science
literature, then they would probably be dismissed out of hand.
The structure of the scientiﬁc community will also affect the selection
pressures on theories: the professional standing of an individual scientist
will have a bearing on the reception of his work, and politics will affect

188
The Selﬁsh Meme
funding and thereby the progress that can be made in any given disci-
pline. The lifespan of novel scientiﬁc theories may well be affected by
such factors. Once again, though, this is not grounds for total pessimism.
Shrader also notes that no amount of funding or professional kudos can
make a false theory true.
Thus the memetic perspective on science reveals little that is really
surprising, but it does help to demystify some of the processes at work.
Somewhere between the traditional view of scientists as invincible war-
riors in the battle against ignorance and confusion, and the more recent
cynicism about their relationship with government and other vested in-
terests, comes the claim that their work is but one branch of cultural
evolution.
Meme theory highlights, in particular, the interaction between the
subjective world of scientists and the objective world of hypothesis and
evidence. At one level, science can be seen as a system in which novel ideas
emerge via the recombination and mutation of existing hypotheses and
are subject to selective forces such as the very existence of those current
ways of thinking, as well as politics, funding availability and ad hominem
considerations. Crucially, however, oneof thestrongest selectivepressures
on scientiﬁc theories is their compatibility with the evidence. The fact that
the best available theory will always be just that – the best that is currently
available – need not undermine the scientiﬁc enterprise, whose mission
is to match theory to reality, and whose methods have been honed to
ensure that, on the whole, it succeeds.
At another level, my version of memetics allows science simultaneously
to be described as a system run by human scientists. Their rivalries, egos
and respective statuses may well be the source of selection pressures on
the hypotheses that they create, but at the human level this is not what
matters. The human beings engaged in science have a whole range of
priorities, such as intellectual satisfaction, emotional fulﬁlment and peer
respect. They are people like any others, with career aspirations, home
lives and principles.
They also have the human ability to meta-represent. They can step
back from the scientiﬁc enterprise, taking its theories and their implica-
tions into completely separate representational arenas like philosophy,
history, theology and morality: What is the aim of science, and how does
it progress? How have its theories developed over the centuries? What, if
anything, can it tell us about religious matters? How ought its results to
be implemented, and what safeguards need to be put in place? Questions
like these matter, and the fact that science can be described by a theory of

Science, Religion: What Can Memes Tell Us?
189
cultural evolution does not absolve scientists from their human responsi-
bilities. The view of memetics that I have defended in this book allows
both levels of description their place. As science evolves, towards what
we hope will be the most accurate possible representations of the world, so
there must be a parallel process of meta-representation, whereby we reﬂect
on its methods and outcomes.
Religion
Another cultural area that has seemed to many memeticists an obvious
target for the application of their theory is religion. In particular, those
like Dawkins and Blackmore who are themselves atheists have seen the
meme hypothesis as another arrow in their quiver of ammunition against
God. As noted in Chapter 8, in Dawkins’s view religion is more like a
mental virus than a “good” meme, and his theory of cultural evolution can
thus be extended to explain away religious belief as “an infectious disease
of the mind”.2 Extensive arguments were ranged against Dawkins’s virus-
meme distinction and there is no need to revisit them, but his speciﬁc
overapplication of memetics is far from the only way in which it has been
claimed that religion is undermined by any close examination of human
culture.
For instance, one of the key factors that leads many people towards
scepticism about religion is the close correlation between an individual’s
background and his religious beliefs – and indeed memetics emphasizes
the signiﬁcance of the cultural environment for the success of particu-
lar memes. It seems obvious that a Christian culture breeds Christians,
and conversely that Christian people are likely to have a Christian back-
ground. As Bertrand Russell put it: “With very few exceptions, the religion
which a man accepts is that of the community in which he lives, which
makes it obvious that the inﬂuence of the environment is what has led
him to accept the religion in question.”3 The claim is that people do
not, on the whole, take up a religion because they have been moved by
rational argument: “most people believe in God because they have been
taught from early infancy to do it.”4
Of course it would be ridiculous to say that nobody ever becomes a
Christian who is not raised in a Christian society: people have converted
to Christianity from all manner of faith (and lack of faith) backgrounds.
Equally, there are plenty of people who spend their formative years
within a Christian society, and yet adopt a different belief system as they
mature – whether Islam, atheism, or whatever. Indeed, clergy children

190
The Selﬁsh Meme
are notorious for rebelling and taking a different path from the one that
their parents have chosen. The chances are that a person who was forced
to attend Mass each week as a teenager won’t darken church doors again
for years afterwards.
Yet the opposite can be true, too: sustained cultural opposition (under
a Communist regime, for instance) cannot stiﬂe people’s faith. Consider,
also, the fact that social reformers will by deﬁnition be going against
prevailing practice through the inﬂuence of conscience – which cannot
therefore be just the result of prevailing practice.
Clearly, then, this argument is not as straightforward as some of its
proponents imply; indeed their very existence demonstrates as much.
The claim that Anna is a Christian because she was brought up in England,
by parents of Christian extraction, sounds strange when it is made by an
atheist who was brought up in England, by parents of Christian extraction.
Why should her background be an adequate explanation of her belief
system, but the same not be true of a nonbeliever? Or perhaps the same
is true of the nonbeliever, whose atheism is simply a product of a more
sceptical infant environment? “A student once criticized Dr Frederick
Temple, then Archbishop of Canterbury, saying, ‘you believe what you
believe because of the way you were brought up.’ Temple replied, ‘That
is as it may be. But the fact remains that you believe that I believe what I
believe because of the way I was brought up, because of the way you were
brought up’!”5
It is notoriously difﬁcult to pinpoint the reasons behind people’s
opinions – especially those as emotionally signiﬁcant as their religious
beliefs. The crux of this argument, though, does not depend on an end-
less “‘yes you are,’ ‘no I’m not’” response to the claim that most people
are only Christians because of their background. Rather, it turns on the
assertion that our reactions to religious matters are peculiarly different
from our reactions to other controversies: whereas we usually check our
beliefs against criteria of rationality and evidence, our religion is so much
a part of our cultural heritage that we don’t bother with these checks – it
just seems right to us. Religion is, in addition, so emotionally signiﬁcant
that most of us will resist any attempt to challenge it. The argument with
which this section is concerned, therefore, is that religion is not only the
product of our environment – after all, lots of things are – but that the
environment moulds our religious beliefs in a disturbingly pernicious
fashion.
Memes, it has been noted, are subject to selection pressures which vary
according to their content. A meme for a scientiﬁc theory, for example,

Science, Religion: What Can Memes Tell Us?
191
might be favoured because it corresponds well to the evidence, facil-
itates useful predictions and does not contradict the rest of scientiﬁc
knowledge; a meme for a melody might do well because it excites pathos;
a meme for a particular design of bridge might succeed because that type
of structure is robust as well as attractive.
When it comes to religion, the claim is that its successes are not based
on rationality. Rather than being compatible with other existing theories,
or standing up well to independent veriﬁcation, religious ideas do well
simply because they have found some way of ensuring that they are taught
and imitated. The popular and long-lasting religions are the ones that
are emotionally appealing, ﬁnd ways around our rational defences, and
include the claim that it is necessary to pass them on to others. Thus
the selective pressures in spiritual matters bear no resemblance to the
criteria of rationality and evidence to which scientiﬁc theses, for instance,
are subject. In science, we decide which theory to adopt on the basis of
superior evidence, but in religion we just follow our parents, or possibly
some “particularly potent infective agent”,6 as Dawkins puts it, whom we
happen to encounter. Informed decision between the world’s faiths plays
no part in this process of selection. Religious memes are unique in our
culture, in that they are able to bypass some of the ﬁlters through which
we usually process new claims.
One of Dawkins’s main arguments for the fact that religion is a mental
virus (or at least unique amongst memes), is that those who have been
infected by it, but have now “recovered”, still insist on infecting their
children with it. The best explanation of this, he says, is that the virus
has thereby provided itself with future victims, even if earlier ones re-
cover. Dawkins derides the reasons given by such parents for having their
children baptized: he says the claim that children deserve the choice of
whether or not to believe is, at best, a good argument for telling them
about every world religion.
Even disregarding the weakness of his meme-virus distinction, how-
ever, the reasoning here is faulty. Religious parents rear their children
within a faith because they regard its teachings as true. Atheistic parents,
on the other hand, regard the teachings of all religions as false. Therefore
if they decide to provide their children with the background necessary to
make an informed choice about whether to adopt a religion, then they
are unlikely to care, particularly, on which religion their offspring are de-
ciding. It is only through open-minded generosity that they are willing to
give their children the option of believing in any such ﬁction. It would be
clearly impracticable for them to educate the children in every faith – and

192
The Selﬁsh Meme
to do so would be to spend a disproportionate amount of time on religion,
considering that the parents under discussion are atheists. Thus the only
ground for their decision between the world’s religions will be their own
familiarity with the one in which they were raised. Indeed, this familiarity
may be the very reason for passing it on: Christianity, for instance, is part
of the historical fabric of British society, and it may be that nonbelieving
parents simply want to give their children an understanding of this aspect
of national life.
Moreover, such parents’ actions may more simply be explained as a
result of open-mindedness than as the result of a blind obedience to
instructions that were part and parcel of a long-discarded belief system.
As noted several times already, we possess lots of information to which we
do not subscribe, and which therefore exerts little executive control over
our thoughts or behaviour. Religion need not be seen as an exception
to the general rule that no open-minded person objects to his children’s
adherence to beliefs and tastes that he no longer shares (unless he has
particular reason to regard them as harmful). Thus he might pass on
to his children books that he has bought but did not enjoy, or records
of bands whose music he no longer appreciates – and usually these will,
inevitably, reﬂect his own culture and background. He might tell them
about the political opinions that are opposed to his own (usually this
would, at least initially, be restricted to those of their own country), or
explain why some people hold different beliefs about various moral issues.
There is no reason why religion should constitute a special case: for an
atheist, it is merely another set of beliefs to which he does not adhere,
but about which he wishes to say to his children something like “there
are people who believe this, for these reasons; I don’t; you may decide
for yourselves.”
Nevertheless, in support of the claim that religion is adopted for emo-
tional and not rational reasons, the tendency of some religious people
towards fanaticism and gullibility, when it comes to their spiritual beliefs,
is often highlighted. Surely such characteristics strongly imply that reli-
gious memes have some sort of unique bypass around our usual systems
of reason and logic? Yet neither trait is in fact unique to religion: both can
arise in any area in which the beliefs at stake are important and/or life
changing. The scientist’s “eureka!”–type experience is itself not wholly
devoid of emotion. Does this mean that what we perceive as exciting sci-
entiﬁc discoveries may, rather, be cases of infection by a mental virus that
exploits the “internal sensations of the patient”?7 That the keener the
scientist is on his new theory, the more evidence there is that it is really

Science, Religion: What Can Memes Tell Us?
193
a virus? Obviously not, any more than for people’s emotions about their
religion. There is no reason why one’s feelings about a claim should im-
ply anything about its truth value. This is the case for the ways in which
one arrives at beliefs about all sorts of information: in science, “eureka!”
is as valid as years of hard slog if the end result is correct, and in religion
hearing it from your parents is as valid as working it out for yourself or
by revelation, if what you get is the truth.
This last point hints at a broader distinction between the world and
our attitude towards it. On the one hand there is some objective truth
about the nature of the universe, our place in it, and whether or not
God exists. There is a “fact of the matter”, if you like. On the other hand
there are questions about how (or indeed if) we can discover the facts of
the matter, and how we feel about what we learn. For instance, Dawkins
ﬁnds it surprising that we are especially likely to share our own parents’
religion, or that of the culture in which we are raised: “since religious
beliefs purport to be true all over the universe it is odd, to say the least,
that which belief you hold depends so heavily on where in the world you
were brought up.” But why is it odd? Rather, it is perfectly reasonable
that people’s views of the universe should be based on their place within
it (i.e., be culturally founded). This cultural dependency of our beliefs is
quite separate from the objective truth of the facts. The facts according
to an atheist are quite different from the ones that a Christian or Sikh
believes to be the case – but the truth value of each point of view is not
affected by its cultural grounding.
That this is the case is actually quite fortunate for Dawkins, for should
his argument be valid then it would also count against atheism. Many
people absorb atheistic beliefs from their parents, and it is increasingly
common for people in the West to be brought up within a secular culture
in which religion is subject to ridicule or simply ignored altogether. Does
this mean (as Dawkins implies that it does for other religious beliefs) that
atheism must be false, since it is in these cases merely absorbed rather
than chosen? Of course it doesn’t: the ways in which we acquire a belief
are completely irrelevant to whether it is true or false. As the well-known
atheist George Smith puts it: “The American child who grows up to be
a Baptist simply because his parents were Baptist and he never thought
critically about those beliefs is not necessarily any more irrational than
the Soviet child who grows up to be an atheist simply because his parents
were atheist and because the state tells him to be an atheist.”8
Again we can see that there is a distinction to be made between the
evolution of claims and practices in this particular cultural area and the

194
The Selﬁsh Meme
beliefs and priorities of the humans who engage in it. On the one hand
religious ideas, like scientiﬁc hypotheses, evolve towards what we hope
will be the most accurate possible representations of the world and our
place in it. (Theists believe that religion is aided in this process by the
revelations of a loving creator God, so that in this area at least it may be
that cultural evolution is not wholly autonomous.) On the other hand
these ideas are accepted or rejected by human beings, and it may well
be true that some people set aside their usual capacity for rationality
and restraint when it comes to religious matters, just as others do when
dealing with politics or family feuds. As in any other cultural area, my
version of memetics allows both levels of description to hold.
As a ﬁnal consideration, I should note that a theme running through
almost all of this section’s arguments against religion is something that
C. S. Lewis has termed “Bulverism”.9 He points out that before explaining
why someone’s views are wrong you ﬁrst have to show that they are wrong.
“The modern method is to assume without discussion that he is wrong
and then distract his attention from this (the only real issue) by busily
explaining how he became so silly.” This indeed seems to be the method
of many of the arguments from culture against religion: to assume that
religious beliefs are unfounded, and use cultural heritage, individual
fanaticism or viral infection as an explanation of why people hold them
regardless.
The fact is that, although our environment undoubtedly plays its part
in shaping our faith, there is really no basis to the claim that culture’s
inﬂuence on our religious beliefs is such as to undermine their credibility.
Memetics is a theory about the development of ideas and information: it
has little if anything to say about the truth or falsehood of either religious
beliefs or indeed any other sort of belief. We are able, as explained in
the previous chapter, to make choices about what we do with the cultural
baggage that previous generations have left us: to use our capacity for
meta-representation in order to collate and evaluate it. The route via
which religion was handed down to us is irrelevant to the question of its
validity.
Contradictions from Genetics
Despite the irrelevance of memetics to the question of religious truth,
however, we have seen that in its application to the development of the
natural sciences meme theory appears to enjoy a degree of explanatory
success. Are there any other areas in which it might usefully be applied?

Science, Religion: What Can Memes Tell Us?
195
A signiﬁcant piece of evidence in favour of gene theory was its ability
to explain various apparent empirical contradictions, such as altruism.
Is meme theory able to explain apparent contradictions that arise from
gene theory, such as suicide or contraception? In fact, this seems to be
one of the theory’s strongest candidates for success. Clearly, a gene for
suicide, self-sacriﬁce or contraception could not replicate successfully
without various complex strategies to compensate for its lack of fecundity;
similarly, at the level of the individual such behaviour is inexplicable.
Viewed in meme terms, however, such examples are easily explained.
Suicide
Consider an emergent meme for suicide: with the prior existence of a
meme for heaven or at least the peace of death’s oblivion, and circum-
stances which render life unbearable, the meme for an escape from life
to death would surely be well received. Even if the recipient does not act
immediately upon the information, the idea of killing oneself has surely
been preserved in a form that retains its potential for a behavioural result.
The deep shock that greets the news of a suicide would mean that such
news would spread very quickly – so the meme for suicidal behaviour
would not only be well received within the existing meme pool but also
highly fecund. Hence, even though suicide destroys the individual bearer,
it promotes the survival of its meme. For a deeply unhappy person who
has this meme, and is looking for a way out of a situation when he has lost
all hope that it could be changed or improved, it is easy to move from
feeling that he cannot bear to live like this any more, to the belief that he
cannot bear to live any more.
This is not to say that someone might kill himself simply because he
had heard of suicide. Like any other meme, it could not exert its effects
unless the circumstances favoured them. It is a ﬁrmly established princi-
ple within the Samaritans, for example, that asking someone whether he
feels suicidal will not increase the risk of his killing himself. The suicide
meme is in most cases recessive, in that it produces no effects, despite be-
ing successfully replicated. The point, though, is that this recessive meme
can bear its tragic fruit when context renders it dominant. The most sig-
niﬁcant element of the “dominant” context is, I would suggest, the belief
that there is no other way out of the person’s situation. A suicidal person,
asked whether she really wants to die, will often answer that what she
really wants is an end to the situation or feelings that are making her
suicidal – and that suicide seems the only way to achieve this. Helping

196
The Selﬁsh Meme
her to come up with alternatives can change the context for her suicide
meme, making it recessive once more.
There is an important corollary to this view of suicide as a meme that
we can separate from its phenotypic effects. Contrary to some popular
opinion, people who talk about feeling suicidal often do go on to make
suicide attempts, and this is just what the memetic view would predict.
If their previously recessive suicide meme has begun to be expressed in
speech, then this is a hint that its phenotypic effects are beginning to
be implemented – that there is currently a context in which it could
dominate. Again, the opportunity to talk about why the person is feeling
suicidal, and what the alternatives might be, can be enough to change
that context back to one in which the suicide meme recedes.
Contraception
Another genetic anomaly is the ubiquity of contraception, and again this
is a fact that beneﬁts from a memetic explanation. The idea of contra-
ception would be well received for various obvious reasons, and despite
its adverse effects on the survival of its bearers’ genes, its fecundity would
be proportional to the number of people with whom its bearers had sex.
Later, information about it would spread verbally, or via written profes-
sional advice, and at this stage its fecundity would be self-perpetuating.
Interestingly, although I have written that contraception will have “ad-
verse effects on its bearers’ genes”, this is in fact rather too simplistic
a view. As noted in Chapter 9, contraception will indeed have negative
genetic effects, if there are sufﬁcient resources available for any children
who would have been born if it had not been used. In circumstances
where resources are scarce, however, the meme for contraception could
instead be genetically advantageous, so long as it is used to keep the pop-
ulation within the limits of its resources (although obviously this would
not apply to any couples who used it to prevent their having any children
at all).
The key in either situation, however, is that memetic success is inde-
pendent of genetic advantage, and the introduction of meme theory can
therefore account for some phenomena that genetics just cannot explain.

14
Conclusions
The theory of the selﬁsh meme was introduced, some chapters ago, with
a challenge: what does it contribute to our understanding of cultural
change? I said then that my approach would be to focus on the under-
lying structure of Dawkins’s hypothesis: to examine whether it could be
true, is internally coherent and could form a solid basis for any empirical
applications. What have those enquiries revealed?
The Meme Hypothesis
Ideas and customs develop at a pace that is far too great to be picked
up at the level of biological evolution, and sociobiology’s attempts to
show how the evolution of the body could account for changes within
our culture are therefore bound to fail. Richard Dawkins’s suggestion
is that we should look instead to evolution within culture itself, and he
has proposed that this might occur via “memes”, which are (roughly
speaking) the cultural analogues of genes. On this view Darwinism is an
example of a general type of theory which we should not artiﬁcially restrict
to the realm of biology. Its essential features can be extracted and their
domain of inﬂuence extended: whatever the type of replicator involved,
their variation under conditions of restricted resources would lead to a
form of evolution, and memes are simply cultural replicators. This is not
to say that they will be tied to the particular pattern of development that
genes have followed, for they are a different form of the type of process
that Darwinism exempliﬁes – the term “analogy” should be used with
great care in this context.
197

198
The Selﬁsh Meme
In order for Dawkins’s hypothesis to hold water, the three key aspects
of evolution (replication, variation and selection) must be shown to apply
in the cultural realm. In particular, the existence must be demonstrated
of identiﬁable units of replication that are realized in the appropri-
ate way.
Replication: A Process of Assembly
Human culture is so vast that any theory of its development must be able
to account for the ways in which its complexity has built up over the
millennia. The most efﬁcient methods of replicating complexity are hi-
erarchical – or (to use a phrase less laden with distracting connotations)
processes that build assemblies of subunits. If variation were permitted
in every element of a complex structure then copying processes would
lose much of their stability. As the constituents of our complex culture,
memes must therefore be dependent for their replication on assembling
constraints: this means, for example, that they must be able to slot into es-
tablished cultural assemblies without their own informational content be-
ing lost or blended in the process; and whilst the results that they produce
might be ﬁxed, such packets of information must also have a degree of
ﬂexibility that enables those effects to be produced in a variety of cultural
contexts. Copied in these ways, information is given the stability to grow
and develop in complexity. The breadth and depth of human culture is
thus explained by the cumulative replication of particulate information.
Particulate Memes
Yet the particulateness of human culture is one of the features of meme
theory that has proved most controversial. For cultural transmission to
beneﬁt from the stability that assembling constraints provide, culture
itself must be composed of particulate units of replication in the same
way that the natural world beneﬁts from the particulateness of genes, and
it is not immediately obvious that this is the case. Yet there is the same
evidence in its favour as Mendel once presented for his theory of genes:
the clear presence or absence of the replicators’ effects on the world.
Just as genetic effects can sometimes give the misleading appearance of
blending, so it can be hard in practice to separate the effects of one
meme from another – especially since the actions that result from meme
possession can be so very complex. This is not to say, however, that it
is impossible in principle to identify units of cultural information – just

Conclusions
199
that it is sometimes difﬁcult in practice (as indeed it was for genes in the
earliest years of genetic theory).
What does our understanding of cultural change gain from seeing it as
a process based in interactions between particulate memes? At the most
basic level the answer is that memes’ particulate nature is what facilitates
cultural evolution: the processes of variation and selection, on which
any form of evolution depends, cannot take place without the hered-
ity mechanism of discrete replicators. In addition, their particulateness
is what supports the assembling mechanisms that provide culture with
its stability and potential for growth: if bits of cultural information were
constantly blended with each other then the distinctive features of each
element would soon be lost. Even within the individual mind, the partic-
ulate nature of what we learn is what underpins our ability to partition
existing knowledge, to organize and manipulate incoming information,
and systematically to synthesize different parts of what we have learnt.
The important point to remember in memetics, just as in genetics, is
that the replicators exist independently of their effects: even when their
effects appear to blend, the replicators themselves remain particulate.
They carry information about the effects that they control; they are not
identical with those effects. In the case of genes, their independence is
maintained via the medium of DNA, which preserves biological informa-
tion in a form that is replicable and can produce its effects in a variety of
contexts. In the case of memes, this role is performed by representational
content.
Representational Content: Memetic DNA
What do we know about this cultural DNA? Many organisms are capable
of representing the world around them, but only some of these represen-
tations will count as memes. Only organisms that are capable of a certain
amount of behavioural ﬂexibility, for example, will be able to form repre-
sentations with a wholly determinate content: if it is not possible for the
organism to adapt its behaviour in response to environmental changes,
then it is equally impossible for us to determine exactly which bits of its
environment are included in its representations. Without this determi-
nacy of content, its representations cannot be memetic, because they do
not perform the vital replicative function of preserving a given portion of
content.
Other organisms are able to form determinate representations of the
world, but not to learn from each other: in other words, the content

200
The Selﬁsh Meme
of their representations is not replicable. Clearly these representations
cannot count as memes – cultural replicators – either.
Memes, then, are representations which preserve their content in a
way that can be copied between generations. As representations, they
are speciﬁcally those bits of our mental “furniture” which control our
behaviour in response to the information that they carry. In other words,
memes’ basis in representational content is precisely what accounts for
their ability to exert executive effects on the world.
More than this, however, memes must be able to interact and assemble
with other memes in order to account for the breadth and cumulative
stability of human culture; and they must be able to represent highly com-
plex portions of information in order to account for the depth and com-
plexity of human culture. Again, these faculties are the result of memes’
basis in representational content. Some organisms (namely humans) are
able to form internal links between representations, in addition to their
links with external perceptions and behaviour: these internal links give
representations their internal properties such as identity, and ultimately
free them from their dependence on external stimulation. Representa-
tions can now be meta-represented, and thus gain independence
from their original context, as well as developing in complexity and
abstractness.
As has been noted before, variation is necessary before a characteristic
can be selected, and there is no question that modern humans vary in
their abilities and tendencies to make links between the knowledge and
information that they acquire. In particular, gifted children and adults
typically display “keen powers of observation and reasoning, of seeing
relationships, and of generalising from a few given facts”.1 In other words,
these individuals are especially good at making links between ideas, of
the sort that can ultimately result in works of creative or intellectual
genius. Such observations lend support to the thesis that our ability to
form internal mental links is both innate and key to the development of
human culture – for not only does this faculty vary amongst humans, but
still today it characterizes the brightest amongst us.
Just as genetics was limited at ﬁrst by a lack of understanding of bio-
logical heredity, so memetics has until now been restricted by a lack of
understanding of cultural heredity. And just as the nature of DNA pro-
vides the mechanism for biological heredity, so the nature of representa-
tional content provides the mechanism for cultural heredity. It explains
how memes can preserve information between cultural generations in a
form that enables them to exert their phenotypic effects in a variety of

Conclusions
201
contexts, and thus accounts for the preservation and transmission of the
information that constitutes human culture.
One DNA; Many RSs
The forms that representational content can take in its fulﬁlment of this
role are various. Individual representations gain meaning from their con-
text within a conventionalized representational system (RS) – this is as
true for DNA as for cultural RSs – and the uniquely human capacity that
lies at the heart of culture is our ability to copy and develop RSs as well as
adding individual representations to our repertoire: the ability, in other
words, to meta-represent. Natural languages, systems of mathematical
and musical notation, the conventions of engineers’ drawings – all are
examples of cultural RSs, and each is peculiarly appropriate to its partic-
ular cultural area. Whereas organisms acquire their replicators in a job
lot from their parents, human minds acquire replicators on an ongoing
basis throughout their lives, and this means that they can acquire novel
RSs as well as novel representations.
Amongst these various RSs, the natural languages have primacy: they
alone beneﬁt from an innate device for their acquisition. Yet they beneﬁt,
too, from the innate ability to meta-represent – and it is this which allows
us also to develop nonlinguistic RSs, whose diverse rules and structures
are realized in media other than speech. Once these sorts of RS have been
taken into account, it becomes clear that there are many concepts that are
not available to us until the RS that supports them has been developed.
Our understanding of the complexity and enormity of human culture
is thus increased: we can see that it is facilitated by the development
of specialist RSs which enable the development of novel concepts, thus
acting as a springboard to a growth in knowledge and the development
of artistic expression.
Where Are Memes?
Representational systems are found both inside and outside human
minds: we can manipulate representations in our thoughts, but are often
assisted by writing things down as we go; vast stores of information are
maintained in a variety of external media, although they depend on in-
teraction with a human mind for their copying and development. More
speciﬁcally, we struggle to use speech or thought alone as media for the re-
alization of nonlinguistic representations, relying instead on the support

202
The Selﬁsh Meme
of cultural artefacts like pen and paper. Whereas our language instinct
gives rise to speech as the primary medium of natural languages, the
universal grammar of those languages proves too restricting to allow that
same medium to support nonlinguistic RSs. They are realized, instead,
in external, physical media like books.
An important consequence of this range of cultural media is that the
location of each representation will affect the ways in which it is able
to preserve and replicate its content. Some representations can play an
active role in ensuring the fecundity of the information that they carry,
whilst others will have a more passive role, in ensuring its longevity. This
picture of cultural change, as based on the hereditary mechanism of
representational systems, can thus account for both its continual devel-
opment and the remarkable persistence of its content.
The effects of cultural information, too, can be found both within and
without humans: our behaviour is affected by information especially when
it is presented to us in manipulative formats like advertisements; the ef-
fects of our thoughts and inventions are seen all around us in cultural arte-
facts like bridges and pianos. Yet if both memes and their effects can be
found both internally, in human minds, and externally, in human culture,
then what does this imply about the relationship between those minds
and the culture that surrounds them? Is culture the product of human
minds, or are our minds the product of the culture that they inhabit?
Human Minds and Culture
Most people’s intuitive answer would probably be “a bit of both” – and
the advantage of seeing culture as based in a variety of RSs is that this
perspective enables us to afﬁrm that intuitive response, and moreover
to explain why it is valid. According to this view, humans are born with
a degree of mindedness that includes, for example, the “representation
instinct”: an ability and tendency to learn and manipulate vast numbers
of representations, as well as the various systems in which they are em-
bedded. Humans are surrounded by such representations and their RSs
from the moment of birth – the most pervasive being natural language –
and infants’ innate mental potential is realized as a result of exposure
to this cultural environment. Conversely, the origins of those representa-
tions and their RSs are to be found in other, more fully developed human
minds.
Yet culture does not “build” human minds in the same way that biology
builds our bodies. Genes preserve and replicate biological information

Conclusions
203
by building vehicles for their own propagation and protection. In other
words, part of genes’ job is to create the replicative apparatus on which
they depend. Their effects may be found both within the survival ma-
chines that they build and on occasion in the external world (or even
in other organisms) – but their replication depends ultimately on the
machinery that they build for this purpose. Memes, on the other hand,
depend for their replication on a faculty of the human mind that is at root
genetic: the representation instinct. Although that faculty could not fully
develop and play its vital role within cultural evolution without the ac-
quisition of existing memes, this developmental process has more in com-
mon with the development of a muscle by use and exercise than with the
ontogeny of an organism. Both organisms and minds develop as a result
of the interaction between innate potential and the environment – and in
the mind’s case a crucial part of that environment is composed of memes.
A human mind, then, is partly the product of the memes that bombard
it, but only because it has the innate potential to interact with and develop
in response to those memes. Culture, in turn, is ultimately the product of
human minds, but the preservation of information in representational
content ensures that the culture we encounter today is largely composed
of memes produced by human minds of long ago. In any developmental
process there is an interaction between the formative constituents and
their environment: genes depend on environmental input (nutrition,
etc.) in order to fulﬁl their role as preservers and replicators of biological
information; memes depend on human minds and other external media
for their preservation and replication. The development of human minds
depends on a combination of these processes: their innate potential is
the result of an interaction between genes and the physical environment,
and that potential is fulﬁlled as a result of interaction with memes (the
cultural environment).
Yet there seems to be a danger here of implying that cultural evolution
is not after all a genuinely distinctive process. If minds are ultimately the
product of interaction between genes and the environment (even though
much of that environment is cultural), then this seems no different from
any other Darwinian process. Fortunately for memetics this problem is
illusory: rather, minds are the unique product of an interaction between
two quite independent Darwinian processes, one biological and the other
cultural. The ﬁrst is responsible for the mind’s innate potential, and the
other for the realization of that potential. Memes form part of the mind’s
environment, but they are a part that is governed by an evolutionary
algorithm.

204
The Selﬁsh Meme
The advantage of this view is that it provides a systematic algorithm for
the study of cultural change, without undermining our view of humans as
genuinely conscious, creative and intentional beings. Minds do what we
have always known that they do: they think, they are aware, they create
and they feel. These processes provide the mechanisms of replication,
variation and selection on which memetic evolution depends – but the
fact that conscious minds provide those mechanisms does not contradict
the claim that the consequent evolution is truly Darwinian. Cultural in-
formation is copied, varies and is selected, which is all that is needed for
evolution to occur. The consciousness that is involved (at least some of
the time) in these mechanisms serves no more to undermine the uncon-
sciousness of the cultural evolutionary algorithm than the emotions and
awareness that are involved in human sexual reproduction serve to un-
dermine the unconsciousness of the biological evolutionary algorithm.
Both cases exemplify the mundane scientiﬁc fact that we can often pro-
vide different levels of description (chemical, biological, psychological,
cultural, etc.) for the same process.
Variation and Selection
At one level, then, alterations and novelties in cultural information, and
their differential survival rates, can be described as processes involving
human creativity and decision making. At another, though, they can be
seen as memetic processes of variation and selection. In common with
genes, memes can be shown to vary via both mutation and recombina-
tion, and from this perspective the shifting patterns of cultural change
can be understood more clearly. Like genes, some portions of cultural
material will be more likely than others to mutate; some directions of
mutation will be more likely than others; and the ways in which cultural
information is able to exert its effects on the world will also inﬂuence the
changes that can take place. Whether the result of mutation or recombi-
nation, the variations that arise will be random with respect to ﬁtness. Of
course cultural evolution is played out at a far higher pace than biologi-
cal evolution, and in culture many unsuitable variations are discarded
so quickly that nobody other than their originator is aware of them.
Nonetheless, the vision of cultural change as determined by recombina-
tion and random mutation can give us some insight into the nature of that
change.
It should lead us to expect, for example, that the direction of cul-
tural evolution will be largely dependent on what has gone before: both

Conclusions
205
recombination and mutation are processes by which existing information
is altered. This is in sharp contrast to the view of science, for example, as
being directed primarily by an inexorable movement towards the truth;
rather, the primary inﬂuence on its direction comes from behind, in the
form of existing observations and theories. Similarly, we should expect
to see the selection of information with the best ﬁt to its environment,
not in absolute terms but relative to what other information is available.
Just as in genetics, we should not expect a certain variation automatically
to appear because it would be useful or is an improvement on what has
gone before. Like biology, culture has to wait upon the variations that
are actually thrown up against the background of what already exists –
and this is consistent with what history teaches us about many (to us)
outlandish theories and perspectives that seemed reasonable and valid
to our forebears.
Indeed, selection will often depend on a novelty’s compatibility with
the rest of the meme pool. In their bid to gain and retain our attention,
memes will succeed best if they ﬁt in with facts and skills that we have
already absorbed, being inﬂuenced particularly by those to which we are
greatly attached. Other factors in the selection process will include the
best available evidence, the physical environment, and the dictates of hu-
man psychology. As cultural material accumulates, then, its inﬂuence on
future variations will increase, and this explains why lateral thinking and
novel theories are often much more welcome in emerging cultural areas
than in established ones. The differential success of cultural variations
will usually be determined more by the environment (memetic, genetic
and physical) than by their own content.
The Selﬁsh Meme: A Critical Reassessment
Richard Dawkins describes the essence of his selﬁsh gene theory as the
insight “that there are two ways of looking at natural selection, the gene’s
angle and that of the individual”, and adds that such a change of vision
can, at its best, “usher in a whole climate of thinking, in which many
exciting and testable theories are born, and unimagined facts laid bare”.2
What, then, is the essence of his selﬁsh meme hypothesis? It is the
insight that there are two ways of looking at cultural change, the meme’s
angle and that of the human individual. We can see culture’s development
as the result of human aspirations, creativity, intellect and effort – or we
can see it as the product of memetic evolution. These are, as Dawkins
puts it, “two views of the same truth”.3

206
The Selﬁsh Meme
What theories are given birth, which facts laid bare by this change of
vision? One of the most signiﬁcant implications of the theory of the selﬁsh
gene is that the individual organism was not an inevitable outcome of
genetic evolution: it so happens that genes have banded together to build
survival machines, but the only crucial feature of any form of evolution
is the replicator – the unit of selection. Although organisms clearly exist,
and have a perspective from which the world of genes is irrelevant to their
everyday lives, fundamentally their lives and evolution are determined by
that world.
No analogous insight arises from the theory of the selﬁsh meme, because
memes do not build survival machines. Their replicative mechanisms, and
the means of their variation and selection, lie in genetically determined
human faculties, not in vehicles that they themselves build. The familiarity
of the individual organism lent wonder to the claims that Dawkins made
for the power of the selﬁsh gene, but memes are not bundled up in a
comparable way: analogously to the early genes, they are peppered freely
throughout the cultural environment.
Memeticists like Daniel Dennett and Susan Blackmore, who disagree
with this claim, have concluded that we are meme machines as much as
gene machines, and are led to the assumption that “there is no conscious
self inside” those machines; that “a complex interplay of replicators and
environment” is all there is to life.4 They are mistaken: it is not all there
is to life, but merely one way of describing life. The other way – in terms of
intellect and consciousness, desires and hopes, beliefs and emotions – is
equally valid.
Nonetheless, there is an important insight to be gained by taking the
perspective of the selﬁsh meme: that cultural evolution is an autonomous
process over which we exercise a limited amount of control. Our sense of
self is not illusory, but our sense of control over the collective products
of our minds may well be. Although our minds provide the mechanisms of
memetic evolution, there is a very real sense in which the directions of that
evolution are independent of us. As individuals we develop new ideas, give
responses to existing cultural material and make an undeniable impact
on the world around us – but we can do little about the ideas, responses
and impact of other people, and each of us is so heavily outnumbered
by everyone else that our own contributions are bound to be limited. The
existence, moreover, of such a vast body of cultural material means that
the success or failure of novel hypotheses, technological inventions or
even ethical opinions will be determined more by their relative ﬁtness
for this immense meme pool than by their intrinsic merits.

Conclusions
207
Yet even this should not lead to despair. Although we can do noth-
ing about the soil on which our cultural seeds fall, still we should care
about the type of seeds that we plant. Scientists do not give up on their
search for the truth just because there is a chance that they are starting
from a position bogged down by the legacy of past theses rather than sup-
ported on the shoulders of the giants who originated them. The politics
of funding, the stature of individual scientists and even the language that
they speak may all inﬂuence the chances of their own research bearing
fruit, but this need not detract from the value of the enterprise in which
they are engaged. The same applies in any other area of culture, too.
In religion, for instance, there are myriad different points of view, and
their differential success (in terms of numbers of people who subscribe to
each) may be affected by factors unrelated to their validity – but again
this does not mean that there is no truth to be found, and no value in
the search for it.
From the perspective of the selﬁsh meme we can see that culture’s de-
velopment will ultimately be determined by a complex interplay between
memes and their environment. The content of those memes, however, is
our responsibility.


Acknowledgements
The work towards my doctoral thesis, on which this book was originally
based, was not only supervised but also constantly inspired and encour-
aged by George Botterill. His generous gifts of time and thought were
greatly appreciated. My thanks are also due to Peter Carruthers for his
help and guidance during that period.
I am grateful for the support of the late Terence Moore and of
Stephanie Achard at the Cambridge University Press and for the con-
structive comments, on earlier drafts, of two anonymous reviewers.
No work towards rewriting this book would have been possible with-
out the provision of safe and enjoyable childcare for my sons, for a few
precious hours each week. For this I am especially grateful to Jocelyn
Lewry, to the Nursery and Kindergarten staff at The Croft School and
Sally Jones in particular, and for a brief period to the staff at The Ark
Nursery. Equally sustaining in this regard have been the times that the
boys have spent with their Grandmas.
Encouragement for my endeavours has been unstintingly provided by
my family and friends – particularly my parents – and for this I am very
thankful.
Most of all, my gratitude is due to my husband, Keith, whose sup-
port has been immeasurable. From unforgivingly precise proofreader to
most thought-provoking critic; from grand ﬁxer of all computer prob-
lems to chief provider of practical examples; from most generous ﬁ-
nancial supporter to principal retriever of philosopher’s head from the
clouds; from most effective dismisser of self-doubt to foremost reinforcer
of faith . . . none of this would have been possible without him.
Now to him who is able to do immeasurably more than all we ask or imagine,
according to his power that is at work within us, to him be glory in the church and
in Christ Jesus throughout all generations, for ever and ever! (Ephesians 3: 20–1)
209


Notes
Chapter 1
Introduction
1. Dawkins 1989: 189.
2. Jeremy H. Barkhow 1989: 118.
Chapter 2
The Meme Hypothesis
1. Dawkins 1989: 194.
2. Ibid. 191.
3. Ibid. 200.
4. Dawkins 1982: 290.
5. Dawkins 1989: 193.
6. Dawkins 1982: 109.
7. Ibid.
8. Anthony Flew ed. 1979: 353.
9. C. Darden and J. A. Cain 1989: 109.
10. Wilson, “Heredity,” in Michael Ruse 1989: 247.
11. Elliott Sober 1993: 191.
12. R. Boyd and P. J. Richerson 1985: 13.
Chapter 3
Cultural DNA
1. This theory has been defended by Fred Dretske, 1988, amongst others.
2. The following discussion draws heavily on the work of Nicholas Agar, 1993.
Agar’s thesis was itself in part a response to Fodor, 1990.
3. Agar, 1993: 1.
4. An example taken from the work of Kandel et al. on Aplysia californica. See
for instance Eric R. Kandel and James H. Schwartz eds. 1981, ch. 52.
211

212
Notes to Pages 40–74
Chapter 4
The Replication of Complex Culture
1. Blackmore 1999
2. Quoted variously by Arthur Koestler and others. Originally Simon 1962.
3. Richard Dawkins 1982: 251.
4. Albert R. Meyer and Eric Lehman 2002.
5. Dawkins 1976.
6. Dawkins 1982: 251. He is quoting from Dawkins 1976.
7. Koestler 1978.
8. David L. Hull, in Robert Aunger ed. 2000: 55.
Chapter 5
Variation
1. Richard Dawkins 1986: 307.
2. Ibid.
3. Liane Gabora 1997: 4.1.
4. Cf. George Botterill 1995.
5. Gabora 1997 – though notice that the original point of her quotation was
not to support the views that I express here.
6. Sperber 1996: 29.
7. Ibid. 118.
8. Ibid. 29.
9. Pinker 1994.
10. Dennett 1995: 355.
11. Ibid. 354.
Chapter 6
Selection
1. Dan Sperber 1996: 54.
2. Liane Gabora 1997: 3.2.
3. Mario Vaneechootte 1998.
4. Rosaria Conte in Robert Aunger ed. 2000: 103.
5. See Rowan Bayne, Ian Horton, Tony Merry, Elizabeth Noyes et al. 1999: 62–3
for further discussion of this point.
6. Sperber 1996: 71ff.
7. Kevin Laland and John Odling-Smee in Aunger ed. 2000: 134.
8. P. E. Grifﬁths 1993.
Chapter 8
The Human Mind: Meme Complex with a Virus?
1. See, e.g., M. Midgely 1979, a surprisingly vitriolic attack in which both genes
and memes are characterized as conscious; John Bowker 1995, ch. 8, an
equally passionate rebuttal of meme theory, which is based on a different
series of misconceptions.
2. E.g., Dawkins 1993a and 1993b.
3. Dawkins 1993b.
4. Ibid.

Notes to Pages 74–101
213
5. Ibid.
6. Dawkins 1993a: 26.
7. Shrader 1980: 281.
8. Dawkins 1989: 36.
9. Ibid. 199.
10. Dennett 1991: 210.
11. This interpretation has been taken from Dennett 1990, and from the rele-
vant parts of Dennett 1991. Dennett 1995 is also relevant, but (on memes,
anyway) does not add much to Dennett 1991.
12. Dennett 1991: 200 (emphases Dennett’s).
13. Ibid. 207.
14. Dennett 1995: 349.
15. Ibid. 347–8.
16. Dennett 1991: 203–4.
17. Blackmore 1999: 17.
18. Conte in Robert Aunger ed. 2000: 113.
19. Dawkins 1982: 20.
20. 1982.
21. Dawkins 1982: 117.
22. Ibid. 292.
23. Ibid. 210.
24. Ibid. 263–4.
25. Dennett 1990: 128.
26. Dennett 1991: 416.
27. Dennett 1995: 366.
28. Ibid.
29. Dawkins 1989: 235.
30. Elliott Sober 1993, ch. 7.
31. Andy Clark 1995: 23.
Chapter 9
The Meme’s Eye View
1. Blackmore 1999: 65.
2. Blackmore in Robert Aunger ed. 2000: 32.
3. Ibid. 36.
4. Ibid. 37.
5. Blackmore 1999: 192.
6. Ibid. 197.
7. Terence Deacon 1997.
8. Blackmore in Aunger ed. 2000: 26.
9. J. B. Sykes 1982: 231.
10. Blackmore in Aunger ed. 2000: 34.
11. Kevin Laland and John Odling-Smee in Aunger ed. 2000: 128.
12. Blackmore in Aunger ed. 2000: 27.
13. Plotkin in Aunger ed. 2000: 77.
14. Ibid. 76.
15. Ibid. 78.

214
Notes to Pages 102–138
16. Ibid. 79.
17. Ibid. 80.
18. Sperber in Aunger ed. 2000: 164.
19. Sperber 1996: 102.
20. Ibid.
21. Ibid. 106.
22. Sperber in Aunger ed. 2000: 171.
23. Ibid. 169.
24. Dawkins: foreword to Susan Blackmore 1999: vii–xvii.
25. Sperber 1996: 101.
26. Sperber in Aunger ed. 2000: 172.
27. Ibid.
28. Sperber 1996: 106.
29. Boyd and Richerson in Aunger ed. 2000: 155.
30. Ibid.
31. Ibid. 159.
32. Mario Vaneechootte 1998.
Chapter 10
Early Cultural Evolution
1. Richard Dawkins 1989: 14ff.
2. Ibid. 19.
3. Ibid.
4. Ibid.
5. Byrne and Russon 1998.
6. Ibid. 13. This quotation was underlined in the original.
7. Deacon 1997, ch. 4.
8. R. Leakey and R. Lewin 1992: 302–3.
9. Cf. ibid. 298.
10. Ibid. 300.
11. Frans de Waal (primatologist), quoted in Leakey and Lewin, ibid. 300–1.
12. George Botterill 1994. His reference is to A. Whiten (1993) “Evolving a the-
ory of mind: the nature of non-verbal mentalism in other primates”, in Baron-
Cohen, Tager-Flusberg and Cohen eds. 1993, Understanding Other Minds.
13. G. Ettlinger 1987: 173.
14. A. N. Meltzoff and R. W. Borton 1979.
15. V. W. Gunderson 1983.
16. Meltzoff and Borton 1979: 404.
17. Leakey and Lewin 1992: 289–90.
18. A. H. Brodick 1960: 85.
19. Dawkins 1986: 190.
20. Leakey and Lewin 1992: 170.
21. Ibid. 172.
22. National Association for Gifted Children 1998: 4.
23. Byrne and Russon 1998.
24. Ibid. 22.
25. Deacon 1997: 94.

Notes to Pages 143–182
215
Chapter 11
Memetic DNA
1. Dawkins 1986: 217–18.
2. See Sleven Pinker 1994: 106ff for a discussion of X-bar theory, which claims
that all phrases in all languages are governed by one plan – so the rules are
all that matter.
3. Deacon 1997, ch. 3.
4. Ibid. 92–3 (my italics).
5. Ibid. ch. 4.
6. Ibid. 146.
7. Elliott Sober 1993: 41.
8. Mike Darton and John O. E. Clark 1994: 308.
9. Robert Aunger 2002.
10. Ibid. 154.
11. Ibid. 157.
12. Ibid. 154.
13. Ibid. 157.
14. Ibid. 154.
15. Ibid.
16. Dawkins 1989: 33–4.
17. Ibid. 196.
18. Bloch in Robert Aunger ed. 2000: 194.
19. Ibid. 200.
20. Ibid. 199.
21. Ibid. 201.
22. David L. Hull in Aunger ed. 2000: 45.
23. Chomsky in Richard L. Gregory 1987: 420.
24. Darton and Clark 1994: 524.
25. Chomsky in Richard L. Gregory 1987: 420.
26. Ibid. 421.
27. Ibid. 420.
Chapter 12
Memes and the Mind
1. Susan Blackmore in Robert Aunger ed. 2000: 29.
2. Blackmore 1999: 233.
3. Ibid.
4. Conte in Aunger 2000: 87 (original in italics).
5. Aunger in Aunger ed. 2000: 14 – here Aunger is summarizing Conte.
6. Sheila Dainow 1995.
7. Matthew 13: 1–9 and 18–23.
8. The remainder of this chapter is taken largely from an earlier paper which
I wrote jointly with Keith Distin: K. E. Distin and K. W. Distin 1996.
9. Wallace 1989: 1.
10. Ibid. 10.
11. Ibid. 11.
12. Rose 1999a.

216
Notes to Pages 182–206
13. Rose 1999b.
14. David L. Hull 1999.
15. Richard Dawkins 1989: 215.
Chapter 13
Science, Religion and Society: What Can Memes Tell Us?
1. Douglas Shrader 1980.
2. Richard Dawkins 1993b.
3. Russell 1927: 19.
4. Ibid. 20.
5. Michael Poole ed. 1997: 5.
6. Dawkins 1993a: 25.
7. Ibid.
8. Smith 1976.
9. Lewis 1941: 17–21.
Chapter 14
Conclusions
1. National Association for Gifted Children – Education and Research Sub-
Committee 1998: 4.
2. Dawkins 1989: viii–ix.
3. Ibid. ix – though notice that Dawkins’s use of this phrase did not refer to
memes, and was not intended to support the view of memes that I express
here.
4. Blackmore 1999: 241–6.

Bibliography
Agar, Nicholas (1993) What do frogs really believe? Australasian Journal of Philos-
ophy 71:1–12.
Alp, R. (1993) Meat eating and ant dipping by wild chimpanzees in Sierra Leone,
Primates 34:463–8.
Andreski, S., ed. (1971) Herbert Spencer, Nelson.
Antilla, R. (1972) An introduction to historical and comparative linguistics, Macmillan.
Aunger, Robert (1999) Culture vultures, The Sciences 39 (5):36–42.
Aunger, Robert, ed. (2000) Darwinizing culture – the status of memetics as a science,
Oxford University Press.
Aunger, Robert (2002) The electric meme: a new theory of how we think, Free Press.
Avers, C. J. (1989) Process and pattern in evolution, Oxford University Press.
Ball, J. A. (1984) Memes as replicators, Ethology and Sociobiology 5:145–61.
Barkhow, Jeremy H. (1989) The elastic between genes and culture, Ethology and
Sociobiology 10:111–26.
Barnett, S. M., ed. (1962) A century of Darwinism, Mercury.
Bayne, Rowan; Horton, Ian; Merry, Tony; Noyes, Elizabeth; & McMahon,
Gladeana (1999) The counsellor’s handbook – a practical A-Z guide to professional
and clinical practice, Stanley Thorne.
Beer, Francis A. (1999) Memetic meanings – a commentary on Rose’s paper:
Controversies in meme theory, Journal of Memetics – Evolutionary Models of Infor-
mation Transmission [Internet] 3 (1), June 1999. Available from: <http://jom-
emit.cfpm.org/1999/vol3/beer fa.html>
Benzon, William L. (2002) Colorless green homunculi, Human Nature Review
2:454–62.
Bickerton, Derek (1990) Language and species, University of Chicago Press.
Blackmore, Susan (1999) The meme machine, Oxford University Press.
Blackmore, Susan (2000) The power of memes, Scientiﬁc American 283 (4):52–61.
Bonjour, Laurence (1985) The structure of empirical knowledge, Harvard University
Press.
217

218
Bibliography
Botterill, George (1993) “Functions and functional explanation”. Unpublished
manuscript.
Botterill, George (1994) Personal communication.
Botterill, George (1995) “How can we learn anything from thought experi-
ments?” Unpublished manuscript.
Botterill, George, & Carruthers, P. (1999) The philosophy of psychology, Cambridge
University Press.
Bowker, John (1995) Is God a virus? Genes, culture and religion, SPCK.
Boyd, Gary (2001) The human agency of meme machines, An extended review
of “The meme machine” by Susan Blackmore, Journal of Memetics – Evolutionary
Models of Information Transmission [Internet] 5 (1), March 2001. Available from:
<http://jom-emit.cfpm.org/2001/vol5/boyd g.html>
Boyd, R., & Richerson, P. J. (1985) Culture and the evolutionary process, University
of Chicago Press.
Brodick, A. H. (1960) Man and his ancestry, Scientiﬁc Book Club.
Bryson, Bill. (1990) Mother tongue, Penguin Books.
Burhoe, Ralph Wendell (1979) Religion’s role in human evolution: the miss-
ing link between ape-man’s selﬁsh genes and civilized altruism, Zygon 14:
135–62.
Byrne, Richard W., & Russon, Anne E. (1998) Learning by imitation: a hierarchi-
cal approach, Behavioural and Brain Sciences 21 (5):667–84.
Carruthers, Peter (1992) Human knowledge and human nature, Oxford University
Press.
Carruthers, Peter (1994) “Prolegomena to a project: the natural involvement of
language in thought”. Unpublished manuscript.
Carruthers, Peter (1995) Language, thought and consciousness, Cambridge Univer-
sity Press.
Cavalli-Sforza, L. L., & Feldman, M. (1981) Cultural transmission and evolution: a
quantitative approach, Princeton University Press.
Christians in Science, Proceedings of the Conference on Creation and Evolution, 1993,
Regent’s College London (1993), conference chairman Oliver Barclay.
Clark, Andy (1995) Language: the ultimate artifact, unpublished ﬁrst draft of
chapter 10 in Andy Clark (1997) Being there: putting brain, body and world together
again, MIT Press.
Clark, S. R. L. (1993) Minds, memes and rhetoric, Inquiry 36:3–16.
Cloak, F. T. (1975) Is a cultural ethology possible? Human Ecology 3:161–82.
Critchlow, P. (1982) Mastering chemistry, Macmillan.
Dahlbom, B., ed. (1993) Dennett and his critics, Blackwell.
Dainow, Sheila (1995) Uncovering a TA script with pictures, Counselling 6: 291–3.
Darden, C., & Cain, J. A. (1989) Selection type theories, Philosophy of Science 56:
106–29.
Darton, Mike, & Clark, John O. E. (1994) The Dent dictionary of measurement, J. M.
Dent.
Darwin, Charles (1859) The origin of species, Penguin 1968 edition.
Darwin, Charles (1887) Autobiographical chapter in Darwin, F., ed., Life and
letters, vols. 1–3, John Murray.

Bibliography
219
Dawkins, Richard (1976) Hierarchical organisation: a candidate principle for
ethology, in P. P. G. Bateson & R. A. Hinde, eds (1976) Growing points in ethology,
Cambridge Universty Press, pp. 7–54.
Dawkins, Richard (1978) Reply to Fix and Greene, Contemporary Sociobiology 7.
Dawkins, Richard (1982) The extended phenotype, Oxford University Press.
Dawkins, Richard (1986) The blind watchmaker, Penguin Books.
Dawkins, Richard (1989) The selﬁsh gene, revised edition, Oxford University
Press.
Dawkins, Richard (1993a) Viruses of the mind, in B. Dahlbom, ed. (1993) Dennett
and his critics, Blackwell, pp. 13–27.
Dawkins, Richard (1993b) Is religion just a disease? Daily Telegraph, 15 December,
p. 18.
Dawkins, Richard (1995a) A reply to Poole, Science and Christian Belief 7:45–50.
Dawkins, Richard (1995b) River out of Eden, Weidenfeld and Nicolson.
Deacon, Terence (1997) The symbolic species – the co-evolution of language and the
human brain, Allen Lane, The Penguin Press.
Delfgaauw, Bernard (1961) The theory of Teilhard de Chardin, Collins (Fontana).
Dennett, Daniel C. (1990) Memes and the exploitation of imagination, Journal
of Aesthetics and Art Criticism 48:127–35.
Dennett, Daniel C. (1991) Consciousness explained, Penguin Books.
Dennett, Daniel C. (1993) Living on the edge, Inquiry 36:135–8.
Dennett, Daniel C. (1995) Darwin’s dangerous idea – evolution and the meanings of
life, Allen Lane, Penguin Press.
Dennett, Daniel C. (1999) The evolution of culture, Charles Simonyi Lecture at
Oxford University, February 17 1999 [Internet] Available from:<http://www.
edge.org/3rd culture/dennett/dennett p1.html>.
Desmond, A., & Moore, J. (1991) Darwin, Michael Joseph.
Distin, K. E. (1997) Cultural evolution – the meme hypothesis, in Proceedings of
the Conference on Evolution, or How did we get here? 1997, Westminster College
Oxford, Christ and the Cosmos.
Distin, K. E. (1999) : Interfaith issues in Religious Education: a response to Lat
Blaylock, REsource 21 (3):16–18.
Distin, K. E., & Distin, K. W. (1996) Human design methods, in Proceedings of the
Conference on Design in Nature?, Birmingham 1996, conference chairman Colin
Russell, Christians in Science.
Donald, Merlin (1993) Reply to Plotkin, Behavioural and Brain Science 16:782–3.
Dretske, F. (1988) Explaining behaviour, MIT Press.
Durham, W. H. (1990) Advances in evolutionary culture theory, Annual Review of
Anthropology 19:187–210.
Durkheim, ´Emile (1938) The rules of sociological method, University of Chicago
Press.
Ettlinger, G. (1987) Cross-modal sensory integration, in Richard L. Gregory, ed.
(1987) The Oxford companion to the mind, Oxford University Press, pp. 173–4.
Flew, Anthony, ed. (1979) Dictionary of philosophy, Pan Books.
Fodor, J. A. (1987) Psychosemantics, MIT Press.
Fodor, J. A. (1990) A theory of content and other essays, MIT Press.

220
Bibliography
Fregmen, A., & Fay, D. (1980) Over-extensions in production and compre-
hension: methodological clariﬁcation, Journal of Child Language 7:205–11.
Gabora, Liane (1997) The origin and evolution of culture and creativity, Journal of
Memetics – Evolutionary Models of Information Transmission [Internet] 1 (1), May
1997. Available from <http://jom- emit.cfpm.org/1997/vol1/gabora l.html>
Gabora, Liane (1999) A review of “The Meme Machine” by Susan Blackmore, The
Journal of Artiﬁcial Societies and Social Simulation [Internet] 2 (2), March 1999.
Available from: <http://jasss.soc. surrey.ac.uk/2/2/review2.html>
Gatherer, Derek (1999) A plea for methodological Darwinism – a commentary on
Rose’s paper: Controversies in meme theory, Journal of Memetics – Evolutionary
Models of Information Transmission [Internet] 3 (1), June 1999. Available from:
<http://jom-emit. cfpm.org/1999/vol3/gatherer dg2.html>
Goswami, Usha (1990) “Developmental psychology”. Cambridge University NST
1B lecture notes.
Gregory, Richard L., ed. (1987) The Oxford companion to the mind, Oxford Univer-
sity Press.
Grifﬁths, P. E. (1993) Functional analysis and proper functions, British Journal for
the Philosophy of Science 44:409–22.
Gross, John (1991) The Oxford book of essays, Oxford University Press.
Gunderson, V. W. (1983) Development of cross-modal recognition in infant pig-
tail monkeys (Macaca nemestrina), Developmental Psychology 19:389–404.
Hacking, I. (1983) Representing and intervening, Cambridge University Press.
Heylighen, Francis (1998) What makes a meme successful? Selection criteria
for cultural evolution, in Symposium on memetics, 15th International Congress
on Cybernetics, Namur (1998), symposium chairmen Francis Heylighen
& Mario Vaneechoutte. Available from: <http://pespmc1.vub.ac.be/papers/
MemeticsNamur.html>
Hofstadter, Richard (1944) Social Darwinism in American thought, 1959 edition,
George Braziller.
Honderich, Ted, ed. (1995) The Oxford companion to philosophy, Oxford University
Press.
Hull, David L. (1988) A mechanism and its metaphysics: an evolutionary account
of the social and conceptual development of science, Biology and Philosophy
3:123–55.
Hull, David L. (1999) Strategies in meme theory – a commentary on Rose’s paper:
Controversies in meme theory, Journal of Memetics – Evolutionary Models of Infor-
mation Transmission [Internet] 3 (1), June 1999. Available from <http://jom-
emit.cfpm.org/1999/vol3/hull dl.html>
Jones, B. E. M. (1995) “Is there a role for syntax/parsing in NLP?” Unpublished
manuscript.
Kandel, Eric R., & Schwartz, James H., eds. (1981) Principles of neural science,
Edward Arnold.
Karmiloff-Smith, Annette (1992) Beyond modularity – a developmental perspective on
cognitive science, MIT Press.
Kenny, A. (1989) The metaphysics of mind, Clarendon Press.
Kirk, Robert (1993) “The best set of tools”? Dennett’s metaphors and the mind-
body problem, The Philosophical Quarterly 43:335–43.

Bibliography
221
Koestler, Arthur (1964) The act of creation, Hutchinson.
Koestler, Arthur (1978) Janus – a summing up, Hutchinson.
Kolenda, K. (1979) Introduction in Gilbert Ryle, On thinking, Blackwell.
Leakey, R., & Lewin, R. (1992) Origins reconsidered, Little, Brown & Co.
Levi, Primo (1992) The periodic table, Abacus.
Lewis, C. S. (1941) Bulverism, in Walter Hooper ed. (1996) Compelling reason,
Fount, pp. 17–21.
Lewis, D. (1983) Philosophical papers, vol. 1, Oxford University Press.
Line, Christina Personal communication.
Lukes, Steven (1975) ´Emile Durkheim – his life and work: a historical and critical study,
Peregrine.
Lycan, W. ed. (1990) Mind and cognition: a reader, Blackwell.
Lynch, A. et al. (1989) A model of cultural evolution of chafﬁnch song derived
with the meme concept, American Naturalist 133:634–53.
Lynch, A. et al. (1993) A population memetics approach to cultural evolution in
chafﬁnch song, American Naturalist 141:597–620.
McCrone, J. (1990) The ape that spoke, Picador.
McGinn, C. (1989) Mental content, Blackwell.
Magee, Bryan (1975) Popper, Collins (Fontana).
Malthus, T. R. (1826) An essay on the principle of population, John Murray.
Mason, Kelby (1998) Thoughts as tools: the meme in Daniel Dennett’s work,
in Symposium on memetics, 15th International Congress on Cybernetics, Namur
(1998), symposium chairmen Francis Heylighen & Mario Vaneechoutte. Avail-
able from: <http://pespmc1. vub.ac.be/Conf/MemePap/Mason.html>
Masters, R. D. (1970) Genes, language and evolution, Semiotica 2:295–320.
Medawar, Peter (1990): The threat and the glory, Oxford University Press.
Meltzoff, A. N., & Borton, R. W. (1979) Intermodal matching by human neonates,
Nature 282:403–4.
Meyer, Albert R., & Lehman, Eric (2002) Random variables: Expectation, Math-
ematics for Computer Science Handouts and Course Notes Week 12 (Fall 2002).
Available from <http://theory.lcs.mit.edu/classes/6.042/fall02/handouts/
#week12>
Midgley, M. (1979) Gene-juggling, Philosophy 54 (210):439–58.
Millikan, Ruth G. (1984) Language, thought, and other biological categories, MIT
Press.
Millikan, Ruth G. (1990) Compare and contrast Dretske, Fodor, and Millikan on
teleosemantics, Philosophical Topics 18 (2):151–61.
Modelski, George (1999) An evolutionary theory of culture? – a commentary on
Rose’s paper: Controversies in meme theory, Journal of Memetics – Evolutionary
Models of Information Transmission [Internet] 3 (1), June 1999. Available from:
<http://jom-emit.cfpm.org/1999/vol3/modelski g.html>
Morris, Desmond (1968) The naked ape, Corgi.
National Association for Gifted Children, Education and Research Sub-
Committee (1998) Help with bright children, NAGC.
Oldroyd, D. R. (1983) Darwinian impacts, Open University Press.
Papineau, D. (1993) “The teleological theory of representation”. Seminar deliv-
ered to Shefﬁeld University Philosophy Department.

222
Bibliography
Pinker, Steven (1994) The language instinct – the new science of language and mind,
Penguin Books.
Plotkin, H. C. (1993) Hunting memes, Behavioural and Brain Science 16:768–9.
Poole, Michael (1994) A critique of aspects of the philosophy and theology of
Richard Dawkins, Science and Christian Belief 6:41–59.
Poole, Michael (1995) A response to Dawkins, Science and Christian Belief 7:51–8.
Poole, Michael, ed. (1997) God and the scientists, CPO – Design and Print.
Popper, Karl R. (1972) Objective knowledge – an evolutionary approach, Oxford Uni-
versity Press.
Porter, Roy (1987) Man masters nature, BBC.
Price, If (1999) Steps towards the memetic self – a commentary on Rose’s paper:
Controversies in meme theory, Journal of Memetics – Evolutionary Models of Infor-
mation Transmission [Internet] 3 (1), June 1999. Available from: <http://jom-
emit.cfpm.org/1999/vol3/price if.html>
Research Scientists’ Christian Fellowship, Proceedings of the Conference on Evolution,
1974, Bedford College London (1974), conference chairman Duncan Vere.
Robbins, T. W., & Cooper, P. J. (1988) Psychology for medicine, Edward Arnold.
Roberts, K. (1998) The academic and emotional needs of gifted children – a
personal case study, Gifted and Talented 2:32–8.
Rose, Nick (1998) Controversies in meme theory, Journal of Memetics – Evolutionary
Models of Information Transmission [Internet] 2 (1), June 1998. Available from:
<http://jom-emit.cfpm.org/1998/vol2/rose n.html>
Rose, Nick (1999a) Rationale for commentary on Rose’s paper: Controversies
in meme theory, Journal of Memetics – Evolutionary Models of Information Trans-
mission [Internet] 3 (1), June 1999. Available from <http://jom-emit.cfpm.
org/1999/vol3/rose n case for commentary.html>
Rose, Nick (1999b) Okay, but exactly “who” would escape the tyranny of the
replicators? – reply to the commentaries on the author’s paper: Contro-
versies in meme theory, Journal of Memetics – Evolutionary Models of Informa-
tion Transmission [Internet] 3 (1), June 1999. Available from: <http://jom-
emit.cfpm.org/1999/vol3/rose n.html>
Ruse, Michael (1982) Darwinism defended, Addison-Wesley.
Ruse, Michael, ed. (1989) Philosophy of biology, Macmillan.
Russell, Bertrand (1927) Why I am not a Christian, in Paul Edwards, ed. (1957)
Why I am not a Christian, 1996 edition, Routledge, pp. 13–26.
Ryle, Gilbert (1963) The concept of mind, Penguin Books.
Ryle, Gilbert (1979) On thinking, Blackwell.
Schull, J. (1990) Are species intelligent? Behavioural and Brain Sciences 13:68–113.
Searle, John (1989) Minds, brains and science, Pelican.
Shafto, Michael, ed. (1985) How we know, Harper and Row.
Shrader, Douglas (1980) The evolutionary development of science, Review of
Metaphysics 34:273–96.
Simon, Herbert (1962) The architecture of complexity, Proceedings of the American
Philosophical Society 106:6, December 1962, pp. 467–82.
Singer, Peter ed. (1986) Applied ethics, Oxford University Press.
Sluckin, W. (1954) Minds and machines, Pelican.

Bibliography
223
Smith, George (1976) How to defend atheism, Speech delivered to the Society of
Separationists [Internet]. Available from: <http://www. inﬁdels.org/library/
modern/george smith/defending.html>
Sober, Elliott (1993) Philosophy of biology, Oxford University Press.
Spencer, Herbert (1862) First principles, 1900 edition, Williams & Norgate.
Sperber, Dan (1996) Explaining culture – a naturalistic approach, Blackwell.
Sperber, Dan (2000) Metarepresentations in an evolutionary perspective, in Dan
Sperber, ed., Metarepresentations: a multidisciplinary approach, Oxford University
Press, pp. 117–37.
Sperber, Dan, & Wilson, Deirdre (1986) Relevance: communication and cognition,
Blackwell.
Steen, E. B. (1971) Dictionary of biology, Barnes and Noble.
Steinbeck, John (1979) A life in letters, Pan Books.
Sykes, J. B. (1982) The concise Oxford dictionary, seventh edition, Oxford University
Press.
Tomasello, M. & Farrar, M. J. (1986) Object permanence and relational words: a
training study, Journal of Child Language 13:495–505.
Vaneechoutte, Mario (1998) The replicator: a misnomer. Conceptual impli-
cations for genetics and memetics, in Symposium on Memetics, 15th Interna-
tional Congress on Cybernetics, Namur (1998), symposium chairmen Francis
Heylighen & Mario Vaneechoutte. Available from <http://pespmc1.vub.ac.be/
Conf/MemePap/Vaneechoutte.html>
Wallace, A. R. (1895) Natural selection and tropical nature, Macmillan.
Wallace, K. M. (1989) An introduction to the design process, Cambridge University
Engineering Department.
Wilkins, John (1999): On choosing to evolve: strategies without a strategist –
a commentary on Rose’s paper: Controversies in meme theory, Journal of
Memetics – Evolutionary Models of Information Transmission [Internet] 3 (1),
June 1999. Available from: <http://jom-emit.cfpm.org/1999/vol3/wilkins
j2.html>
Young, R. M. (1985) Darwin’s metaphor, Cambridge University Press.


Index
advertising, 89
alleles
as the basis for variation, 9, 48
deﬁnition and role, 7, 54, 81, 109–10
how they are identiﬁed, 55, 133
see also memes and their alleles
altruism, 8–9
analogy, 11–12
see also gene-meme analogy
ant dipping, 123–4, 129, 132, 138
arpeggios, 134
artefacts, 80–2, 93–5, 114
artiﬁcial selection, 7, 182–3
assemblies, see genetic replication; memetic
replication
associative learning, 33–4, 35, 136
attention
deﬁnition, 57–8
and design memes, 180
limited resource, 141
memetic resource, 14, 65, 66, 90
varying amounts, 60–1
see also ﬁtness; memetic selection
Aunger, Robert, 154–7
Batesian mimicry, 27
beavers, 85
beliefs, 169–70
behaviour
behavioural patterns, 121–3,
129
law of effect, 119–21
stable unions between behaviours,
119–21, 123–4
Ben’s lucky mistake, 25–6, 29–30
Blackmore, Susan, 4, 81
beliefs as memes, 169–70
copy-the-instructions (deﬁnition), 93
copy-the-product (deﬁnition), 93
copy-the-product is not really copying,
93–5
cui bono? 99–100
imitation, 40, 95, 100–2, 112, 135–6
meme fountains, 96
memes and the mind, 92
memetic “drive”, 95–100
no distinction between memes and their
effects, 92–5
soup example, 93, 94, 95
viruses, 92
Bloch, Maurice, 158–60
blue tits, 100, 120, 135–6
blueprints, 80, 82, 94
book on my desk, 20, 21–4, 26
Bower, T. G. R., 126
Boyd, Robert, and Richerson, Peter J.,
108–12
information induced not replicated,
108–12
brain, 73, 89, 96, 164
early mental capacities, 15, 124–8
Encephalisation Quotient, 130–1
evolution, 118–19, 140
size, 130–2, 140
Brazilian vehicles, 174–6
Byrne, Richard, and Russon, Anne, 121–2,
136
cantilevers, 133–4
car wheels, 137–8
225

226
Index
Cartesian soul, 119
causally relevant properties, 31, 32, 33, 34,
35
deﬁnition, 27
CDs, 156
celibacy, 11
chess, 42, 122
chimpanzees, see primates
Chomsky, Noam, 161–7
chromosome, 7, 55
Clark, Andy, 90
computers, 16
concepts
blue tit example, 135–6
cantilever example, 133–4
established by a comparative process,
132–4
vs. notions, 130, 132–3, 136, 138
violinist example, 134
see also meta-representation
consciousness, see Dennett
Conte, Rosaria, 81, 170
content, see representational content;
theories of content
contraception, 98, 99, 196
copy-the-product vs. copy-the-instructions,
92–5
Coulomb’s law, 12
counselling, 63, 171–2
Crick, Francis, and Watson, James, 18,
37
cross-modal sensory integration, 126–7
cuckoos, 73
cui bono? 99–100
cultural DNA, 18, 35–8, 142
capacity for representation, 147, 154
representational systems as cultural
DNA, 150–2, 199
words as cultural DNA? 143–6
cultural population, 14
culture, 10
changes rapidly, 15–16
deﬁnition, 2
Darwin, Charles, 2, 13
on humans, 7, 14
and Malthus, 7
natural selection, 14, 34
Origin of Species, 6, 8
Dawkins, Richard
culture, 2, 3
and Dennett, 82–3
early evolution, 117–18
EQ, 130
extended phenotype, 85–6
gene complexes, 43
gene theory, 2, 8
hierarchical replication, 41
language evolution, 143–4
meme complexes, 10
meme hypothesis, 6, 9–10, 12, 197
memes, 10
memetic selection, 10
particulate genes, 157–8
phenotypic effects, 11
religion and culture, 193–4
religion as a virus, 65, 72, 73–4, 189,
191–2
selﬁsh genes, 8, 43, 75, 205
Sperber’s objections to his test for
replication, 105–6
survival machine, 79
test for replication, 104–5, 113
vehicle, 79
viruses and genes, 73, 76
viruses of the mind, 69, 72–7, 78, 92
Deacon, Terence, 122, 147–8, 149–50
deception, 125–6, 127
Dennett, Daniel, 4
artefacts, 80–2
consciousness is a meme complex, 77–8,
80, 82, 86–8
cui bono? 99–100
cultural variation too great for evolution,
56
and Dawkins, 82–3
extended phenotype, 86–8
meme vehicles, 78, 79–80
origin of memes, 78
phenotypic effects and vehicles, 79–80,
92
representations, 80–2
spoked wheel example, 79, 81–2, 94, 95
vehicles and phenotypic effects, 79–80,
92
viruses, 92
design, see engineering design methods
dictionaries, 159
discrete combinatorial systems, 56
disjunctive problem, 23–4
see also frog
DNA
an arbitrary system, 151
biology and culture, 83–4
common to all species, 144
content vs. structure, 148–9
deﬁnition and role, 7, 19, 34, 64
a discrete combinatorial system, 56

Index
227
as a representational system, 18, 19, 114,
142
see also cultural DNA; representational
content
electric current, 11
electrostatic force, 12
emotions, 62–3
empathy, 62, 63
engineering design methods, 174–82
analogous to natural selection, 176–81
both evolutionary and designed, 181–2
Brazilian vehicle example, 174–6
stage 1, market research, 174–5
stage 2, conceptual design, 175
stage 3, embodiment design, 175–6
stage 4, detail design, 176
Wallace, Ken, 174
EQ, 130–1
evolution, 6, 7
deﬁnition, 2–3
and design reconciled, 181–2
in different media, 9
and God, 4
extended phenotype, 85–8
Extended Phenotype, The, 85
eye colour
genes and their alleles, 7, 54, 55, 81
genes and their effects, 43, 48, 78, 109
faith, 74
ﬁtness
genetic, 57
memetic, 57–8
relative, 65–7, 75, 186–7, 205
ﬂags, see mental ﬂags
ﬂat earth meme, 44, 61, 65
ﬂukes, 85
folk songs, 65
frog, 24–5, 29, 31–3, 34
functionally relevant properties, 31, 33,
35
deﬁnition, 27
indeterminate in some representations,
32, 35, 37
Gabora, Liane, 54
Gallup’s mirror test, 125
gene complexes, 43, 59, 61
gene-meme analogy, 4
and Dennett, 77, 79
and design evolution, 177
nature of the analogy, 11–12, 76,
119
genes, 7, 8
and the body, 168
crossing over, 43
early evolution, 116–18
“for” features, 81
genetic contradictions, 194–5
location, 85–6
particulate, 157–8
recessive, 43
for religion, 98
as representations in DNA, 148–9
selﬁsh, 8, 9, 43, 205
their function, 9
vehicles, 79
viruses, 73, 75, 76
genetic replication, 69, 113
as hierarchical, 43, 46
its speed, 46–7
genetic selection, 61, 68
en masse rather than ongoing, 45
generally obliterates variation, 15
inﬂuenced by memes, see memetic
“drive”
tendency towards complexity, 118
genetic variation, 13, 48–50, 81
mutation, 48–50
necessary for selection, 98–100
recombination, 48
genetics, 7–9
gifted children and adults, 134, 200
God, 72, 146
and evolution, 4
see also Blackmore; Dawkins; faith;
religion
gravity, 12
habituation, 29
hominids
A and B, 120–1, 123–4, 132, 138, 139
ant dipping, 123–4, 129, 132, 138
brain size, 130–2, 140
comparing representations, 132–3
early mental capacities, 124–8
vs. modern primates, 124–5, 131
icons, 147
imitation, 39, 40, 112–15
Blackmore, 40, 100–2, 112, 135–6
blue tit example, 100, 120, 135–6
Byrne and Russon, 121–2, 136
car wheel example, 137–8
different levels, 121–3, 136–9
not the only method of meme
transmission, 101–2, 107–8

228
Index
imitation (cont.)
Plotkin, 101–2, 112
reproduction vs. replication, 101, 102,
112–15, 120–1, 135–6
imprinting, 28
indices, 147
information
and actions, 159–60
evolution of, 18
and its effects, 19–20, 118, 177, 199
lost in translation, 156–7, 160–1
interactors, 79, 80
jargon, 7
Koestler, Arthur, 42, 122
Kuhn, T. S., 45
Lamarck, J.-B., 75
language
acquisition, 107, 149–50, 162, 164, 165,
201
allophones, 111
ambiguities, 144–5
Chomsky, 161–7
differences, 144
and meta-representation, 163–7,
201
parent-child example, 109–12
phonemes, 109, 110, 111
powerful, 153–4
as a representational system, 147
rules, 146
and thought, 140
translation, 108, 153
uniformity, 162
universal grammar, 165–7, 202
what is a word? 146
words and their effects, 145
laughter, 104, 105
law of effect, 119–21
Lewis, C. S., 194
Little Red Riding Hood, 155–6
local enhancement, 100, 120
locus, 7, 55
Malthus, T., 7, 13
mandolin, 1–2, 46, 80, 81
mathematics, 147, 151, 152, 154, 162–3
meme complexes, 10, 44
confused by Dennett with phenotypes,
86–8
as selectively advantageous, 44–5,
59–60
meme fountains, 96
meme hypothesis, 3, 9–11, 12–14, 197
contrasted with sociobiology, 15–16
Meme Machine, The, 92
memes, 3
active and passive copies, 89–91
beliefs, 169–70
content affected by medium and RS,
156–7
cultural population, 14
Dawkins’s deﬁnition, 10
design memes, 177
early evolution, 139–41
examples, 10
extended phenotype, 88–9
location, 84–91, 201–2
vs. mental viruses, 73, 74, 75, 76–7, 83
particulate, 44, 157–61, 179, 198–9 (see
also memes and their alleles)
phenotypic effects, see phenotypic effects
(memetic)
vs. primitive cultural replicators, 124,
135
recessive, 44–5, 58, 69, 111
selﬁsh, 11, 75
simple and complex, 101–2
vehicles, 78
as words? 143–6
see also meta-representation
memes and the mind, 4–5, 70–1, 115,
202–4, 205–7
beliefs are not memes, 169–70
Blackmore, 92, 169–70
Dennett, 78, 82–3, 92
directed evolution? 173–4
early mental capacities, 124–8
emotions are not memes, 62–4
engineering design methods, 174–82
memetic RSs, 149–50
memetic variation, 51–2
mind as a muscle, 83–4, 115, 170–1,
203
our responses to memes, 160, 171–3
parable of the sower, 173
points of view, 183, 205
self, 5, 87, 169–70, 172
memes and their alleles, 54–6, 133
in engineering designs, 179
objections to Sperber, 55–6, 103
memetic “drive”, 95–100
Blackmore’s deﬁnition, 96
imitating the best imitators, 96–7
meme fountains, 96–7
religion as an example, 97–100

Index
229
memetic replication, 35, 38, 69–70
active and passive meme copies, 89–91
Aunger, 154–7
vs. averaging, 110–12
of complexity, 41–6, 122–3
Dawkins’s test for replication, 104–5, 113
early, 140
in engineering designs, 178–9
hierarchical (via assemblies), 41–3, 46,
122, 198
vs. inference, 109–10
its speed, 46–7, 61, 102–3
Little Red Riding Hood example, 155–6
across media and substrates, 154–7
methods, 39–40 (see also imitation)
vs. mindless repetition, 139
necessary for evolution, 102
not possible via artefacts, 82, 93–5, 114
via psychological mechanisms, 107–8,
109, 110, 112–15
vs. reproduction, 101, 102, 112–15,
120–1, 135–6
Sperber vs. Dawkins, 105–6
Sperber’s test for replication, 104,
112–15
teaching as one method, 40
vs. transformation, 160–1
see also Boyd and Richerson; imitation;
Sperber
memetic selection, 10, 14, 68–9, 204–5
affected by beliefs, 169–70
affected by memetic content, 64–5,
67
based on trust, 63–4
biological factors, 61–2
dependent on existing memes, 59–61
directed by humans, 171–4
“duplicate me” memes, 64–5
early, 140
in engineering designs, 180
genetic factors, 11, 61–2
its speed, 98
ongoing rather than en masse, 45
physical factors, 61
psychological factors, 62–4, 110
social factors, 59
sometimes due to memes’ novelty, 59
see also attention; ﬁtness; memetic “drive”
memetic variation, 13, 70, 204–5
in engineering designs, 178
its speed, 56, 98, 102–3, 118
as a mental process, 51–2
mutation, 50–1, 204
pastry example, 50–1
piano playing as an example, 13
recombination, 52–6
scientiﬁc theories, 185–6
structural vs. detail, 137–8
via teaching, 53–4
memetics, see meme hypothesis
Mendel, Gregor
hypothesis not immediately accepted,
18, 74
particulate genes and their effects, 44,
157, 158, 179, 198
vindicating Darwin, 8, 9, 34
mental ﬂags, 22–4, 25
meta-representation, 128–30, 148, 152–4
comparing representational systems,
153–4, 201
comparing representations, 131–3
as a deﬁning human characteristic,
149–50, 201, 202
due to brain size or brain power? 131
and language, 163–7
meta-representation device, 163–7
in modern humans, 133–4
and religion, 194
and science, 188–9
see also concepts
mind, see memes and the mind
musical notation
as a language, 147
as a representational system, 148, 151,
152, 154
natural internal indicators, 22, 24
natural selection, 6
deﬁnition, 14
and design evolution, 177
evidence for it, 68
never forward planning, 180
Newton’s law of universal gravitation, 12
nonassociative learning, 28–9
notions, see concepts
o’clock, 153
parables, 53
of the sower, 173
of the watchmakers, 41
parent-child example, 109–12
Pavlovian conditioning, 33
phenotype, 87
phenotypic effects (genetic), 8
appearance of blending, 160–1
deﬁnition and role, 7, 11, 78, 80
and genetic information, 118

230
Index
phenotypic effects (memetic), 11, 19, 61
appearance of blending, 160–1
Blackmore’s denial that they exist, 92–5
Bloch on information and actions,
159–60
Dennett’s confusion with vehicles, 79–80
dependent on memetic medium
(Aunger), 155–6
evidence of memes’ presence or
absence, 158
location, 88–9, 201–2
violin example, 160, 161
Piaget, Jean, 126
piano playing, 13, 45
Pinker, Steven, 56
Plotkin, Henry, 101–2, 104, 112
points of view, 183, 205–7
positive main effect, 87–8
primates (modern)
cross-modal sensory integration, 126–7
deception, 125–6, 127
vs. hominids, 124–5
social skills, 127
unable to meta-represent, 129–30, 131,
135
primeval soup, 8, 116, 139
cultural, 118–21, 139–40
propositional attitudes, 169
randomness, 49
of genetic mutation, 48–9
of memetic mutation, 50–2
recipes, 58, 95
reductio ad absurdum, 89
religion, 63–4, 72, 73–4, 189–94
atheist assumptions (Bulverism), 194
and cultural background, 189–90
as an example of memetic drive, 97–100
genes for religion, 98
irrational, 190–1, 192–3
passed on by parents, 191–2
subjective beliefs vs. objective facts,
193–4, 207
see also Blackmore; Dawkins; faith; God
replication, see genetic replication;
memetic replication
replicators, 7
representational content, 20–37, 69–70
affected by choice of medium and RS,
156–7
book example, 20, 21–4, 26
controlling behaviour, 36–7, 38, 200
as cultural DNA, 20, 36, 37–8, 69, 128
deﬁnition, 20
frog example, 24–5, 29, 31–3
indeterminate, 31–3, 34–5
internal properties and lucky mistakes,
30
lucky mistakes, 25–6
snake example, 27
three-stage process for determining, 36
types of property, 26–8, 29–30
wasp example, 25–6, 29–30
see also representations; theories of
content; types of property
representational systems (RSs), 142, 147–8
acquisition of an RS, 148–50, 201
choice between RSs, 151
clock example, 153
comparing RSs, 153–4
contrasted with memetic media, 155
diverse, 162–3
evolution of different RSs, 150–2, 201
language as an RS, 147
mathematics, 151, 152, 154, 162–3
musical notation, 148, 151, 152, 154
nonlinguistic, 152–3, 162–3, 165–7, 201,
202
sign language, 147
translation between RSs and media,
156–7
words as memes? 143–6
representations, 89
cat example, 150
deﬁnition, 20
dependent on their RS, 147–8, 152, 165
different representations of the same
information, 152–3
icons, indices and symbols, 147–8
internal links between them, 30–1, 33,
34, 35, 37–8, 128–9, 139, 200
non-memetic, 35–6, 37, 199–200
simple and complex, 28, 30, 34
as “switches”, 28–9, 30, 34, 37
see also meta-representation
restaurants, 102
Richerson, Peter J., see Boyd and Richerson
RNA, 149
Rose, Nick, 182
Russell, Bertrand, 189
Russon, Anne, see Byrne and Russon
sbt’s, 24–5, 29, 31–2
scientiﬁc theories, 185–9
different levels of enquiry, 84, 183
establishing their truth, 3–4, 63–4
memes or viruses? 74–5
and scientists, 188–9, 207

Index
231
their emergence, 185–6
their progress towards the truth, 45, 186,
187–8, 205
their success, 58, 59, 186
scripts, 171–2
sea snails, 29
selection, see genetic selection; memetic
selection
self, 5, 87, 169–70, 172, 206
Selﬁsh Gene, The, 6, 75
Shrader, Douglas, 75, 187–8
sign language, 147
Simon, Herbert, 41, 45
simple indicator theory, 21–3
small black things, 24–5, 29, 31–2
Smith, George, 193
snails, 85
Sober, Elliott, 87
social learning, 36, 100–1, 120
society vs. culture, 2
sociobiology, 14–16, 61
contrasted with memetics, 15–16
deﬁnition, 15
soup, 93, 94, 95
Spanish speaking, 19
species, 8
speed of evolution, 46–7
Sperber, Dan, 54, 56, 102–8
information transformed not replicated,
103–4, 160
information reconstructed not
replicated, 106–8
language acquisition, 107
memetic variation too swift for
replication, 102–3
objections to memetic alleles, 55, 103
test for replication, 104, 105–6, 112–15
spiders, 85, 87
spoked wheels, 79, 81–2, 94, 95
star and scribble, 105, 106, 113
stimulus enhancement, 100, 120
struggle for existence, 7, 57
suicide, 145–6, 195–6
survival machines, 8, 43, 69, 79, 118
symbols, 147
tabula rasa, 16
taxonomic measures, 144
teachers and teaching, 40, 53–4, 161
History, 53
Religious Education, 53
theories of content, 20
therapy, 63, 171–2
thought experiments, 54
tokens and types, 12
see also artefacts; Dennett;
representations
translation between languages, 108, 153
trematode parasites, 85
truth testing, 63–4
twins, 88
types, see tokens and types
types of property, 26–8
variation, see genetic variation; memetic
variation
vehicles, 79, 88
Daniel Dennett, 78, 79–80
vinyl, 156
violins, 46, 51, 114, 134, 160, 161
viruses, see Dawkins; genes; memes
Wallace, Ken, 174
watchmakers, Simon’s parable, 41
water ﬂow, 12
Watson, James, and Crick, Francis, 18, 37
wave properties, 12
Whiten, A., 126
Wilson, Edward, 15
words as memes? 143–6

