
the
intelligence
paradox


the
intelligence
paradox
why the intelligent choice
isn’t always the smart one
Satoshi Kanazawa
John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

Copyright © 2012 by Satoshi Kanazawa. All rights reserved
Credit, page 40: Sample item similar to those found in the Raven’s Progressive Matrices
(Advanced). Copyright © 2007, 1976, 1962, 1947, 1943 NCS Pearson, Inc. Repro-
duced with permission. All rights reserved. “Raven’s Progressive Matrices and vocabulary
scales” is a trademark, in the US and/or other countries, of Pearson Education, Inc.
or its afﬁliate(s).
Published by John Wiley & Sons, Inc., Hoboken, New Jersey
Published simultaneously in Canada
No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or trans-
mitted in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording,
scanning, or otherwise, except as permitted under Section 107 or 108 of the 1976
United States Copyright Act, without either the prior written permission of the
Publisher, or authorization through payment of the appropriate per-copy fee to the
Copyright Clearance Center, 222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923, (978) 750-
8400, fax (978) 646-8600, or on the web at www.copyright.com. Requests to the
Publisher for permission should be addressed to the Permissions Department, John
Wiley & Sons, Inc., 111 River Street, Hoboken, NJ 07030, (201) 748-6011, fax (201)
748-6008, or online at http://www.wiley.com/go/permissions.
Limit of Liability/Disclaimer of Warranty: While the publisher and the author have
used their best efforts in preparing this book, they make no representations or war-
ranties with respect to the accuracy or completeness of the contents of this book
and speciﬁcally disclaim any implied warranties of merchantability or ﬁtness for a
particular purpose. No warranty may be created or extended by sales representatives
or written sales materials. The advice and strategies contained herein may not be
suitable for your situation. You should consult with a professional where appropriate.
Neither the publisher nor the author shall be liable for any loss of proﬁt or any other
commercial damages, including but not limited to special, incidental, consequential,
or other damages.
For general information about our other products and services, please contact our
Customer Care Department within the United States at (800) 762-2974, outside the
United States at (317) 572-3993 or fax (317) 572-4002.
Wiley also publishes its books in a variety of electronic formats and by print-on-
demand. Some content that appears in standard print versions of this book may not
be available in other formats. For more information about Wiley products, visit us at
www.wiley.com.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data:
Kanazawa, Satoshi.
The intelligence paradox : why the intelligent choice isn’t always the smart one /
Satoshi Kanazawa.
p. cm.
Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN 978-0-470-58695-2 (hardback); ISBN 978-1-118-13764-2 (ebk);
ISBN 978-1-118-13765-9 (ebk); ISBN 978-1-118-13766-6 (ebk)
1. Intellect. 2. Evolutionary psychology. I. Title.
BF431.K366 2012
153.9—dc23
2011042289
Printed in the United States of America
10
9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1

For Kaja Perina,
who makes all great things happen in my career


Contents
Acknowledgments
xi
Introduction
1
What Do People Want?
3
A Brief Word on the Data
8
1
What Is Evolutionary Psychology?
13
Four Core Principles of Evolutionary Psychology
15
Two Logical Fallacies That We Must Avoid
19
2
The Nature and Limitations of the Human Brain
23
The Savanna Principle
23
3
What Is Intelligence?
37
Common Misconceptions about Intelligence
38
How Did General Intelligence Evolve?
49
Cognitive Classes
54
vii

Contents
4
When Intelligence Matters
(and When It Doesn’t)
55
The Savanna-IQ Interaction Hypothesis
55
From the Hypothesis to the Paradox:
The Intelligence Paradox on Individual
Preferences and Values
71
5
Why Liberals Are More Intelligent than
Conservatives
73
What Is Liberalism?
73
Are Liberals More Intelligent than Conservatives?
76
If Liberals Are More Intelligent than Conservatives,
Why Are Liberals So Stupid?
78
IQ and the Values of Nations
84
6
Why Atheists Are More Intelligent than the
Religious
87
Where Does Religion Come From?
87
Is It Natural to Believe in God?
92
Societal Implications
95
7
Why More Intelligent Men (but Not More
Intelligent Women) Value Sexual Exclusivity
97
Humans Are Naturally Polygynous, Not
Monogamous
97
Are More Intelligent Men More Likely
to Be Faithful?
101
Intelligence and Marriage Institutions
110
viii

Contents
8
Why Night Owls Are More Intelligent than
Morning Larks
113
Choice within Genetic Predisposition
114
Night Life Is Evolutionarily Novel
115
So Are Asians Really More Nocturnal
than Others?
122
9
Why Homosexuals Are More Intelligent than
Heterosexuals
127
What Does It Mean to Be Homosexual?
128
Evolutionary Novelty of Homosexual
Identity and Behavior
130
Intelligence and Homosexuality
133
10
Why More Intelligent People Like
Classical Music
141
Evolutionary Origins of Music
144
Intelligence and Tastes for Music
148
Evolutionary Novelty or Cognitive
Complexity?
152
11
Why Intelligent People Drink and
Smoke More
157
Brief Histories of Alcohol, Tobacco,
and Drugs
158
Intelligence and Substance Use
160
Intelligence and Criminality
173
ix

Contents
12
Why Intelligent People Are the Ultimate Losers
in Life
177
Reproduction Is the Ultimate Goal of All Living
Organisms
177
Intelligence and the Value for Children
178
Intelligence and the Number of Children
181
Heritability of Fertility: An Evolutionary Puzzle
186
Possible Societal Consequences
187
13
Other Possible Consequences of Intelligence
191
Coffee
192
Vegetarianism
192
Crime and Punishment
198
Representative Democracy
199
Conclusion: Intelligent People Are Not What
You Think
205
Notes
209
References
221
Index
243
x

Acknowledgments
I
ﬁrst became interested in the problem of values when I was a
student of Michael Hechter’s at the University of Arizona. For
my Ph.D. dissertation, I pursued an old theoretical problem that
Michael had been interested in for many years, the Hobbesian
problem of order (How is society possible among self-interested
rational actors?). However, by the time I became his student in
1989, Michael was already beginning to move on to another
project. He was trying to ﬁgure out where values and preferences
of human actors came from. Rational choice theory can explain
human behavior very well if it assumes what humans want and
desire, but it cannot explain these wants and desires themselves.
Michael, a leading rational choice theorist, wanted to advance the
frontiers of rational choice theory by ﬁguring out where human
values and preferences came from, by providing a theoretical
explanation for them. In technical language, he was trying to
endogenize values in rational choice models.
I was not involved in Michael’s values project at all, but was
aware of the problem that he was struggling to solve. Even though
Michael and I never discussed these theoretical issues, I was able
to follow the contours and directions of his current thinking from
the books and journal articles that he asked me to fetch from the
library. On my long walks back from the main university library to
the Social Sciences building, I would peruse the books and articles
xi

Acknowledgments
he wanted to read next. Sometimes I kept them for a couple of
hours so that I could ﬁnish reading them before handing them to
Michael.
Neither Michael nor I (nor anyone else) solved the problem
of values, but the importance of the problem stayed with me.
Years later, when I discovered evolutionary psychology by reading
Robert Wright’s The Moral Animal, I immediately realized that
evolutionary psychology provided the answer that Michael had
been searching for all these years. It could explain where human
values and preferences came from. This book is the result of the
realization.
My ﬁrst and foremost intellectual debt is therefore to Michael
Hechter, who unwittingly and unintentionally made me realize
the importance of the problem of values and set me on this
intellectual path. But I’m not sure how happy he is with the
answer that I have found.
My intellectual life in London would be entirely barren but
for a small group of like-minded scientists in and around Lon-
don with whom I can share our mutual interest in evolutionary
psychology and intelligence research. I thank Tomas Chamorro-
Premuzic, Bruce G. Charlton, David de Meza, Adrian Furnham,
Richard Lynn, Diane J. Reyniers, J¨orn Rothe, Peter D. Sozou,
and in particular Jay Belsky (who has since left London for greener
intellectual pastures back in the United States) for years of stim-
ulating discussions.
Since Februar
ogy Today called the Scientiﬁc Fundamentalist (http://www
y 2008, I have had a blo
.psychologytoday.com/blog/the-scientiﬁc-fundamentalist/). I’ve
g at Psychol-
thrown out some of the ideas contained in this book initially on
the blog, and they were subsequently developed, often with in-
tellectual contributions from astute readers. I have a great team of
editors at Psychology Today who have given tremendous support
to me and my blog over the years. My warmest thanks go to Kaja
Perina, Hara Estroff Marano, Carlin Flora, Lybi Ma, Wendy Paris,
xii

Acknowledgments
PT COO Charles Frank, PT Director of Business Development
Batya Lahav, and PT CEO Jo Colman. I consider them all to be
part of my extended intellectual family.
Kaja is responsible for recruiting me as one of the inaugural
PT bloggers. In December 2007, “blogging” was the last thing
in the world I wanted to do. I had always thought that there
could not possibly be any value in doing something that anyone
can (and apparently does) do, and that “bloggers” were the most
idiotic and self-obsessed group of people. (After four years, I have
not changed my opinion of bloggers. The only people who are
stupider than bloggers are people who leave anonymous com-
ments on blogs.) With one transatlantic phone call, Kaja changed
my mind and got me to agree to sign up as one of the four inau-
gural PT bloggers. As it turns out, to my great surprise, blogging
was something I could do, and I was somewhat good at it. As
usual, Kaja knew me much better than I knew myself.
In the last nine years, since Kaja became Editor-in-Chief,
Psychology Today has done more to popularize and promote evo-
lutionary psychology to the general nonacademic public than we
evolutionary psychologists have done ourselves. So the scientiﬁc
community of evolutionary psychologists owes a great intellec-
tual debt of gratitude to Kaja and her superb editorial staff at
Psychology Today.
A large number of friends and colleagues have made sub-
stantive contributions to this book, either as coauthors of the
academic papers that constitute individual chapters in the book
or generous colleagues who have taken the time to read and
comment on drafts of such papers. I want to thank Jay Belsky,
Tomas Chamorro-Premuzic, David de Meza, Ian J. Deary, Paula
England, Aurelio Jos´e Figueredo, Barbara L. Finlay, Jeremy Freese,
Linda S. Gottfredson, Josephine E. E. U. Hellberg, Christine
Horne, Evelyn Korn, Norman P. Li, Patrick M. Markey, John
D. Mayer, Andrew Oswald, Nando Pelusi, Kaja Perina, Qazi
Rahman, Diane J. Reyniers, Todd K. Shackelford, Brent T.
xiii

Acknowledgments
Simpson, and Pierre L. van den Berghe. Gordon G. Gallup Jr. was
kind enough to read the entire book manuscript and provide ex-
tremely constructive comments. Thanks to Kipling D. Williams
for giving me permission to use a picture from Cyberball in
Chapter 2 (and for inventing Cyberball in the ﬁrst place).
None of my scientiﬁc research described in this book would
have been possible without my formal afﬁliations with University
College London and Birkbeck College University of London.
I thank Adrian Furnham and David Shanks for offering me an
honorary research fellowship in the Department of Psychology at
UCL and Jay Belsky and Mike Oaksford for doing the same with
the Department of Psychological Sciences at Birkbeck.
Finally, I would like to thank the pioneers in intelligence
research, who have been unafraid to tell the truth in the face
of political oppression and persecution. Many of them have paid
tremendous personal and professional prices for their scientiﬁc
integrity, but their courage has made it easier for others like me
to continue their work and tell the truth. For their courageous and
groundbreaking work, I thank Arthur R. Jensen, Richard Lynn,
J. Philippe Rushton, Linda S. Gottfredson, Richard J. Herrnstein,
Charles Murray, and Helmuth Nyborg. I am proud to count many
of them among my personal friends and colleagues.
On 15 October 2001, in front of the building in Washing-
ton DC that houses the American Enterprise Institute, Charles
Murray calmly told me that it would ultimately be my personal
choice what kind of work I do, whether I succumb to the public
pressure or pursue the truth no matter what the cost. For him
personally, Charles continued, the life and career would not be
worth living unless one told the truth. I was then too young, too
inexperienced, too untenured, and too afraid to appreciate his
wisdom. But I now know he was right. E pur si muove.
xiv

Introduction
T
his book challenges some of the common misconceptions
that people have about the nature of intelligence: what it is,
what it does, and what it is good for (if anything). People have
a tendency to equate intelligence with character, and to believe
that intelligence is the ultimate gauge of an individual’s worth.
They believe that people are not worthy human beings unless
they are intelligent, at least in some way. Somehow, intelligence
is regarded as the hallmark of human worth and character, the
most important trait that any human can have.
Conversely, people claim that, because all humans are equally
worthy, they must all hold the potential to be equally intelligent
as well. They balk at scientiﬁc discoveries that suggest that some
groups of individuals on average may not be as intelligent as
others, as if that is tantamount to saying that such groups of
people are somehow less worthy humans because of their lower
intelligence. When they realize that some people do not score
1

The Intelligence Paradox
high on standard IQ tests, they automatically assume that IQ tests
must therefore be biased against some groups of people. They
take group differences in performance on the IQ tests as prima
facie evidence of such bias.
At the same time, they also maintain that there are “multiple
intelligences”1 and fabricate other types of “intelligences” such
as “bodily-kinetic intelligence” for people who are athletic, and
“interpersonal intelligence” for extroverted people who have so-
cial skills. No longer does it sufﬁce to say that some people are
athletic and others are social; they must all possess different kinds
of “intelligences.” They have to ensure that everybody is intelli-
gent in some way because everybody is an equally worthy human
being.
In this book, I want to break this equation of intelligence
with human worth, by pointing out that intelligence (and intelli-
gent people) may not be what you think. While more intelligent
people can do many things better and more efﬁciently than less
intelligent people, there are many things that they cannot, and
intelligent people tend to fail at the most important things in life
from a purely biological perspective. The list of what intelligent
people are not good at may surprise you. Intelligent people are
only good at doing things that are relatively new in the course of
human evolution. They are not necessarily good at doing things
that our ancestors have always done, like ﬁnding and keeping a
mate, being a parent, and making friends. Intelligent people tend
not to be good at doing things that are most important in life.
There is no question that intelligence is a positive trait, but
then so are beauty, height, and health. Yet we don’t equate beauty,
height, and health with human worth. (However, we do a little
bit when it comes to beauty, by maintaining that people who are
not physically attractive nonetheless have “inner beauty.” “Inner
beauty” is to physical attractiveness what “multiple intelligences”
are to intelligence.) We don’t necessarily think that beautiful, tall,
or healthy people are better, more worthy humans than ugly,
2

Introduction
short, or unhealthy people. Nor do we claim that everyone is
equally beautiful, equally tall, or equally healthy. But we seem
to believe that more intelligent people are more worthy human
beings. Or, conversely, because all humans ought to be equally
worthy, they must all be equally intelligent. In this book, I want
to convince you to stop having this assumption and break the
equation of intelligence with human worth. Intelligence is just
another quantitative trait of an individual like height or weight.
What Do People Want?
This book is also about what people want—their preferences and
values. What do people want? Why do people want what they
want? Where do individual preferences and values come from?
These are some of the questions that I address in this book.
These questions are known as the “problem of values,” and it
is one of the central questions in social and behavioral sciences.
Mathematically elegant models of human behavior, especially in
microeconomics, can explain human behavior very well, if we
know what people want in the ﬁrst place. These microeconomic
models essentially say, “Human actors do the best they can within
their constraints and circumstances to achieve what they want
to achieve,” and their mathematical models are about how these
constraints and circumstances affect their choices. However, these
models cannot tell us what human actors actually do and what
actual choices they make, unless we know “what they want to
achieve,” namely, their goals, preferences, and values.
Without the knowledge of individual preferences and values,
any choice can be used to support the microeconomic model.
Let’s say two individuals, A and B, are facing identical constraints
and circumstances; they both ﬁnd themselves at a local grocery
store, with limited choices of items to buy and only $10 to
spend. If, under these conditions, Individual A purchases apples
3

The Intelligence Paradox
and Individual B purchases oranges, both choices can be used
to support the rational actor model, by positing, ex ante, that
Individual A has a preference for apples while Individual B has a
preference for oranges. If, under the same conditions, Individual
C chooses not to buy anything at all, that, too, supports the theory
because Individual C has a preference for savings.
In order to provide a full explanation of human behavior,
we must endogenize individual preferences and values, by making
them part of the theoretical explanations. We must ﬁrst explain
individual preferences and values before we can explain the behav-
ioral choices. We must be able to explain why Individual A wants
apples, not oranges, and why Individual B wants oranges, and not
apples, and why Individual C wants neither.
However, economists themselves have given up on the at-
tempt to explain preferences and values. In 1977, two University
of Chicago economists (and future Nobel prizewinners), George
J. Stigler and Gary S. Becker, published a very inﬂuential paper
in the American Economic Review entitled “De Gustibus Non Est
Disputandum.”2 The Latin title means “There’s no accounting for
tastes.” In this paper, Stigler and Becker argued that economics
should not be concerned with explaining preferences and values,
but instead with how constraints affect choice. In other words,
they wanted to leave preferences and values exogenous to the eco-
nomic models, rather than endogenous to them. (Endogenous means
within the model of explanation whereas exogenous means out-
side of such models. Endogenous factors are explained within the
model whereas exogenous factors are left unexplained.)
Economists since then have faithfully followed Stigler and
Becker’s dictum and left preferences and values unexplained.
They focus on money—how individuals seek to maximize in-
come and wealth—because money is fungible3; people can use
money to buy virtually anything they want (except, of course, for
love). Economists reason that they don’t need to know people’s
preferences and values because they would all want to maximize
4

Introduction
monetary incomes regardless of their idiosyncratic preferences and
values. Whatever they want, they all want more money because
more money will allow them to have more of whatever they want.
With more money, you can buy more apples, more oranges, or
increase the level of your savings. So, in the above example, In-
dividuals A, B, and C—in fact, all individuals—would want to
maximize their monetary income because it would allow each to
purchase whatever they want. The focus on the fungible resource
of money obviates the need to know what individuals really want.
This is where microeconomics stands today.
I want to endogenize preferences and values to models of
human behavior, by introducing evolutionary psychology. I want
to explain what people want and why they want it, and I believe
evolutionary psychology is key to such an explanation. So this
book is also about explaining the origin of individual preferences
and values.
Given the main focus on intelligence in this book, I will
emphasize the role that intelligence plays in inﬂuencing people’s
preferences and values. How does intelligence inﬂuence peo-
ple’s preferences and values? What do more intelligent people
want? What do less intelligent people want? And why are there
differences?
So this book is at the intersection of two scientiﬁc ﬁelds: evo-
lutionary psychology and intelligence research. In Chapter 1, I
brieﬂy introduce you to the ﬁeld of evolutionary psychology.
Those of you who have read my previous book Why Beautiful
People Have More Daughters4 can probably skip Chapter 1 without
missing much.
In Chapter 2, I discuss one important implication of evo-
lutionary psychology for the functions and constraints on the
human brain. I introduce an important idea called the Savanna
Principle about what the human brain can easily do or has
5

The Intelligence Paradox
difﬁculty doing. Readers of my earlier book may recall reading
about the Savanna Principle in it.
In Chapter 3, I discuss the concept of intelligence and intro-
duce you to the ﬁeld of intelligence research. I will explain what
intelligence is, what it is not, and what it does (and doesn’t do).
There are so many misconceptions about intelligence, and I will
try to dispel many of them in this chapter.
In Chapter 4, I introduce you to the central idea in this
book, which I call “the Intelligence Paradox.” It is about how
more intelligent people may differ from less intelligent people
in their preferences and values, often in quite counterintuitive
ways. Readers of my Scientiﬁc Fundamentalist blog at Psychology
Today will see that “the Intelligence Paradox” captures the same
essential idea as what I call “the Hypothesis” in my blog, but
applied speciﬁcally to individual preferences and values.
The rest of the book (Chapters 5–12) details various applica-
tions and manifestations of the Intelligence Paradox. Chapter 5
is about political attitudes on the liberal-conservative continuum,
and explains why liberals in the United States are on average
more intelligent than conservatives. I also explain why liberals
are stupider than conservatives. (No, that’s not a typo. Confused?
Read on!)
Chapter 6 is about religiosity and belief in God. I will explain
where religion came from and why atheists are more intelligent
than people who believe in God. It’s not because religion is false
or there is no God. It’s because religion is deeply human. We are
designed by evolution to believe in God, and that is why more
intelligent people are atheists.
Chapter 7 is about preferences about sexual exclusivity. I will
explain why more intelligent men prefer being sexually exclusive
more than less intelligent men, but more intelligent women do
not value sexual exclusivity more than less intelligent women.
People think that evolutionary psychology is all about sex dif-
ferences between men and women, but, in this book, this is the
6

Introduction
only area in life where the Intelligence Paradox makes different
predictions for men and women. The chapter also explains why,
despite their greater preference for sexual exclusivity, more intel-
ligent men are nonetheless more likely to cheat on their wives
and girlfriends than less intelligent men. Once again, that’s not
a typo. More intelligent men are simultaneously more likely to
value being sexually faithful and more likely to cheat.
Chapter 8 is about circadian rhythms, whether you are a
morning person or a night person. I will explain why night owls
are more intelligent than morning larks. Believe it or not, more
intelligent people go to bed and wake up later than less intelligent
people, and it’s because it’s unnatural for humans to stay up late
at night.
Chapter 9 is about sexual orientation, where I will explain
why homosexuals are on average more intelligent than hetero-
sexuals. Sexual orientation, at least for men, is largely geneti-
cally and hormonally determined before birth. But, within their
genetic constraints, more intelligent individuals choose to en-
gage in homosexual behavior more than less intelligent individ-
uals. Genetic inﬂuence and individual choice are not necessarily
incompatible.
Chapter 10 deals with people’s musical preferences. It is gen-
erally assumed that more intelligent people prefer certain types
of music, like classical music. But why? Why should intelligence
affect people’s musical preferences? And what other types of mu-
sic do intelligent people prefer? The answer may surprise you. It
turns out that intelligent people also like elevator music.
Chapter 11 is about substance use: alcohol, tobacco, and
drugs. Consistent with the Intelligence Paradox, there appears
to be some evidence that more intelligent people drink more
alcohol, smoke more cigarettes, and use more illegal drugs than
less intelligent people. Not only are more intelligent people more
likely to consume alcohol more frequently and in greater quanti-
ties, they are also more likely to binge drink and get drunk. Yes,
7

The Intelligence Paradox
more intelligent people are more likely to do stupid things. I will
explain why in this chapter.
Chapter 12 is about how intelligent people fail at the most
important task in life, which is reproductive success. This is where
I make the point that intelligent people are the ultimate losers
in life. (Yes, that’s an evolutionary pun.) They are really not that
great when it comes to important things that truly matter in life.
There is some evidence that more intelligent people—at least
more intelligent women—have fewer children and are altogether
less likely to become parents. I will also discuss what this ﬁnding
likely means for the average intelligence of the population of the
future generations in western industrial societies.
In Chapter 13, I explore some of the other possible implica-
tions of the Intelligence Paradox, and wonder what other values
may be affected by intelligence. For example, it has been known
that criminals on average have lower intelligence than law-abiding
citizens. But why? And why are vegetarians more intelligent than
meat eaters?
In this book, I continue the system of references that I bor-
rowed in a modiﬁed form from Charles Murray5 and that I began
using in Why Beautiful People Have More Daughters. For endnotes
which simply give citation information, I use the standard end-
note reference numbers, like this.1 References which give greater
information not contained in the text have reference numbers
with brackets, for example.[2]
A Brief Word on the Data
Most of the empirical analyses that are summarized in this book
use three different data sets: General Social Surveys (GSS) in
the US, National Longitudinal Study of Adolescent Health (Add
Health) in the US, and the National Child Development Study
(NCDS) in the UK. They are all large, nationally representative,
8

Introduction
high-quality samples. Two of them are prospectively longitudi-
nal data which have followed a cohort of individuals for many
years, in one case, since birth for more than half a century. Here
I will brieﬂy describe the data sets and how each survey mea-
sures intelligence, which is the central concept in this book.
Interested readers who want to know more about the actual
empirical analyses can consult the academic papers cited in the
chapters.
General Social Surveys (GSS)
The GSS is widely considered to be the best source of data in
the world on a wide range of social attitudes and social trends.
Its success has spawned counterparts in other nations (such as
Canada, the UK, the Netherlands, and Germany), which now
conduct their own periodic surveys of social attitudes which are
modeled after the GSS in the US.
The National Opinion Research Center at the University
of Chicago has administered the GSS, either annually or, more
recently, biennially, since 1972. Personal interviews are conducted
with a nationally representative sample of non-institutionalized
adults over the age of 18 in the US. The sample size is about 1,500
individuals for each annual survey, and about 3,000 individuals
for each biennial one. The exact questions asked in the survey
vary by the year. The 1972–2008 cumulative data ﬁle contains
53,043 individuals and 5,364 variables (although not all variables
are measured of all individuals).6
The GSS measures the respondent’s verbal intelligence with a
10-item synonyms test. The survey asks the respondent to select a
synonym for a word out of ﬁve candidates. Half of the respondents
in each GSS sample answer 10 of these questions. This is a measure
of verbal intelligence, not strictly general intelligence, which is
the focus of this book. However, verbal intelligence is known
to be very highly correlated with general intelligence.7 In fact,
9

The Intelligence Paradox
as I explain in Chapter 3, all measures of intelligence are highly
correlated with each other.
National Longitudinal Study of Adolescent Health
(Add Health)
The National Longitudinal Study of Adolescent Health (Add
Health) is a prospectively longitudinal study of a nationally repre-
sentative sample of more than 20,000 adolescents in junior high
and high school (Grades 7–12 in the 1994–1995 school year) in
the United States. The Add Health cohort has been followed into
young adulthood with four in-home interviews (in 1994–1995,
1996, 2001–2002, and 2008).8
Add Health measures the respondent’s verbal intelligence with
an abbreviated version of the Peabody Picture Vocabulary Test
(PPVT). The PPVT asks the respondent to identify a picture
that corresponds to a word out of four candidate pictures. While
properly a measure of verbal intelligence, the PPVT has been
shown to be a good measure of general intelligence as well.9
For all analyses of Add Health in this book, the intelligence is
measured during adolescence (at Wave I) whereas all the outcome
measures are taken in early adulthood in Wave III.
National Child Development Study (NCDS)
The National Child Development Study (NCDS) is one of the
world’s oldest prospectively longitudinal studies. It has followed
a population of respondents in the United Kingdom since birth
for more than half a century. The study includes all babies (more
than 17,000) born in Great Britain (England, Wales, and Scot-
land) during one week (03–09 March 1958). The respondents
have subsequently been reinterviewed eight times (at ages 7, 11,
16, 23, 33, 42, 47, and 51). In each survey, personal interviews
10

Introduction
and questionnaires are administered to the respondents, to their
mothers, teachers, and doctors during childhood, and to their
partners and children in adulthood.
The NCDS has one of the best measures of general intel-
ligence of all large-scale, population-based surveys. The NCDS
respondents take multiple intelligence tests at ages 7, 11, and 16.
At age 7, the respondents take four cognitive tests (Copying De-
signs Test, Draw-a-Man Test, Southgate Group Reading Test,
and Problem Arithmetic Test). At age 11, they take ﬁve cognitive
tests (Verbal General Ability Test, Nonverbal General Ability Test,
Reading Comprehension Test, Mathematical Test, and Copying
Designs Test). At age 16, they take two cognitive tests (Reading
Comprehension Test, and Mathematical Comprehension Test).
From these 11 cognitive tests, a measure of childhood general
intelligence is calculated by a statistical technique called factor
analysis. The technique measures the underlying general intelli-
gence that explains the individual’s performance on all of these
varied cognitive tests at three different ages. It also eliminates all
random measurement errors which are inherent in any measure-
ment of human traits.
11


Chapter 1
What Is Evolutionary
Psychology?[1]
E
volutionary psychology, at the most fundamental level, is
the study of human nature. Human nature consists of what
evolutionary psychologists call evolved psychological mechanisms or
psychological adaptations (which are roughly synonymous with
each other). Evolved psychological mechanisms provide solu-
tions to adaptive problems (problems of survival and reproduction).
Through a long process of natural and sexual selection, evolu-
tion has equipped humans with the ability to solve important
problems, by allowing those who could solve the problems to
live longer and reproduce more successfully and by eliminating
those who couldn’t. Those who had these innate solutions in
their brain enjoyed distinct advantages over those who didn’t,
and lived longer and produced more children who survived. And
their children inherited their parents’ genetic tendency to solve
13

The Intelligence Paradox
these problems, and, in turn, lived longer and had more children
themselves.
Over time there were more and more people who had these
solutions in their brains and fewer and fewer people who didn’t,
until these innate solutions to adaptive problems became uni-
versal, characterizing all normally developing members of the
human species. Human nature is therefore universal or species-
typical (typical or characteristic of all members of a species). Some
evolved psychological mechanisms are speciﬁc to only men or
only women; others are shared by both men and women.
The important point to remember is that the psychological
adaptations produce the correct solutions to the adaptive problems
only in the context of the ancestral environment. Evolved psychological
mechanisms are designed for and adapted to the conditions of the
ancestral environment, not necessarily to those of the current en-
vironment. Evolution cannot anticipate or foresee the future, so
its products—evolved psychological mechanisms—are not nec-
essarily adapted to the conditions that emerged after they were
designed. To the extent that our current environment is radically
different from the ancestral environment, where our ancestors
lived on the African savanna as hunter-gatherers in a small band of
about 150 related individuals,2 then the execution of the evolved
psychological mechanisms does not necessarily produce the cor-
rect solutions to the adaptive problems at hand. In fact, as you
will see below, it often produces the wrong solutions.
Our ancestors were, and had been for more than a million
years, hunter-gatherers, ﬁrst in Africa, then elsewhere on earth.
Their hunter-gatherer lifestyle came to an (evolutionarily speak-
ing) abrupt end around 10,000 years ago, when agriculture was
invented. The invention of agriculture at around 8,000 bc is prob-
ably the single most important event in human history. Agricul-
ture necessitated sedentary life; our ancestors, for the ﬁrst time,
ceased to be nomadic and stayed put in one place. That led to
permanent settlements, villages, towns, cities, houses, roads, horse
14

What Is Evolutionary Psychology?
carriages, bridges, buildings, governments, democracy, automo-
biles, airplanes, computers, and iPods. The iPods would not have
been possible without agriculture and everything else it led to.
Four Core Principles of Evolutionary
Psychology
Evolutionary psychology, in its intellectual origin, is the appli-
cation of evolutionary biology to human cognition and behav-
ior. Ever since Darwin, evolutionary biologists and zoologists
had known that principles of evolutionary biology applied to all
species in nature, except for humans. In 1992, a group of psy-
chologists and anthropologists, following the courageous lead of
E. O. Wilson,3 simply asked “Why not?”4 Why are humans ex-
ceptions to the rule of nature? Why not apply the same principles
of evolutionary biology to humans as well? And thus evolutionary
psychology was born, merely 20 years ago. It’s a very new science.
But it has made tremendous progress in its very short history.
As an application of evolutionary biology to human cogni-
tion and behavior, evolutionary psychology is based on four core
principles.
1. People Are Animals5
The ﬁrst and most fundamental principle of evolutionary psychol-
ogy is that there is nothing special about humans. This realization,
that humans are not exceptions to nature but part of it, initially
led the original evolutionary psychologists to apply the laws of
evolution by natural and sexual selection to humans. It turns out
that humans are not exceptions to nature at all, but just another
animal species.
Scientists once believed that humans possessed many traits
that were strictly unique to humans and that no other species
15

The Intelligence Paradox
had, such as culture, language, tool use, consciousness, moral-
ity, sympathy, compassion, romantic love, homosexuality, murder,
and rape. This turns out to be false. Recent scientiﬁc research has
shown that there is at least one other species that shares any trait
that humans have.[6] To the best of my knowledge, there are no
traits that only humans have.
This, however, does not mean that humans are not unique. To
quote the great sociobiologist Pierre L. van den Berghe, “Cer-
tainly we are unique, but we are not unique in being unique.
Every species is unique and evolved its uniqueness in adaptation to
its environment.”7 The fact that humans are unique means that
no other species have the exact constellation of traits and charac-
teristics that humans have. If chimpanzees were exactly the same
as humans in every possible way, then they would not be a sepa-
rate species from humans; they would be humans. Humans are a
separate species because no other species is exactly like humans.
But this is true of every species in nature: dogs, cats, giraffes,
cockroaches. No other species is exactly like cockroaches. Hu-
mans as a species are just as unique and special as cockroaches, no
more, no less. Every species in nature is equally unique.
The unavoidable conclusion from evolutionary biology is that
there is nothing special about humans as a species, and we are just
another ape species in nature. As such, all laws of biology hold for
humans as they do for all other species. And this includes the law
of evolution by natural and sexual selection, which states that the
ultimate goal of all living organisms is reproductive success. All
living organisms in nature are designed by evolution to reproduce
and make as many copies of their genes as possible.
2. There Is Nothing Special about the Human Brain
For evolutionary psychologists, the brain is just another body
part, like the hand or the pancreas. Just as millions of years of
evolution have gradually shaped the hand or the pancreas to
16

What Is Evolutionary Psychology?
perform certain functions, so has evolution shaped the human
brain to perform its function, which is to solve adaptive problems
to help humans survive and reproduce successfully. Evolutionary
psychologists apply the same laws of evolution to the human brain
as they do to any other part of the human body.
Social scientists tend to believe that evolution stops at the
neck.8 They believe that, while evolution has shaped the struc-
ture and function of every other human body part, the human
brain has been immune to evolutionary history. In sharp con-
trast, evolutionary psychologists contend that the human brain is
not an exception to the inﬂuences of evolutionary forces on the
human body. Evolution does not stop at the neck; it goes all the
way up.
3. Human Nature Is Innate
Just as dogs are born with innate dog nature, and cats are born
with innate cat nature, humans are born with innate human na-
ture. This follows from Principle 1 above. What is true of dogs
and cats must also be true of humans. Socialization and learning
are very important for humans, but humans are born with the
innate capacity for cultural learning. Pierre van den Berghe con-
tinues the quote above by saying, “Culture is the uniquely human
way of adapting, but culture, too, evolved biologically.” Culture
and learning are part of the evolutionary design for humans. So-
cialization merely reiterates and reinforces what is already in our
brain (like the sense of right and wrong, which we share with
other species9).
This principle of evolutionary psychology is in clear contrast
to the blank slate (“tabula rasa”) assumption held by most so-
cial scientists.10 They contend that, because evolution stops at
the neck, humans are born with a mind like a blank slate, on
which cultural socialization must and can write anything what-
soever. Evolutionary psychologists strongly reject the tabula rasa
17

The Intelligence Paradox
assumption of the social sciences. In the memorable words of
William D. Hamilton, who is universally regarded as the great-
est Darwinian since Darwin, “The tabula of human nature was
never rasa and it is now being read.”11 Evolutionary psychology
is devoted to reading the tabula of human nature.
4. Human Behavior Is the Product of Both Innate Human
Nature and the Environment
There are a few genetic diseases, such as Huntington’s disease,
that are 100% determined by genes. If someone carries the af-
fected gene, they will develop the disease no matter what their
experiences or environment.12 An individual’s eye color or blood
type is also 100% determined by genes. So these (and a very few
other) traits are entirely genetically determined. Otherwise, there
are no human traits that are 100% determined by genes. Nor are
there any serious scientists who think there are complex human
behaviors that are entirely determined by genes. Contrary to what
the critics of evolutionary psychology often claim, there are no
genetic determinists in science.
Genes for most traits seldom express themselves in a vacuum.
Their expressions—how the genes translate into behavior—often
depend on and are guided by the environment. The same genes
can express themselves differently depending on the context. In
this sense, both innate human nature, which the genes program,
and the environment in which humans grow up and live, are
equally important determinants of behavior.
Many social scientists believe that human behavior is 100%
determined by the environment, and genes and biology have ab-
solutely no role to play in it.13 In sharp contrast, evolutionary
psychologists do not believe that human behavior is 100% deter-
mined by either genes or environment alone. However, evolu-
tionary psychologists tend to emphasize the biological and genetic
factors in their research, because they are ﬁghting the supremacy
18

What Is Evolutionary Psychology?
of environmentalism (the belief that the environment determines
human behavior 100%) both in the social sciences and among
the general public. Nobody is surprised to learn that the environ-
ment inﬂuences behavior; that is not news. But people are often
surprised by the extent to which genes inﬂuence behavior. That
is news.
Two Logical Fallacies That We Must Avoid
In any discussion of evolutionary psychology, or human sciences
in general, it is very important to avoid two logical fallacies. They
are called the naturalistic fallacy and the moralistic fallacy.
The naturalistic fallacy, which was coined by the English
philosopher George Edward Moore14 in the early 20th century,
though ﬁrst identiﬁed much earlier by the Scottish philosopher
David Hume,15 is the leap from is to ought—that is, the tendency
to believe that what is natural is good; that what is, ought to
be. For example, one might commit the error of the naturalistic
fallacy and say, “Because different groups of people are genetically
different and endowed with different innate abilities and talents,
they ought to be treated differently.”
The moralistic fallacy, coined by the Harvard microbiologist
Bernard Davis16 in the 1970s, is the opposite of the naturalistic
fallacy. It refers to the leap from ought to is, the claim that the
way things ought to be is the way they are. This is the tendency
to believe that what is good is natural; that what ought to be,
is. For example, one might commit the error of the moralistic
fallacy and say, “Because everybody ought to be treated equally,
there are no innate genetic differences between groups of people.”
The science writer extraordinaire Matt Ridley calls it the reverse
naturalistic fallacy.17
Both are logical fallacies, and they get in the way of progress in
science in general, and in evolutionary psychology in particular.
19

The Intelligence Paradox
However, as Ridley astutely points out, political conservatives are
more likely to commit the naturalistic fallacy (“Nature designed
men to be competitive and women to be nurturing, so women
ought to stay home to take care of the children and leave business
and politics to men.”), while political liberals are equally likely
to commit the moralistic fallacy (“The Western liberal demo-
cratic principles hold that men and women ought to be treated
equally under the law, and therefore men and women are bio-
logically identical and any study that demonstrates otherwise is a
priori false.”). The evolutionary psychologist Robert O. Kurzban
concisely captures the common attitude among political liber-
als when he quips, “It’s only ‘good science’ if the message is
politically correct.”18
Since academics, and social scientists in particular, are over-
whelmingly left-wing liberals, the moralistic fallacy has been a
much greater problem in academic discussions of evolutionary
psychology than the naturalistic fallacy. Most academics are above
committing the naturalistic fallacy, but they are not above com-
mitting the moralistic fallacy. The social scientists’ stubborn refusal
to accept sex and race differences in behavior, temperament, and
cognitive abilities, and their tendency to be blind to the empiri-
cal reality of stereotypes, reﬂect their moralistic fallacy driven by
their liberal political convictions.
The left-wing denial of certain inconvenient empirical truths
culminates in the wholesale postmodern denial of scientiﬁc ob-
jectivity and the concept (and possibility) of scientiﬁc truth. Con-
servatives too deny some empirical truths, like evolution, but they
do not deny that there is such a thing as a scientiﬁc truth. But,
once again, we do not have to worry about conservatives in
academia, because there are very few of them (and you will
ﬁnd out why in Chapter 5). There are virtually no creationists
who deny evolution among the faculties of American universi-
ties, but there are many, many postmodernists who deny scientiﬁc
objectivity.
20

What Is Evolutionary Psychology?
It is actually very easy to avoid both fallacies—both leaps
of logic—by simply never talking about what ought to be at all
and only talking about what is. It is not possible to commit
either the naturalistic or the moralistic fallacy if scientists never
talk about ought. Scientists, by which I mean basic scientists, not
applied scientists like engineers and physicians, do not draw moral
conclusions and implications from the empirical observations they
make, and they are not guided in their observations by moral and
political principles. Real scientists—basic scientists—only care
about what is, and do not at all care about what ought to be. In
this book, I will only talk about what is, and will never talk about
what ought to be.
What Does “Natural” Mean?
It is always important in any discussion of science to avoid
the naturalistic and moralistic fallacies, but it is particularly im-
portant to remember not to be tempted by them when you
read this book. From a purely biological perspective, natural
only means “that for which the organism is evolutionarily de-
signed” and unnatural only means “that for which the organ-
ism is not evolutionarily designed.” The only organisms that I
will talk about in this book are humans. From a purely sci-
entiﬁc perspective, murder19 and rape20 are completely natural
for humans, and getting a Ph.D. in evolutionary psychology is
completely unnatural (which is partly why intelligent people do
it!). Natural decidedly does not mean good, valuable, or desirable,
and unnatural decidedly does not mean their opposites. One of
the consistent themes in this book is that intelligent people often
do unnatural things.
There are only two legitimate criteria by which to evalu-
ate scientiﬁc ideas and theories: logic and evidence. Accord-
ingly, you may justiﬁably criticize evolutionary psychological
theories (or any other theories in science) if they are logically
21

The Intelligence Paradox
inconsistent within themselves or if there is credible scientiﬁc
evidence against them. As a scientist, as the Scientiﬁc Fundamental-
ist,21 I take all such criticisms seriously. However, you may not
criticize scientiﬁc theories, whether mine or otherwise, simply
because their implications are immoral, ugly, contrary to our ide-
als, or offensive to some or all. I can tell you right now that the
implications of many of the scientiﬁc ideas and theories discussed
in this book, whether mine or otherwise, are indeed immoral,
ugly, contrary to our ideals, or offensive to some group of people.
They are very offensive to me. But it doesn’t matter.
The truth is the only guiding principle in science, and it is
the most important thing for all scientists. In fact, it is the only
important thing; nothing else matters in science besides the truth.
However, I also believe that any solution to a social problem
must start with the correct assessment of the problem itself and
its possible causes. We can never devise a correct solution to a
problem if we don’t know what its ultimate causes are. So the
true observations are important foundations of both basic science
and social policy, if you do care about solving social problems,
which of course I don’t.
If what I say is wrong (because it is illogical or lacks credible
scientiﬁc evidence), if it is not true, then it is my problem. It is
my job as a scientist then to construct better theories or collect
more evidence. In contrast, if what I say offends you, it is your
problem. My credo as a scientist, which undergirds my scientiﬁc
fundamentalism, is “If the truth offends people, it is our job
as scientists to offend them.”22 As a scientist, as the Scientiﬁc
Fundamentalist, I don’t care if people live or die. I just want to
know why.
22

Chapter 2
The Nature and Limitations
of the Human Brain
I
n this chapter I will focus on the human brain as an evolved
organ and talk about how evolution has shaped and designed
the human brain to have certain limitations and constraints. I will
introduce you to a very fundamental observation in evolutionary
psychology, which I call “the Savanna Principle.”1
The Savanna Principle
Evolutionary adaptations, whether they are physical or psycho-
logical, are designed for and adapted to the conditions of the
ancestral environment, during the period of their evolution, not
necessarily to the conditions of the current environment.2 Evo-
lution cannot anticipate or foresee the future; it can only respond
23

The Intelligence Paradox
to conditions in the past. So it is impossible for it to design adap-
tations that will suit conditions that have not yet existed. This is
easiest to see in the case of physical adaptations, such as the vision
and color-recognition system.
What color is a banana? A banana is yellow in the sunlight
and in the moonlight. It is yellow on a sunny day, on a cloudy
day, on a rainy day. It is yellow at dawn and at dusk. The color
of a banana appears constantly yellow to the human eye under
all these conditions, despite the fact that the actual wavelengths
of the light reﬂected by the surface of the banana under these
varied conditions are different. Objectively, they are not the same
color all the time. However, the human eye and color-recognition
system can compensate for these varied conditions because they
all occurred during the course of the evolution of the human
vision system, and the visual cortex can perceive the objectively
varied colors as constantly yellow.[3]
So a banana looks yellow under all conditions, except in a
parking lot at night. Under the sodium vapor lights commonly
used to illuminate parking lots, a banana does not appear natural
yellow. This is because the sodium vapor lights did not exist in the
ancestral environment, during the course of the evolution of the
human vision system, and the visual cortex is therefore incapable
of compensating for them. Evolution, which designed the human
eye, only “knew” about the sun, the moon, and possibly open ﬁre
as the only sources of illumination. It could not have anticipated
the sodium vapor lights or any other type of artiﬁcial illumination,
like ﬂuorescent lamps, which is why things look unnatural under
ﬂuorescent light.
Fans of the 1989 James Cameron movie The Abyss may re-
call a scene toward the end of the movie, where it is impossible
for Ed Harris’s character (a deep-sea diver) to distinguish col-
ors under artiﬁcial lighting in the otherwise total darkness of the
deep oceanic basin. Regular viewers of the TV show Forensic Files
(formerly known as Medical Detectives) and other real-life crime
24

The Nature and Limitations of the Human Brain
documentaries may further recall that eyewitnesses often misiden-
tify the colors of cars on freeways, leading the police either to rule
in or rule out potential suspects incorrectly. This happens because
highways and freeways are often lit with sodium vapor lights and
other evolutionarily novel sources of illumination, which distort
colors to the human eye.
The same principle that holds for physical adaptations like the
color recognition system also holds for psychological adaptations.
Pioneers of evolutionary psychology4 all explicitly recognized
that the evolved psychological mechanisms are designed for and
adapted to the conditions of the ancestral environment, not neces-
sarily to those of the current environment. In 2004, I systematized
these observations into what I call the Savanna Principle.5
Savanna Principle: The human brain has difﬁculty com-
prehending and dealing with entities and situations that did
not exist in the ancestral environment.
Other evolutionary psychologists call the same observation
the evolutionary legacy hypothesis6 or the mismatch hypothesis.7 The
names may vary, but the observation remains the same. We are
stuck with the stone-age brain which assumes that we are still
hunter-gatherers on the African savanna, and responds to the
environment as if it were the African savanna.[8] There are many
manifestations of the Savanna Principle in our daily life.
TV Friends
Here is one illustration of the Savanna Principle in action. In
2002, I discovered that individuals who watched certain types
of TV shows were more satisﬁed with their friendships, just as
they were if they had more friends or socialized with them more
frequently.9 And this ﬁnding was later replicated by others.10 From
the perspective of the Savanna Principle, this may be because
25

The Intelligence Paradox
realistic images of other humans, such as those found in TV,
movies, videos, photographs, and DVDs, did not exist in the
ancestral environment, where all realistic images of other humans
were other humans. As a result, the human brain may have implicit
difﬁculty distinguishing their “TV friends” (the characters they
repeatedly see on TV shows) and their real friends. So by being
repeatedly exposed to their “TV friends,” that is, by watching
TV shows with their familiar characters, they feel like they are
actually with their friends, and their satisfaction with friendships
increases.
The Savanna Principle suggests that, because TV and other
realistic electronic depictions of other human beings did not exist
in the ancestral environment, our brain cannot really comprehend
TV. A lot of people get angry when I say this, and they vehemently
deny that their brain fails to distinguish between “TV friends”
and their real friends. They adamantly insist that they do know
how TV works.
Well, you do and you don’t. At the conscious level, you
do know how TV programs are produced. You do know that
the people you see on TV are actors, who are hired and paid
millions of dollars to play certain roles written by screenwriters
in their scripts. You consciously know that TV shows and movies
aren’t real.
But your brain doesn’t. If it does, why did you cry when Julia
Roberts’s character died at the end of Steel Magnolias? Don’t
you know that she’s just an actor who was paid a lot of money
(reportedly, $90,000 in 198911) to play the role of a dying woman?
Don’t you know that she’s not really dead? Why did you get scared
when Freddie Kruger slashed many teenagers in A Nightmare on
Elm Street? Don’t you know that the actor who played Freddie
Kruger (Robert Englund) is really a nice person and has never
killed anyone? Don’t you know that none of the teenagers who
were murdered in the movie actually died, nor were they in any
real danger because they were surrounded by dozens of crew at
26

The Nature and Limitations of the Human Brain
every moment? Your brain doesn’t truly comprehend any of these
things, and that’s why you are able to enjoy watching movies and
TV shows. If your brain truly did comprehend movies and TV
shows, you would never be able to enjoy them.
This is what I mean by comprehension in the Savanna Principle
(and later in the Savanna-IQ Interaction Hypothesis, discussed in
Chapter 4). Comprehension means true, logical, and scientiﬁcally
and empirically accurate understanding of how something works.
Your brain (as opposed to you) truly comprehends something
when your reaction or behavior in response to it is consistent
with a scientiﬁcally and empirically accurate understanding of
how it works.
So true comprehension of a TV show is that a large number
of professional actors are paid to enact certain scripted roles but
the characters they play on the show do not really exist in real
life. Untrue comprehension of it includes, among others, that the
stories portrayed on the show are real and that you know the
characters on the show personally and they know you personally.
The studies discussed above suggest that your brain (as opposed
to you) does not always have true comprehension of TV shows
because your reaction to them—increased satisfaction with your
friendships—suggests otherwise.
Pornography
Pornography—in particular, the vast sex differences in its con-
sumption and reactions to it—is another illustration of the Sa-
vanna Principle at work.
An overwhelming majority of consumers of pornography
worldwide are men.12 Given their greater desire for sexual variety,
it is understandable why men would consume more pornogra-
phy and seek out sexual encounters with numerous women in
pornographic photographs and videos, just as they do when they
contract prostitutes in search of greater sexual variety.
27

The Intelligence Paradox
Such desire for sexual variety on the part of men is evolution-
arily adaptive. A man who has sex with 1,000 women in a year
can potentially produce 1,000 children (or more if there are mul-
tiple births); more realistically, he can expect to father 30 children
(given that the probability of conception per coital act is .03).13
In sharp contrast, a woman who has sex with 1,000 men in a year
can still only expect to have one child (barring a multiple birth)
in the same time period, which she can achieve by having regular
sex with only one man. So there is very little reproductive beneﬁt
for women in seeking a large number of sex partners, as there is
for men.
However, unlike consorting with prostitutes, watching por-
nography does not lead to actual sexual intercourse. So why do
men like to consume pornography?
The Savanna Principle suggests that a man’s brain does not
really know that he cannot copulate with the women he sees
in pornographic photographs and videos. When men see im-
ages of naked and sexually receptive women, their brains can-
not truly comprehend that they are artiﬁcial images of women
whom they will likely never meet, much less have sex with, be-
cause no such images existed in the ancestral environment. Every
single naked and sexually receptive woman that our male ances-
tors saw throughout human evolutionary history was a potential
sex partner.
As a result, their brains think that they might have actual sex-
ual encounters with these women. Why else would men have an
erection when they view pornographic photographs and videos,
when the only biological function of an erection is to allow men
to have intercourse with women? If men’s brains truly compre-
hended that they would likely never have sex with the naked
women in pornography, they would not get an erection when
they watch it.
The same principle holds in strip clubs and peep shows, even
though these involve real live women, not their photographic
28

The Nature and Limitations of the Human Brain
and electronic images. In the ancestral environment, there were
no women who were paid to dance around naked in front of
men, and pretended to be sexually aroused and interested in them,
but would never actually have sex with them. So men’s brains
cannot truly comprehend strippers and lap dancers. That is why
they get an erection at strip clubs and peep shows, when they
consciously know that they would not actually have sex with the
naked women dancing in front of them.
The failure of men’s brains to comprehend images of naked
women nevertheless has some real consequences. In one exper-
iment, men who viewed Playboy centerfolds subsequently found
their own girlfriends physically less attractive and expressed less
love for them.14 Why would men love their girlfriends less after
viewing pictures of naked women in Playboy unless their brains
implicitly assume that they could potentially date the Playboy cen-
terfolds instead of their current girlfriends, most of whom pale in
comparison to them?
But it’s not only men’s brains that fail. The Savanna Principle
applies equally to women as it does to men; women’s brains have
the same evolutionary constraints and limitations as those of men.
This is why women do not consume pornography nearly as much
as men do, even though women enjoy having sexual fantasies as
much as men do.15 Women do not seek sexual variety because
their reproductive success does not increase by having sex with
a large number of partners. In fact, given the limited number
of children they can have in their lifetimes, the potential cost of
having sex with the wrong partner is far greater for women than
it is for men. This is why women are far more cautious about
having sex with someone they do not know well16 and tend to
require a much longer period of acquaintance before agreeing to
have sex than men do.17
So it makes perfect evolutionary sense for women to avoid
casual sex with anonymous strangers, and their brains cannot re-
ally tell that there is no chance that they might copulate with,
29

The Intelligence Paradox
or, worse yet, be impregnated by, a large number of the naked
and sexually aroused men they see in pornography. Women’s
brains cannot fully comprehend that they will not get pregnant
by watching pornography, just as men’s brains do not know that
they cannot copulate with women in pornography. Women avoid
pornography for the same reason that men consume it; in both
cases, their brains cannot really distinguish between real sex part-
ners and the imaginary ones, because the latter did not exist in
the ancestral environment.
The human brain (of both men and women), incidentally,
also implicitly assumes that all sex potentially leads to reproduc-
tion. That is why we still experience sex with contraception as
pleasurable, and we are motivated to pursue it. The human brain,
adapted to and designed for the ancestral environment, cannot
truly comprehend modern contraceptives that did not exist in
the ancestral environment. If it did, we would not ﬁnd sex with
contraception physically pleasurable. The only contraception that
existed in the ancestral environment was abstinence, and, conse-
quently, this is the only form of contraception that the human
brain can truly comprehend. This why men and women do not
experience abstinence (not having sex) as pleasurable, but still ex-
perience sex when the woman is on the pill as pleasurable, even
though both have the same reproductive consequences.
Cooperation in One-shot Prisoner’s Dilemma Games
In a Prisoner’s Dilemma game, two players make simultaneous
decisions without knowing what the other player decides. Each
player can decide to “cooperate” with the other player, or to
“defect” on the other player. Cooperative choice beneﬁts the
other player, whereas the defective choice hurts the other player.
Given the particular payoffs in Prisoner’s Dilemma games, it is
always rational to defect on the other player as long as the game is
30

The Nature and Limitations of the Human Brain
one-shot and not repeated inﬁnitely. Regardless of what the other
player does, you get a higher payoff by defecting than cooperating.
In one-shot games, there is nothing the other player can do to
punish you for defecting. When the game is repeated inﬁnitely,
however, it becomes rational for you to cooperate in a Prisoner’s
Dilemma game because then the other player can punish you on
future rounds for defecting. But there are no such concerns for
possible future retaliation in a one-shot game. In typical exper-
imental settings for Prisoner’s Dilemma games, the two players
interact via computers and never face each other in person. In
addition, the researchers make sure that the two players will never
run into each other before, during and after the experiment, so
the two players will remain completely anonymous to each other.
Under these experimental conditions, it is always rational to de-
fect on the other player and receive higher payoffs. There are no
negative consequences for defection.
Yet experiment after experiment conducted in the last half
century show that roughly half of the players of one-shot Pris-
oner’s Dilemma games make the theoretically irrational decision
to cooperate.18 This has been one of the longstanding unsolved
mysteries in game theory for more than 50 years. There are some
ideas, but no one yet knows for sure exactly why half the people
make the irrational decision to cooperate in one-shot Prisoner’s
Dilemma games in clear contradiction to the prediction of their
elegant mathematical models. Microeconomics assumes that all
human actors are rational, yet the evidence from these experi-
ments seems to suggest that half of them are not. And microeco-
nomics cannot explain why.
From the perspective of the Savanna Principle, it may be
because the two conditions that are theoretically necessary for the
prediction of universal defection in one-shot Prisoner’s Dilemma
games—complete anonymity and noniteration—did not exist in
the ancestral environment. There was no such thing as anonymous
31

The Intelligence Paradox
exchange in the ancestral environment because there were no
computer-mediated interactions that would make it possible; all
exchanges and interactions in the ancestral environment were
face-to-face. And very few, if any, social exchanges were one-
shot. Our ancestors lived in a small band of about 150 related
individuals all their lives. Everyone in their band was a relative,
friend, or ally for life.[19]
So the Savanna Principle suggests that the human brain may
have difﬁculty truly comprehending one-shot games and com-
pletely anonymous exchanges, because there were no such things
in the ancestral environment. As a result, some individuals may
act as if the anonymous one-shot games are face-to-face repeated
games, the only kind that existed in the ancestral environment,
and decide to cooperate, because it is rational to cooperate in
nonanonymous repeated games.
This may be why as many as half the people in one-shot
Prisoner’s Dilemma games make the irrational choice to coop-
erate. Further, the Savanna-IQ Interaction Hypothesis, an idea
that I introduce in Chapter 4, can potentially explain which
50% of the people are likely to cooperate in one-shot Prisoner’s
Dilemma games.
When Inclusion Costs and Ostracism Pays,
Ostracism Still Hurts
An incredibly ingenious experiment recently conducted by a
couple of social psychologists provides yet another illustration of
the Savanna Principle in operation.20
Humans are a highly social species, and they rely and depend
on each other for survival. For this reason, humans have always
lived in social groups. Because humans are highly dependent
on others in their groups, ostracism—being excluded from their
social groups and the beneﬁts they provide—has always been
32

The Nature and Limitations of the Human Brain
costly throughout human evolutionary history, and their very
survival has often depended on being included in their groups.
It is therefore not surprising at all that humans have evolved
psychological mechanisms that incline them to seek group afﬁl-
iation and avoid ostracism. Studies examining the human brain
using the fMRI (functional magnetic resonance imaging) tech-
nology have revealed that being ostracized activates the same
region of the brain that lights up when individuals experience
physical pain.21 In other words, humans are designed to feel
physical pain when they are ostracized. Given how dangerous be-
ing excluded from the group is for human survival and how very
costly ostracism is, especially in the ancestral environment of the
African savanna, this makes perfect evolutionary sense. Our an-
cestors who did not mind being ostracized and didn’t feel any
pain about it probably didn’t live long enough to produce many
children.
But what if ostracism was not costly at all? What if, instead,
being included is costly and being excluded is beneﬁcial? Would
people then come to enjoy being excluded and fear being in-
cluded? This is the question that motivated Ilja van Beest and
Kipling D. Williams to conduct their ingenious experiment in
their 2006 article “When Inclusion Costs and Ostracism Pays,
Ostracism Still Hurts” published in the premier journal in social
psychology, Journal of Personality and Social Psychology.
In their experiment, van Beest and Williams use a variant of
a multi-player computer game called Cyberball. An individual
plays Cyberball with two other players. Each player can see the
other two players on the computer screen, but they are in other
locations; each player is alone in the room. The game is very
simple. The three players toss a ball on the computer screen back
and forth with each other. If you get the ball, you can toss it
to either of the other two players, and whoever receives the ball
tosses it to one of the other players. Each player has a choice of
two players to toss the ball to.
33

The Intelligence Paradox
Figure 2.1 Cyberball
Figure 2.1 is a screenshot from Cyberball (courtesy of Kipling
D. Williams). If you are a player in this game, the left hand that
you see at the bottom of the screen is yours, and you see the
other two players in the game in front of you. In the screen shot,
you are observing one of the other players (on the left) throwing
the ball to the other player (on the right). You are therefore not
involved in this particular ball toss. The player on the left has
chosen the other player, not you, to whom to toss the ball.
Unbeknownst to the human player, however, the other two
players on the screen are simulated actors programmed by the
researchers to behave in certain ways. The experiment has a 2
(inclusion vs. exclusion) x 2 (gain vs. loss) design. In some games,
the human player is included in a fair share of the ball tosses. This
is the “inclusion” condition. In other games, after a couple of
tosses at the beginning, the human player is completely excluded
from the ball toss, and watches the other two players toss the
ball back and forth with each other, completely ignoring and
excluding the human player. This is the “exclusion” condition.
In some games, in both “inclusion” and “exclusion” condi-
tions, the human players earns 50 cents every time they touch the
34

The Nature and Limitations of the Human Brain
ball (when they are included in the ball toss). This is the “gain” or
“inclusion pays” condition. In other games, in both the “inclu-
sion” and “exclusion” conditions, the human players lose 50 cents
every time they touch the ball; in other words, in this condition,
people are ﬁnancially better off if they are excluded from the ball
tosses. This is the “loss” or “exclusion pays” condition.
Van Beest and Williams’s experimental design makes these
two factors completely independent of each other. Some subjects
gain money while being included, some subjects gain money
while being excluded. Other subjects lose money while being
included, still others lose money while being excluded. Then,
after the Cyberball game is over, the researchers measure the
subjects’ satisfaction and mood.
It makes perfect sense that human players who were excluded
from the ball toss in the “inclusion pays” condition were hurt
by being excluded. They would have earned more money if
they were included in the game, but they were not, so they
felt hurt. No surprises here. What is surprising is that people in
the “exclusion pays” condition were also hurt when they were
excluded. These people made more money by being excluded
from the game, yet they were equally hurt by not being included
in the ball toss by the other two players. How could this be? How
could people feel hurt when they were doing better?
The Savanna Principle can offer one potential answer.
Throughout the course of human evolution, exclusion was always
costly and inclusion was always beneﬁcial. These two things
always went together, because there were no evil experimental
psychologists in the ancestral environment to manipulate these
variables independently. There were no such things as “beneﬁcial
exclusion” and “costly inclusion.” Our ancestors were never in
the “exclusion pays” condition. The human brain therefore can-
not comprehend such a thing. The human brain implicitly and
unconsciously assumes that all ostracism is costly, just as it assumes
that all realistic images of people whom they see on a regular basis
35

The Intelligence Paradox
(and who don’t try to kill or harm them in any way) are their
friends, even when these people are on TV.
Microeconomic theory, or any other theory of human be-
havior which assumes that human behavior is rational and based
on carefully calculated cost-beneﬁt analysis, cannot explain van
Beest and Williams’s remarkable ﬁndings that humans are happy
to lose money and sad to make money. Without the Savanna
Principle, it would be difﬁcult to explain why ostracism makes
people sad when it pays. This is one of the many reasons why
evolutionary psychology is superior to microeconomics (or any
other theory) as an explanation for human behavior, even when
we are not talking about sex differences.22
The fundamental insight of evolutionary psychology, ex-
pressed in the Savanna Principle, is that the human brain responds
to the environment as if it were still the African savanna in the
ancestral environment (for the most part, during the Pleistocene
Epoch, 1.6 million to 10,000 years ago). You the person may
consciously know that this is the 21st century, and you are a
stockbroker in New York, an artist in Seattle, a housewife in San
Francisco, or a student in Kansas City, but your brain doesn’t know
that. Your brain, unconsciously and implicitly, still thinks that
you are a hunter-gatherer living on the African savanna more
than 10,000 years ago, where there was no TV or psychology
experiments or virtually anything else you see around you today.
As you can imagine, implications of this fundamental observation
of evolutionary psychology for our modern life are signiﬁcant
and widespread.
36

Chapter 3
What Is Intelligence?
I
ntelligence (or, more precisely, general intelligence) refers to the
ability to reason deductively or inductively, think abstractly,
use analogies, synthesize information, and apply it to new do-
mains.1 Perhaps no other concept in science suffers from greater
misunderstanding and is plagued with more misconceptions than
the concept of intelligence. Many of these misconceptions are
politically motivated by the equation of intelligence with hu-
man worth that I mention in the Introduction. Before I dis-
cuss how general intelligence evolved and what it is good for, I
want to attempt to dispel these common misconceptions about
intelligence.[2]
37

The Intelligence Paradox
Common Misconceptions about Intelligence
Misconception 1: IQ Tests Are Culturally Biased
Probably the most pervasive misconception about intelligence is
that IQ tests, which measure intelligence, are culturally biased
against certain racial and ethnic groups or social classes. This mis-
conception stems from the well-established and replicated fact
that different racial and ethnic groups on average score differently
on standardized IQ tests. As I mention in the Introduction, social
scientists and lay public alike assume (without any logical or em-
pirical support) that everyone (and all racial and ethnic groups)
is equally intelligent because they are all equally worthy human
beings. If everybody is equally intelligent, yet some groups con-
sistently score lower than others, then, the argument goes, it must
by deﬁnition mean that the IQ tests are culturally biased against
the groups who score lower.
But the claim of cultural bias rests entirely on the conviction
and unquestioned assumption that everybody and all groups are
equally intelligent, which in turn rests entirely on the conviction and
unquestioned assumption that intelligence is the ultimate measure
of human worth. The claim is untenable once we dismiss these
untested and hence religiously held convictions and assumptions.
Think about the sphygmomanometer, for a moment. It is
the device that doctors and nurses commonly use to measure
blood pressure, with the inﬂatable cuff with Velcro and a mer-
cury manometer to measure the pressure of blood ﬂow. It is an
unbiased and accurate (albeit imperfect) device to measure blood
pressure. (It is very imperfect, as I discuss later in the chapter.)
Nobody would argue that it is culturally biased against any racial
or ethnic group. Yet there are well-established race differences in
blood pressure; blacks on average have higher blood pressure than
whites.3 Does that mean that the sphygmomanometer is culturally
biased against (or for!) blacks? Is blood pressure a racist concept?
38

What Is Intelligence?
Of course not. It simply means that blacks on average have higher
blood pressure than whites. Nothing more, nothing less.
Or think of the bathroom scale. Once again, the bathroom
scale is an unbiased and accurate (albeit imperfect) device to mea-
sure someone’s weight. Nobody would argue that it is culturally
biased against certain groups. Yet on any bathroom scale, women
on average “score” lower than men, and Asians on average “score”
lower than Caucasians. Does that mean the bathroom scale is cul-
turally biased against women or Asians? Is weight a sexist or racist
concept? Of course not. It simply means that women on aver-
age weigh less than men, and Asians on average weigh less than
Caucasians. Nothing more, nothing less.
Nobody argues that blood pressure is a racist concept, or
that the sphygmomanometer is culturally biased, because nobody
equates (low) blood pressure with human worth. As a result, no-
body gets upset about observed race differences in blood pressure.
Nobody argues that weight is a racist or sexist concept, or that
the bathroom scale is culturally biased, because nobody equates
weight with human worth. As a result, nobody gets upset about
observed sex or race differences in weight. Why are race and sex
differences bona ﬁde evidence of bias only with IQ tests?
The single most accurate IQ test currently available is called
the Raven’s Progressive Matrices. Intelligence researchers univer-
sally consider it to be the single best test to measure general intelli-
gence because scores on this test are more strongly correlated with
the underlying dimension of general intelligence than any other
single intelligence test. (In technical language, Raven’s Progressive
Matrices are more highly g-loaded than any other cognitive test.)
The test comes in three different versions: the standard version
(Raven’s Standard Progressive Matrices); the advanced version for
college students and other more intelligent people (Raven’s Ad-
vanced Progressive Matrices), designed to discriminate the higher
end of the IQ distribution more precisely; and the multi-color
version for children (Raven’s Colored Progressive Matrices).
39

The Intelligence Paradox
Figure 3.1 A question from the Raven’s Advanced Progressive Matrices
Here is an example of a question item from Raven’s Advanced
Progressive Matrices. The test comes with only one instruction:
Choose the ﬁgure that ﬁts the next in the progression of matrices.
Which one of the eight alternatives comes next?
All question items in all versions of Raven’s Progressive Ma-
trices are very similar to this one. Can anyone tell me exactly
how this question, and all the other similar questions that com-
prise the Raven’s Progressive Matrices, can possibly be culturally
biased against any group? The question is a pure measure of rea-
soning ability. The only thing it’s biased against is the inability to
think logically.
By the way, if you are wondering, the correct answer to the
above question is 7.
Misconception 2: Nobody Knows What Intelligence Is,
because Intelligence and IQ Are Not the Same Thing
A related misconception that people have is the claim that IQ
is not a measure of general intelligence. Some people believe
40

What Is Intelligence?
in the concept of intelligence; they know that some people are
more intelligent than others. But they do not believe that IQ tests
accurately measure individuals’ intelligence, once again, because
IQ test scores typically show average differences between different
groups and they believe that individuals from different groups on
average must be equally intelligent.
Contrary to this view, intelligence researchers unanimously
agree that intelligence is exactly what IQ tests measure,4 in the
same way that your weight is exactly what your bathroom scale
measures. To maintain that intelligence is real and some people
are more intelligent than others, yet IQ tests do not accurately
measure intelligence is akin to claiming that weight is real and
some people are heavier than others, but the bathroom scale does
not accurately measure weight. It simply doesn’t make any sense.
I have just said that Raven’s Progressive Matrices is the single
best IQ test currently available, and that is true. But there is actu-
ally a better way to measure someone’s general intelligence than
Raven’s, and that is to administer a series of different cognitive tests.
The best way to assess someone’s level of general intelligence is to
administer a large number of cognitive tests like vocabulary, ver-
bal comprehension, arithmetic, digit span (to measure the ability
to repeat a sequence of digits after it is given, sometimes ex-
actly as it is given, sometimes backwards), spatiovisual rotation
(to measure the ability to imagine what a three-dimensional ob-
ject would look like if it is rotated in space), etc. You will recall
from the Introduction that this is precisely how NCDS measures
intelligence, which is why NCDS has one of the best measures
of general intelligence of all large-scale national surveys.
Across individuals, performances on all these cognitive tests
are highly positively correlated. In other words, people who
do well in verbal comprehension tests tend also to do well on
arithmetic tests, and they have better ability to visualize a three-
dimensional object from a different angle or to repeat a sequence
of digits that is given to them backwards. Contrary to popular
41

The Intelligence Paradox
belief, people who are good with concrete tasks are also good
with abstract tasks; people who are good with numbers are also
good with words.
For example, in a classic paper published in 1904, Charles
Spearman shows that students’ relative school performance in
mathematics is highly correlated with their performance in clas-
sics (r = .87), French (r = .83), English (r = .78), pitch dis-
crimination (r = .66) and music (r = .63). (The “r” is a measure
of association between two variables, known in statistics as the
correlation coefﬁcient. It varies from -1, when the two variables are
perfectly negatively correlated, through 0 when they are com-
pletely unrelated to each other, to +1 when they are perfectly
positively correlated. As you can see, all of the correlations re-
ported by Spearman are very highly positive.) In fact, the students’
relative performance in music is more highly correlated with
their mathematical ability than with their pitch discrimination
(r = .40)!
In the NCDS data, at age 16, the correlation between verbal
comprehension and mathematical comprehension is .654, which
once again is very high. As I note below in the next section,
the correlation between true blood pressure and blood pressure
measured by the sphygmomanometer is about .50. It means that
using a verbal comprehension test to measure one’s mathematical
ability, or using one’s relative performance in mathematics to
measure one’s relative performance in musical ability, is more
accurate than using the sphygmomanometer to measure blood
pressure. That is how high all measures of cognitive abilities are
intercorrelated.
At the same time, it is also important to remember that as
highly as verbal comprehension and mathematical comprehen-
sion are correlated in NCDS (r = .654), one can explain less than
half of the variance in the other. (“Explained variance” in one
variable by another is computed by squaring the correlation co-
efﬁcient between them. So it means that one’s score in the verbal
42

What Is Intelligence?
comprehension test explains 43% ((.654)2 = .428) of the vari-
ance in mathematical comprehension and vice versa.) It means
more than half of the variance in mathematical comprehension
test scores across individuals cannot be explained by their scores
in the verbal comprehension test scores.
What psychometricians (whose job it is to measure intelli-
gence accurately and devise tests to do so) do then is to subject
individual scores on all these cognitive tests to a statistical tech-
nique called factor analysis. What factor analysis does is to analyze
the correlations between all pairs of cognitive tests and then mea-
sure an individual’s latent cognitive ability that underlies their
performance on all of the cognitive tests. This latent cognitive
ability is general intelligence. Factor analysis also eliminates all
random measurement errors that are inevitably associated with
any individual cognitive test as a measure of intelligence. So it
can measure general intelligence purely, without any random
measurement errors.
The IQ score thus obtained is a pure measure of intelligence.5
It measures someone’s ability to think and reason in various con-
texts and situations, such as numerical manipulations like arith-
metic, verbal comprehension like reading, and mental visualiza-
tion like spatiovisual rotation. Believe it or not, all these cognitive
abilities have something in common, and that something is gen-
eral intelligence. So intelligence is precisely and exactly what IQ
tests measure. Intelligence is what allows us to perform on all
kinds of cognitive tests.
Misconception 3: IQ Tests Are Unreliable
Unlike other misconceptions about intelligence, there is some
truth to this one, in the sense that IQ tests are not per-
fectly reliable. IQ tests have some measurement errors, which
is why psychometricians perform factor analysis to eliminate
such random errors in measurement. So it is true that IQ tests
43

The Intelligence Paradox
are not perfectly reliable, but then no scientiﬁc measurements
ever are.
If the same individuals take different IQ tests on different days,
or even on the same day, their scores will be slightly different from
test to test (but only slightly). So IQ tests do not give the perfect
measurement of someone’s intelligence. But then, if you step on
the bathroom scale, get the reading, step off, and step on it again,
it will give you slightly different readings as well. The same is true
if you measure your height, your shoe size, and your vision. No
measurements of any human quality are perfectly reliable.
So the measurement of intelligence is no different from the
measurement of any other human trait. But nobody ever claims
that, because the measurement of weight is never perfectly reli-
able, there is no such thing as weight and weight is a culturally
constructed concept. But that’s exactly what people who are
unfamiliar with the latest psychometric research think about in-
telligence. Intelligence is no less real than height or weight, and
its measurement is just as reliable (or unreliable).
In fact, Arthur R. Jensen, probably the greatest living intelli-
gence researcher, claims that IQ tests have higher reliability than
the measurement of height and weight in a doctor’s ofﬁce.6 He
says that the reliability of IQ tests is between .90 and .99 (mean-
ing that random measurement error is between 1% and 10%),
whereas the measurement of blood pressure, blood cholesterol,
and diagnosis based on chest X-rays typically has a reliability of
around .50.
Reliability is the correlation coefﬁcient between repeated mea-
surements. If the measurement instrument is unbiased (as IQ tests
are as a measure of general intelligence and the sphygmomanome-
ter is as a measure of blood pressure), then the reliability translates
into the correlation coefﬁcient between the true values and the
measured values. The reliability of .50, for example, like the
reliability of the sphygmomanometer as a measure of blood pres-
sure, means that the correlation between individuals’ true blood
44

What Is Intelligence?
pressure and the readings on the sphygmomanometer is only .50.
In contrast, the reliability of .90-.99, for example, the reliability
of IQ tests as a measure of general intelligence, means that the
correlation between individuals’ general intelligence and their IQ
test scores is .90–99. So the measurement of intelligence is nearly
twice as accurate as the measurement of blood pressure, yet no-
body ever claims that blood pressure is not real or that it is a
culturally constructed concept.
Misconception 4: Genes Don’t Determine Intelligence, Only
the Environment (Education and Socialization) Does
This is another widely held misconception about intelligence.
It is true that genes don’t determine intelligence completely; they
only do so substantially and profoundly.
Heritability is the measure of the inﬂuence of genes on any
trait.[7] Heritability of 1.0 means that genes determine the traits
completely and the environment has absolutely no effect. As
I mention in Chapter 1, some genetic diseases like Hunting-
ton’s disease have a heritability of 1.0; genes entirely determine
whether or not you will get Huntington’s disease. If you have
the affected genes for the disease, it does not matter at all how
you live your life or what your environment is; you will develop
the disease. One’s natural eye color or natural hair color also has
a heritability of 1.0. So does one’s blood type. Very few other
human traits have a heritability of 1.0.
On the other hand, a heritability of 0 means that genes have
absolutely no inﬂuence on the given trait, and the environment
completely determines whether or not someone has the trait. No
human traits have a heritability of 0; genes partially inﬂuence all human
traits to some degree. (This is known as Turkheimer’s ﬁrst law of
behavior genetics.8)
Most personality traits and other characteristics—like whether
you are politically liberal or conservative or how likely you are
45

The Intelligence Paradox
to get a divorce—have a heritability of .50; they are about 50%
determined by genes.[9] In fact, most personality traits and social
attitudes follow what I call the 50–0–50 rule:10 roughly 50%
heritable (the inﬂuence of genes), roughly 0% what behavior
geneticists call “shared environment” (parenting and everything
else that happens within the family to make siblings similar to each
other), and roughly 50% “nonshared environment” (everything
that happens outside of the family to make siblings different from
each other). It turns out that parenting has very little inﬂuence
on how children turn out.11
Of course, this emphatically does not mean that parents are
not important for how children turn out; they are massively and
supremely important because children get their genes from their
genetic parents. It simply means that parenting—how parents raise
their children—is unimportant. This is why adopted children
usually grow up to be nothing like their adoptive parents who
raised them and a lot like their biological parents (or their twin
reared apart) whom they have never even met.12
One of the very few exceptions to the 50–0–50 rule is in-
telligence, for which heritability is larger. Heritability of general
intelligence increases from about .40 in childhood to about .80 in
adulthood. Among adults, intelligence is about 80% determined
by genes.
Yes, heritability of intelligence increases over the life course,
and genes become more important as one gets older. This may
at ﬁrst sight seem counterintuitive, but it really isn’t. This is be-
cause for adults the environment is part of their genetic makeup
whereas for children it isn’t. Children must live in the environ-
ment created by their parents, older siblings, teachers, neighbors,
clergy, and other adults. In contrast, adults determine their own
environment to a much greater extent than children do. So for
adults, genes and the environment become more or less the same
thing, whereas for children they are not. For adults, when the
46

What Is Intelligence?
environment inﬂuences their intelligence, it shows up as the in-
ﬂuence of their genes, which largely determine their environ-
ment, whereas for children it does not. This is why the inﬂuence
of genes increases dramatically throughout life.
Sorry, Education Does Not Increase Your Intelligence; It’s
the Other Way Around
A subcategory of this common misconception is that you can
become more intelligent, by reading more books, attending better
schools, or receiving more education. It is true that there are
strong associations among these traits. People who read more
books are more intelligent; people who attend better schools are
more intelligent; and people who attain more education are more
intelligent. But the causal order is the opposite of what many
people assume. There are associations among these traits, because
more intelligent people read more books, attend better schools
(partly because their parents are more intelligent and therefore
make more money), and receive more education.
Early childhood experiences do affect adult intelligence, but
they mostly function to decrease adult intelligence, not to increase
it. Childhood illnesses, injuries, malnutrition, and other adverse
conditions inﬂuence adult intelligence negatively, and these in-
dividuals often fail to fulﬁll their genetic potential. But there are
very few childhood experiences that will increase adult intelli-
gence much more than their genes would have inclined them
to have.
Somewhat paradoxically, the wealthier, the safer, and the more
egalitarian the nations become, the more (not less) important the
genes become in determining adult intelligence. In poor na-
tions, there are many children who grow up ill, injured or mal-
nourished, and these children will decrease the correlation be-
tween genes and adult intelligence. In wealthy societies like the
United States, where very few children now grow up ill and
47

The Intelligence Paradox
malnourished, the environment is more or less equalized. When
the environment becomes equal for all individuals, it has the same
effect for everyone and it can no longer explain any variance in
the individual outcome. (Statistically, a factor that does not vary
between individuals cannot be correlated with individual differ-
ences in an outcome. And no correlation means no explained
variance, as zero squared equals zero.) So the more equal the en-
vironment between individuals, the more important the inﬂuence
of genes becomes. A longitudinal study of Scottish people born
in 1921 and 1936 shows that their intelligence does not change
much after the age of 11.13 Their intelligence at age 11 is very
strongly correlated with their intelligence at age 80.
So contrary to the popular misconception, genes largely
(though, even for adults, never completely) determine intelli-
gence. In fact, intelligence is one of the most heritable of all
human traits and characteristics. For example, intelligence is just
as heritable as height.14 Everybody knows that tall parents beget
tall children, and nobody ever questions the strong inﬂuence of
genes on height, yet they vehemently deny any inﬂuence of genes
on intelligence.
There is something curious about heritability. A trait’s heri-
tability and its adaptiveness (how important it is for survival and
reproductive success) are generally inversely related: The more
adaptive the trait is (the more important it is for the organism’s
survival and reproductive success), the less heritable it is.15 This
is because, when a trait is crucial for survival and reproductive
success, every individual must have it at the optimal and most
efﬁcient level. Evolution cannot “allow” it to vary across indi-
viduals. It is only when a trait is less important for survival and
reproductive success that evolution can “allow” it to vary across
individuals. Thus, according to the basic principles of quantitative
genetics, the fact that general intelligence is highly heritable sug-
gests that it is not very important for our survival and reproductive
success, as I argue throughout the book.
48

What Is Intelligence?
How Did General Intelligence Evolve?
As I discuss in Chapter 1, evolutionary psychology contends that
the human mind consists of evolved psychological mechanisms.
Evolved psychological mechanisms are domain-speciﬁc. It means
that these evolved and innate solutions to adaptive problems each
operate only in their own speciﬁc narrow domains of life.
For example, the cheater detection mechanism, which was
among the very ﬁrst evolved psychological mechanisms to be
discovered,16 operates only in the domain of social exchange; it
helps us detect potential cheaters when they try to cheat us out
of a fair exchange. But the cheater detection mechanism does
not help us, nor is it operative, in any other domains of life.
It does not help us, for example, learn our native language. It
does not help us decide how to allocate limited parental resources
among our children (in other words, which of our children to
favor unconsciously—yes, parents do have favorites among their
children17). And it does not help us recognize familiar faces of
the people we know.
By the same token, the language acquisition device, which
helps us learn our native language from our mothers when we
are small children,18 does not help us detect cheaters in social
exchange, decide how to allocate parental resources, or recognize
familiar faces. In fact, it does not help us do anything except for the
one task of learning our native language. It does not even help us
learn second and third languages as adults, which is why learning
a foreign language is so much more difﬁcult than learning to
speak our native language as a child, which comes very naturally
and easily to us (because we have the innate ability to do so).
Evolved psychological mechanisms are domain-speciﬁc be-
cause adaptive problems, which they are designed to solve, are
domain-speciﬁc. All problems of survival and reproduction hap-
pen in speciﬁc domains; there were no general problems that
did not happen in a speciﬁc context for our ancestors to solve.
49

The Intelligence Paradox
Evolution did not give us a domain-general solution like a com-
puter because there were no domain-general problems like an IQ
test in the ancestral environment.
However, if the contents of the human brain are domain-
speciﬁc, how can evolutionary psychology explain general intelli-
gence, which is seemingly domain-general, not domain-speciﬁc?
Isn’t general intelligence a domain-general solution?
General intelligence thus posed a signiﬁcant theoretical prob-
lem for evolutionary psychology for a long time. How can evolu-
tionary psychology explain the evolution of general intelligence?
I believe that what is now known as general intelligence may have
originally evolved as a domain-speciﬁc adaptation to deal with
evolutionarily novel, nonrecurrent problems.19 Now what does
that mean?
The Pleistocene Epoch (between 1.6 million and 10,000 years
ago), during which humans evolved, was a period of extraordi-
nary constancy and continuity. Nothing much happened for more
than a million years. Our ancestors were hunter-gatherers on the
African savanna all of their lives. Their grandparents were hunter-
gatherers on the African savanna all their lives. Their parents were
hunter-gatherers on the African savanna all their lives. Their chil-
dren were hunter-gatherers on the African savanna all their lives.
Their grandchildren were hunter-gatherers on the African sa-
vanna all their lives.
This kind of constancy is difﬁcult for us to fathom. In our
grandparents’ generation, most people were farmers; now very
few people are. In our parents’ generation, most people were
factory workers; now very few people are. Now most of us,
regardless of our speciﬁc occupation, conduct our business and
trade at least partly on our computer, a device that did not exist
in our grandparents’ or even our parents’ generation.
It is against the backdrop of the extreme stability of our an-
cestors’ environment during the Pleistocene Epoch that all of
our psychological adaptations evolved. For instance, those who
50

What Is Intelligence?
had a taste for sweet and fatty food during the Pleistocene Epoch
lived longer and reproduced more successfully, by acquiring more
calories, than those who did not have such a taste for sweet or
fatty food.20 Or those who preferred a certain landscape for their
habitat lived longer and reproduced more successfully, by avoiding
potential predators in hiding, than those who did not have such
a preference.21 The evolution of psychological mechanisms—or
any adaptation, physical or psychological—assumes a stable envi-
ronment. Because evolution usually takes place very, very slowly,
over tens and hundreds of thousands of years, solutions cannot
evolve in the form of psychological mechanisms if the problems
keep changing.22 The fact that we have so many evolved psy-
chological mechanisms today is testimony to the extraordinary
stability and constancy of the ancestral environment.
Technically, the speed of evolution depends on the strength of
selection pressure—how crucial it is for survival and reproduction
to solve a given adaptive problem. The rate of evolution of a trait
is proportional to the adaptiveness of the trait—the correlation
between possessing the trait and being able to reproduce. For
example, if cosmic rays from an explosion of a nearby supernova
render all but redheads sterile, then in just one generation every-
one on earth will be a redhead because no one else will be able to
reproduce. But selection pressures are usually much weaker (for
example, the cosmic rays will allow redheads to reproduce at a
5% greater rate than everyone else), so evolution of most traits
take many, many generations.
Because adaptive problems in the ancestral environment re-
mained more or less the same generation after generation, our
evolved psychological mechanisms were sufﬁcient for our ances-
tors to solve them. In this sense, our ancestors did not really have
to think in order to solve their adaptive problems. They didn’t
have to think, for instance, what was good to eat. All they had to
do was to eat and keep eating what tasted good to them (sweet
and fatty foods that contained high calories), and they lived long
51

The Intelligence Paradox
and remained healthy. People who preferred the wrong kind of
food—like brightly colored mushrooms or an entirely vegetarian
diet—died off before leaving too many offspring, and we did not
inherit our psychological mechanisms from them. All the think-
ing had already been done by evolution, so to speak, which then
equipped our ancestors with the correct solutions in the form of
innate domain-speciﬁc psychological mechanisms. For the most
part, our ancestors never had to ﬁgure out problems on their own.
Even in the extreme continuity and constancy of the ancestral
environment, however, there were likely occasional problems that
were evolutionarily novel and nonrecurrent, which required our
ancestors to think and reason in order to solve. Such problems
may have included, for example:
1. Lightning has struck a tree near the camp and set it on
ﬁre. The ﬁre is now spreading to the dry underbrush.
What should I do? How could I stop the spread of the
ﬁre? How could I and my family escape it? (Since, as they
say, lightning never strikes the same place twice, this is
guaranteed to be a nonrecurrent problem!)
2. We are in the middle of the severest drought in as long
as anyone can remember. Nuts and berries at our normal
places of gathering, which are usually plentiful, are not
growing at all, and animals are scarce as well. We are run-
ning out of food because none of our normal sources of
food are working. What else can we eat? What else is safe
to eat? How else can we procure food?
3. A ﬂash ﬂood has caused the river to swell to several times
its normal width, and I am trapped on one side of it while
my entire band is on the other side. It is imperative that
I rejoin them soon. How could I cross the rapid river?
Should I walk across it? Or should I construct some sort
of buoyant vehicle to use to get across it? If so, what kind
of material should I use? Wood? Stones?
52

What Is Intelligence?
To the extent that these evolutionarily novel, nonrecurrent
problems happened frequently enough in the ancestral environ-
ment (a different problem each time[23]) and had serious enough
consequences for survival and reproduction, then any genetic
mutation that allowed its carriers to think and reason would have
been selected for, and what we now call “general intelligence”
could have evolved as a domain-speciﬁc psychological mechanism
for the domain of evolutionarily novel, nonrecurrent problems,
which did not exist in the ancestral environment and which there
are no dedicated psychological modules to solve.
From this perspective, general intelligence may have become
universally important in modern life24 only because our cur-
rent environment is almost entirely evolutionarily novel. In the
ancestral environment, general intelligence might have been no
more important than any other domain-speciﬁc evolved psy-
chological mechanism, like the cheater detection mechanism
or the language acquisition device. General intelligence helped
our ancestors only in the very narrow domain of evolution-
ary novelty—evolutionarily novel problems were by deﬁnition
few and far between in the ancestral environment—just as the
cheater detection mechanism helped them only in the very nar-
row domain of social exchange and the language acquisition de-
vice helped them only in the very narrow domain of the native
language acquisition. General intelligence became more impor-
tant than other evolved psychological mechanisms only because
our environment has changed so radically in the last 10,000 years
and most of the problems we face today are evolutionarily novel.
The importance of general intelligence may itself be evolution-
arily novel.
This theory suggests that more intelligent individuals are bet-
ter than less intelligent individuals at solving problems only if
they are evolutionarily novel. More intelligent individuals are not
better than less intelligent individuals at solving evolutionarily fa-
miliar problems that our ancestors routinely had to solve. The
53

The Intelligence Paradox
theory suggests that the performance of general intelligence, as
but one domain-speciﬁc psychological mechanism, is indepen-
dent of the performances of all the other domain-speciﬁc psycho-
logical mechanisms. I review some of the evidence for this theory
of the evolution of general intelligence in the next chapter.
Cognitive Classes
Before we leave this chapter on intelligence, I’d like to intro-
duce the concept of “cognitive classes,” which I use frequently
throughout the rest of the book. It is a way of grouping in-
dividuals into ﬁve ordinal categories by their intelligence, from
highest to lowest. This is a classiﬁcation system that other scholars
have invented25 and I have used before in my own work.26 The
labels for the cognitive classes are used merely as a convenient
shorthand, without any connotations.
Very bright (IQ > 125: roughly 5% of the US population)
Bright (110 < IQ < 125: roughly 20% of the US population)
Normal (90 < IQ 110: roughly 50% of the US population)
Dull (75 < IQ < 90: roughly 20% of the US population)
Very dull (75 < IQ: roughly 5% of the US population)
Here is a way to give you a quick ﬂavor of what these cognitive
classes mean. Among white Americans, 75% of those who earn
a bachelor’s degree are “very bright”; none are “very dull.” In
contrast, 64% of those who drop out of high school are “very
dull”; none are “very bright.”27
54

Chapter 4
When Intelligence Matters
(and When It Doesn’t)
The Savanna-IQ Interaction Hypothesis
The logical intersection of the Savanna Principle—discussed
in Chapter 2—and the theory of the evolution of general
intelligence—discussed in Chapter 3—suggests a qualiﬁcation
of the Savanna Principle. If general intelligence evolved to deal
with evolutionarily novel problems, then the human brain’s dif-
ﬁculty in comprehending and dealing with entities and situa-
tions that did not exist in the ancestral environment (proposed
in the Savanna Principle) should interact with general intelli-
gence. In other words, the Savanna Principle should hold stronger
among less intelligent individuals than among more intelligent
individuals. More intelligent individuals should be better able
55

The Intelligence Paradox
to comprehend and deal with evolutionarily novel (but not
evolutionarily familiar) entities and situations than less intelligent
individuals.
So I now propose the Savanna-IQ Interaction Hypothesis1
(or “the Hypothesis”). The Hypothesis qualiﬁes and elaborates
on the Savanna Principle by introducing intelligence and how it
modiﬁes the operation of the Savanna Principle.
The Savanna-IQ Interaction Hypothesis: Less intelligent
individuals have greater difﬁculty comprehending and deal-
ing with evolutionarily novel entities and situations that
did not exist in the ancestral environment than more in-
telligent individuals. In contrast, general intelligence does
not affect individuals’ ability to comprehend and deal with
evolutionarily familiar entities and situations that existed
in the ancestral environment.
Recall the deﬁnition of “comprehension” from Chapter 2
as the true, logical, and scientiﬁcally and empirically accurate
understanding of how something works. Now I am going to
review the empirical evidence for the Savanna-IQ Interaction
Hypothesis in many different domains of life.
Back to TV Friends
In Chapter 2, I discuss my 2002 study,2 which suggests that peo-
ple may have some implicit difﬁculty distinguishing their “TV
friends”—characters that they repeatedly see on TV—from their
real friends. The more they watch certain types of TV shows,
the more satisﬁed they become with their friendships, just as they
do if they have more friends or socialize with them more fre-
quently. This makes perfect sense from the perspective of the
Savanna Principle. Because there were no realistic electronic
56

When Intelligence Matters (and When It Doesn’t)
(or photographic) images of other humans in the ancestral envi-
ronment, the human brain has difﬁculty with such images. Since
all realistic images of other humans in the ancestral environment
were other humans, the human brain implicitly assumes that any
such images of other humans, who don’t attempt to kill or maim
them (which very few TV characters do), are their friends.
In 2006, after I formulated the initial ideas behind the Hy-
pothesis, I reanalyzed the same data from the General Social
Surveys to see if individuals’ IQ was related to their implicit
tendency to confuse “TV friends” and real friends.3 And it was.
This tendency, which I initially thought (according to the Savanna
Principle) was a universal human trait in 2002, appears to be lim-
ited to men and women below median intelligence (consistent
with the Savanna-IQ Interaction Hypothesis). Those who are
above median in intelligence do not report greater satisfaction
with friendships as a function of watching more TV; only those
below median intelligence do.
This seems to suggest that the evolutionary constraints on the
brain predicted by the Savanna Principle, whereby individuals
have implicit difﬁculty with recognizing realistic electronic images
on TV for what they are, appear to be weaker or altogether
absent among more intelligent individuals. Since truly enjoying
the experience of watching TV requires suspension of disbelief
and not really understanding that characters repeatedly seen on the
screen are highly paid actors hired to play scripted roles, this new
ﬁnding can potentially explain why less intelligent individuals
tend to enjoy the experience of watching TV more than more
intelligent individuals do.
Of course, just like everything else I say in this book, the
negative association between general intelligence and the en-
joyment of TV is an empirical generalization, for which there
are many exceptions. I personally happen to love watching
TV myself. However, among my highly intelligent academic
57

The Intelligence Paradox
colleagues, there are many who do not watch television at all.
Some don’t even own a television set. I’m often frustrated with
them, because I have nothing to talk to them about if they don’t
watch television at all. I share no common points of reference
with such people. Like the comedy writer Tina Fey, I believe that
American television is one of the greatest things about the coun-
try, and I feel sorry for people who cannot appreciate its many
wonderful programs. Nevertheless, the Savanna-IQ Interaction
Hypothesis can explain why many intelligent people do not watch
television at all.
We all know people who have a tendency to talk back and
speak to characters they see while they are watching TV or
movies. I believe this habit also stems from their implicit con-
fusion of “TV friends” and real friends, the confusion of realistic
electronic images of other human beings on the screen and real
human beings. I would therefore predict that less intelligent in-
dividuals are more likely to talk back and speak to TV and movie
screens, and further that these are precisely the people who enjoy
watching TV and movies more than others do. Less intelligent
individuals are less likely truly to comprehend electronic images
on the screen and more likely to forget unconsciously that they
are not real live human beings who can hear us when we talk
back to them.
Back to Pornography
In Chapter 2, I explain that men’s and women’s brains cannot truly
comprehend pornography—realistic photographic and video-
graphic images of sexually aroused men and women—because
no such thing existed in the ancestral environment. The Savanna
Principle can explain why men and women confuse porn stars
with real potential sex partners, just as they confuse “TV friends”
with real friends. Now the Hypothesis would predict that such
confusion of porn stars with real potential sex partners might
58

When Intelligence Matters (and When It Doesn’t)
interact with general intelligence, just as does the confusion of
“TV friends” with real friends.
In the ﬁrst independent empirical conﬁrmation of the Hy-
pothesis, conducted by researchers other than myself, Gorge A.
Romero and Aaron T. Goetz, two young evolutionary psychol-
ogists at California State University-Fullerton, demonstrate that
this indeed is the case.[4]
In their survey, Romero and Goetz measure three things from
their male respondents: (1) their perception of women’s sexuality
and sexual behavior; (2) their consumption of pornography; and
(3) their general intelligence. Their analysis demonstrates that
there is a positive association between men’s consumption of
pornography and how sexually promiscuous they think women
are, in other words, how likely they think women in real life
behave like porn stars. The more frequently they watch porn, the
more they believe that women are sexually more promiscuous
(have a large number of sex partners and one-night stands), and
enjoy having casual sex, giving oral sex, receiving anal sex, and
having threesomes, just as women typically do in porn movies.
However, this confusion of real women and porn stars happens
only if the men are less intelligent (at least one standard deviation
below the mean), not if they are of average or above-average
intelligence (at least one standard deviation above the mean).
This is a brilliant empirical demonstration of the Hypoth-
esis in operation. Men’s brains confuse real women and porn
stars—thereby believing that real women act like porn stars by
being sexually promiscuous and enjoying unusual sexual acts—but
only if they are of below-average intelligence. Romero and
Goetz further demonstrate that, once they control for general
intelligence, the consumption of pornography alone does not
increase men’s tendency toward this confusion. One must simul-
taneously have below-average intelligence and consume a large
quantity of pornography in order to confuse real women with
porn stars.
59

The Intelligence Paradox
The Failures of the Truly Gifted
Perhaps nothing illustrates the operation of the Hypothesis, and
the sharp distinction between the evolutionarily novel and evo-
lutionarily familiar domains of life, more clearly than the pro-
ﬁle of the truly gifted. The Study of Mathematically Precocious
Youth tracks the lives of more than 5,000 individuals who have
been identiﬁed as truly gifted in the SAT talent search.5 Most
people take the SAT in the last year of high school at age 17.
Participants in the talent search take it in the 7th or 8th grade,
before the age of 13. If they score within the top .01% (top 1
in 10,000) for their age, by scoring either more than 700 (out
of 800) on the SAT mathematical reasoning ability or more then
630 on the SAT verbal reasoning ability, they are included in the
study. Their IQ is therefore higher than 155.
The SAT is considered to be a reasonable IQ test, a test of
reasoning ability, not of acquired knowledge, while the ACT is
more an achievement test of acquired knowledge.6 According
to the ACT’s own website, “The ACT is an achievement test,
measuring what a student has learned in school. The SAT is
more of an aptitude test, testing reasoning and verbal abilities.”7
As you might expect, these individuals of extraordinarily high
intelligence achieve equally extraordinary success in the evolu-
tionarily novel domains of formal education and paid employ-
ment in the capitalist economy. More than half of them (51.7%
of men and 54.3% of women) have earned a doctorate (Ph.D.,
M.D., or J.D.), compared to the population baseline in the US
of 1%. An additional 5.3% of them have earned an MBA, all but
one of them in the top 10 US programs. Nearly half (45.8%) of
them are university professors, engineers, or scientists; an addi-
tional 13.6% are in medicine or law. More than a ﬁfth (21.7%)
of those in tenure-track positions in the top 50 US universities are
already full professors in their early 30s. (It is virtually unheard of
for someone to achieve the rank of full professor in their early 30s
60

When Intelligence Matters (and When It Doesn’t)
in any university, let alone in a top 50 US university.) More than a
third of the men and about a ﬁfth of the women earn more than
$100,000 a year in 2003–2004 in their early 30s. (Yes, in their early
30s!) Additionally, 17.8% of the men and 4.3% of the women
have earned patents, compared to the population baseline in the
US of 1%.
No matter how you slice it, there is no question that these
individuals in the Study of Mathematically Precocious Youth go
on to experience tremendous success in life, measured by their
educational achievement, professional careers, income, and cre-
ativity. All of these, however, are evolutionarily novel areas of life,
which our ancestors did not have more than 10,000 years ago.
How do the same individuals, with IQs higher than 155, fare in
evolutionarily familiar areas of life?
Mating and parenting are eminently evolutionarily familiar
domains of life. Despite the cumbersome interventions of modern
inventions (condoms, sperm banks, internet porn), we still mate,
pretty much the same way as our ancestors did 10,000 years ago.
Sexual courtship today still involves initial visual and chemical
attraction, verbal and physical interaction, mutual mate choice
based on social status, physical attractiveness, and moral character
as clues to good genes and parental abilities, foreplay, copulation,
positive or negative reaction to the mate choice by friends and
family, etc. And we still have children as our ancestors did then.
Children today, as then, are raised by pair-bonded couples, single
mothers and their kin, biological mothers and stepfathers, etc.
Few other domains of life today are as evolutionarily familiar as
marriage and parenting, so the Hypothesis would predict that
more intelligent individuals do not fare better than less intelligent
individuals in the domains of marriage and parenting.
This indeed appears to be the case. In stark contrast to their
stellar successes in education and employment, the participants
in the Study of Mathematically Precocious Youth do not do
very well in the evolutionarily familiar domains of marriage and
61

The Intelligence Paradox
parenting. For example, 64.9% of the men and 69.0% of the
women remain childless at age 33, compared to the population
baseline of 26.4% in the age group 30–34. The majority of parents
only have one child. As a result, the mean number of children
is .61 for men and .44 for women, compared to the population
baseline of 1.59 for women in the age group 30–34. Despite their
extraordinarily high general intelligence, these men and women
seem to lag behind everyone else in the evolutionarily familiar
domains of marriage and parenting.
The fact that truly gifted individuals have no particular ad-
vantage (and often disadvantage) in such evolutionarily familiar
domains as mating is illustrated by the following exchange be-
tween Stephen Hawking and Larry King. Hawking appeared on
Larry King Live Weekend on Christmas Day 1999, on the eve of
the new millennium, when the following exchange took place:
Larry King: What, Professor, puzzles you the most? What do
you think about the most?
Stephen Hawking: Women.
Larry King: Welcome aboard.
The Hypothesis would indeed predict that the Lucasian Pro-
fessor of Mathematics at the University of Cambridge (a post
once held by Isaac Newton), who is putatively the most intelli-
gent person in the United Kingdom today and can ﬁgure out the
origin and the destiny of the universe, has no particular advan-
tage in evolutionarily familiar domains of life such as mating, over
someone like Larry King, who has only a high school education,
and, incidentally, has had seven wives and ﬁve children.
What about the Rest of Us?
The sharp contrast between great success in evolutionarily novel
domains and great failures in evolutionarily familiar domains for
62

When Intelligence Matters (and When It Doesn’t)
the very intelligent is not limited to the truly gifted in the Study
of Mathematically Precious Youth. General intelligence affects
life outcomes in virtually every area and throughout the entire
life.8 From schooling to employment to crime and welfare de-
pendency to civility and citizenship, not only do more intelligent
individuals achieve more desirable outcomes, but general intelli-
gence almost always has a linear positive effect on the desirability
of the life outcomes. The more intelligent the individuals, the
more desirable the life outcomes.
Marriage and parenting are among the very few exceptions
to this pattern in a comprehensive review of American life. In
fact, “very bright” individuals are the least likely to marry of all
the cognitive classes. (Recall their deﬁnition of cognitive classes
at the end of Chapter 3.) Only 67% of these “very bright” white
Americans marry before the age of 30, whereas between 72%
and 81% of those in other cognitive classes marry before 30.9
The mean age of ﬁrst marriage among the “very bright” whites
is 25.4, whereas it is 21.3 among the “very dull” individuals and
21.5 among the “dull” individuals. The more intelligent you are,
the later you marry.
The pattern is similar in parenting. For example, general in-
telligence does not confer advantages in giving birth to healthy
babies. For example, 5% of white babies born to “very bright”
mothers suffer from low birth weight, compared to 1.6% of those
born to “bright” mothers and 3.2% of those born to “normal”
mothers. Only babies born to “dull” mothers (7.2%) and “very
dull” mothers (5.7%) fare worse.10
The lack of IQ advantage continues later in the childhood.
“Very bright” mothers are more likely to have children who
are behind in motor and social development or have the worst
behavioral problems. Speciﬁcally, 10% of children born to “very
bright” white mothers are in the bottom 10% of the motor and
social development index, compared to 5% of those born to
“bright” mothers and 6% of those born to “normal” mothers.
63

The Intelligence Paradox
Similarly, 11% of children born to “very bright” mothers ﬁnd
themselves in the bottom 10% of the behavioral problems index,
compared to 6% of those born to “bright” mothers and 10%
of those born to “normal” mothers.11 It is important to note
that the problems suffered by children born to “very bright”
mothers are not just social and behavioral—for which there might
be varying and changing cultural deﬁnitions of what constitutes
“normal”—but are also physical, such as birth weight and motor
development, for which the criteria of normal development are
objective and invariant.
Now, since “very bright” white women marry later, and thus
give birth to their babies at older ages compared to other mothers,
perhaps some of these physical and behavioral problems of their
children may be attributable to their older maternal age at birth or
the greater possibility of harmful mutations in the sperm of older
men.12 But this is precisely my point. Women with higher intel-
ligence are not using their intelligence to marry early and have
healthier children, which are the direct means toward achieving
reproductive success. More intelligent individuals are more likely
to receive more education and earn more money, both of which
are evolutionarily novel, but they are certainly not more likely to
achieve the evolutionarily familiar goals of marriage and repro-
duction. This has led some scholars to muse, “Can mothers be
too smart for their own good?”13
The Exception that Proves the Rule: Evolutionarily Novel
Elements in Mating and Parenting
This is not to argue, however, that intelligent people are not
better mates or parents in general today. Intelligent individuals
do make better mates and parents in some ways in the current
(evolutionarily novel) environment. For one thing, more intel-
ligent individuals universally attain more desirable outcomes in
all evolutionarily novel domains, such as education, economy,
64

When Intelligence Matters (and When It Doesn’t)
criminal justice, even health and longevity in contemporary so-
ciety.14 More educated, wealthier, healthier parents who avoid
trouble with the law undoubtedly do make better parents today.
One need go no farther than to recall the news story from
many years ago of an illiterate teenage mother whose baby died of
dehydration because the mother could not read the instructions
for how to make the baby formula and instead fed the dry pow-
der to the baby as is, without ﬁrst dissolving it in water. Note,
however, that this tragedy happened precisely because it involved
written instructions for making a baby formula—an evolution-
arily novel stimulus about an evolutionarily novel product. My
contention is that even this mother may have done ﬁne raising
her children in the ancestral environment, where childrearing
most likely did not require general intelligence, as all the an-
swers necessary for parenting would have been provided by other
evolved psychological mechanisms. In the ancestral environment,
everyone was illiterate.
Modern means of contraception are another evolutionarily
novel element in the evolutionarily familiar domain of mating
and parenting. In the ancestral environment, our ancestors prob-
ably mated all the time, with pregnancy and lactation (lactational
amenorrhea) serving as the only natural means of contraception,
besides abstinence. As a result, our ancestors invariably produced
a larger number of offspring than we do today, but many of
them died in infancy due to infectious diseases, malnutrition, and
other natural causes (including predation by humans and other
animals).15 The average number of offspring surviving to sex-
ual maturity in the ancestral environment might not have been
much larger than it is today. So while mating and parenting are
evolutionarily familiar, voluntary control of fertility through con-
traception (such as condoms or the pill) is evolutionarily novel.
So the Hypothesis would predict that more intelligent individ-
uals are better able to control their fertility voluntarily through
artiﬁcial means of contraception than less intelligent individuals.
65

The Intelligence Paradox
This indeed appears to be the case.16 Among contemporary
Americans in the GSS data, the association between the lifetime
number of sex partners and the number of children is positive
among less intelligent individuals (who are below the median
in verbal intelligence), but negative among more intelligent indi-
viduals (who are above the median in verbal intelligence). The
more sex partners less intelligent individuals have, the more chil-
dren they have, as a natural consequence of greater sexual activity
with more partners. In sharp contrast, the more sex partners more
intelligent individuals have, the fewer children they have. You can-
not have fewer children on average by having more sex partners,
unless you employ effective contraception.
Figures 4.1 shows the partial association, after controlling for
age, race, sex, education, marital status, and religion, between
Residuals for the lifetime number of sex partners
Residuals for the number of children
0
100
-100
8
6
4
2
0
-2
-4
200
300
Figure 4.1 Partial association between lifetime number of sex partners and
number of children among the less intelligent
66

When Intelligence Matters (and When It Doesn’t)
Residuals for the number of lifetime sex partners
Residuals for the number of children
0
100
-100
8
6
4
2
0
-2
-4
200
300
400
Figure 4.2 Partial association between lifetime number of sex partners and
number of children among the more intelligent
the lifetime number of sex partners and the number of children,
among individuals who are below the median in verbal intelli-
gence. As you can see, the relationship is positive, as indicated by
the regression line with an incline.
Figure 4.2 presents the same relationship among individuals
who are above the median in verbal intelligence. Here the re-
lationship between the lifetime number of sex partners and the
number of children is negative, as indicated by the regression line
with a decline.
The contrast between these two graphs suggests that more
intelligent Americans are indeed more efﬁcient in employing
(evolutionarily novel) modern means of contraception than their
less intelligent counterparts.
67

The Intelligence Paradox
Intelligence and Interpersonal Relationships
Interpersonal relationships are an eminently evolutionarily fa-
miliar domain of life. Even in the ancestral environment, our
ancestors had friends, allies, and enemies that they had to deal
with. They also had parents, children, siblings, and other rel-
atives. There is nothing evolutionarily novel about interacting
with these categories of people.
In addition, it was very important in the ancestral environment
(as it is now) to maintain good relations with these categories of
people (except, perhaps, for enemies). Reliable friends and allies
are crucial in survival and reproductive success,17 and investing in
kin is a very important means of increasing reproductive success.18
So the Hypothesis would predict that general intelligence does
not have any effect on individuals’ ability to maintain interper-
sonal relationships with these evolutionarily familiar categories
of people.
Survey data from the United States support this prediction
of the Hypothesis.19 While more intelligent Americans socialize
with their friends signiﬁcantly more frequently than their less
intelligent counterparts, intelligence does not seem to improve
interpersonal relationships with other evolutionarily familiar cat-
egories of people. In fact, more intelligent individuals socialize
with neighbors, siblings, and other relatives signiﬁcantly less fre-
quently than less intelligent individuals. Investing in kin is one of
the important means of increasing reproductive success, yet more
intelligent American seem less able to do so than less intelligent
individuals.
Intelligence and Wayﬁnding
In the hunter-gatherer life of our ancestors on the African sa-
vanna, navigation and wayﬁnding was an essential skill, on which
their very survival depended. After a long hunting or gathering
68

When Intelligence Matters (and When It Doesn’t)
trip, which could sometimes last for days, our ancestors had to
ﬁnd their way home without relying on maps, street signs, arti-
ﬁcial landmarks, and the satellite navigation devices. Those who
could not ﬁnd their way home from their trips probably faced
certain death. I would therefore expect navigation and wayﬁnd-
ing to be an evolutionarily familiar task, for which there is an
evolved psychological mechanism, and the Hypothesis would
predict that general intelligence is independent of wayﬁnding
abilities.
A couple of studies support this prediction of the Hypothesis.
In a highly ingenious experiment,20 researchers at York University
in Canada took participants on a meandering journey through a
wooded area, without any visible landmarks or maps, and asked
them, at predetermined locations, to point to the direction of the
origin. The participants must then lead the researchers back to
the origin. In this study, the participants’ wayﬁnding ability had
no correlation at all with their general intelligence, measured by
Raven’s Progressive Matrices (which, as discussed in Chapter 3,
is the best single measure of general intelligence).
Researchers at the University of Arizona replicated the Cana-
dian study in virtual reality.21 Their participants navigated in
computer-generated “rooms” displayed on a computer screen
by way of a joystick, and had to ﬁnd an invisible target placed
somewhere in the room on the ﬂoor. They got a beep when
they (initially unknowingly) “walked” over the invisible target,
and then must ﬁnd it again and again in the same room by nav-
igating to the same location in the room. The researchers’ data
showed that the participants’ general intelligence had no effect
on their ability to learn their way around the rooms and return to
the invisible target. They concluded that the individual’s ability
at spatial navigation and general intelligence were largely inde-
pendent. Given that more intelligent people tend to do virtually
everything better than less intelligent people, their distinct lack
of advantage in wayﬁnding is noteworthy.
69

The Intelligence Paradox
Intelligence and Exercise
As hunter-gatherers, our ancestors engaged in constant physical
activities. Their active, nomadic lifestyle, combined with their
limited caloric intake, meant that obesity was probably very rare in
the ancestral environment, and most of our ancestors maintained
a healthy, active lifestyle by our contemporary standards. It means
that regular exercise for its own sake, that is, exercising in order to
stay healthy and control weight, is probably evolutionarily novel,
and the Hypothesis would therefore predict that more intelligent
individuals are more likely to engage in regular exercise today
than less intelligent individuals.22
A couple of recent studies show that this indeed appears to be
the case.23 In one study, the frequency of exercise is signiﬁcantly
positively associated with general intelligence.24 In another, indi-
viduals who can successfully maintain a regular exercise schedule
are more intelligent than those who are unsuccessful by more
than one full standard deviation (122.50 vs. 106.25). And this
is not because intelligence is associated with conscientiousness.25
It appears that more intelligent individuals are more likely to
adopt the evolutionarily novel lifestyle of regular exercise for its
own sake.
Of course, more intelligent individuals are more likely to have
white-collar desk jobs that are more physically sedentary, whereas
less intelligent individuals are more likely to have blue-collar jobs
that are physically more active. Thus more intelligent individ-
uals may need to exercise more than less intelligent individuals.
However, in the ﬁrst study, education, income, and work status
are all statistically controlled, and the participants in the second
study are all college students (86.3% of whom are female, who are
less likely to have blue-collar jobs). So the effect of intelligence
on voluntary physical exercise appears to be genuine, but more
research is necessary to arrive at a more ﬁrm conclusion.
70

When Intelligence Matters (and When It Doesn’t)
From the Hypothesis to the Paradox:
The Intelligence Paradox on Individual
Preferences and Values
I now switch from the discussion of the Savanna-IQ Interaction
Hypothesis to the central idea in this book, which I call the Intel-
ligence Paradox. The Intelligence Paradox is the application of the
Hypothesis to the speciﬁc domain of individual preferences and
values. It explains how general intelligence affects and inﬂuences
such preferences and values.
Evolutionarily novel entities and situations that more intelli-
gent individuals are better able to comprehend and deal with may
include ideas and lifestyles, which may form the basis of their val-
ues and preferences. It would be difﬁcult for individuals to prefer
or value something that they cannot truly comprehend. However,
comprehension does not equal preference. While not everyone
who comprehends certain entities and situations would thereby
acquire preferences for them, I assume some would, whereas very
few (if any) who do not comprehend them would acquire pref-
erences for them. My assumption is that individuals only prefer
or value things that they can truly comprehend. Thus compre-
hension is a necessary but not sufﬁcient condition for preference.
Applied to the domain of preferences and values, the Hypoth-
esis may therefore suggest what more or less intelligent individuals
hold as their preferences and values.26 Hence I propose the Intel-
ligence Paradox.
The Intelligence Paradox: More intelligent individuals are
more likely to acquire and espouse evolutionarily novel pref-
erences and values that did not exist in the ancestral en-
vironment (and thus our ancestors did not have) than less
intelligent individuals. In contrast, general intelligence has
71

The Intelligence Paradox
no effect on the acquisition and espousal of evolutionarily
familiar preferences and values that existed in the ancestral
environment (and thus our ancestors had).
Recall from Chapter 1 that, by natural, I mean “that for which
we as a human species are evolutionarily designed,” and, by unnat-
ural, I mean “that for which we as a human species are not evolu-
tionarily designed.” Thus another way to express the Intelligence
Paradox is that more intelligent individuals are more likely to ac-
quire and espouse unnatural preferences and values which we are
not evolutionarily designed to have. Herein lies the essence of the
Paradox. More intelligent individuals are more likely to go against
their biological design, escape their evolutionary constraints and
limitations on their brains, and hence have unnatural and often
biologically stupid preferences and values. Yes, more intelligent
individuals are more likely to be stupid and do stupid things.
In the remainder of the book, I talk about various applications
and manifestations of the Intelligence Paradox with regard to nu-
merous evolutionarily familiar and novel preferences and values.
This is where intelligence research meets the problem of values.
72

Chapter 5
Why Liberals Are More
Intelligent than
Conservatives
What Is Liberalism?
It is difﬁcult to provide a precise deﬁnition of a whole school
of political ideology like liberalism or conservatism. To make
matters worse, what passes as liberalism or conservatism varies
by place and time. The Liberal Democratic Party in the United
Kingdom is middle-of-the-road, while the Liberal Democratic
Party in Japan is conservative. Most “conservatives” in the UK
and Europe are far more liberal than liberal Democrats in the US.
The political philosophy which originally emerged as “liberalism”
during the Enlightenment is now called “classic liberalism” or
73

The Intelligence Paradox
“libertarianism,” and represents the polar opposite of what is now
called “liberalism” in the United States.1
In this book, as elsewhere in my work,2 I adopt the contem-
porary American deﬁnition of liberalism. I provisionally deﬁne
liberalism (as opposed to conservatism) as the genuine concern for
the welfare of genetically unrelated others and the willingness to contribute
larger proportions of private resources for the welfare of such others. In the
modern political and economic context, this willingness usually
translates into paying higher proportions of individual incomes in
taxes toward the government and its social welfare programs. Lib-
erals prefer higher taxes and income transfers to achieve equality
of outcomes. While conservatives believe in equality of opportu-
nities (egalitarianism) and are happy with inequality of outcomes
(as long as there is equality of opportunities), liberals believe in
equality of outcomes (equality) and prefer any means to achieve it.
Deﬁned as such, liberalism is evolutionarily novel; our an-
cestors were not liberal in the contemporary American sense.
Humans (like all other living species) are designed by evolution
to be altruistic toward their genetic kin,3 their friends and al-
lies with whom they engage in repeated social exchange,4 and
members of their deme (a group of intermarrying individuals) or
ethnic group.5 (Yes, it has been mathematically proven that hu-
mans are evolutionarily designed to be ethnocentric. The math-
ematical sociologist Joseph M. Whitmeyer has shown that any
individual tendency to beneﬁt those whom one might marry, or
those whose children one’s children might marry, or those whose
grandchildren one’s grandchildren might marry—in other words,
favoritism toward members of an intermarrying group of people
known as the deme or, in short, ethnocentrism—will be evolu-
tionarily selected.6) But humans are not designed to be altruistic
toward an indeﬁnite number of complete strangers whom they
are not likely ever to meet or exchange with. This is largely be-
cause our ancestors lived in a small band of about 150 genetically
related individuals all their lives, and large cities and nations with
74

Why Liberals Are More Intelligent than Conservatives
thousands and millions of people are themselves evolutionarily
novel.7
But how do we really know that our ancestors were not liber-
als? In order to make reasonable inferences about what values our
ancestors might have held during the course of human evolution,
I have relied on two sources. First, I have consulted the 10-volume
compendium The Encyclopedia of World Cultures,8 which exten-
sively describes all human cultures known to anthropology (more
than 1,500) in great detail. Second, I have consulted ﬁve dif-
ferent extensive, monograph-length ethnographies of traditional
(hunter-gatherer, pastoral, and horticultural) societies around the
world.9 While contemporary hunter-gatherer societies are not
exactly the same as our ancestors during the Pleistocene Epoch,
they are the best analog that we have available for close examina-
tion, and are thus often used for the purpose of making inferences
about our ancestral life.
These ethnographic sources make it clear that, while shar-
ing of resources, especially food, with other members of their
own tribe is quite common and often expected among hunter-
gatherers, and while trade with neighboring tribes may have taken
place,10 there is no evidence that people in contemporary hunter-
gatherer bands freely share resources with members of other tribes.
Because all members of a hunter-gatherer tribe are genetic kin
(for men) or friends and allies for life (for women),[11] sharing
of resources among them does not qualify as an expression of
liberalism as deﬁned above.
It may therefore be reasonable to infer from these ethno-
graphic accounts that, while sharing of food and other resources
with genetic kin may be part of universal human nature, sharing
of the same resources with total strangers whom one has never
met or is not likely ever to meet is not part of evolved human na-
ture. The Intelligence Paradox would therefore predict that more
intelligent individuals are more likely to espouse liberal political
ideology than less intelligent individuals.
75

The Intelligence Paradox
Are Liberals More Intelligent than
Conservatives?
This indeed appears to be the case. Even when statistically con-
trolling for such relevant factors and potential confounds as age,
race, education, income, and religion, more intelligent children
are more likely to grow up to become more liberal than less intel-
ligent children.12 Intelligence measured in junior high and high
school strongly predicts adult political ideology seven years later.
The more intelligent American adolescents are in junior high and
high school, the more liberal they become as young adults.
Figure 5.1 shows that young adults in their early 20s who
identify themselves as “very conservative” have the average ado-
lescent IQ of 94.82 in junior high and high school, whereas
young adults who identify themselves as “very liberal” have the
average adolescent IQ of 106.42. And the association between
Very
conservative
94.82
99.02
99.05
104.12
106.42
Conservative Middle of
the road
Liberal
Adult political ideology
Very liberal
Mean childhood intelligence
110.00
108.00
106.00
104.00
102.00
100.00
98.00
96.00
94.00
92.00
90.00
Figure 5.1 Association between childhood intelligence and adult liberalism
76

Why Liberals Are More Intelligent than Conservatives
adult political ideology and adolescent IQ is monotonic; as one
increases, the other steadily increases as well.
As a mean difference between two large categories of indi-
viduals, the 11-point difference in childhood IQ between “very
liberal” and “very conservative” young American adults is very
large and statistically signiﬁcant. The probability that the results
in the above ﬁgure can happen by chance, when there is actually
no association between intelligence and liberalism, is less than
one in 100,000. Even though past studies show that women are
more liberal than men,13 and that blacks are more liberal than
whites,14 the statistical analysis shows that the effect of childhood
intelligence on adult political ideology is twice as strong as the
effect of sex or race.
The analyses of both Add Health and GSS data conﬁrm the
prediction of the Intelligence Paradox that more intelligent indi-
viduals are more likely to acquire and espouse the evolutionarily
novel value of liberalism, whereas less intelligent individuals are
more likely to acquire and espouse the evolutionarily familiar
value of conservatism. But the association between intelligence
and political ideology is not limited to the United States.
For example, even though there are no “liberals” and “con-
servatives” in the American sense in the United Kingdom—by
the American standard, everybody in the United Kingdom is a
socialist and there is very little substantive political disagreement
among British citizens—a longitudinal study of a large, nationally
representative sample of British citizens shows that British chil-
dren who are more intelligent at ages 5 and 10 are more likely to
vote for either the Green Party or the Liberal Democratic Party
at age 34.15 However, because British political parties are not as
different from each other on the liberal-conservative dimension
as American political parties are, I am not sure what this results
means in the context of the Intelligence Paradox.
Incidentally, the empirical ﬁnding that liberals are on aver-
age more intelligent than conservatives substantiates one of the
77

The Intelligence Paradox
persistent complaints among conservatives. Conservatives often
complain that liberals control the media or show business or
academia or some other social institutions. The Intelligence Para-
dox can explain why conservatives are correct in their complaints.
Liberals do control the media, or show business, or academia,
among other institutions, because, apart from a few areas in life
(such as business) where countervailing circumstances may pre-
vail, liberals control most institutions. They control the institutions,
not because they are liberals, but because they are on average more
intelligent than conservatives. They are therefore more likely
to attain the highest status in any areas of evolutionarily novel
modern life.
Of course, as with any other broad empirical generalizations,
there are exceptions. Liberals do not control every single orga-
nization in every single area of life. However, the balance is far
from equal, and the overall bias is pretty obvious. For example, in
the area of the mass media, AM talk radio is predominantly con-
servative; however, it is only one of many mass media channels
(newspapers, magazines, TV, radio, movies, the internet, etc.),
and all other mass media exhibit a strong liberal bias. In fact, as I
elaborate later in Chapter 10, while AM talk radio is conservative,
FM talk radio (mostly, NPR) is very liberal. Among cable TV
news channels, Fox News is relatively conservative, but it is only
one of many cable TV news channels, all of which are entirely
liberal. So it is safe to conclude that liberals control most organiza-
tions in most areas of life, even though the American population
in general is mostly conservative.
If Liberals Are More Intelligent than
Conservatives, Why Are Liberals So Stupid?
While it is consistent with the prediction of the Intelligence
Paradox, the conclusion in the previous section that liberals are
78

Why Liberals Are More Intelligent than Conservatives
on average more intelligent than conservatives may not resonate
with most people’s daily observations and experiences. If they are
more intelligent, why are liberals—especially those in Hollywood
and academia—so much more likely than conservatives to say and
do stupid things and hold incredulous beliefs and ideas that stretch
credibility?
Bruce G. Charlton, Professor of Theoretical Medicine at the
University of Buckingham and former Editor in Chief of Med-
ical Hypotheses, may have an explanation. In his editorial in the
December 2009 issue of Medical Hypotheses,16 Charlton suggests
that liberals and other intelligent people may be “clever sil-
lies,” who incorrectly apply abstract logical reasoning to social
and interpersonal domains. As I explain in Chapter 3, general
intelligence—the ability to think and reason—likely evolved as a
domain-speciﬁc evolved psychological mechanism to solve evolu-
tionarily novel problems, whereas, for all evolutionarily familiar
problems, there are other dedicated psychological adaptations.
Everyone—intelligent or not—is evolutionarily designed to have
the ability to solve such evolutionarily familiar problems in the
social and interpersonal domains as mating, parenting, social ex-
change, and personal relationships with the other evolved psy-
chological mechanisms.
Charlton suggests that the totality of all the other evolved psy-
chological mechanisms (all of human nature except for general
intelligence) represents what we normally call “common sense.”
Everyone has common sense. Intelligent people, however, have a
tendency to overapply their analytical and logical reasoning abil-
ities derived from their general intelligence incorrectly to such
evolutionarily familiar domains and, as a result, get things wrong.
In other words, liberals and other intelligent people lack common
sense because their general intelligence overrides it. They think
in situations where they are supposed to feel. In evolutionarily fa-
miliar domains such as interpersonal relationships, feeling usually
leads to correct solutions whereas thinking does not.
79

The Intelligence Paradox
I personally dislike Charlton’s term “clever sillies”—I don’t
like the British usage of both words, “clever” and “silly.” But
otherwise I completely agree with his analysis substantively. As
Charlton points out, common sense is eminently evolutionarily
familiar. Our ancestors could not have survived a single day in
their hostile environment full of predators and enemies if they did
not possess functional common sense. That’s why it has become an
integral part of evolved human nature in the form of evolved psy-
chological mechanisms in the social and interpersonal domains.
As I explain in my last book,17 despite all the surface and
superﬁcial differences, all human cultures are essentially the same
in broad and abstract terms; there is only one human culture.
And part of the common human culture is “common sense”
about how to behave and how to treat each other. So not only
do individuals from different ethnic, cultural, political, and class
backgrounds in the same society share common sense, but so
do all peoples of the world. Notice that common sense only
pertains to evolutionarily familiar and relevant aspects of social
life, not evolutionarily novel aspects. There is no common sense
about how to boot up a Macintosh computer or how to ﬂy an
airplane, although there is common sense about how to behave
in a computer lab or in a crowded airplane, which is the same
as how to behave in a crowded cave. Common sense is thus
evolutionarily familiar.
Because common sense is evolutionarily familiar and thus nat-
ural, the Intelligence Paradox would predict that more intelligent
people may be less likely to resort to it. They may be more likely
to resort to evolutionarily novel, non-commonsensical, stupid
ideas to solve problems in the evolutionarily familiar domains.
If this is not paradoxical, worthy of the name “the Intelligence
Paradox,” I don’t know what is.
This, incidentally, is the reason I never use words like “smart”
and “clever” as synonyms for “intelligent.” Similarly, I never use
words like “dumb” and “stupid” as synonyms for “unintelligent.”
80

Why Liberals Are More Intelligent than Conservatives
“Intelligent” has a speciﬁc scientiﬁc meaning—possessing higher
levels of general intelligence measured by a series of cognitive
tests or heavily g-loaded tests like Raven’s Progressive Matrices,
as I explain in Chapter 3. In sharp contrast, “smart” and “stupid”
have more to do with common sense than intelligence. From my
perspective, more intelligent people like liberals are more likely
to be “stupid” (lacking common sense), whereas less intelligent
people like conservatives are more likely to be “smart” (pos-
sessing functional common sense). Yes, more intelligent people
are stupider, and less intelligent people are smarter. If this is not
paradoxical, I don’t know what is.
Matt Stone and Trey Parker—the co-creators of South Park—
get it perfectly. In the episode “Go God Go XII,” the Wise One
(the elderly leader of atheist otters—Don’t ask: You have to see it)
says, with reference to Richard Dawkins:
Perhaps the Great Dawkins wasn’t so wise. Oh, he
was intelligent, but some of the most intelligent ot-
ters that I’ve ever met were completely lacking in
common sense.
Charlton’s concept of “clever sillies,” and the Intelligence
Paradox, can explain why general intelligence and the capacity
for common sense may be negatively associated across individuals,
and why people like Richard Dawkins are simultaneously very
intelligent and very stupid, lacking in common sense, precisely
because they are very intelligent. As the pioneer evolutionary psy-
chologist Gordon G. Gallup Jr. puts it very eloquently, in science,
common sense is often common nonsense.18
Higher Intelligence as a Peacock’s Tail?
There may be other reasons why intelligent people like lib-
erals tend to espouse stupid ideas. The Norwegian-Australian
81

The Intelligence Paradox
journalist Mads Andersen, in personal communication, suggests
to me another explanation for why liberals are stupider than con-
servatives. Andersen has a couple of great suggestions, both of
which utilize the handicap principle, ﬁrst proposed by the Israeli
biologist Amotz Zahavi.19
A prime example of a handicap is the peacock’s tail. The long,
elaborate, and ornate tail of a peacock does not have any adaptive
value; it does not serve any tangible, useful purpose that would
aid the survival of the peacock. In fact, it only harms its survival
chances. Peacocks with longer, more elaborate trains are easier for
predators to catch and kill than fellow peacocks with shorter and
simpler trains. It is also biologically more expensive to maintain
elaborate trains with symmetrical eyes. So they only have costs
and no beneﬁts.
But that, according to Zahavi, is precisely the point. Peacocks
are advertising to peahens, “Look, I am so genetically ﬁt and I
can run so fast that I can still evade the predators with this huge
thing hanging from my ass! Them other guys ain’t so ﬁt and the
only reason they can evade predators is because their trains are
shorter. They wouldn’t be able to evade the predators if their tails
were as long as mine! Now whose genes would you like your
offspring to carry?”
And peahens indeed do prefer to mate with peacocks with
longer, more elaborate, and more symmetrical tails that are bio-
logically very expensive to maintain and costly for their survival
chances. Peahens prefer such peacocks as mates so that their male
offspring will also sport long, elaborate tails that attract females
of their generation.
The same idea is captured by the expression “ﬁghting with
one arm tied behind my back.” Any ﬁghter who can win a ﬁght
with one arm tied behind his back would naturally have to be
stronger and more genetically ﬁt than anyone who needs both
hands to ﬁght. Zahavi and other biologists suggest that many
seemingly useless traits like peacocks’ long tails may have evolved
82

Why Liberals Are More Intelligent than Conservatives
as a handicap, an honest signal of one’s genetic ﬁtness to potential
mates. They are therefore sexually selected (they increase the
carrier’s reproductive success), even though they are not naturally
selected (they do not increase the carrier’s survival chances).
Andersen’s ideas capitalize on the Zahavian handicap prin-
ciple. First, he suggests that more intelligent individuals tend to
espouse absurdly complex ideas as an honest signal of their higher
intelligence. Because common sense is evolutionarily familiar, and
all humans are equipped with common sense, it is by deﬁnition
the simplest and easiest solution available to them. More intelli-
gent people reject the “simplistic” solution offered by common
sense, even though it is usually the correct solution, and instead
adopt unnecessarily complex ideas simply because their intelli-
gence allows them to entertain such complex ideas, even when
they may be untrue or unuseful in solving the problem at hand.
Many observers have noted that this is indeed already hap-
pening in academia.20 In ﬁelds like literary criticism that lack
external objective criteria for evaluating ideas (in contrast to nat-
ural sciences whose theories must be evaluated against nature),
or in pseudoscientiﬁc ﬁelds like sociology where nobody can
agree on what the truth is and political ideology trumps empir-
ical evidence, academics are increasingly rewarded for propos-
ing complex and absurd ideas like reader response theory or
social constructionism. Andersen suggests that these academics
may be (unconsciously) saying, “Look, I have such an excess of
intelligence that I don’t have to go for the obvious and simple
(albeit true) answers provided by common sense. I can come
up with absurdly complex ideas because my higher intelligence
allows me to!”
Second, Andersen points out that many political liberals, es-
pecially in Hollywood and academia, are themselves well off and
do not individually and directly beneﬁt from the liberal policies
of greater welfare states. Once again, these liberals may be giving
an honest signal that they have accumulated and are still able to
83

The Intelligence Paradox
accumulate so many resources that they can afford to pay higher
taxes and allow the public funds to beneﬁt other people. If they
are not able to accumulate resources themselves, they would not
be able to afford paying higher taxes to fund welfare programs
that do not directly beneﬁt them. In essence, they are (uncon-
sciously) saying, “Look, I’m so wealthy that I can afford to waste
my money on other people who are not related to me!”
I believe Andersen may be right in both of his suggestions.
But I don’t think his explanations necessarily contradict the ones
offered by Charlton and myself earlier. Instead, they may be addi-
tional reasons why intelligent people are more likely to be liberals
and espouse stupid ideas as honest signals of their genetic ﬁtness
and higher intellectual capacity. One does not have to be wrong
for the other to be right; they may both be correct and provide
partial explanations.
IQ and the Values of Nations
The Intelligence Paradox about the effect of general intelligence
on individual preferences and values may also have implications
for national differences in their characters, institutions, and laws.
Just like individuals, nations also vary in their collective prefer-
ences and values. Individual preferences and values of millions of
people can aggregate to shape national institutions and laws at the
societal level.
If more intelligent individuals are more likely to be liberal,
as the data both in the United States and the United Kingdom
seem to suggest, then it logically follows that, at the societal level,
populations with higher average intelligence are more likely to
be liberal. Data indeed do conﬁrm this macrolevel implication of
the Intelligence Paradox.
Even after statistically controlling for such relevant factors
as economic development, education, history of communism,
84

Why Liberals Are More Intelligent than Conservatives
geographic location, and the size of the government, societies
with higher average intelligence are more liberal.21 The average
intelligence in society increases the highest marginal tax rate (as
an expression of people’s willingness to contribute their private
resources for the welfare of genetically unrelated others) and,
partly as a result, decreases income inequality. The more intelli-
gent the population, the more they pay in income taxes and the
more egalitarian their income distribution.
In fact, the average intelligence of the population is the
strongest determinant of the highest marginal tax rate and the
level of income inequality in the society. Each IQ point in av-
erage intelligence increases the highest marginal income tax rate
by more than half a point; in societies with higher average intel-
ligence by 10 IQ points, individuals pay more than 5% more of
their individual incomes in taxes.
It appears that the Intelligence Paradox can not only explain
individual differences in their preferences and values, but also
national differences in their characters, institutions, and laws, in
other words, the values of nations.
85


Chapter 6
Why Atheists Are More
Intelligent than
the Religious
Where Does Religion Come From?
While religion is a cultural universal—humans in all known soci-
eties practice some religion1—recent evolutionary psychological
theories suggest that religiosity—belief in higher powers—may
not be an adaptation in itself.2 Religiosity may instead be a by-
product of other evolved psychological mechanisms, variously
known as “animistic bias”3 or “the agency-detector mechanism.”4
Now, what in God’s name does that mean?
Imagine you are our ancestor living on the African savanna
100,000 years ago, and you encounter some ambiguous situation.
For example, you heard some rustling noises nearby at night. Or
87

The Intelligence Paradox
you were walking in the forest, and a large fruit falling from a tree
branch hit you on the head and hurt you. Now what’s going on?
Given that the situation is inherently ambiguous, you can
either attribute the phenomenon to impersonal, inanimate, and
unintentional forces (for example, wind blowing gently to make
the rustling noises among the bushes and leaves, or a mature
fruit falling by the force of gravity and hitting you on the head
purely by coincidence) or attribute it to personal, animate, and
intentional forces (for example, a predator hiding in the dark
and getting ready to attack you, or an enemy hiding in the tree
branches and throwing fruits at your head to hurt you). The
question is, which is it?
As you can see in the 2 × 2 table in Figure 6.1, there are four
possible outcomes. In the two diagonal cases, you have made the
correct inference. You inferred that the cause of the ambiguous
situation was personal, animate, intentional, and it was; or you
inferred that the cause of it was impersonal, inanimate, uninten-
tional, and it was. There are no negative consequences if you
made the correct inference.
True state of nature
Personal,
animate,
intentional
Correct
inference
Personal,
animate,
intentional
Impersonal,
inanimate,
unintentional
Correct
inference
Inference
False positive
(Type I) error
Consequence =
paranoia
False negative
(Type II) error
Consequence =
potential death
Impersonal,
inanimate,
unintentional
Figure 6.1 Error management theory applied to religiosity
88

Why Atheists Are More Intelligent than the Religious
Given the insufﬁcient information you have, however, you
cannot always make the correct inference. Sometimes you make
mistakes in your judgment. In the two off-diagonal cases, you
have made incorrect inferences. If you inferred that the cause was
personal, animate, and intentional, whereas its true cause was im-
personal, inanimate, and unintentional, you have made what the
statisticians call the “Type I” error of false positive. You thought
the danger was there, when it wasn’t. In contrast, if you in-
ferred that the cause was impersonal, inanimate, and uninten-
tional, whereas its true cause was personal, animate, and inten-
tional, you have made what the statisticians call the “Type II”
error of false negative. You didn’t think there was danger, when
there was.
All errors in inference have negative consequences, but these
two types of errors—Type I error of false positive and Type II er-
ror of false negative—have very different negative consequences.
The consequence of Type I error is that you become paranoid.
You are always looking around and behind your back for preda-
tors and enemies that don’t exist. The consequence of Type II
error is that you are dead, being killed by a predator or an enemy
when you least expect them. Obviously, it’s better to be paranoid
than dead, so evolution should have designed an inference sys-
tem that overinfers personal, animate, and intentional forces even
when none exist. Evolution should build an inference system that
minimizes the chances of making Type II errors.
Here’s the catch. An inference system cannot simultaneously
decrease the chances of making Type I error and Type II error.
Any inference system that decreases the probability of making
Type I error must necessarily increase the probability of making
Type II error. Conversely, any inference system that decreases
the probability of making Type II error must necessarily in-
crease the probability of making Type I error. So if the human
mind has been selected to minimize the probability of making
Type II errors, so that they could never be caught off guard and
89

The Intelligence Paradox
attacked by predators and enemies that they assumed didn’t exist,
then the human mind must necessarily make a large number of
Type I errors.
You cannot simultaneously be paranoid and oblivious (or re-
laxed). The more paranoid you are, then, necessarily, the less
oblivious (or relaxed) you are. The more oblivious (or relaxed)
you are, then, necessarily, the less paranoid you are. In the face
of a potentially dangerous yet ambiguous situation, the human
mind is designed to be more paranoid and less oblivious.
Think of a smoke detector, which is designed, not by evo-
lution by natural and sexual selection, but by engineers.5 Just
like the human mind’s inference system, smoke detectors can
make errors of inference. It can sound the alarm, “thinking”
there is ﬁre, when there isn’t (Type I error of false positive), or
it can remain silent, “thinking” there is no ﬁre, when there is
(Type II error of false negative). The consequence of Type I er-
ror is that you are woken up in the middle of the night by the
ﬁre alarm, when there is no ﬁre. The consequence of Type II
error is that you sleep through the ﬁre and are potentially burned
to death.
True state of nature
Fire
Correct
inference
Fire!
e
Correct
inference
Inference
False positive
(Type I) error
Consequence =
woken up in the
middle of the night
False negative
(Type II) error
Consequence =
potential death
e
Figure 6.2 The smoke detector principle
90

Why Atheists Are More Intelligent than the Religious
As annoying as it is to be repeatedly woken up by false alarms
at three o’clock in the morning, the annoyance, even repeated
annoyance, is nothing compared to what could happen if the
smoke alarm makes one Type II error of not sounding the alarm
when there is ﬁre. So the smoke detector designers and engineers
deliberately design smoke detectors to make lots of Type I er-
rors of sounding alarm when there is no ﬁre, in order to make
sure that it would never ever make a single fatal Type II er-
ror of remaining silent when there is ﬁre. Smoke detectors are
therefore designed to be extremely sensitive for any potential
smoke or ﬁre. Just like the human mind, smoke detectors are
designed to be “paranoid.” This is known as the “smoke detector
principle.”6
Recent evolutionary psychological theories therefore suggest
that the human inference system may have been designed by evo-
lution to operate like a smoke detector. It may be designed to
make as few Type II errors as possible, and, as a necessary and
unavoidable consequence, to make many Type I errors. These
theories suggest that the evolutionary origins of religious be-
liefs in supernatural forces may have come from such an in-
nate cognitive bias to commit Type I errors rather than Type
II errors, and thus to overinfer personal, animate, intentional
forces behind otherwise perfectly natural phenomena. This ten-
dency underlies what some researchers call the “animistic bias” or
the “agency-detector mechanism.” These tendencies happen be-
cause evolution employs the same “smoke detector principle” that
engineers use.
You see a bush on ﬁre. It could have been caused by an im-
personal, inanimate, and unintentional force (lightning striking
the bush and setting it on ﬁre). Or it could have been caused by
a personal, animate, and intentional force (God trying to com-
municate with you). The “animistic bias” or “agency-detector
mechanism” predisposes you to opt for the latter explanation
rather than the former. It predisposes you to see the hands of
91

The Intelligence Paradox
God (an animistic and intentional agent) at work behind natural,
physical phenomena whose exact causes are unknown.
In this view, religiosity—the human capacity for belief in su-
pernatural beings—is not an evolved tendency per se; after all,
religion itself is not adaptive. It is instead a by-product of the ani-
mistic bias or the agency-detector mechanism, the tendency to be
paranoid, which is adaptive because it can save your life. Humans
did not evolve to be religious; they evolved to be paranoid. And
humans are religious because they are paranoid.
Some readers may recognize this argument as a variant of
“Pascal’s wager.” The 17th-century French philosopher Blaise
Pascal (1623–1662) argued that given that one cannot know for
sure if God exists, it is nonetheless rational to believe in God. If
one does not believe in God when He indeed exists (Type II error
of false negative), one must spend eternity in hell and damnation.
In contrast, if one believes in God when he actually does not
exist (Type I error of false positive), one only wastes a minimal
amount of time and effort spent on religious services. The cost
of committing Type II error is much greater than the cost of
committing Type I error. Hence one should rationally believe
in God.
Is It Natural to Believe in God?
So recent evolutionary psychological theories suggest that the
evolutionary origin of religious beliefs in supernatural forces may
stem from such an innate evolutionary bias to commit Type I
errors rather than Type II errors. If these theories are correct,
then it means that religion and religiosity have an evolutionary
origin. It is evolutionarily familiar and natural to believe in God,
and evolutionarily novel not to be religious.
Once again, in order to make reasonable inferences about the
religious beliefs of our ancestors during the course of human
92

Why Atheists Are More Intelligent than the Religious
evolution, I consult the same primary ethnographic sources on
which I rely in Chapter 5 in making inferences about their lib-
eralism. Out of more than 1,500 distinct cultures throughout
the world described in The Encyclopedia of World Cultures,7 only
19 contain any reference to atheism Not only do all these 19
cultures exist far outside of our ancestral home in sub-Saharan
Africa, but all 19 without an exception are former Communist
societies (Abkhazians in Georgia, Ajarians in Georgia, Albanians,
Bulgarians, Chuvash in Russia, Czechs, Germans in Russia [but
not in Germany], Gypsies in Russia, Itelmen in Russia, Kalmyks
in Russia, Karakalpaks in Russia, Koreans in Russia [but not
in Korea], Latvians, Nganasan in Russia, Nivkh in Russia,
Poles, Turkmens, Ukrainian peasants, Vietnamese). All Com-
munist states are ofﬁcially atheist and impose atheism on their
citizens. There are no non-former-Communist cultures de-
scribed in The Encyclopedia as containing any signiﬁcant segment
of atheists.
Nor is there any reference to any individuals who do not
subscribe to the local religion in any of the monograph-length
ethnographies that I have consulted.8 Once again, contemporary
hunter-gatherers are not exactly the same as our ancestors during
evolutionary history. But I do believe it is quite telling that, out of
all the human cultures known to anthropology (more than 1,500
cultures), the only cultures that contain a substantial number of
atheists (only 19 out of 1,500+) are former communist societies.
It may therefore be reasonable to conclude that atheism may not
be part of the universal human nature, and widespread practice of
atheism may have been a recent product of Communism in the
20th century. The Intelligence Paradox would therefore suggest
that more intelligent individuals are more likely to be atheist than
less intelligent individuals.
Consistent with the prediction of the Intelligence Paradox,
analyses of Add Health and GSS data show that more intelligent
children are more likely to grow up to be atheists.9 Even after
93

The Intelligence Paradox
statistically controlling for such relevant factors as age, sex, race,
education, income, and religion, more intelligent individuals are
more likely to be atheistic than less intelligent individuals.
Even though intelligence and education are highly positively
correlated (because, as I explain in Chapter 3, more intelligent
individuals on average receive more education), intelligence and
education have opposite effects on religiosity. More intelligent
individuals are less religious, while more educated individuals
are more religious (net of intelligence and all the other variables
mentioned above). So it is decidedly not that more intelligent
individuals are less religious because they are more educated and
education reduces religiosity. First, education is statistically held
constant (its effect is removed) in assessing the effect of intelligence
on religiosity. Second, contrary to what you might expect, more
educated people are more religious, not less.
As you can see in Figure 6.3, young adults (in their early
20s) who identify themselves as “very religious” have the average
childhood IQ of 97.14 in junior high and high school. In contrast,
young adults who identify themselves as “not at all religious” have
the average childhood IQ of 103.09. Once again, because these
are averages from a sample of tens of thousands of Americans, the
difference of 6 IQ points separating the two extreme categories
is very large and statistically signiﬁcant. The probability that the
results in Figure 6.3 can happen by chance, when there is actually
no association between intelligence and religiosity, is less than
one in 100,000.
Even though past studies have shown that women are much
more religious than men,10 the analysis shows that the effect of
childhood intelligence on adult religiosity is twice as strong as
the effect of sex. It is remarkable that childhood intelligence is
a signiﬁcant determinant of adult religiosity even when religion
itself (whether the respondent is Catholic, Protestant, Jewish, or
other) is statistically controlled for (with “no religion” as the
reference category).
94

Why Atheists Are More Intelligent than the Religious
Not at all 
103.09
99.34
98.28
97.14
Slightly
Moderately
Very
Adult religiosity
Mean childhood intelligence
104.00
102.00
100.00
98.00
96.00
Figure 6.3 Association between childhood intelligence and adult religiosity
Societal Implications
Once again, if more intelligent individuals are more likely to
be atheistic, then it follows that, at the societal level, the aver-
age intelligence of a population should decrease its average level
of religiosity. The more intelligent the population, the less reli-
gious (and more atheistic) it should be. This indeed appears to be
the case.11
Across nations, even after statistically controlling for such rel-
evant factors and potential confounds as economic development,
education, history of communism, and geographic location, the
average intelligence of a population signiﬁcantly and strongly re-
duces its average level of religiosity. Average intelligence in society
decreases the proportion of the population who believe in God,
95

The Intelligence Paradox
how important God is to the people, and the proportion of the
population who consider themselves to be religious. The more
intelligent the population, the less religious they are on average.
In fact, just as with the highest marginal tax rate and income
inequality discussed in Chapter 5, the average intelligence of the
population is the strongest determinant of its level of religiosity.
Each IQ point in average intelligence, for example, decreases the
percentage of the population who believe in God by 1.2%, and
the proportion of people who consider themselves to be religious
by 1.8%. Average intelligence singlehandedly explains 70% of the
variance in how important God is in different nations.
It appears, once again, that the Intelligence Paradox not only
explains individual preferences and values, such as religiosity, at
the micro level of individuals, but can also explain national dif-
ferences in values, preferences, and character at the macro level
of societies.
96

Chapter 7
Why More Intelligent Men
(but Not More Intelligent
Women) Value
Sexual Exclusivity
Humans Are Naturally Polygynous,
Not Monogamous
Because there is still a lot of confusion over terminology, I feel
I must repeat what I said in my earlier book and ﬁrst clarify
different institutions of marriage.1 Monogamy is the marriage of
one man to one woman, polygyny is the marriage of one man
to more than one woman, and polyandry is the marriage of one
woman to more than one man. Polygamy, even though it is of-
ten used in common discourse as a synonym for polygyny, refers
97

The Intelligence Paradox
to both polygyny and polyandry. It is therefore ambiguous as
to what polygamy refers to, and the word should be avoided
in any scientiﬁc discussion, unless it refers speciﬁcally to both
polygyny and polyandry simultaneously. The reason people use
“polygyny” and “polygamy” interchangeably is because, for rea-
sons I explain in the earlier book,2 there are very few polyan-
drous societies in the world (polyandry contains the seed of its
own extinction), and virtually all polygamous societies are indeed
polygynous.
Throughout most of human evolutionary history, our ances-
tors were mildly polygynous, not monogamous. Now how do we
know this? Marriage institutions, unlike skeletons, do not leave
fossil records. So how do we know what kind of marriage insti-
tution (polygyny vs. monogamy) our ancestors practiced? From
their skeletons; that’s how we know.
How polygynous members of a species are in general corre-
lates with the extent of sexual dimorphism in size (the average
size difference between the male and the female). The more sex-
ually dimorphic the species (where the males are bigger than the
females), the more polygynous the species.3 This is either because
males of polygynous species become larger in order to compete
with other males and monopolize females,4 or because females of
polygynous species become smaller in order to mature early and
start mating.5 Sexual selection can also create sexual dimorphism
in size, if women prefer taller men as mates and/or if men prefer
shorter women as mates.
I personally believe that polygyny is key to sexual dimorphism
in size among humans.6 I believe men and women could poten-
tially be the same size in a perfectly monogamous society. But all
human societies are invariably polygynous to various degrees.7 In
fact, women’s (but not men’s) average height in society is partly
determined by its degree of polygyny. The more polygynous the
society, the shorter women are on average, while men’s average
height is unaffected.8
98

Why More Intelligent Men Value Sexual Exclusivity
At any rate, what is indisputable is the positive association
between the degree of polygyny and the degree of sexual dimor-
phism in size, both across species and across human societies. Thus
strictly monogamous gibbons are sexually monomorphic (males
and females are about the same size), whereas highly polygynous
gorillas are equally highly sexually dimorphic in size.
Southern elephant seals (Mirounga leonina) represent the ex-
treme of this association. Male southern elephant seals on average
maintain about 50 females in their harems. In other words, only
2% of male southern elephant seals get to reproduce each breeding
season, and the other 98% end up being complete reproductive
losers. Theirs is an extremely polygynous breeding system. As a
result, male southern elephant seals are nearly eight times as large
by weight as female elephant seals.9 In fact, many female southern
elephant seals are often crushed to death under the weight of the
male during copulation.
Fortunately, the average human male is only 17% heavier than
the average human female.10 So, on this scale, humans are mildly
polygynous, not as polygynous as gorillas (let alone southern
elephant seals), but not strictly monogamous like gibbons either.
Consistent with this comparative evidence, a comprehensive
survey of traditional societies shows that an overwhelming ma-
jority (83.39%) of them practice polygyny, with only 16.14%
practicing monogamy and .47% practicing polyandry.11 The fact
that polygyny is so widespread in such societies, combined with
the comparative evidence discussed above, strongly suggest that
our ancestors might have practiced polygyny throughout most of
human evolutionary history.
Of course, polygynous marriage in any society is mathemat-
ically limited to a minority of men.12 Given a roughly 50–50
sex ratio, the highest proportion of men in polygynous marriage
in any society is 50%. If half the men each take two wives, the
other half must remain wifeless. If some men take more than
two wives, more men must remain wifeless and the proportion of
99

The Intelligence Paradox
polygynous men will be even smaller. So the proportion of polyg-
ynous men in any society must always be lower than 50%. Most
men in polygynous societies either have only one wife or no
wife at all.
However, at least some men throughout evolutionary history
were polygynous, and we are disproportionately descended from
polygynous men with a large number of wives, because such
men had more children than monogamous or wifeless men. Nor
does the human evolutionary history of mild polygyny mean that
women have always remained faithful to their legitimate husband.
There is clear anatomical evidence in men’s genitals to suggest
that women have always been mildly promiscuous over human
evolutionary history.13
As you can see in Figure 7.1, under polygyny, one man is
married to several women, so a woman in a polygynous marriage
still (legitimately) mates with only one man, just as a woman
in a monogamous marriage does. So a woman in a polygy-
nous marriage and a woman in a monogamous marriage are
both (supposed to be) sexually exclusive to one man. In sharp
contrast, a man in a polygynous marriage concurrently mates
with several women, quite unlike a man in a monogamous mar-
riage, who mates with only one woman. So throughout hu-
man evolutionary history, men have mated with several women
concurrently while women have (legitimately) mated with only
one man.
Monogamy
Polygyny
M
F
M
F
F
F
Figure 7.1 Marriage institutions: Monogamy vs. polygyny
100

Why More Intelligent Men Value Sexual Exclusivity
Sexual exclusivity prescribed under socially imposed mono-
gamy today is therefore evolutionarily novel for men, but not for
women. The Intelligence Paradox would therefore predict that
more intelligent men may value sexual exclusivity—having only
one sexual partner in a committed relationship—more than less
intelligent men, but intelligence may not affect women’s likeli-
hood of espousing value of sexual exclusivity.
Consistent with this prediction of the Intelligence Paradox,
an analysis of the Add Health data shows that more intelligent
boys are more likely to grow up to value sexual exclusivity in
early adulthood than less intelligent men. Even after statistically
controlling for the effects of such relevant factors and poten-
tial confounds as age, race, education, income, religion, and the
number of times the respondent has been married, the more in-
telligent they are in junior high and high school, the more they
value sexual exclusivity in a relationship seven years later. In con-
trast, net of the same control variables, childhood IQ does not
affect women’s value on sexual exclusivity in early adulthood (in
their 20s). More intelligent girls do not grow up to value sex-
ual exclusivity in a relationship more than less intelligent girls.
The effect of childhood intelligence on the value of sexual ex-
clusivity is more than four times as strong among men as among
women. Among women, the association between childhood in-
telligence and adult value on sexual exclusivity is not statistically
signiﬁcant at all.
Are More Intelligent Men
More Likely to Be Faithful?
Some tabloid newspapers have sensationally reported the above
ﬁndings with such salacious headlines as “Cheat-on-Wives Men
‘Less Intelligent’”14 (Metro), “Smart Men Less Likely than Dumb
101

The Intelligence Paradox
Ones to Cheat on Lovers: Study”15 (New York Daily News), and
“Intelligent Men ‘Less Likely to Cheat’”16 (Daily Telegraph). Apart
from the sensationalism, and the confusion between “intelligent”
and “smart,” which I address in Chapter 5, are these headlines
correct? Do the data presented above suggest that more intelligent
men are less likely to be sexually unfaithful to their wives and
girlfriends?
Probably not. But before I can explain why not, and why
more intelligent men are actually more likely to cheat, I need
to make a small detour and discuss a very important concept in
evolutionary biology called female choice.
Female Choice
Among all mammalian species (including humans) in which
the female makes greater parental investment in children than
the male does, sex and mating are a female choice, not a male
choice.17 It happens whenever and with whomever the female
wants, not whenever and with whomever the male wants. And
humans are no exception.
A couple of studies brilliantly highlight the operation of fe-
male choice among humans. In a classic 1989 study, two social
psychologists, Russell D. Clark and Elaine Hatﬁeld, hired a young
attractive confederate of each sex to approach college students of
the opposite sex on campus.18 So a young attractive female con-
federate would approach a male student, or a young attractive
male confederate would approach a female student, and say, “I
have been noticing you around campus. I ﬁnd you to be very
attractive.” Then the confederate asked one of three questions:
“Would you go out with me tonight?” “Would you come over
to my apartment tonight?” and “Would you go to bed with me
tonight?” The confederate would then simply record the subject’s
response (yes or no). They conducted the experiment twice, once
in 1978 and again in 1982.
102

Why More Intelligent Men Value Sexual Exclusivity
Here’s what Clark and Hatﬁeld found.
1978 Percentage Saying “Yes”
Type of request
Sex of requestor
Date
Apartment
Sex
Male
56%
6%
0%
Female
50%
69%
75%
1982 Percentage Saying “Yes”
Type of request
Sex of requestor
Date
Apartment
Sex
Male
50%
0%
0%
Female
50%
69%
69%
There are two interesting ﬁndings here, although they are
wholly unsurprising to anyone with common sense. First, both in
1978 and 1982, absolutely none of the dozens of women who were
approached by a handsome strange man agreed to have sex with
him. Second, an overwhelming majority of men (75% in 1978 and
69% in 1982) agreed to have sex with a beautiful strange woman
whom they had never met before. Notice that a much smaller
proportion of men (exactly 50% in both 1978 and 1982) would go
out on a date with her. In other words, many men who would
not go out on a date with the woman would nonetheless have sex
with her! More women than men in 1978 and exactly as many
women as men in 1982 were willing to go out on a date with the
stranger, but none of the women would sleep with him.
This classic study was recently replicated in Denmark in 2009,
even though the sex difference in the proportion saying “yes”
(2% vs. 38%) is not as stark in the Danish study as it was in the
original American study (0% vs. 75%).19 Interestingly, while none
of the Danish women who were not currently in relationships said
103

The Intelligence Paradox
yes (just like their American counterparts), 4% of the women
who were currently in relationships did. Given that the male
confederates who approached them were physically attractive, this
ﬁnding is actually consistent with the evolutionary psychological
prediction from the Good Genes Sexual Selection Theory.20 It
proposes that women seek to marry resourceful men of high
status who would invest in their children (“dads”) while at the
same time being impregnated by handsome men of high genetic
quality (“cads”), and then to pass off the resultant children as
their long-term mates’. The women cannot cuckold their mates
unless they are already in a relationship, so it makes sense from
this perspective that more women who are in relationships agreed
to sleep with a handsome stranger.
Many of the men who said “No” in the original Clark and
Hatﬁeld study actually apologized to the female confederate, saying
that they could not sleep with her because they were married or
have a steady girlfriend, implying that they would have slept with
her if they weren’t married or didn’t have a steady girlfriend. The
Danish study indeed shows that men who were not currently in
relationships were much more likely to say yes than men who were
(59% vs. 18%). In contrast, many of the women were angry when
the male confederate asked them if they would sleep with him.
The Clark and Hatﬁeld study, like nothing else, demonstrates
the power of female choice, which is why it has become a classic.
It shows that a reasonably attractive young woman can approach
any man and have sex with him. A reasonably attractive young
man cannot with a woman. The woman decides when and with
whom sex takes place; the man doesn’t.
Another study shows the continuing power of female choice.
In an article published in the September 2008 issue of Obstetrics
& Gynecology,21 Bliss Kaneshiro of the University of Hawaii and
colleagues studied the effect of women’s body mass index (BMI)
on their sexual behavior. Their sample contained 3,600 women of
“normal” body weight (BMI < 25), 1,643 “overweight” women
104

Why More Intelligent Men Value Sexual Exclusivity
(25 < BMI < 30), and 1,447 “obese” women (BMI > 30)
between the ages of 15 and 44.
Their statistical analysis shows that there is no signiﬁcant dif-
ference between normal-weight women, on the one hand, and
overweight and obese women, on the other, on their sexual ori-
entation, age at ﬁrst intercourse, frequency of heterosexual in-
tercourse, and the number of either lifetime or current male
sexual partners. It means that, contrary to what one might ex-
pect, overweight and obese women are not having sex later, less
frequently, or with fewer partners than normal-weight women.
There is a signiﬁcant difference, however, on whether they have
ever had sexual intercourse with men. Overweight (92.5%) and
obese (91.5%) women are signiﬁcantly more likely ever to have
had sexual intercourse with men than normal-weight women
(87.4%).
Studies of mate preference throughout the world overwhelm-
ingly show that men prefer to mate with women with low waist-
to-hip ratios in the normal weight range.22 Men don’t like women
who are underweight, and men certainly don’t like women who
are overweight. So overweight and obese women could not pos-
sibly have as much sex as normal-weight women, let alone more
sex, if men decide when and with whom to have sex. Most
men would simply not choose overweight and obese women as
their preferred sexual partners. Overweight and obese women
can have more sex than normal-weight women only if women
decide when and with whom to have sex, and men have little say
in the matter.
When a man propositions a woman, she can respond in one
of two ways; she can say “yes” or she can say “no.” When a
woman propositions a man, he can also respond in one of two
ways; he can say “yes” or he can say “yes, please.” He has no
realistic choice to say no. Men may not be saying “yes, please” to
overweight and obese women, but Kaneshiro et al.’s study clearly
suggests that they are deﬁnitely saying “yes.”
105

The Intelligence Paradox
Because of the power of female choice, every woman has the
power to predict the future, while very few men do. If a man
wakes up in the morning and says to himself, “Tonight I will get
laid,” the prediction will fail a vast majority of times, unless he
is incredibly handsome. Most young men in fact do make this
prediction every morning and go to bed alone and disappointed
every night. If a woman—any woman—wakes up in the morn-
ing and says to herself, “Tonight I will get laid,” the prediction
will likely come true every time. Such is the power of female
choice.
What Does Female Choice Mean for Intelligent Men’s
Preference for Sexual Exclusivity?
If sex and mating were an entirely or mostly male choice, and
it happened whenever and with whomever men wanted, then
it would be reasonable to conclude that more intelligent men,
who value sexual exclusivity more than less intelligent men, may
be less likely to be sexually unfaithful than less intelligent men.
However, sex and mating are a female choice.
There are several complicating factors here. First, more in-
telligent individuals—both men and women—are more likely
to attain higher status and accumulate more resources than less
intelligent individuals, at least in the evolutionarily novel envi-
ronment of today.23 And women prefer men of higher status
and greater means as their mates.24 Second, more intelligent
individuals—both men and women—are on average physically
more attractive than less intelligent individuals.25
For example, in a recent study with the NCDS data, those
who are described as “attractive” by two different judges are sig-
niﬁcantly more intelligent (IQ = 104.2) than those who are
described as “unattractive” (IQ = 91.8), by 12.4 IQ points!
The difference was much greater among boys (105.0 vs. 91.4)
than among girls (103.6 vs. 92.3).26 In fact, by pure coincidence,
106

Why More Intelligent Men Value Sexual Exclusivity
intelligence in the NCDS data is just as strongly associated with
physical attractiveness as it is with education; in both, the bivariate
correlation coefﬁcient is r = .381. Among other things, it means
that, if you want to estimate someone’s intelligence without giv-
ing them an IQ test, then you would do just as well to base your
estimate on their physical attractiveness as you would to base it
on their years of formal education!27
At any rate, women prefer handsome men as mates, partic-
ularly for short-term mating (“casual sex” or “affairs”).28 Third,
general intelligence is strongly correlated with height; more in-
telligent individuals—both men and women—are signiﬁcantly
taller than less intelligent individuals.29 And, once again, women
prefer taller men as mates.30
So, if you simply compare more intelligent men and less intel-
ligent men, without statistically controlling for their social status,
income, wealth, physical attractiveness, and height, I am almost
certain that more intelligent men are more likely to have affairs
than less intelligent men, not necessarily because they are more
intelligent, but because they are more likely to have higher social
status and greater resources, and to be physically more attractive
and taller. If you partial out the effects of status, resources, physical
attractiveness, height, and all the other potential confounds and
correlates of general intelligence, then, and only then, may more
intelligent men be less likely to have affairs.
However, to the best of my knowledge, no one has examined
the partial effect of general intelligence on the probability of
having affairs, net of all potential confounds. So we need further
research in this area to determine what effect (if any) men’s general
intelligence has on their actual sexual behavior (extramarital or
otherwise).
In fact, data from the GSS do suggest that more intelligent
men (and women) are more likely to have affairs. The mean
IQ of men who have had an extramarital affair is signiﬁcantly
(though only slightly) higher than that of men who have never
107

The Intelligence Paradox
Yes
No
102.4
791
100.5
2,562
110.0
108.0
106.0
104.0
102.0
100.0
98.0
96.0
94.0
92.0
90.0
Men
Figure 7.2 Association between intelligence and having an affair among men
had an extramarital affair (102.4 vs. 100.5). Among women, the
difference is slightly larger (104.6 vs. 101.5).
The association between IQ and extramarital affairs remains
signiﬁcant, for both men and women, even after I control for
education, income, and social class, as well as race, age, current
marital status, number of children, religion, and religiosity. The
effect of IQ is much stronger for women than for men. It is
not clear to me why more intelligent women are more likely to
have affairs than less intelligent women. Interestingly, as is quite
often the case, intelligence and education have opposite effects on
extramarital affairs for women. While more intelligent women
are more likely to have affairs, more educated women are less
likely to have them.
Unfortunately, the GSS does not measure the respondent’s
height or physical attractiveness, so I cannot control for them in
108

Why More Intelligent Men Value Sexual Exclusivity
Yes
No
104.6
638
101.5
4,174
Women
110.0
108.0
106.0
104.0
102.0
100.0
98.0
96.0
94.0
92.0
90.0
Figure 7.3 Association between intelligence and having an affair among
women
the analysis. Add Health and NCDS, both of which do measure
height and physical attractiveness, do not measure the respon-
dents’ experience of extramarital affairs. It therefore remains to
be seen whether the signiﬁcant association between intelligence
and the propensity to have affairs among men is a function of the
greater physical attractiveness and height of more intelligent men.
Note that the Intelligence Paradox is about individual pref-
erences and values, what people desire and want in their heads;
it’s not necessarily about what people actually do. If people have
complete choice over their behavior, they are expected to pursue
what they desire and want, but they do not always have such
complete choice. And, when it comes to sex and mating, men
have very little choice.
109

The Intelligence Paradox
Intelligence and Marriage Institutions
Now what does the association between intelligence and the
value for sexual exclusivity among men mean for the society?
What would be the macrolevel implications at the societal level
of the microlevel association between intelligence and preference
for sexual exclusivity among men at the individual level?
It turns out that the institution of marriage (monogamy vs.
polygyny) is very strongly associated with the average intelligence
of the population.31 Across 187 nations, average intelligence and
the degree of polygyny is correlated at r = −.615. Even net
of such relevant factors and potential confounds as economic
development, average level of education, geographical location,
Muslim religion, and income inequality, the average intelligence
of a population is very strongly associated with the level of polyg-
yny in society. The more intelligent the population, the less polyg-
ynous (and the more monogamous) it is.
In a 1999 paper with Mary C. Still,32 I argued that a major
determinant of the level of polygyny in society was income in-
equality. The more unequal the income distribution, the more
polygynous the society. This is because, when the income in-
equality among men is great, it makes more economic sense for
women to share a wealthy man than to monopolize a poor man.
In the memorable words of George Bernard Shaw (one of the
founders of the London School of Economics and Political Sci-
ence, where I teach), “The maternal instinct leads a woman to
prefer a tenth share in a ﬁrst rate man to the exclusive possession
of a third rate one.”33 This is no longer true when the income
inequality among men is less. Under more egalitarian income
distribution, women should prefer “the exclusive possession of a
third rate” man to “a tenth share in a ﬁrst rate man.”
The earlier ﬁnding still stands; income inequality does greatly
increase the level of polygyny in society. However, it turns out
110

Why More Intelligent Men Value Sexual Exclusivity
that the average intelligence of a population is an even stronger
determinant of the level of polygyny. In fact, the average intel-
ligence of a population is the strongest determinant of it of all
factors considered, even stronger than the Muslim religion. Yes,
Muslim nations are more polygynous than non-Muslim nations,
but the effect of the average intelligence of the population on the
level of polygyny in society is much greater.
111


Chapter 8
Why Night Owls Are
More Intelligent than
Morning Larks
I
ﬁrst became interested in circadian rhythm—why some people
are night owls while others are morning larks—when I lived in
Christchurch, New Zealand, for one year. I lived on Riccarton
Road, one of the main thoroughfares in Christchurch. Down
Riccarton Road from where I lived, there was a supermarket
called Countdown that was open 24 hours a day, 7 days a week.
I would often go to Countdown to shop at three o’clock in the
morning. Every time I did, I noticed that the place was crawling
with Asian customers. This was before the recent explosion of
Asian immigration to New Zealand, so Asians were still a small
minority in Christchurch back then. I would not see many Asians
113

The Intelligence Paradox
in Christchurch most of the time, except at three o’clock in the
morning in a 24-hour supermarket.
I began wondering then if this was because Asians were more
nocturnal than other races. I had not thought about possible race
differences in circadian rhythm until I lived in New Zealand and
encountered a large number of Asians at three o’clock in the
morning in a 24-hour supermarket. It was many years before I
solved the mystery of late-night Asian shoppers.
Choice within Genetic Predisposition
Choice is not incompatible with or antithetical to genetic inﬂu-
ence. As long as heritability (the proportion of the variance in
behavior explained by genes) is less than 1.0, genes merely set
broad limits, and individuals can still exercise some choice within
broad genetic constraints.
For example, political scientists in the emerging ﬁeld of ge-
nopolitics1 have discovered that two genes are responsible for
predisposing individuals to be more or less likely to vote in elec-
tions.2 In other words, whether you choose to turn out to vote in
any given election is partially determined by your genes. How-
ever, individuals can still choose to turn out to vote or not for
any election, and there are environmental (nongenetic) factors
that can predict their voting, such as whether the candidate you
voted for in the last election won or lost.3 You become more
likely to vote if you voted for a candidate who won in the last
election, and less likely to vote if you voted for a candidate who
lost in the last election.
Similarly, genetic inﬂuences and constraints do not preclude
individual acquisition of values and preferences. Individuals can
still choose certain values and preferences even in the face of
genetic predisposition. In fact, Turkheimer’s ﬁrst law of behavior
genetics,4 which I brieﬂy introduce in Chapter 3, states that all
114

Why Night Owls Are More Intelligent than Morning Larks
human traits are heritable and inﬂuenced, at least in part, by
genes. So if genetic predisposition is incompatible with personal
choice, it would mean that humans have absolutely no choice to
make at all. In reality, however, humans make choices in the face
of genetic predisposition.
For example, both political ideology5 and religiosity6 have
now been shown to have genetic bases. Some individuals are
genetically predisposed to be liberal or conservative, or more or
less religious. Yet, as we see in Chapters 5 and 6, more intelligent
children are more likely to grow up to be liberal and less likely
to grow up to be religious.7 Similarly, whether you are a night
person or a morning person is partly genetically determined,
but that does not mean that people still cannot consciously and
volitionally choose to be a night owl or a morning lark.
Night Life Is Evolutionarily Novel
Virtually all species in nature, from single-cell organisms to
mammals, including humans, exhibit a daily cycle of activity
called the circadian rhythm. “This timekeeping system, or bi-
ological ‘clock,’ allows the organism to anticipate and prepare
for the changes in the physical environment that are associated
with day and night, thereby ensuring that the organism will
‘do the right thing’ at the right time of the day.”8 The circa-
dian rhythm in mammals is regulated by two clusters of nerve
cells called the suprachiasmatic nuclei (SCN) in the anterior
hypothalamus.9
Geneticists have by now identiﬁed a set of genes that regulate
the SCN and thus the circadian rhythm among mammals.10 A
behavior genetic study of 977 South Korean twin pairs shows
that the heritability in morningness-eveningness (whether you
are a morning person or a night person) is .45 and nonshared
environment accounts for 55% of the variance, while shared
115

The Intelligence Paradox
environment does not appear to explain any of the variance.11
So the circadian rhythm appears to be yet another human trait
that roughly follows the 50–0–50 rule I discuss in Chapter 3.
“For most animals, the timing of sleep and wakefulness un-
der natural conditions is in synchrony with the circadian control
of the sleep cycle and all other circadian-controlled rhythms.
Humans, however, have the unique ability to cognitively override their
internal biological clock and its rhythmic outputs.”12 While there are
some individual differences in their circadian rhythm, where some
individuals are more nocturnal than others, humans are basically
a diurnal (day-living) species, as are all extant monkey and ape
species, except for one.13
Humans rely very heavily on vision for navigation but, unlike
genuinely nocturnal species, cannot see in the dark or under little
lighting. Our ancestors did not have artiﬁcial lighting during the
night until the domestication of ﬁre. Any human in the ancestral
environment up and about during the night would have been at
risk of predation by nocturnal predators. It is therefore safe to
assume that our ancestors rose at around dawn and went to sleep
at around dusk, to take full advantage of the natural light provided
by the sun, and that “night life” (sustained and organized activities
at night after dark) is probably evolutionarily novel.
In order to ascertain the extent to which our ancestors might
have engaged in nocturnal activities, I have once again con-
sulted ethnographic records of traditional societies throughout
the world. In the 10-volume compendium The Encyclopedia of
World Cultures,14 which extensively describes all human cultures
known to anthropology, there is no mention of nocturnal activ-
ities in any of the traditional cultures. There are no entries in
the index for “nocturnal,” “night,” “evening,” “dark(ness),” or
“all-night.” The few references to the “moon” are all religious in
nature, as in “moon deity,” “Mother Moon (deity),” and “moon
worship.” The only exception is the “night courting,” which is
a socially approved custom of premarital sex observed among
116

Why Night Owls Are More Intelligent than Morning Larks
the Danes and the Finns, which are entirely western cultures far
outside of the ancestral environment.
In addition, I have consulted the same ﬁve extensive
(monograph-length) ethnographies that I consult in Chapters 5
and 6.15 Many of these ethnographies contain a section where the
authors describe what usually happens and what people routinely
do in a typical day in the tribal society under study.
These detailed ethnographic records make it clear that the day
for people in these traditional societies begins shortly before sun-
rise, and ends shortly after sunset. “Daily activities begin early
in a Yanomam¨o village.”16 “The day begins about 6 a.m., when
the sun is about to rise.”17 The only routine activities conducted
after dark are people conversing and visiting with each other as
they drift off to sleep. “Despite the inevitable last-minute visiting,
things are usually quiet in the village by the time it is dark.”18
“Most evenings are spent quietly chatting with family members
indoors. If the moon is full then it is possible to see almost as
well as during the day, and people take advantage of the light
by staying up late and socializing a great deal.”19 “After cooking
and consuming food, evening is often the time of singing and
joking. Eventually band members drift off to sleep, with one
or two nuclear families around each ﬁre.”20 The only nocturnal
activities, other than chatting visiting, and making speeches, that
I can ﬁnd in all of these ethnographies is when Mukogodo men
go searching for missing animals in the dark, if one happens to
be missing.21
It may be signiﬁcant in this context that humans mostly
evolved in sub-Saharan Africa near the Equator, where the length
of the day remains more or less constant throughout the year. So
the practice of “wake up at dawn, go to sleep at dusk” would have
produced days of roughly the same length throughout the year. At
higher latitude, however, the same practice would have produced
days of varying lengths, longer in the summer and shorter in the
winter. In the extreme cases, near the arctic circles, days would
117

The Intelligence Paradox
Very dull
Dull
Normal
Bright
Very bright
584
23:41
00:03
00:10
00:21
00:29
2,967
6,820
3,483
468
Childhood IQ
Mean weekday time to go to bed
25.0
24.5
24.0
23.5
23.0
Figure 8.1 Association between childhood intelligence and weekday time to
go to bed
never have ended in the summer and would never have begun
in the winter. Thus humans in higher latitudes would have had
to wake up before dawn and stay up after dusk if they wanted
to have days of roughly the same length throughout the year.
Incidentally, the average intelligence of populations tends to be
higher at higher latitudes (and longitudes), even controlling for
the average temperature.22
Ethnographic evidence of traditional societies therefore sug-
gests that our ancestors probably had a largely diurnal lifestyle,
and sustained and routine nocturnal activities may be evolution-
arily novel. The Intelligence Paradox would therefore predict that
118

Why Night Owls Are More Intelligent than Morning Larks
Very dull
Dull
Normal
Bright
Very bright
585
00:35
01:03
01:13
01:25
01:44
2,985
6,854
3,488
465
Childhood IQ
25.0
24.5
24.0
23.5
23.0
Mean weekend time to go to bed
Figure 8.2 Association between childhood intelligence and weekend time
to go to bed
more intelligent individuals are more likely to be nocturnal, get-
ting up later in the morning and going to bed later in the evening,
than less intelligent individuals.
Previous to my 2009 article with Kaja Perina,23 there had
only been one study which examined the association between
intelligence and circadian rhythm.24 The 1999 study found that,
in a small sample of US Air Force recruits, evening types were sig-
niﬁcantly more intelligent than morning types. This is consistent
with the prediction of the Intelligence Paradox.
The analysis of the Add Health data conﬁrm this prediction
of the Intelligence Paradox. Net of age, sex, race, marital status,
119

The Intelligence Paradox
Very dull
Dull
Normal
Bright
Very bright
583
07:20
07:25
07:32
07:40
07:52
2,965
6,814
3,480
468
Childhood IQ
Mean weekday time to wake up
9.0
8.5
8.0
7.5
7.0
Figure 8.3 Association between childhood intelligence and weekday time to
wake up
parental status, education, income, religion, whether currently
in school, and the number of hours worked, more intelligent
children are more likely to grow up to be nocturnal in their early
adulthood. More intelligent individuals go to bed later, both on
weeknights and on weekend nights, and they wake up later on
weekdays (but not on weekends, for which the positive effect of
general intelligence on nocturnality is not statistically signiﬁcant).
Figures 8.1 through 8.4 show that the association between
childhood IQ and adult nocturnality is monotonically positive,
even though absolute differences are not very large. For example,
120

Why Night Owls Are More Intelligent than Morning Larks
Very dull
Dull
Normal
Bright
Very bright
586
10:09
10:14
10:14
10:23
11:07
2,986
6,850
3,488
466
Childhood IQ
Mean weekend time to wake up
12.0
11.5
11.0
10.5
10.0
Figure 8.4 Association between childhood intelligence and weekend time
to wake up
on weeknights, “very dull” children (with IQs below 75) on
average go to bed at 23:41 in early adulthood, whereas “very
bright” children (with IQs above 125) on average go to bed at
00:29. In general, the more intelligent they are in junior high
and high school, the later they go to bed and the later they
wake up in early adulthood. The probability that one would get
the patterns as strong as those represented in the four ﬁgures
above purely by chance, when there is actually no association
between childhood intelligence and adult circadian rhythm, is
one in 10,000 or smaller.
121

The Intelligence Paradox
So Are Asians Really More Nocturnal
than Others?
So are Asians really more nocturnal than other races, as was my
impression on my frequent trips to Countdown in Christchurch
at three o’clock in the morning? I don’t have data on Kiwis, but
Add Health data on Americans do suggest that they are.
Compared to all other races (whites, blacks, and Native Amer-
icans), Asians go to bed signiﬁcantly later on weeknights (00:43
vs. 00:08) and on weekend nights (01:27 vs. 01:12). However,
White
Black
Asian
Native
American
00:05
00:19
00:43
00:10
9,779
3,390
1,176
481
Race
Weekday time to go to bed
25.0
24.5
24.0
23.5
23.0
Figure 8.5 Association between race and weekday time to go to bed
122

Why Night Owls Are More Intelligent than Morning Larks
White
Black
Asian
Native
American
01:11
01:15
01:27
01:24
9,825
3,394
1,175
488
Race
Weekend time to go to bed
26.0
25.5
25.0
24.5
24.0
Figure 8.6 Association between race and weekend time to go to bed
Asians do not wake up signiﬁcantly later than others either on
weekdays (07:38 vs. 07:32) or on weekends (10:20 vs. 10:18). In
general, races differ signiﬁcantly from each other in what time
they go to bed, both on weeknights and weekend nights, but
they do not differ signiﬁcantly from each other in what time they
wake up, either on weekdays or on weekends.
So it appears that my casual observations at Countdown in
Christchurch so many years ago may have some empirical ba-
sis. Compared to other races, Asians do appear to stay up (and,
presumably, shop for groceries, among other things) later into
the night. The bivariate associations between being Asian and
123

The Intelligence Paradox
White
Black
Asian
Native
American
07:33
07:32
07:38
07:35
9,770
3,388
1,176
480
Race
Weekday time to wake up
9.0
8.5
8.0
7.5
7.0
Figure 8.7 Association between race and weekday time to wake up
nocturnality (what time they go to bed at night), represented
in Figures 8.5 and 8.6, remain statistically signiﬁcant even when
childhood IQ is controlled for. Even net of childhood intelli-
gence, Asians go to bed signiﬁcantly later than others every night.
So it is not because they are slightly more intelligent than other
races that Asians are more nocturnal.
However, the association disappears once I control for all the
other social and demographic variables included in the multiple
regression analyses (age, sex, current marital status, parental status,
education, income, religion, whether currently in school, and the
number of hours worked). In fact, the only signiﬁcant effect of
124

Why Night Owls Are More Intelligent than Morning Larks
White
Black
Asian
Native
American
10:18
10:22
10:20
10:03
9,822
3,397
1,174
487
Race
26.0
25.5
25.0
24.5
24.0
Weekend time to wake up
Figure 8.8 Association between race and weekend time to wake up
race in the multiple regression analyses is being black. Compared
to whites (the reference category), blacks go to bed later on
weekends (but not on weeknights) and wake up later on weekends
(but not on weekdays).25
Unfortunately, the Intelligence Paradox is completely mute
on genuine race differences in nocturnality (or anything else) net
of general intelligence. So I do not know why Asians or blacks
stay up later into the night or wake up later in the morning.
125


Chapter 9
Why Homosexuals Are
More Intelligent than
Heterosexuals
R
ecall the discussion of the naturalistic and moralistic fallacies
in Chapter 1. Science is all about what is, and it is never
about what ought to be. Nothing in science is good or bad;
everything just is (or isn’t). Science does not make any moral
judgments.
Even though some form of homosexuality is observed in
many species,1 the basic biological design of all mammalian
species is heterosexual reproduction, and exclusive or predom-
inant homosexuality is rare in nature. Most importantly, we are
not descended from ancestors who were exclusively homosex-
ual, so it is unlikely that homosexuality has been part of human
127

The Intelligence Paradox
nature throughout evolutionary history. In this narrow sense, be-
ing homosexual is unnatural; humans (as all the other species) are
not designed to be homosexual.
So the Intelligence Paradox would predict that more intelli-
gent individuals may be more likely to be homosexual than less
intelligent individuals. But before we discuss the potential effect
of general intelligence on sexual behavior, let’s ﬁrst of all talk
about what it means to be homosexual or heterosexual. It’s not
as straightforward as you may think at ﬁrst.
What Does It Mean to Be Homosexual?
Heritability of male homosexuality—the proportion of the vari-
ance in male sexual orientation that is explained by genetic
factors—has been estimated to be between .262 and .60.3 So
somewhere between a quarter and two-thirds of the variance in
male sexual orientation is genetically determined. The remain-
ing variance, however, appears to be accounted for by prenatal
exposure to androgen in the womb; the more androgen—male
hormones—the male fetus is exposed to in the womb during
gestation, the more likely they are to become homosexual.4 This
is why, for example, men who have more older brothers are more
likely to be homosexual.5 Each additional brother increases the
odds that a man becomes homosexual by 33–38%. The current
consensus among sex researchers is that, between genes and pre-
natal hormones, men’s sexual orientation is largely determined
before birth,6 while women’s sexual orientation is more malleable
and ﬂuid.7
There are four different measures of sexual orientation:8
1. Self-identiﬁed labels = whether you consider yourself to
be homosexual, bisexual, heterosexual, etc.
128

Why Homosexuals Are More Intelligent than Heterosexuals
2. Actual sexual behavior = with whom you have sex.
3. Self-reported sexual feelings = to whom you are sexually
attracted and about whom you have sexual fantasies.
4. Genital or brain responses = physiologically measured
arousal to male or female images.
In their 2005 book Born Gay, the sex researchers Glenn
Wilson and Qazi Rahman note that self-identiﬁed labels can
be inﬂuenced by political and cultural climate. For example,
many homosexuals throughout history and in some oppres-
sive regimes today have been forced to remain in the closest
due to social pressure and threat of legal punishment, includ-
ing death. Actual sexual behavior, Wilson and Rahman note,
can be inﬂuenced by opportunities and circumstances. For ex-
ample, many heterosexual men often have sex with other men
while in prison due to the complete absence of potential female
sexual partners.
In contrast, sexual feelings and physiological measures (3 and 4
above) are more stable and closer to individuals’ “true” sexual ori-
entation. For example, self-identiﬁed heterosexual men who are
openly and publicly homophobic may nonetheless show genital
response of arousal to sexual images of other men.9 (Yes, some of
the most openly homophobic men turn out to be secretly homo-
sexual themselves. Remember the ex-Marine neighbor of Kevin
Spacey’s character in American Beauty?) Wilson and Rahman also
note that homosexual fantasies are quite common in heterosexual
men and women as a form of “mental explorations”10 and that
measuring homosexuality with reported sexual fantasies and de-
sires assumes that survey respondents are completely honest about
them.
All in all, Wilson and Rahman conclude that physiologically
measured arousal (genital or brain responses to sexual images of
men or women) is probably the most accurate measure of true
129

The Intelligence Paradox
sexual orientation, and the other three measures may correlate
poorly with it and may deviate from their true sexual orientation,
especially among women.11
Given that an individual’s true sexual orientation, at least for
men, is prenatally determined (either genetically at the moment
of conception or through prenatal exposure to androgen dur-
ing gestation prior to birth), it is not likely that more intelligent
individuals are more likely to be truly homosexual. There is a
possibility, however, that the (as yet undiscovered) genes for intel-
ligence are somehow linked to the (as yet undiscovered) genes for
homosexuality in men, because genes for both intelligence and
male homosexuality appear to be located on the chromosome
Xq28.12 At any rate, given that the ﬁrst three measures of sexual
orientation (1, 2, and 3 above) are more malleable and subject
to conscious choice and self-presentation, it may also be possible
that more intelligent individuals are more likely to appear ho-
mosexual by these measures, that is, if homosexual identity and
behavior are evolutionarily novel. Regardless of their true sexual
orientation, more intelligent individuals may identify themselves
as homosexual, engage in homosexual behavior, or report homo-
sexual fantasies and desires.
Evolutionary Novelty of Homosexual
Identity and Behavior
In order to examine the extent to which our ancestors might have
identiﬁed themselves as homosexuals and engaged in homosexual
behavior, I have once again consulted the same ethnographic
records of traditional societies throughout the world that I use in
earlier chapters. When it comes to homosexuality, contemporary
hunter-gatherers, while not exactly the same as our ancestors, are
130

Why Homosexuals Are More Intelligent than Heterosexuals
probably a lot more similar to our ancestors than are residents of
San Francisco or Brighton today.
The 10-volume compendium The Encyclopedia of World Cul-
tures13 mentions male homosexuality in seven different cultures
(Foi, Gebusi, Kaluli, Keraki, Kiwai, Marind-anim, and Sambia).
However, these are phylogenetically closely related tribes all in
Papua New Guinea, and all practices of male homosexuality in
these Papua New Guinean cultures occur strictly as part of initi-
ation rites for boys.
For example, “Gebusi believe boys must be orally inseminated
to obtain male life force and attain adulthood. Insemination con-
tinues during adolescence and culminates in the male initiation
(wa kawala, or ‘child becoming big’) between ages 17 and 23.”14
And among the Sambia, “male maturation requires homoerotic
insemination to attain biological competence. Initiation rituals
thus involve complex homosexual contact from late childhood
until marriage, when it stops.”15
These homosexual practices in Papua New Guinea appear
highly ritualized and culturally mandated. There appears very
little individual choice involved, and, as such, homosexuality does
not appear to be an individual-difference variable (where some
people practice it while others don’t, where some people are
homosexual and others are heterosexual). It therefore appears
quite different from what we normally mean by “sexual relations,”
which involve choice, emotions, and attachment. At any rate, it
is very difﬁcult to suggest that homosexuality was a routine part
of our ancestors’ life if its present-day practice on a large scale
among traditional societies is limited only to one island in the
South Paciﬁc far outside of the ancestral environment of sub-
Saharan Africa.
In addition, I have also consulted the ﬁve extensive
(monograph-length) ethnographies of traditional societies around
the world which I rely upon in earlier chapters.16 In any of these
131

The Intelligence Paradox
ethnographies, there is no mention of explicit homosexual rela-
tionships among the members of the societies under study. The
only potential exception is the panegi among the Ache.17
Some men in our sample never had any children and
others never acquired a wife. One category of men in
Ache society opts out of the male mating pool alto-
gether. These men, called panegi, take on a female so-
cioeconomic role (the world pane means unsuccessful
or unlucky at hunting). Men who are panegi generally
do not hunt, but instead collect plant resources and
insect larvae. They weave baskets, mats, and fans, and
make tooth necklaces, bowstrings, and other female
handicrafts. They spend long hours cooking, collect-
ing ﬁrewood or water, and caring for children. Most
informants stated that “panegis” did not ever engage in
homosexual behavior (oral or anal) prior to ﬁrst contact. A
few informants said they were not sure, but had never
heard of such behavior.
Panegis are apparently small in stature.18 And, at least in North
America, homosexual men are shorter than heterosexual men.19
So perhaps the panegis among the Ache might have been ge-
netically and hormonally predisposed to homosexuality. But the
ethnographic records make it clear that they nonetheless did not
engage in homosexual behavior prior to ﬁrst contact with the
western civilization.
It is very important to point out, however, that even very
extensive ethnographies, based on long-term ﬁeldwork by very
experienced anthropologists familiar with the local culture and
language, may not always detect instances of homosexuality. This
may especially be the case if homosexuality is condemned and
negatively sanctioned in the local culture. So the absence of ref-
erences to homosexuality in these ethnographies is not by itself
conclusive evidence of its absence in traditional societies.
132

Why Homosexuals Are More Intelligent than Heterosexuals
However, the same ethnographers and anthropologists have
nonetheless been adept at uncovering evidence of other nega-
tively sanctioned and concealed behavior like murder, theft, in-
fanticide, and extramarital affairs in the same traditional societies.
So the near total absence of any documentation of homosexual
behavior as an individual choice may suggest that it may be rel-
atively rare in such societies. It may also suggest that widespread
practice of homosexual behavior may have been rare in the an-
cestral environment, and it may therefore be evolutionarily novel.
If homosexual identity and behavior are evolutionarily novel,
then the Intelligence Paradox would predict that, regardless of
their true sexual orientation, more intelligent individuals may be
more likely to identify themselves as homosexual, report homo-
sexual feelings and desires, and engage in homosexual behavior
than less intelligent individuals. All three main data sets for this
book (the GSS, Add Health, and the NCDS) allow me to examine
the association between intelligence and homosexuality.
Intelligence and Homosexuality
Add Health
Add Health uses two different measures of homosexuality. The
ﬁrst question asks the respondents to identify their sexual orien-
tation as either 1 = “100% heterosexual (straight),” 2 = “mostly
heterosexual (straight), but somewhat attracted to people of your
own sex,” 3 = “bisexual—that is, attracted to men and women
equally,” 4 = “mostly homosexual (gay), but somewhat attracted
to people of the opposite sex,” and 5 = “100% homosexual
(gay).” This measure of sexual orientation corresponds to the
“self-identiﬁed label” deﬁnition of it (1 above).
The analysis of Add Health data show that, even net of sex,
age, race, marital status, parenthood, education, income, and
133

The Intelligence Paradox
religion, more intelligent children are more likely to identify
themselves as homosexual in early adulthood than less intelli-
gent children.20 The more intelligent Add Health respondents
are in junior high and high school, the more homosexual they
identify themselves to be in their 20s. The effect of childhood
intelligence on adult homosexual identify does not differ for men
and women.
Even though childhood intelligence and education are nat-
urally positively associated (the more intelligent they are in
childhood, the greater education they attain by early adulthood),
intelligence and education have opposite effects on adult homo-
sexual identity. While more intelligent individuals are more likely
to identify themselves to be homosexual, the more educated in-
dividuals are less likely to do so.
Very dull
1.1165
1.1331
1.1394
1.1992
1.2811
Dull
Normal
Bright
Cognitive class
Very bright
Mean adult sexual identity
1.5
1.4
1.3
1.2
1.1
1.0
Figure 9.1 Association between childhood intelligence and adult sexual
identity
134

Why Homosexuals Are More Intelligent than Heterosexuals
Figure 9.1 represents the bivariate association between child-
hood intelligence and adult sexual identity. It shows that the
association is monotonically positive; “very bright” children grow
up to become more homosexual in their identity than “bright”
children, who in turn grow up to become more homosexual
than “normal” children, etc. The probability that one would ob-
serve a pattern as strong as the one depicted in Figure 9.1 purely
by chance, when there is actually no association between child-
hood intelligence and adult sexual identity, is less than one in a
hundred billion!
The second question asks, “Have you ever had a roman-
tic attraction to a member of the same sex?” The respondents
can answer either yes or no. This measure corresponds to the
“self-reported sexual feelings” deﬁnition of sexual orientation
(3 above).
The analysis of Add Health data shows that, net of the same
factors as above, more intelligent children are more likely to
have experienced adult homosexual attraction than less intelligent
children.21 The more intelligent Add Health respondents are in
junior high and high school, the more likely they are to have
ever experienced romantic attraction to members of the same
sex. If you increase childhood intelligence by 15 IQ points (one
standard deviation), then you increase the odds of expressed adult
homosexual attraction by 27%.
The effect of childhood intelligence on adult homosexual at-
traction is signiﬁcantly stronger for women than for men. In fact,
underscoring their more ﬂuid sexuality,22 women have more than
50% greater odds of having ever experienced romantic attraction
to members of the same sex than men do.
Figure 9.2 represents the bivariate association between child-
hood intelligence and expressed adult homosexual attraction.
It shows that the association is monotonically positive. “Very
bright” children are more likely ever to have experienced adult
135

The Intelligence Paradox
Very dull
0.0795
0.0814
0.0899
0.1065
0.1453
Dull
Normal
Bright
Cognitive class
Very bright
Mean proportion with adult expressed
homosexual attraction 
0.2
0.15
0.1
0.05
Figure 9.2 Association between childhood intelligence and expressed adult
homosexual attraction
homosexual attraction than “bright” children, who are in turn
more likely ever to have experienced it than “normal” children,
etc. In fact, “very bright” children are nearly twice as likely
to grow up to experience adult homosexual attraction as “very
dull” children. The probability that one would observe a pattern
as strong as the one depicted in Figure 9.2 purely by chance,
when there is actually no association between childhood intelli-
gence and expressed adult homosexual attraction, is less than one
in 10,000.
GSS
While Add Health has precise measures of homosexual identity
and feelings (corresponding to 1 and 3 in the list of deﬁnitions
136

Why Homosexuals Are More Intelligent than Heterosexuals
of sexual orientation above), it unfortunately lacks any measure
of actual sexual behavior with members of the same sex; it only
measures heterosexual sexual behavior. I therefore now turn to
the GSS, which measures both homosexual and heterosexual
behavior.
The GSS measures the respondents’ homosexual and hetero-
sexual behavior by asking how many sex partners of each sex they
have ever had since they were 18. This measure of sexual orien-
tation corresponds to the “actual sexual behavior” deﬁnition of
it (2 in the above list).
The analysis of the GSS data shows that, consistent with the
Intelligence Paradox, net of sex, age, race, social class, education,
income, marital status, number of children, religion, and survey
year, more intelligent individuals have more homosexual partners
in their adult life than less intelligent individuals.23 Contrary to
the prediction of the Intelligence Paradox, the GSS data also show
that, net of the same control variables, more intelligent individuals
have more heterosexual partners in their adult life as well than
less intelligent individuals.
However, the effect of intelligence on the number of ho-
mosexual partners is twice as strong as its effect on the number
of heterosexual partners. As Figures 9.3 and 9.4 below show,
“very bright” Americans have had eight times as many homo-
sexual partners as “very dull” Americans (2.42 vs. .31). In sharp
contrast, “very bright” Americans have had less than 40% more
heterosexual partners than “very dull” Americans (9.79 vs. 7.10).
In fact, “bright” Americans have had more heterosexual partners
(9.98) than “very bright” Americans.
NCDS
Add Health and GSS very precisely measure homosexuality by the
three more malleable, less stable deﬁnitions of sexual orientation
(1, 2, and 3 in the list above). And the data show that all three
137

The Intelligence Paradox
Very dull
0.31
0.55
0.67
1.14
2.42
Dull
Normal
Bright
Cognitive class
Very bright
Mean lifetime number of homosexual
sex partners
4.0
3.0
2.0
1.0
0.0
Figure 9.3 Association between intelligence and the lifetime number of
homosexual partners
measures of homosexuality are signiﬁcantly positively associated
with intelligence. The more intelligent the individuals, the more
homosexual they are, even net of a large number of potential
confounds and correlates of intelligence.
However, Add Health and GSS have one small problem, as I
mention in the Introduction when I discuss the details of the data
sets. Both Add Health and GSS have measures of verbal intelli-
gence, not general intelligence. While verbal intelligence is very
strongly and signiﬁcantly correlated with general intelligence—in
fact, it is an important component of general intelligence—it is
not exactly the same as general intelligence. NCDS rectiﬁes this
problem, as it has a very good and highly reliable measure of
general intelligence, assessed by 11 cognitive tests administered at
three different ages.
138

Why Homosexuals Are More Intelligent than Heterosexuals
Very dull
7.10
7.92
8.94
9.98
9.79
Dull
Normal
Bright
Cognitive class
Very bright
Mean lifetime number of heteroosexual
sex partners
12.0
10.0
8.0
6.0
4.0
2.0
0.0
Figure 9.4 Association between intelligence and the lifetime number of
heterosexual partners
Unfortunately, the only measure of sexual orientation that
NCDS has is the number and sex of cohabitation partners. At age
47, NCDS asks its respondents how many same-sex and opposite-
sex cohabitation partners they have had, deﬁned as someone with
whom the respondents have lived “as married” and shared an
accommodation for six months or longer.
Using this measure of sexual orientation, the analysis of the
NCDS data show that more intelligent children (before the age
of 16) have signiﬁcantly more lifetime homosexual cohabitation
partners 30 years later than less intelligent children, even after sta-
tistically controlling for sex, whether currently married, whether
ever married, whether ever a parent, education, income, and
religion.24 In sharp contrast, childhood general intelligence is
not at all associated with the lifetime number of heterosexual
139

The Intelligence Paradox
partners. Since heterosexual cohabitation is eminently evolution-
arily familiar, this is once again perfectly consistent with the
prediction of the Intelligence Paradox.
The analyses of all three data sets (Add Health, GSS, and NCDS)
uniformly conﬁrm the prediction of the Intelligence Paradox.
More intelligent children are more likely to grow up to identify
themselves as homosexual and to have ever experienced romantic
attraction to members of the same sex. More intelligent indi-
viduals have had more lifetime homosexual sex partners than
less intelligent individuals (although intelligence is also associ-
ated with the lifetime number of heterosexual partners). More
intelligent children grow up to have a larger number of lifetime
homosexual cohabitation partners 30 years later, but childhood
general intelligence does not predict the lifetime number of het-
erosexual partners. The positive association between intelligence
and homosexuality appears to be quite strong and robust.
140

Chapter 10
Why More Intelligent
People Like Classical Music
I
ﬁrst became interested in the possible effect of general
intelligence on musical tastes when I was visiting my wife’s
hometown of Novgorod, Russia, in June 2002. Novgorod is an
ancient provincial town, not at all cosmopolitan like Moscow or
St. Petersburg. And it was years before the current inﬂux of guest
workers from the former Soviet Republics in Central Asia into
Novgorod and other Russian cities. So I was just about the only
Asian—the only non-Slav—in the entire town of Novgorod,
and I stuck out like a sore thumb everywhere I went. People
stared at me because it was obvious to all that I was not a local.
The only other time I experienced anything like that in my
life was when my car—my trusted 1977 Datsun Cherry F-10
hatchback—broke down in Wallace, Idaho, during my transcon-
tinental drive in the early fall of 1986. I had to spend several hours
141

The Intelligence Paradox
in Wallace, while my car was being repaired in a local garage. I
appeared to be the only non-white person in the entire town
of Wallace that day (or, quite possibly, any day), and everybody
looked at me like I was a rock star. A group of teenagers would
walk by and wave at me simply because I looked different.
Anyway, being in Novgorod was like being in Wallace, Idaho,
all over again, and I was the only Asian in the whole town. I did
not see another non-Slavic face during my entire visit.
One night, my wife and I decided to go to a classical music
concert held at a local concert hall. It was a very small concert,
with a small audience and a small orchestra. Yet there she was,
the ﬁrst violin of the small local orchestra in Novgorod was an
Asian woman. She was the only Asian I saw in all of Novgorod
during my entire visit.
Could this be a coincidence? I don’t know anything about
classical music, but casual observations seemed to suggest that
many of the famous classical musicians throughout the world
were either Jewish or Asian, the two ethnic groups with the
highest average intelligence. It also seemed to me that many
of the people who enjoyed listening to classical music (which
decidedly does not include me) were typically highly educated
and upper-class (therefore, more intelligent) people. Could there
possibly be a connection between intelligence and appreciation
for classical music? Are more intelligent people more likely to
appreciate (and therefore perform) classical music? If so, why?
What’s special about classical music?
Here’s another casual observation. If you like driving across
the country in the United States (as I do), and if you are a fan
of the National Public Radio (as I am), you may notice a pattern
in the character of NPR stations across the country. In big cities
(like New York or Washington DC), NPR stations tend to be
news and talk stations and air news and talk programs throughout
the day. In small towns, in contrast, NPR stations tend to air news
and talk programs (like Morning Edition, All Things Considered, and
142

Why More Intelligent People Like Classical Music
Fresh Air) only during the morning and evening driving hours,
but otherwise air music throughout the day and night. I assume
this is because carefully produced news and talk programs are
more expensive to purchase and air than CDs, and NPR stations
in large cities have larger budgets that allow them to purchase such
programs, whereas NPR stations in smaller towns with smaller
operating budgets must play music from CDs most of the day.
Typically, NPR and other radio stations which play music
have “themes.” No radio stations play a random collection of
music; they usually focus on certain genres of music to play. So
there are “classic rock” stations, and there are “country western”
stations. Over the years, I have noticed that NPR stations that are
not news and talk stations frequently play classical and jazz music.
According to surveys conducted on behalf of the Record-
ing Industry Association of America in 2008,1 only 1.9% of a
representative sample of Americans purchased classical music (in
all formats) in the past month, and 1.1% purchased jazz. The
largest number of people (31.8%) purchased rock music in the
past month. More than 10 times as many people purchased rock
music than classical and jazz combined. In sharp contrast, of the
143 NPR stations which provide online streaming as of April
2011 (out of a total of 910 NPR stations nationwide2), 42.7%
(61) play classical music, and a further 14.0% play jazz. Only
30.8% play the combined genres of rock, pop and folk.3 Judg-
ing by these statistics, classical and jazz listeners are nearly 20
times overrepresented among the NPR station listeners (3% of
the American population vs. 56.7% of NPR stations).
But why is this? Why do NPR listeners like to listen to
classical or jazz music? NPR stations and their listeners are noto-
riously and overwhelmingly left-wing liberals. And, as I show in
Chapter 5, left-wing liberals are on average more intelligent than
right-wing conservatives. Does that mean that more intelligent
radio listeners are more likely to prefer classical or jazz music? If
so, why?
143

The Intelligence Paradox
In order to answer these questions, I ﬁrst had to ﬁnd out how
music initially came about in human evolutionary history. What
is the evolutionary origin of music? Why are humans musical?
Evolutionary Origins of Music
In comparison to evolutionary origins and functions of language
and art, anthropologists and archeologists have paid scant atten-
tion to the origin of music. In his book The Singing Neanderthals:
The Origins of Music, Language, Mind and Body,4 the cognitive
archeologist Steven Mithen offers a novel theory of the evolution
of music. Mithen argues that language and music had a com-
mon precursor—called musilanguage5—which later developed
into two separate systems of music and language.
There are two distinct perspectives on the evolution of
language. The compositional approach6 suggests that words came
before sentences. A lexicon of words that referred to speciﬁc
entities like “meat,” “ﬁre,” and “hunt” emerged ﬁrst, and were
later combined into phrases, and then into sentences. Grammar
emerged at the end to dictate how words could be combined into
sentences.
In contrast, the holistic approach7 proposes that sentences
came before words. It suggests that the precursor to human
language was a communication system composed of messages
in the form of arbitrary strings of sounds rather than words.
Each individual utterance or sequence of sounds was associated
with a speciﬁc meaning. These utterances were later broken up
into words, which could then be recombined to create further
utterances.
Mithen favors the holistic approach. As evidence, he points
to the fact that all nonhuman primate utterances, such as vervet
monkeys’ alarm calls, rhythmic chatters of geladas, duets of pair-
bonded gibbons, and pant-hoots of chimpanzees, are holistic and
144

Why More Intelligent People Like Classical Music
indivisible.8 In other words, nonhuman primates do not have
words, even though they have languages and their utterances as a
whole convey speciﬁc meanings and emotions. Some primatolo-
gists disagree, however, and point out, in support of the compo-
sitional approach, that Diana and Campbell’s monkey calls have
both syntactic and semantic rules, which can be used to combine
elements (“words”) to produce further utterances.9 The debate
on the origin of human language between the compositional and
holistic approaches is far from closed.
Humans and Monkeys Can Communicate with Each Other
Here’s something very interesting. Studies demonstrate that
meanings and emotions of primate utterances may be shared
by different primate species. For example, when macaque vo-
calizations that are made in speciﬁc social contexts as expres-
sions of contentment, pleading, dominance, anger, and fear are
recorded and then played back, Finnish children and adults are
able to interpret accurately what the expressed emotions are.10 In
other words, humans can understand what monkeys mean when
they speak!
Another study shows that words spoken by Finnish and En-
glish speakers in the social contexts of contentment, pleading,
dominance, anger, and fear have the same acoustic waveforms as
the macaque vocalizations made in the corresponding contexts.11
It is as though humans and macaques may be able to commu-
nicate with each other through the use of holistic utterances and
messages.
Mithen contends that human proto-language was holistic, ma-
nipulative (it was designed to induce desired emotions and behav-
ior in other individuals), multi-modal (it involved not only vocal
utterances but also gesture and dance), musical (the utterances
had distinct pitches, rhythms, and melodies), and mimetic (con-
scious and intentional). This proto-language eventually evolved
145

The Intelligence Paradox
Musilanguage
Language (to transmit information)
Music (to express emotions)
Figure 10.1 Mithen’s view on the evolution of music and language
into two systems of communication: music to express emotions,
and language to transmit information.
To demonstrate the common evolutionary origin of music
and language, Mithen surveyed a large number of clinical cases
of individuals with amusia (the absence of musical abilities while
retaining some linguistic abilities) and aphasia (the absence of
linguistic abilities while retaining some musical abilities).12 These
case studies largely show that music and language are based on
discrete modules in the brain; some of these are separate and
dedicated to one or the other while others are shared.
Songs Are Evolutionarily Familiar, but Instrumental Music
Is Evolutionarily Novel
If Mithen is right, if music and language share a common evolu-
tionary origin in holistic, musical utterances designed to convey
messages, one possible implication is that music, in its evolution-
ary origin, was songs that individuals sang to express their desires
and emotions, in an attempt to induce desired emotions and be-
havior in others. In other words, music in its evolutionary origin was
always vocal and never purely instrumental. Purely instrumental mu-
sic, unaccompanied by singing, may therefore be evolutionarily
novel.
It may be instructive to note in this context that Black-
foot Indians have a word for “song” but not for “instrumental
146

Why More Intelligent People Like Classical Music
music.”13 The language of the Pirah˜a in the Amazon forest in
Brazil may be an extant example of a musilanguage which Mithen
envisions as the precursor to the modern language and music.14
While the Pirah˜a language does have words, it has the fewest num-
ber of vowels (three) and consonants (seven for women, eight for
men) of all known human languages. “The Pirah˜a people com-
municate almost as much by singing, whistling, and humming as
they do using consonants and vowels. Pirah˜a prosody is very rich,
with a well-documented ﬁve-way weight distinction between
syllable types.”15
The former professional musician and current academic lin-
guist, as well as the originator of the holistic approach to the
evolutionary origin of language, Alison Wray notes: “To my
taste, western classical music (as indeed most other musical tra-
ditions worldwide) is different in kind [from musical expressions
in evolutionary history]. Its production is, for a start, subject to
a heavy burden of learning that few master. There is no natu-
rally facilitated access to the comprehension (let alone creation)
of the kinds of melodies, harmonies and rhythms found in the
works of Bach or Schoenberg: no equivalent—for music of this
kind—of ﬁrst language acquisition.”16 In other words, according
to Wray, classical music of Bach, Schoenberg, and others is evo-
lutionarily novel, partly, I contend, because it is largely or entirely
instrumental.
Consistent with Wray’s assertion, a far greater proportion of
the general population can (and spontaneously do) sing songs
than play musical instruments. For example, the incidence of
tone-deafness in the United Kingdom is estimated to be about
4–5%.17 In other words, 95% of the population can sing ade-
quately (and some of the tone-deaf people nonetheless often do
sing). The proportion of the general population who play musical
instruments adequately is nowhere near as high. Further, in many
cases of playing musical instruments (such as the guitar or the
piano), it is often accompanied by singing.
147

The Intelligence Paradox
In the context of the Intelligence Paradox, then, Mithen’s
theory of the evolutionary origins of music suggests that more
intelligent individuals are more likely to appreciate purely instru-
mental music than less intelligent individuals because such music
is evolutionarily novel. In contrast, general intelligence has no
effect on the appreciation of vocal music. From this perspec-
tive, more intelligent people may appreciate classical music more
because it is largely or entirely instrumental. And more intelligent
people should prefer other types of instrumental music as well.
Intelligence and Tastes for Music
Two large, nationally representative data sets have asked questions
about the respondent’s musical tastes. One is the GSS, which I
explain in the Introduction. The other is the 1986 follow-up to
the British Cohort Study (BCS). The BCS is very similar to the
NCDS; in fact, it was modeled after the NCDS. Just like the
NCDS, the original sample of the BCS includes all babies born in
Great Britain during one week in April 1970, and they have been
followed periodically ever since. In 1986, when the respondents
were 16, the BCS asked them a series of questions about what
kinds of music they listened to.
In 1993, the GSS asked about the respondents’ taste for
18 different kinds of music: “big band,” “bluegrass,” “coun-
try western,” “blues or R&B,” “Broadway musicals,” “classi-
cal,” “folk,” “gospel,” “jazz,” “Latin,” “easy listening,” “new
age,” “opera,” “rap,” “reggae,” “contemporary rock,” “oldie,” and
“heavy metal.” Even though it’s difﬁcult to classify entire genres
of music as either entirely vocal or entirely instrumental, I nev-
ertheless classify big band, classical and easy listening (“elevator
music”) as largely instrumental, and the rest as largely vocal.
Jazz is a difﬁcult case, as much of jazz is also purely instru-
mental. However, an earlier study18 found that more intelligent
148

Why More Intelligent People Like Classical Music
individuals prefer to listen to jazz. So classifying it as largely
vocal, rather than largely instrumental, constitutes a conservative
classiﬁcation, which would make it more difﬁcult for me to ﬁnd
evidence for the prediction that more intelligent people are more
likely to prefer instrumental music. When it comes to statistical
analysis, it is always good to be conservative rather than liberal. I
believe the fact that so many established musical genres are vocal,
and so few are instrumental, is in itself evidence that music in its
evolutionary origin might have been vocal.
The 1986 follow-up to the BCS asked about the respondent’s
taste for 12 different kinds of music: “classical,” “light music,”
“folk music,” “disco,” “reggae,” “soul,” “heavy rock,” “funk,”
“electronic,” “punk,” “other pop music,” and “other.” I classify
classical and light music (easy listening or “elevator music”) as
largely instrumental, and the rest as largely vocal.
In addition, the 1986 follow-up to the BCS also asked the
teenagers’ TV viewing habits, by asking whether they watched
22 different types of TV shows. Two of these 22 types refer to
music: pop/rock music, and classical music. I therefore examine
the effect of intelligence on watching TV programs on different
genres of music.
Despite the fact that these surveys were conducted in differ-
ent decades in different countries, they both support the pre-
diction derived from the Intelligence Paradox.19 In the US, net
of age, race, sex, education, family income, religion, whether
currently married, whether ever married, and number of chil-
dren, more intelligent individuals are more likely to prefer largely
instrumental music (big band, classical, and easy listening) than
less intelligent individuals. In contrast, intelligence is not asso-
ciated with the GSS respondents’ preference for largely vocal
music. Intelligence is also signiﬁcantly associated with the differ-
ence in preference between instrumental and vocal music (the
mathematical difference obtained by subtracting their average
preference for vocal music from their average preference for
149

The Intelligence Paradox
instrumental music). The more intelligent the GSS respondents
are, the greater their difference in preference between the two
types of music.
The results are exactly the same for the 1986 BCS sample
in the United Kingdom. Net of academic performance (all BCS
respondents are still in school), sex, race, religion, family income,
mother’s education, and father’s education, more intelligent
British teenagers are more likely to prefer instrumental music
(classical and light music) than their less intelligent classmates. In
contrast, their intelligence is not associated with their preference
for vocal music. As a result, their intelligence is also signiﬁcantly
associated with the difference in preference between instrumental
and vocal music. The more intelligent the BCS respondents are,
the greater the difference in preference between the two types
of music.
Net of the same potential confounds, more intelligent BCS
respondents are more likely to watch TV shows about classical
music than their less intelligent classmates, despite the fact that
more intelligent people enjoy watching TV less in general than
less intelligent people.20 In sharp contrast, more intelligent BCS
respondents are less likely to watch TV shows about pop/rock
music. As a result, intelligence is very strongly associated with
the difference in the viewing frequency of TV shows about the
two types of music.
For illustrative purposes, here is the association between in-
telligence and preference for classical music among the GSS re-
spondents. The GSS respondents who “like classical music very
much” have the average IQ of 106.5. In contrast, those who
“dislike classical music very much” (like myself) have the average
IQ of 93.3. People who like classical music very much are more
intelligent than those who dislike it very much by more than 13
IQ points! As you can see, the association between intelligence
and preference for classical music is monotonic; the more they
like classical music, the more intelligent they are. The probability
150

Why More Intelligent People Like Classical Music
Dislike
very much
93.27
94.82
100.62
102.95
106.52
Dislike
Mixed
feelings
Like
Like or dislike classical music
Like
very much
Mean IQ
110.00
108.00
106.00
104.00
102.00
100.00
98.00
96.00
94.00
92.00
90.00
Figure 10.2 Association between intelligence and preference for classical
music: GSS
that one would observe a pattern as strong as the one depicted
in Figure 10.2 purely by chance, when there is actually no as-
sociation between verbal intelligence and preference for classical
music, is less than one in 100 quadrillion (or 100 thousand trillion
or 100 million billion or 1017)!
And here is the association between intelligence and whether
they usually listen to classical music among the BCS respondents.
As you can see, British teenagers who usually listen to classi-
cal music are much more intelligent than their classmates who
don’t usually listen to classical music, by more than 7 IQ points.
The probability that one would observe a pattern as strong as
the one depicted in Figure 10.3 purely by chance, when there
is actually no association between verbal intelligence and prefer-
ence for classical music, is less than one in 10 nonillion (that’s 1
followed by 31 zeroes or 1031). In other words, it’s less likely than
impossible.
151

The Intelligence Paradox
No
Yes
99.65
106.85
Do you usually listen to classical music?
Mean IQ
110.00
108.00
106.00
104.00
102.00
100.00
98.0
Figure 10.3 Association between intelligence and preference for classical
music: BCS86
Evolutionary Novelty or Cognitive Complexity?
The analyses of two separate large, nationally representative data
sets, with one sample of teenagers in the United Kingdom and
another of adults in the United States, suggest that more intel-
ligent individuals are more likely to prefer evolutionarily novel
instrumental music than less intelligent individuals, while intel-
ligence does not affect individuals’ preference for evolutionarily
familiar vocal music. One potential objection to this conclusion
is that the dimension of evolutionary novelty, captured by the
distinction between instrumental and vocal music, is confounded
with cognitive complexity of music, which is deﬁned by chordal
complexity (the number of chords, tones, and instruments used
in the music and their interrelationships).
152

Why More Intelligent People Like Classical Music
For example, classical music, which is largely instrumental,
is also cognitively complex. It is probably the most cognitively
complex form of music in human history. On the other extreme,
rap music, which is almost entirely vocal, often to the exclusion of
any discernible melodic structure, is also cognitively very simple.
So critics may argue that the association between intelligence and
preference for instrumental music may really be an association
between intelligence and cognitively complex forms of music.
In order properly to examine and rule out this alternative
hypothesis, I would ideally need a quantitative “cognitive com-
plexity score” for each genre of music, in the form (classical =
5, jazz = 4.5, etc.). Further, such “cognitive complexity scores”
would ideally have been validated and widely in use. I searched
the literature extensively, and consulted several different experts in
music perception, but have not been able to locate such “cogni-
tive complexity scores” for different musical genres. They simply
do not seem to exist. Yet most people seem to understand and
agree intuitively that, for example, classical music and jazz are
far more cognitively complex than, say, rap music. In the ab-
sence of quantitative and validated “cognitive complexity scores,”
I must rely on such intuitive but widely shared senses of cognitive
complexity of musical genres.
A potential problem with inspecting the association between
intelligence and preference for each speciﬁc musical genre is that
preferences for all musical genres are very highly correlated. It
appears that there are people who like music and there are those
(like me) who don’t, and those who like music like all types of
music. For example, in the GSS data, preference for classical music
is positively and signiﬁcantly correlated with preference for both
bluegrass and reggae music. In fact, it is signiﬁcantly positively
associated with 12 out of the 17 other genres of music. People
who like classical music like to listen to most genres of music.
In Chapter 3, I explain the statistical technique called factor
analysis. This is the technique psychometricians use to extract a
153

The Intelligence Paradox
common underlying factor—general intelligence—that explains
individuals’ performance on all types of cognitive tests. Factor
analysis can be used with any set of scores to extract what’s com-
mon among them. If you submit GSS respondents’ preference for
18 different genres of music, factor analysis extracts only one un-
derlying dimension. It means that one dimension—general pref-
erence for music—explains individuals’ preference for all types
of music, just as one dimension—general intelligence—explains
individuals’ performance on all types of cognitive tests.
So I examine the association between intelligence and prefer-
ence for each genre of music, while holding constant preferences
for all other types of music. The result shows that, as expected,
preference for classical music is signiﬁcantly positively associated
with intelligence, net of preferences for all other types of music.
However, preference for big band is even more strongly positively
associated with intelligence than is preference for classical music.
It would be difﬁcult to make the case that big band music is more
cognitively complex than classical music.
At the other extreme, as suspected, preference for rap music
is signiﬁcantly negatively associated with intelligence. However,
preference for gospel music is even more strongly negatively as-
sociated with intelligence. It would be difﬁcult to make the case
that gospel is less cognitively complex than rap. (I might also point
out in passing that, with its close link to religious rituals, gospel
is a particularly evolutionarily familiar form of music.21)
At the same time, preference for opera, another highly cogni-
tively complex form of music, is not signiﬁcantly correlated with
intelligence. Its nonsigniﬁcantly positive association is smaller
than those for oldies, reggae, and Broadway musicals. It would
be difﬁcult to make the case that oldies, reggae, and Broadway
musicals are cognitively more complex than opera.
These conclusions remain when I further control for the GSS
respondent’s age, race, sex, education, family income, religion,
whether currently married, whether ever married, and number
154

Why More Intelligent People Like Classical Music
of children. When these additional controls are included in the
statistical analysis, the positive association between preference for
classical music and intelligence is no longer statistically signiﬁ-
cant, while the association between preference for big band and
intelligence remains statistically signiﬁcantly positive. With the
additional controls, the association between preference for oldies
and intelligence is statistically signiﬁcantly positive. It would be
difﬁcult to make the case that oldies and big band are cognitively
more complex than classical music. Other researchers22 have clas-
siﬁed blues, jazz, classical and folk music as “structurally com-
plex,” but, when preferences of all musical genres are controlled,
preferences for none of these “structurally complex” genres are
signiﬁcantly correlated with intelligence. Preferences for folk and
jazz are nonsigniﬁcantly negatively associated with intelligence.
All in all, the analysis provides very little support for the view
that more intelligent individuals necessarily and uniformly prefer
cognitively complex genres of music.
The Intelligence Paradox applied to musical genres might there-
fore explain, among other things, why Jews and East Asians are
more likely to excel as classical musicians and why most NPR sta-
tions throughout the country play classical and jazz music as their
station themes. Purely instrumental music may be evolutionarily
novel and therefore unnatural, and more intelligent individuals
may have a preference for such unnatural genres of music.
155


Chapter 11
Why Intelligent People
Drink and Smoke More
R
ecall from the Introduction that one of my major goals
in this book is to break the equation of intelligence with
human worth and to demolish the myth that intelligence is uni-
versally good and that more intelligent people are universally
better at everything than less intelligent people. For this pur-
pose, an interesting test case involves the consumption of alco-
hol, tobacco, and drugs, because it is widely agreed that their
consumption—especially their excessive use—has largely nega-
tive health consequences. If I can demonstrate that more intelli-
gent individuals are more likely to consume these substances to
excess, then I would have gone a long way toward demonstrating
that more intelligent people don’t always do the right thing and,
in fact, more intelligent people are often more likely to do stupid
things.
157

The Intelligence Paradox
In this chapter, I’m therefore going to discuss drinking al-
cohol, smoking cigarettes, and using illegal drugs. While, once
again, science does not make any value judgment, it would be
very difﬁcult to make the case from any perspective other than
strictly scientiﬁc that these activities are neither good nor bad. We
know the health hazards of drinking, smoking, and taking drugs.
Although the current consensus of medical researchers appears to
be that drinking alcohol in moderation may have some health ben-
eﬁts, you will see below that that’s not what I am talking about.
I will be talking about getting drunk and binge drinking, which
have no discernible health beneﬁts.
So, unlike all the preferences and values I have discussed so
far in this book, drinking alcohol, smoking cigarettes, and tak-
ing drugs, especially to excess, are all inherently bad for health.
But the Intelligence Paradox is not about good or bad (healthy
or unhealthy) values and preferences. All that matters is their
evolutionary novelty. No matter how bad they may be, the Intel-
ligence Paradox would nevertheless predict that more intelligent
individuals are more likely to value and prefer them if they are
evolutionarily novel. So the question is, are they?
Brief Histories of Alcohol, Tobacco, and Drugs
Alcohol
The human consumption of alcohol probably originated from
frugivory—consumption of fruits.1 Fermentation of sugars by yeast
naturally present in overripe and decaying fruits produces ethanol,
known to intoxicate birds and mammals that consume them.2
However, the amount of ethanol alcohol present in such fruits
ranges from trace to 5%, roughly comparable to light beer (0–4%).
It is nothing compared to the amount of alcohol present in regular
beer (4–6%), wine (12–15%), and distilled spirits (20–95%).
158

Why Intelligent People Drink and Smoke More
“Ingestion of alcohol, however, was unintentional or haphaz-
ard for humans until some 10,000 years ago,”3 and “intentional
fermentation of fruits and grain to yield ethanol arose only re-
cently within human history.”4 The production of beer, which
relies on a large amount of grain, and that of wine, which simi-
larly require a large amount of grapes, could not have taken place
before the advent of agriculture around 8,000 bc. Archeological
evidence dates the production of beer and wine to Mesopotamia
at about 6,000 bc.5 The origin of distilled spirits is far more re-
cent, and is traced either to the Middle East or China at about
700 ad. The word alcohol—al kohl—is Arabic in origin.
“Relative to the geographical duration of the hominid lin-
eage, therefore, exposure of humans to concentration of ethanol
higher than those attained by fermentation alone [i.e., at most 5%]
is strikingly recent.”6 Further, any “unintentional or haphazard”
consumption of alcohol in the ancestral environment, via the con-
sumption of overripe and decaying fruits, happened as a result of
eating, not drinking, whereas alcohol is almost entirely consumed
today via drinking. So there appears very little doubt that drink-
ing alcohol of any measureable concentration is evolutionarily
novel.
Tobacco
The human consumption of tobacco is more recent in origin than
that of alcohol. The tobacco plant originated in South America
and spread to the rest of the world.7 Native Americans began
cultivating two species of the tobacco plant (Nicotiana rustica and
Nicotiana tabacum) about 8,000 years ago.8 The consumption of
tobacco was unknown outside of the Americas until Columbus
brought it back to Europe at the end of the 15th century.9 The
consumption of tobacco is therefore of very recent historical
origin and is deﬁnitely evolutionarily novel.
159

The Intelligence Paradox
Drugs
Most psychoactive drugs have even more recent historical ori-
gin than alcohol and tobacco. “Before the rise of agriculture,
access to psychoactive substances likely was limited.”10 The use
of opium dates back to about 5,000 years ago,11 and the earliest
reference to the pharmacological use of cannabis is in a book
written in 2737 bc by the Chinese Emperor Shen Nung.12 Most
other psychoactive drugs commonly in use today require mod-
ern chemical procedures to manufacture, and are therefore of
much more recent origin. Morphine was isolated from opium
in 1806.13 Heroin was discovered in 1874.14 Cocaine was ﬁrst
manufactured in 1860.15 It is therefore safe to conclude that most
psychoactive drugs in use today are evolutionarily novel and very
recent in historical origin.
Given that the consumption of alcohol, tobacco, and psychoactive
drugs is all evolutionarily novel—unknown before the end of the
Pleistocene Epoch 10,000 years ago—the Intelligence Paradox
would predict that, perhaps contrary to common sense and the
unquestioned assumption that intelligent people make “smart”
choices in life, more intelligent individuals are more likely to
consume all such substances than less intelligent individuals. Both
NCDS and Add Health allow me to examine the effect of child-
hood intelligence on adult substance use.
Intelligence and Substance Use
Alcohol
NCDS asks its respondents about the frequency and quantity of their
alcohol consumption. First, it asks its respondents how often they
160

Why Intelligent People Drink and Smoke More
usually have an alcoholic drink at ages 23, 33, and 42. I use factor
analysis to compute the NCDS respondents’ latent tendency to
consume alcohol frequently in their adult life. (Latent factors
produced by factor analysis have the mean of 0 and standard
deviation of 1.)
Then NCDS asks its respondents about the quantity of their
consumption of different alcoholic beverages such as beer, spirits,
wine, martini, sherry, and “alcopops” (that’s British for ﬂavored
alcoholic drinks like wine coolers). NCDS asks these questions
at ages 23, 33, and 42. Once again, I use factor analysis to com-
pute the NCDS respondents’ latent tendency to consume a large
quantity of various alcoholic beverages.
The analysis of the NCDS data shows that, net of sex, reli-
gion, religiosity, whether currently married, whether ever mar-
ried, number of children, education, income, whether depressed,
satisfaction with life, parents’ social class, mother’s education, and
father’s education, more intelligent children are more likely to
grow up to consume more alcohol in their adult life, measured
both by frequency and quantity. Because such a large number of
potential confounds are statistically controlled for, it is not likely
(albeit technically possible) that the association between child-
hood general intelligence and adult alcohol consumption can be
attributed to another factor.
For example, it’s not likely that it is because more intelli-
gent people are more likely to have certain occupations—such
as executive or managerial positions that require socialization or
negotiation over drinks—that childhood general intelligence and
adult alcohol consumption are positively associated, because both
education and income, as well as social class at birth, mother’s ed-
ucation, and father’s education, are controlled for. Interestingly, of
these factors, only income and father’s education independently
increase the respondent’s adult alcohol consumption, both by fre-
quency and quantity. Education, social class at birth, and mother’s
education have no effect on adult alcohol consumption.
161

The Intelligence Paradox
Add Health asks four questions about their alcohol consump-
tion: How much they drink, how often they drink, how often
they engage in binge drinking (ﬁve or more drinks in one sitting),
and how often they get drunk. Once again, using factor analysis,
I compute Add Health respondents’ latent tendency to consume
alcohol.
The analysis of the Add Health data shows that, net of age,
sex, race, Hispanicity, religion, marital status, parenthood, ed-
ucation, income, political attitude (liberal vs. conservative), re-
ligiosity, general satisfaction with life, whether they are taking
medication for stress, whether they feel stress but do not take
medication for it, frequency of socialization with friends, number
of sex partners in the last 12 months, childhood family income,
mother’s education, and father’s education (in other words, lots of
potentially confounding factors), childhood intelligence signiﬁ-
cantly increases adult alcohol consumption. The more intelligent
they are in junior high and high school, the more alcohol they
consume in early adulthood.
Once again, given the even larger number of statistical con-
trols in the analysis of the Add Health data than in the analysis
of the NCDS data, it is very unlikely that the apparent effect of
childhood intelligence can be attributed to something else. Nei-
ther income nor education is signiﬁcantly associated with adult
alcohol consumption. As with NCDS, father’s education (but
not mother’s education) increases Add Health respondents’ adult
alcohol consumption.
Figures 11.1 and 11.2 show the association between child-
hood general intelligence (grouped into “cognitive classes”) and
adult alcohol consumption, by frequency and by quantity, from
the NCDS data. As you can see, the association is perfectly mono-
tonic. The more intelligent NCDS respondents are in childhood,
the more they consume alcohol in adulthood. In Figure 11.1 for
frequency, “very bright” individuals and “very dull” individuals
162

Why Intelligent People Drink and Smoke More
Latent factor for frequency of alcohol consumption
0.50000
0.25000
0.00000
-0.25000
-0.50000
Very dull
Dull
Normal
Bright
Cognitive class
Very bright
Figure 11.1 Association between childhood general intelligence and fre-
quency of alcohol consumption (NCDS)
are separated by nearly a full standard deviation. In Figure 11.2 for
quantity, they are separated by four-ﬁfths of a standard deviation.
These effects are very large.
More Intelligent People Are More Likely to Binge Drink
and Get Drunk
There are occasional medical reports and scientiﬁc studies which
tout the health beneﬁts of mild alcohol consumption, such as
drinking a glass of red wine with dinner every night. So it
may be tempting to conclude that more intelligent individuals
163

The Intelligence Paradox
Latent factor for quantity of alcohol consumption
0.40000
0.20000
0.00000
-0.20000
-0.40000
-0.60000
Very dull
Dull
Normal
Bright
Cognitive class
Very bright
Figure 11.2 Association between childhood general intelligence and quan-
tity of alcohol consumption (NCDS)
are more likely to engage in such mild alcohol consumption
than less intelligent individuals, and the positive association be-
tween childhood general intelligence and adult alcohol consump-
tion reﬂects such mild, and thus healthy and beneﬁcial, alcohol
consumption.
Unfortunately for the intelligent individuals, this is not the
case. More intelligent children are more likely to grow up to
engage in binge drinking (consuming ﬁve or more units of alcohol
in one sitting) and getting drunk.
Add Health asks its respondents speciﬁc questions about binge
drinking and getting drunk. For binge drinking, Add Health asks:
“During the past 12 months, on how many days did you drink
164

Why Intelligent People Drink and Smoke More
Frequency of binge drinking in 12 months
2.0
1.5
1.0
0.5
0.0
Very dull
Dull
Normal
Bright
Cognitive class
Very bright
1.487
1.473
1.225
0.816
0.503
Figure 11.3 Association between childhood general intelligence and fre-
quency of binge drinking (Add Health)
ﬁve or more drinks in a row?” For getting drunk, it asks: “During
the past 12 months, on how many days have you been drunk or
very high on alcohol?” For both questions, the respondents can
answer on a six-point ordinal scale: 0 = none, 1 = 1 or 2 days in
the past 12 months, 2 = once a month or less (3 to 12 times in
the past 12 months), 3 = 2 or 3 days a month, 4 = 1 or 2 days a
week, 5 = 3 or 5 days a week, 6 = every day or almost every day.
As you can see in Figure 11.3, there is a clear monotonic
positive association between childhood intelligence and adult fre-
quency of binge drinking. “Very dull” Add Health respondents
(with childhood IQ < 75) engage in binge drinking less than once
a year. In sharp contrast, “very bright” Add Health respondents
(with childhood IQ > 125) engage in binge drinking roughly
once every other month.
165

The Intelligence Paradox
Frequency of getting drunk in 12 months
2.0
1.5
1.0
0.5
0.0
Very dull
Dull
Normal
Bright
Cognitive class
Very bright
1.524
1.478
1.158
0.667
0.352
Figure 11.4 Association between childhood general intelligence and fre-
quency of getting drunk (Add Health)
The association between childhood intelligence and adult fre-
quency of getting drunk is equally clear and monotonic, as you
can see in Figure 11.4. “Very dull” Add Health respondents al-
most never get drunk, whereas “very bright” Add Health respon-
dents get drunk once every other month or so, just as frequently
as they engage in binge drinking, which makes sense, since binge
drinking almost necessarily and by deﬁnition would make most
people drunk.
In a multiple ordinal regression, childhood intelligence has
a signiﬁcantly positive effect on adult frequency of both binge
drinking and of getting drunk (ps < .00001), controlling for age,
sex, race, ethnicity, religion, marital status, parental status, edu-
cation, earnings, political attitudes, religiosity, general satisfaction
166

Why Intelligent People Drink and Smoke More
with life, taking medication for stress, experience of stress with-
out taking medication, frequency of socialization with friends,
number of sex partners in the last 12 months, childhood family
income, mother’s education, and father’s education. I honestly
cannot think of any other variable that might be correlated with
childhood intelligence than those already controlled for in the
multiple regression analyses. It means that the effect of childhood
intelligence is not confounded with any of the variables already
included in the equations. It is very likely that childhood intel-
ligence itself, not anything else that may be confounded with
it, increases the adult frequency of binge drinking and getting
drunk.
Note that education is controlled for in the ordinal multiple
regression analysis. Given that Add Health respondents in Wave
III (when their drinking behavior is measured) are in their early
20s, it may be tempting to conclude that the association between
childhood intelligence and adult frequency of binge drinking
and getting drunk may be mediated by college attendance. More
intelligent children are more likely to go to college, and college
students are more likely to engage in binge drinking and to get
drunk. The signiﬁcant partial effect of childhood intelligence on
the adult frequency of binge drinking and getting drunk, net
of education, shows that this indeed is not the case. Childhood
intelligence itself, not education, increases the adult frequency of
binge drinking and getting drunk.
In fact, in both equations, education does not have a signiﬁ-
cant effect on binge drinking and getting drunk. Net of all the
other variables included in the ordinal multiple regression equa-
tions, education is not signiﬁcantly associated with the frequency
of binge drinking and getting drunk. Among other things, it
means that college students are more likely to engage in binge
drinking, not because they are in college, but because they are
more intelligent.
167

The Intelligence Paradox
Tobacco
NCDS measures its respondents’ tobacco consumption by ask-
ing how many cigarettes a day they usually smoke at ages 23,
33, 42, and 47. I compute their latent tendency toward tobacco
consumption by performing factor analysis.
To my surprise, and contrary to the prediction of the Intel-
ligence Paradox, the analysis of the NCDS data shows that, net
of the same control variables as above in the analysis of alcohol
consumption, more intelligent British children are less likely to
grow up to consume tobacco in their adult life.
Add Health measures its respondents’ tobacco consumption
by asking on how many days they have smoked cigarettes in the
last 30 days and how many cigarettes a day they smoked in the
last 30 days. I compute their latent tendency toward tobacco
consumption by performing factor analysis.
In sharp contrast to NCDS, and consistent with the predic-
tion of the Intelligence Paradox, Add Health data conﬁrm the
prediction. Net of the same control variables as before in the
analysis of alcohol consumption, more intelligent children grow
up to consume more tobacco in their early adulthood.
The divergent effect of childhood intelligence on adult to-
bacco consumption is clear in Figures 11.5 and 11.6. Figure 11.5
depicts the monotonically negative association between child-
hood intelligence and adult tobacco consumption among the
NCDS respondents in the United Kingdom. The more in-
telligent they are before the age of 16, the less tobacco they
consume in their 20s, 30s, and 40s. Figure 11.6 shows the
largely positive association between intelligence and adult to-
bacco consumption among the Add Health respondents in the
United States. The association is not monotonically positive, but
still “normal,” “bright,” and “very bright” Add Health respon-
dents consume more tobacco than their “very dull” and “dull”
counterparts.
168

Why Intelligent People Drink and Smoke More
Latent factor for tobacco consumption
0.60000
0.40000
0.20000
0.00000
-0.20000
-0.40000
-0.60000
Very dull
Dull
Normal
Bright
Cognitive class
Very bright
Figure 11.5 The association between childhood intelligence and adult to-
bacco consumption (NCDS)
Why Does Intelligence Affect Smoking Differently in the US
and the UK?
I’m not sure what accounts for the divergent results from NCDS
and Add Health when it comes to the effect of childhood intel-
ligence on adult smoking. However, mine is not the only study
which shows such varied results. Other studies16 have also shown
that more intelligent Brits are less likely to smoke, while more
intelligent Americans are more likely to smoke.
In my study, the two data sets are different in two major
respects. First, NCDS is conducted in the United Kingdom,
while Add Health is conducted in the United States. Second,
NCDS respondents were born in March 1958, while Add Health
169

The Intelligence Paradox
Latent factor for tobacco consumption
0.60000
0.40000
0.20000
0.00000
-0.20000
-0.40000
-0.60000
Very dull
Dull
Normal
Bright
Cognitive class
Very bright
Figure 11.6 The association between childhood intelligence and adult to-
bacco consumption (Add Health)
respondents were born between 1974 and 1983. Further re-
search is necessary to determine whether it is the cultural dif-
ferences between the two (otherwise very similar) nations or the
generational differences between the NCDS and Add Health
cohorts that produce the strikingly divergent results when it
comes to the effect of childhood intelligence on adult tobacco
consumption.
Among the possible differences between the US and the UK,
the public anti-smoking campaign has been far more aggressive
and blatant in the UK than in the US. For example, in the US,
each pack of cigarettes carries the Surgeon General’s (relatively
tame and clinical) warning (“Smoking causes lung cancer, heart
170

Why Intelligent People Drink and Smoke More
disease, emphysema, and may complicate pregnancy”) in small
print, on the side of the package. In the UK, the warnings are
much more blatant and graphic (“Smoking kills,” “Smokers die
younger,” “Smoking may reduce the blood ﬂow and causes impo-
tence,” “Smoking can cause slow and painful death,” “Smoking
clogs the arteries and causes heart attacks and strokes,” “Smoking
when pregnant harms your baby”) in extremely large print, on the
front of the package. Note that death is never mentioned explicitly
in the Surgeon General’s warning in the US, but is frequently
mentioned in the UK warnings. And they mention something
much worse than death from an evolutionary perspective: impo-
tence (for men) and harm to the baby (for women), and thereby
implied lack of reproductive success.
When I saw the warning “Smoking kills” for the ﬁrst time in
2003, on a pack of cigarettes that my LSE colleague was smoking,
I thought it was a joke. It looked like a gag item that one might
buy at a novelty store in a shopping mall, like Spencer’s or Hot
Topic. I didn’t realize that it was for real until after I saw other
packs of cigarettes with similar warnings later.
Because government warnings and public campaigns (as well
as the written language as their medium of communication) are
themselves evolutionarily novel, more intelligent individuals may
be more likely to respond to such warnings than do less intel-
ligent individuals. This is just one of the possible reasons why
intelligence may have such starkly opposite effects on smoking in
the US and the UK.
To be honest, I don’t ﬁnd this a particularly convincing answer
myself. I feel relatively certain that the national difference in the
effect of general intelligence on smoking is robust and real, not a
methodological artifact, because different studies using different
data sets and methodologies all conﬁrm it. But I don’t like my
own explanation for it. I feel there is a better explanation out
there; I just don’t know what it is.
171

The Intelligence Paradox
Drugs
At age 42 only, NCDS asks its respondents whether they have ever
tried 13 different types of illegal psychoactive drugs: cannabis,
ecstasy, amphetamines, LSD, amyl nitrate, magic mushrooms,
cocaine, temazepan, semeron, ketamine, crack, heroine, and
methadone. Via factor analysis, I compute NCDS respondents’
latent tendency to consume illegal drugs.
The statistical analysis of the NCDS data shows that, net of
the same control variables as before, more intelligent children are
more likely to grow up to consume more illegal drugs than less
intelligent children. The higher their general intelligence before
the age of 16, the more illegal drugs that they try before the age
of 42.
Figure 11.7 shows the association between childhood intelli-
gence, grouped by “cognitive class,” and latent adult tendency to
consume illegal drugs. Just as with alcohol consumption, there is
a monotonic positive association between childhood general in-
telligence and adult consumption of illegal drugs. But the effect
of childhood general intelligence on adult consumption of illegal
drugs is not as large as its effect on adult alcohol consumption.
“Very bright” and “very dull” NCDS respondents are separated
only by about one third of a standard deviation.
Add Health asks its respondents about their consumption of
ﬁve different illegal drugs: marijuana, cocaine, LSD, crystal meth,
and heroine. Via factor analysis, I once again compute Add Health
respondents’ latent tendency to consume illegal drugs.
The statistical analysis of the Add Health data shows that the
effect of childhood intelligence on adult consumption of illegal
drugs, while positive as predicted by the Intelligence Paradox,
is not statistically signiﬁcant. So Add Health data do not pro-
vide unambiguous support for the prediction of the Intelligence
Paradox with regard to illegal drugs as do the NCDS data.
172

Why Intelligent People Drink and Smoke More
Latent factor for frequency of drug consumption
0.20000
0.10000
0.00000
-0.10000
-0.20000
Very dull
Dull
Normal
Bright
Cognitive class
Very bright
Figure 11.7 Association between childhood general intelligence and fre-
quency of illegal drug consumption
Intelligence and Criminality
Criminologists have long known that criminals on average have
lower intelligence than the general population.17 Juvenile delin-
quents are less intelligent than nondelinquents,18 and a signiﬁ-
cant difference in IQ between delinquents and nondelinquents
appears as early as ages 8 and 9.19 Chronic offenders are less in-
telligent than one-time offenders,20 and serious offenders are less
intelligent than less serious offenders.21 The negative association
between general intelligence and criminality is not an artifact of a
selection bias, whereby less intelligent criminals are more likely to
be caught than more intelligent criminals who get away, because
173

The Intelligence Paradox
the association exists even in self-report studies that do not rely
on ofﬁcial police statistics.22 (Yes, people often do reveal in inter-
views and surveys that they have committed crimes that they are
not charged with, even those that the police don’t know about.)
Why is this? Why do criminals have lower intelligence than
the general population? And why do more chronic and serious
criminals have lower intelligence than their less chronic and seri-
ous counterparts?
From the perspective of the Intelligence Paradox, there are
two important points to note. First, much of what we now call
interpersonal crime today, such as murder, assault, robbery, and
theft, were probably routine means of competition among men
for resources and mates. This is how men likely competed for
resources and mating opportunities for much of human evolu-
tionary history. We may infer this from the fact that behaviors
that would be classiﬁed as criminal if engaged in by humans are
common among other species,23 including other primates such
as chimpanzees,24 bonobos,25 and capuchin monkeys.26
Second, the institutions and technologies that control, detect,
and punish criminal behavior in society today—the police, the
courts, the prisons, CCTV cameras, DNA ﬁngerprinting—are
all evolutionarily novel. There was very little formal third-party
enforcement of norms in the ancestral environment, only second-
party enforcement (retaliation by victims and their kin and allies)
or informal third-party enforcement (ostracism). (One need only
recall van Beest and Williams’s ﬁndings in their Cyberball exper-
iment, discussed in Chapter 2, to realize how powerful a punish-
ment ostracism must have been in the ancestral environment.)
It therefore makes sense from the perspective of the Intelli-
gence Paradox that men with low general intelligence may be
more likely to resort to evolutionarily familiar means of com-
petition for resources (theft rather than full-time employment)
and mating opportunities (rape rather than computer dating), be-
cause they are less likely to recognize and comprehend the more
174

Why Intelligent People Drink and Smoke More
evolutionarily novel means (as well as often lacking access to
them). It also makes sense that such men do not fully comprehend
the consequences of criminal behavior imposed by evolutionarily
novel technologies and institutions of law enforcement.
Why Do Less Intelligent People Commit Some Crimes
but Not Others?
But if less intelligent individuals are more likely to commit crimes,
why are they less likely to use illegal drugs? The consumption of
psychoactive drugs, such as marijuana, cocaine, and heroin, is
illegal in both the UK and the US; in other words, it is a crime
to use such substances. So why aren’t less intelligent individuals
more likely to commit the crime of drug use?
This is the proverbial case of “the exception which proves the
rule.” As I mention above, less intelligent individuals are more
likely to engage in crime, not because it is criminal per se, but
because most of it is evolutionarily familiar. Less intelligent indi-
viduals are less likely to engage in behavior that is evolutionarily
novel, whether it is deﬁned by the civilized society as criminal
or not.
This is why less intelligent individuals are less likely to con-
sume evolutionarily novel substances of psychoactive drugs, even
though it is criminal. Less intelligent individuals are probably less
likely to engage in other evolutionarily novel forms of criminal
behavior, such as check forgery, insider trading, and embezzle-
ment, even apart from the fact that more intelligent individuals
are probably more likely to have the opportunity to commit such
crimes. (That is true for insider trading and embezzlement, but
probably not check forgery.)
Less intelligent individuals are simultaneously less likely to
consume the legal substance of alcohol and the illegal substances
of marijuana, cocaine, and heroin. At the same time, they are
175

The Intelligence Paradox
more likely to commit the crimes of murder, rape, and theft
but not the crime of drug consumption. These two observations
suggest that what matters is not legality or criminality per se but
evolutionary novelty. Less intelligent individuals are more likely
to commit crimes, but only when they are evolutionarily familiar.
Unlike the implications of the Intelligence Paradox discussed in
Chapters 5 through 10, the empirical support for the implication
of the Intelligence Paradox with regard to alcohol, tobacco, and
illegal drugs is somewhat equivocal. Both NCDS and Add Health
data provide strong empirical support for the Intelligence Paradox
with regard to alcohol consumption. Both in the UK and in
the US, more intelligent children grow up to consume more
alcohol than less intelligent children. In addition, more intelligent
American children grow up to binge drink and get drunk more
frequently in their early adulthood.
The empirical support is split when it comes to tobacco con-
sumption. More intelligent children grow up to consume less
tobacco in adulthood in the UK, while the opposite is the case
in the US. Only the Add Health data provide support for the
prediction of the Intelligence Paradox with regard to tobacco
consumption. Finally, NCDS data provide strong empirical sup-
port for the implication of the Intelligence Paradox with regard
to illegal drugs while Add Health data don’t. More research is
necessary to ﬁgure out what is behind the divergent results for
tobacco and illegal drugs in the UK and in the US.
176

Chapter 12
Why Intelligent People Are
the Ultimate Losers in Life
Reproduction Is the Ultimate Goal of All
Living Organisms
If any value is deeply evolutionarily familiar, it is reproductive
success. If any value is truly unnatural, if there is one thing that
humans (and all other species in nature) are decisively not designed
for, it is voluntary childlessness. All living organisms in nature,
including humans, are evolutionarily designed to reproduce. Re-
productive success is the ultimate end of all biological existence.
While having children is not the only means to achieve reproduc-
tive success (representation of one’s genes in the next generation),
as it could also be achieved by investment in close genetic relatives,
it is nonetheless the primary means of maximizing reproductive
success. None of us are descended from ancestors who remained
177

The Intelligence Paradox
childless, and we are disproportionately descended from indi-
viduals who achieved disproportionate reproductive success. So
voluntary childlessness is not part of evolved human nature, just
as exclusive homosexuality is not part of evolved human nature.
In Chapter 9, I address the question of why some people
identify themselves as homosexual and engage in homosexual
behavior despite the fact that human nature is largely heterosex-
ual. In this chapter, I address the question of why some individuals
choose to remain childless or have fewer children than they can
safely raise to sexual maturity despite the fact that reproductive
success is the ultimate meaning of life.
Having children, and having as many children as one can po-
tentially raise to sexual maturity so that the children themselves
can reproduce, is an evolutionarily familiar goal. In contrast, vol-
untary childlessness, or having far fewer children than one can
reasonably raise to sexual maturity, is evolutionarily novel. The
Intelligence Paradox would therefore predict that more intelligent
individuals are more likely to have fewer children or to remain
childless than less intelligent individuals.
Intelligence and the Value for Children
At age 23, near the beginning of the reproductive careers of most
British people, NCDS asked its respondents how many children
they wanted to have in their lives. More intelligent NCDS respon-
dents wanted signiﬁcantly fewer children than their less intelligent
counterparts. Childhood general intelligence has a signiﬁcantly
negative effect on how many children they want, for both men
and women. The more intelligent they are in childhood, the
fewer children they want in adulthood.
As you can see in Figure 12.1, women who do not want
to have any children at all in their lives have signiﬁcantly higher
childhood IQ than those who want at least one child. Those who
178

Why Intelligent People Are the Ultimate Losers in Life
Yes
Do you ever want children?
No
105.5
377
99.9
3,169
Women
Mean childhood IQ
110.0
105.0
100.0
95.0
90.0
Figure 12.1 Association between mean childhood IQ and desire for parent-
hood at 23: women (NCDS)
want no children have a mean childhood IQ of 105.5 whereas
those who want some children have a mean childhood IQ
of 99.9.
The picture is identical among men. Those who do not want
to have any children at all have a mean childhood IQ of 104.3
whereas those who want some children have a mean childhood
IQ of 100.0. The differences between the two categories of
NCDS respondents are highly statistically signiﬁcant among both
women and men.
However, once I control for whether currently married,
whether ever married, religiosity, religion, income, education,
social class at birth, mother’s education, father’s education, and
number of siblings, childhood IQ has a signiﬁcantly negative ef-
fect on the desired number of children only among men, not
among women. Among men, childhood general intelligence
still has a signiﬁcantly negative effect on the desired number of
179

The Intelligence Paradox
Yes
Do you ever want children?
No
104.3
377
100.0
3,064
Men
Mean childhood IQ
110.0
105.0
100.0
95.0
90.0
Figure 12.2 Association between mean childhood IQ and desire for parent-
hood at 23: men (NCDS)
children at age 23. No other variables have any signiﬁcant effect
on the number of desired children for men.
Among women, the number of siblings has a signiﬁcantly
positive effect on the desired number of children. The more sib-
lings the women have themselves, the more children they want
to have. But childhood general intelligence no longer has a sig-
niﬁcant association with the desired number of children once all
the social and demographic factors are statistically controlled.
However, even net of the same social and demographic fac-
tors, childhood general intelligence has a signiﬁcantly negative
effect on the desired parenthood—whether they want to become
parents or remain childless—both among men and women. More
intelligent men and women are signiﬁcantly more likely to want
to remain childless than less intelligent men and women.
So it appears that general intelligence makes a difference only
in the decision to become parents or not for both sexes. Less intel-
ligent individuals are signiﬁcantly more likely to want to become
180

Why Intelligent People Are the Ultimate Losers in Life
parents, and more intelligent individuals are signiﬁcantly more
likely to want to remain voluntarily childless. But, beyond that,
only less intelligent men, but not less intelligent women, want
to have more children than their more intelligent counterparts.
Childhood general intelligence signiﬁcantly predicts the value for
parenthood for both men and women, but the value for children
only for men.
Intelligence and the Number of Children
According to one study of the Swedish population, 99.7%
of women and 96.5% of men complete their lifetime repro-
duction by the time they are 45.1 In other words, very few
people—women or men—have children after they are 45. By
Sweep 7 in 2004–2005, the NCDS respondents were 46–47 years
old, so I can safely assume that most of them have completed
their reproductive careers by Sweep 7. I will therefore look at
how many children they have actually had before Sweep 7.
By the time they are 47, childhood general intelligence has
a signiﬁcantly negative effect on the number of children NCDS
respondents have had only among women, not among men. More
intelligent women have had fewer children than less intelligent
women, but more intelligent men have not had fewer children
than less intelligent men. Recall that, in a bivariate analysis, both
more intelligent men and more intelligent women wanted to have
fewer children when they were 23. It therefore means that more
intelligent women have been able to fulﬁll their desire to have
fewer children a quarter of a century later, at the end of their
reproductive careers, but more intelligent men have not been
able to fulﬁll their similar desire to have fewer children.
Even net of the same social and demographic characteristics
as before, in the analysis of the desired number of children above,
more intelligent women have fewer children in their lifetimes than
181

The Intelligence Paradox
Yes
Have you ever had children?
No
105.3
444
101.7
2,210
Women
Mean childhood IQ
110.0
105.0
100.0
95.0
90.0
Figure 12.3 Association between mean childhood IQ and parenthood at 47:
women
less intelligent women. In contrast, more intelligent men, despite
having wanted to have fewer children at age 23, do not actually
have fewer children by age 47. Among women, childhood general
intelligence signiﬁcantly decreases the number of children they
have had in their lifetimes. Among men, it does not. While the
effect of childhood general intelligence on women’s fertility is
consistent with the prediction of the Intelligence Paradox, the
lack of the same effect among men is inconsistent with it.
As you can see in Figures 12.3 and 12.4, more intelligent
women are signiﬁcantly more likely to remain childless—and
signiﬁcantly less likely to become parents—than less intelligent
women. The mean childhood IQ of women who have remained
childless for life is 105.3, whereas the mean childhood IQ of
women who have become parents is 101.7. The difference in
mean childhood IQ between the two categories of women is
very large and statistically signiﬁcant.
182

Why Intelligent People Are the Ultimate Losers in Life
Yes
No
102.2
475
103.0
1,844
110.0
105.0
100.0
95.0
90.0
Have you ever had children?
Men
Mean childhood IQ
Figure 12.4 Association between mean childhood IQ and parenthood at 47:
men
In contrast, more intelligent men are no more likely to remain
childless for life than less intelligent men. The mean childhood
IQ of men who have remained childless is 102.2 while the mean
childhood IQ of men who have become parents is 103.0. The
difference is not statistically signiﬁcant. Men who remained child-
less and men who have become parents have essentially the same
mean childhood IQ. This is once again contrary to the prediction
of the Intelligence Paradox.
Why Women, Not Men?
It is not clear to me why more intelligent men, who wanted
fewer children than less intelligent men at the start of their re-
productive careers, do not actually have fewer children. This is
in sharp contrast to more intelligent women who wanted fewer
children and in fact do have fewer children than less intelligent
183

The Intelligence Paradox
women. The data, however, allow me to rule out some possible
explanations.
Some might suspect that more intelligent women have fewer
children than less intelligent women, because more intelligent
women are more likely to pursue higher education or more
demanding careers, and, in doing so, must sacriﬁce and forgo
motherhood. In this view, women often have to make a dif-
ﬁcult decision between family and careers, as the latter often
demands pursuit of graduate education and investment in ca-
reers during the prime reproductive years for women. As a result,
women cannot often pursue both family and careers and must
choose between them. In contrast, men do not have to make
such a decision. They can still pursue higher education or de-
manding careers, and at the same time manage to have family
and children.
However, the data analysis shows that this is decidedly not
the reason we observe the sex difference in the effect of child-
hood general intelligence on lifetime fertility among the NCDS
respondents. It is not why more intelligent women have fewer
children while more intelligent men don’t. How do we know?
We know this because neither education nor income has any
effect on the number of children women have. If the alterna-
tive explanation above is correct, then more educated women
and women with greater earnings (which usually accompany
demanding careers) should have fewer children than women
with less education and earnings. But this is not the case. Only
childhood intelligence, not educational achievement or earnings,
decreases the number of children women have. Contrary to pop-
ular belief, more educated women and women with more demanding
careers do not have fewer children and are not more likely to remain
childless.
Another possibility is that women ﬁnd intelligent men more
attractive as mates. The evolutionary psychologist Geoffrey F.
Miller has consistently argued that women preferentially select
184

Why Intelligent People Are the Ultimate Losers in Life
men with higher levels of intelligence to mate with.2 Given that,
as I discuss in Chapter 7, mating among mammalian species is
largely a female choice, women’s preference for intelligent men
as mates can potentially explain why more intelligent men may
end up with just as many children as less intelligent men, despite
their desire to have fewer children and to remain childless.
There appears to be some evidence for this suggestion. Net
of the same control variables as above, more intelligent men are
signiﬁcantly more likely to have ever been married and to be
currently married at age 47 than less intelligent men. One stan-
dard deviation (15 IQ points) increase in childhood IQ increases
men’s odds of having ever been married by 23% and the odds
of being currently married by 27%. In contrast, more intelligent
women are no more likely to have ever been married, although
they are more likely to be currently married. It is important to
point out, however, that whether they have ever been married
and whether they are currently married are always controlled in
all the multiple regression analyses summarized above. So more
intelligent men’s greater tendency to have ever been married and
to be currently married is not the only reason for the absence of
the effect of intelligence on men’s fertility and parenthood.
At any rate, the divergent effect of childhood intelligence on
completed fertility for men and women, where more intelligent
women have fewer children than less intelligent women but more
intelligent men do not have fewer children than less intelligent
men, means, among other things, that modern British people
are not very endogamous on intelligence. More intelligent men
do not appear to marry more intelligent women in the con-
temporary United Kingdom. If they are strongly endogamous
on intelligence, then the fact that more intelligent women have
fewer children will necessarily mean that more intelligent men
also have fewer children. This is not the case, and the only reason
is that more intelligent men are not married to more intelligent
women, and vice versa.[3]
185

The Intelligence Paradox
Heritability of Fertility: An Evolutionary Puzzle
Among both men and women, number of siblings signiﬁcantly
increases the number of children. Since the number of siblings
(plus one) is the same as the number of children that their par-
ents had, this means that fertility—the total number of children
individuals have—is highly heritable. The more children your
parents have had (and hence the more siblings you have), the
more children you have yourself.
While this is consistent with earlier studies,4 heritability
of fertility—where the number of children the parents had is
positively associated with the number of children the children
have—is a mystery from an evolutionary psychological perspec-
tive.5 The evolutionary psychological logic suggests that the as-
sociation should be negative, not positive.
As I mention earlier in this chapter, there are two principal
means for you to increase your reproductive success: you can have
and raise your own children, or you can invest in close genetic
relatives, such as your full siblings, who share half of your genes.
But the option of maximizing reproductive success by investing
in siblings is available only to those who have a large number of
siblings. If you do not have any siblings, this option is not available
to you. So you must have more children yourself if you do not
have many siblings.
In contrast, if you do have a large number of siblings, then
you don’t necessarily have to have many children yourself, be-
cause you can increase your reproductive success by investing in
your siblings. It is important to remember that you share just as
many genes with your full siblings as you do with your own biological
children. Both share half of your genes. Genetically speaking, it is
slightly more advantageous to invest in your own children than in
your full siblings, because your children belong in the next gen-
eration, not in the current generation with you and your siblings,
and your children are expected to outlive your younger siblings.
186

Why Intelligent People Are the Ultimate Losers in Life
Nevertheless, it is possible to increase your reproductive success
by investing in your siblings.
In Chapter 3, I discuss a fundamental principle of quantitative
genetics: that there is an inverse relationship between the heri-
tability of a trait and its adaptiveness; the more adaptive a trait,
the less heritable it is.6 Fertility—the desire for and tendency to
have children—is very adaptive; in fact, it’s the very deﬁnition
of reproductive success. So fertility should not be heritable at all,
and all humans should be designed to have the maximum number
of children that they can safely raise to sexual maturity, regardless
of how many siblings they have.
If the number of siblings does affect fertility at all, then, for
reasons I state above, evolutionary logic suggests that people who
have more siblings should have fewer children (and instead invest
in their siblings), and people who have fewer siblings should have
more children. So the number of siblings and the number of chil-
dren should be negatively correlated. Yet all the evidence suggests
that this is not the case. Fertility appears to be heritable, and peo-
ple who have more siblings have more children themselves. This
remains an evolutionary puzzle.
Possible Societal Consequences
The analysis of the NCDS data suggests that more intelligent
women are more likely to remain childless for life and to have
fewer children than less intelligent women. If this ﬁnding is robust,
and is true not only in the United Kingdom but in other western
societies as well, what would it mean for these societies? What
are the likely consequences of more intelligent women being
more likely to remain childless and having fewer children than
less intelligent women?
As I explain in Chapter 3, general intelligence is known to
be highly heritable.7 Genes determine about 80% of the variance
187

The Intelligence Paradox
in adult intelligence. On average, more intelligent parents beget
more intelligent children. And the genes that inﬂuence general
intelligence are thought to be located on the X chromosomes.8
(In fact, as I mention in Chapter 9, they are thought to be located
in the same region of the X chromosomes as the genes for
male homosexuality, Xq28, which may or may not explain why
homosexuals are more intelligent.) It means that boys inherit their
general intelligence from their mothers only, while girls inherit
their general intelligence from both their mothers and their fa-
thers. Their fathers in turn inherit their general intelligence from
their mothers (the girls’ paternal grandmothers) only.
So women inﬂuence the general intelligence of future gener-
ations very strongly, through their sons and through their paternal
granddaughters. If more intelligent women have fewer children
and are more likely to remain childless, then one potential conse-
quence is that the average level of general intelligence in society
may decline over time.
Throughout the 20th century, the average level of general
intelligence in most western industrial nations steadily increased.
This phenomenon is now widely known as “the Flynn Effect,”9
after two comprehensive reviews of secular increases in average
IQ in many western industrialized nations conducted by James
R. Flynn.10 However, Richard Lynn documented the secular rise
in intelligence in Japan a few years before Flynn did.11 For this
reason, some scientists prefer the name “the Lynn-Flynn Effect”12
and I adopt the practice here. The ﬁrst documentation of the
secular rise in IQ may date even further back to the 1930s.13
Although there is no consensus on what caused the Lynn-
Flynn Effect, one likely factor, identiﬁed by Richard Lynn him-
self,14 is the increasing levels of infant and child nutrition and
health. Regardless of their genetic endowment, healthier and
better nourished babies on average grow up to have higher intel-
ligence later in life than ill and malnourished babies. These factors
likely more than compensated for the dysgenic fertility—where
188

Why Intelligent People Are the Ultimate Losers in Life
less intelligent parents have more children—throughout the 20th
century, and the average level of intelligence has increased in
most advanced industrial nations with the improved level of in-
fant health and nutrition.
The improved health and nutrition as potential causes of the
Lynn-Flynn Effect, however, would predict that the secular in-
crease in general intelligence would halt in advanced industrial
nations. The optimal level of health and nutrition has long passed
and now obesity and diabetes have become serious problems in
such nations. We are no longer getting healthier and better nour-
ished; we are simply getting fatter in the United States and in
other industrial nations.
If improved health and nutrition are chieﬂy responsible for
the secular increase in general intelligence throughout the 20th
century, and if these factors no longer contribute to the increase,
then the negative effect of the dysgenic fertility should lead to a
declining level of average intelligence in advanced industrial na-
tions.15 This is in fact happening already. There is strong evidence
to suggest that the Lynn-Flynn Effect was only a 20th-century
phenomenon. It appears to have ended at the end of the 20th cen-
tury in the most advanced industrial nations (with simultaneously
the highest rates of obesity and diabetes). Studies suggest that the
average level of intelligence has begun to decline at the begin-
ning of the 21st century in such advanced industrial nations as
Australia,16 Denmark,17 Norway,18 and the United Kingdom.19
189


Chapter 13
Other Possible
Consequences of
Intelligence
I
n previous chapters, I explain why more intelligent individuals
are more likely to be liberals and atheists, why more intelligent
men (but not women) are more likely to value sexual exclusivity
(even though they may actually be more likely to have extramarital
affairs), why night owls are more intelligent than morning larks,
why homosexuals are more intelligent than heterosexuals, why
more intelligent individuals prefer to listen to purely instrumental
music such as classical music, why more intelligent individuals
drink alcohol, smoke cigarettes, and use illegal drugs more, and
why more intelligent women (but not men) have fewer children
and are more likely to remain childless. All of these preferences,
values, and lifestyles have one thing in common: they are all
evolutionarily novel.
191

The Intelligence Paradox
So what other preferences and values are evolutionarily novel?
What else do more intelligent people like? What else can the
Intelligence Paradox potentially explain?
Coffee
In Chapter 11, I discuss the effect of general intelligence on
the consumption of alcohol, tobacco and illegal drugs. More
intelligent people are more likely to consume these substances
because they are evolutionarily novel.
The human consumption of coffee is even more recent in
origin than that of alcohol or tobacco.1 It is traced to Ethiopia
in the 9th century.2 The Intelligence Paradox would therefore
predict that more intelligent individuals will consume more coffee
than less intelligent individuals.
Among Add Health respondents in Wave I, those who usually
have coffee or tea for breakfast on weekday mornings have a
signiﬁcantly (albeit very slightly) higher intelligence than those
who don’t (99.5 vs. 98.5). Net of age, sex, race, and religion,
however, the effect of childhood intelligence on the consumption
of coffee or tea is no longer statistically signiﬁcant.
Vegetarianism
Another evolutionarily novel value is vegetarianism. Humans are
naturally omnivorous, and anyone who eschewed animal protein
and ate only vegetables in the ancestral environment, in the face
of food scarcity and precariousness of its supply, was not likely
to have survived long enough and stayed healthy enough to have
left many offspring. So such a person is not likely to have become
our ancestor. Anyone who preferentially ate animal protein and
fat in the ancestral environment would have been much more
192

Other Possible Consequences of Intelligence
Yes
No
18,458
98.5
1,244
99.5
110.0
105.0
100.0
95.0
90.0
Figure 13.1 Association between childhood intelligence and consumption
of caffeine (Add Health)
likely to live longer and stay healthier. They are therefore much
more likely to have become our ancestors.
Vegetarianism would therefore be an evolutionarily novel
value, as well as a luxury of abundance. The Intelligence Paradox
would predict that more intelligent individuals are more likely to
choose to become a vegetarian than less intelligent individuals.
This indeed appears to be the case.3 Among the NCDS sam-
ple, those who are vegetarian at age 42 have signiﬁcantly higher
childhood general intelligence than those who are not vegetarian.
Vegetarians have the mean childhood IQ of 109.1 whereas meat
eaters have the mean childhood IQ of 100.9. The difference is
large and highly statistically signiﬁcant.
The association between childhood general intelligence
and adult vegetarianism holds among both women and men
separately. Among women, vegetarians have a mean childhood
IQ of 108.0 while meat eaters have the mean childhood IQ of
193

The Intelligence Paradox
Yes
Are you a vegetarian?
No
100.9
6,531
109.1
175
Childhood IQ
120.0
115.0
110.0
105.0
100.0
95.0
90.0
Figure 13.2 Association between childhood general intelligence and adult
vegetarianism (NCDS)
100.7. Among men, vegetarians have the mean childhood IQ of
111.0 and meat eaters have the mean childhood IQ of 101.1,
a 10-point difference!
The fact that the difference in childhood IQ between vege-
tarians and meat eaters is larger among men than among women
makes sense in light of the historical division of labor between
the sexes. Throughout evolutionary history, men have tradition-
ally hunted animals for their meat while women have tradition-
ally gathered plant food. So vegetarianism—a complete and total
eschewal of animal meat—should be even more evolutionarily
novel for men than for women. Women are 60% more likely to
be vegetarians than men are (3.33% vs. 2.07%).
Childhood general intelligence has a signiﬁcantly positive ef-
fect on the likelihood of vegetarianism at age 42, even net of
a large number of social and demographic factors, such as sex,
whether ever married, whether currently married, education,
194

Other Possible Consequences of Intelligence
Yes
Are you a vegetarian?
Women
No
100.7
3,322
108.0
110
Childhood IQ
120.0
115.0
110.0
105.0
100.0
95.0
90.0
Figure 13.3 Association between childhood general intelligence and adult
vegetarianism: women (NCDS)
Yes
Are you a vegetarian?
Men
No
101.1
3,209
111.0
65
Childhood IQ
120.0
115.0
110.0
105.0
100.0
95.0
90.0
Figure 13.4 Association between childhood general intelligence and adult
vegetarianism: men (NCDS)
195

The Intelligence Paradox
income, religion, religiosity, social class at birth, mother’s educa-
tion, and father’s education, both in the full sample and among
men and women separately.
There appears very little doubt that more intelligent children
are more likely to grow up to be vegetarian as adults in the
United Kingdom. One standard deviation (15 points) increase in
childhood IQ increases the odds of adult vegetarianism by 37%
among women and by 48% among men.
Interestingly, the strong association between childhood intel-
ligence and adult vegetarianism is not replicated with Add Health
data in the US. American vegetarians in early adulthood do have
signiﬁcantly higher childhood intelligence in junior high and
high school, but the difference is not large (101.5 vs. 99.3). And
it is only signiﬁcant among women (101.4 vs. 98.5), not among
men (101.7 vs. 100.1). This is very strange given the historical
division of labor by sex that I note above. The signiﬁcant effect of
Yes
Are you a vegetarian?
No
99.3
14,015
101.5
416
Childhood IQ
120.0
115.0
110.0
105.0
100.0
95.0
90.0
Figure 13.5 Association between childhood intelligence and adult vegetari-
anism (Add Health)
196

Other Possible Consequences of Intelligence
Yes
Are you a vegetarian?
Women
No
98.5
7,344
101.4
312
Childhood IQ
120.0
115.0
110.0
105.0
100.0
95.0
90.0
Figure 13.6 Association between childhood intelligence and adult vegetari-
anism: women (Add Health)
childhood intelligence on adult vegetarianism among Americans
disappears entirely once mother’s or father’s education or religion
is statistically controlled.
It is not at all clear to me why the difference in childhood
intelligence between vegetarians and meat eaters is so much larger
and stronger in the UK than in the US. As I note in Chapter 11,
when I discuss the divergent effects of childhood intelligence on
the adult consumption of tobacco, there are two principal differ-
ences between NCDS and Add Health: the national differences
between the UK and the US; and the generational differences
between those born in March 1958 and those born between
1974 and 1983. I am not sure if it is the national differences or
the generational differences, or something entirely different, that
account for the observed differences in the association between
childhood intelligence and adult vegetarianism in the UK and
the US.
197

The Intelligence Paradox
Yes
Are you a vegetarian?
Men
No
6,671
100.1
104
101.7
Childhood IQ
120.0
115.0
110.0
105.0
100.0
95.0
90.0
Figure 13.7 Association between childhood intelligence and adult vegetari-
anism: men (Add Health)
Crime and Punishment
As I note above in Chapter 11, the fact that criminals on aver-
age are less intelligent than noncriminals is consistent with the
Intelligence Paradox. Much of what we call interpersonal crime
today was probably a routine means of intrasexual male com-
petition in the ancestral environment, so, in this sense, crime is
“natural.” In contrast, the technologies and institutions of law en-
forcement and criminal punishment are evolutionarily novel, so,
in this sense, the police and the courts are “unnatural.” It there-
fore makes sense from the perspective of the Intelligence Paradox
that less intelligent men are more likely to resort to the “natural”
means of criminal behavior to achieve their goals but they do
not fully comprehend the “unnatural” entities of the criminal
justice system.
Further, as I also explain in Chapter 11, what matters is not
the criminality of the behavior per se, but its evolutionary novelty.
198

Other Possible Consequences of Intelligence
Less intelligent individuals are more likely to engage in evolution-
arily familiar behavior and less likely to engage in evolutionarily
novel behavior. This is why less intelligent individuals are less
likely to consume illegal drugs because such consumption, while
criminal, is evolutionarily novel.
The Intelligence Paradox would also suggest a novel hypoth-
esis with regard to intelligence and criminality. As I mention
in Chapter 11, while third-party enforcement (the police and
the criminal justice system) is evolutionarily novel, second-party
enforcement (retaliation and vigilance by the victims and their
kin and allies) is not. So the Intelligence Paradox would pre-
dict that the difference in intelligence between criminals and
noncriminals will disappear in situations where third-party en-
forcement of norms is weak or absent, and criminal behavior is
largely controlled via second-party enforcement, such as situa-
tions of prolonged anarchy and statelessness, in fact, any situation
that resembles the ancestral environment. If I’m right about this,
it ironically means that less intelligent men will commit fewer
crimes if the police disappeared, although more intelligent men
may then commit more crimes. This may also explain why white-
collar corporate crimes (of the types perpetrated by Enron and
WorldCom), which are overwhelmingly committed by men of
higher intelligence, abounded in the absence of the “police” un-
der ﬁnancial deregulation.
Representative Democracy
When Congressman Jack Murtha (D-PA) unexpectedly died in
ofﬁce in February 2010, one of the names brought up and brieﬂy
considered as a possible successor was his wife Joyce. This is very
common. When Senator Ted Kennedy (D-MA) died in 2009,
his wife Vicki was seriously considered as a possible interim suc-
cessor. And when Congressman Sonny Bono (R-CA) died in
199

The Intelligence Paradox
ofﬁce in 1998, his widow Mary did succeed him in ofﬁce. She
still represents her late husband’s old district to this day, though
now married to another Congressman from Florida (Connie
Mack IV). All of this happened despite the fact that none of the
widows had any political experience at the time of their husbands’
deaths.
Sometimes political power is passed on to other family mem-
bers. When my former Congressman Bud Shuster (R-PA) re-
signed in 2001 after a lengthy ethics investigation and a mild
Congressional sanction,4 he was succeeded in ofﬁce by his son
Bill, who still represents the 9th District of Pennsylvania to this
day. His father’s ethics problems apparently have not hampered
his own success in politics.
And it turns out that the transmission of a Congressional
seat from father to son has a long history in the United States.
A Time magazine article from 1929 entitled “The Congress:
Fathers & Sons,” begins with the following (somewhat disturbing)
paragraph.
Primogeniture and hereditary public ofﬁce have no
place in U.S. tradition. This fact, however, did not last
week deter the voters of the 7th Minnesota District
from electing by a two-to-one majority Paul John
Kvale (pronounced “Ka-volley”) of Benson to the
Congressional seat for six years occupied by his father,
the Rev. Ole John Kvale, whose charred body was
last month found in his burned summer cottage.5
Sometimes the son does not wait for the father to pass the
torch to him. According to the Senate’s own records, there has
only been one father and son pair in history who served in the
Senate simultaneously (Henry Dodge of Wisconsin from 1848 to
1857 and his son, Augustus Dodge of Iowa from 1855 to 1858).6
Interestingly, there have been no father and son who served
200

Other Possible Consequences of Intelligence
in the House of Representatives simultaneously, but there has
been a mother and son pair (Frances Bolton and her son, Oliver
Bolton, both of Ohio) who served simultaneously (1953–1957
and 1963–1965).7
And it is not limited to the U.S. Congress. We have elected
family members as Presidents of the United States (the Adamses,
the Harrisons, the Roosevelts, the Bushes, and almost the
Kennedys and the Clintons). In Argentina, the popular President
N´estor Kirchner chose not to seek (nearly certain) re-election for
a second consecutive term and stepped aside in 2007, so that his
wife Cristina could run and win the Presidency. And she did.
Argentineans voted overwhelmingly for her and she won by a
wide margin.
The United States is one of the oldest and most well estab-
lished representative democracies in the world. It is also probably
the only major world power which has never had any history of
hereditary monarchy. In fact, the nation was founded with the
very goal of rejecting the rule of hereditary monarchy. Why then,
now that we have ﬁrmly established a secure form of representa-
tive democracy in the last two centuries, do we act as if we want
hereditary monarchy, by electing wives, sons, and other family
members of politicians to succeed?
Now, I’m sure that, just like any other profession or career, be-
ing a good politician requires certain skills and personality traits,
and these skills and personality traits may very well be heritable.
(Remember, Turkheimer’s ﬁrst law of behavior genetics?8 All hu-
man traits are heritable. And the 50–0–50 rule, which I discuss
in Chapter 3, suggests that many of these important traits may be
50% heritable.) So it makes sense that sons and other genetic rel-
atives (but not wives) of former politicians want to pursue political
careers and turn out to be good politicians themselves. Wives of
politicians may also turn out to be good politicians themselves
if there is assortative mating—where like marries like—on the
important personality traits for politicians.
201

The Intelligence Paradox
But that’s not what I’m talking about. My question is, why
do the people want the wives, sons, and other relatives of former
politicians to succeed in ofﬁce and vote for them, as if we have
hereditary monarchy and politics ought to be family business?
Family business is ubiquitous. Everywhere in the world, sons
and daughters inherit and continue their parents’ occupations and
professions. But politics in representative democracy is different
because the continuation of family business requires popular sup-
port and consent. The son of the hardware store owner or the
plastic surgeon does not require anyone’s consent and support to
continue his family business. The son of the Congressman does.
There exist family political dynasties in other democracies
as well. For example, from 2005 to 2007, Lech Kaczynski was
President of Poland while his twin brother Jaroslaw was Prime
Minister.9 If it turns out that people everywhere tend to want
family members to succeed in political ofﬁce, then such desire
may very well be part of universal human nature. Does that mean
that humans everywhere naturally want hereditary monarchy (but
with popular support)? Is there something in our human nature
that would want our political leaders to be succeeded by their
wives, sons, and other family members?
People sometimes complain that the wives and the sons who
inherit their political ofﬁces from their family members are not
qualiﬁed to be elected. Such complaints were particularly strong
for George W. Bush and Mary Bono. But this is precisely the point.
When a king dies, nobody asks the question “But is the crown
prince ready and qualiﬁed to succeed to the throne?” Instead he
automatically, unquestioningly, and immediately succeeds to his
father’s throne and becomes the next king, regardless of whether
he is qualiﬁed or ready. Nobody complains that the legitimate
son of a king is not qualiﬁed to succeed to the throne, be-
cause his bloodline is his qualiﬁcation. That’s how hereditary
monarchy works.
202

Other Possible Consequences of Intelligence
My point is that we are acting like we are electing hereditary
monarchs. Despite all the complaints about their utter lack of
qualiﬁcation, George W. Bush was reelected for the second term
(a feat his father did not achieve), and Mary Bono continues to
be reelected today. The fact that they and others may not be
qualiﬁed for their ofﬁce therefore supports my speculation.
If the desire for hereditary monarchy—political succession
within the family—is part of human nature and universal among
all humans, then it means that such a desire is evolutionarily
familiar, and the desire for representative democracy—or any
other form of government—is evolutionarily novel.
Our ancestors during most of human evolutionary history
were undoubtedly more egalitarian and democratic than we were
in the recent historical past, during the late agrarian and early
industrial periods.10 However, all the accoutrements of modern
representative democracy—such as the secret ballot, one person-
one vote, universal suffrage, and proportional representation—are
all evolutionarily novel. The Intelligence Paradox would therefore
suggest that more intelligent individuals and populations have
greater desire and capacity for representative democracy than less
intelligent individuals and populations.
Indeed this appears to be the case. In his comprehensive study
of 170 nations in the world, the Finnish political scientist Tatu
Vanhanen showed that the average intelligence in society increases
its degrees of democracy.11 The more intelligent the population
on average, the more democratic their government. Vanhanen’s
ﬁnding suggests that representative democracy may indeed be
evolutionarily novel and unnatural for humans. It does not nec-
essarily mean that humans naturally prefer authoritarian govern-
ment, the only major alternative form of government in the
world today to representative democracy. After all, authoritarian
government is also evolutionarily novel. My suggestion is merely
that it may be natural for the human mind to expect their new
203

The Intelligence Paradox
political leader to be a blood relative of the old political leader,
and that pure representative democracy, where political successors
are not related to their predecessors, may therefore be unnatural.
However, recall from Chapter 1 the dangers of naturalistic
fallacy. Natural does not mean good or desirable, and unnatural
does not mean bad or undesirable. It simply means that humans
did not evolve to practice representative democracy.
204

Conclusion
Intelligent People Are Not
What You Think
B
y now I hope you have a very different view of intelligence
and intelligent people than before you started reading this
book. Yes, intelligent people have more education and do better
in school, because formal education and universities, as well as
many subjects taught in schools and universities, are entirely evo-
lutionarily novel, although they may not be equally evolutionarily
novel. Psychology (the study of human character and behavior)
and home economics (the management of a household) are prob-
ably less evolutionarily novel than, say, trigonometry or particle
physics. But studying any academic subject in school by listening
to lectures, reading books, and taking written exams is evolution-
arily novel.
In fact, probably all subjects taught in school are more or less
evolutionarily novel, which is why we need to teach the students
205

The Intelligence Paradox
how to do them. We don’t need to teach the students how to
make friends, because it is part of human nature and everybody
knows how to make friends on their own. Everybody, that is,
except for intelligent people.
Yes, intelligent people make more money and attain higher
status in organizations, because capitalist economy and complex
organizations in which most people work today are entirely evo-
lutionarily novel. Yes, intelligent people make better physicians,
better astronauts, better scientists, and better violinists, because
all of these pursuits are evolutionarily novel.
But these are all the unimportant things in life. We are not designed
to be physicians, astronauts, scientists, or violinists. And intelligent
people fail (or at least are no more successful than less intelligent
people) in the most important things in life. They do not make
better friends, they do not make better spouses and partners, and
they do not make better parents, precisely because these are things
that our ancestors have done for hundreds of thousands of years
on the African savanna. Intelligent people—especially intelligent
women—make the worst kind of parents, simply because they
are least likely to be parents. And intelligent people lack common
sense and have stupid ideas.
Think about it. If you had a choice, would you rather be a
good brain surgeon, or a good parent? Would you rather be a
good corporate executive, or a good friend?
I hope it is apparent by now that intelligence is just one of
many, many traits that humans possess and on which there are
individual differences, like height, weight, hair color, eye color,
and many personality traits like aggressiveness and sociability. Just
as intelligent people are different from less intelligent people—in
both good and bad ways in most people’s minds—taller people
are different from shorter people, and sociable people are differ-
ent from unsociable people. But we never equate any of these
individual traits with human worth. We never believe that taller
people or sociable people are inherently more worthy or better
206

Intelligent People Are Not What You Think
human beings than others who don’t share their traits. (Yes, taller
and better looking people make more money, but this is at least in
part because they are on average more intelligent.1) That is why
we don’t get upset when there are observable group differences
in these traits. Nobody gets upset that men are on average taller
than women, and Caucasians are on average taller than Asians.
Yet, for some unfathomable reason, people treat intelligence
differently. They believe (or at least act as though they believe) that
intelligence is the ultimate gauge of human worth. They believe,
or at least act publicly as though they believe, that everybody is or
should be equally intelligent, because everybody is equally worthy
as human beings. They get upset at scientiﬁc ﬁndings (by now,
incontrovertible and indisputable) that show there are observable
race and sex differences in intelligence. They a priori condemn
such ﬁndings as racist or sexist. (Once again, as Kurzban aptly says,
“It’s only ‘good science’ if the message is politically correct.”2)
But they are no more racist than the ﬁnding that Caucasians
are taller than Asians or blacks have higher blood pressure than
whites; they are no more sexist than the ﬁnding that men are
taller than women. Why should intelligence be any different?
Intelligent people are not at all what you think. Intelligent
people are more likely to be liberal and atheistic. Why is it in-
herently better to be liberal and atheistic than to be conservative
and religious? Intelligent people are more likely to be night owls
than morning larks. Why is it inherently better to get up later in
the morning (or in the afternoon) than earlier? Intelligent people
are more likely to be homosexual. Why is it inherently better
to be homosexual than heterosexual? Intelligent people prefer to
listen to purely instrumental music than vocal music. Why is it
inherently better to listen to classical music than folk music?
And more intelligent people are more likely to drink alcohol,
to smoke tobacco, and to use illegal drugs. Intelligent people are
more likely to binge drink and get drunk. Although this too is
a value judgment, which science does not make, it seems very
207

The Intelligence Paradox
difﬁcult to argue from any perspective that it is better to binge
drink, get drunk, smoke cigarettes, and do drugs. Strictly from
the health perspective, it is decidedly not good to drink alcohol
(especially to excess), smoke tobacco, and use drugs.
And intelligent people—especially intelligent women—have
fewer children and are more likely to remain childless for life
than less intelligent people. Once again, whether or not to have
children is a matter of personal choice, at least in western liberal
societies, and it is neither better nor worse to have children than
not to have children. Strictly from the perspective of your genes,
however, not having children, or having fewer children than you
can safely raise to sexual maturity, is the worst thing you can
possibly do in your life. You are failing at the most important task
in life, the one thing—the most important thing—that you are
evolutionarily designed to do. More than exclusive homosexu-
ality or listening to classical music, voluntary childlessness is the
most unnatural thing that any living organism can do, including
humans.
Reproductive success is the ultimate goal of all living organ-
isms, including all humans. That is what all humans are evolu-
tionarily designed to do. It is the meaning of life itself.3 Voluntary
childlessness is therefore the greatest crime against nature, which
is why intelligent people do it.
Why is the tendency to commit the greatest crime against
nature the ultimate gauge of human worth?
208

Notes
Introduction
1. Gardner (1983).
2. Stigler and Becker (1977).
3. Friedman, Hechter and Kanazawa (1994).
4. Miller and Kanazawa (2007).
5. Herrnstein and Murray (1994); Murray (2003).
6. Davis, Smith, and Marsden (2009).
7. Huang and Hauser (1998); Miner (1957); Wolﬂe (1980).
8. http://www.cpc.unc.edu/projects/addhealth
9.
Stanovich,Cunningham,andFeeman(1984);ZagarandMead(1983).
1. What Is Evolutionary Psychology?
[1].
In this chapter, I will brieﬂy introduce you to the ﬁeld of evolution-
ary psychology. For a more comprehensive introduction, I (prejudi-
cially) recommend that you turn to my earlier book Why Beautiful
People Have More Daughters (Miller and Kanazawa, 2007), which is a
comprehensive introduction to the entire ﬁeld of evolutionary psy-
chology written for a general, nonacademic audience. It’s not only
about why beautiful people have more daughters. You may also con-
sult any of the other popular general introductions to the ﬁeld, such
as Matt Ridley’s The Red Queen (1993), Robert Wright’s The Moral
Animal (1994), David M. Buss’s The Evolution of Desire (1994), and
Steven Pinker’s The Blank Slate (2002).
2.
Dunbar (1992).
3.
Wilson (1975).
4.
Barkow, Cosmides and Tooby (1992).
5.
Betzig (1997a).
209

Notes to Pages 16–24
[6]. Culture: McGrew (1998), Wrangham et al. (1994); language: Reiss
and McCowan (1993); Savage-Rumbaugh and Lewin (1994); tool
use: van Lawick-Goodall (1964, 1968); consciousness: Gallup (1970);
Plotnik, de Waal and Reiss (2006); Reiss and Marino (2001); moral-
ity: Brosnan and de Waal (2003); sympathy and compassion: de Waal
(1996); romantic love: Leighton (1987); Smuts (1985); homosex-
uality: de Waal (1995); Bagemihl (2000); murder: Goodall (1986);
Wrangham and Peterson (1996); rape: Thornhill (1980); Thornhill
and Palmer (2000); Wrangham and Peterson (1996, pp. 132–143).
7. van den Berghe (1990, p. 428).
8. Campbell (1999, p. 243).
9. de Waal (1996); Brosnan and de Waal (2003).
10. Pinker (2002).
11. Endorsement on the cover of Betzig (1997b).
12. Ridley (1999, pp. 256–258).
13.
Ellis (1996).
14.
Moore (1903).
15.
Hume (1739).
16.
Davis (1978).
17.
Ridley (1996, pp. 256–258).
18. http://www.epjournal.net/blog/2010/11/its-only-good-science-if
-the-message-is-politically-correct/
19.
Buss (2005).
20.
Thornhill and Palmer (2000); Thornhill and Thornhill (1983).
21. http://www.psychologytoday.com/blog/the-scientiﬁc-fundamen
talist
22. Kanazawa (2006a). http://www.psychologytoday.com/blog/the
-scientiﬁc-fundamentalist/200802/if-the-truth-offends-it-s-our-job
-offend
2. The Nature and Limitations of the Human Brain
1.
Kanazawa (2004a).
2.
Tooby and Cosmides (1990).
[3].
Cosmides and Tooby (1999, pp. 17–19); Shepard (1994). Some vision
researchers disagree, however, and claim that perception of color is
distorted under moonlight (Khan and Pattanaik, 2004) or reduced il-
lumination (Shin, Yaguchi and Shioiri, 2004). If so, this is potentially
due to the fact that our ancestors did not engage in many nocturnal
activities (see Chapter 8). They likely woke up when the sun rose,
210

Notes to Pages 24–32
and went to sleep when the sun set. If the human vision system has
difﬁculty accurately perceiving color under moonlight or reduced
illumination, it may be because the need to do so is evolutionarily
novel.
4. Crawford (1993); Symons (1990); Tooby and Cosmides (1990).
5. Kanazawa (2004a).
6. Burnham and Johnson (2005, pp. 130–131).
7. Hagan and Hammerstein (2006, pp. 341–343).
[8]. Most evolutionary psychologists and biologists concur that humans
have not undergone signiﬁcant evolutionary changes in the last
10,000 years, since the end of the Pleistocene Epoch, as the envi-
ronment during this period has not provided a stable background
against which natural and sexual selection could operate over many
generations (Miller and Kanazawa, 2007, pp. 25–28). Evolution
cannot operate against a moving target. This is the assumption
behind the Savanna Principle. More recently, however, some
scientists have voiced opinions that human evolution has continued
and even accelerated during the Holocene Epoch in the last 10,000
years (Cochran and Harpending, 2009; Evans et al., 2005). While
their studies conclusively demonstrate that new alleles (varieties of
genes) have indeed emerged in the human genome since the end of
the Pleistocene Epoch, the implications and importance of such new
alleles for evolutionary psychology are not immediately obvious.
In particular, with the sole exception of lactose tolerance, it is not clear
whether these new alleles have led to the emergence of new evolved
physiological and psychological adaptations in the last 10,000 years.
9.
Kanazawa (2002).
10.
Derrick, Gabriel and Hugenberg (2009).
11. http://www.imdb.com/name/nm0000210/bio
12.
Held (2006); Malamuth (1996); Symons (1979, pp. 170–184).
13.
P´erusse (1993, pp. 273–274).
14.
Kenrick et al. (1989).
15.
Ellis and Symons (1990).
16.
Clark and Hatﬁeld (1989); Hald and Høgh-Olesen (2010).
17.
Buss and Schmitt (1993).
18.
Sally (1995).
[19].
Fehr and Henrich (2003) suggest that one-shot encounters and ex-
changes might have been common in the ancestral environment.
In their response to Fehr and Henrich, Hagen and Hammerstein
211

Notes to Pages 32–46
(2006) point out that, even if one-shot encounters were common
in the ancestral environment, anonymous encounters could not have
been common, and the game-theoretic prediction of defection in
one-shot games requires both noniteration and anonymity. A lack
of anonymity can lead to reputational concerns even in nonrepeated
exchanges.
The available molecular genetic evidence suggests that our an-
cestors practiced female exogamy. It means that, when girls reached
puberty, they left their natal group to marry into neighboring groups,
in order to avoid inbreeding, whereas boys stayed in their natal group
their entire lives. So all men in a hunter-gatherer band were geneti-
cally related to each other, whereas women were not. But they mostly
stayed in the group they married into, so they became friends and
allies for the rest of their lives. Seielstad, Minch and Cavalli-Sforza
(1998).
20.
van Beest and Williams (2006).
21.
Eisenberger, Lieberman and Williams (2003).
22.
Kanazawa (2006d).
3. What Is Intelligence?
1.
Gottfredson (1997a); Neisser et al. (1996).
[2].
Earlier attempts by intelligence researchers to dispel similar miscon-
ceptions about intelligence include Gottfredson (1997b, 2009) and
Herrnstein and Murray (1994, pp. 1–24).
3.
Burt et al. (1995); Profant and Dimsdale (1999).
4.
Gottfredson (1997b); Jensen (1980).
5.
Jensen (1980).
6.
Jensen (1998, pp. 49–50).
[7].
Technically, heritability is the proportion of the variance in the trait across
individuals that is inﬂuenced by genes. In order to have nonzero
heritability, there has to be variance in the trait across individuals. So
even though genes completely and entirely determine how many eyes
you have, heritability of the trait “number of eyes” is 0, because there
is no variance in the trait across individuals. All normally developing
humans have the identical number of eyes.
8.
Turkheimer (2000).
[9].
Political attitudes: Alford, Funk and Hibbing (2005); Eaves and
Eysenck (1974); divorce: Jockin, McGue and Lykken (1996); McGue
and Lykken (1992).
212

Notes to Pages 46–63
10. http://www.psychologytoday.com/blog/the-scientiﬁc-fundamen
talist/200809/the-50-0-50-rule-why-parenting-has-virtually-no
-effect-chi
11. Harris (1995, 1998); Rowe (1994).
12. Bouchard et al. (1990); Rowe (1994).
13. Deary et al. (2004).
14. Silventoinen et al. (2003).
15. Falconer (1960).
16. Cosmides (1989).
17. Daly and Wilson (1988, pp. 37–93; 1999).
18. Chomsky (1957).
19. Kanazawa (2004b).
20. Barash (1982, pp. 144–147).
21. Orians and Heerwagen (1992).
22. Miller and Kanazawa (2007, pp. 25–28).
[23]. If the problem was novel but recurring from then on (which thus
ceases to be novel), then there would eventually be an evolved
psychological mechanism speciﬁcally to deal with it. General in-
telligence would not be necessary to solve such problems. Gen-
eral intelligence is necessary only for novel and nonrecurrent adaptive
problems.
24. Gottfredson (1997a); Herrnstein and Murray (1994); Jensen (1998).
25. Herrnstein and Murray (1994).
26. Kanazawa (Forthcoming); Kanazawa and Perina (2009).
27. Jensen (1998, p. 296, Table 9.1).
4. When Intelligence Matters (and When It Doesn’t)
1. Kanazawa (2010a).
2. Kanazawa (2002).
3. Kanazawa (2006b).
[4]. Romero and Goetz (2010). In addition to their empirical support of
the Hypothesis, Romero and Goetz invent a handy acronym for the
“Savanna-IQ Interaction Hypothesis”—SIQXH, which I happen to
like very much.
5.
Lubinski et al. (2006).
6.
Frey and Detterman (2004); Kanazawa (2006e).
7. http://www.actstudent.org/faq/answers/actsat.html 
(emphases
added)
8.
Herrnstein and Murray (1994).
213

Notes to Pages 63–81
9.
Herrnstein and Murray (1994, p. 168–172).
10.
Herrnstein and Murray (1994, pp. 213–218).
11.
Herrnstein and Murray (1994, pp. 225–229).
12.
Crow (2003).
13.
Herrnstein and Murray (1994, p. 216).
14.
Deary (2008); Gottfredson and Deary (2004); Kanazawa (2006c).
15.
Volk and Atkinson (2008).
16.
Kanazawa (2005).
17.
de Waal (1982).
18.
Hamilton (1964).
19.
Kanazawa (2004, p. 518).
20.
Silverman et al. (2000).
21.
Weiss, Morales and Jacobs (2003).
22.
Romero and Goetz (2010).
23.
Hall et al. (2008); Kingma et al. (2009).
24.
Kingma et al. (2009).
25.
Hall et al. (2008).
26.
Kanazawa (2010a).
5. Why Liberals Are More Intelligent than Conservatives
1.
Murray (1998).
2.
Kanazawa (2010a).
3.
Hamilton (1964).
4.
Trivers (1971).
5.
Whitmeyer (1997).
6.
Whitmeyer (1997).
7.
Dunbar (1992).
8.
Levinson (1991–1995).
9.
Chagnon (1992); Cronk (2004); Hill and Hurtado (1996); Lee
(1979); Whitten (1976).
10.
Ridley (1996).
[11].
See Note 19, Chapter 2, above.
12.
Kanazawa (2010a).
13.
Lake and Breglio (1992); Shapiro and Mahajan (1986); Wirls (1986).
14.
Kluegel and Smith (1989); Sundquist (1983).
15.
Deary, Batty, and Gale (2008).
16.
Charlton (2009).
17.
Miller and Kanazawa (2007, pp. 38–40).
214

Notes to Pages 82–101
18. Gallup (1990).
19. Zahavi (1975); Zahavi and Zahavi (1997).
20. Barkow (2006).
21. Kanazawa (2009).
6. Why Atheists Are More Intelligent than the Religious
1. Brown (1991).
2. Atran (2002); Boyer (2001); Guthrie (1993); Haselton and Nettle
(2006); Kirkpatrick (2005).
3. Guthrie (1993).
4. Atran (2002).
5. Nesse (2001).
6. Nesse (2001).
7. Levinson (1991–1995).
8. Chagnon (1992); Cronk (2004); Hill and Hurtado (1996); Lee
(1979); Whitten (1976).
9. Kanazawa (2010a).
10. Miller and Hoffman (1995); Miller and Stark (2002).
11. Kanazawa (2009); Lynn, Harvey and Nyborg (2009).
7. Why More Intelligent Men (but Not More Intelligent
Women) Value Sexual Exclusivity
1.
Miller and Kanazawa (2007, p. 81).
2. Miller and Kanazawa (2007, pp. 81–85). http://www.psycho
logytoday.com/blog/the-scientiﬁc-fundamentalist/200806/why-are
-there-virtually-no-polyandrous-society-0
3.
Alexander et al. (1977); Leutenegger and Kelly (1977).
4.
Alexander et al. (1977); Leutenegger and Kelly (1977).
5.
Harvey and Bennet (1985); Kanazawa and Novak (2005); Pickford
(1986).
6.
Kanazawa and Novak (2005).
7.
Daly and Wilson (1988, pp. 140–142).
8.
Kanazawa and Novak (2005).
9.
Alexander et al. (1977, pp. 424–425, Table 15-1).
10.
Eveleth and Tanner (1976).
11.
Smith (1984).
12.
Kanazawa (2001).
13.
Baker and Bellis (1995); Gallup et al. (2003).
215

Notes to Pages 102–115
14. http://www.metro.co.uk/lifestyle/815295-cheat-on-wives-men
-less-intelligent
15. http : // articles . nydailynews . com / 2010 - 03 - 02 / entertainment /
27057710_1_iqs-monogamy-smart-men
16. http://www.telegraph.co.uk/science/science-news/7339654/
Intelligent-men-less-likely-to-cheat.html
17. Trivers (1972).
18. Clark and Hatﬁeld (1989).
19. Hald and Høgh-Olesen (2010).
20. Gangestad and Simpson (2000).
21. Kaneshiro et al. (2008).
22. Dixson et al. (2010); Furnham, Tan and McManus (1997); Henss
(2000); Singh (1993, 1994); Singh and Luis (1995); Singh and Young
(1995); Tov´ee and Cornelissen (2001).
23. Kanazawa (2004b).
24. Buss (1994).
25. Kanazawa (2011); Kanazawa and Kovar (2004).
26. Kanazawa (2011).
27. http://www.psychologytoday.com/blog/the-scientiﬁc-fundamen
talist/201012/beautiful-people-really-are-more-intelligent
28. Gangestad and Simpson (2000).
29. Jensen and Sinha (1993); Kanazawa and Reyniers (2009).
30. Buss and Schmitt (1993); Cameron, Oskamp and Sparks (1978);
Lynn and Shurgot (1984); Gillis and Avis (1980).
31. Kanazawa (2009).
32. Kanazawa and Still (1999).
33. Shaw (1957, p. 254).
8. Why Night Owls Are More Intelligent than Morning Larks
1. http://www.psychologytoday.com/blog/the-scientiﬁc-fundamen
talist/200809/the-50-0-50-rule-in-action-partisan-attachment
2.
Fowler and Dawes (2008).
3.
Kanazawa (1998, 2000).
4.
Turkheimer (2000).
5.
Alford, Funk and Hibbing (2005); Eaves and Eysenck (1974).
6.
Bouchard et al. (1999); Koenig et al (2005).
7.
Kanazawa (2010a).
8.
Vitaterna, Takahashi and Turek (2001, p. 85).
9.
Klein, Moore and Reppert (1991).
216

Notes to Pages 116–132
10.
King and Takahashi (2000).
11.
Hur (2007).
12.
Vitaterna et al. (2001, p. 90, emphasis added).
13.
Dyer et al. (2009, p. 8964); Ross (2000).
14.
Levinson (1991–1995).
15.
Chagnon (1992); Cronk (2004); Hill and Hurtado (1996); Lee
(1979); Whitten (1976).
16.
Chagnon (1992, p. 129).
17.
Cronk (2004, p. 88).
18.
Chagnon (1992, p. 132).
19.
Cronk (2004, p. 93).
20.
Hill and Hurtado (1996, p. 65).
21.
Cronk (2004, p. 92).
22.
Ash and Gallup (2007); Bailey and Geary (2009); Kanazawa (2008).
23.
Kanazawa and Perina (2009).
24.
Roberts and Kyllonen (1999).
25.
Kanazawa and Perina (2009).
9. Why Homosexuals Are More Intelligent than Heterosexuals
1.
Bagemihl (2000); de Waal (1995).
2.
Kirk et al. (2000).
3.
Bailey and Pillard (1991).
4.
Ellis and Ames (1987).
5.
Blanchard and Bogaert (1996a); Bogaert (2003).
6.
Mustanski, Chivers and Bailey (2002); Wilson and Rahman (2005).
7.
Bailey (2009); Chivers et al. (2004); Diamond (2008).
8.
Mustanski et al. (2002, pp. 122–127); Wilson and Rahman (2005,
pp. 13–16).
9.
Adams, Wright and Lohr (1996).
10.
Wilson and Rahman (2005, p. 15).
11.
Chivers, Seto and Blanchard (2007).
12.
Hamer et al. (1993); Turner (1996a).
13.
Levinson (1991–1995).
14.
Levinson (1991–1995, Volume 2, p. 79).
15.
Levinson (1991–1995, Volume 2, p. 285).
16.
Chagnon (1992); Cronk (2004); Hill and Hurtado (1996); Lee
(1979); Whitten (1976).
17.
Hill and Hurtado (1996, pp. 276–277; emphasis added).
18.
Hill and Hurtado (1996, p. 277).
217

Notes to Pages 134–159
19. Blanchard and Bogaert (1996b); Bogaert and Blanchard (1996).
20. Kanazawa (Forthcoming).
21. Kanazawa (Forthcoming).
22. Diamond (2008).
23. Kanazawa (Forthcoming).
24. Kanazawa (Forthcoming).
10. Why More Intelligent People Like Classical Music
1. http://76.74.24.142/8EF388DA-8FD3-7A4E-C208-CDF1ADE8
B179.pdf
2. http://www.npr.org/about/aboutnpr/stations_publicmedia.html
3. http://www.npr.org/music/
4.
Mithen (2005).
5.
Brown (2000).
6.
Bickerton (1990); Jackendoff (2000).
7.
Wray (1998).
8.
Mithen (2005, pp. 105–121).
9.
Zuberb¨uhler (2002, 2003).
10.
Leinonen et al. (1991); Linnankoski et al. (1994).
11.
Leinonen et al. (2003).
12.
Mithen (2005, pp. 28–68).
13.
Nettle (1983).
14.
Everett (2005).
15.
Everett (2005, p. 622).
16.
Wray (2006, p. 104).
17.
Fry (1948); Kalmus and Fry (1980).
18.
Rentfrow and Gosling (2003).
19.
Kanazawa and Perina (forthcoming).
20.
Kanazawa (2006b).
21.
Mithen (2005).
22.
Rentfrow and Gosling (2003).
11. Why Intelligent People Drink and Smoke More
1.
Dudley (2000).
2.
Vallee (1998).
3.
Vallee (1998, p. 81).
4.
Dudley (2000, p. 9).
5.
Dudley (2000).
6.
Dudley (2000, p. 9).
218

Notes to Pages 159–189
7.
Goodspeed (1954).
8.
Wilbert (1991).
9.
Goodman (1993); Smith (1999).
10.
Smith (1999, p. 377).
11.
Brownstein (1993).
12.
Smith (1999, pp. 381–382).
13.
Smith (1999).
14.
Smith (1999).
15.
Holmstedt and Fredga (1981).
16.
Johnson et al. (2009); Batty et al. (2007); Batty, Deary and Macintyre
(2007).
17.
Herrnstein and Murray (1994); Hirschi and Hindelang (1977);
Wilson and Herrnstein (1985).
18.
Wolfgang, Figlio and Sellin (1972); Yeudall, Fromm-Auch and
Davies (1982).
19.
Gibson and West (1970).
20.
Wolfgang et al. (1972); Mofﬁtt (1990).
21.
Lynam, Mofﬁtt and Stouthamer-Loeber (1993); Mofﬁtt et al. (1981).
22.
Mofﬁtt and Silva (1988).
23.
Ellis (1998).
24.
de Waal (1998).
25.
de Waal (1992).
26.
de Waal, Luttrel and Canﬁeld (1993).
12. Why Intelligent People Are the Ultimate Losers in Life
1.
Fielder and Huber (2007).
2.
Miller 2000a, 2000b, 2009.
[3].
I owe this insight to Lena Edlund.
4.
Kohler, Rodgers and Christensen (1999); Kohler et al. (2006).
5.
Miller and Kanazawa (2007, p. 184).
6.
Falconer (1960).
7.
Jensen (1998).
8.
Lehrke (1972, 1997); Turner (1996a, 1996b).
9.
Herrnstein and Murray (1994, pp. 307–309).
10.
Flynn (1984, 1987).
11.
Lynn (1982).
12.
Murphy (2011); te Nijenhuis (2011).
13.
Merrill (1938).
14.
Lynn (1990, 1998).
219

Notes to Pages 189–208
15. Lynn and Harvey (2008).
16. Cotton et al. (2005).
17. Teasdale and Owen (2008).
18. Sundet, Barlaug and Torjussen (2004).
19. Shayer, Ginsburg and Coe (2007); Shayer and Ginsburg (2009).
13. Other Possible Consequences of Intelligence
1. Smith (1999).
2. Pendergrast (1999).
3. Gale et al. (2007).
4. http://www.nytimes.com/2000/10/06/us/congressman-draws
-rebuke-but-no-penalty.html
5. http://www.time.com/time/magazine/article/0,9171,752267,00
.html. Yes, a Time article published in 1929 is available online! I
have no idea why.
6. http://www.senate.gov/artandhistory/history/common/brieﬁng/
Facts_Figures.htm
7. http://clerk.house.gov/art_history/house_history/family_ﬁrsts
.html
8. Turkheimer (2000).
9. Nizynska (2010); http://www.time.com/time/magazine/article/
0,9171,1655447,00.html
10.
Boehm (1999); Lenski (1966).
11.
Vanhanen (2003).
Conclusion: Intelligent People Are Not What You Think
1.
Jensen and Sinha (1993); Kanazawa (2011); Kanazawa and Kovar
(2004); Kanazawa and Reyniers (2009).
2. http://www.epjournal.net/blog/2010/11/its-only-good-science-if
-the-message-is-politically-correct/
3.
Dennett (1995); Kanazawa (2004c).
220

References
Adams, Henry E., Lester W. Wright, and Bethany A. Lohr. 1996. “Is Ho-
mophobia Associated with Homosexual Arousal?” Journal of Abnormal
Psychology. 105: 440–445.
Alexander, Richard D., John L. Hoogland, Richard D. Howard, Katharine
M. Noonan, and Paul W. Sherman. 1979. “Sexual Dimorphisms and
Breeding Systems in Pinnipeds, Ungulates, Primates and Humans.”
Pp. 402–435 in Evolutionary Biology and Human Social Behavior: An An-
thropological Perspective, edited by Napoleon A. Chagnon and William
Irons. North Scituate, Mass.: Duxbury Press.
Alford, John R., Carolyn L. Funk, and John R. Hibbing. 2005. “Are Po-
litical Orientations Genetically Transmitted?” American Political Science
Review. 99: 153–167.
Ash, Jessica and Gallup, Gordon G. Jr., 2007. “Paleoclimatic Variation
and Brain Expansion during Human Evolution.” Human Nature. 18:
109–124.
Atran, Scott. 2002. In Gods We Trust: The Evolutionary Landscape of Religion.
Oxford, U.K.: Oxford University Press.
Bagemihl, Bruce. 2000. Biological Exuberance: Animal Homosexuality and
Natural Diversity. New York: St. Martin’s Press.
Bailey, Drew H. and David C. Geary. 2009. “Hominid Brain Evolution:
Testing Climatic, Ecological, and Social Competition Models.” Human
Nature. 20: 67–79.
Bailey, J. Michael. 2009. “What Is Sexual Orientation and Do Women
Have One?” Nebraska Symposium on Motivation. 54: 43–63.
Bailey, J. Michael and Richard C. Pillard. 1991. “A Genetic Study of Male
Sexual Orientation.” Archives of General Psychiatry. 48: 1089–1096.
221

References
Baker, R. Robin and Mark A. Bellis. 1995. Human Sperm Com-
petition: Copulation, Masturbation and Inﬁdelity. London: Chapman
and Hall.
Barash, David P. 1982. Sociobiology and Behavior, Second Edition. New York:
Elsevier.
Barkow, Jerome H. 2006. “Introduction: Sometimes the Bus Does
Wait.” Pp. 3–59 in Missing the Revolution: Darwinism for Social Sci-
entists, edited by Jerome H. Barkow. Oxford: Oxford University
Press.
Barkow, Jerome H., Leda Cosmides and John Tooby. (Editors.) 1992. The
Adapted Mind: Evolutionary Psychology and the Generation of Culture.
New York: Oxford University Press.
Batty, G. David, Ian J. Deary, and Linda S. Gottfredson. 2007. “Premorbid
(Early Life) IQ and Later Mortality Risk: Systematic Review.” Annals
of Epidemiology. 17: 278–288.
Batty, G. David, Ian J. Deary, Ingrid Schoon, and Catharine R.
Gale. 2007. “Mental Ability across Childhood in Relation to Risk
Factors for Premature Mortality in Adult Life: The 1970 British
Cohort Study.” Journal of Epidemiology and Community Health. 61: 997–
1003.
Betzig, Laura. 1997a. “People Are Animals.” Pp. 1–17 in Human Nature: A
Critical Reader, edited by Laura Betzig. New York: Oxford University
Press.
Betzig, Laura. (Editor.) 1997b. Human Nature: A Critical Reader. New
York: Oxford University Press.
Bickerton, Derek. 1990. Language and Species. Chicago: University of
Chicago Press.
Blanchard, Ray and Anthony F. Bogaert. 1996a. “Homosexuality in Men
and Number of Older Brothers.” American Journal of Psychiatry. 153:
27–31.
Blanchard, Ray and Anthony F. Bogaert. 1996b. “Biodemographic Com-
parisons of Homosexual and Heterosexual Men in the Kinsey Inter-
view Data.” Archives of Sexual Behavior. 25: 551–579.
Boehm, Christopher. 1999. Hierarchy in the Forest: The Evolution of Egali-
tarian Behavior. Cambridge: Harvard University Press.
Bogaert, Anthony F. 2003. “Number of Older Brothers and Sexual Ori-
entation: New Tests and the Attraction/Behavior Distinction in Two
National Probability Samples.” Journal of Personality and Social Psychol-
ogy. 84: 644–652.
222

References
Bogaert, Anthony F. and Ray Blanchard. 1996. “Physical Development
and Sexual Orientation in Men: Height, Weight and Age of Puberty
Differences.” Personality and Individual Differences. 21: 77–84.
Bouchard, Thomas J. Jr., David T. Lykken, Matthew McGue, Nancy L.
Segal, and Auke Tellegen. 1990. “Sources of Human Psychological
Differences: The Minnesota Study of Twins Reared Apart.” Science.
250: 223–228.
Bouchard, Thomas J. Jr., Matt McGue, David Lykken, and Auke Telle-
gen. 1999. “Intrinsic and Extrinsic Religiousness: Genetic and En-
vironmental Inﬂuences and Personality Correlates.” Twin Research. 2:
88–98.
Boyer, Pascal. 2001. Religion Explained: The Evolutionary Origins of Religious
Thought. New York: Basic Books.
Brosnan, Sarah F. and Frans B. M. de Waal. 2003. “Monkeys Reject
Unequal Pay.” Nature. 425: 297–299.
Brown, Donald E. 1991. Human Universals. New York: McGraw-Hill.
Brown, Steven. 2000. “The ‘Musilanguage’ Model of Music Evolution.”
Pp. 271–300 in The Origins of Music, edited by Nils L. Wallin, Bj¨orn
Merker, and Steven Brown. Cambridge: MIT Press.
Brownstein, Michael J. 1993. “A Brief History of Opiates, Opioid Pep-
tides, and Opioid Receptors.” Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences. 90: 5391–5393.
Burnham, Terence C. and Dominic D. P. Johnson. 2005. “The Biological
and Evolutionary Logic of Human Cooperation.” Analyse & Kritik.
27: 113–135.
Burt, Vicki L., Paul Whelton, Edward J. Roccella, Clarice Brown, Jeffrey
A. Cutler, Millicent Higgins, Michael J. Horan, and Darwin Labarthe.
1995. “Prevalence of Hypertension in the US Adult Population.”
Hypertension. 25: 305–313.
Buss, David M. 1994. The Evolution of Desire: Strategies of Human Mating,
Second Edition. New York: Basic Books.
Buss, David M. 2005. The Murderer Next Door: Why the Mind Is Designed
to Kill. New York: Penguin.
Buss, David M. and David P. Schmitt. 1993. “Sexual Strategies Theory:
An Evolutionary Perspective on Human Mating.” Psychological Review.
100: 204–232.
Cameron, Catherine, Stuart Oskamp, and William Sparks. 1977.
“Courtship American Style: Newspaper Ads.” Family Coordinator. 26:
27–30.
223

References
Campbell, Anne. 1999. “Staying Alive: Evolution, Culture, and Women’s
Intrasexual Aggression.” Behavior and Brain Sciences. 22: 203–252.
Chagnon, Napoleon. 1992. Yanomam¨o, 4th ed. Fort Worth: Harcourt
Brace Jovanovich.
Charlton, Bruce G. 2009. “Clever Sillies: Why High IQ People Tend to
Be Deﬁcient in Common Sense.” Medical Hypotheses. 73: 867–870.
Chivers, Meredith L., Gerulf Rieger, Elizabeth Latty, and J. Michael
Bailey. 2004. “A Sex Difference in the Speciﬁcity of Sexual Arousal.”
Psychological Science. 15: 736–744.
Chivers, Meredith L., Michael C. Seto, and Ray Blanchard. 2007. “Gen-
der and Sexual Orientation Differences in Sexual Response to Sexual
Activities versus Gender of Actors in Sexual Films.” Journal of Person-
ality and Social Psychology. 93: 1108–1121.
Chomsky, Noam. 1957. Syntactic Structures. The Hague: Mouton.
Clark, Russell D. III and Elaine Hatﬁeld. 1989. “Gender Differences
in Receptivity to Sexual Offers.” Journal of Psychology and Human
Sexuality. 2: 39–55.
Cochran, Gregory and Henry Harpending. 2009. The 10,000 Year Explo-
sion: How Civilization Accelerated Human Evolution. New York: Basic
Books.
Cosmides, Leda. 1989. “The Logic of Social Exchange: Has Natural Selec-
tion Shaped How Humans Reason? Studies with the Wason Selection
Task.” Cognition. 31: 187–276.
Cosmides, Leda and John Tooby. 1999. What Is Evolutionary Psychology?
Center for Evolutionary Psychology. University of California at Santa
Barbara.
Cotton, Sue M., Patricia M. Kiely, David P. Crewther, Brenda Thomson,
Robin Laycock, and Sheila G. Crewther. 2005. “A Normative and
Reliability Study for the Raven’s Coloured Progressive Matrices for
Primary School Aged Children from Victoria, Australia.” Personality
and Individual Differences. 39: 647–659.
Crawford, Charles B. 1993. “The Future of Sociobiology: Counting Ba-
bies or Proximate Mechanisms?” Trends in Ecology and Evolution. 8:
183–186.
Cronk, Lee. 2004. From Mukogodo to Maasai: Ethnicity and Cultural Change
in Kenya. Boulder: Westview Press.
Daly, Martin and Margo Wilson. 1988. Homicide. New York: De Gruyter.
Daly, Martin and Margo Wilson. 1999. The Truth about Cinderella: A
Darwinian View of Parental Love. New Haven: Yale University Press.
224

References
Davis, Bernard. 1978. “Moralistic Fallacy.” Nature. 272: 390.
Davis, James Allan, Tom W. Smith, and Peter V. Marsden. 2009. General
Social Surveys, 1972–2008: Cumulative Codebook. Chicago: National
Opinion Research Center.
Deary, Ian J. 2008. “Why Do Intelligent People Live Longer?” Nature.
456: 175–176.
Deary, Ian J., G. David Batty, and Catharine R. Gale. 2008. “Childhood
Intelligence Predicts Voter Turnout, Voting Preferences, and Political
Involvement in Adulthood: The 1970 British Cohort Study.” Intelli-
gence. 36: 548–555.
Deary, Ian J., Martha C. Whiteman, John M. Starr, Lawrence J. Whalley,
and Helen C. Fox. 2004. “The Impact of Childhood Intelligence on
Later Life: Following Up the Scottish Mental Surveys of 1932 and
1947.” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology. 86: 130–147.
Dennett, Daniel C. 1995. Darwin’s Dangerous Idea: Evolution and the Mean-
ings of Life. New York: Touchtone.
Derrick, Jaye L., Shira Gabriel, and Kurt Hugenberg. 2009. “Social Sur-
rogacy: How Favored Television Programs Provide the Experience of
Belonging.” Journal of Experimental Social Psychology. 45: 352–362.
Diamond, Lisa M. 2008. Sexual Fluidity: Understanding Women’s Love and
Desire. Cambridge: Harvard University Press.
Dixson, Barnaby J., Alan F. Fixson, Phil J. Bishop, and Amy Parish. 2010.
“Human Physique and Sexual Attractiveness in Men and Women: A
New Zealand-U.S. Comparative Study.” Archives of Sexual Behavior.
39: 798–806.
Dudley, Robert. 2000. “Evolutionary Origins of Human Alcoholism in
Primate Frugivory.” Quarterly Review of Biology. 75: 3–15.
Dunbar, Robin I. M. 1992. “Neocortex Size as a Constraint on Group
Size in Primates.” Journal of Human Evolution. 20: 469–493.
Dyer, Michael A., Rodrigo Martins, Manoel da Silva Filho, Jos´e Augusto
P. C. Muniz, Luiz Carlos L. Silveira, Constance L. Cepko, and Barbara
L. Finlay. 2009. “Developmental Sources of Conservation and Varia-
tion in the Evolution of the Primate Eye.” Proceedings of the National
Academy of Science. 106: 8963–8968.
Eaves, L. J. and H. J. Eysenck. 1974. “Genetics and the Development of
Social Attitudes.” Nature. 249: 288–289.
Eisenberger, Naomi I., Matthew D. Lieberman, and Kipling D. Williams.
2003. “Does Rejection Hurt?: An fMRI Study of Social Exclusion.”
Science. 302: 290–292.
225

References
Ellis, Lee. 1996. “A Discipline in Peril: Sociology’s Future Hinges on
Curing Its Biophobia.” American Sociologist. 27: 21–41.
Ellis, Lee. 1998. “Neodarwinian Theories of Violent Criminality and An-
tisocial Behavior: Photographic Evidence from Nonhuman Animals
and a Review of the Literature.” Aggression and Violent Behavior. 3:
61–110.
Ellis, Lee and M. Ashley Ames. 1987. “Neurohormonal Functioning and
Sexual Orientation: A Theory of Homosexuality-Heterosexuality.”
Psychological Bulletin. 101: 233–258.
Evans, Patrick D., Sandra L. Gilbert, Nitzan Mekel-Bobrov, Eric J. Wal-
lender, Jeffrey R. Anderson, Leila M. Vaez-Azizi, Sarah A. Tishkoff,
Richard R. Hudson, and Bruce T. Lahn. 2005. “Microcephalin, a Gene
Regulating Brain Size, Continues to Evolve Adaptively in Humans.”
Science. 309: 1717–1720.
Eveleth, Phyllis B. and James M. Tanner. 1976. Worldwide Variation in
Human Growth. Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge University Press.
Falconer, Douglas S. 1960. Introduction to Quantitative Genetics. New York:
Ronald Press.
Fehr, Ernst and Joseph Henrich. 2003. “Is Strong Reciprocity a Maladap-
tation? On the Evolutionary Foundations of Human Altruism.” Pp.
55–82 in Genetic and Cultural Evolution of Cooperation, edited by Peter
Hammerstein. Cambridge: MIT Press.
Fielder, Martin and Susanne Huber. 2007. “The Effects of Sex and Child-
lessness on the Association between Status and Reproductive Output
in Modern Society.” Evolution and Human Behavior. 28: 392–398.
Flynn, James R. 1984. “The Mean IQ of Americans: Massive Gains 1932
to 1978.” Psychological Bulletin. 95: 29–51.
Flynn, James R. 1987. “Massive IQ Gains in 14 Nations: What IQ Tests
Really Measure.” Psychological Bulletin. 101: 171–191.
Fowler, James H. and Christopher T. Dawes. 2008. “Two Genes Predict
Voter Turnout.” Journal of Politics. 70: 579–594.
Frey, Meredith C. and Douglas K. Detterman. 2004. “Scholastic Assess-
ment or g?: The Relationship Between the Scholastic Assessment Test
and General Cognitive Ability.” Psychological Science. 15: 373–378.
Friedman, Debra, Michael Hechter, and Satoshi Kanazawa. 1994. “A
Theory of the Value of Children.” Demography. 31: 375–401.
Fry, D. B. 1948. “An Experimental Study of Tone Deafness.” Speech. 1948:
1–7.
226

References
Furnham, Adrian, Tina Tan, and Chris McManus. 1997. “Waist-to-Hip
Ratio and Preferences for Body Shape: A Replication and Extension.”
Personality and Individual Differences. 22: 539–549.
Gale, Catharine R., Ian J. Deary, Ingrid Schoon, and G. David Batty.
2007. “IQ in Childhood and Vegetarianism in Adulthood: 1970
British Cohort Study.” British Medical Journal. 334: 245–248.
Gallup, Gordon G. Jr. 1970. “Chimpanzees: Self-Recognition.” Science.
167: 86–87.
Gallup, Gordon G. Jr. 1990. “Review of The Unheeded Cry: Animal Con-
sciousness, Animal Pain and Science, by Gernard E. Rollin.” Animal
Behaviour. 40: 200–201.
Gallup, Gordon G. Jr., Rebecca L. Burch, Mary L. Zappieri, Rizwan
A. Parvez, Malinda L. Stockwell, and Jennifer A. Davis. 2003. “The
Human Penis as a Semen Displacement Device.” Evolution and Human
Behavior. 24: 277–289.
Gangestad, Steven W. and Jeffry A. Simpson. 2000. “The Evolution of
Human Mating: Trade-offs and Strategic Pluralism.” Behavioral and
Brain Sciences. 23: 573–644.
Gardner, Howard. 1983. Frames of Mind: The Theory of Multiple Intelligences.
New York: Basic Books.
Gibson, H. B. and D. J. West. 1970. “Social and Intellectual Handicaps
as Precursors of Early Delinquency.” British Journal of Criminology. 10:
21–32.
Gillis, John S. and Walter E. Avis. 1980. “The Male-Taller Norm in Mate
Selection.” Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin. 6: 396–401.
Goodall, Jane. 1986. Chimpanzees of Gombe: Patterns of Behavior. Cam-
bridge: Harvard University Press.
Goodall, Jane. 2001. “Tool-Use and Aimed Throwing in a Community
of Free-Living Chimpanzees.” Nature. 201: 1264–1266.
Goodman, Jordan. 1993. Tobacco in History: The Cultures of Dependence.
London: Routledge.
Goodspeed, Thomas Harper. 1954. The Genus Nicotiana. Waltham, Mass.:
Chronica Botanica.
Gottfredson, Linda S. 1997a. “Why g Matters: The Complexity of Every-
day Life.” Intelligence. 24: 79–132.
Gottfredson, Linda S. 1997b. “Mainstream Science on Intelligence: An
Editorial with 52 Signatories, History, and Bibliography.” Intelligence.
24: 13–23.
227

References
Gottfredson, Linda S. 2009. “Logical Fallacies Used to Dismiss the Evi-
dence on Intelligence Testing.” Pp. 11–65 in Correcting Fallacies about
Educational and Psychological Testing, edited by Richard P. Phelps. Wash-
ington, D.C.: American Psychological Association.
Gottfredson, Linda S. and Ian J. Deary. 2004. “Intelligence Predicts Health
and Longevity, but Why?” Current Directions in Psychological Science. 13:
1–4.
Guthrie, Stewart Elliott. 1993. Faces in the Clouds: A New Theory of Religion.
New York: Oxford University Press.
Hagen, Edward H. and Peter Hammerstein. 2006. “Game Theory and
Human Evolution: A Critique of Some Recent Interpretations of
Experimental Games.” Theoretical Population Biology. 69: 339–348.
Hald, Gert Martin. 2006. “Gender Differences in Pornography Consump-
tion among Young Heterosexual Danish Adults.” Archives of Sexual
Behavior. 35: 577–585.
Hald, Gert Martin and Henrik Høgh-Olesen. 2010. “Receptivity to Sex-
ual Invitations from Strangers of the Opposite Gender.” Evolution and
Human Behavior. 31: 453–458.
Hall, Peter A., Lorin J. Elias, Geoffrey T. Fong, Amabilis H. Harrison,
Ron Borowsky, and Gordon E. Sarty. 2008. “A Social Neuroscience
Perspective on Physical Activity.” Journal of Sport & Exercise Psychology.
30: 432–449.
Hamer, Dean H., Stella Hu, Victoria L. Magnuson, Nan Hu, and Angela
M. L. Pattatucci. 1993. “A Linkage between DNA Markers on the X
Chromosome and Male Sexual Orientation.” Science. 261: 321–327.
Hamilton, William D. 1964. “Genetical Evolution of Social Behavior.”
Journal of Theoretical Biology. 7: 1–52.
Harris, Judith Rich. 1995. “Where Is the Child’s Environment?: A
Group Socialization Theory of Development.” Psychological Review.
102: 458–489.
Harris, Judith Rich. 1998. The Nurture Assumption: Why Children Turn
Out the Way They Do. New York: Free Press.
Harvey, P. H. and P. M. Bennett. 1985. “Sexual Dimorphism and Repro-
ductive Strategies.” Pp. 43–59 in Human Sexual Dimorphism, edited
by J. Ghesquiere, R. D. Martin and F. Newcombe. London: Taylor &
Francis.
Haselton, Martie G. and Daniel Nettle. 2006. “The Paranoid Optimist:
An Integrative Evolutionary Model of Cognitive Biases.” Personality
and Social Psychology Review. 10: 47–66.
228

References
Henss, Ronald. 2000. “Waist-to-Hip Ratio and Female Attractiveness:
Evidence from Photographic Stimuli and Methodological Consider-
ations.” Personality and Individual Differences. 28: 501–513.
Herrnstein, Richard J. and Charles Murray. 1994. The Bell Curve:
Intelligence and Class Structure in American Life. New York: Free
Press.
Hill, Kim and A. Magdalena Hurtado. 1996. Ache Life History: The Ecology
and Demography of a Foraging People. New York: Aldine.
Hirschi, Travis and Michael J. Hindelang. 1977. “Intelligence and Delin-
quency: A Revisionist Review.” American Sociological Review. 42:
571–587.
Holmstedt, Bo and Arne Fredga. 1981. “Sundry Episodes in the
History of Coca and Cocaine.” Journal of Ethnopharmacology. 3:
113–147.
Huang, Min-Hsiung and Robert M. Hauser. 1998. “Trends in Black-
White Test-Score Differentials: II. The WORDSUM Vocabulary
Test.” Pp. 303–332 in The Rising Curve: Long-Term Gains in IQ and
Related Measure, edited by Ulric Neisser. Washington, D.C.: American
Psychological Association.
Hume, David. 1739. A Treatise of Human Nature: Being an Attempt to
Introduce the Experimental Method of Reasoning into Moral Subjects and
Dialogues Concerning Natural Religion. London: John Noon.
Hur, Yoon-Mi. 2007. “Stability of Genetic Inﬂuence on Morningness-
Eveningness: A Cross-Sectional Examination of South Korean Twins
from Preadolescence to Young Adulthood.” Journal of Sleep Research.
16: 17–23.
Jackendoff, Ray. 2000. Foundations of Language: Brain, Meaning, Grammar,
Evolution. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Jensen, Arthur R. 1980. Bias in Mental Testing. New York: Free Press.
Jensen, Arthur R. 1998. The g Factor: The Science of Mental Ability. West-
port: Praeger.
Jensen, Arthur R. and S. N. Sinha. 1993. “Physical Correlates of Human
Intelligence.” Pp. 139–242 in Biological Approaches to the Study of Human
Intelligence, edited by Philip A. Vernon. Norwood: Ablex.
Jockin, Victor, Matt McGue, and David T. Lykken. 1996. “Personality and
Divorce: A Genetic Analysis.” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology.
71: 288–299.
Johnson, Wendy, Brian M. Hicks, Matt McGue, and William G. Iacono.
2009. “How Intelligence and Education Contribute to Substance
229

References
Use: Hints from the Minnesota Twin Family Study.” Intelligence. 37:
613–624.
Kalmus, H. and D. B. Fry. 1980. “On Tune Deafness (Dysmelodia): Fre-
quency, Development, Genetics and Musical Background.” Annals of
Human Genetics. 43: 369–382.
Kanazawa, Satoshi. 1998. “A Possible Solution to the Paradox of Voter
Turnout.” Journal of Politics. 60: 974–995.
Kanazawa, Satoshi. 2000. “A New Solution to the Collective Action
Problem: The Paradox of Voter Turnout.” American Sociological Review.
65: 433–442.
Kanazawa, Satoshi. 2001. “A Bit of Logic Goes a Long Way: A Reply to
Sanderson.” Social Forces. 80: 337–341.
Kanazawa, Satoshi. 2002. “Bowling with Our Imaginary Friends.” Evolu-
tion and Human Behavior. 23: 167–171.
Kanazawa, Satoshi. 2004a. “The Savanna Principle.” Managerial and Deci-
sion Economics. 25: 41–54.
Kanazawa, Satoshi. 2004b. “General Intelligence as a Domain-Speciﬁc
Adaptation.” Psychological Review. 111: 512–523.
Kanazawa, Satoshi. 2004c. “Social Sciences Are Branches of Biology.”
Socio-Economic Review. 2: 371–390.
Kanazawa, Satoshi. 2005. “An Empirical Test of a Possible Solution to
‘the Central Theoretical Problem of Human Sociobiology.’” Journal of
Cultural and Evolutionary Psychology. 3: 255–266.
Kanazawa, Satoshi. 2006a. “If the Truth Offends, It’s Our Job to Offend.”
Times Higher Education Supplement. 15 December. 1773: 14.
Kanazawa, Satoshi. 2006b. “Why the Less Intelligent May Enjoy Television
More than the More Intelligent.” Journal of Cultural and Evolutionary
Psychology. 4: 27–36.
Kanazawa, Satoshi. 2006c. “Mind the Gap . . . in Intelligence: Reexamin-
ing the Relationship between Inequality and Health.” British Journal
of Health Psychology. 11: 623–642.
Kanazawa, Satoshi. 2006d. “First, Kill All the Economists . . .”: The Insuf-
ﬁciency of Microeconomics and the Need for Evolutionary Psychol-
ogy in the Study of Management.” Managerial and Decision Economics.
27: 95–101.
Kanazawa, Satoshi. 2006e. “IQ and the Wealth of States.” Intelligence. 34:
593–600.
Kanazawa, Satoshi. 2009. “IQ and the Values of Nations.” Journal of Bioso-
cial Science. 41: 537–556.
230

References
Kanazawa, Satoshi. 2010a. “Why Liberals and Atheists Are More Intelli-
gent.” Social Psychology Quarterly. 73: 33–57.
Kanazawa, Satoshi. 2010b. “Evolutionary Psychology and Intelligence
Research.” American Psychologist. 65: 279–289.
Kanazawa, Satoshi. 2011. “Intelligence and Physical Attractiveness.” Intel-
ligence. 39: 7–14.
Kanazawa, Satoshi. Forthcoming. “Intelligence and Homosexuality.” Jour-
nal of Biosocial Science.
Kanazawa, Satoshi and Jody L. Kovar. 2004. “Why Beautiful People Are
More Intelligent.” Intelligence. 32: 227–243.
Kanazawa, Satoshi and Deanna L. Novak. 2005. “Human Sexual Dimor-
phism in Size May Be Triggered by Environmental Cues.” Journal of
Biosocial Science 37: 657–665.
Kanazawa, Satoshi and Kaja Perina. 2009. “Why Night Owls Are More
Intelligent.” Personality and Individual Differences. 47: 685–690.
Kanazawa, Satoshi and Kaja Perina. Forthcoming. “Why More Intel-
ligent Individuals Like Classical Music.” Journal of Behavior Decision
Making.
Kanazawa, Satoshi and Diane J. Reyniers. 2009. “The Role of Height in
the Sex Difference in Intelligence.” American Journal of Psychology. 122:
524–536.
Kanazawa, Satoshi and Mary C. Still. 1999. “Why Monogamy?” Social
Forces. 78: 25–50.
Kaneshiro, Bliss, Jeffrey T. Jensen, Nichole E. Carlson, S. Marie Harvey,
Mark D. Nichols, and Alison B. Edelman. 2008. “Body Mass Index
and Sexual Behavior.” Obstetrics & Gynecology. 112: 586–592.
Kenrick, Douglas T., Sara E. Gutierres, and Laurie L. Goldberg. 1989.
“Inﬂuence of Popular Erotica on Judgments of Strangers and Mates.”
Journal of Experimental Social Psychology. 25: 159–167.
King, David P. and Joseph S. Takahashi. 2000. “Molecular Genetics of
Circadian Rhythms in Mammals.” Annual Review of Neuroscience. 23:
713–742.
Kingma, E. M., L. M. Tak, M. Huisman, and J.G.M. Rosmalen. 2009.
“Intelligence Is Negatively Associated with the Number of Functional
Somatic Symptoms.” Journal of Epidemiology and Community Health. 63:
900–906.
Kirk, K. M., J. M. Bailey, M. P. Dunne, and N. G. Martin. 2000. “Mea-
surement Models for Sexual Orientation in a Community of Twin
Sample.” Behavior Genetics. 30: 345–356.
231

References
Kirkpatrick, Lee A. 2005. Attachment, Evolution, and the Psychology of Reli-
gion. New York: Guilford.
Khan, Saad M. and Sumanta N. Pattanaik. 2004. “Modelling Blue Shift
in Moonlit Scenes Using Rod Cone Interaction.” Journal of Vision. 4
(8): 316.
Klein, David C., Robert Y. Moore, and Steven M. Reppert. 1991.
Suprachiasmatic Nucleus: The Mind’s Clock. New York: Oxford Uni-
versity Press.
Kluegel, James R. and Eliot R. Smith. 1986. Beliefs about Inequality: Amer-
icans’ View of What Is and What Ought to Be. New York: Aldine.
Koenig, Laura B., Matt McGue, Robert F. Krueger, and Thomas J.
Bouchard, Jr. 2005. “Genetic and Environmental Inﬂuences on Reli-
giousness: Findings for Retrospective and Current Religiousness Rat-
ings.” Journal of Personality. 73: 471–488.
Kohler, Hans-Peter, Joseph L. Rodgers, and Kaare Christensen. 1999.
“Is Fertility Behavior in Our Genes?: Findings from a Danish Twin
Study.” Population and Development Review. 25: 253–288.
Kohler, Hans-Peter, Joseph Lee Rodgers, Warren B. Miller, Axel Skytthe,
and Kaare Christensen. 2006. “Bio-Social Determinants of Fertility.”
International Journal of Andrology. 29: 46–53.
Lake, Celinda C. and Vincent J. Breglio. 1992. “Different Voices, Different
Views: The Politics of Gender.” Pp. 178–201 in The American Woman,
1992–93: A Status Report, edited by Paula Ries and Anne J. Stone.
New York: W. W. Norton.
Lee, Richard Borshay. 1979. The !Kung San: Men, Women, and Work in a
Foraging Society. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Lehrke, Robert. 1972. “A Theory of X-Linkage of Major Intellectual
Traits.” American Journal of Mental Deﬁciency. 76: 611–619.
Lehrke, Robert. 1997. Sex Linkage of Intelligence: The X-Factor. Westport,
Conn.: Praeger.
Leighton,
Donna
Robbins.
1987.
“Gibbons:
Territoriality
and
Monogamy.” Pp. 135–145 in Primate Societies, edited by Barbara
Smuts, Dorothy L. Cheney, Robert M. Seyfarth, Richard Wrang-
ham, and Thomas T. Struhsaker. Chicago: University of Chicago
Press.
Leinonen, Lea, Ilkka Linnankoski, Maija-Liisa Laakso, and Reijo Aulanko.
1991. “Vocal Communication between Species: Man and Macaque.”
Language & Communication. 11: 241–262.
232

References
Leinonen, Lea, Maija-Liisa Laakso, Synn¨ove Carlson, and Ilkka Lin-
nankoski. 2003. “Shared Means and Meanings in Vocal Expression
of Man and Macaque.” Logopedics Phoniatrics Vocology. 28: 53–61.
Lenski, Gerhard E. 1966. Power and Privilege: A Theory of Social Stratiﬁcation.
Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press.
Leutenegger, Walter and James T. Kelly. 1977. “Relationship of Sexual
Dimorphism in Canine Size and Body Size to Social, Behavioral, and
Ecological Correlates in Anthropoid Primates.” Primates. 18: 117–
136.
Levinson, David (editor in chief). 1991–1995. Encyclopedia of World Cul-
tures. (10 volumes.) Boston: G. K. Hall.
Linnankoski, Ilkka., Maija Laakso, Reijo Aulanko, and Lea Leinonen.
1994. “Recognition of Emotions in Macaque Vocalizations by Chil-
dren and Adults.” Language & Communication. 14: 183–192.
Lubinski, David, Camilla P. Benbow, Rose Mary Webb, and April Bleske-
Rechek. 2006. “Tracking Exceptional Human Capital over Two
Decades.” Psychological Science. 17: 194–199.
Lynam, Donald, Terrie E. Mofﬁtt, and Magda Stouthamer-Loeber. 1993.
“Explaining the Relation between IQ and Delinquency: Class, Race,
Test Motivation, School Failure, or Self Control?” Journal of Abnormal
Psychology. 102: 187–196.
Lynn, Michael and Barbara A. Shurgot. 1984. “Responses to Lonely
Hearts Advertisements: Effects of Reported Physical Attractiveness,
Physique, and Coloration.” Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin.
10: 349–357.
Lynn, Richard. 1982. “IQ in Japan and the United States Shows a Growing
Disparity.” Nature. 297: 222–223.
Lynn, Richard. 1990. “The Role of Nutrition in the Secular Increases of
Intelligence.” Personality and Individual Differences. 11: 273–286.
Lynn, Richard. 1998. “In Support of the Nutrition Theory.” Pp. 207–215
in The Rising Curve: Long-Term Gains in IQ and Related Measures,
edited by Ulric Neisser. Washington, D.C.: American Psychological
Association.
Lynn, Richard and John Harvey. 2008. “The Decline of the World’s IQ.”
Intelligence. 36: 112–120.
Lynn, Richard, John Harvey, and Helmuth Nyborg. 2009. “Average In-
telligence Predicts Atheism Rates Across 137 Nations.” Intelligence. 37:
11–15.
233

References
Malamuth, Neil M. 1996. “Sexually Explicit Media, Gender Differences,
and Evolutionary Theory.” Journal of Communication. 46: 8–31.
McGrew, W. C. 1992. “Culture in Nonhuman Primates?” Annual Review
of Anthropology. 27: 301–328.
McGue, Matt and David T. Lykken. 1992. “Genetic Inﬂuence on Risk of
Divorce.” Psychological Science. 3: 368–373.
Merrill, Maud A. 1938. “The Signiﬁcance of IQ’s on the Revised
Stanford-Binet Scales.” Journal of Educational Psychology. 29: 641–651.
Miller, Alan S. and John P. Hoffmann. 1995. “Risk and Religion: An Ex-
planation of Gender Differences in Religiosity.” Journal for the Scientiﬁc
Study of Religion. 34: 63–75.
Miller, Alan S. and Satoshi Kanazawa. 2007. Why Beautiful People Have
More Daughters. New York: Penguin.
Miller, Alan S. and Rodney Stark. 2002. “Gender and Religiousness: Can
Socialization Explanations Be Saved?” American Journal of Sociology.
107: 1399–1423.
Miller, Geoffrey F. 2000a. The Mating Mind: How Sexual Choice Shaped the
Evolution of Human Nature. New York: Doubleday.
Miller, Geoffrey. 2000b. “Sexual Selection for Indicators of Intelligence.”
Pp. 260–275 in The Nature of Intelligence, edited by Gregory R. Bock,
Jamie A. Goode, and Kate Webb. New York: Wiley.
Miller, Geoffrey. 2009. Spent: Sex, Evolution, and Consumer Behavior. New
York: Viking.
Miner, John B. 1957. Intelligence in the United States: A Survey—with Con-
clusions for Manpower Utilization in Education and Employment. New
York: Springer.
Mithen, Steven. 2005. The Singing Neanderthals: The Origins of Music,
Language, Mind and Body. London: Weidenfeld & Nicholson.
Mofﬁtt, Terrie E. 1990. “The Neuropsychology of Delinquency: A Crit-
ical Review of Theory and Research.” Crime and Justice: An Annual
Review of Research. 12: 99–169.
Mofﬁtt, Terrie E., William F. Gabrielli, Sarnoff A. Mednick, and Fini
Schulsinger. 1981. “Socioeconomic Status, IQ, and Delinquency.”
Journal of Abnormal Psychology. 90: 152–156.
Mofﬁtt, Terrie E. and Phil A. Silva. 1988. “IQ and Delinquency: A Direct
Test of the Differential Detection Hypothesis.” Journal of Abnormal
Psychology. 97: 330–333.
Moore, George Edward. 1903. Principia Ethica. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
234

References
Murphy, Raegan. 2011. “The Lynn-Flynn Effect: How to Explain It?”
Personality and Individual Differences.
Murray, Charles. 1997. What It Means to Be a Libertarian: A Personal
Interpretation. New York: Broadway Books.
Murray, Charles. 2003. Human Accomplishment: The Pursuit of Ex-
cellence in the Arts and Sciences, 800 B.C. to 1950. New York:
Perennial.
Mustanski, Brian S., Meredith L. Chivers, and J. Michael Bailey. 2002.
“A Critical Review of Recent Biological Research on Human Sexual
Orientation.” Annual Review of Sex Research. 13: 89–140.
Nesse, Randolph M. 2001. “The Smoke Detector Principle: Natural
Selection and the Regulation of Defensive Responses.” Annals of the
New York Academy of Sciences. 935: 75–85.
Nettl, Bruno. 1983. The Study of Ethnomusicology: Twenty-nine Issues and
Concepts. Urbana: University of Illinois Press.
Nijenhuis, Jan te. 2011. “The Lynn-Flynn Effect in Korea.” Personality and
Individual Differences.
Nizynska, Joanna. 2010. “The Politics of Mourning and the Crisis of
Poland’s Symbolic Language after April 10.” East European Politics and
Societies. 24: 467–479.
Orians, Gordon H. and Judith H. Heerwagen. 1992. “Evolved Responses
to Landscapes.” Pp. 555–579 in The Adapted Mind: Evolutionary Psy-
chology and the Generation of Culture, edited by Jerome H. Barkow,
Leda Cosmides, and John Tooby. New York: Oxford University
Press.
Pendergrast, M. (1999). Uncommon Grounds: The History of Coffee and How
It Transformed Our World. New York: Basic Books.
P´erusse, Daniel. 1993. “Cultural and Reproductive Success in Industrial
Societies: Testing the Relationship at the Proximate and Ultimate
Levels.” Behavioral and Brain Sciences. 16: 267–322.
Pickford, Martin. 1986. “On the Origins of Body Size Dimorphism in
Primates.” Pp. 77–91 in Sexual Dimorphism in Living and Fossil Pri-
mates, edited by Martin Pickford and Brunetto Chiarelli. Florence: Il
Sedicesimo.
Pinker, Steven. 2002. The Blank Slate: The Modern Denial of Human Nature.
London: Penguin.
Plotnik, Joshua, Frans B. M. de Waal, and Diana Reiss. 2006. “Self-
Recognition in an Asian Elephant.” Proceedings of the National Academy
of Sciences. 103: 17053–17057.
235

References
Profant, Judi and Joel E. Dimsdale. 1999. “Race and Diurnal Blood Pres-
sure Patterns.” Hypertension. 33: 1099–1104.
Reiss, Diana and Lori Marino. 2001. “Mirror Self-Recognition in the
Bottlenose Dolphin: A Case of Cognitive Convergence.” Proceedings
of the National Academy of Sciences. 98: 5937–5942.
Reiss, Diana and Brenda McCowan. 1993. “Spontaneous Vocal Mimicry
and Production by Bottlenose Dolphins (Tursiops truncatus): Evidence
for Vocal Learning.” Journal of Comparative Psychology. 107: 301–312.
Rentfrow, Peter J. and Samuel D. Gosling. 2003. “The Do Re Mi’s of
Everyday Life: The Structure and Personality Correlates of Music
Preference.” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology. 84: 1236–1256.
Ridley, Matt. 1993. The Red Queen: Sex and the Evolution of Human Nature.
New York: Penguin.
Ridley, Matt. 1996. The Origins of Virtue: Human Instincts and the Evolution
of Cooperation. New York: Viking.
Ridley, Matt. 1999. Genome: The Autobiography of a Species in 23 Chapters.
New York: Perennial.
Roberts, Richard D. and Patrick C. Kyllonen. 1999. “Morningness-
Eveningness and Intelligence: Early to Bed, Early to Rise Will Likely
Make You Anything but Wise!” Personality and Individual Differences.
27: 1123–1133.
Romero, Gorge A. and Aaron T. Goetz. 2010. “Sexually Insatiable
Women: Evidence for the Savanna-IQ Interaction Hypothesis with
Pornography.” Department of Psychology. California State University.
Ross, Callum F. 2000. “Into the Light: The Origin of Anthropoidea.”
Annual Review of Anthropology. 29: 147–194.
Rowe, David C. 1994. The Limits of Family Inﬂuence: Genes, Experience,
and Behavior. New York: Guilford.
Sally, David. 1995. “Conversation and Cooperation in Social Dilemmas:
A Meta-analysis of Experiments from 1958 to 1992.” Rationality and
Society. 7: 58–92.
Savage-Rumbaugh, Sue and Roger Lewin. 1994. Kanzi: The Ape at the
Brink of the Human Mind. New York: Wiley.
Seielstad, Mark T., Eric Minch, and L. Luca Cavalli-Sforza. 1998. “Genetic
Evidence for a Higher Female Migration Rate in Humans.” Nature
Genetics. 20: 278–280.
Shapiro, Robert Y. and Harpreet Mahajan. 1986. “Gender Differences
in Policy Preferences: A Summary of Trends from the 1960s to the
1980s.” Public Opinion Quarterly. 50: 42–61.
236

References
Shaw, Bernard. 1957. Man and Superman. New York: Penguin.
Shayer, Michael and Denise Ginsburg. 2009. “Thirty Years On—A Large
Anti-Flynn Effect? (II): 13- and 14-Year-Olds. Piagetian Tests of For-
mal Operations Norms 1976–2006/7.” British Journal of Educational
Psychology. 79: 409–418.
Shayer, Michael, Denise Ginsburg, and Robert Coe. 2007. “Thirty Years
On—A Large Anti-Flynn Effect? The Piagetian Test Volume & Heav-
iness Norms 1975–2003.” British Journal of Educational Psychology. 77:
25–41.
Shepard, Roger N. 1994. “Perceptual-Cognitive Universals as Reﬂections
of the World.” Psychonomic Bulletin & Review. 1: 2–28.
Shin, Jae Chul, Hirohisa Yaguchi, and Satoshi Shioiri. 2004. “Change of
Color Appearance in Photopic, Mesopic and Scotopic Vision.” Optical
Review. 11: 265–271.
Silventoinen, Karri, Sampo Sammalisto, Markus Perola, Dorret I.
Boomsma, Belinda K. Cornes, Chyana Davis, Leo Dunkel, Marlies
de Lange, Jennifer R. Harris, Jacob V. B. Hjelmborg, Michelle Lu-
ciano, Nicholas G. Martin, Jakob Mortensen, Lorenza Nistic`o, Nancy
L. Pedersen, Axel Skytthe, Tim D. Spector, Maria Antonietta Stazi,
Gonneke Willemsen, and Jaakko Kaprio. 2003. “Heritability of Adult
Body Height: A Comparative Study of Twin Cohorts in Eight Coun-
tries.” Twin Research. 6: 399–408.
Silverman, Irwin, Jean Choi, Angie Mackewn, Maryanne Fisher, Judy
Moro, and Esther Olshansky. 2000. “Evolved Mechanisms Under-
lying Wayﬁnding: Further Studies on the Hunter-Gatherer The-
ory of Spatial Sex Differences.” Evolution and Human Behavior. 21:
201–213.
Singh, Devendra. 1993. “Adaptive Signiﬁcance of Waist-to-Hip Ratio
and Female Physical Attractiveness.” Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology. 65: 293–307.
Singh, Devendra. 1994. “Is Thin Really Beautiful and Good? Relation-
ship between Waist-to-Hip Ratio (WHR) and Female Attractiveness.”
Personality and Individual Differences. 16: 123–132.
Singh, D. and S. Luis. 1995. “Ethnic and Gender Consensus for the Ef-
fect of Waist-to-Hip Ratio on Judgments of Women’s Attractiveness.”
Human Nature. 6: 51–65.
Singh, D. and R. K. Young. 1995. “Body Weight, Waist-to-Hip Ratio,
Breasts, and Hips: Role in Judgments of Female Attractiveness and
Desirability for Relationships.” Ethology and Sociobiology. 16: 483–507.
237

References
Smith, E. O. 1999. “Evolution, Substance Abuse, and Addiction.”
Pp. 375–400 in Evolutionary Medicine, edited by Wenda R. Trevathan,
E. O. Smith, and James J. McKenna. New York: Oxford University
Press.
Smith, Robert L. 1984. “Human Sperm Competition.” Pp. 601–659 in
Sperm Competition and the Evolution of Mating Systems, edited by Robert
L. Smith. New York: Academic Press.
Smuts, Barbara. 1985. Sex and Friendship in Baboons. New York: Aldine.
Spearman, C. (1904). “General Intelligence, Objectively Determined and
Measured.” American Journal of Psychology, 15, 201–293.
Stanovich, Keith E., Anne E. Cunningham and Dorothy J. Feeman. 1984.
“Intelligence, Cognitive Skills, and Early Reading Progress.” Reading
Research Quarterly. 19: 278–303.
Stigler, George J. and Gary S. Becker. 1977. “De Gustibus Non Est
Disputandum.” American Economic Review. 67: 76–90.
Sundet, Jon Martin, Dag G. Barlaug, and Tore M. Torjussen. 2004. “The
End of the Flynn Effect?: A Study of Secular Trends in Mean Intelli-
gence Test Scores of Norwegian Conscripts during Half a Century.”
Intelligence. 32: 349–362.
Sundquist, James L. 1983. Dynamics of the Party System, Revised Edition.
Washington, D.C.: Brookings Institution.
Symons, Donald. 1979. The Evolution of Human Sexuality. Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Symons, Donald. 1990. “Adaptiveness and Adaptation.” Ethology and So-
ciobiology. 11: 427–444.
Teasdale, Thomas W. and David R. Owen. 2005. “A Long-Term Rise
and Recent Decline in Intelligence Test Performance: The Flynn
Effect in Reverse.” Personality and Individual Differences. 39: 837–
843.
Thornhill, Randy. 1980. “Rape in Panorpa Scorpionﬂies and a General
Rape Hypothesis.” Animal Behaviour. 28: 52–59.
Thornhill, Randy and Craig T. Palmer. 2000. A Natural History of Rape:
Biological Bases of Sexual Coercion. Cambridge: MIT Press.
Thornhill, Randy and Nancy Wilmsen Thornhill. 1983. “Human Rape:
An Evolutionary Analysis.” Ethology and Sociobiology. 4: 137–173.
Tooby, John and Leda Cosmides. 1990. “The Past Explains the Present:
Emotional Adaptations and the Structure of Ancestral Environments.
Ethology and Sociobiology, 11, 375–424.
238

References
Tov´ee, Martin J. and Piers L. Cornelissen. 2001. “Female and Male Per-
ceptions of Female Physical Attractiveness in Front-View and Proﬁle.”
British Journal of Psychology. 92: 391–402.
Trivers, Robert L. 1972. “Parental Investment and Sexual Selection.” Pp.
136–179 in Sexual Selection and the Descent of Man 1871–1971, edited
by Bernard Campbell. Chicago: Aldine.
Turkheimer, Eric. 2000. “Three Laws of Behavior Genetics and What
They Mean.” Current Directions in Psychological Science. 9: 160–164.
Turner, Gillian. 1996a. “Finding Genes on the X Chromosome by Which
Homo May Have Become Sapiens.” American Journal of Human Genetics.
58: 1109–1110.
Turner, Gillian. 1996b. “Intelligence and the X Chromosome.” Lancet.
347: 1814–1815.
Vallee, Bert L. 1998. “Alcohol in the Western World.” Scientiﬁc American.
278 (6): 80–85.
van Beest, Ilja and Kipling D. Williams. 2006. “When Inclusion Costs and
Ostracism Pays, Ostracism Still Hurts.” Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology. 91: 918–928.
van den Berghe, Pierre L. 1990. “From the Popocatepetl to the Limpopo.”
Pp. 410–431 in Authors of Their Own Lives: Intellectual Autobiographies
by Twenty American Sociologists, edited by Bennett M. Berger. Berkeley:
University of California Press.
Vanhanen, Tatu. 2003. Democratization: A Comparative Analysis of 170
Countries. New York: Routledge.
van Lawick-Goodall, Jane. 1968. “Tool-Using Bird: The Egyptian Vul-
ture.” National Geographic. 133 630–641.
Vitaterna, Martha Hotz, Joseph S. Takahashi, and Fred W. Turek. 2001.
“Overview of Circadian Rhythms.” Alcohol Research and Health. 25:
85–93.
Volk, Tony and Jeremy Atkinson. 2008. “Is Child Death the Crucible of
Human Evolution?” Journal of Social, Evolutionary, and Cultural Psychol-
ogy. 2: 247–260.
de Waal, Frans B. M. 1982. Chimpanzee Politics: Power and Sex among Apes.
London: Jonathan Cape.
de Waal, Frans B. M. 1989. “Food Sharing and Reciprocal Obligations
among Chimpanzees.” Journal of Human Evolution. 18: 433–459.
de Waal, Frans B. M. 1992. “Appeasement, Celebration, and Food Sharing
in the Two Pan Species.” Pp. 37–50 in Topics in primatology: Human
239

References
origins, edited by Toshisada Nishida, W. C. McGrew, and Peter Marler.
Tokyo: University of Tokyo Press.
de Waal, Frans B. M. 1995. “Bonobo Sex and Society.” Scientiﬁc American.
272 (3): 82–88.
de Waal, Frans. 1996. Good Natured: The Origins of Right and Wrong in
Humans and Other Animals. Cambridge: Harvard University Press.
de Waal, Frans B. M., Lesleigh M. Luttrell, and M. Eloise Canﬁeld. 1993.
“Preliminary Data on Voluntary Food Sharing in Brown Capuchin
Monkeys.” American Journal of Primatology. 29: 73–78.
Weiss, Alexander, Alicia Morales, and W. Jake Jacobs. 2003. “Place Learn-
ing in Virtual Space IV: Spatial Navigation and General Intelli-
gence Appear Independent.” Department of Psychology. University of
Arizona.
Whitmeyer, Joseph M. 1997. “Endogamy as a Basis for Ethnic Behavior.”
Sociological Theory. 15: 162–178.
Whitten, Norman E. Jr. 1976. Sacha Runa: Ethnicity and Adaptation of
Ecuadorian Jungle Quichua. Urbana: University of Illinois Press.
Wilbert, Johannes. 1991. “Does Pharmacology Corroborate the Nicotine
Therapy and Practices of South American Shamanism?” Journal of
Ethnopharmacology. 32: 179–186.
Wilson, Edward O. 1975. Sociobiology: The New Synthesis. Cambridge:
Harvard University Press.
Wilson, Glenn and Qazi Rahman. 2005. Born Gay: The Psychobiology of
Sex Orientation. London: Peter Owen.
Wilson, James Q. and Richard J. Herrnstein. 1985. Crime and Human
Nature: The Deﬁnitive Study of the Causes of Crime. New York: Touch-
stone.
Wirls, Daniel. 1986. “Reinterpreting the Gender Gap.” Public Opinion
Quarterly. 50: 316–330.
Wolfgang, Marvin E., Robert M. Figlio, and Thorsten Sellin. 1972. Delin-
quency in a Birth Cohort. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Wolﬂe, Lee M. 1980. “The Enduring Effects of Education on Verbal
Skills.” Sociology of Education. 53: 104–114.
Wrangham, Richard W., W. C. McGrew, Frans B. M. de Waal, and Paul G.
Heltne. 1994. Chimpanzee Cultures. Cambridge: Harvard University
Press.
Wrangham, Richard and Dale Peterson. 1996. Demonic Males: Apes and
the Origins of Human Violence. Boston: Mariner.
240

References
Wray, Alison. 1998. “Protolanguage as a Holistic System of Social Inter-
action.” Language and Communication. 18: 47–67.
Wray, Alison. 2006. “Joining the Dots: The Evolutionary Picture of Lan-
guage and Music.” Cambridge Archaeological Journal. 16: 103–105.
Wright, Robert. 1994. The Moral Animal: The New Science of Evolutionary
Psychology. New York: Vintage.
Yeudall, Lorne T., Delee Fromm-Auch, and Priscilla Davies. 1982. “Neu-
ropsychological Impairment of Persistent Delinquency.” Journal of Ner-
vous and Mental Diseases. 170: 257–265.
Zagar, Robert and John D. Mead. 1983. “Analysis of Short Test Battery
for Children.” Journal of Clinical Psychology. 39: 590–597.
Zahavi, Amotz. 1975. “Mate Selection—Selection for a Handicap.” Journal
of Theoretical Biology. 53: 205–214.
Zahavi, Amotz and Avishag Zahavi. 1997. The Handicap Principle: A Missing
Piece of Darwin’s Puzzle. New York: Oxford University Press.
Zuberb¨uhler, Klaus. 2002. “A Syntactic Rule in Forest Monkey Com-
munication.” Animal Behaviour. 63: 293–299.
Zuberb¨uhler, Klaus. 2003. “Natural Semanticity in Wild Primates.” Pp.
362–367 in Animal Social Complexity: Intelligence, Culture, and Individ-
ualized Societies. Edited by Frans B. M de Waal and Peter L. Tyack.
Cambridge: Harvard University Press.
241


Index
Note: Page numbers followed by f indicate ﬁgures.
ACT, as achievement test, 60
adaptiveness of traits, 48, 187
adaptive problems
as domain-speciﬁc, 49–50
human brain and, 17
selection pressure and, 51
solutions to, 13–14
Add Health (National
Longitudinal Study of
Adolescent Health), 10
affairs, likelihood of having,
106–109, 108f , 109f
agency-detector mechanism,
91–92
agriculture, invention of, 14–15,
159
alcohol
binge drinking and getting
drunk, intelligence and,
163–167, 165f , 166f
human consumption of,
158–159
intelligence and use of,
160–163, 163f , 164f
altruism, 74–75
ancestral environment
contraception and, 30
description of, 14
human brain responses and, 36
novel and nonrecurrent
problems in, 52–54
ostracism in, 33
physical adaptations and, 24–25
polygyny in, 98–101, 100f
psychological adaptations and,
25
stability of, 50–52
Andersen, Mads, 81–82, 83, 84
androgen, exposure to in womb,
and homosexuality, 128
animistic bias, 91–92
Asians, as nocturnal, 122–125,
122f , 123f , 124f , 125f
atheism, 93–94
attractiveness, physical, 106–107
Becker, Gary S., 4
big band music, 154, 155
243

Index
binge drinking, 162, 163–167,
165f
blank slate assumption, 17–18
blood pressure, race differences in,
38–39
body mass index and sexual
behavior, 104–105
Bono, Mary, 200, 202, 203
Bono, Sonny, 199–200
British Cohort Study, 148
Bush, George W., 202, 203
Charlton, Bruce G., 79, 81, 84
cheater detection mechanism, 49
childlessness, voluntary, as crime
against nature, 208
children
intelligence and number of,
181–185, 182f , 183f
intelligence and value for,
178–181, 179f , 180f
number of, and number of sex
partners, 66–67, 66f , 67f
See also parenting; reproductive
success
choice within genetic
predisposition, 114–115
circadian rhythm
of Asians, 122–125, 122f , 123f ,
124f , 125f
description of, 113
night life as evolutionarily
novel, 115–121
Clark, Russell D., 102–103, 104
classical music
cognitive complexity of,
152–155
as evolutionarily novel,
146–148, 151f , 152f
on NPR stations, 143
preferences for, 148–151
“clever sillies,” 79, 81
coffee, human consumption of,
192, 193f
cognitive classes, 54
cognitive complexity of music,
152–155
color-recognition system, 24–25
common sense, 79–81
Communism and atheism, 93
competition for resources and
criminality, 174–175
compositional approach to
evolution of language, 144
comprehension
in Savanna Principle, 27, 56
values, preferences, and, 71
conservatives
intelligence and, 76–78, 76f
naturalistic fallacy and, 20
contraception, 30, 65–67, 66f , 67f
cooperation in one-shot Prisoner’s
Dilemma games, 30–32
correlation coefﬁcient, 42
criminality, 173–176, 198–199
culture, human, commonality in,
80
Cyberball computer game, 33–35,
34f
Darwin, Charles, 15
data sets
General Social Surveys, 9–10
National Child Development
Study, 10–11
National Longitudinal Study of
Adolescent Health, 10
overview of, 8–9
244

Index
Davis, Bernard, 19
Dawkins, Richard, 81
days, length of, 117–118
deme, 74
democracy, representative,
199–204
digit span tests, 41
drugs, psychoactive
human consumption of, 160
intelligence and use of, 172,
173f , 175–176
education
binge drinking, getting drunk,
and, 167
as evolutionarily novel, 205–206
intelligence and, 47–48
religiosity and, 94
The Encyclopedia of World Cultures,
116
endogenizing preferences and
values, 4, 5
endogenous, deﬁnition of, 4
enjoyment of watching TV,
57–58
environment
equality of, 47–48
human behavior as product of
innate human nature and,
18–19
See also ancestral environment
environmentalism, 19
error management theory and
religiosity, 88f
ethnocentrism, 74
evolutionary legacy hypothesis, 25.
See also Savanna Principle
evolutionary psychology
core principles of, 15
human behavior as product of
nature and environment
principle of, 18–19
human brain as nothing special
principle of, 16–17
human nature is innate principle
of, 17–18
logical fallacies to avoid, 19–22
overview of, 13–15
people are animals principle of,
15–16
See also Savanna Principle
evolved psychological mechanisms
ancestral environment and, 14
common sense and, 79–81
deﬁnition of, 13
as domain-speciﬁc, 49–50,
52–54
exercise, 70
exogenous, deﬁnition of, 4
explained variance, 42–43
expression of genes, 18
factor analysis, 43, 153–154
family business, 199–204
female choice, 102–106
fertility, heritability of, 186–187
50-0-50 rule, 46
Flynn, James R., 188
friendships and TV shows, 25–27,
56–58
Gallup, Gordon G., Jr., 81
general intelligence. See
intelligence
General Social Surveys (GSS),
9–10
genetically determined traits, 18,
45–47
245

Index
genetic predisposition, choice
within, 114–115
gifted, failures of, 60–62
God, belief in, 92–96, 95f
Goetz, Aaron T., 59
Good Genes Sexual Selection
Theory, 104
gospel music, 154
GSS (General Social Surveys),
9–10
Hamilton, William D., 18
handicap principle, 82–83
Hatﬁeld, Elaine, 102–103, 104
Hawking, Stephen, 62
hereditary monarchies, 199–203
heritability
deﬁnition of, 114
of fertility, 186–187
of homosexuality, 128
of intelligence, 45–48
holistic approach to evolution of
language, 144
homosexuality
as evolutionarily novel,
130–133
heritability of, 128
intelligence and, 133–140, 134f ,
136f , 138f , 139f
in nature, 127–128
human behavior
microeconomic models of, 3–5,
31, 36
as product of nature and
environment, 18–19
human brain
as nothing special, 16–17
physical pain of ostracism in, 33
See also Savanna Principle
human nature
deﬁnition of, 13
human behavior as product of
environment and, 18–19
as innate, 17–18
as universal or species-typical, 14
See also traits
human worth, intelligence equated
with, 1–3, 38, 157, 206–207
Hume, David, 19
hunter-gatherer lifestyle, 14, 50
Hypothesis. See Savanna-IQ
Interaction Hypothesis
income inequality
intelligence in society and, 85
polygyny and, 110–111
inference systems, 88–90, 88f ,
91–92
instrumental music
as evolutionarily novel, 146–148
preferences for, 148–151, 151f ,
152f
intelligence
deﬁnition of, 37
determinants of, 45–47
education and, 47–48
equated with human worth,
1–3, 38, 157, 206–207
evolution of, 49–54
heritability of, 45–48
limitations of, 205–208
misconceptions about, 38–48
outcomes in life and, 62–63
as positive trait, 2–3
See also IQ; IQ tests
Intelligence Paradox, overview of,
71–72
interpersonal relationships, 68
246

Index
IQ
as measure of intelligence,
40–43
religiosity and, 95–96
secular rise in, 188–189
values of nations and, 3–5
See also Savanna-IQ Interaction
Hypothesis
IQ tests
as culturally biased, 38–40
Raven’s Progressive Matrices,
39–40, 40f , 41
SAT as, 60
as unreliable, 43–45
jazz music, 143, 148–149, 155
Jensen, Arthur R., 44
Kaczynski, Lech and Jaroslaw, 202
Kanazawa, Satoshi, Why Beautiful
People Have More Daughters, 5
Kaneshiro, Bliss, 104, 105
Kennedy, Ted and Vicki, 199
kin, investment in, 68
King, Larry, 62
Kirchner, N´estor and Cristina, 201
Kurzban, Robert O., 20
language, evolution of, 144–145,
146f , 147
language acquisition device, 49
latent cognitive ability, 43
latent factors, 161
law of evolution by natural and
sexual selection, and
reproductive success, 16
liberalism
common sense and, 79–81
institutions and, 78
intelligence and, 76–78, 76f
moralistic fallacy and, 20
of nations, 84–85
NPR and, 143
overview of, 73–75
Lynn, Richard, 188
Lynn-Flynn Effect, 188, 189
marginal tax rates, 85
marriage/mating
cognitive classes and, 63
criminality and, 174–175
evolutionarily novel elements
in, 64–67
female choice in, 102–106
intelligence and, 110–111
polygynous, 97–101, 100f
sexual exclusivity and, 106–109
truly gifted individuals and,
61–62
mass media, political bias in, 78
microeconomic models of human
behavior, 3–5, 31, 36
Miller, Geoffrey F., 184–185
mismatch hypothesis, 25. See also
Savanna Principle
Mithen, Steven, 144, 145–146,
147, 148
monogamy, deﬁnition of, 97
Moore, George Edward, 19
moralistic fallacy, 19–21
multiple intelligences concept, 2
Murray, Charles, 8
Murtha, Jack, 199
music
cognitive complexity of,
152–155
evolutionary origins of,
144–148, 146f
247

Index
music (continued)
intelligence and tastes for,
148–151, 151f , 152f
on NPR stations, 143
musilanguage, 144–145, 146f ,
147
National Child Development
Study (NCDS),
10–11
National Longitudinal Study of
Adolescent Health (Add
Health), 10
National Public Radio (NPR)
stations, character of,
142–143
nations
degrees of democracy in,
203–204
IQ and religiosity of, 95–96
IQ and values of, 3–5
polygynous, 110–111
values and preferences of,
84–85
voluntary childlessness in,
187–189
natural, deﬁnition of, 21, 72
naturalistic fallacy, 19–21
navigation, spatial, 68–69
NCDS (National Child
Development Study), 10–11
night life
Asians and, 122–125, 122f ,
123f , 124f , 125f
association between childhood
intelligence and, 118f , 119f ,
120f , 121f
as evolutionarily novel,
115–121
novel problems in ancestral
environment, 52–54
novelty, evolutionary
commission of crime and,
175–176
consumption of alcohol,
tobacco, and drugs as,
158–160
education as, 205–206
homosexual identity and
behavior as, 130–133
instrumental music as, 146–148
of marriage and parenting,
64–67
night life as, 115–121
of representative democracy,
203–204
Novgorod, Russia, 141, 142
NPR (National Public Radio)
stations, character of,
142–143
number of children
intelligence and, 181–185, 182f ,
183f
number of sex partners and,
66–67, 66f , 67f
sex differences and, 183–185
offensive, scientiﬁc ideas and
theories as, 22
opera, 154
ostracism and Savanna Principle,
32–36
paranoia in evolution, 89–92
parenting
cognitive classes and, 63–64
evolutionarily novel elements
in, 64–67
248

Index
inﬂuence of, 46
truly gifted individuals and,
61–62
Parker, Trey, 81
Pascal, Blaise, and Pascal’s wager,
92
Peabody Picture Vocabulary Test,
10
peacock’s tail, intelligence as,
81–84
people are animals principle of
evolutionary psychology,
15–16
Perina, Kaja, 119
physical adaptations and ancestral
environment, 24–25
Pleistocene Epoch, 50–51
political dynasties, 199–204
political ideology and IQ, 76–77,
76f. See also liberalism
polyandry, deﬁnition of, 97
polygamy, deﬁnition of, 97–98
polygyny
in ancestral environment,
98–101, 100f
deﬁnition of, 97
intelligence, income inequality,
and, 110–111
pornography, 27–30, 58–59
preferences
choice of, 114–115
comprehension and, 71
explanations for, 3–5
of nations, 84–85
primates
behavior classiﬁed as criminal
among, 174
communication between
humans and, 145
Prisoner’s Dilemma games,
one-shot, cooperation in,
30–32
problem of values, 3–5
proto-language, 145–146
psychological adaptations
ancestral environment and, 25
evolution of, 50–51
See also evolved psychological
mechanisms
psychometricians, 43
race differences
in blood pressure, 38–39
in circadian rhythm, 122–125,
122f , 123f , 124f , 125f
Rahman, Qazi, 129
rap music, 154
rational actor model, 3–4
Raven’s Progressive Matrices,
39–40, 40f , 41
reliability of IQ tests, 43–45
religion
belief in God, 92–94, 95f
as cultural universal, 87
error management theory
applied to, 88f
nations and, 95–96
origins of, 87–92
representative democracy, 199–204
reproductive success
handicap principle and, 82–83
intelligence and, 48, 64
investment in kin and, 68
law of evolution by natural and
sexual selection and, 16
maximizing by investing in
siblings, 186
sex differences in, 28, 29
249

Index
reproductive success (continued)
U.K. cigarette packages and, 171
as ultimate goal of all living
organisms, 177–178
reverse naturalistic fallacy, 19
Ridley, Matt, 19, 20
Romero, Gorge A., 59
SAT, as aptitude test, 60
Savanna-IQ Interaction
Hypothesis
exercise and, 70
interpersonal relationships and,
68
marriage, parenting, and,
62–67, 66f , 67f
overview of, 55–56
pornography and, 58–59
truly gifted and, 60–62
TV friends and, 56–58
wayﬁnding and, 68–69
Savanna Principle
inclusion, ostracism, and, 32–36
overview of, 23–25
pornography and, 27–30
Prisoner’s Dilemma games and,
30–32
TV friends and, 25–27
scientiﬁc ideas and theories,
criteria by which to evaluate,
21–22
scientiﬁc truth, concept of, 20, 22
second-party enforcement of
norms, 199
selection pressure, 51
sex differences
in desired number of children,
179–181
in homosexual attraction, 135
in number of children,
181–185, 182f , 183f
pornography and, 27–30
religiosity and, 94
in reproductive success, 28, 29
in sexual exclusivity values, 101
in vegetarianism, 193–194,
195f , 196–197, 197f , 198f
sexual behavior and body mass
index, 104–105. See also
sexual exclusivity
sexual exclusivity
female choice and, 106–109
society, institutions, and,
110–111
as value, 101–102
sexual orientation, measures of,
128–130, 136–138, 139. See
also homosexuality
sexual selection and sexual
dimorphism in size, 98
Shaw, George Bernard, 110
Shuster, Bud and Bill, 200
“smart,” use of term, 80–81
smoke detector principle, 90–91,
90f
society. See nations
sodium vapor lights, 24–25
spatiovisual rotation tests, 41
Spearman, Charles, 42
Stigler, George J., 4
Still, Mary C., 110
Stone, Matt, 81
Study of Mathematically
Precocious Youth, 60–62
“stupid,” use of term, 80–81
“tabula rasa” (blank slate)
assumption, 17–18
250

Index
tobacco
human consumption of, 159
intelligence and use of, 168,
169f , 170f
smoking in U.S. compared to
U.K., 169–171
tone-deafness, 147
traits
adaptiveness of, 48, 187
genetically determined, 18,
45–47
positive, intelligence as, 2–3
Turkheimer’s ﬁrst law of behavior
genetics, 45, 114–115
TV shows and friendships, 25–27,
56–58
Type I error of false positive, 89
Type II error of false negative, 89
uniqueness of humans, 16
unnatural, deﬁnition of, 21, 72
U.S. compared to U.K.
smoking in, 169–171
vegetarianism in, 197
values
for children, 178–181, 179f ,
180f
choice of, 114–115
explanations for, 3–5
of nations, 84–85
sexual exclusivity, 101–109
See also vegetarianism
van Beest, Ilja, 33, 35, 36
van den Berghe, Pierre L., 16, 17
Vanhanen, Tatu, 203
vegetarianism
as evolutionarily novel, 192–193
intelligence and, 193–194, 194f ,
195f , 196, 196f
sex differences in, 196–197,
197f , 198f
U.S. compared to U.K., 197
vision and color-recognition
system, 24–25
wayﬁnding, 68–69
Whitmeyer, Joseph M., 74
Why Beautiful People Have More
Daughters (Kanazawa), 5, 8
Williams, Kipling D., 33, 35, 36
Wilson, E. O., 15
Wilson, Glenn, 129
Wray, Alison, 147
Zahavi, Amotz, 82, 83
251

