
The Collected Clinical Works of Alfred Adler Volume 5

 
Journal Articles: 1921-1926
Talent & Occupation Crime & Revolution Philosophy
of Living
Alfred Adler
New Translations by Gerald L. Liebenau Edited by Henry T.
Stein, Ph.D. 
Classical Adlerian Translation Project
© 2004 by Henry T. Stein, Ph.D.
All rights reserved under International and Pan-American Copyright
Conventions. No part of this book may be reproduced or transmitted in any form
or by any means, electronic or mechanical, including photocopy, recording, or
any information storage and retrieval system, without prior permission in writing
from the editor. All inquiries should be sent to Henry T. Stein, Ph.D., Classical
Adlerian Translation Project, 2565 Mayflower Lane, Bellingham, WA 98226.
Tel (360) 647-5670 or email to HTStein@att.net .
Published 2004 by The Classical Adlerian Translation Project.
Printed in the United States of America
ISBN 0-9715645-5-8
Table of Contents
Editor’s Preface 2004............................................................................................
iii 
About 
the 
Translator
............................................................................................. iv
Chapter I:

Chapter II: Chapter III:
Chapter IV: 
Chapter V: 
Chapter VI: 
Chapter VII: Chapter VIII: Chapter IX: 
Chapter X: 
Chapter XI: 
Chapter XII: Chapter XIII: Chapter XIV: Chapter XV: Chapter XVI: Chapter
XVII: Chapter XVIII: Chapter XIX: Chapter XX: Chapter XXI: Chapter XXII:
Chapter XXIII:

Chapter XXIV: Chapter XXV:
Chapter XXVI: Chapter XXVII: Chapter XXVIII: Chapter XXIX: Chapter
XXX Chapter XXXI: Chapter XXXII: Chapter XXXIII: Chapter XXXIV:
Chapter XXXV: Where the Struggle Against Delinquency 
Should Begin [1921] ..............................................................1 
Educational Guidance Center [1922] .....................................4 
Introductions to Heilen und Bilden, Both Editions 
and Postscript [1922] .............................................................7 
Danton, Marat, Robespierre: A Character Study [1923] .....12 
Progress in Individual Psychology – Part I [1923] ..............16 
The Capacity of the Human Psyche [1923] .........................25 
The Dangers of Isolation [1923] ..........................................27 
Individual Psychology and World View – I [1923] .............30 
Punishment in Child Rearing[1924] ...................................32 
Progress in Individual Psychology – Part II [1924] .............35 
Change of Neurosis and Training in the Dream [1924] .......39 
Psychic Causality [1924] .....................................................44 
Neurosis and Crime [1924] ..................................................46 
A Frequent Root of Sadism [1924] ......................................59 
Critical Considerations on the Meaning of Life [1924] .......61 
A Case of Melancholia [1924] .............................................65 
Problem Children and Neurotic Adults [1924] ....................68 
Individual Psychology and Worldview – II [1924] .............70 
Marriage as a Mutual Task [1925] .......................................74 
Unteachable Children or Unteachable Theory [1925] ........80 
Inscriptions on the Human Spirit [1925] .............................82 
Reports From Child Guidance Centers [1925] ....................86 
Remarks on a Lecture by Prof. Max Adler 
at the Society for Individual Psychology [1925] .................89 
Salvaging Mankind by Psychology [1925] ..........................92 
Discussion on Paragraph 144, 
Legalizing Abortion [1925] .................................................96 On Neurosis and
Talent [1925] ............................................99 
Disturbances in Love Relationships [1926] .......................100 
Psychological Attitude of Women Toward Sex [1926] .....112 
Man’s Psychosexual Behavior [1926] ..............................119 

Manifestations of Puberty [1926] ......................................125 
Homosexuality [1926] .......................................................129 
Sadism, Masochism, and Other Perversion [1926] ............137 
Sexual Neurasthenia [1926] ...............................................146 
Problem Children [1926] ...................................................151 
Individual Psychology [1926] ............................................162
i 
Chapter 
XXXVI: 
Marriage 
as 
Responsibility 
[1926]
.....................................170 
Chapter XXXVII: The Function of the Mother [1926] ...................................173 
Chapter XXXVIII: A Case of Fear of Cancer [1926] .......................................175
Chapter XXXIX: Chapter XL: 
Chapter XLI:

Chapter XLII:
Chapter XLIII: A Contribution to the Problem of Distance [1926]
............177 
Neurosis and the Lie [1926] ...............................................180 
Individual-Psychological Profile 
of a Compulsion Neurosis [1926] ......................................182 
Occupational Aptitude and 
Occupational Interest [1926] ..............................................187 
Individual Psychology – Its Significance in 
Treating Neurosis, in Upbringing, and for a 
Philosophy of Life [1926] ..................................................192
Index ..................................................................................199 Appendix A:
“Basic Principles of 
Classical Adlerian Psychology” .........................................221
ii
Editor’s Preface - 2004
Editor’s Preface - 2004
In forty-three articles published from 1921 to 1926, Adler illuminates the
heights and depths of human nature. Reflecting his growing interest in the
prevention of neurosis and crime, he addresses child guidance issues of problem
children, punishment, delinquency, neurotic parents, and faulty education. After
commenting on the challenges of puberty, and male and female sexuality, in
“Marriage as a Mutual Task,” he offers timeless guidelines for developing a
healthy partnership.
His articles on neurosis, crime, depression, sadism, and masochism offer
classic insights into the varieties of psychopathology, but again, his comments
about homosexuality reflect the common bias of his time and culture. In
“Danton, Marat, Robespierre: A Character Study,” Adler takes on the leading
figures in the French Revolution, unveiling the personality dynamics that
sparked a revolutionary spirit.
His vision of the future and the direction of social evolution is crystallized
in “Critical Considerations on the Meaning of Life” and “Individual Psychology
and World View – Parts I & II.” In “Remarks on a Lecture by Prof. Max Adler”
(A Viennese sociologist, not related to Alfred Adler), he speaks to a number of
political issues, including Marxism. In his provocative article “Discussion on
Paragraph 144, Legalizing Abortion,” Adler supports a woman’s right to

terminate a pregnancy. This article about legalizing abortion champions a
position considerably ahead of his time.
He emphasizes the self-training purpose of dreaming in “Change of
Neurosis and Training in the Dream.” Finally, in “On Neurosis and Talent,” he
challenges widespread, common assumptions about talent and its development.
Adler offers encouraging perspectives on occupational aptitude and interest. He
emphasizes the importance of an optimistic world view and philosophy of living,
and cautions us about the dangers of distance and isolation. Once again, Adler
spreads his deep wisdom over an abundant range of topics.
For readers unfamiliar with Adler’s ideas, a brief overview, titled “Basic
Principles of Classical Adlerian Psychology,” is included in the appendix. Other
comprehensive articles, titled “Classical Adlerian Theory and Practice” and “A
Psychology of Democracy” have been published in Volumes 1 & 2 of The
Collected Clinical Works of Alfred Adler. Studying all of the volumes in this
series provides an essential perspective on the development of Adler’s theory.
iii About the Translator

 
About the Translator
Gerald L. Liebenau
Gerald L. Liebenau was born in Berlin, Germany. During World War II he
served with the Office of Strategic Services as an interpreter and translator. He
graduated from Yale University and embarked on a career with the Central
Intelligence Agency. He is the translator of Nicholas Gonner's Luxemburgers in
the New World, and Janusz Piekalkiewicz's World History of Espionage. He
currently resides in Arlington, Virginia.
iv
Chapter I
Where the Struggle Against Delinquency Should Begin1 2
[1921]
This question should come as a surprise to most of those who struggle with
this problem. The answer will be: everywhere! Wherever it appears! With all the
means and with all the support available! With the help of parents, teachers,
caregivers, and government authorities! It should be carried out in the context of
attacking the depressed standard of life that exists among certain segments of the
population in order to raiser moral standards.
The fulfillment of these demands has been in order for some time. That
parents are obligated to provide for the welfare of their children is self-evident.
Schools watch not only over the progress of knowledge, but also guard standards
of diligence and morals. With punishment and the threat of punishment, the state
institutions and the juvenile courts extend the range of their authority, ensure an
improved welfare system, and ameliorate the rough measures applied in penal
institutions. A large number of private and public organizations are dedicated to
serving these tasks.
All the institutions point to their success; only the parents, the schools, and
the public remain dissatisfied. 
If we add to this the numerous failures in upbringing that are a burden not so
much to the public but only to the families, at least until such contrary persons
reach maturity. At that point they become a burden to society as criminals,
gamblers, alcoholics, as runaways, or as a neurotics; if we add the not so
insignificant number of retrogrades, and those who join the ranks of delinquents
as newcomers, it makes sense to ask at what point measures taken against
delinquency should be increased. 
Increasing parent involvement would be gratifying but unproductive. Their lack

of time and the sum of their prejudices would always be a barrier. Furthermore,
there is neither an organization nor even a fraction of qualified personnel to
undertake such a Sisyphean task. 
The legal system, juvenile courts, welfare organizations, and correction
institutions are always brought into play after the trouble has started. Those
caught up in these systems eventually find more or less favorable opportunities
for making their way back into society. 
This then leaves the schools. As they are constituted today, they are almost
powerless to engage in a struggle with delinquency. They are unable to stop the
bad influence of the home and the streets. Compulsory universal school
attendance by necessity leads to contacts with bad elements whose attraction
under certain circumstances, to be explained later, is not insignificant. The
means employed by the schools for enforcing their authority are exhausted with
punishment, poor report cards, the assistance of helpless parents, and expulsion
in cases of extensive and widely known misdeeds. Classroom loyalties and
clever deception often deter the uncovering of delinquency. The contacts
between teachers and their pupils is in most cases only superficial, and even if
the teacher is clever enough to recognize the misdeeds, the causes remain a
mystery to him. Neither his educational skills, his understanding of child
psychology, nor the time available to him are sufficient to rush to the assistance
of the failing child. 
It is easy to see, however, that the school is the only institution qualified to
check delinquency, albeit, not in the form the schools are in today. It can also not
be done by applying extreme measures. Schools embrace all children and keep
them under their care for several hours a day. They accept them from their
homes along with all their faults, which constantly arise again in school, leading
to obvious problems. Schools administer a large number of people who are
closer to problems concerning education than can be found in any other
profession, and are staffed with personnel with easy access to the facilities that
would further advance their professional education. Finally, it is in the most
basic interest of the schools themselves, if they are to meet their responsibilities
for upbringing and educating, not to let delinquency tarnish their successes in
transforming children through education to becoming decent and cooperative
human beings. 
There is one more factor known to every expert in this field that needs to be
addressed. Delinquency begins with failure in school! 
Up to now the significance of this obvious fact is being totally misunderstood. It
is generally believed that delinquency and neglecting school work go together.
Furthermore, a wayward child's avoidance of school is quietly accepted as self-

evident. 
What would be the impression, however, if it turned out that children are
delinquent because they escape their responsibilities?
As it is, on closer examination this is the only reasonable conclusion. 
If a child is not won over by the family to be a social human being in early life,
then that person will become antisocial. If the school is unable to redeem the
child, if school knowingly or unknowingly makes it more difficult for the child
to become cooperative, then it will foster the child's inclination for delinquency.
The school then engages in complicity, if it makes it easier for the child to turn
away from cooperation. It leaves the child with few choices. Among these,
delinquency is the easiest and most tempting. 
It becomes the task of schools to see to it that children will not try to shy away
from the demands that lie at hand. That itself is a task that requires for its
fulfillment a thorough understanding of Individual Psychology. Straightening
out a child so that it is done smoothly and without the exertion of extensive
effort calls for problems to be recognized at the very earliest and to be treated
skillfully. Poor grades and punishment will not work with children who have a
tendency to be delinquent. 
Can a child thus afflicted be recognized early? And, if this is the case, are there
signs and expressions that identify such a child? Both questions can be answered
in the affirmative. I have described it in great detail along with all the
manifestations, and it is not my fault if schools are not acquainted with this
material. I have written on this subject in my works (Praxis und Theorie der
Individualpsychologie, published by Bergmann, Munich, 1920, and Ueber den
nervösen Charakter, third edition, 1922, by the same publisher) and have
described this phenomenon from all aspects and with all the consequences that
can ensue. 
At this point I can only provide a short characterization. There are a many
children whose early childhood years were difficult. Pressure from their
environment, which also takes forms of pampering, an increasing striving for
recognition and problems in their early years faced with impatience and inner
misgivings. They suffered breakdowns, became lazy and indolent whenever they
encountered difficulties, looked for escape, or became antisocial and diffident.
They always are pessimistic, see the world painted in dark colors, have trouble
making friends, are always in a struggle with those around them, a struggle that
often was silent and conducted in secret; they always think of themselves and
not of others, and are filled with a hostility which they also expect to find in
others. Their sensitivity, often not recognized by others, always is stretched to
the limit. They yearn to gratify a vanity that can never be satisfied, a mostly

unsolvable problem that forces them to refrain from a normal lifestyle. When
they encounter problems, such as those usually found in school, they escape
them. 
Among these children are many who find they have much free time on their
hands. Driven by their vanity, they follow the path of delinquency, always
keeping the same distance from their real tasks. They are forced into forbidden
deeds by spare time, and by their egocentricity, greed, and their effort to win the
admiration of like-minded people. They acquire courage and strength from
having experienced cunning and subterfuge, and from having succeeded in past
misdeeds without having been discovered. 
It should now be clear from what has been said above and given our culture, that
the task falls to the schools to repair the damage caused by upbringing and,
especially, to prevent such damage from coming to full fruition. 
Having made these observations, the significance of Individual Psychology for
teachers' training becomes unequivocal: Along with the schools' unavoidable
responsibility, it has to take its proper place in the struggle against delinquency.
1 Originally published in Soz. Praxis (Vienna), pages 116-1119, 1921.
Reprinted in Heilen und Bilden, pages 116-118, 1922. 
2 New translation by Gerald L. Liebenau, 2003.
Chapter II
Educational Guidance Center1 2 [1922]
The spirit of a people and of their time is expressed nowhere more clearly
than in the upbringing of children. The unique cultural demands of a nation
constantly force parents, educators, and schools to take appropriate educational
measures to satisfy those needs. This also applies to a child's immediate and
extended circle which make their own demands and set clear limitations.
People's ideals are derived from their place among the nations and established by
their intellectual advancement. These ideals also govern their conscious and
subconscious methods for parenting, educating, and influencing reform.
The readiness of a child depends upon the depths of his innate perception of
and growing social feeling. It is this that connects the child to his society’s ideals
and what makes the needs of the public become personal. It is also this that
ascribes logic to society making the necessities of society a personal task for the
child.
Along with our culture’s social ideal is, in most ominous ways, the ideal of
personal power. Vanity, arrogance, egotism and ambition poison the child’s
atmosphere and imbue him with a combative attitude toward others for the rest
of his life, preventing him from becoming a cooperative member of his society.

Unwilling and, therefore, incomplete, such a child, filled only with himself and
his own selfishness, faces the tasks that nature set for his young life while
forever yearning for triumphs and seeking ways to satisfy his intoxication with
power, or trying to exploit the weaknesses in others. The decline into vulgarity
and childhood impairments characterizes this path. Often the child is tempted by
poor examples set by others and by the low level of our culture. Life's
accounting is botched; the child rebels against the logic of the community,
becomes ensnared by delinquency, and is fated to suffer the consequences.
The selfish striving for power finds fertile ground in the family, society's
basic institution that contains essential advantages as well as serious
shortcomings. The imperious role of the father tempts imitation. The role of the
woman, exhibiting extreme signs of submissiveness and often denigration,
drives the child to resistance and protest: The boy is tempted by machismo and
bragging, but often is also driven to a fear of life and into escapism; the girl is
led to revolt or falls into a state of portentous, unstable resignation. Created in
the family, delinquency cannot be healed through the family.
The school assumes responsibility for children who are saddled with life
patterns established during their second and third years of life. Where mistakes
in upbringing were made, only a thorough individual, in-depth psychological
examination and individual instruction can ameliorate problems. The school,
based on the principle of mass education, is impotent. Our demands would be
satisfied only where the school system includes classroom assistants well trained
in Individual Psychology and capable of coming to the aid of a troubled child.
Today, however, schools often prove that an ill-prepared or poorly adjusted child
is not ready for school by introducing obstacles which the child then prefers to
avoid through delinquency. The school reforms introduced by Glöckel are a
promising beginning. However, until teachers become Individual Psychological
pedagogues, these reforms require the recruitment of teachers’ aides and their
training in accordance with our principles toward providing individual
instruction for problem children.
1 Originally published in Heilen und Bilden, pages 119-121, 1922. 2 New
translation by Gerald L. Liebenau, 2003.
The training of such teacher assistants, however, has not been started as of
this date. The "Volksheime" are among the few existing institutes where
lectures, courses, modern pedagogy, and Individual Psychology are practiced. A
modest beginning was made in the Vienna "Volksheim" where an "Educational
Counseling Center" was established to discuss needs and respond to questions
from children, parents, and teachers regarding problems related to upbringing.
Such centers care for delinquent and problem children within and outside the

family, helping them become capable of reestablishing "contact," that is,
readjusting to society and its demands.
School reform, itself a product of the needs of the times, is determined to
transform the public schools into social institutions. In the process, it creates and
uncovers new requirements. By assuming increasing responsibilities from the
family, which no longer is capable of handling them, the schools also are faced
with the task of individual training. The family cannot correct mistakes in
upbringing and inadequate parenting unless it is drawn into the educational
process.
Organizing parent counseling centers such as those that exist in Germany,
Switzerland, and America requires an association with a childcare center that has
the same experience and expertise. This necessitates that the counseling centers
provide staffing. They must, therefore, be organized so that interested parties can
participate, obtain advice, and become informed. Practical experience and the
right pedagogical approach can be attained only when there is direct personal
contact with problem children. If funds are limited, as in our case, a gymnasium
facility must suffice for starters. A program should include outings with problem
children along with those responsible for them, games to be played together,
trips to beaches in the summer, or work in small garden plots. Every child
presents a particular problem that must always be kept in mind. Contact between
the children and parents must not be broken. At every meeting the status of each
case must tactfully be discussed and any progress noted.
In conclusion, I would like to present a scheme that, despite its
incompleteness, provides enough starting points to avoid serious mistakes. (1)
Do not involve any authorities. 
(2) Identify the origin of the situation that causes the illness and trace it back to
earliest childhood. 
(3) Pay meticulous attention to the rights of the delinquent. (4) Uncover vanity. 
(5) Develop the individual's social feelings and set exemplary role models by
parents/educators. 
(6) Reject the myth of talent and accept true, realistic, limitations. (7) Each of
these points must be worked with empathy, must be made to come alive, and
must rise above words and self-delusion.
It is urgent for us now to examine the views and attitudes differing from
ours of all those who become involved with the care of problem children and to
take appropriate measures with each individually.
Chapter III
Introductions to Heilen und Bilden, Both Editions, & Postscript1 2
[1922]

Introduction to the First Edition
The present volume reports on the activities of a working group of
physicians and pedagogues that has been developing over the recent past. The
purpose of our publication is not only to attract readers and interested persons,
but above all, to involve active participants in our cause. At the outset, therefore,
we wish to present, as far as this can be done without anticipating the work
before us, the underlying thoughts that guide our effort, and what in this joint
endeavor of physician and educator appears new and characteristic.
The fact that the physician's advice and teachings are indispensable for the
educator, and that on their part physicians are called upon to engage in
educating, is not something that needs to be explored. This is particularly true
for the psychotherapist whose activity, in some cases consciously, in others
unconsciously, is in its very essence always educational. A joint undertaking as
we see it, however, became possible only at that point where the Individual
Psychological method became fully developed in psychotherapy.
If an attempt were made to sort out logically what in actuality is closely
related and runs a parallel course, then, according to that method, the task of the
psychiatrist divides into a practical and a theoretical part. He must first of all try
to understand his patient's inner life at its core by uncovering the hidden goal
toward which all the patient's actions and psychological expressions are directed.
In that way he will begin to see with increasing clarity the outlines of the
personality ideal, the realization of which forms the patient's deepest life-
interests; also becoming visible will be the guidelines that determine the
direction toward which the patient strives as his final goal. Now he must ferret
out what in this fixed life plan has gone awry and become untenable, what has
forced the patient into an insolvable disparity with reality crowding him into by-
paths, the most portentous of which constitutes neurosis and psychosis. To
resolve this theoretical task, he must combine the gift of psychological intuition
with the application of a thorough schooling in the techniques of Individual
Psychology. The practical task for the psychotherapist will have been established
when he can bring the patient to shed his unrealistic life plan and replace it with
another that will enable him to adjust to reality.
1 Introductions to the first and second editions of Heilen und Bilden, were
written by Carl Furtmüller and Erwin Wexberg. Adler wrote the brief
postscripts. Adler’s articles from Heilen und Bilden appear in this collection as
chapters 6, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, & 16 of volume 1; as chapters 1, 2, 6, 7, 11, 14, &

20 of volume 2; and as chapter 1 & 2 of volume 3. 
2 New translation by Gerald L. Liebenau, 2003.
This part of the treatment is a particularly difficult and deeply penetrating
pedagogical task. Yet, it is in the theoretical realm where our colleagues the
physicians and pedagogues are united. The psychotherapist who wishes to
understand the personality of his patient must study the history of that
individual. Looking into his past, he must establish the patient’s psychological
reaction to particular physical idiosyncrasies. He must find out how the patient
related to his parents, siblings, comrades, and teachers and how this attitude in
his early years gradually established a clearly discernible and for him
characteristic opinion of the world. Thus, psychotherapists and pedagogues meet
with a common interest in the psychology of the child.
Added to this tangible aspect there is a development that has possibly even
greater meaning. The creation of an Individual Psychological method in
psychotherapy was possible only because the psychotherapist reached so far
beyond the original framework of his work that he laid the groundwork for a
universal Individual Psychology. If psychology up to that point had embraced
the spiritual manifestations lying at the periphery of the personality, and had it
modestly and hesitatingly attempted from that point to approach the center, it has
now become a basic principle which declares one must first grapple with the
core of the personality in order to even understand and properly analyze the
peripheral expressions. The traditional psychologist must make the effort to
immerse himself in this new viewpoint, which stands the accustomed procedure
on its head. The pedagogue, however, always faced the living personality of his
students and had always tried to judge their behavior not in isolation but in the
context of their whole being. Only to the extent that he has been able to do this
has he been able to individualize. Were he to turn to psychology for advice, he
would learn much of value, but he would learn little concerning his major
problem. He would not be taken into the depth of the individual personality. It
should now become clear what joyful confidence, yes, elation, he must have
experienced the moment he confronted the possibility offered by a scientific
Individual Psychology. Thus, for the pedagogue and psychotherapist there arises
out of practical necessity a new theoretical interest that connects both.
Psychology for the pedagogue no longer appears as a supporting science, which,
from afar, he regards as helpful, but he now feels himself called upon to
cooperate productively in the construction and further development of an
Individual Psychology.
In all this, the practical needs of the pedagogue are not neglected. By
understanding the child better, he also understands and can better evaluate the

often deeper-lying influence of his pedagogical methods. This holds true in
particular when the psychotherapist has the patient’s medical history which,
added to his own findings, will allow him to judge the extent to which the
educator’s efforts will have an effect on the adult. It may be that some will think
in this publication insufficient emphasis is given to concrete pedagogical
problems. The attentive reader, however, is unlikely to overlook the many
pedagogical hints and references throughout this book. However, if anyone
expects to find an educational program, he will be disappointed. We have
avoided such, since it could easily produce formulas and easily become
mechanical. We shall satisfy ourselves with continuing our psychological
research and recording the pedagogical insights that will come to us as ripe fruit
falling from trees. We see that the greatest use that pedagogues can make of
Individual Psychology is to sharpen their human interest in the individual
student, exhort other educators to adopt a critical view of their own work,
increase their psychological instincts, and refine their approach to pedagogy.
A fleeting glance at this book's table of contents shows that it is divided into
two parts. The first presents the works of Alfred Adler covering the years 1904-
1913, offering a complete picture of the development of the Individual
Psychological method that he created. The second part presents members of our
circle in an effort to resolve by applying Individual Psychology the manifold
problems they encounter. We hope that in the not too distant a future we shall be
able to introduce to the public a significant, newly enlarged, circle of
collaborators. It hardly needs to be said that our colleagues are not admitted
among our ranks for their support of our particular positions, but solely for how
they make use of Individual Psychology.
Dr.CarlFurtmüller

Introduction to Second Edition
The World War, which not only crippled international scientific
relationships but also the interest in peaceful research in Europe, was partly
responsible for the failure to attract the kind of reaction to "Heilen und Bilden"
that this work would otherwise have drawn. The fact, however, that the edition
was sold out shortly after the peace agreement is evidence of the acceptance of
the book's ideas, and that a segment of the public is receptive to new ways and
initiatives in medical and pedagogical psychology. Thus, eight years after the
publication of the first edition, we can redeem our promise and appear a second
time before the public with an enlarged circle of collaborators.
Time did not pass by our teachings without a trace. Some things of which
we then were unsure, or could hardly have envisioned, have taken firm shape.
Other aspects of our views, which today seem embryonic in their development,
have been fully rejected. Thus, certain individual works were eliminated; most
of the others, however, were subjected to a thorough reworking and new
contributions have been accepted. It is no accident that psychoanalysis as a name
and concept, which in the first edition still played a major role, appears in the
new version of "Heilen und Bilden" only as a kind of historical reminiscence.
Without the manifold stimulation and pollination that modern psychology owes
to psychoanalysis, and, above all, not misjudging the historical origin of
Individual Psychology from psychoanalysis, we are clear that during the course
of further development the divergence between psychoanalytical and Individual
Psychological theory and practice has grown so much that a clean separation
would be of mutual interest and in the interest of the scientific world. As little as
we wish to identify Individual Psychology with those parts of psychoanalysis
that we regard as erroneous and misdirected--and there is hardly any pedagogical
opinion of Freud that we would wish to accept today--so little do we wish to
burden psychology with the responsibility for what must appear as heretical. It
should at some time in the future be possible to make the scientific public aware
of the division between psychoanalysis and Individual Psychology.
The ideas of Individual Psychology have long pushed beyond the narrow
circle of Alfred Adler's friends and colleagues. Slowly but surely, it has been
gaining the international recognition on which we could count from the start.
Thus, today, we can renew that promise of eight years ago with which we sent
forth the first edition: We shall come back when our ranks have swollen again,
when new annual rings appear on our tree of knowledge.

Vienna, May 1922 Dr.ErwinWexberg
Postscript
What we have presented in this volume to the well disposed and educated
reader is nothing other than the result of a decade of work in Individual
Psychology. The extent to which we covered this field is evidenced by the many
problems encountered. The selection of articles was determined by the positions
we have taken and the demands of the day. The considerable number of our
coworkers is explained by the undeniable need for physicians and educators to
meet on a common ground.
The unity of our basic philosophy, which forms the basis for the claim of
conducting independent research and pursuing a unique philosophy of life, is as
evident in this collection as in the work "Ueber den nervösen Charakter"
(Munich, Bergmann, 3rd edit., 1922), in "Schriften" - writings (Munich, E.
Reinhardt) and in "Praxis und Theorie der Individualpsychologie" (Bergmann,
1920). Minor changes in some of the older articles in this collection were
necessary because of progress made in our science.
Scientific and practical advances in child education are possible only when
both interact. The writings in our field thus far are held together and interlinked
by the empirically derived at basic philosophy that recognizes a goal-providing
direction within the inner life of the child according to which all phenomena
correspond to a planned lifeline. For us, Individual Psychology is that artistic
striving which allows us to view all expressions in the context of a unified
development. In terms of practical child education it means that by illuminating
the unrecognized lifeplan and by revising it, by sharpening the sense of reality,
the sick and asocial manifestations of the self-created system can be eliminated,
and the road toward reconciliation can be taken.
This volume may well represent a modest reflection of this striving and also
appeal to the interest of our supporters.
Vienna 1913 Dr.AlfredAdler
Regarding the second edition, we should merely like to note that a number
of articles on important problems and offering new approaches have been.
included in this rendition while a few others were eliminated.
Vienna 1922 Dr.AlfredAdler
Chapter IV
Danton, Marat, Robespierre: A Character Study1 2
[1923]
Economic developments in France prior to the outbreak of the French
Revolution created chaos, threatening the existing power structure of kingdom,
nobility, and clergy. The glitter and luxury of the court and nobility, with which

the church was in league, greatly afflicted the people. The growth of the cities,
technical developments in manufacture, and the sudden rise of an industrial
proletariat burst the chains of close knit fellowship and habits. Farmers under
bondage suffered from exploitation by the landowners. Vast numbers of beggars
and vagrants wandered over land and towns.
Constant police and military raids were conducted against vagrants and the
hungry, rebelling, farmers. Barbaric punishment and extensive torture were the
practice. However, when the people of Paris rose up against hunger and
subjugation and when citizens, soldiers and workers rioted, the kingdom
collapsed.
The course of the bloody revolution that shook the world is known, even if
some details remain in impenetrable darkness. "A counter-revolution will not
remain stagnant any more than a revolution." The attitude of the people toward
Louis XVI resulted in a call for weapons in almost all other parts of Europe.
From abroad émigrés of the French nobility stoked the flames against their
homeland. France itself was shaken by a civil war. Betrayal lurked or was
suspected everywhere: in the army, the national assembly, and among those in
prisons. It was most apparent in all-night meetings of clubs, particularly those of
the Jacobins, who in their heated debates could not conceive of being defeated
without betrayal.
The armies of France, a people's army fighting against mercenaries, were
victorious in every corner of the land. Carnott's organizational genius provided a
steady stream of reserves, weapons, and supplies. After a whole string of army
leaders were exhausted, it was Napoleon's turn. It was into his hands that an
unresisting country, worn down by hunger and party struggles, finally fell.
Let us look back at the causes of the revolution--a people in chains and in
want, yearning to reach out and expand--and just as we find in individuals, we
see a more or less pronounced line of movement. Voltaire, Rousseau, and others
are caught in it and with stinging irony, or with philosophical incisiveness, tore
apart the finery of a civilization condemned to death, or they provided the battle
cry to a movement they could foresee. When the situation grew more tense, the
"genuine despair" became everyone's affair. Even the stronger leaders lagged
behind, could no longer find a place, and became victims of failed government
and economic organizations. However, their power, their defiance and ambition
had no room for humility and tolerance. Excluded from a state system of
protectionism and empire building, the most competent were spurred by their
anger and temerity. They reached the top of a movement more easily, understood
better the mood of the times, could give expression to their ideas and wisdom,
and were able to find the right ways and means. Since they were denied a place

in a defective social organization, they had the time to forge plans and enlist
followers.
1 Originally published in Arbeiter-Zeitung (Vienna), pages 17-18, Dec. 25, 1923.
2 New translation by Gerald L. Liebenau, 2003. (Edited by Kurt A. Adler. M.D.,
Ph.D.)
"In a revolution everything depends on a first refusal or a first battle. If
reform is to be peaceful, it must not be contested lest people become agitated
and everything leads to a battle and the bold win."
Marat--once renowned in England as a physician, an author of learned
treatises, constantly involved in scientific feuds which Goethe recognized for
their significance--when he came to France, was found in the royal stable of a
nobleman. Suffering from hunger and cold, dressed in rags, he was constantly in
flight from the police who pursued him because of his inflammatory articles in
the "Ami du Peuple" with which he drove the people always further along the
road toward a revolution that, as if it were his own child, he tried to keep
unblemished. For him only the poor and the wretched existed; anyone better
dressed was his and the people's enemy. He sought and gained nothing for
himself. When he died, stabbed by Charlotte Corday, he was as poor as a church
mouse. His guiding thought was the victory of the poor over the wealthy and
powerful. He found common cause with anyone who complained about
suppression, injustice, abuses of the rights of others, as well as with anyone who
testified against those who betrayed the people. His boundless hatred of the
rulers and exploiters knew no limits. When he considered making Robespierre
dictator, he changed his mind when he recognized Robespierre's vanity. It is
impossible to say how much the Revolution's cruelty is his due. His sister and
his girl friend, whom he deeply loved, repeatedly spoke of his humaneness.
He fought as someone who despaired of the revolution, but who was ready
to sacrifice everything to save it. "Marat is truly convinced, but is unaware that a
large segment of his followers is composed of criminals," from a common
soldier's letter. When he was most active, he devoted two hours of a twenty-four
hour day to sleep, one to eat and to perform household chores, and four hours
listening to grievances from a great number of unfortunate and oppressed people.
He also read numerous letters to which he responded, listened to complaints and
tried to verify them, wrote his paper, and turned to the publication of an
extensive work.
A consuming illness depleted his strength. When the dagger was driven into
his body, he was already dying. He was always only a writer, not a speaker.
When he spoke, no one paid attention as they would to Danton and Robespierre.

As a physician, he was well aware of the nature of his suffering and had no
doubt that his lifestyle was exhausting. It is, therefore, justifiable to say that he
knew his life was lost and that he sacrificed himself to an ideal that he
recognized more clearly than others and whose dangers he knew better than
Danton and Robespierre.
At the start of the revolution, Danton was an unemployed, but ambitious
lawyer. He probably was the most powerful speaker of the revolution and had a
fine scent for nascent movements, which he was excellent in fomenting. He
never lost contact with the intelligentsia and the affluent with whom he tried to
make himself useful and among whom he secretly saved a number from the
guillotine. In school already, he demonstrated his unbounded ambition and his
compulsion to become involved in everything. On the day of the coronation, he
skipped school so as not to miss the festivities. He also could not have been held
back from storming the Bastille and attacking the Tuileries. Everyone saw him
as courageous and quick-witted and as one who knew how to take advantage of
the evolving revolution. When he attained the greatest heights, he seemed
satisfied and withdrew to his country estate, but then changed his mind,
returning to political activities. However, he became enmeshed with
Robespierre, whom he had first served to lash at the radical and anti-religionist
Hébertists, but by whom he was later attacked and brought to the guillotine.
His resilience subsided after he had advanced from the depths of a poor
lawyer to the heights of a Minister of Justice. Greedy for happiness, he became
estranged from the poor who had brought him to his elevated position and then
tried to reconcile the revolution with the wealthy classes.
Robespierre kept himself in the background. His rise was much slower than
that of the other two; his tempo was hesitating. Often his immeasurable ambition
threatened him and kept him from overreaching. During the uprisings in the
revolution, he was nowhere to be seen. When he was strongly attacked, he
demanded time to prepare his responses. When he spoke, his opponents
capitulated before the power of his well-prepared addresses.
He always appeared faultlessly dressed, his face made up. The walls of his
home were covered with many portraits. He surrounded himself only with
people devoted to him and who served him with unremitting adoration.
At school he was always a model student and his university studies
produced a prized paper. He lived a clean and highly moral life, but in all his
virtuousness he hid an ambition that would not allow for mistakes or corruption.
Like a model student, he saw the revolution as an academic contest for which he
would be crowned at the end. His political tactics were always the same: he
skillfully maneuvered one opponent to destroy another. When he and his

followers finally faced the last opponent, his quick-wittedness deserted him. He
also died under the guillotine, as Danton had prophesied, while on his own last
walk toward death.
The goal he had set for the revolution turned into fantasy. Virtuousness and
veneration for God's creatures, which he saw as made in His own image, were
meant to save the panic-stricken and discouraged from hunger. At the same time,
he kept the guillotine working, as if his diligence were being tested. The people,
however, reached for other hands to save them and the giant fell from his
pedestal.
Chapter V
Progress in Individual Psychology – Part I1 2
[1923]
In the pursuit of our research over the last several years, we were able to
reinforce our findings so that we can now present them to the public for their
examination. This applies first of all to the basic concept of Individual
Psychology: Understanding a person is not derived from the forces and
phenomena that exist in his inner life as discovered either experimentally or
analytically. The individual either is able to employ these forces and phenomena
in various ways, or disregard them. What we objected to were conclusions in
other research conducted in psychology and anthropology that at best tells us
something of existing forces, but not how they operate and how they are applied;
we learn nothing of their direction. The inner life, however, is not a being, but
goal-driven. By means of this compulsion for goal direction, the inner life
experiences a forward thrust and in this stream of events all psychological
categories and forces are given their form, direction, and shape.
The development of man's inner life occurs with the help of a presumed
teleology, by which a goal is established under pressure of a teleological
apperception. Therefore, we will find in all psychological phenomena the
characteristic of goal-striving that incorporates all forces, experiences,
judgments, desires and fears, deficiencies and abilities. From this we conclude
that a true understanding of a psychological phenomenon, or of a person, can be
gained only when teleologically examined in context.
From this it follows that every person acts and endures according to his
individual teleology, which, to the person who does not understand this, seems
like fate. The origins of a person’s teleology lead back to earliest childhood and
seem almost always to have been under the adverse influence of physical and
psychological problems, caused by kindness and unkindness in earliest
childhood.
When examined this way, the significance of causality for an understanding

of what transpires psychologically is limited to such a degree that we must find it
insufficient for elucidating a psychological puzzle, and certainly for predicting
psychological behavior.
* The goal of a person's inner life thus becomes the conductor, the causa finalis
that pulls all emotions into the stream of psychological existence. This is the root
of the unity of the personality, of individuality. Its force, wherever it might have
originated, becomes unique not because of how it was created, but where it is
going, to where it is directed, its destination. An example will explain this: A
forty-year old senior government official suffered since childhood from
compulsion. Periodically, he has to write down meticulously the small tasks that
he sets for himself. In doing this he discovers a secret feeling of pleasure that he
cannot explain. Soon it is replaced, however, by a strong guilt feeling for
having wasted time with such things. Now he blames himself for failing to get
ahead in life because of these impediments. Shortly thereafter he repeats the
game.
1 Originally published as "Fortschritte der Individualpsychologie" in
Internationale Zeitschrift für Individualpsychologie, Vol. II, No. 1, p.1-7, 1923.
Based on a lecture presented at the VII Congress for Psychology in Oxford,
August 1923. 
2 New translation by Gerald L. Liebenau, 2003. Editing assistance by Kurt
Adler, M.D.
Based on the current state of Individual Psychology, such puzzles can be
solved at a glance. We see this man who instead of trying to be sociable and
working on his problems, is caught up in bewildering difficulties. At this point,
however, he runs away, like a deserter, from the necessary responsibilities set by
society. His feelings of guilt, far from efforts to rectify his past mistake, all
contribute to keeping him further from his work. Furthermore, they become the
means for deserting his responsibilities. His complaint of suffering for not being
able to advance in his profession affords us some clarity since it states to us:
"What I could have achieved had I not suffered from this evil."
We can see him preparing himself for a sideshow that would allow him to
turn away from his primary obligations. All present psychological phenomena,
compulsions, pleasures, guilt, logic, and changes in life defy every attempt to
understand their causes and meaning since they respond only to one effort:
avoiding facing actual problems in life, and creating a distance from solving the
real questions, in order to gain the apparent comfort expressed in the thought of:
"What I could have achieved, if ---."
*

Neurosis and psychosis are manifestations of discouragement. Whoever has
gained this Individual Psychological knowledge will avoid, in cases of
discouraged persons, undertaking extensive excursions into mystical fields of the
psyche. Even occasionally correct conjectures about basic psychological
phenomena will only be a welcome means for distancing oneself from vital
questions. Whatever useful and effective means are, unknowingly, derived from
the benevolent and patient ministrations of the physician can, like suggestion and
hypnotic therapy, give encouragement.
This form of a partial encouragement is good enough only in the rarest
cases. It should never be compared with our method, which creates
independence and self-sufficiency by eliminating the causes of discouragement.
Does this mean that Individual Psychology gives weight to psychological
manifestations? Actually, it does in order to remedy basic germane phenomena
for as long as discouragement lasts. However, it does not give weight to those
manifestations whose only usefulness is to express or evince discouragement.
Speaking of the causes of discouragement: They are always unjustified!
There are no fully sufficient grounds for discouragement! It is only a mistaken
belief that justifies us for using radical therapy in an attack on neurosis. In the
case above, it was the arrogant, dominating father who had oppressed his son
since childhood and had deprived him methodically of any hopes for a
successful future. One might ask whether every child can be forced into
discouragement. Well, I trust that every educator has the ability to do this to
every child, since all mankind tends toward discouragement. Clearly, the
capacity to accomplish this differs in every case; the extent to which means are
applied must be greater where there are physical inferiorities and can be less
where there are favorable circumstances. However, the goal of the child in the
case I cited was to surpass his father. Since he dared not do this openly, he tried
to preserve an illusion of superiority, looked for detours, found a way out, and
also ameliorating circumstances, in his obsessive-compulsive neurosis.
Who is the actual conductor who directs the person, perhaps only where it
suits him, to advance or occasionally exchanges other goals than the person’s
own (survival, hunger, love, gaining pleasure) or occasionally changes them?
Who in all phenomena plays his own game, and dominates all forms of
expression, emotional as well as physical, placing them at his service? Is it only
one entity? Are there many? Is it perhaps conceivable that an individual pursues
several goals, this individual who is indivisible, who we perceive and understand
to be a unity and whose behavior under certain circumstances we can predict,
which is the only criteria for understanding that has any value? We have never

discovered it. What about the double vie, ambivalence? Are there really two
goals that can be discerned here? Or is it just vacillation, doubt?
The striving for significance, this general sense of yearning, always shows
us that all psychological phenomena contain a movement that starts from a
feeling of inferiority and reach upward. The theory of Individual Psychology of
psychological compensation states that the stronger the feeling of inferiority, the
higher the goal for personal power.
However, if the striving for significance with its goal of superiority is the
directing force that guides all of our actions, then we cannot perceive it as an
irrelevant factor. Then it is tied up with our entire life; it then represents a life or
death struggle. In fact, it is capable of disrupting or abrogating our drive for
selfpreservation, our quest for pleasure, our sense of reality, our feelings of
morality. It finds in suicide a way to assert itself, it guides our feelings for
friendship and love, it allows us to suffer hunger and thirst, causes us pain and
sadness, and leads us on an anguished path toward our triumphs. Nothing that a
person enjoys, feels, or does is arbitrary to him. "Fair is foul, and foul is fair"
sing the witches in Macbeth; and Hegel declares "the mind is cunning." When
Socrates once saw a sophist wearing a torn cloak he called out to him: "Young
man from Athens, vanity peeks through the holes of your cloak!" Humble and
vain at one and the same time! Is there a sincere ambivalence to be found here?
Or is it not a stratagem to drive with two horses instead of one, to shine from
modesty? In the dual struggle both roles are supported in order to help attain the
goal of dominance, just as a stock market speculator, depending on the occasion,
will appear at times a bull and at other times a bear, both in order to gain money,
i.e. power. In that same vein, a businessman who recently became rich answered
my question why he still wanted to earn money, since he could buy anything he
desired with, "You know, it's power, the power over others!"
As a psychologist, I could also follow different paths. I could research the
psychological roots to determine the reason why this particular sophist had a
preference for torn cloaks so as to demonstrate his humbleness. In that case,
however, I would have taken a secondary path, one that the sophist would have
wished for me to follow. I would have overlooked his vanity. It is more
important that I discover the source of his vanity.
It probably is irrelevant whether he acts from a sense of a father ideal, from
a so-called "Oedipus complex," from both, or from neither. Even the wellknown
fact that one acts to imitate or reject one's father has not been enhanced by such a
mystifying insight.
At this point our understanding of the psychological structure of doubt
comes into play. In the case of doubt there also are not two different goals but

only one: coming to a standstill! The same idea applies to all so-called
symptoms of neurosis. They lock on to the forward movement like a hidden
brake system, lead it to an ancillary track and impede the fulfillment of oft self-
proclaimed needs. In such cases we also find the conductor to be vanity, a vanity
that fears being injured.
The goal of superiority, which is set particularly high in persons suffering
from neurosis, forms that person's individuality; it modifies his logic, esthetics,
and morality, and infuses him with germane character traits, intelligence, energy,
and emotions. The leading idea of his personality helps him shape his unique
style and the direction he follows in life, which, like an eternal melody,
permeates his entire life. Whoever understands that direction can make sense out
of every single step. If a single phenomenon is torn out of this context, it will
always be misunderstood. The individual sounds convey no meaning if we don't
know the melody. However, whoever understands the lifeline of a person, for
him every manifestation begins to speak to him. From this follows that correctly
understood psychological phenomena can be understood as preparatory steps
toward a goal of superiority.
The origins of the striving for significance are not at all obscure to us. The
needs and helplessness of a child regularly result in a feeling of inferiority that
presses for relief. A poor upbringing, unfavorable conditions, and physical
deficits increase the feeling of inferiority and also the yearning for worth and
power. In his first years, the child finds the pattern for his attitude toward life
that reflects his situation, his environment, his courage to face life, and his
resourcefulness. Either in defiance or through obedience, he will constantly
strive upward.
Depending on the degree of immaturity of the child’s psyche and
understanding, there is much room for error. Since human nature is imperfect,
we shall never lack in making mistakes, not in assessing our own situation or in
choosing a goal. Additionally, with ambitiously striving people, conflicts,
setbacks, and defeats are always present because they had removed themselves
too far from the logic of the community and from the absolute truth of social
interest. Along with that, discouragement, which always is wrong, sets in. It
occurs in various degrees of intensity and with its arranged safeguards further
leading to numerous mistakes. We have found that all neurotics are discouraged
ambitious people, and that discouragement in children and adults probably is
shared by 90% of humankind.
The challenge for the educator is to prevent the pattern of striving for power
from developing, and to further the development of inborn social interest. The
aim of Individual Psychological treatment for people with neuroses, the

discouraged ambitious, is to uncover their mistakes, reduce their striving for
power, and raise their social interest.
*
From our viewpoint, it might be tempting to look for a pattern, for example
the feeling of inferiority and its forms of compensation, and then be assured that
knowing that pattern would be enough to solve all puzzles of the psyche.
However, one should not overllok the existence of innumerable subterfuges and
ploys that are as diverse as life itself. The basic principles of Individual
Psychology cannot provide more than a key, a more dependable guide. This path
must be taken time and again and light must pierce the darkness until inspiration
comes to the physician and to the patient and the connection becomes clear to
them. It is certainly not going to be clear at first glance, where, in the case of
depression, or melancholia, the goal of superiority is effective. We shall try to
prove this in a case of manicdepressive psychosis.
A forty-year old, athletically built man with an elongated nose and an
eggshaped face, complains that he has already suffered three times from
melancholia. Everything makes him sick. He is unable to undertake anything.
His sleep has been disturbed since the beginning of the depression eight months
ago, just as it had been in the two previous phases of depression. He is
constantly sad and finds no pleasure in anything; erotically he is completely
unaffected. Everything seems like rubbish to him. In 1918, he suffered from
mania. It came over him as if he were intoxicated by champagne. He thought
that he had to save his fatherland and had been chosen for that task; he thought
he would have to become an imperial administrator. He attempted negotiations
and had developed expansive plans for colossal buildings until his family
committed him to a mental institution. Several weeks thereafter he fell into a
depression that lasted nine months and was not unlike the one of which he
currently complains.
He had hardly begun to feel better and thought of taking up regular work
when the mania returned, lasting about as long as the first time, only to be
replaced by depression. Almost immediately, followed the third condition of
mania that was replaced by the current depression.
The ways in which his total discouragement were expressed could hardly be
overlooked. This man’s lifestyle made this very obvious and provided
confirmation for what transpired. He was the child of a wealthy family whose
godfather was one of the most prominent persons in the country. His mother, an
ambitious artistic woman, declared shortly after he left his crib that he was an

incomparable genius and prodded his ambitions enormously. He was far
preferred over his siblings. His childhood fantasies consequently became
immeasurable. His favorite game was to play field marshal, drumming together
several boys and building a dirt mound from which he directed battles. Already
as a child and later in middle school, he would be deeply hurt if things did not
come quickly and easily. From that time on, he avoided his school assignments
and wasted his time making objects from clay. We shall see how those youthful
games became the starting point for his choice of work. He later joined the army,
but left after a short while to dedicate himself to becoming a sculptor. When he
failed to gain immediate honors and fame, he changed his work again and
became a landlord. As such he administered his father's estates, speculated, and
one day faced total financial ruin. When he was called crazy for his risky
undertakings, he gave up the race and withdrew.
After the war came the great economic upturn, and all of his risky ventures
that were thought to have collapsed began to bloom. Money flowed into his
house and evaporated all his concerns. Even his prestige seemed to have been
saved. Now he could have begun to engage in useful work. At that point, he was
overcome by an attack of mania that prevented him from doing anything. The
favorable economic times found him in a state of total discouragement.
He remembered from his youth a strong feeling of predestination. Even
thoughts of being godlike dared to encroach on him. His rooms were decorated
everywhere with pictures of Napoleon, which we can accept as valid testimony
for his striving for power. When I once told him as an illustration of the line he
followed in life that he carries a hero in his bosom, he was taken aback and told
me that he has a quotation from Nietzsche over the door of his office that says:
"By all that is holy to you, I beg and implore you: do not cast out the hero from
your bosom!"
Regarding one of life's most important questions, one's work, we can see
clearly this person's progressive discouragement following his unfulfilled, and
unfulfillable, ambitions. Even if we cannot approve of them, we can at least
understand them. How did he do with regard to the next important question, his
social interaction with others? It could have been easily predicted that in this
area, he would also fail, that his arrogance would make human contacts unlikely,
and that in general he was not likeable and would remain isolated. Even his
sisters and close friends could not warm up to him, nor could he to them.
Occasionally, at the beginning of an acquaintanceship, he showed some interest,
but that declined shortly thereafter. He knew people only from their bad side and
kept his distance. That aspect as well as his goal of dominance was also reflected
in his satirical and biting wit.

With respect to the third major question in life, he also ran afoul. He
probably never loved anyone and saw in women only objects. When young, he
contracted syphilis followed by slight symptoms of tabes dorsalis. This
contributed further to his discouragement. He now saw himself disqualified from
all triumph that he had experienced with women, in competitive fencing,
swimming, and running.
Because he had alienated others, he now stood alone, a stranger in this life
that offered him no contacts anywhere. He was incapable of recognizing his
mistakes and correcting them. He was probably also deterred by his pride, the
hero in his bosom. I thus found him to be a person who after a shining, even
fanatic, start always slackened as soon as his ambitions were threatened.
As soon as I recognized the rhythm of his life, how he developed under the
pressure of his ambitious striving, I also knew that all of his psychological
achievements must occur in light of that rhythm. In order to test this, I asked him
to show me some samples of his handwriting.
One can see here, even without any expert knowledge of graphology, the
strong initial letter in each word followed by smaller letters. 
The extreme poles in the direction of his lifeline are equally obvious from his
selection of subjects that he chose to sculpt. He wanted to create a sun worshiper
with outstretched arms reaching for heaven as well as grief, deeply bent down to
earth, mourning lost fortune. However, he failed even to make a start. His
ambition lived on, but powerless and hidden. 
Now that he lost contact with the outside world, everything that his impotent and
diminished ambition could still permit, could be seen in the expression of his
psychosis. It starts with a manic, upbeat, screaming to try to prove the courage to
achieve, but his discouragement is betrayed by his monstrous behavior and by
his contradicting all logic. In his intoxicated lust for power, he he races toward
that goal forcing others to set him right and to constrain him which, because of
his illness, he could not allow himself to do for himself since his bruised ego
could not suffer any exertion dictated by common sense. 
Then follows declining strength caused by his style of life. Despondency in the
depressive phase is clearly apparent. Where is the ambition? Everything is dull.

Nothing can move him, please him, or affect him. He is as cold and alienated
from everything as he was in his younger years. The barrenness of all earthly
things, the uselessness of all people and of every human relationship is the
revenge of his wounded ambition with which he evades all the efforts and help
of others. 
The more he complains about this debasement, the more he is sure of it. Instead
of raising himself, he debases others. The mistaken, far too ambitiously set goal
of his early childhood encountered the reality of unsolvable problems. Only for
games, for fantasies, and for easy and quickly won triumphs does he have
enough courage and stamina. Measured by Individual Psychological standards,
he represented the depressive person. His manic depressive psychosis is the
expression of a deeper discouragement that is in tune with the rhythm of his
lifeline. 
The following further clarifies the puzzle of the cyclical progression of this
illness as well as its treatment .
Summary3
It is not by analysis or experimental investigation of the forces manifested
in the mental life of the individual that we can gain a proper understanding of
him, but rather by investigation of the manner in which he uses these forces.
This leads naturally to an examination of the individual's purpose in life as
indicated by the goals he has in view and which he has adopted to serve as
orientation points in the field of life around him. By this method of investigation
the importance of causality is considerably limited, for all the forces latent in the
individual work in the service of his individual teleology and can be understood
when the goal is discovered.
Neuroses and psychoses are manifestations of individuals who are
discouraged in life--discouraged relative to the real demands of the every day
life around them. A rational therapy should not carry the individual into mystic
fields of the mind, thus affording him at once an escape from these real
demands, but should encourage him into contact with the activities of
cooperative working, loving and playing which the logic of communal life and
the division of labor imply. A rational therapy in the treatment of neurosis is
justified by the fact that the causes of the discouragement are fictional.
The ultimate goal of the nervous individual is that of personal superiority.
He strives towards this goal from early childhood, under pressure of a feeling of
inferiority arising from organ inferiority or oppressive environmental forces.
Often the goal of superiority is cleverly disguised, and the traits of character
manifested in striving towards the goal subtly clothed, as when the individual
displays his vanity in his modesty. Individual psychological treatment discloses

to the individual his secret teleology, traces it back to its sources in early
childhood, and points out where it is in real conflict with the logic of communal
life and the development of social feeling (Gemeinshaftsgefühl). Education
should encourage the child and make him capable of unimpeded contact with his
fellows and the real problems of life, by the development of his social feeling,
rather than discourage him into striving towards the fictitious goal of superiority
over all others.
3 Translator’s note: As presented in English in the original text
Chapter VI
The Capacity of the Human Psyche 1 2
[1923]
Individual Psychology unmasks neurosis and psychosis of their pretense of
being passive. It establishes that both are very active; they accuse, exhibit
contempt, and strive to prove dominance, which is their strongest driving force.
Given the heavy psychological burden created by the development of these
ailments, we can characterize them as a breakdown. We measure the seriousness
of that breakdown by the way the neurotic relates to the community, which is
contrary to the extent to which others support and further it.
Those distancing themselves from the demands of the community are
exclusive, isolated persons, whose contact with life has been loose and fashioned
mostly by personal ambition. Experience regularly has taught that all tasks in life
can be divided into three groups:
1. social world 
2. work, and 
3. the sexual realm
Those who are neurotically disposed are characterized by a wrong attitude
toward these tasks, one that sees these demands more or less as personal matters;
they overlook the connection to the community and misunderstand the universal
good. Consequently, when they are unsuccessful or are threatened by failure,
they easily lose courage. The capacity of the human psyche, therefore, depends
on the strength of the individual’s ties to the community. Its capacity is
measured best when a person is about to make a decision or is confronted by a
test.
If an individual’s psychological capacity is threatened, it will manifest itself
clearly in that person’s ability to deal with the demands of life. Lesser defects
are expressed by the patient as if he wanted to say to the world: "You can't
expect so much from me; I must be measured by different standards!" "What I
accomplish is not all that I am able to accomplish if I were healthy!" The most

extreme degree of neurosis and psychosis communicates the message that: "You
can't demand anything from me!" Everyone has some of this attitude. The
symptoms and the expressions of a person's mental well being usually are found
in a place away from the normal battleground and can always be recognized by
the Individual Psychologist as a feeling of inferiority and the striving for
personal superiority, both confined to a narrow sphere: the family and one's own
person. In the state of delirium, in closing oneself off, and in psychosis in
general, the detachment from the community shows itself clearly; at the same
time the person pretends his superiority over the community by deprecating
others, as well as by rejecting logic. The insane person has destroyed his
connection with the above three basic questions of life because he no longer
trusts himself to find a solution for them, because he is discouraged.
1 Originally published as "Die Tragfähigkeit der menschlichen Seele" in
Internationale Zeitschrift für Individualpsychologie, Vol. II, No. 2, p.42, 1923. 
2 New translation by Gerald L. Liebenau, 2003. Editing assistance by Kurt A.
Adler,
Discouragement occurs more easily the more one strives for superiority.
The person's capacity to endure is systematically worn down by failures that can
be expected. His severing of relationships can be anticipated. Even the point in
time when he will have his breakdown can be predicted. He is always threatened
as soon as he approaches life's milestones. The most significant of these are the
phases of puberty, love, entering the work force, and aging. Within these phases,
the degree of his tolerance will become apparent as soon as the person faces the
need to make decisions. Encouragement can increase the tolerance for failures
and prevent the outbreak of neurosis, ameliorate it, or defer it.
The point of attack for a cure is, therefore, the striving for dominance. The
goal becomes a reconciliation with reality, and engendering encouragement. For
that reason, only Individual Psychology offers the possibility for an etiological
treatment because its fundamental philosophy is to point out the errors that have
shocked the tolerance of the soul.
Chapter VII
The Dangers of Isolation1 2
[1923]
A person's nature and the sense of his life can be ascertained only from his
relationship with others and how he responds to inevitable social problems. The
value and meaning of a thought, a deed, or an ingenious achievement rest always
on what they contribute to the advancement of the community. All great
creations of the individual and of the masses, laws, religions, works of science

and art derive their sole meaning and their entitlement from their permanent or
temporary usefulness to the community.
In his relationship to nature, humankind regards itself as a stepchild. Even
our current civilization with all the help it provides has not yet been developed
sufficiently to provide us with a carefree existence. The process that nature
forces on us is hard and inexorable. The stresses under which it places us and the
impermanence of all worldly goods, as well as our helplessness during the first
years of our existence, create in every psyche a mood of uncertainty and
inferiority from which develops an urge to improve the human condition.
The path to ameliorating childhood insecurity is quite clearly prescribed by
logic; it leads to the human community. Its support along with the feeling of
belonging can banish the insecurity of the child. Therefore, the task of raising
and educating a child and his education is to promote the process of "taking
root" and to awaken a feeling of being at home on this earth.
A large number of children grow up without having taken root. They move
about like strangers among their fellows and exclude themselves from social
responsibilities. The variety of forms this takes is unlimited. Such people totally
failed in their calculations. Like a mathematical problem, life too has a solution
for every individual: to be absolutely truthful to oneself. However, that solution
is difficult to find and impossible to attain completely. Every significant mistake
by the individual is critiqued and punished by nature and by the outside world
and obstructs his integration into the community and its mission. We are tied in
three ways to the community and must account to it in three ways: in society, in
work, and in love.
The task assigned to us presumes an affirmation of the goals of society.
Accordingly, the preparation for life must already be made in childhood. The
child must not be allowed to grow up as a stranger in his environment, must gain
a belief in his capabilities, must get to know the extent to which he can depend
on the world around him, and must understand his development toward the
community as valuable and proper.
1 Originally published as "Die Gefahren der Isolierung" in Zbl.
Vormundschaftsw, 15 (3), p.53, 1923. 
2 New translation by Gerald L. Liebenau, 2003. Editing assistance by Kurt A.
Adler,
This development into a fellow human can easily be thwarted by problems
arising out of our earthly existence. One can always find causes that reside in
earliest childhood. Although understandable, they are not of an objective nature
and may in time be remedied. They arise because of immature and faulty

perceptions by the child and are at one time organic weaknesses, illnesses, and
sufferings that lead to an early and indelible impression of the hostility of life. At
other times a child may feel a justified or unjustified lack of affection that leads
to the same end. Pampering also causes an excessive tie to the child's most
immediate caregivers and causes a crippling feeling of insecurity about anything
new.
All three types of individuals afflicted by these problems see themselves as
if living in a hostile land in which they must forfeit their contact with life. Such a
view of life invariably is tied to an increasing concern for oneself, to an
aggressive attitude, and to a hostile lack of consideration for others. Only when
one understands the entire pattern of the egocentric life with all of its
uncertainties about the future, its lack of confidence in one's own strength, as
soon as it has run out of subterfuges and tricks by degrading the fortunes and
destinies of others, with its throttling the feeling of community, and its vain
striving to enhance personal power by uncivilized means, then can one
understand the isolation of these people and their detour into neurosis, into
fantasies and, in more serious cases, into demoralization, crime, and suicide.
The detour, the bolting from the community, is expressed early in many
ways. However, perhaps none of the early childhood detours are as much a cause
and effect as is isolation, whether apparent outwardly or psychologically. The
proper preparation for life in the community becomes thereby impossible. Even
today, the necessity for such preparation probably is being underestimated. It is a
precondition for associating with others, for choosing a profession, for getting
ready for work, for the development of moral and esthetic feelings, for
integrating into new situations, for the development of logic and speech
functions, and for the unconstrained establishment of friendships and love
relationships. It also is preparation for tolerance with regard to difficulties and
failures at home, in school, and in life.
The right preparation for life, however, is possible only in society, just as
learning to swim is possible only in water. The small, but so important ways of
holding one’s hands, expressions of speech, thought processes, feelings and
emotions, the satisfying of one's needs appropriate for society, as well as the
proper gratification of drives can only be learned in a social setting. It is,
therefore, necessary that the child be exposed as early as possible, with all
appropriate care, to conditions in the broadest circles of society and to avoid that
he isolates himself there.
In practical life this requirement must be applied so that the child already in
the circle of his family is not barred from establishing contact with its members
either by a lack of affection or by tying the child to one of the parents. Also

animosity between the parents, fights, and quarrels prevent contact just as does
forcing authority on the child. Imposing authority, cantankerousness, and the
prevention of the development of independence also lead to insecurity and
discouragement in the child and prevent his readiness to make contacts.
Tendencies in the family toward isolation, discouragement of the mother or
father, and creating concern for the future also easily rob the child of his faith in
himself and weaken his ability to establish relationships. Such discouragement
can affect whole classes of people, nations or states.
The picture of the isolated child is not always easily discernable. The
significance of isolation is almost always misjudged. These shy, diffident, closed
off children who have no friends, or only those who let themselves be dominated
by them, who constantly read books and wallow in daydreams can not be easily
won over for cooperation and fellowship. Their vanity and sensitivity is
frighteningly great and makes them unsuitable as playmates. They display
courage only in fantasies or for show. When confronted by even small
difficulties or failures, they immediately seek escape and easily succumb to
discouragement. Excuses, lies, and pretense are often seen as signs of a poor
adjustment to the demands of the community, as are feelings of alienation,
dissatisfaction, impatience, and lacking in understanding for one's fellow human
beings. Their lives appear strange to us, since they feel themselves to be
strangers on this earth with petty vanities that seem as if they believe themselves
to have been created for loftier spheres.
Chapter VIII
Individual Psychology and World View - I1 2
Report on the First International Congress for Individual Psychology (Munich,
December 1922)
[1923]
The significance of Individual Psychology is not primarily because of the
confidence its practitioners have in their therapeutic successes in cases of
neurosis as well as in all forms of other psychological ailments; more important
to us is that we are in a position to raise the courage of those who are ill and
those around them, to reestablish their capacity to enjoy life, and to transform
them into fellow members of society. We are most elated by the idea and the
expectation that we are able to provide relief to an unknown child or to an
inaccessible adult and to ease their suffering. We see as our mission that our
teachings move out of the arena in which the sick are treated and in which
children are brought up so that our teachings become a prophylaxis, a
philosophy of life.
Let us first emphasize our point of view that has grown out of a reality

which for us has become a partially realized absolute truth, and one that is based
on man's circumstances regarding the demands and onslaughts of nature. It is
clearly evident--the great efforts made for cultural development point that way-
that mankind is urged and will continue to be urged to venture toward greater
security by continual feelings of insecurity and inferiority . The vulnerability of
the human organism in the face of nature at this stage of his evolution created
man's capabilities. Human capabilities originate from a real need that constantly
sustains a sense of inferiority as a significant content of a person's inner life. All
human life forms, all psychological phenomena, are ways and means to banish
this insecurity. The particular variations, the resulting large and small failures,
give rise to the individual personality.
The basic safeguard for preserving mankind lies in forming groups that
support each other in apportioning work. From need and community stem the
impulses to form language, intellect and logic, ethics and aesthetics, which are
the accomplishments of a social interest. These can flourish only under a
developed social interest.
1 Originally published as "Individualpsychologie und Weltanschauung" in
the Internationale Zeitschrift für Individualpsychologie, Vol. II, No. 2, p.30-31,
1923. 
2 New translation by Gerald. L. Liebenau, 2003. Editing assistance by Kurt A.
Adler, M.D., Ph.D.
According to the findings of Individual Psychology, there exist within the
established relationship for man and his environment two congenitally
interrelated factors basic to an inner life, the magnitude and development of
which mutually influence the nature of a personality: feelings of inferiority and
the feeling of community. These are junctions along a path that has as its goal
the elimination of the first as the most significant effort to ward off attacks from
the outside world. Solving this unremitting task is the meaning of life for
mankind and for the individual. The recognition that within this framework of
man and nature, the forces of the human organism are directed teleologically,
and that the answers lie in the feeling of community are the primary pillars on
which Individual Psychology rests. The recognition that the sufferings of
mankind and of the individual are the result of failed attempts at resolutions, in
particular to have recognized that neurosis and psychosis are such failed efforts,
is the achievement of Individual Psychology. Likewise, we have established that
every way other than the community is characterized by arrogance, tyranny,
force, guile, vanity and their consequences, in short, a disturbance in absolutely
logical human relationships and their consequences.

All great achievements of societies tend in the same direction: to attain
security in order to ameliorate the assaults of nature (organizing groups,
establishing laws, religion, attaining outstanding achievements). For the time
being, the last effort to attain amelioration for the process that nature mustered
against us is Individual Psychology. This process is unrelenting, much more
severe than we are ourselves. It threatens the neurotic and psychotic almost with
extinction. Professional and social incompetence, degeneration, and the
disintegration of whole families lie in this path. Unhappiness, alcoholism,
criminality, venereal disease, perversion, impotence, frigidity, rejection of love
and marriage characterize this decline. The flowering of pride smothers the
feeling of community. The key to an understanding of man's age-old fate, arising
from ignorance and error, certainly lies in the fundamental tenets of Individual
Psychology. Its philosophy of life is the surest safeguard for mankind.
Chapter IX
Punishment in Child Rearing1 2
[1924]
The contemporary art of child rearing is still under the influence of old
traditions. Every adult is of the impression of knowing how to raise a child for
once having been reared and having seen others bring up a child. A number of
formulas for upbringing have become sacred and rarely does anyone question
their validity. Correcting these in light of experience is very difficult. Every
successful development is ascribed by those raising children to the method
employed, without giving consideration to the fact that despite having been
brought up wrong, the child still found the right direction. When the many
mistakes made in a child's upbringing erupt, the child's actions are ascribed
solely to a bad inheritance. The true connection will be misconstrued and the
anger over the child having developed adversely impedes any thoughtful
consideration of the true problems. Pride on the part of the those raising children
rejects any admission of having made mistakes. Because much time passes
between cause and effect, any review of the legitimacy in the upbringing gets
lost. The pedagogical remainder consists only of long discredited principles.
Even eager and learned observers who wish to track down the secrets of
upbringing are foiled. Children of a faulty upbringing have no knowledge of the
stones strewn in their paths, and those responsible for raising them, unlikely to
judge themselves, mostly have no idea where the wound is located that caused
the calamity.
A critical study of child rearing does not reach far into the past. Like
glowing torches, some revelations can be gleaned from ancient experts on
human nature, poets, philosophers, as well as from the Bible, and in fables.

Formulas can also be found that never led to cures or, at the very least, have now
become indefensible.
Among the latter is punishment employed in upbringing. The judicial
system, and in particular courts for minors, seek ways to supplant their system of
punishment. Even in serious breaches of the law, the idea of rehabilitating the
criminal is not being rejected. The surprising number of repeat offenders is
powerful evidence that positive results cannot be expected from punishment.
Furthermore, every failed child already experienced extensive punishment at
home and in school without this having had any effect on his behavior.
1 Originally published as "Die Strafe in der Erziehung," from “Erziehung
und Unterricht,” published in the Arbeiter Zeitung, Saturday, 14 June 1924, p.
12, Vienna. 
2 New translation by Gerald L. Liebenau, 2003.
The practice of punishment in child rearing points to a precondition
characteristic of the person who employs it. He follows a simple, clumsy, pattern
which he thinks will lead to spiritual development. He intends to enforce his
authority without any regard for the psychological connection with the child’s
adverse behavior.
These sad observations, which by themselves would suffice to question the
principle of punishment in upbringing--because it shows that the person meeting
out punishment attempts to take an easy way out and strives to gain prestige--
reflect an even worse situation when one thinks of how many people believe
they lack worth, and of an equally large number of people who disregard the
psychological connection.
It is, therefore, small wonder that among the ghosts haunting children
punishment, in particular spanking, plays an ominous role. When children speak
freely of what frightens them, the fear of punishment, beatings, the bogeyman,
hell, etc. play a very important role.
A widely held mistaken belief demands a system of penalties in child
rearing. We hear almost constantly of reports concerning problem children, who
almost always already had been subjected to a regime of punishment, along with
such statements as: "I have tried kindness, but it had no effect." Often one has
the impression that it was not the right type of kindness. Yet, even kindness is
not an adequate means for rearing. While preferable in every case, it still can
only be a starting point that creates a more favorable situation in which the right
means for rearing, which first have to be found, must be employed.
The most serious failure with the principle of punishment is that it touches
only the superficial manifestations of a failed psychological attitude; it deals

only with its forms of expression. The roots of the personality, the nature of the
child, remain unchanged. Yes, neither the child nor the caretaker know where
the actual wrong lies, and in their deteriorating relationship the truth of the
matter becomes even more clouded. Consider, for example, the situation of an
ambitious child who encounters difficulties in school which, over time, he tries
unsuccessfully to overcome and, with injured vanity, then blames the school and
the teacher for his situation. His attitude toward both becomes hostile. This leads
to relationships in which the child's aversion becomes very apparent. He no
longer speaks directly and his forms of expression, depending on the greater
power and authority of the school, become evasive. The child's indifference is
expressed in many failures. He fails to pay attention because he no longer feels
he can keep up, or excel. Consequently, he is punished in school and at home.
He forgets to do his homework, wastes time, is late for school, or fails to come at
all. Every failure is followed by punishment,--punishment for what? His
discouragement? No, that should be eliminated.
Alternatively, the child is driven by fear of punishment to lying. In most
cases of lying, the strong hand of punishment can easily be seen. If one desires
only to eliminate the lie instead of assuaging the feeling of weakness, the result
will be that the child is raised to practice guile and hypocrisy and becomes more
careful when lying, since every liar learns eventually that not all of his lies work.
There are weapons available to the child, other than guile, that can be
employed to deal with punishment. He can humiliate the guardian and soon
range above the punishment system whether it entails reprimands, bad marks in
school, or spanking. Or the child can inure himself through training so that he
feels nothing, even when he seems to be crying and asking for forgiveness. It is
common for a child to become dulled to constant preaching about his sins. In
such cases he fills his mind with other things, or counts to himself so that he is
immune to reprimands and, like us, wonders why after having been scolded
hundreds of times, the scolder thinks he will have greater luck with one more
attack.
Training is possible even for dealing with spanking. Some children find
consolation in their defiance and seem not to feel anything. At times a child
might even find pleasure in being beaten and occasionally seek such punishment
intentionally. One should not overlook the fact that sexual feelings in such
instances lead to feeling superior over the person meting out the punishment who
then becomes upset and feels outwitted, in that his efforts at punishment have
become pleasurable. The punisher who would then come to believe that
chastising is justified as something natural and infallible might share the same
feelings.

Our greatest objection to the principle of punishment lies in ignoring the
connection between cause and failure, making it impossible to get at the root of
the problem with understanding. Failures of any kind in children should first of
all lead to reflection. Certainly, the state and the community should make
available places where considerate parents and teachers can come for
counseling. Particularly teachers applying a method of punishment should try to
understand the context and act accordingly. For example, a model for such an
approach is Selmann (Internationale Zeitschrift für Individualpsychologie, 1924,
Issue 5), the teacher in Munich who has pointed the way.
Seen from a broader perspective, it should be understood that children
subjected to a system of punishment do not grow into independently thinking
and acting people. We shall always find that punishment, in particular spanking,
is among the factors working against the independence of the individual, and is
deterring a person from relying on himself and on his own ideas.
Chapter X
Progress in Individual Psychology - Part II1 2
[1924]
Our description of the manic depressive patient presented us with a totally
uniform picture. The high plateau to which such a person was directed during
early childhood by his pampering mother clouded his vision of reality and made
it seem natural for him to demand and expect as his due only to be in first place!
At home and also in his pre-school years, and later also outside of school, he was
successful thanks to the prominent position of his family and with the help of his
mother who preferred him over the other siblings. However, he was poorly
prepared for school with his high expectations, his poor preparation to meet the
expectations of others, and his lack of social feeling and friendships. Therefore,
he turned sour on school and allowed it to slide into the background. For several
years, enuresis gave evidence of his wish to have others occupy themselves with
him at night, in particular his mother. It also revealed his lack of independence
and his fear of the future.
When he started out on his own, he was badly prepared. He tended to shy
away from problems, was easily discouraged when faced by tasks, but was
imbued with enormous ambition to realize effortlessly his youthful dreams of
domination and to meet his mother's expectations of triumphant greatness
without any exertions as if by a gift from heaven.
The realities of life presented obstacles. Three times he left his job defeated.
Fleeing from the serious aspects of love, he fell into the banality of sexual
activities and caught syphilis. His Götterdämmerung came down on him. A case
of tabes dorsalis, his disqualification for military service, and the threatening

loss of his family's fortunes because of his fantastic projects crippled the last
vestiges of his energies. When, contrary to all expectations, his commercial
undertakings began to flourish during the crazy war and post-war periods, his
will was already crippled.
However, he heard the call to action. Incompetent at serious achievements,
he succeeded only in an ecstatic rush of energy, a magnified heroic start along
his old guideline that, as usual, led toward ruin. His mania was followed by
depression. When that slowly receded, which for us Individual Psychologists
means: when his courage after a defeat began to rise, as is usual, he heard only
comforting words from his psychiatrist that lured him to work and promised
recovery. Again he heard the call for work, and again he lacked preparation
without the benefit of sufficient courage. At that point mania broke out for a
second time.
1 Originally published as "Fortschritte der Individualpsychologie" in the
Internationale Zeitschrift für Individualpsychologie, Vol. II, No. 3, pages 10-12. 
2 New translation by Gerald L. Liebenau, 2003. Editing assistance by Kurt A.
Adler, M.D., Ph.D.
Speaking modestly, but at the same time decisively, we should like to assert
that only an Individual Psychological procedure could have prevented the
second attack. This man was not ill only during the period of his
manicdepressive psychosis. This condition was simply the forced expression of
his old guideline; he was also ill, discouraged, and affected with a deep sense of
inferiority when he appeared to be well. And he was to go to the front lines of
life with such a background?
When his second phase of depression lasted almost as long as the first, he
heard from a psychiatrist who gave particular emphasis to the "syphillic basis"
for his cyclothymic disorder and who undertook to heal him. He also took this
antiluetic treatment. Physician and patient saw the depression dwindling. Then,
almost abruptly, the manic condition appeared again.
I took over the patient after he had suffered from depression for about five
months. On the basis of the analogies of earlier attacks, the end of the attack
could be expected in two months. For me, it was not a matter of stopping the
depression. I saw my task clearly before me. I needed much more time to correct
his errors, his wrong lifestyle, and his self-created guideline. I first had to
encourage the patient before sending him out into life; I did not want to risk a
fourth manic attack. After a three-month treatment, the patient departed. His
depression had vanished. He already took pleasure in a number of things, went
on short hikes, and became quite sociable.

I calmed him down with regard to his feeling of inferiority. He did not
become a convinced follower of Individual Psychology's teachings on equality,
but he had obviously gained more courage, understood, and took to heart the
difference between courage and manic affectations. He has been spared from
further attacks for the past year. I hear from others that he feels well and only a
little bit lazy and out of sorts. For the time being, his courage goes no further
than that.
*
Although we cannot yet generalize from this case, what is new is that the
clinical picture of a physical ailment is not at all everything that has to be
considered by the psychologist and therapists. Rather, we were able to show that
the clinical illness totally matched the guideline of the patient, that it revealed
the unique ways of the patient from his better days, that it is aimed at the earlier
goal of the patient, and that it should be seen as strengthening his security
against failures. In that kind of arrangement, which is caused mainly by the ever
increasing exclusion of normal human relationships until finally even reasonable
(family) relations are more intensely held on to and devalued, the old feeling of
weakness and discouragement becomes stronger in the patient. However, just as
in the expression of fear the individual expresses visible gestures of protective
and defensive movements, so does the goal of superiority become apparent in
the ecstasies of mania, visible to everyone in the devaluation of everything
human, more secretively than apparent in depression.
A second important finding is that the visible illness breaks out in a phase
of greatest discouragement, that this discouragement is understandable even if
not justified--because the patient tends to become discouraged while there is
never a fully satisfactory reason for discouragement--and that each time a
subjective cause can be found for the eruption of the illness.
A third finding, important for the dynamic and for therapy in particular, is
that it is not enough to allow the attack to run its course and to await recidivism.
The task is concretely to show in a way that the patient understands that the
extremely high degree of his discouragement is not justified. With the
knowledge gained from this and other cases we can claim with some certainty:
not the illness but the discouragement recidivates! Extensive consideration must
be given to this point of view in the preparation of the patient for his life.
*

In a certain way, all neurotics are victims of errors of our culture. The latter
did not develop accidentally, but stem from the deficient development of human
society. If we draw the final conclusions from the above observations, sine ira et
studio, as is scientifically appropriate, then we must say: only he is safe from
discouragement and its accompanying phenomena of neurosis and psychosis,
who recognizes the equality of all normal human beings. The only differences lie
in achievement. However achievement results from a combination of preparation
and determination. True strength can never be derived only from talent, but from
the courageous struggle with difficulties. Whoever overcomes wins.
(English summary from German journal)
SUMMARY: A further consideration of the case of Cyclothymia described in the
first number of this magazine shows: 
1. That the illness is merely a more strongly marked guiding line, the result of
greater discouragement. 
2. That the cause of the illness is great discouragement by which the patient is
forced to strive after seeming greatness. 
3. That it is not the illness which recidivates, but only the discouragement.
The final cause of neurosis and psychosis is the superstition about the
fundamental inequality of human beings. This forms the basis of the feeling of
inferiority and the morbid striving after fictitious superiority.
Chapter XI
Change of Neurosis and Training in the Dream1 2
[1924]
The illness of the patient began with a neurotic fear of heart trouble. He had
attended secondary school and, as a mommy's boy, he always felt that school
was too far away from his home. Here already are signs of possible agoraphobia.
It is clear in the case of this pampered boy, who also has a strict, domineering,
and sometimes drunk father, and who always clings to his mother in whom he
finds his whole world, that we can expect him to have problems in all situations
that do not involve a connection to his mother. He did reasonably well in
elementary school, but began to deteriorate in secondary school. He missed
classes frequently. Since his mother suffered from a nervous heart ailment and
with that often succeeded to be freed of her occupation, it is not surprising to us
that soon thereafter, when hallucinating and seeing himself in a frightening
confrontation with his father, he occasionally was able to produce heart
palpitations in order to stay with his mother.
This was the beginning of heart palpitations that made it possible for him to
remain at home. The treatment was the usual: he was given ice bags, bromine,
and other heart medications. The longer stays with his mother always sufficed to

calm him down, and when he felt better after a time, he returned to school. His
academic performance in school worsened and suddenly there were indications
that the palpitations and his constant fear of a heart attack no longer appeared to
be a satisfactory way for him to react to being kept at home. He should have
been told, had he then been properly understood, that a neurotic fear of heart
trouble is a poor choice.
He now hit on a better choice. Suddenly, he no longer could go out of his
house alone. His father or mother had to accompany him everywhere, something
that was not easy for them. He thus was able to reach the same goal: to stay at
home and to have no home work to do since he now needed someone to take him
to school, which could not be done easily.
His education, therefore, became very arduous. Occasionally, he thought
that he was about to die. However, that thought was very disturbing. It became
compelling and appeared whenever he was asked to do something. One day he
had enough of that and said to himself: "Something bad is going to happen to
me, but does it have to be death? Could I not also go crazy?" With this, another
obsessive idea began to take root. This thought alone, however, did not have the
power of his earlier nervous manifestations. He might have been able to irritate
his parents, even create fear in them. However, he could not totally avoid school.
1 Originally published as "Neurosenwandel und Training im Traum" in the
Internationale Zeitschrift für Individualpsychologie, Vol. II, No. 5, p.5-8, 1924. 
2 New translation by Gerald L. Liebenau, 2003. Editing assistance by Kurt A.
Adler, M.D., Ph.D.
Suddenly, he was possessed by an obsessive act which consisted of turning
back halfway whenever he went out somewhere, an obsessive act that we
encounter frequently. Since he had now saved for himself one viable contact
possibility with his mother, it is understandable that this neurosis could not be
strong enough to prevent him from undertaking any activity. However, it could
deter him and could be kept in reserve to be activated whenever things appeared
to become too threatening for him.
Eventually, he started to work in an office where he encountered
supervisors and other workers who outranked him. Although he was treated in a
relatively friendly manner, he felt very strongly the bureaucratic pressure of
rank. The obsessive neurosis again became apparent. He hardly had left his
home when his obsessiveness drove him back with tremendous power. After a
short period of time, he succeeded in terminating his position and his work.
When on the advice of a physician he was freed from any kind of work for the
period of one year, the power of this manifestation, the obsessive act of returning

home, seemed to have subsided. This does not surprise us since the neurosis lost
its value as soon as he was relieved from work. After some time, the obsessive
idea of going crazy returned. Clearly, he was able to do several things to avoid
this: go dancing, visit the theater, etc. However, as soon as mention was made
that he could go to work, the obsessive idea returned with great force and
prevented him from doing anything. It even occurred in the form of: "If you go
to work now, you will go crazy." When the real meaning of his symptom, which
he did not understand, was pointed out to him, he admitted readily that he really
wanted to stay at home.
A few days ago he appeared at my office with his father with the request to
take him for treatment. Several times a good start was made, but he was very
reticent. He became increasingly enterprising and even began to think of going
back to his office "because he obviously was getting better." He had begun to
pay more attention to the meaning of the symptom.
Today he came to me and told me the following dream: "I was standing
opposite the girls' school that is located near the elementary school together with
a female dancer and with one of my teachers at the secondary school. I walked
with them for a while, but at the next corner I said good bye to them and went
home."
Actually, the girls' school is located very close to his home, while the
elementary school is some distance from there. He remembers that when he
attended elementary school he was always very angry that the girls' school was
so close while he had to walk so far to his school. Moving the elementary school
near the girls' school, which he did in his dream, showed us that: "as a child, I
always wanted to have everything close by!" It now also becomes clear why he
does not continue to walk with the two people in his dream but returns home.
When we consider, however, how regularly a patient likens his treatment with us
to that of being in school, then it becomes apparent that the dream was not about
the elementary school, but about the treatment, and that the physician, I myself,
represents the secondary school teacher. The treatment with me is the only
situation that appears to him as a big undertaking and since he lives far from me,
the "long way" relates to me. This assumption on my part was immediately
confirmed. When I had finished my discussion with him, he said to me: "I now
remember that the teacher told me to be back tomorrow at two o'clock, but that is
when I have to be in your office."
It is me then whom he accompanies for a short piece, but then bids farewell
in order to return home. This is a very conspicuous moment that allows us to
look behind the facade. It means that: I shall go with them a short distance, but
then take leave of them. I told him that this could be looked at in two different

ways: That he thought this over and questioned whether the treatment is to his
advantage. He denied that, but told me that he again felt that his earlier obsessive
thoughts were returning. Which means he believes that: "This is going too far; if
it continues like this, I will end up having to go to work."
I now was able to tell him that: "If this idea came to you last night, then you
must have had a very good day yesterday." He agreed with that and said that he
had spent a very social evening and that he had much fun, danced (the female
dancer), to the point where everyone said that nothing could be wrong with him
since he is so happy.
Today, his ties to his mother are no longer as deeply felt as they were in the
past. Today, they are only a good excuse, a fiction that exists only for its
usefulness, and are not a realistic, warmly affectionate, factor. He can do
anything except when he has to work, and then he hears an inner voice calling
for his mother. That also is the meaning of the dream. When I explained this to
him he replied: "It is understandable that a patient does not care to come for
treatment since everything is disclosed." What he does not know is ‘that a patient
may be worthless and unable to accomplish anything, an incompetent person,
and that this might be uncovered.’ He already feels himself to be a weakling
which he fears could become known and he would thus be betrayed.
The most important motive of a dream is that the dreamer in accordance
with his personality makes an effort, a trial, to determine how he should behave
in the face of an impending problem. However, his whole being is implicated by
it since such an attempt can only be made by someone who is just like the
dreamer. This is a matter of successfully overcoming a problem, therefore, to
rise from below to above. The dream appears always when the sleeper finds
himself in a situation in which he feels threatened, oppressed.
We can now assert that the dream itself is not the effort. But by
understanding the dream, it is possible to see that attempt not as a singular event,
but as a constant struggle evident even in the dynamics of the dream about how
that person prepares himself to face his problem. Such preparation is nothing
other than the neurotic arrangement, training. In his dream we can trace the
training of the patient. If we can observe this tendentious, wrongly directed
training then we can deduce that: the patient here has a goal that he constantly
pursues in order to resolve problems in life in his own manner. And, we shall
always find in dreams attempts at resolving problems that are suited to the
personality of the patient.
In the dream cited above, we see how the patient brings himself to depart
secretly. He recalls again the concerns that he already had as a child. We also
remember the way the patient contrasts girls' and boys' schools which we

interpret to mean that he believes that girls have it easier than boys. When I
remembered this, I asked whether he ever contemplated whether boys or girls
are better off in this world. He thought about that a while and then said: "I had
always thought that girls have it better. Now I recall that even my mother always
said that it would have been better had I been born a girl, since I then could stay
at home with her all the time."
It appears that the boy had at least wavered on the point whether he would
have preferred being born a girl. In the entire development of his personality, we
can clearly see how he tries to eliminate the characteristics of a boy. He acts
what derogatorily is called girlish. He is fearful, has no courage, does not want
to undertake anything, work is something unpleasant; he constantly needs
someone to accompany him, etc.
We now understand why he trained to escape work and to find situations in
which everything is handed to him. This dynamic can also be recognized in
dreams. He tried to arrange his whole life so that he could always be with his
mother. For that reason, he has to train that tendency toward his mother
constantly. He is a discouraged youth who was pampered and made useless for
life by his mother. He can find only one place in life where he feels secure and
which corresponds to his preparations and his development: at the side of his
mother.
We find the neurotic ruse of the boy developed along the same lines as we
described under perversions. His feelings of inferiority, nourished by the rages
of the father, by his situation as an only child, by soft-heartedness, and by the
indulging mother tempt him to eliminate all relationships where one might
discover that he is worthless. In this mood he feels threatened by work,
independence, and purposefulness. By progressive elimination there remains
only one way: to the mother. Since childhood this path has been very familiar.
His lack of courage has not allowed him to find another way. In this light, his
entire striving for security becomes apparent in his training: to keep open the
path to his mother and to avoid all other ways. In this labyrinth of wrongs even
his tendency toward his mother is only a function of his discouragement. Only
his feeling of inferiority is real and genuine. Accordingly, his recovery depends
on the elimination of this mistaken belief.
Also with reference to the "unity of the neurosis,” advocated by Individual
Psychology, this case has much to teach. Anxiety neuroses, agoraphobia,
obsessive ideas, and obsessive actions replace each other. They are directed and
demanded solely by the searching patient and desired and trained for by his
mistaken fear that his presumed "incompetence" will be discovered. Whoever
attempts to take a measure of this labyrinth of errors, whether by psychological

or, what would be the same, by "libidinous" means, will only be drawing himself
into this comedy of errors.
Summary (Unedited From German Journal):
In the case of a neurotic youth, we see how symptoms are taken up and
dropped according to their suitability and usefulness. In connection with his
dream-life, we recognize how all symptoms and dreams are the effects of
training. Even his relation to his mother is an arrangement which is trained,
because it is a very suitable means by which to exclude most other life-
relationships. Behind the scenes of his life, the hidden conductor of all these
entanglements, stands the uneliminated feeling of inferiority which has persisted
from childhood. The psychic phenomena cannot however be taken as causal, nor
measured quantitatively, for they are all errors and therefore mutable.
Chapter XII
Psychic Causality1 2
[1924]
(From a report on a session of the International Union for Individual
Psychology, Klesheim, near Salzburg, June 29, 1924)
Dr. Alfred Adler opened the scientific portion of the meeting with a lecture on
the question of psychic causality:
Individual Psychology is said to be fully self-contained and yet, several
aspects require additional clarification of which an important topic is the
question of causality. When considered far removed from all philosophical
aspects, causality in Individual Psychology has been an obstacle that was
bypassed. We regard the human being as if nothing in his life were causally
determined, and that every manifestation in his life could also have been
different. All human thoughts, feelings, and actions rest on an error and we can
influence that error by detecting it. This conception is not new; we find it in
Kant, in pragmatism, in the philosophy of "as if;" however, no attention has been
paid to it and yet, all practical action is rooted in it. We cannot cure an illness
that is causally determined; what we can eliminate is the mistaken belief. We
cannot attribute mistakes to causal events in nature; but in psychology, with
regard to the inner life, we cannot speak of causality or of determination. We do
not think of preserving psychic energy, because we know that the causality that
we encounter was first instigated by that individual; man makes something into a
cause and something into an effect and then connects both.
Adler at this point presents a very illustrative example and then continues:
Much appears to be causally determined, despite the fact that causality first
had to be introduced; that goes so far that even organ inferiorities impact on the
individual only to the extent that he chooses. People can elevate organ

inferiorities to rank and honor and make them into a cause. Many people cannot
resist this tendency. A child with a serious birth defect will face life with a
fearful and antagonistic attitude. However, this is not causally determined
because we know that it can be overcome when several things are made easier
for the child. We are dealing here with a limitation on human thinking; we are
not anymore masters of the connections. We have a goal in mind that is
direction-giving, but for some psychic reasons, the consequences do not become
clear. When this becomes important in practical attempts to uncover significant
errors, interposing lesser errors, and diminishing these to where they no longer
are damaging, it all comes into focus when examined in light of our basic
principles. An example: A child was pampered and shows all the symptoms
along with all their drawbacks. The child grows older and becomes conscious of
the harm toward which he steers, that he expects someone else to come and do
everything for him. When at that point the child were to ask whose fault this is,
the entire world would respond with: the mother. We often run the danger of
agreeing and also attributing blame to the mother. However, this thesis breaks
down when we ask what happens when the child on his own, or with the
assistance of others, no longer makes these mistakes. The mother is to blame
only as long as the child makes mistakes; when the child no longer makes
mistakes can that be attributed to the mother? Here, one cannot speak of
causality.
1 Originally published as "Psychische Kausalität" in the Internationale
Zeitschrift für Individualpsychologie, Vol. II, No. 6, p.38, 1924. 
2 New translation by Gerald L. Liebenau, 2003. Editing assistance by Kurt A.
Adler,
Of course, it is important in education when parents can be confronted
without casting blame. The child of an alcoholic can also become an alcoholic;
but if he does not succumb to alcohol then the father is not guilty.
The following participated in a subsequent discussion: Prof. Oppenheim,
Miss Esslen (Munich), Dr. Schmiedt, Director Weisskopf, Princess Salm-Salm,
Dr. Sumpf, Miss Ida Löewy (Vienna).
Chapter XIII
Neurosis and Crime1 2
[1924]
Within the concept and the nature of man lies fellowship. "Love your
neighbor" came first from the heart and then from the lips. Every harmful act
against another goes against the logic of human communal living and awakens
consternation that manifests itself in sinister and mostly misunderstood ways.

Let us consider a child who is brought up without love, butted about brutally by
the world around him, and who is not won over to be cooperative and humane.
He grows up seeking revenge on society, and as soon as he grows up, commits
crime after crime. There is no logic in this behavior, and no causality, but an
always ready, seldom recognized erroneous course. Hardship and the problems
of life escalate hate toward others; understandable failures in friendships and
love rob of all hope and support those who see themselves as outcasts, bringing
them close to the abyss from which they seek escape by cunning and deceit.
Grown up in the small world of hatred and hostility, they bring a criminal
perspective and hatred into the great community of fellow men whose desire is
love and mutual help, which these outcasts could not attain themselves. People
from that kind of background are unable to develop positive qualities on their
own. Even when they try to improve themselves, it is only a fragmented effort:
We are still awaiting the artist, the leader, the genius, the innovator, who can
find a better solution for these problems, and prevent or at least point the way to
win back these renegades for the human community.
At times there is only a stark impression that the child now grown into
adulthood was brought up cruelly. It is not facts as such that have an effect on
us. It is from the way we see them and from our primary attitude toward life that
all psychological consequences follow. The causality that evolves from the
psyche is not couched in a relationship of cause and effect, but we make
something into a cause and then allow the consequences to follow. All
psychological events are initially directed toward the goal of elevating the
personality. Even the oppressiveness of a loveless upbringing is felt as painful
only to the extent that it is in conflict with the person's real feeling about himself.
The steadfast rule for the human psyche: every psychological situation with all
its impressions and perceptions receives its status, value, and meaning within a
frame of reference created under the mandate of the striving for significance.
(The fundamental statement of Individual Psychology).
1 Originally published as "Neurose und Verbrechen" in the Internationale
Zeitschrift für Individualpsychologie, Vol. III, p. 1-11, 1924. 
2 New translation by Gerald L. Liebenau, 2003. Editing assistance by Kurt A.
Adler,
However, since everyone confusedly seeks, and is forced to seek, a way to
strive upward, it is possible, given various frames of reference and the many
paths in this labyrinth, that the same "causes" will result in different
"consequences." Another child, also not shown kindness, has enough courage
and confidence to seek in life the love that was denied him, albeit in most cases

too tempestuously and full of mistrust. A third child in a similar situation tries
with cunning to become master of every situation and betrays in doing so his
weakened selfconfidence. Again, another child fashions a weapon out of his
weakness and lack of power. With that weapon this person abandons
responsibility and selfconfidence, demonstrates incompetence, and finds ways to
justify doing nothing, forcing society, thereby, to assume the responsibility for
his care. He becomes neurotic in the broadest sense.
When we examine the radius of a neurotic's activities, starting with his
childhood and continuing to the end of his days, then we notice in particular a
suppressed aggressiveness. There are neither "good" nor "bad" achievements
that can be listed. A last residue of activity rages conspicuously and
obstreperously in one or both directions. At times it can impart to the neurotic
person who affiliates himself with a sound idea the appearance of greatness,
loftiness, or humility without any sustained fruitful or valuable results. The few
eminent mad geniuses always were obsessed, carried aloft by an unstoppable
idea thrusting forward to where traditional inhibitions meant a handicap. Or
these were people who flaunted their neurosis as a pretense before others. They
carried it as a keepsake, a scar from battles and difficulties in their childhood
which, contrary to others, they had endured successfully by raising their
selfconfidence and their courage.
There are people who fear following a normal path in life and struggle
against it powerlessly, or simply give up and let themselves go, while others
with greater or lesser activity throw themselves into another, usually an
oppositional way of life. Hardly any of those afflicted people establish balance
and harmony in their actions; thus nearly always the child deprived of affection
lacks balance and harmony in his psychological development. Out of this large
pool of people come the weaklings, eccentrics, neurotics, loners, offenders, and
artists of all kinds. In all of these people there gnaws restless discontent, and
only the artist and philosopher manage to attain reconciliation with social life,
the necessary prerequisite for fruitful work and for every worthwhile
transformation of human communal existence.
The course of the psychological development of pampered children is very
similar, even if along different paths. Spurned and denied love, some are driven
into isolation and discontent, and forced to suspend the normal way of living
which deters them from solving their life problems. Pampered children in their
various forms generally missed preparation for an independent life. Brought up
depending on others, as a rule they lean on the mother whose support eventually
decreases as she makes greater demands on her children and has increasingly
greater expectations. Their inadequate preparation for the discipline in school,

for making friends, for society, for work and love promotes constant
disappointments that stand in the way of developing a modicum of courage to
face life, and adversely affects them and wears them down. The destiny of this
type of person depends on his situation while growing up, his role models, the
amelioration or deterioration of his predictable path through life, and the chances
for greater or lesser mistakes depending on society's goodwill or lack of it. That
destiny while understandable also is not comprehended, since "cause" and
"effect" are too far apart for man's comprehension. Similarly, the way people
make something the cause and another thing the effect is too far beyond man's
understanding. This is how people ascribe the blows they receive more to their
own weakness, or inferiority, and even more so to the bad intentions of others or
to circumstances, rather than perceiving and rectifying mistakes they were
enticed into making because of faulty conditions in their childhood.
 
The enormous number of people who have gone astray and whose
background is in these two categories points to the extensive propagation of the
tendency toward neurosis and criminality. These two categories of people are
similar (1) in the feelings of discontentment and being short-changed; (2) in their
difficulty in establishing relationships, the underdeveloped social interest, the
inconsiderateness toward others and society, the inadequate preparation for a
social role; (3) in the egotistical perspective, the egotistical pattern trained for
since childhood and reflected in the style of life; (4) in the unfettered compulsion
to gain superiority over others not by courageous actions, but by deception,
guile, or by overpowering them; (5) in strictly limiting the scope of their radius
of action. All these characteristics, which can readily be seen as interrelated, are
regularly seen in the structure of neurosis as well as in criminality.
How neurosis and criminality differ psychologically seems not very
significant at first glance. The harm caused by neurosis to those who are close to
the neurotic as well as to society in general, the psychological and material
damage, the failure to carry out essential tasks for society, can destroy the joys
and pleasures in life, even the very lives of those nearby. However, such results
never seem as if consciously intended, and always appear in the context of the
patient's situation as if spontaneous and self-generated. Also in cases of
homicide and murder during psychosis, in sex crimes, theft, slander, and fraud,
the inadequate preparation, the senselessness and purposefulness will
immediately become apparent, and the sense and purpose in these acts can be
perceived only from within the neurotic system, from the viewpoint of the
neurotic person's goal and ultimate intent. Absent also in these destructive acts is

a logical and socially understandable benefit, which at least in purely criminal
cases becomes apparent. Thus, a sick person in his youthful madness kills his
guardian because his maniacal system forces him to believe that he is being
persecuted and needs to defend himself. A young man who in some mistaken
belief lost faith in his abilities, but who tries at any cost to keep secret his
feelings of inferiority, seeks relief in cocaine and alcohol. This neurosis and its
consequences cause the parents to lose their fortunes, embitter their lives, and
damage everyone around. All harm resulting from a sick person's mistaken
philosophy of life and from his faulty style of life is predictable with nearly
mathematical certainty. The courage to follow the norm was lost; the invalid
flees from the life tasks, is concerned only with appearances, and tries to hide his
weakness and imagined worthlessness. Whenever he contemplates his condition
or speaks of it, as long as his cowardliness persists, he is a captive of his illness:
he acts like a person who sees himself as nothing but rubbish. Only when this
deep-seated error is resolved and removed will the courage to deal with the
problems of life reappear. In an Individual Psychological examination of the
neurotic person one will find that the training of the discouraged person was to
protect and hide a belief in his assumed inferiority and his neurotic symptoms.
Hurting those close by comes almost automatically, without making the sick
responsible, most of the time without his being aware of it, and contrary to his
feelings. The entire area of sexual perversions is a sanctuary for those who lost
courage. Whatever then happens when the sexual drive becomes active always
ends up harming others. The harm done is never considered. It is the same with
criminal negligence where "no one thought about it." The same relative
psychological forces come into play in all other neuroses and psychoses. The
ultimate intention of the ill person always is: to escape the responsibilities of life,
society, work, and sex, and to avoid their solutions. In cases of such automatic,
stereotypical tendencies toward evasion that are logical in light of the individual
and his character, neuroses on their own become symptoms, and the harm done
to one's own person and to those nearby resolves into something unavoidable,
mostly seen as unwillingly assumed costs imposed once that erroneous path is
chosen.
For example, what has always been apparent to those who examine patients
is the naiveté and the little forethought given to the wrongs that occur under so
called moral insanity by kleptomaniacs, sexual murderers, and pure sadists. As
sadly as such excesses often end, one senses them as mimicry, as if someone
who is ill prepared plays at being a criminal. The crime is poorly designed, it
lacks conviction for criminality; it even lacks a prior history, and not enough
effort is devoted to finding more favorable conditions. Frequently a strong

emotional mixture can be found, unexplainable as to where the crime takes
place. However, this is understandable with reference to neurosis, which aims at
an evasion of life's tasks, and the creation of ameliorating circumstances for
escape from and excuses for oneself and others. The criminal, as it were, is
honestly acting from hate, jealousy, anger, or fear to give himself an advantage
in the face of threatening conditions and, given such motives, make his deeds
appear to himself and to others as less odious. The neurotic, on the other hand,
appears almost unfazed with regard to any benefits or harm; he comes from a
totally different direction than from seeking an advantage. He acts much more
from a feeling of being justified than does the criminal.
With an imperishable feeling of responsibility to himself and society the
criminal, in his feeling of distress, hatred, jealousy and revenge, will look for
some semblance of cover. Such a feeling of responsibility is lacking in the
neurotic when he intends to do harm. This is partly because his attention is
required elsewhere--usually by his fear of life's tasks, and partly also his weaker
than the criminal’s sense of belonging to society. Mainly, however, because the
neurotic can by such means reach his ultimate goal: to avoid a normal life
activity. Hidden behind the confusion and disadvantages that come from his
actions, there lies a hope: to be relieved of life's tasks. Even social condemnation
and criminal punishment is taken in stride since that would only remove him
further from the normal life that he fears because of the constant humiliation he
anticipates.
On one point the transgressions of criminals and neurotics are alike: They
have a greater advantage over their victims. However, even on this point we
must observe differences in that the victims of neurotics are at a greater
disadvantage. We find among them relatives who are tied down by seriously
assumed obligations, children, and credulous fools; attacks come so suddenly
and surprisingly that there are no defenses that can be mounted in time;
opportunities are taken advantage of when it seems that no one can intercede. All
these sharply drawn manifestations confirm that the neurotic, even in his errant
sphere, is constantly lacking in courage and activity. Only with great effort
would it be possible to find a neurotic among professional burglars.3
The insight and experience of Individual Psychology allow us to bring the
forms of expression into a common line, to record them like a melody, in order
to identify the composer. This can most sensibly be done in the case of neurotics
and criminals. The circumventions and security measures taken with regard to
society's normal requirements are in those cases drawn sharply enough so that
they appear to us as if in relief. The start of this common line originates from a
heightened feeling of inferiority resulting from unnecessary pampering or

severity beginning in earliest childhood, and--as we must also add--from badly
experienced organ deficiencies and weaknesses that at times can also be traced
to a deficient development of glands of internal secretion. However, not even
these deficiencies and frequently temporary problems have an immediate and
causal effect. Under certain circumstances, which entail primarily distancing the
child from power or the sense of power in his environment, they can also give
rise to an increased feeling of inferiority. The child then establishes a new,
artificial, causality: he acts as if his inferiority were an undisputable fact and
enters a state of severe pessimism, loses faith in his own strength, no longer
trusts himself to achieve anything expected or demanded of him, and at the first
sign of failure, or perceived failure, goes into flight. This flight distances the
child from the norm and the expectation to which the child no longer feels
himself equal, and opens the way to neurosis, or isolation, or delinquency, and to
criminality. A determining factor in making the next decision is how much
social interest and courage the child has at the moment of the deviation. Form
and content of a neurosis in the clearest cases result where there is almost total
hopelessness for a breakthrough. A cure will be possible when there is
recognition of the community and its sanctification, which is the logic of human
interrelationships, the acceptance of responsibility for the weak and the sick, and
when the individual himself embraces a less severe standard for his
achievements.
3 Editor’s note: The burglar also lacks courage, but usually has a greater level of
activity.
The courage to live has not been totally exhausted. In that respect, neurosis
differs from psychosis, in particular from dementia praecox and suicide
tendencies. However, the patient has deteriorated so far that in the flight from
the tasks of life, the illness is grasped like a lifesaver, even when there are
constant complaints about the cost of such an unsatisfactory life. The ultimate
intent to stop before life's decisions becomes the most significant and only task.
Next to that no other plans, desires, or insights have any more value than
assurances given a hare not to fear dogs. Just as the hare sees, touches, and tests
everything from the viewpoint of a hare, and as the pattern of its entire life, and
all its movements betray the fact that it is a hare, so does the neurotic acquire his
form, shape, and theme. Regardless of our logic, on the strength of the neurotic’s
logic and philosophy of life not only does he go his own neurotic way, but also
constantly prepares and trains for it. His training and the arrangements he makes
all point to a turning away from life, and all harm he causes supports such a
rejection of life or becomes a necessity.
The clearly discernible remainder of his social interest is manifested in his

overblown fear of conflict with the community. Only when such a conflict
becomes necessary to reinforce his rejection will it be sought. His whole
behavior no longer is in the direction of overcoming the other person, but toward
separating one's "I" from the "you." More clearly recognized than under normal
conditions is the neurotic's style after a decisive failure in life, when being
tested, when having to make decisions, and also when improving and with
burgeoning expectations. The fear of new defeats brings all neurotic
manifestations into sharper focus.
The seriousness and meaning of a neurosis can only be measured by the
degree of discouragement, never by its form or content. All measures that even
unsuspectingly raise courage, all miracle cures, suggestions, autosuggestions,
and all medical interventions, are effective only to the extent that they can
elevate the courage of the patient. Certain success is assured only by a treatment
that gives the patient the feeling of equality by destroying the erroneous
childhood belief of insufficiency.
At times one can find in the thoughts and fantasies of neurotics a flirtation
with criminality or a fear of such a tendency. The context always indicates a
mostly superfluous stimulation of social interest, which in this manner sends out
a warning, often not without strengthening the efforts to untie bonds to the
community, necessitated by the ultimate intent of the patient. Along this line, in
the course of untying one can also find lesser or greater harm. The youth
mentioned above, who is a schizophrenic patient in a mental health facility,
practiced his rejection of people, all of whom he perceived to be his enemies, by
killing his guard.
When we compare the direction taken by the neurotic and the criminal we
can find the same starting point: the feeling of inferiority. Even the unavoidable
as well as avoidable failures, understandable results of a poor preparation for
school and life, are the same for both. However, the crucial discouragement and
rejection of normal problems of life in the second case (i.e., criminal) appear as a
psychological situation in which during the psychological preparation there
remained sufficient courage for a desire to want to conquer others. To be sure,
the conquering is not thought of or meant in the cultural sense nor does it arise
from a feeling of power. It merely is to alleviate the tormenting feelings of
weakness and to assume a guise of heroism. However, basically, it has all the
earmarks of cowardliness. The criminal activity always follows the line of least
resistance. This observation applies not only to the cunning person, but also to
the active criminal. The criminal activity reflects the same lack of courage that
already was apparent when the person rejected a normal life.
In contrast, the relationship between the "I" and "you" is much stronger

among criminals.4 This better social relationship is seen in the formation of
gangs with their allusion to knighthood. It also is apparent in their visits to bars,
their relations with the opposite sex, the cultivation of friendships and
camaraderie, all of which are much stronger than in the neurotic. All these
manifestations are in the context of the will to conquer. Even the guarded
treatment afforded the poor and the obviously weak point in that direction. Of
course, cunning comes into play to an extraordinary degree in their contacts with
everyone else. It is a sign of a psychological training that is encountered in less
courageous and less selfassured people. The mutually contradicting tendencies,
conquering and feeling inferior, resolve in the stream of life into a loose social
connection that is strong enough to assert itself in contacts with others, but not
strong enough to fulfill normal tasks. The fear of having to succumb to the latter
allows these people to look for achievements that always reflect their cowardice,
but that nevertheless lend them the semblance of victors. In murder, burglary,
homicide, breakins, and robbery the defeat of an opponent, at the very least, is a
certain satisfied expectation.
As is well known among criminologists, a widely held belief in superstition
is another sign of the neurotic’s cowardice. It sometimes appears as vain daring
in a moment of danger when it takes on the guise of foolhardiness. Under all
circumstances, it can be seen as an emergency anchor, as a support for a deep-
seated cowardice in these people. Along that line, we see the vanity and
boastfulness that covers their feeling of inferiority.
Occasionally, a professional criminal after age 30 will abandon his life as a
criminal and take a wife and job. In that context, the following observation will
provide an explanation: Every criminal has the ambition, which stems from his
drive to conquer, to distinguish himself in the eyes of his colleagues. For
obvious reasons, this is easier for the younger criminal. The revolt of the
youthful criminal relentlessly denies the older every form of prestige. Thus, with
his security threatened, the older criminal seeks a way out of the field.
4 The language of the criminal also points to a preserved social interest. Such
language by neurotics would be hard to imagine.
The analogy for the psychological actions of criminals and neurotics is in
the heightened feeling of insecurity stemming from early childhood, in the low
selfconfidence to accomplish routine tasks, in an all too hasty cessation of efforts
following disappointments and failures, and in an inadequately developed social
interest.
The important difference we find is in a misunderstood evasion of social
feeling in the neurotic and a correctly understood, although an underestimation

of the significance of social feeling, and deliberate breach of that responsibility
by the criminal. Avoidance as well as breaching requires training and proper
preparation. The criminal seeks his cheap victory; the neurotic dreams of it and
is kept by his suffering from carrying through. Both seek mitigating
circumstances: the neurotic seeks some gains in life by being a neurotic; the
criminal seeks success for his decision to act as well as for the act itself.
In the following we would like to demonstrate this point with the careers of
well-studied criminals. A classic description of the psychological events that
lead to a criminal act can be found in Dostoyevsky's Raskolnikov. The writer,
being a sharp observer and well acquainted with criminals, lets his hero prepare
in bed for the murder. Only then comes the violating of the feeling of
community. Raskolnikov finds an ameliorating need in the fact that his victim is
an old usurer, good for nothing, and that he himself must not be cowardly, a
louse, but a Napoleon. His falling off begins when he finds himself without any
money, and sees his sister in danger of having to sell herself to a man whom she
does not love. He is always ready to aid the weak and the poor.
Our exposition points out that in light of our Individual Psychological
research, we have gained far greater certainty than heretofore in determining
whether we are dealing with a neurotic or a criminal. Of course, we also require
a far more specific investigation of the case history and the style of life of the
person being examined. In the course of that examination, what we have learned
and expressed above will be very significant. We are now in the difficult
situation of having to make a diagnosis based only on the available case
information and not from a personal examination. It is then surprising to find the
mass of concurring facts that are revealed.
1. The infamous burglar Breitwieser began his criminal career when he
thought himself defrauded of the fruits of one of his inventions. He was a social
person, at times showed consideration for the poor, and was inconspicuous in his
sexual affairs. He was always ready to fight and when attacked was killed in a
fight with the police.
The following is from the extremely valuable "Aktenmässigen Darstellung
merkwürdiger Verbrecher" (Documentary Reports of Notable Criminals) by
Anselm v. Feuerbach: 
2. Josef Auermann, a man without a fault, a citizen, and the head of a 
family, owed his servant 400 Gulden. The servant demanded his money 
insistently. Every plea for help was left unanswered. The thought of getting rid 
of his tormenter became more pressing and seemed to him the only way to
relieve 
himself of this burden. Auermann felt himself abandoned by everyone. He found

relief in the idea that: "If that servant is still with me and pesters me for the 
money, for which he has no rights in my house, particularly since the time for 
payment has not yet passed, then I shall kill him. He is worth no more." He 
began to drink more heavily in various bars to deaden his social interest, his
sense 
of responsibility. He thereby was able to violate the feeling of community. He 
killed the servant the next time they had an argument, admitted his guilt 
subsequently, and went to court. When he saw the servant's bride, he tried to 
hide. 
3. Konrad Kleinschrot killed his father with the help of a servant. The 
father had led a chaotic life, treated his family cruelly, and when they once
fought 
back, took them to court. The judge said: "You have a bad, contentious father. 
There is no help for you!" The family looked for help to no avail. The father 
lived with a mistress and urged his sons to leave home. A day-laborer, who was 
obsessed with picking the eyes out of chickens, and who had served in the 
military for 20 years where he was trained to murder and kill, advised the sons to
kill the father. This called for lengthy discussions. At first they tried to use magic
potions. When this failed, Konrad and the day laborer killed the father. 4.
Margarete Zwanziger, the German Brinvillier(s), grew up as a foster 
child, was small and deformed and therefore vain, coquettish, and fawningly 
polite. After several failures, which brought her close to despair, she tried three 
times to gain possession of married men by poisoning their wives. She feigned 
pregnancy and threatened suicide. In her autobiography she wrote: "Whenever I 
did something bad afterwards, I thought that no one took pity on me and I, 
therefore, take no pity on others in their misfortunes." She worked toward 
criminality and sought ameliorating circumstances. 
5. Matthias Lenzbauer, badly brought up, was lame in one foot brought 
on by neglect. With his younger brother he took his father's place, but then drove
his mother to begging with the admonition: "Get out, you slut, why did you 
cripple me!" For a long time he was unable to find work and caught a venereal 
disease; he had no money to become a trade union worker. After having looked 
in vain for work, he killed his brother on his way home to gain the brother’s
small 
inheritance. 
6. Andreas Bichl, the murderer of girls, was renowned as a thief and a 
coward. He lured girls into a cellar with superstitious pretensions, killed them, 
and robbed them of their belongings. During this act, he became sexually 
aroused, which in his mind ameliorated and justified his action. 

7. Simon Stigler was poorly prepared for life. He cold not read, or write. 
His father was in jail for theft. He completed his training at home, where he
threatened to kill his parents with a knife whenever they failed to do his bidding.
Subsequently, he turned against strangers in the same way when they failed to do
his bidding. He got into fights easily and killed several people. In court he lied.
He cried out: " What do I care that my life is over!" He expected nothing from
life and thereby found it easier to extinguish any social interest. 
8. Jacob Talreuter was born out of wedlock and early orphaned. He came 
to a foster home where the foster mother pampered him to no end. He learned 
little and wrote poorly but had a sense for business. He constantly strove to 
impress everyone. His foster mother, who later fell in love with him, supported 
him in his lies, his boastfulness, and swindling whereby he enticed people to
give 
him money. Since his foster parents were vaguely linked to nobility, he bragged 
of a highly aristocratic background. He squandered all the money of his foster 
parents and eventually drove them out of their home. He was praised early as a 
genius, but kept from honest work by poor preparation and pampering. He saw
as 
his life's work satisfying his desire to conquer by any means. This made
everyone 
an adversary whom he tried to overtake by guile. Beginning with his training in 
childhood, nourished by the foster mother who placed him above everyone else 
including her husband, he broke down under increasing expectations. As a 
swindler with the aim to deceive everyone and to make that his purpose in life,
his 
criminal activities became easier for him. His lack of selfesteem, his lack of 
courage and selfconfidence were reflected in his lies, in his boastfulness, in his 
evading of normal life-tasks, and in the value he placed on deceit. 9. Ludwig
Christin v. Ohnhausen, the second-born child in his family, 
believed that he could get ahead by his own powers, which was a common 
characteristic for second born children and persons from a minor nobility. He
saw 
himself stifled in his career by his older brother, who was indolent and tended to 
thievery, and who with his skepticism upset his meager selfconfidence. "Either 
you, brother, must perish, or I, or both of us," he said to himself. Taking a pistol 
he killed his brother while out for a walk, when he once more expressed serious 
doubts and then rejected his younger brother's ideas. The younger had undergone
long training against his older brother who compromised him with his lifestyle. 
The constant rejection of his ideas robbed the younger brother of his

selfconfidence. He found an ameliorating viewpoint in the formulation of: either
you 
or me! He lacked the courage and strength to advance in spite of his brother. 
After the deed, his social interest was awakened: he thought he saw screaming 
ravens. He ran away. During the court hearing, he kept silent about his deed 
because the court declared that he appeared too virtuous to commit such a crime.
The confession initially was laconic and incoherent. He admitted to everything 
before a commission of nobles. 
10. Lorenz Simmler saw his older brother in possession of their father's 
estate, while he was relegated to acting the servant. In losing his selfconfidence, 
he was driven to gambling, drinking, and vagrancy. He joined the military. At 
one point, he knifed a fellow gambler in the back and pierced his lungs. His 
brother would not take care of him. Frequently, he said that he would burn down
his brother's house. "You also must go begging!" When the older brother again
got the better of the younger, the latter got drunk and burned down the house.
Cowardice, training, and ameliorating circumstances that allowed for a break 
down of social interest became apparent. 
11. Kaspar Prison ran away from a foster mother who was a strict 
disciplinarian. He was physically deformed, "had a lame hip and fingers that 
were too short." He was very vain. He owed money to a Jew. He lured him into 
a forest and slew him. For days before this deed, he was excited. He heard voices
that warned him. An owl howled. He called to it: "Why are you howling? You 
can howl all you want, I shall do it anyhow!" The slaying became easier on him
by his persistent thought that it involved only a Jew. 
12. Franz the painter suffered from epilepsy. He was married and had one 
child. He lived with his wife who was as lazy as he. They were in debt and in 
need. They barely were able to sustain themselves by begging and thieving. For 
a long time he thought of a big theft or murder. Finally, he killed an old woman 
from whom he begged unsuccessfully. When he fell under suspicion, he went to 
court to enter a complaint, but then fell to his knees and confessed. The old 
woman's refusal to give him money made his long planned murder plot easier. 
His surprising confession was forced by the reappearing social interest. Breaking
through to the feeling of community is not a simple matter, as 
we have seen. When its borders are reached a severe shock is felt. A physician
told me the following: "I was known for my good nature 
during the war. The soldiers in my field hospital could always count on my
forbearance. One day, a student was to be sent to the front. Because of his, albeit
mild nervous complaints, I suggested lighter duty. He then asked me to consider 
that he must support his parents with his teaching, which he can only do when he

is totally free. I was unable to extend my consideration that far. During the night 
I dreamed that I was a murderer and that I wandered the streets in the dark 
tortured by my conscience. I awoke bathed in sweat. I remembered Raskolnikov.
However, then I guessed that it was my concern for the student that confronted 
me in my dream with the severest consequences." 
How many people during the war struggled with themselves until they 
finally were able to complete training! Of course, they also had available to them
the most ameliorating circumstances even if the support for breaking through the
borders of social interest goes only as far as expressed in the words of the great 
expert on the soul, Balzac ("Le medecin de campagne"): "We great killers want 
our victims to defend themselves; then at least the fight justifies the killing." 13.
Stefan Lukszits, who gruesomely had murdered two persons, wrote 
before he committed his crime: "Worn down by life and rejected by relatives, the
object of loathing and contempt (he suffered from ozena), almost totally brought 
down by horrendous squalor, nothing held me back. I felt that I could not last 
long. I might have been able to endure my neglected state, but the stomach, the 
stomach cannot be commanded. I was foretold that I would die of starvation in a 
ditch, somewhere along a back road. It was then that the terrible thought hit me
that it would all be the same, whether I die of hunger or if my life is ended at the
gallows. I no longer cared about the consequences; I must die one way or
another. I am nothing and no one wants to know of me. Those with whom I am
in contact seek to avoid me (Oh, sweet Gretchen). It all comes down to the same;
it will be my salvation or my downfall. Everything is planned for Thursday, the
victim already has been selected, I must only wait for the right opportunity.
When it arrives what will happen is what not every person can do ("the will to 
conquer"). Terrible, if one only thinks of it one must tremble." 
After his crime he wrote the following: "Just as the shepherd drives his 
sheep, the stomach drives the individual to commit the worst crimes. It is 
possible that I will not live to see the morning, but I don't care about that. The 
worst is being tortured by hunger ("ameliorating excuse"). I am also embittered 
by my incurable illness. It also drives me away from society and for that reason 
alone I have had many unpleasant experiences. I will encounter the last 
unpleasantness when I am judged in court. A sinner must do penance for his
sins. 
However, one must die one day, and it is all the same how one dies. This will 
probably be a better way to die than by starvation. When I die of starvation no 
one will see me; this way the public will be in attendance and perhaps one of the 
spectators will have compassion for me. The police will soon arrest me for 
murder because what I had planned already happened. I lived through an

exciting 
night and never had anyone had greater fear than I had feared last night." At the
hearing, Lukszits explained, of course without being able to get to 
the core: "I have killed and I know that I have lost to the hangman. I don't care 
about that. I had to do it. The young man had beautiful clothes and I knew that I 
would never have any such as those. The idea that I must have them became a 
fixation. That is why I killed." 
It will probably never be clear to him that he converted the beautiful 
clothes into a cause and allowed them to dictate the consequences.
*
During my research in abnormal psychology, I am confronted time and
again by early childhood behavior and by the lack of preparation for life. In this
regard we are more or less in agreement with all psychologists. However, as far
as that most important factor, social interest, is concerned, the role of the mother
appears to us increasingly more significant for its development and cultivation.
This is because the mother transmits to her child an awareness of the absolute
dependence of a human being. If the mother is not there, or fails to play her role,
then it will be difficult in our times to find a competent substitute. In fact we
find, as our observations above have shown, that our subjects obviously were
lacking in this since they grew up without love, or were pampered. Both styles of
life lead children away from the community: the former by failing in
preparation, the latter by relating the social interest to only one person. In both
cases children lack essential ingredients for life: security and selfesteem. They
soon find themselves as in enemy territory; they underestimate their strength and
their capabilities and express discouragement and feelings of inferiority.
Physical inferiorities of all kinds further destroy their faith in their own strength
and create styles of life that we find, in most criminals and neurotics. A criticism
of the various treatments for neurosis and criminality must take this aspect into
account.
Chapter XIV
A Frequent Root of Sadism1 2
[1924]
Most cases of sadism concern persons whose hostile impulses, in their
fantasies as well as in reality, are directed against children. They frequently mete
out to children some of the most severe punishment. When looked at closely, the
connection always becomes apparent that these are people who think of
themselves as being in the place of that child so that it becomes understandable

that authorities are misguided into believing that here is not only a sadistic, but
also a masochistic component. However, when examined more closely, this
contradiction disappears, as does the necessity to assume that masochism was
originally present. It is exactly here that it becomes clear that there could only
exist pseudo-masochism, a parody of masochism, but never a true masochism, or
else, that masochism is only the onset of responsibilities to be imposed on
others. For example, who never heard a master about to flog his servant say:
"When I was your age, you should have seen all that I had to do, and how I was
punished at the slightest instigation." Such expressions are very common and
often mean nothing other than what was explained above, except under milder
circumstances. Generally, it provides us with a broad basis for what we find in
more severe cases. One is led to presume that these are cases where people
cannot erase the horror of their childhood from their minds, and who believe
that: "The others should have it no better than I had." These are people who
suffered under terrible pressures in their childhood, whether real or only deeply
felt. One is reminded of the words of Shakespeare who in a similar case of a
deformed person who remembers his childhood has the character say: "I am
determined to become a villain." This connection is very frequently found in
sadists. We must also presume that it exists among many educators who cannot
spare the rod, and who probably also suffered from an abusive childhood.
Therefore, we can perhaps differentiate between merely two types of educators
and parents, only in accordance with unintelligible errors, and possibly also
misunderstood truths. The first wish that children have a better experience than
they themselves had; the other that the children should have it no better than they
did. Both types can appear in such a veiled and complicated manner that such a
person would be surprised if one were to point out the connection, and would
say something like: "You also are among those who wish that children should
have it no better."
1 Originally published as "Eine häufige Wurzel des Sadismus,” in the
Internationale Zeitschrift für Individualpsychologie, Vol. III , p.49-50, 1924. 
2 New translation by Gerald L. Liebenau, 2003. Editing assistance by Kurt A.
Adler,
One can see how such manifestations may be part of general human
behavior and that they actually present nothing new to us. As grotesque as such
people may appear to us, when closely examined under Individual Psychological
guidelines, these distorted personalities resolve into caricatures of what we also
observe very frequently in daily life.
Chapter XV

Critical Considerations on the Meaning of Life1 2
[1924]
If we understood the purpose of life, the goal-oriented progress of mankind
could not be stopped. We would then have a common goal to which everyone
would dedicate himself fully in order to fulfill this purpose. We would also know
how this could be done, even if not with undisputed certainty. But even the many
mistakes that we would make along this path would all be borne in the striving
to approach an absolute truth, a truth that we know is an "endless task," never
attainable, but always enticing. Our sensitivity to the mistakes in our lives would
be heightened and sharpened, and out of our view of a prevailing interrelation
with the universe, the earth, I and you, would come a simpler and quicker
opportunity for making corrections. The purpose of our life would be the
compass for our striving. The short-lived teleology that today still points to
immediate goals would give way to a distant light that would influence our
course. The false values of our days would then wither quickly and collapse
before the certain judgment of our increased selfconfidence.
As long as we do not possess this goal in life, the variety of our daily
purposes, which are less the result of our intellect than of our feelings, appear to
be vacillating and easily interchangeable. We change our clothes, our minds, our
jobs, our men and women, and our friends, and we look for values that we
ourselves will overthrow at some later time. Has mankind ever understood the
purpose of life? Have we lost it at some time? Would it be possible for us to
speculate what it might have been, even by happenstance?
The animals, and more so plants, live by a "formula." When we say "rabbit"
we know most of the psychological and physical laws of that creature. However,
even the animal has a certain degree of freedom of choice in his movements; I
even knew a courageous rabbit who was the terror of his neighborhood. One
could presume that the "natural selection" in the animal world points toward an
inner conflict between the living creature and the conditions for existence, that
the origin of the species reveals a mistake or an error that could not withstand
the criteria of the times and changes on earth. Perhaps progress in any direction
was determined by that mistake and now is progressing beyond the present
toward a mankind that is better suited than the present one for the relational
system of man and the world.
1 Originally published as "Kritische Erwägungen über den Sinn des
Lebens," in Der Leuchter: Weltanschauung und Lebensgestaltung, Vol. 5,
Darmstadt: O. Reichl., pages 
343-350, 1924. Subsequently re-printed in the Internationale Zeitschrift für

Individualpsychologie, Vol. III, pages 93-96, 1924.
2 New translation by Gerald L. Liebenau, 2003. Editing assistance by Kurt A.
Adler,
Perhaps with this line of thought, we have established more than room for
fantasizing. Perhaps the problems of our day are so enormously great because
we are so wide off the mark with regard to the "absolute truth." Perhaps the
individual and the masses are much more threatened by extermination than we
wish to know, because they fail to know the purpose of life and go astray.
Does this not lead again to that oft-seen perspective, which at times is
called nemesis, or causality, retribution, or God, and which sends warnings,
threats, and punishment, like irrepressible road signs before us? These road signs
are placed in infinite space and time, in the chaos of life, as if they understood
something of the order in the universe, of the purpose of life that is still an
enigma to us.
In this entanglement of our present, laissez faire asserts itself with such
fervor that because of our feeling of weakness and inferiority, it seems as if we
would have to forego forever any conscious control over life. Our present
awareness lacks confidence, thinks itself too weak to understand and to master
the relation between man and nature. It makes a virtue out of need and leaves the
destiny of mankind to God, happenstance, or the struggle of all against all. By
making more victims and causing greater devastations, by exterminating
individuals and whole communities, we think we might attain what is required
for a social existence. The purpose of life asserts itself and if contradicted, hurls
people and facilities into Hades. Age-old suspicions accompany mankind on this
road to martyrdom, but our mind focuses only on single sequential notes and
does not grasp the whole melody.
Our age, unlike past, primitive epochs, is unable to understand the world in
its proper context. For that reason, uniform guidelines have not been possible
since Kant, except for those of Marx. Our aesthetic and ethical rules originated
ages ago and serve almost exclusively the personal striving for power. The
progress of science and technology usually serves the selfish and the greed of
influential groups and disturbs rather than advances the harmony of communal
living. Most of the time, the larger picture is missing; momentary success and
one-sided benefits are the usual results and not the raising of the standard of
living. These results are accompanied by preposterous praises and much
celebrating with little justification and rarely by close observation of temporal
events that are replaced one after another and are lustily hailed by cohorts of
fellow travelers.
However, the unrest that now more than ever before urges society to find a

framework in order to understand the purpose of life, the grasping for every
possible lifesaver, and the enthusiasm that is fired up whenever something new
is said shows more clearly than anything else that any satisfying answer still is
missing. It would be presumptuous to provide a definitive answer; only hints and
modest pointers derived from the rich experience of Individual Psychology are
in order.
For a good reason Individual Psychology avoids studying the individual in
isolation. It views him only in a cosmic and social context. Fiercely besieged by
nature and suffering from considerable physical weakness, man's intellect points
him to that communal living. This process of association, itself the result of
personal weakness and insecurity, indicates a precondition that must be met in
every way just as the will to live must tacitly be accepted: Man is a social being.
Expressed differently: The human being and all his capabilities and forms of
expression are inseparably linked to the existence of others, just as he is linked
to cosmic facts and to the demands of this earth.
As long as these preconditions are accepted as valid, there will be directions
for man's existence. He takes proper care to maintain his physical needs in a
more or less purposeful manner. For example, the passage of day into night,
gravity, and atmospheric conditions compel man to engage in certain essential
activities that are predetermined, rightly or wrongly, by the relationship of man
to nature. Also predetermined by this relationship is the change in man's physical
and psychological development. All progress, which appears as inevitable
because it means adjusting to this relationship and because if thwarted leads to a
burdened life, to problems, troubles, and to extermination, is only a necessary
correction of mistakes. The origin of the species, the natural selection, also takes
effect under the pressure that exists within the relationship of human to earth.
From this linkage that poses an absolutely correct solution as an "endless
task,” a direction of life will be constructed that will lead to the purpose of life.
A second linkage is the existence of two sexes.
The connection between these two linkages can easily be seen. With a long
view over time, the last variation in the evolution of life is the smallest mistake.
Here again, it is valid to say: The fact of two sexes represents a challenge for
mankind that must be met in harmony with the other essential factors of human
life. The two linkages, man to earth and the two sexes to each other, set limits
for the multitude of possible ways of life and give it sense and direction. The
meaning of life cannot be derived from causality, or from individual fantasies.
But can be arrived at, not unlike a mathematical problem, by pursuing a goal and
by searching for a solution that is contained within the problem by virtue of the
mathematical conditions. Man's final becoming thus becomes the driving cause.

A third linkage that is profoundly determining exists in group and
community life. Again we can observe the permeation of the system with the
results of the previously derived tensions. Only this world could have produced
the Homo sapiens, only by means of the two sexes it created could there have
been a promise of equality and congeniality resulting from the constant
promotion of the mingling of bloods and the undeviating revulsion against
incest. Man's social adjustment is threatened as long the equality of the
individual is questioned, as long as there is a denigration of a "lower person,” as
long as an inferiority of women is dogmatically enforced. However, man in his
physical and psychological uniqueness is forever imprisoned by the limits
imposed by society. The fate of mankind lies in solving the problem of a
sufficiently well organized social establishment.
Harnessed by at least three linkages, mankind moves from larger mistakes
to always smaller mistakes, toward the fulfillment of a task that is forever not
understood but always prodding and urging. Hidden in that task lies an absolute
truth. Any significant deviation is threatened with extermination. The search of
the individual is imbued with the unfathomable will of the masses; it is a
minuscule part of the driving force of mankind. It matters not what the
individual thinks he understands of this stream of life that he either advances or
retards. Only his achievement counts.
The life of the individual as well as of the community is always an aiming
at the future. Our present, a cross-section in the eternal development, is fraught
with the burdens and cares of an unfinished, still much too erroneous, attempt at
adjustment. Man as the center of every event in this world cannot be redeemed.
We are the ones who answer and the purpose of our life lies within our linkages
and the answer-demanding consequences.
Chapter XVI
A Case of Melancholia1 2
[1924]
After some time, in a marriage during which several children were born, it
turned out that the wife had fallen in love with another man. Her husband, as a
result, fell into a deep state of depression. For a long time, he struggled with
himself about divorcing his wife, but finally concluded that he could not live
without her. All types of treatment were unsuccessful for a long time. He was
particularly despondent in the mornings, blamed himself for all kinds of faults
and was not capable of working in his job at the level that he felt necessary for a
forthcoming promotion. Besides, now that his condition was known, he believed
that a promotion was out of the question.
If one were to act extremely naive, one might say: This man was struck a

severe blow by fate and consequently broke down. However, suspicions arose in
us that he must be a curious type of person who sometimes first says “yes” and
then “no. He was terribly grieved by his wife's infidelity, wanted to divorce her,
but decided for the sake of the children and their future to reconcile himself with
her.
Through his grief he gained some advantages, for example, his wife was
more concerned with him and treated him more gently than heretofore and
submitted more easily to his wishes. However, when, for example, he said that
he did not wish to go out with her, then she could also say that she would go out
with the man to whom she was bound by pure friendship. He allowed this to
happen but suffered again from depression when he confronted her the next day
and tried to win the children over to his side.
The early history of this man should make us suspicious. He used to relate
that when his mother was expecting him, his father was also once unfaithful.
This upset his mother so much that he was born weak and grew up a frail child.
Now he was a giant. This appeared to him to be the cause of all his misfortune.
His mother was callous and unfeeling toward him. He actually never loved
anyone.3 Once in his youth he had a sexual affair. The woman was a prostitute
from whom he caught a disease. His physician raised doubts about his being able
to have children. When he recovered, he said to himself: There exists no other
possibility for me but to get married! He then began to look for a woman who is
now his wife.
1 Originally published as "Ein Fall von Melancholie," in the Internationale
Zeitschrift für Individualpsychologie, Vol. III, pages 103-105, 1924. 
2 New translation by Gerald L. Liebenau, 2003. 
3 See Adler, "Melancholie" in "Praxis and Theorie der Individualpsychologie"
published by Bermann, Munich, Second Edition.
This all seems very honorable and normal. However, when this incident is
viewed from an Individual Psychological standpoint, then the whole course of
the life of this man comes into question. His wife probably did not see it that
way. However, while she did not consciously arrive at a conclusion that
something was wrong, she began to feel that this was not true love and the right
marriage. As a result, there was a natural consequence to what possibly was
apparent already in childhood.
His wife raised numerous complaints about him. For example, he had never
responded to her affectionately, although she had always sought love. The
patient was enormously pedantic and only made demands; he also was very
jealous so that she really could only do whatever pleased him. These were her

complaints, which he in his state of melancholia, in a way considered justifiable.
"As if" understanding came over him.
What then comes out of this? The wife obviously had always felt depressed
and because of the resulting constraint sought some form of relief, some joy, a
rising toward a victory. And this husband, who since childhood had suffered
from a feeling of being set back, and who also failed in sexual encounters, no
longer aspired to anything and in the course of his marriage lost the relationship
with his wife.
In the second act, the wife, when she found a lover "who understood her,"
got into a situation in which she felt that she became the more powerful. The
husband, who saw the changing situation, now began to feel that he has been
conquered and tried to reverse direction in order to attain the upper hand. How
did he do that? If he allowed his wife to move out to marry another, then he was
seen as the vanquished. He could not do that. He must hold on to her. He must
figure out some way to do that. The wife for her part had become calmer and felt
somewhat superior. Sometimes a sense of power overcomes a person at the
thought that the domineering partner could be made unhappy. Not every woman
can do that. It requires the power to attract and to influence the man, which the
wife here felt lacking. Then thoughts take shape that play an enormous role in all
romantic affairs. Finally, she said to herself: It is not my fault that I had made
him unhappy; it was love! Who could prove to her that it was not love? It cannot
be done because what else would it have been?
The two, therefore, fight with one another for preeminence, for superiority;
the husband with his depression, and the wife by continuing her friendship with
the other man. The husband cannot be sad enough to shackle his wife and to
cause her to be oppressed. It is understandable that this kind of depression can be
extremely oppressing, and must be tied in with threats of suicide in order to be
effective; otherwise it misses its goal. This depression imputes blame, and our
patient always represents to his wife the living embodiment of reproach.4
In such cases I always have the following impression: It depends on
whether one of the two parties is capable of some generosity of spirit. The
husband, despite all his difficulties should be able to say: I did not approach this
matter correctly and should not hold another fully responsible. Actually, I
spoiled everything from the start. However, for a person who since childhood
has had a feeling of being set back, this obviously is not easy. A further
aggravating circumstance in this case is the promotion that is in question. If he
will is not promoted, then he has an excuse. If he is promoted, it will have been
in spite of the enormous burden that he carried.
Would it be possible, however, for us to open the eyes of the wife? If we

should succeed in convincing her, it would require a generosity of spirit on her
part. However, what would then have been her infidelity, if it was not love? This
is not a simple matter for a person in our time.
In such cases, it is recommended to advance modestly and with caution,
which is always useful in treatment. One should never have hopes of being able
to force the patient to give up his nonsense just like that. It also is not easy to be
skeptical without having it become apparent to the patient. There are forms of
neuroses where one must be prepared from the start that in terms of the neurosis,
the physician will be utilized by the patient. He will try to play his games behind
the physician's back to show him that even the physician is unable to help him.
Sometimes he even says it himself: "You are my last hope."
4 The same situation can be found in Dostoyevsky's "Netochka Nesvanova"
where it was described masterfully.
Chapter XVII
Problem Children and Neurotic Adults1 2
[1924]
At the starting point of Individual Psychology, our endeavor was to
discover a scientific basis for the knowledge of human nature and to explore the
psyche of children. Our findings at that time concerned the basic meaning of
organ deficits, the feeling of inferiority, psychological compensation and over
compensation, the fate of social interest and the direction giving effects of
guiding ideals. Today, these are firm concepts that have readily been accepted by
all schools of psychology and psychiatry, sometimes with only slight changes in
terminology.
To be sure, for some of our silent supporters these fundamentals of
psychology remain as hollow sounds. Occasionally they thought they recognized
these elements in their preparatory work, but actually had a long way to go
before they were able to understand the deep-seated connections. They never
overcame the superstition of a causal organ determination, an embellishment
they offered up to others so as to enhance what had become obsolete views and
for some had become a safeguard to support wavering theories.
Only the consistent and stubborn among our associates were afforded the
most valuable knowledge such as the forms of misguided striving toward
selfenhancement, the unique ways by which discouragement is expressed, the
curse of a superstitious belief in innate talents, and the consoling hymn of the
invincible social interest. They recognized the meaning of never-ceasing study to
solve problems imposed by nature on humanity, and found the courage to
reinvigorate the courage of others that had foundered through mistakes.

In them grew, to a totally different extent than in others, an understanding
of the insufficiencies in preparing children for life. They saw in the strongest
light the connection between the open or veiled problems of childhood and
neurotic and other aberrations in later years. The fact of "omnia ad opinionem
pertinent" was revealed to them, as was the fundamental effect of the philosophy
of life,3 and in particular the insufficient and faulty preparation of the individual
in cases of problem children and neurotics.
Thus, the psychological dynamic of problem children and neurotics became
melded into a common lifeline. From an all too-low self-evaluation came a
striving for significance that lost its way and we recognized in these two ways of
life instead of a straight-line progression and a socially valuable solution to the
problems of life, an evading and hesitating attitude seeking egocentrically
ameliorating circumstances in order to hide the secret of a presumed
worthlessness.
1 Originally published as "Schwer erziehbare Kinder und nervöse
Erwachsene" in the Internationale Zeitschrift für Individualpsychologie, Vol. III,
pages145-146, 1924. 
2 New translation by Gerald L. Liebenau, 2003. 
3 See Wexberg: "Zur Psychopathologie der Weltanschauung," Zeitschrift für
Neurologie und Psychiatrie, Vol. XCVI, Issue 1/3.
In the same way, however, research of neurosis, the knowledge of human
nature, and pedagogy became for us fused into one. Individual Psychology welds
more firmly than ever before the link between psychiatry and pedagogy, between
physician and teacher. Our lectures and writings on the knowledge of human
nature, and our educational counseling centers provide both with educational
material and an opportunity never previously afforded for a prophylaxis against
neglect and psychological illnesses.
The booklet submitted herewith, a small segment of the work of Individual
Psychology, provides an insight into the cooperative effort and the far-reaching
ripening fruits of our school of psychology.
Chapter XVIII
Individual Psychology and World View - II1 2
[1924]
Leonhard Seif
One night, two frogs fell into a jug of milk. 
The first of the two was a pessimist. He cried out infuriated: "Damn it! This is
the end! Why should I suffer any longer; it won't help any and I don't want to go
on any more. I give up!" He stretched out his four legs and drowned. 

The other was an optimist. "This is very embarrassing," he said in a state of
initial shock, "but I won't give up; perhaps there is a way!" All night long he
kicked with his legs in the jug of milk. 
When the sun came up the next morning, it was solid under foot--butter!
*
Report on a Meeting of the International Organization for Individual
Psychology 
Nürnberg, October 25 and 26, 1924 Sophie Freudenberg (Munich)
The purpose of this meeting was to acquaint a larger number of people with
the views of Individual Psychology. During the course of the two days several
public lectures were presented that were attended by representatives from the
fields of pedagogy, medicine, and social services. (Summary)
In an introductory talk, Dr. Alfred Adler spoke on "Individual Psychology
and Outlook on Life." Individual Psychology sees the source of man's problems
with regard to communal living in his lack of preparation and education for the
tasks of the community.
We find this lack of preparation (1) in pampered children who lacked in
physical, verbal and mental development and who, consequently, failed to
become self-sufficient; (2) in discouraged and suspicious children who never
became affectionate and who now go through life hostile, unable to establish
relationships, and lacking in courage to persevere; (3) in children who suffer
from organ deficiencies. By clarifying their erroneous perceptions of life and the
opportunities open to them, as well the capabilities they possess, Individual
Psychology seeks to ease their integration into the community. Beyond that, its
goal is to convey a better understanding of childhood in order to avoid the harm
mentioned above.
1 Originally published as "Individualpsychologie und Weltschauung," in the
Internationale Zeitschrift für Individualpsychologie, Vol. III, pages 132-133,
1924. 
2 New translation by Gerald L. Liebenau, 2003. Editing assistance by Kurt A.
Adler, M.D., Ph.D.
A basic belief of Individual Psychology is that it does not matter what a
person brings with him into life, but what he makes of it. From its perspective
pessimism is an absolutely contemptible philosophy of life to which it must be
added that many who consider themselves optimists act as if they were
pessimists and, therefore, are such.
Discouraged people meet the demands of life in a way that considers only
their own feelings of weakness. The solution to the three primary questions of

life which are one's occupation, social relations, and one's love relations, never is
a mere personal matter; therefore, in examining the individual the context of his
life must never be neglected. The goal always remains to develop a social being
who has the courage to accept and deal with the inescapable tasks of life.
The second speaker, Director Weisskopf (Nürnberg-Fürth) spoke on
developing the feeling in the child of being adequate. The feeling of insecurity
still projects itself in the child as a feeling of inferiority and outwardly as a
tendency seeking security. The only possible antidote is the feeling of being
fully worthwhile which is characterized by individual achievements in life and
by integration into the community. The attainment of this goal is hindered by the
special nature of human society. The only way to help a child attain a feeling of
being fully worthwhile is to allow him to acquire early a sense of belonging, to
be a part of the world outside. Circumventing this with a false belief of
superiority and artificially raising ambitions must be avoided. From a sense of
adequacy grows the sense of equality (not homogeneity) and then fellowship, a
free unfolding of self-development, and selfassertion.
In the following discussion, Dr. Seif emphasized that education toward
integration into the community is more important than the development of full
equality, which can easily lead to confusion with ambition. The significant
question that remains is the extent to which the individual through his own
development furthers the development of society. Furthermore, a significant
factor in our culture is the attitude of men that creates a feeling of insecurity. A
number of practical problems in education also were touched.
(Summary) Discussions followed on a new law covering youth and educational
measures.
During the evening, Ms. Ida Löewy (Vienna) first spoke on Individual
Psychology and education, which starts out from a position of equality and
always takes the child seriously. When rudeness and difficulties arise the first
question asked should be: "Where does this lead?" Action then should be taken
with that question in mind. The first requirement is constant self-education. Ms.
Löewy demonstrated with a number of examples the practical application of this
guideline.
Dr. Leonhard Seif (Munich) later presented a talk. He asked for an
explanation for why so many model children despite their respected position
among their families so often fail in life, at least fail to come up to the
expectations held for them, and why do they represent a high percentage of
patients with neuroses? The answer lies in the suppressed, fearful, unhappy and
early-maturing character of the model child. Such a child constantly worries
about his prestige and lives under the burning pressure of ambition. Since such a

child is used to working toward success and not for achievement, he is poorly
prepared for interpersonal relationships. The danger that such model children in
their perfection represent to others who often are driven to revolting and to an
opposite behavior should not be underestimated. In support of his thesis, Dr. Seif
provided cases from his practice.
(Summary) The next morning was devoted to administrative and organizational
affairs.
Dr. Fritz Künkel (Berlin) then spoke on "Social Interest and Courage:
Reflections on the Positive Basic Tenets of Individual Psychology." The
criticism raised against Individual Psychology is prompted by its desire to help
the individual. In the background there always is optimism, the belief in life.
Neurosis also is perceived basically from a positive perspective as an attempt to
deal with life. In therapy, criticism is unthinkable without concurrent
encouragement. Other basic principles of Individual Psychology are the unity of
the personality, the community, and finality. The latter two appear to be of a
more formal nature; basically they are governed by social interest and by
courage. Social interest is not necessarily identical with living in a closed
community, such as a caste or clan. Conversely, the individual action of the
reformer or savior can acquire strength only from social interest. Courage can be
restated as: "holding fast to the goal even while changing the means to attain it;"
restricting it is obstinacy; conversely, to reject striving for the goal while
disregarding the means is equal to repudiating the goal. Social interest and
courage are in direct proportion to each other; without courage there is no social
interest; the struggle also results in relative isolation if the opponent is being
exploited. As long as there is courage life will sustain itself.
An overall unifying concept for "community" and "courage" is an
affirmation of the world in which we live. Such a “yes” does not exclude a “no.”
Individual characteristics can be denied, but the essence, the circumstances, can
still be supported. Christian ethics in that same sense affirm the existence of
Satan, yet also reject his attributes. Individual Psychology teaches the
affirmative: life is all right; we must only reject relative deviations and then life
will assert itself.
The question that arose during the discussion was: How will I bring a
person to affirmation? It is answered with equality, by turning off the main
sources of discouragement: an authoritarian education, empty vanity, and
arrogance (Dr. Seif). In the case of adults, therapy must be employed in the most
difficult cases. Courage always is the primary factor; love materializes it (Dr.
Künkel).
During the afternoon, Dr. Roemer (Stuttgart) was the guest speaker who

employed slides to discuss "Depth Psychology: Its Technique and Application."
He was successful in testing the results of ten symmetrical, fantastic pictures
which allowed him to provide in a short time a personality self-portrayal with
interpretations ranging from the very general to the very specific based on the
variety of expressions of a viewer. These reflect an average, so to say, between
surface reactions and innermost feelings. This method for the time being has
application primarily in industry. Experiments also were made in schools
concerning the reactions of secondary, high school and other students. Using the
results of observations made during a short trip with a patient, Dr. Roemer
sought to display graphically the connection between physical and mental
events.
Dr. Alfred Adler missed in Dr. Roemer's method the question of goals and
the attitude of individuals toward given themes, and is of the opinion that
Individual Psychology can attain more profound conclusions. He then addressed
further the question of talent mentioned in various discussions. He stated very
emphatically that talent plays no role at all. We often find great achievement on
the part of those who had long been viewed as lacking in talent. He pointed to
the martyrdom of the "untalented," those who despair in life, and he objected to
the unfairness of assigning a secondary role to people.
The question of the goal is the basis of Individual Psychology. Awareness
of a goal means awareness of all movements; from the behavior we can disclose
the goal, which is conditioned by the feeling of inferiority and the striving for
compensation. Perception, movement, logic, and feelings all depend on the final
goal. The delusion of questioning talent or the lack of talent retards all mankind.
Why should that not be called a delusion, just as witchcraft was a delusion?
Individual Psychology has brought proof for the possibility of changing
character. Not the deviants and deniers, but the courageous and progressives
pave the way for mankind.
Dr. Alfred Adler presented the last lecture on “Neurosis and Crime”. The lecture
can be found in Issue #1, Volume III of this publication.3
3 This lecture corresponds to Chapter XIII in this volume.
Chapter XIX
Marriage as a Mutual Task1 2 [1925]
Any aspect of a person's social life or of his personality can be judged
properly only when not taken out of context, and when evaluated as a continuum
in the course of eternity. Short-term memory attempts, of course, to operate in
shorter time frames in order to take quick advantage of any opportunities, which
is appropriate when one is constantly measuring against norms. In this study, we

cannot afford to adhere to slogans or age-old hallowed concepts. We are always
subjected to and compelled by the unshakable relationship of the human being to
the world. This relationship burdens us eternally with a task that is imbued with
ironclad rules that insinuate themselves unrelentingly into every human
experience, at times in the form of rewards and sometimes as punishment. A
man is murdered in a moment of irrationality and the world becomes unhinged.
When mankind's yearning for harmony with the universe encountered one
experience that effectively took form, the ensuing exhilaration vibrated for
thousands of years. The rest of us sense only a premonition of the miracle;
feelings and moods overwhelm us until someone like Shakespeare, pondering on
murder, shows us that debasing the meaning of life will, and must, be avenged.
When a person plants a tree, he thinks of the composition of the soil and the
suitability of the climate. He will not allow willfulness or vanity to lead him. By
the way, it does not matter what he might think, feel, or desire in carrying out
this task. The only thing that matters is that there is harmony between his deed
and the essentials for growth. He serves the common good and future
generations even were he to think only of his own gain, or even if he wished to
carry out an antisocial act, or were to act contrary to his future best interest.
Is there anyone who can recall any accomplishment that was regarded as
good, great or noble that was carried out for any reason other than that it
advanced society, or enhanced mankind's future? Does not everyone carry within
him a standard against which to measure such things? Is there a fully rational
person who does not know the difference between good and evil?
This then establishes for us the vantage point from which all human
relationships and affairs are viewed. Value and "correctness" are first of all
conditional and they are subject to their appropriateness for society as a whole. If
something is irrational, or logically contradicts reality, it will become obvious
even to those unaware of such a conflict. The ease with which we cast blame on
people often saves us the trouble to look for these contradictions. Also, the fact
that mistakes and consequences always are far apart makes gaining insight
difficult and hardly allows for an individual, and even for the generation that
follows, to gain fruitful experiences. The thousandfold experiences of the
multitude do not lend themselves to individual examination. Thus, a whole
generation can go through life without establishing firm traditions. And every
individual's pride prevents his own meager insights, often in petulant ways, from
coming to fruition and being applied to life-essential relationships, ignoring the
fact that thousandfold mistakes are repeated and goals chased that destroy his
own and the good fortunes of others.
1 First appeared in : H. Keyserling (publ.): Das Ehe Buch: Eine neue Sinngebung im

Zusammenklang der Stimmen führender Zeitgenossen, Celle (Publisher
Kampmann), 
1925, pages 308-315. [A Marriage Manual: "A new Meaning in Harmony with
the Voices of Leading Contemporaries."] Translated into English and published
in The Book of Marriage, pages 363-372, Harc. and Brace, 1926. 
2 New translation by Gerald L. Liebenau, 2003.
Man's fate is threefold entwined. His body and soul cling to Mother Earth
and to cosmic demands, while they constantly search with always renewed
strength for compensation and ways to adapt so as to live in harmony with the
laws of nature. Culture and physical hygiene emanate from this compulsion. All
beauty draws from this its alluring powers.
The concept of "human being" is linked unalterably to "fellow human
being." The prerequisites for human beings to develop physically and mentally
are encompassed by fellowship and can exist and grow only in accordance with
social needs. Language, understanding, culture, ethics, religion, nationality, and
citizenship, are social forms that separately are a deposit for humanity as a
whole. These forms of life entail an effective reflection of life on earth; strong
and unwavering like the compulsion toward community. Human beings cannot
develop free of these prerequisites.
The third constraint is formed by the existence of two sexes. What men and
women seek, a search possibly instinctively constituted over eons, is for one
form that would not be in conflict with the prerequisites detailed above. In the
harmonic composition of sexuality there is as much libidinal as social feeling.
And in the most ecstatic moments of lovers there unfold in equal measures
joyful creative powers, a desire to offer a tribute, and an affirmation of life on
earth. Viewed from that vantage point, mankind's romantic existence takes place
under rules for behavior that are not baseless, but also cannot be evaded without
serious consequences. The logic of reality is far more frightful than are humans.
We are far more apt to want to look aside. And we defend the most serious
offenses by arguing the implacability of ruling powers. Our task is to give
warning, to ameliorate harmful results, to show the present and future
generations what has transpired in a context so that these events are seen as
consequences rather than as incoherent, fatalistic occurrences.
Our existence today shows us the passage to the future of mankind. This
fact presses so strongly on our way of life that, unbeknown to us, our romantic
relationships ensue sub specie aeternitatis. The often exaggerated value we
attribute to beauty is meant to ensure a healthier future and greater adaptability.
The loyalty and honesty that we demand, the intertwining of two souls that we
strive for, stem from the yearning for a stronger sense of community. The same

applies to the desire for having children whose affiliation reflects the ideal of a
community, which also promises us eternity. Loyalty and truthfulness, above all
reliability, are the pillars of human society. These give direction to the future of
human civilization and establish goals for bringing up children.
That all these demands come together in love and marriage, that they there
solidify and become legally binding, can only be understood in light of the
indissoluble connection of historical and organic development. Similarly, every
impulsive or mistaken deviation from life's frame of reference creates
shockwaves that jeopardize every tendency toward a favorable development.
Harmful inherited qualities take effect regardless of any scientific knowledge
gained. Incest deteriorates social feeling since, like marriages between blood
relatives, it leads to isolation and not to the greater socialization that is advanced
through a broader intermingling of bloods. Also, more likely than would
otherwise be the case, a strong detrimental organic burden will negatively
influence the genetic make-up. Even where there is hope in the future and the
courage to meet all problems standing in the way of creating a family, including
a close interrelationship with the community, which is a precondition for
avoiding isolation and the fruitless expenditure of one's strength within the
narrow framework of the family. Marriages between relatives often seem to fail.
The other above mentioned characteristics can easily lead the partner as well as
children, who often are unaware of these circumstances, in the same direction
toward a state of constant mistrust, feelings of insecurity, and a family
atmosphere that allows for only aggressive and hostile tendencies to flourish.
All this is only another side of the same psychological dynamics that we
should expect to find when measured against the values of a true fellow human
being. That kind of person's constant and unshakable principle in this harsh
world should only be one: to give! All the profane and holy wisdom comes to
that same end. When applied to love and marriage, it is to pay greater attention
to the other person than to oneself, to live so as to make life for one's partner
easier and more pleasant. How many, or how few people, achieve this end is not
for us to examine here. There are too many people in our society who take and
have great expectations, and too few who give. It seems that too much of human
kind is caught in a love and marriage formula that states: Because I love you,
you must obey me!
What is still lacking in humaneness is also reflected in tension between the
sexes. The striving for personal superiority stems from one's own, mostly
unrecognized, deep-seated inferiority feelings and drives husband and wife in
demonstrative ways to wield their imagined power. Most couples act as if each
fears being weaker than the other. Defiantness, selfishness, negativism, often

also sexual denial, polygamist tendencies and disloyalty, as well as neurosis,
become helpmeets to self-love for the protection of one's own dark plans for
power. The husband, because of a common tradition long overdue for change,
has a small head start which he selfishly, but to his own detriment, tries to
maintain. Those who share our viewpoint no longer lord it over their families.
They see marriage as a mutual task in which both parties try to solve problems
together, not in arbitrary ways, but according to all the applicable rules.
Mankind's organic and historical development toward a monogamous marriage
system is proof enough, particularly when one takes into account the raising of
children, preparing them to become fellow human beings. What is always meant
is marriage as creating social feeling, a social form of the romantic life, a
guardian of children and for raising them to become decent fellow human
beings. Not following these principles are pedestrian marriages, marriages for
money or rank, marriages that are always in decline. A marriage should always
be a model for children, else they will carry bad traditions into their own homes,
despite their parents' good intentions. Dominating or excessively disciplining
fathers can so frighten girls that in their own marriages they will be suspicious of
their husbands' every step; it can also lead to such tensed yearning for affection
that they will never find satisfaction. Having lost all selfconfidence, they can
become unfit for marriage or for the upbringing of their children. The sons of
strict mothers flee from women and become socially ill adjusted. The reason for
this lies in the still only barely recognized function of the mother: to instill in her
child total reliability, and to be a model of noble femininity. Mommy's boys are
incapable of giving. Instead of mutuality they look for motherly affection, which
has its rightful place only in childhood. The selection of older, motherly women
as wives is often the result of such upbringing.
Polygamous tendencies, perversions, and a predilection for persons of low
moral standing and for prostitutes are always due to a tendency for ostracizing or
demeaning a more suitable partner, that is, a fear of not being able to stand up to
the opposite sex. How far removed this is from the true meaning and purpose of
love and marriage can be seen in the spread of venereal diseases. Whatever their
origin, the spread of these diseases is due solely to sexual misconduct. There is
only one cure, only one protection from such epidemics: mutual love.
Contrary to popular belief, the correlation between marriage and the most
essential social needs makes marriage not a private matter. The entire nation, all
of mankind, is involved in this rite. By the act of marriage, everyone who enters
into it, even if unawares, fulfills a mandate shared by everyone. Among the most
significant prerequisites for a marriage is the means for making a living, a task in
which both parties can be involved, and one that will guarantee the family a

livelihood. An occupation also is a way for advancing society, a means for
participation in production. Contributing to sustaining civilization is also not a
private matter. It must be furthered through marriage. The task of the housewife,
still unjustly regarded of lesser value, can be fully productive if with good
management or in supportive ways it will increase the husband's productivity.
Arguing economic problems to avert marriage is another excuse of those
suffering from depression.
It is a commonly held superstition that marriage, even a bad marriage, can
heal neglect and illness. Love and marriage are no medication. Often only new
harm is caused without alleviating the old. The same foolishness lies in believing
that there is healing power in pregnancy. The solution to marriage problems, as
is true for all other problems in life, comes from strength and not from weakness.
A marriage can also be threatened when it is seen as a sacrifice. Inevitably
the persons entering marriage with such feelings will let the partner know this by
constantly cheating that person out of their pleasure. Unsatisfactory marital
relations, neglect, frigidity, unfaithfulness are the most common outcomes. The
goal of marriage, which is to participate in each other's pleasures, is often
destroyed at the start. Marriage is not a furnished house ready for occupancy. It
also is not an unavoidable destiny. It is a task for the present and the future, a
creative achievement in the fast passage of time, a task to establish social values
in a future void. Only what one has brought into a marriage can be found there.
So far we have only mentioned significant conditions essential for a firm
and lasting marriage. We fear that in the daily rush these essentials can easily be
forgotten. It would seem desirable that we look for an easy formula, which
despite its simplicity encompasses all marriage tasks. Would such a formula not
simply state: be a decent fellow human being?
The decision to marry ought to spring from a striving for humaneness.
However, such a decision by itself does not quite make for a marriage in its true
sense. Only when marriage and the striving for decency succeed will all
problems be solved to mutual satisfaction. The decent fellow human being as a
meaning of life must come first; marriage then becomes another step toward
achieving wholeness.
However one may conceive of a decent human being that thought will
always entail maxims and imperatives that at a minimum will convey a sense of
usefulness, thinking more of another person than of oneself, and making life for
others easier and more beautiful. These also are the imperatives for marriage.
Our quest for ‘Marriage as a Task’ comes down to: How does one become a
decent human being?
Physical compatibility is self-evident. The same applies to intellectual

maturity. These are lacking in so few cases that they need not be taken into
account. However, this does not apply to psychological maturity. It is sorely
missing in human society, despite all the efforts that are being made. Individual
Psychological research has explained this extensively. Most individuals begin
with a false start. Too great a feeling of inferiority forces them to egotistical,
demonstrative expressions which they believe will satisfy their compulsion for
domination, or they fall prey to a passive pessimism which acts on them as if
they were under constant restraints. Their path is marked by arrogance that
comes from a weakness or discouragement due to ambition. They are best suited
to remain single; they are ill prepared to live with another or in society. Whoever
comes near them becomes an object. They must fail in marriage since they lack
the psychological make-up for mutuality.
Marriage as a task aims at meeting the requirements of the society, one’s work,
and love.
Chapter XX
Unteachable Children or Unteachable Theory1 2
Comments on the Hug case by Dr. Alfred Adler Presented following a lecture
last night in the Volksheim
[1925]
Quite aside from the personalities and substantive aspects of this case, I
would like to turn to several statements voiced during the court proceedings.
One of these was: "The boy can no longer be saved." We would be very curious
to know where saving a human being begins and where it ends, and why this boy
could not be saved. I should point out that some families have great difficulty
confiding a misfortune in someone within their own family, and they strenuously
try to make that misfortune a secret. The secret then becomes enormous since,
one might say, there lies in this an advantage for the person who suffered the
misfortune. This may apply in particular to families that pride themselves in
being skillful as educators and where, therefore, such a secret becomes more
important than might otherwise be the case. A family that takes pride in the way
their child was raised would feel particularly hurt were a failure in that area
become widely known. But one can see what has happened in this particular
case. People already know and are telling everyone there is nothing left to save
any more. Could not a greater misfortune have been averted?
In the field of child rearing we have known for years that harm is done
when a child is told to his face that he is beyond saving. The authority with
which such statements are made cannot be concealed from the child, and even if
he were not told this a hundred times, he would feel its impact. Nothing is more
damaging than to take from a child hope in his future and nothing is more

harmful than to put it in words such as: "You are a scoundrel and will end a
criminal," etc. Even if the person saying this does not mean it seriously, it will
have a destructive effect on the child's selfesteem. If we look at violent
criminals, we shall find only those who had lost the courage to face a normal
way of life. It is playing with fire when a child's future is presented as a life in
crime.
If I were of the opinion that a child could not be saved, it would not be
merely my personal view, but one that would have an effect well beyond me.
Thus, if one asserts that something bad is going to happen, it is as if one had
provoked it. Furthermore, we must reject out of hand the idea that "someone
cannot be saved." Since we do not believe in an inborn penchant toward
criminality, we do not know how to diagnose someone on that basis. However,
we can clearly identify characteristics of failure that have grown out of mistakes
made. I must also mention that, for example, a statement that a person at the age
of five already is complete does not agree with the principles of Individual
Psychology. We go even further by saying: The person is complete in his second
year of life, but he is not unalterable. Rather, the person attained form and shape
at age two, depending on the circumstances under which he grew up. It is
unacceptable for us to reason that, because the child at this early age had already
formed the unity of his personality, a bad seed must continue to sprout. It is also
a serious mistake to say that in the case before us it is a question of rearing, not
healing. We would have no objections if the boy instead of having been reared
had been healed.
1 
Originally 
published 
as 
"Unerziehbarkeit 
des 
Kindes 
oder
Unbeelehrbarkeit der Theorie? Bemerkungen zum Falle Hug" in the Arbeiter
Zeitung, March 5, 1925, No. 63, page 6, Vienna.
We also heard that several things had happened. Specifically, Hug was
reproached because in spite of everything he remained polite and in control, yet
continued to steal. Reproaching a person for such behavior has been favored for
years and is not a new invention. One cannot claim that here is an unalterable
misfortune because neither had the family interceded appropriately, nor did
society or the state rescue the boy from the mistakes made in his upbringing by
his family. Then there is the claim, following on the first statement, that it was
not appropriate to spank Hug. That situation is not easy to picture. Perhaps what
is meant is that Hug would not let himself be spanked, although he had said
himself that he would have been fortunate had someone really given him a good
beating. Despite his having said that, we do not accept spanking even if the
person asked for it. Many a criminal has claimed that he could have carried out
his crime more easily had he encountered resistance from his victim. Even the

great psychologist Balzac once said that a murderer desires his victim to resist so
as to justify his deed. We can understand that Hug would have liked to have
been spanked because he could then justify his deed. However, spanking is
unnecessary because even without it the child would have carried out his
transgression, except with spanking it would have come easier. I don't think I am
wrong when I say that all these statements of his guardians are not new scientific
findings but are some of the oldest refrains. They contain no new insights but
only reflect one's own insecurity that in organizing ways to protect against evil
one can find a real cure. It goes without saying that under the given conditions
there is no doctrine for preventing evil. However, one must raise one's voice and
not stand aside when someone is about to commit a transgression. We should
remember that it is not only a matter of dealing with difficult situations, but that
what matters is preventing children from becoming criminals by establishing
social institutions for rearing children that can prevent them from becoming
criminals. Above all, one must discard the idea that someone cannot be saved.
Chapter XXI
Inscriptions on the Human Spirit1 2
[1925]
Individual Psychology has shown that the most important discovery in the
dynamics of human inner life concerns the basic meaning of the feeling of
inferiority for all psychological expressions. The child's size, weakness, and
insecurity causes a striving to grow tall, strong, and to attain greater security
through superiority. Like a perpetual inscription, a warning, or an arousing
memento, the feeling of inferiority resides in the spirit and compels a lifestyle
that exhibits superiority and triumph.
This feeling of inferiority can lie very deep if the child feels more insecure
because of weak organs, enfeebling pampering, or an oppressive lack of
affection. If these inscriptions on their inner life are not recognized and treated,
these people often will conspicuously exhibit aggressive behavior for their entire
life, or, discouraged by neurotic symptoms, will barricade themselves from
solving their problems in life. Children who have suffered from ridicule, or who,
under overburdening demands or expectations, break down follow similar paths.
These people are easily prone to fail in love or in making a living because
socializing and being considerate of others is adversely affected by the feeling of
inferiority.
If one examines this more closely, the causes for such permanent
inscriptions, which are the guideposts in life, are never only temporary
experiences or emotions, but always lasting situations for which the child, about
to start in life, is poorly prepared. Children who have lost confidence in their

physical or intellectual powers, who have been pampered and neglected, will
face predictable conflicts in school and in life. Children who feel tied to one
person, initially the mother, will not easily establish contact with strangers.
The single child, for example, is in this situation. That child is the center of
the family and will always strive to remain there, or shy away from contact with
others. Pampered children exhibit similar lifestyles. Childhood conditions are
inscribed almost indelibly on the spirit.
Of particular significance is the birth order of a child among siblings. If
there are several children in a family, everyone has a certain standing. The oldest
child lives for a part of his childhood alone, which by itself distinguishes that
child from the second, who never knew what it is to be an only child. The third
child suffers from being the youngest, the smallest, and the weakest. Another
situation is one in which there are two brothers or two sisters. One of the two is
the stronger and overcomes difficulties more easily. In such situations, the
younger is disadvantaged; something that remains with that person for the rest of
his life. The child will constantly feel the inequality in every situation. There
appears to be only one way to reestablish equality, which is to be the first in all
situations and to create problems for the other sibling to prevent that sibling
from gaining an advantage. This maneuver is so transparent that one can
recognize in a young girl whether she has an older sister. Her every expression
will reveal the desire to take her sister's place. These are normal conditions.
However, if she was not favored by nature, if she is physically or mentally held
back, then she struggles to keep up with the younger sister by the means already
described. A wonderful Bible story tells of the spiritual struggle between Jacob
and Esau involving a lentil meal. It shows us not only that the Bible is an
inexhaustible source of true knowledge, but also that human fate, from time
immemorial, has been governed by particular situations and by specific needs
and tasks.
1 Originally published as "Inschriften der menschlichen Seele," in Bereitschaft,
Vol. 6, (2), pages 6-9, 1925.
A child, therefore, can only be understood correctly when seen in his place
in the family. The youngest child always has certain psychological preconditions
that determine his character. Of course, there are exceptions where other factors
are stronger. However, there is a typical youngest child, who from an inner
feeling of impotence wants to overtake all others, who first by overestimating
himself will find the sought-for superiority over others, who from a lack of
power and a feeling of inferiority will struggle for greater selfconfidence. Such
observations are of the greatest importance for raising a child. They show the
necessity for individual treatment. One should and can treat all children equally,

but each in a particular way. If this is not possible at home, then the school
should adhere to these tenets. It has been said that the youngest child will always
want to be the center of all events. However, if all the youngest children are the
same, where is there room for "inheritance," for "transmitting intellectual and
spiritual characteristics?" One must not let oneself be fooled. Often the character
of the youngest appears to be quite different, yet a more intensive psychological
examination will show the same similarities. If the youngest is unlike what has
been described here, but is inactive, oppressed, always dejected, we are still
facing the same type, only expressed in another form. It is the same struggle only
by other means. It is the ambitious person who wants to excel over all others
who is more easily crippled by problems than anyone else. If that person is not
able to rank above everyone else, he simply escapes, and his dejection is an
appropriate means for him to flee from sociability. Caesar's line is appropriate
here: "aut Caesar, aut nihil," all or nothing!
An incomparably beautiful Biblical story characterizes the situation of the
youngest child. It is the story of Joseph and his brothers. Joseph can be regarded
as the youngest child because he was 17 years older than Benjamin, whom he
did not know at home. Joseph dreamed that all would bow before him, and that
the constellations would honor him. His dream became a reality and Joseph
became mightier than all his brothers. Are there not thousands of similar tales
and fables from ancient and modern times? The youngest child is the hero in
German fables, as well as in Russian, Lithuanian, and Chinese stories. Primitive
conditions were more obvious than today's, and in the past the significant of
being the youngest was understood more deeply.
The last word on birth order among siblings has not yet been uttered. Much,
however, is clearly recognizable. The oldest child can be identified by particular
traits. Fontane described how his father, a French immigrant and a strong Polish
partisan during the Russo/Polish war, was greatly pleased when 10,000 Poles
drove 50,000 Russians to flight. Fontane could not understand his father. In his
opinion, the 50,000 Russians had to be stronger than 10,000 Poles. If that were
not the case, something must be wrong! By his taking that position, we can
speculate that Fontane was an oldest child. An eldest child ascribes to itself the
right to be the stronger. It would be unjust were another to replace that child.
Thus, eldest children display conservative traits. They side with the authorities
because they have tasted authority.
One other aspect should be mentioned with regard to the problem of an
eldest child. Too often insufficient consideration is given to the position of an
older brother toward a younger sister. She occupies a truly tragic role. If one
hears of a particularly passive, disturbed boy, one often can assume correctly

that he has a younger sister. That, of course, is only a guess. Our culture still
tends clearly toward the male. The boy--and in particular, the oldest boy--will be
given higher status than a girl, and the family has particular expectations from
him. As he grows up, he will be coddled. Then a sister is born. She represents an
intrusion in his life, a disturbance. If the girl does not wish to be oppressed by
the boy, she must assert all her powers so as to overtake the boy, if at all
possible. The boy then sees his accustomed superiority threatened. He begins to
feel insecure. Added to these concerns, which may be subjective, comes the
natural condition that the girl between the ages 14 to 18 will mature more
quickly than the boy. Nothing can then stop his psychological downward slide.
The boy cannot cope with having his pride so badly bruised. He becomes totally
discouraged. He loses faith in himself and would rather give up the struggle than
allow himself to be exposed. He begins to sulk, or he creates impediments for
himself that would serve as his excuse. Such a boy can become apathetic and
neurotic so as to be relieved of having to continue the struggle. Often such boys
later develop a deep disdain for women, a contempt that has easily recognizable
roots. Why was the girl not born a boy are words that dig deeply into the soul of
the wounded boy and echo forever.
The situation of an only boy among many sisters is also difficult and entails
its own dangers. The wholly female atmosphere in which the boy finds himself
is difficult for him to flee. The markedly female trend in such an environment is
reflected in every detail, in the rooms of the home, the habits of the people, and
in the behavior toward the boy. All the females pamper and spoil him, or
conspire against him. The wholly female environment does not always meet the
needs for raising a boy. The same, of course, applies to a girl who grows up
among boys. The girl in such cases tries to be equal with the boys, a situation in
which she does not get the proper preparation for the particular demands that life
makes on a woman. The pronounced aversion of so many women against
specifically female tasks, the rejection of domestic responsibilities, has its roots
here. That, of course, is a loss when particularly unique tasks are neglected or
pushed aside. Serious inner struggle, and often fruitless struggle, is nourished by
a lack of attention to the spiritual realities. The importance of the birth order
among siblings cannot be underestimated.
All growth is slow. Fine lines, drawn and barely noticeable in childhood,
eventually become the iron-hard inscriptions on the human spirit.
Chapter XXII
Reports from Child Guidance Centers1 2
[1925]
1. This is the case of a small, fourteen-year old girl who believes herself,

unjustifiably, to be strikingly beautiful, and who has wanted to be a great film
star since the age of three. She urged her mother to get her picture into the
newspapers. In school the girl makes poor progress, is cantankerous and
domineering. She lost her father early in life. She is the second of three sisters.
The girl displays strong strivings for selfenhancement, seeks the path of
least resistance, and frequently falsifies reality by fantasizing. She would
encounter serious problems should she fail.
Guidance: Her choice of career should not be rejected out of hand, but she
should be given careful guidance regarding the problems (clearly not
insurmountable) facing her. She should be counseled on the meaning of work,
the importance of preparing for an acting career through study, and on the
minimal importance of beauty. She should be challenged by pointing out the
need for a higher education required by an acting career, for the need to continue
learning, and it should be recommended strongly that she attend an acting school
should she still wish to become an actress in three years.
2. The second case is that of a fourteen-year old well-developed girl about
whom there are complaints that she runs around with boys and girls, and that she
comes home late at night. Her work in school is deficient. She acts as if she were
better than her schoolmates. Her father--cantankerous, pessimistic--fears that the
girl no longer wants to attend school.
Since her performance in school is poor, she seeks satisfaction in her social
life and tries to ignore school. Consequently, there is a stronger striving toward
sexual activities.
It is necessary in this case for her to establish a more solid foundation in
school and for her to be encouraged to get a better education which would also
be advantageous for her other relationships in life.
3. The third case concerns a thirteen-year old boy in the second grade of
middle school who does no work, but is satisfied with himself and with his
progress. He constantly bothers teachers by asking questions and by presenting
useless objects to them. He is pushy with girls and treats them roughly. He is in a
state of constant animosity toward his parents and wets his bed after every fight
with them. His face muscles twitch. He is fearful, very troubled, physically
small, and frail. Discouraged by an altogether too energetic mother, he was
robbed of all self-determination. His teacher successfully encouraged him to try
gymnastics. Since then there has been some improvement. The boy's adverse
situation should be clarified to him and to his parents.
1 Originally published as "Mitteilungen aus Erziehungsberatungsstellen" in
the Internationale Zeitschrift für Individualpsychologie, Vol. III, page 201-203,
1925. 

2 New translation by Gerald L. Liebenau, 2003. Editing assistance by Kurt A.
Adler, M.D., Ph.D.
4. A fifteen-year old girl in the third grade of middle school shows normal
academic progress until her father committed suicide the previous year. From
that point onward she no longer participates in anything. She floods her teacher
with letters that contain suicide threats. (She always capitalizes "Ich" [I]). She
threatens that if her parents are informed, she will commit suicide immediately.
She has a strongly contemptuous attitude toward her brother who flirts with her
girl friend. She feels herself deserted and demeaned by her father and brother
and tries to make up for her situation by dominating her teacher and by
threatening her.
5. A nine-year old girl in an advanced class in school is strong, good
looking, and well behaved. She suffers from bone tuberculosis and limps
slightly. She has highly intensive attacks of anger and destructive rage. She has
been irascible since attending a camp where out of inattentiveness she pushed a
fellow camper into the water. She was punished by not being permitted to
participate in camp outings. She also felt herself otherwise excluded and wishes
physical harm on others to avenge herself for her "inferiority." She will have to
be counseled as appropriate.
6. A ten-year old girl in the fourth grade is physically very weak and
miserable. She looks like a six-year old child. At the age of six, she suffered
from a bad case of the flu. During her childhood, she suffered from spasms and
consequently was given constant attention. Beyond that, she seeks to force
others to attend to her fully by not eating properly, by appearing unkempt, by
being fearful, and by crying at night. She admits when asked that she also cries
during the day in order to tighten her hold on her mother.
7. A 14 1/2 year-old girl who attends public school disturbs the class by
asking questions constantly, creating trouble, mixing up her words, and
trembling. When asked, she admits that her trembling is an excuse for not doing
anything. After discussing this with her, she no longer trembles. Her mother is in
a constant state of extreme excitement and suffers from agoraphobia. Her father
is strict. The girl clearly is strongly attached to her mother and, therefore, fearful.
When others are tolerated, she becomes demanding. She needs counseling
regarding her situation.
8. A 13 year-old public school student is poor in mathematics and about to
fail. She starts everything with great eagerness, but shortly afterwards drops it;
tends to be boastful; is a gossip; stubborn.
Particular characteristics of her personality are: articulate, writes well, tends
to be a leader and has leadership qualities. When rebuked she falls apart; when

praised she is encouraged to no end. She starts to show a tendency to skip
school.
Early history: She comes from a family that has seen better days. She is her
father's favorite. The parents are in a bad marriage. She was unable to speak until
the age of 2 1/2 (see above, she is articulate). She put everything in her mouth
(oral type?).
Important aspects: In the school environment, she is partly an aggressive
person who thirsts for recognition. Based on some details, there is an apparent
development toward a career in acting. When she experiences a clear failure in
school (failing in a subject), she becomes even more discouraged and more
evasive. A strong suggestion should be made to her that in mathematics she can
keep up with her class. In addition, (just before the end of the school year), she
should be told that she will be promoted to the next grade because there is
confidence in her (at the same time she should be provided with remedial help
during the vacation). Objections on the part of the other students that this
procedure is unfair should be met with an explanation of the case and by
indicating that it is the other students’ duty to stand by their wayward classmate.
9. A 13 1/2 year-old boy voluntarily left the gymnasium because he failed
and now attends a public school. He does his work well as long as the teacher
pays him attention. When no one bothers with him, he stops doing anything and
becomes stubborn and mean. He curries favors from his classmates, boasts, and
when rejected displays hatred and anger. An older man who paid him sexually
abused him. His mother obviously pampered him. He has great ambitions. If he
is unable to present himself as successful, he then chooses to show himself as
neglectful. He is counseled to give up bluffing and to apply more effort to real
endeavors. His current behavior shows that he thinks little of himself. The same
process of encouragement is followed up with his father so that the boy can
attain his goal of becoming a construction engineer.
Chapter XXIII
Remarks On a Lecture by Prof. Max Adler 1 2 3at the Society for Individual
Psychology
[1925]
We who have gathered here can well say of Professor Max Adler's lecture:
As much as it raises our confidence that our basic views are approved by those
who pursue epistemology and sociology, it seems to us that the lecturer, judging
from the almighty throne of philosophy, has not quite properly assessed the
standing of our findings or the scientific basis of our views. It has hitherto not
been our purpose, and also not our task, to place Individual Psychology within
the humanities and in a relationship to philosophy, even though we have viewed

such a possibility in the future as desirable, supportive, and harmless.
Commendable attempts in that direction were made by W. Stern in Hamburg,
Alois Fischer in Munich, Alexander Neuer, and Cäsar Russo in Vienna. The
general approval and the clearing of our name by the lecturer should fill us with
satisfaction. However, the accompanying admonitions, the warnings that he
presumably feels are necessary, his criticism of us before expressing his
affirmation, seem to me to be too severe.
Let us compare the view presented by the lecturer with what is under
consideration here. Individual Psychology is imbued with an innate feeling of
community. We need only point to the recurring emphasis on the social meaning
of all psychic manifestations, whether normal or psychopathic. Let us remember
the starting point for everything we see in all forms of human expressions: “The
idea of man entails the concept of fellow-man.” It is, therefore, not too daring
when we assert that Max Adler’s account at most has supported our
understanding that from the cognitive theoretical standpoint there are no
objections to our teachings. We are pleased when our critics agree with us. We
would have to reject, however, pursuing a cognitive theory instead of Individual
Psychology. From the standpoint of critics among epistemologists, we could
either be right or wrong. The lecturer tells us that we are right. Whoever wishes
can see from the short description in the introduction of "Practice and Theory of
Individual Psychology" whether certain concerns of the lecturer were not
exaggerated, or whether we really needed his severe warning. At that point he
says: "It would be more difficult for us to clarify the general (A.Adler’s
emphasis) contribution (to the direction of human striving) of social interest.
Here we collide with the conscience of the individual. He is much more ready to
accept evidence that he, like all others, strives for prestige and superiority, than
accept the eternal truth that he is also caught in the web of human coexistence
and that he shrewdly hides this from himself and from others. His physical self
points to the amalgamation of language, morals, esthetics, and reason, which aim
at a common validity and presume that love, work, and fellowship, are the real
requirements for human coexistence. The striving for personal power storms and
rages against these indestructible realities or seeks deceptively to circumvent
them. This unremitting struggle, however, indicates an acknowledgment of
social feeling." And: "What leaders of mankind had referred to as an act of God,
or fate, or economic principles, is presented to us by Individual Psychology in a
powerful social law: the iron logic of human coexistence."
1 Originally published as "Diskussionsbemerkungen zum Vortrage des Prof.
Max Adler" in the Internationale Zeitschrift für Individualpsychologie, Vol. III,
pages 221-223, 1925. 

2 New translation by Gerald L. Liebenau, 2003. Editing assistance by Kurt A.
Adler, M.D., Ph.D. 
3 Max Adler (no relation to Alfred Adler) was an influential socialist philosopher
, a sociology professor at the University of Vienna, and the editor of a Marxist
journal.
But enough of that! Originally, we had proven that mistakenly straying
from social interest is the cause of human failure. Based on the standpoint of
Individual Psychology, and a knowledge of man and the inherent logic of human
coexistence, we accept as correct the formulation of the moral philistine: honesty
endures the longest!” And also that "giving is more blessed than taking!"--as
painful as that might sound. However, in holding such a position we have never
accepted these arguments on the basis of common morality instead of scientific
investigations. Our whole effort would have been superfluous had we nothing
more to offer our students than well known moral proverbs. We far more
strongly hold that what is lasting and eternal in human morality can and must be
strengthened, reinforced, and made more comprehensible by Individual
Psychology. We have always emphatically stated that there are no worthy
achievements that have value for any reason other than that they are useful to the
common good. For that reason, the reproach of utilitarianism leaves us cold. The
apparent and fleeting advantage to one person melts away in light of Individual
Psychology's concept of interconnectivity. We can show that the individual who
has such a seeming advantage suffers from neurosis, his selfesteem is lowered
(Weinmann), and a happy coexistence with others is prevented.
This idea, raising the psychological level and this lesson--to make oneself
useful--is a part of every great accomplishment. Individual Psychology tries to
make the often not understood but frequently instinctively driving force--the
unconscious, as Freud would say--evident and more effective. With this task,
however, its goal is not to forge new weapons for a caste of academicians, but to
serve the general good. If the goal is going to reinforce human fellowship, then it
must become a common property. If it is going to eliminate neuroses from this
world and raise the individual and society’s selfconfidence, its fund of
knowledge and ability must avail itself to all. It provides the physician with a
whole new field, but it must also serve educators, parents, and schools. It must
not be made available selectively, and should not only be there for the patient,
but must strive to be understood broadly. The limits of medical intervention are
not difficult to define. The physician will always play the primary role in serious
emotional problems. However, when only educational concerns are involved, the
physician must depend on the educator trained in Individual Psychology, who

will again defer to the physician on medical matters. Under no circumstances,
however, is it appropriate to provide less insight to the educator, parents, or
patient than to the physician or to the philosopher.
I consider the work of Karl Marx of the greatest value. Perhaps like no
other work, his is more suitable to sharpen the focus for and understanding of
interconnectivity. I agree with the lecturer that Marx's thoughts sprang from the
strongest feeling for community and that they can lead to the strongest feeling
for community. I must go beyond that, however, and emphasize that Marx's
scientific achievement from many vantage points, even if in other areas, exhibits
a wonderful concern for interconnectivity. In that respect, it is close to Individual
Psychology because like it, it takes into consideration attitudes and ultimate
goals and judges the meaning of outward appearances appropriately. True, we
must not forget that this can also be found in poetry and in religion.
We see the fact that Max Adler has long recognized and described the
meaning of social tendencies in human forms of expression as a comforting and
valuable enrichment for the history of the development of Individual
Psychology. We yearn to get to know all of our predecessors and to honor them
in accordance with their contributions. We consider it the most important task to
unite all forces that strive toward a common goal, and let the future judge those
who harass and resist.
Chapter XXIV
Salvaging Mankind by Psychology1 2
[1925]
What can individual psychology do to prevent that debacle of our
civilization which, in the belief of some of the most important thinkers of the
day, threatens as a consequence of the over-development of scientific technique
at the expense of morality?
It is generally agreed that man's control over the forces of nature has
increased far beyond his moral fitness to exercise it; and it is also agreed that
herein lies the greatest menace to our civilization. The late war has presented us
with a prospectus of the possibilities of scientific extermination. If the world--
our world--is to be saved, obviously the one thing necessary is to raise man to a
level where he shall not, like a child playing with a loaded pistol, constantly risk
destroying himself by the misuse of his own power. It is difficult to see where
this education is to come from, if not from the new psychology which claims to
bring order into the chaos of blindly struggling forces in man's subconscious
mind.
Individual Psychology holds that the most important key to the
understanding of both personal and mass problems is the so-called sense of

inferiority, or inferiority complex, and its consequences. The truth of this today
is recognized by all tendencies of psychology and psychiatry. From our point of
view each fact of history, each phase of the evolution of the culture, represents
an attempt, sometimes successful, at other times futile, at erasing this sense of
inferiority in a person or a group. Often attempts of persons and groups run
together in this direction.
According to Individual Psychology, the second basic principle permeating
all historic evolution is the sense of solidarity innate in every human society. The
degree to which this sense of solidarity is developed in a person gives the
measure not only of his desires, but even more of his actions. The same holds
true of groups.
History judges human actions according to the degree of human solidarity
which is expressed in them. Without exception, those deeds and events are
regarded as great and valuable which are saturated with the sense of human
solidarity, which promote the welfare of the whole. Lack of this sense of
solidarity, always due to an increased sense of inferiority, drives the individual
into neurosis or crime, and groups and nations toward the abyss of
selfextermination.
1 Originally published as an interview with Eugene Bagger in the The New
York Times, September 20, IX, page 12, 1925. Reprinted in the Int. Z. Indiv.
Psychol., 3, 221-223, 
1925. 
2 Minor grammatical changes have been made by the editor to improve
readibility.
The motives which actuate a crowd are always veiled in darkness, and are
always perceived and interpreted by the persons who are in the grip of the mass
current as solutions of their individual needs and weaknesses. Of course this
process is aided by the circumstance that the relation of large groups to life is
uniform, and that the pressure of a group's inferiority complex somehow makes
itself felt in each individual, be it in different ways and in reference to difficult
personal problems. In a little essay entitled, "The Other Side - The People's Guilt
in the World War," I have shown how the imperialistic tendencies of the great
financial powers pressed on the people of other countries. This pressure
manifested itself in individuals having difficulty earning a livelihood, bad wage,
inadequate educational and cultural facilities, the reluctance of young people to
get married, the reluctance of married people to have children, a joyless
existence, continuous irritation and nervousness, etc.
All these factors increase the sense of inferiority, produce an exaggerated

sensitiveness, and drive the individual to seek "solutions." To someone in this
state of mind, any outside interference seems to be a threat to his security and
rouses him to active or passive self defense. The young men who murdered the
Austrian heir to the throne were at odds with themselves. The crowds which
subsequently clamored for war as a solution, and the still larger crowds which
accepted war as a solution, consisted similarly of individuals at odds with
themselves.
Motives of hatred appear most clearly in the economic disturbances of our
time. The class struggle is carried on by crowds made up of individuals whose
quest for an inwardly and outwardly balanced mode of life is thwarted. On the
other hand, these mass movements produce further disturbing motives in the
individuals.
Mass movements always proceed with a firm and resolute step toward their
destructive aims, for destruction means to the masses a release from situations
felt as intolerable and thus appears as a preliminary condition of improvement.
The craving for power is in the masses, as in individuals, the expression of
the sense of inferiority, of inadequacy. Therefore mass movements can be
properly understood only from the perspective of Individual Psychology which
shows how this striving upwards, which permeates all humanity, originates in
the individual. In his struggle for greater security, man is always somehow right,
even though his methods are inadequate.
Thus the fashion of bobbed hair, expressing women's desire to eliminate an
external difference between themselves and men, originates in the so-called
"masculine protest" of women, in women's tendency to feel and declare
themselves as being of equal rank with men. The individual woman may find
personal reasons for having her hair cut; she may tell herself that bobbed hair
saves her effort, or makes her look prettier, that "everybody is doing it", or she
may simply want to tease her husband; subconsciously she follows the line of
masculine protest, just the same.
If the life tendencies of an individual coincide completely or almost
completely with the direction of a mass movement, if the yearning of the masses
is incarnated in him, if he can lend his voice and his arm to the dumb and
obscure striving of his people or his group, he is a chosen leader of men. All
great achievements of humanity originate in the social genius of individuals. The
questions of an age reach out of an answer, and find it in a man. In him
mankind's struggle for salvation is re-enacted, only with a greater clarity and
intensity than in other men. The very essence of his being is this struggle, and
therefore he cannot fit himself into the inherited forms of life. They cramp him,
and he tries to burst them. In order to adjust himself to existence, he has to

reorganize it. But he can succeed only if his endeavor coincides with a mass
current and serves to promote and elevate the group. The power of the individual
leader, of the "great man" is limited by the preparation of the masses, by their
capacity to fall in line with him.
What are the personal requirements of such leadership? A strongly
developed sense of solidarity is the first of all. An optimistic outlook and
sufficient selfconfidence are just as necessary. The leader must be endowed with
capacity for quick action--he must not be a dreamer or onlooker. He must have
ease in his contact with people, and must possess tact so as not to frustrate the
assent of others. His preparation, his training must be above the average. He
must, in a word, be a real human being who possesses courage and equipment.
In him lives what other men dream about.
All these required features are the products of upbringing in the home, at
school, and in life. Today the education of children is burdened by many errors.
Individual Psychology points out the weaknesses of present day education and
devises a better preparation for the battle of life. For the upbringing of both
normal and neglected or nervous children, it prescribes measures reinforcing the
sense of solidarity, counteracting the sense of inferiority and converting it into a
source of industry and effort, stimulating courage and improving the all-around
equipment of both mind and body.
Can Individual Psychology turn every child into a leader? Of course not.
Apart from any other consideration, we do not claim to possess an infallible
technique of training. But we do claim that we are able to increase the number of
those with potential for leadership, to insure a better start for all in the contest of
life, to prevent that deterioration of human material which would inevitably
reduce the level of achievement.
Individual Psychology claims to increase the standards of individual
achievement, and thus also that of groups. We can already point to our long
series of successes in salvaging neglected, nervous or underdeveloped children
at school, and in restoring a large number of neurotics to a normal routine and
enjoyment of life. The application of our educational principles on a large scale
would produce results that would make a very perceptible difference within a
few years.
Most of the methods employed today to solve pressing problems in the lives
of peoples are obsolete and inadequate. They are mostly based on stimulating
nationalistic and religious passions and lead to oppression, persecution, and war.
An education based on the principles of Individual Psychology would eliminate
these delusions of egotism and folly and would substitute a general zeal for
common welfare. Individual Psychology could rally all the latent forces for good

which are inherent in groups, just as it is already rallying such latent forces in
individuals. War, national hatreds and class struggle, these greatest enemies of
humankind, root in the desire of groups to escape or compensate for the crushing
sense of their inferiority. Individual psychology, which can cure individuals
from the evil effects of this sense of inferiority, might be developed into a most
powerful instrument of ridding nations and groups of the menace of their
collective inferiority complexes.
What I said concerning the hatreds and jealousies that urge nations and
groups against one another holds also true for the bitter struggle of the sexes, a
struggle that is poisoning love and marriage and is ever born anew out of the
inferior valuation of women. The idealized picture of overestimated masculinity
imposes both on the boy and the grown-up man the obligation of appearing, if
not being, superior to women, and this causes him to distrust himself, to
exaggerate his demands on and expectations from life, and increases his sense of
insecurity. On the other hand, the little girl feels that she is valued less than a
boy, and this stimulates her to exaggerated efforts to make up for her
inadequacy, to fight on all sides real or apparent underestimation, or else it will
cause her to resign herself to her supposed inferiority.
In this mental atmosphere, it is impossible to find satisfactory solutions for
the problems of love and marriage. Moreover, the achievements of women often
fall short of the standard of their own possibilities, because women are apt to
underestimate themselves under the pressure of tradition and prejudice.
Unfortunately, this tradition and this prejudice are rooted so deeply in both
sexes that it will take at least two generations until they are ultimately and
absolutely dispersed. In this field, too, Individual Psychology is most effective in
bringing about improvement.
Chapter XXV
Discussion on Paragraph 144, Legalizing Abortion1 2 3
[1925]
As is the case with most problems, an examination of forced pregnancy will
demonstrate that only an Individual Psychological examination of all aspects of
the problem will show it in its proper perspective and will reveal its true
meaning.
The objections which are generally made by the opponents of # 144 seem to
the psychologists not always to be the most valid. I do not wish to discuss here
medical necessities that often require the interruption of pregnancy. One might
suppose that every physician who is not biased on grounds of prejudicial
principles would accept that where the life of the mother is threatened, the life
saving intercession must be carried out. Assessing correctly the extent of the

danger then becomes merely a matter of his diagnostic certainty.
Other objections to the interruption of pregnancy are often those that take
on a compelling character only in light of the pessimistic attitude of the persons
involved. In most cases that we are able to examine objectively we will find that
the situation can also be seen from a different standpoint, one that is more
courageous, and that the compelling reasons for an abortion then fall by the
wayside.
We are often told that a family of two children can exist quite well on its
income, but a third or fourth child would threaten to lower significantly the
standard of living for all of them. On the other hand, we see frequently that it is
the arrival of other children that imbues the parents with a new incentive for
finding more work, fresh ideas for sources of income, and that instead of the
feared impoverishment there is improvement for the whole family. Naturally, the
particular work and housing problems of our times could present difficulties in
individual cases.
In other cases, for example, where a young girl because of pregnancy out of
wedlock would face the danger of losing her social position, or run into
unresolvable opposition of her parents, solutions other than abortion can often be
found. We have frequently experienced that girls who despaired at the idea of
giving birth later saw in their child the greatest treasure of their life and who
found excellent ways to overcome the difficult problem of having their child
born out of wedlock. In fact that situation drove them toward a successful career,
made them self-sufficient, and provided them with independence from a
depressing environment. We have also frequently seen that girls who were able
to interrupt their pregnancy later complained about it bitterly, realizing that other
ways were open to them to attain motherhood which would have brought them
comfort and pleasure. A courageous attitude on the part of the unwed mother
will also encourage her partner to accept marriage. Naturally, however, there are
cases, particularly because we are unable to influence everyone around the girl,
her parents, etc., where we also can find no way to save the unborn child, and
where abortion becomes necessary.
1 Based on a lecture held in the Internationale Verein für
Individualpsychologie reported by Frau Gina Kaus in her bi-monthly magazine,
The Mother. 
2 Originally published as "Eröterungen zum Paragraph 144," in the
Internationale Zeitschrift für Individualpsychologie, Vol. III, p. 338-340. 1925. 
3 New translation by Gerald L. Liebenau, 2003. Editing assistance by Kurt A.
Adler, M.D., Ph.D.

We can see, therefore, that the weightiest reasons that are being presented
in favor of abortion when objectively seen are not valid. It is mostly that the
pregnant woman rejects the unborn child. She does not want it because, in the
discouragement that is generally found in the female sex, she is afraid of failure
in her life. A child means so much more than the responsibility to feed a hungry
small mouth. It means above all a considerable strengthening of the bonds with
the father of the child. It means giving up the boundless egotism of the central
place that some women are accustomed to in their environment. It also means for
many women who in general are in a struggle for dominance over men that
pregnancy and giving birth represent a defeat by man; it reveals nature's
discrimination against women's sexuality.
Only seldom will a woman admit that she is against motherhood because
she knows that it would be admitting egotism and cowardice. Therefore, we
frequently find women who are in a situation favorable to having children, who
are married and who live in good circumstances, cleverly find a way to avoid
motherhood. We see women who guard their homes with such "exaggerated"
care, watch for even the most insignificant disturbance in the accustomed order
that everyone in their circle unconsciously thinks: "How lucky that this woman
has no children!" In the same way we see mothers who guard their child's every
breath with such anxiety that it prompts one to say: "How lucky that this woman
has only one child!" Time and again we shall find the fear of children is the
source of innumerable cases of anxiety.
Should a woman who so strongly rejects children be forced against her will
to bear a child? For the lawmaker the problem ends with the birth of the child.
We, however, know that this is only the beginning, and that such a woman will
not accept unwanted motherhood without a protest. What kind of a mother will
she be for her child?
How can she fulfill a responsibility that was forced on her against her will?
One likes to think that with the birth of the child, mother love will set in
implicitly like a chemical reaction. The psychologist, however, knows that this is
certainly not always the case. He knows that enough women let their children
know in a hundred ways that they were brought into this world unwelcomed.
They also know that the knowledge of having been an unwanted child has
poisoned the life of many people, that it is the poisoned root of serious
psychological ruin, and that from it springs neglected children and all those
"psychopaths" who in their lifetime will not shed the curse of an unloved youth.
In the interest of those children,--because it is with regard to the children that we
evaluate this problem--I am in favor of telling every woman clearly: "You do not
have to have children if you do not want them!"

And I have seen frequently that this same woman, who had a hundred
reasons for rejecting motherhood, the moment that she knew that she had the
freedom to choose the course of her pregnancy, suddenly wanted the child that
she so recently had vehemently repudiated. We must never forget the depth of
the protest in every woman against every inequality with the man. The coercion
from a law created by men that robs her of the freedom to decide her fate must
feel demeaning to every woman. In the eyes of this law, the role of woman is far
less that of a person than a function in the interest of posterity.
Against this argument: that only a woman who wants the child can be a
good mother all others retreat. 
Some people like to assert that abolishing the law against abortion would worsen
the already low state of morals. The low state of morals, however, has many
other, more deep-seated causes--in particular our educational system that pays so
little heed to the feeling of community and so much to personal ambition
-that it is foolish to want to apply moral pressure at this point when a part of
mankind suffers so much more from it than others. We will probably all have to
share the great responsibility for human beings coexisting morally instead of
shifting the heaviest burden on the weakest shoulders. 
It would be a true blessing for mankind if marriage counseling centers were to
be established in which Individual Psychologists would participate and provide
information regarding all pertinent questions.
On Neurosis and Talent
Chapter XXVI
On Neurosis and Talent1 2
[1925]
Every neurosis and neuropsychosis runs a course that tends to be
unproductive. There is no question but that in such cases Individual Psychology
can uncover a person’s avoidance of doing anything productive. The reason for
such avoidance, which can also be found in problem children, always is a
heightened feeling of inferiority. Growing out of that is an increased striving for
prestige, which is marked by an effort “to act as if one were doing something."
While the neurotic complains about the darker side of his suffering, he enjoys,
mostly without really knowing why, the lighter side by creating alibis for the
problems of life that he ignored.
 
All his unproductive activities now are subject to a feeling of inferiority and
follow an upward striving to a goal of superiority. In the right and, yes, even
wrong findings of other authorities there appear, unconsciously on their part,

these lines of movement as a precondition for every possible rationale. This
applies to the Oedipus Complex, wish fulfillment, narcissism, the libido theory,
the death wish, regression, and particularly to the ideal of the ego. The same
driving forces provide the life form to the pykniker, the schizoid, and to the
eidetic.
Despair about one's own worth is caused by a disastrous talent delusion.
This delusion is the common neurosis and the basis for all the variations of
neurosis. Individual Psychology points the way toward a general prophylaxis: it
matters not what someone brings into life; it matters what he makes of it
1 Originally published as "Über Neurose und Begabung," in the
Internationale Zeitschrift für Individualpsychologie, Vol. III, p. 356, 1925. 
2 New translation by Gerald L. Liebenau, 2003. Editing assistance by Kurt A.
Adler,
Chapter XXVII
Disturbances In Love Relationships1 2
[1926]
In order to know people well, it is necessary to understand their love
relationships. We must be able to ascertain whether they act properly or
improperly; we must be able to determine why they act appropriately in one case
and not so in another. From that follows quite obviously the next task: how we
can prevent mistakes in love relationships. When we consider that perhaps the
greatest part of a person's happiness depends on solving problems in love and
marriage, then it becomes apparent that we are faced with a number of most
important issues.
One difficulty in exploring this question becomes apparent right at the
outset--most people express it immediately. People are not all the same and
perhaps two people under different circumstances would have been happier, for
example, if each had found a different partner. This possibility might quickly be
accepted, but it says nothing other than that those involved have made a bad
choice. Whether failures in love are to be found in poor or wrong choices, or
whether we examine cases in which the person would have failed under any
condition because he had to fail for deeper-lying causes, an understanding of the
human psyche and its driving forces will in many cases prevent us from
mistakes.
Love relationships present one of the major questions of human life.
Understanding it is possible only when we examine it in the context of all other
questions of life. Life presents us with a complex of three great tasks on which
our future and our happiness depend.

The first life task is the social task in the broadest sense. Life demands from
everyone a certain behavior and the ability to establish the most extensive
contacts with others, a certain behavior within the family, and a formulation of
one's social attitude. A person's destiny is not indifferent to the direction he
chooses, such as in selecting a social order that guides him toward his goal, that
is, to what extent he thinks only of himself, or how much he is concerned with
benefiting others. His internal choice in this regard is often difficult to discern
from his external decisions. Often a person is unable in questions of social
matters to make any decision, and often his viewpoint can be understood in a
sense different from what it appears. The same applies equally to a political
position taken. Rarely does one find that people are satisfied with their political
party, but often people are met whom one would like to ascribe to another party.
Their attitude toward the community and their behavior toward their fellow man
in the broadest sense play a far greater role than what the individual or others
believes it to be.
1 Originally published as "Liebesbeziehungen und deren Störungen"
Vienna, Leipzig, Moritz Pereles, p. 23, 1926. Reprinted in Psychotherapie und
Erziehung: Ausgewählte Aufsätze, Band I: 1919-1929, p. 99-118. 
2 New translation by Gerald L. Liebenau, 2003. Editing assistance by Kurt A.
Adler,
Another life task that awaits our solution concerns a person's occupation,
that is, the manner in which that person’s energies are applied to serve the
community. The answer to that question will illuminate very clearly the
individual’s nature. For example, when we encounter someone who detests
every occupation, we do not think of him as a suitable fellow human being,
either because he is not yet socially mature, or because he will not mature on his
own without any help from us. When a person enters a particular occupation,
certain interconnections take place of which he is unaware. These correlations
are subconscious because no one who selects an occupation thinks of it as a step
toward being useful to others, seeking a place in the general division of labor.
Certainly, much also depends on how that person acts in the workplace. There
are people who arrive at a point where they choose an occupation, but who fail
in their work, or recognize at some later time that they should have chosen a
different occupation. We can determine from people's frequent changes in work
that we are dealing with individuals who really do not wish to have an
occupation, who think they are too good for any kind of work, which means they
think they are not good enough and pretend they are trying.
The third question posed by life that every person must solve is that of love

and marriage, which we should like to examine here in particular. This is a
question into which a child grows apace as he matures. One's environment is
surrounded by love and by marriage relationships. It is unavoidable that a child,
beginning in his earliest years, develops an attitude and tries to find a direction
for taking a position on these questions. What the child utters on this subject is
not what matters most because a child is consumed by an overwhelming shyness
as soon as this topic is raised. There are children who very decidedly make it
known that they cannot discuss this subject. There are children who are very
devoted to their parents, but find it impossible to act with affection toward them.
A four-year old boy responded to kisses that were offered by striking the person
in the face because the feeling of affection appeared strange to him, frightening,
and actually humiliating. If we look back on our own life, we cannot escape the
feeling that every impulse of affection was accompanied by something like
shame and the impression that one might be weakened and be reduced in worth
for expressing it. This is very curious and requires an explanation. We grow up
with a sense that any expression of affection is shameful. This sentiment agrees
with the uniform direction of our society towards a masculine ideal.
Accordingly, our children are brought up in school, in their reading, and in their
total environment with an impression that matters of love are not masculine, a
view they sometimes express very openly. Some go so far in this respect that we
speak of them as being insensitive.
The first feelings of affection appear very early in the child. We can easily
see in children’s development that these are impulses of innate social feelings.
The fact that social feelings are innate is illuminated by the regularity with
which they appear on each occasion. The degree to which they unfold presents
us with the possibility of gaining a broader view of the individual's attitude
toward life. The concept of "Mensch" (human being) already entails for us our
total understanding of the social feeling. We could not conceive of a human
being who lost it and could still be regarded as human. Also, in history we
cannot find people living as isolated individuals. Wherever we find people, they
appear in groups, unless an individual was artificially separated from the rest, or
became separated because of being deranged. Darwin demonstrated that animals
not favored by nature live in herds. The vitality, the life force, of these
disadvantaged animals has the effect of their gathering in herds, following
subconsciously a principle of selfpreservation. We can further understand that all
those animals living separately, those poorly treated by nature in the
development of a social feeling, had to perish. They became victims of a natural
selection. The principle of natural selection also threatens human beings who are
poorly equipped to struggle with nature.

The state of inferiority and inadequacy of the human race results in both the
individual as well as the masses being constantly driven to a state approximating
calm and stability. We are still on this course and for now humankind might
perhaps best be comforted by being aware that our present situation is nothing
other than a transition, a momentary phase in human development. Those in
harmony with reality and able to justify the logic of the way things are will
endure all problems of life, while those who resist that logic will be ill fated by
nature. In the deepest sense, however, a feeling for the logic of human
coexistence is the social feeling.
The whole development of a child demands an imbedding with
circumstances were there is social feeling.3 Life and health are guaranteed only
when there are people who will devote themselves to that person. A newborn
calf, for example, very soon can distinguish a poisonous plant from others. The
newborn infant, however, because of the inferiority of his organism, is
dependent upon the social feeling of adults. Children must be cared for a long
time, taught, and brought up until they have acquired independence to care for
themselves.
Even when we consider the capabilities that give us our pride and
preeminence over other living things, such as reason, logic, speech,
understanding, and our predilection for all things beautiful and good, we must
recognize that the individual alone never could have attained those qualities,
which first had to be created, in a sense, in the psyche of the masses. With these
we pacify needs that would never have burdened the individual, since those
came to life only in a human community. A solitary person with no connection
to a community would have no need for a conscious, consciously controlled,
logic; he would have no need to speak, and it would be all the same whether he
is good or evil, a concept that loses its meaning without a relationship to a
community, to a fellow human being, as is the case with solitary animals. All
qualities of the human inner life, all attainments of the human spirit, are
conceivable only in the context of people interacting.
3 (Editor’s note) Compare this with Adler's comments in "Discussion of
Paragraph 144, Legalizing Abortion" in Chapter XXVII of The Collected
Clinical Works of Alfred Adler, Volume 5.
This human interaction is ensured not only by need, not only by daily
necessities, but also by our sexual make up. The division of mankind into two
sexes is by no means a separation, but rather signifies an eternal compulsion
toward one another. It provides the sense of a mutual relationship because in the
veins of others there flows blood common to everyone, because the flesh of each

is from the flesh of the other. The marriage laws of nations can be understood
only if one accepts that they regard love as a common bond of the group. They
prohibit marriage and sexual relations among members of a family since that
would lead to the isolation of the family. Poets, religions, the Ten
Commandments, turn against inbreeding and try to eradicate it. The greatest
scholars have racked their brains over the reason for the existence of a natural
aversion to family members. We can understand it easily on the grounds of the
social feeling that develops in every child and that excludes all possibilities that
could lead to people becoming isolated.
We have now reached the point where we are ready to understand that what
we actually call love, the relationship between the sexes, exists always in the
context of social feeling from which it cannot be separated. Love as a
relationship between two people as part of social feeling has its own rules and,
as an essential part for upholding human society, is inconceivable outside of the
community. Whoever consents to the community must by necessity also consent
to love. Whoever is possessed of a social feeling must support marriage or a
form of love that is similar or worthier. However, those whose social feelings
were throttled, who have been unable to develop freely among others, will
display a strange form of love relationships.
Looking back, we can now draw a number of conclusions that will facilitate
an overview of the extensive range of love relationships and will illuminate the
darkness somewhat. We can establish that a person whose social development
was marred, who has no friends, who never became a true fellow human being,
whose philosophy of life is a purely personal one and is contrary to social
feeling, and also is probably unable to solve problems in his work. Therefore, a
person who is all but lost for the community must have problems in his love
relationships and is hardly able to deal with matters relating to sex. People who
develop in that direction will follow strange paths, create problems, and look for
safe excuses at every opportunity. We shall now examine these difficulties more
closely, in order to gain a greater insight into the entire problem. We shall be
able to ascertain that in love relationships also, the entire personality of an
individual resonates. It is possible for us not only to understand his personality
from his love relationships, but also to surmise from an understanding of his
total personality the unique sexual demands that he makes. In sexual
relationships we see very widely held premises, even though wrong, according
to which love obligates the other partner.
If we pay somewhat closer attention to life around us and at the same time
observe ourselves a little, we can become convinced that the person we love is
obligated to us by virtue of being loved. This mistake somehow appears to be

contained in our total outlook. It arises out of our childhood and from the
relationships within the family in which the love of one obligates the other. We
carry only a residue of that childhood viewpoint when we decide to transfer
these relationships into our lives. The negative forms this takes can somehow be
grouped along the following line of thought: "Because I love you, you must do
this and that." This has a considerable impact on those who really care for each
other. One individual’s need for power demands that steps, expressions,
gestures, achievements, etc. are followed according to his will only because "he
loves this person." Supported by the emphasis on his own love, he wants to pull
the other into his scheme, into his pattern of life. This can easily lead to tyranny.
We can find a trace of this in probably every love relationship.
We thus see this element weaving through the love life of every person; this
quality that elsewhere always leads to troubling human fellowships: the striving
for power and personal superiority. In a humane community, the freedom of the
individual must be respected to the extent to which there is an uninhibited
development of that person. Whoever strives for personal superiority avoids
connection with the community. In their relationships with others, such people
seek subordination, not integration. With that, they naturally disturb the harmony
in life, in the society, and among fellow human beings. Since no one will allow
himself to be constantly under a yoke, those who seek to dominate, even their
partner in a love relationship, will face enormous difficulties. If they wish to
bring their tendency toward superiority into the sexual relationship, they must
either find a partner who appears to submit to them, or they must struggle with a
partner who also seeks superiority or victory in sex, or can be enticed into it. In
the first instance we see a transformation from love to slavery, in the second
there is a constant mutually generated struggle for power that has no promise of
harmony.
The paths that are followed in this context are enormously varied. There are
domineering natures who fear so much for their ambitions, their power, that they
seek only a partner over whom they believe their superiority to be ensured and
one who always appears to be subordinated. This relates not only to worthless
ambitious persons, but to the obsession with striving for power as a generally
dominant characteristic in our culture. The immeasurable damage it causes to the
development of all mankind has been the subject of Individual Psychological
research, which has recorded the approximate limits to which it reaches. If one,
for example, were to examine Goethe's love life from this perspective, one
would be astonished at the enormous insecurity with which this ambitious
person encountered problems in his love life.
We can thus understand those peculiarities that often confront us in life

when people in their choices in affairs of love descend into a much lower and
inappropriate social milieu. Not too infrequently, for example, one finds a man
who occupies himself with only the most serious problems facing mankind and
then surprises everyone by marrying his cook. We, who emphasize so much the
equality of all people, are not indignant about this but see in this behavior a
falling out of character and wish to understand it from the standpoint of the actor
by examining his ultimate intent. We have in mind a norm according to which
people seek each other out who are socially well suited for each other based on
their educational background and preparation for life. If we observe the suitor
who chose someone quite different from what commonly is expected, then we
see in most cases a person who faces the problems of love with extraordinary
timidity and preconceptions, who fears the sexual partner, and for that reason
seeks a partner who is suspected to be less powerful and strong. It probably is
possible that someone from a feeling of strength would depart from the common
norm. In most cases, however, we see that this occurs out of weakness.
With such a choice of partner some cautious natures might look upon
themselves as having been extraordinarily lucky, even though they do not
understand their own ultimate intention, cover their deeper motives with love
and sex, and are convinced that the god of love had a hand in their affair. The
course that such a relationship takes is usually bad. It has been shown that
avoiding this kind of rivalry between the sexes is fraught with manifold
disadvantages. The disadvantages appear to be not that the person who is
intellectually or socially more advanced will be disappointed, or that there will
be problems of a social nature when the "lower" partner is not competent in
meeting certain demands and thus introduces difficulties into the family or social
life. These and other external factors could be eliminated or covered up if the
ultimate purpose of the higher standing partner could be realized. However, the
result is the peculiar fact that the partners who are of a lower rank do not tolerate
for long having their weakness abused. Even if they do not understand what goes
on here, they cannot escape the feeling that their shortcoming is being toyed
with. They walk away from that feeling and arrive at a kind of revenge in which
they try to let the partner understand that they are not lesser persons.
There are many conspicuous cases of this type. Often, a young, cultivated,
highly intelligent girl throws herself into the arms of an unimportant, frequently
even corrupt person, sometimes with the idea of saving him whom she seems to
love, and to wrest him from the grasp of alcoholism, gambling, or indolence.
Never have such people been saved through love; the effort fails almost every
time. Deep down, the person of lower status feels the oppression derived from
being classified as inferior. He does not allow himself to be loved and to be

saved because the moving forces of his life are totally different and cannot be
recognized by common sense. He probably gave up long ago the hope that
something would come of him, and he sees in every situation that requires of
him to be a true fellow human being a new danger in which his supposed
inferiority could come to light.
We also know many people who have another, unexplainable tendency to
seek as their love partner only someone with physical shortcomings. There are
young girls who are enamored only with older men, and there are as many cases
the other way around. These facts become apparent and rightfully stimulate our
need for clarification. When we examine these people more closely, we can
sometimes find in particular relationships natural, well-founded, explanations,
but in all cases this tendency reflects the usual lifestyle of such persons: to take
the line of least resistance.
We can also find people who fall in love only with partners who already are
committed to someone else. This unusual fact can reveal a number of intentions.
Under certain conditions, it can mean as much as a "no" in response to an offer
of love, to strive for something impossible, sometimes an ideal that cannot be
fulfilled. It can also reveal the characteristic of having a desire to "steal away,"
which in some people is carried over into the sexual realm, and is determined by
the rest of their style of life. However, first we would like to examine the large
number of cases in which the suitor is intent upon evading the sexual life task,
and who tries to solve it by this no longer unusual means.
There are people who have developed a romantic attachment for someone
without knowing whether that person even exists. This attitude speaks clearly of
the ultimate intent: They don't want to know anything of love or marriage and
have romantic feelings where these probably can never be realized. The same is
true for the predominant number of people who constantly experience unhappy
love. In most cases, it is the means to realize that that from the beginning was the
life goal: with an apparent justification to give up a normal life and to turn away
from the world. In those cases, an unhappy love can never be too tragic to fulfill
this purpose. It applies to those persons who were always ready to run from the
questions of life, and in particular love. This being on the verge of running away
sometimes finds welcome support from a deception, a subterfuge. Such is not
always simply made up of whole cloth, but has some bearing on an actual
relationship in life and now no longer appears to be a subterfuge, but the obvious
result of an experience. An enormous number of people have not fully matured
socially, see in affairs of love and marriage a danger zone, and express their
immature views in manifold, but often outwardly incomprehensible ways. When
such people speak about these always disturbing questions, they utter

generalities that might be true in some context and not appear to be banalities.
When someone, for example, who is otherwise a timid person, declares that he is
not going to marry "since life would then be too difficult," for those who do not
get married every word is true, at the same time it also is true for those who
marry. Only those make such assertions who, even without these truths, would
have responded with “no,” except that they would then have grasped at other
“truths.” It would not be appropriate to support a preconceived intent with a poor
rationale when good justifications are easily available. Those who have had the
opportunity to study the frighteningly large number of people who run away
from dealing with questions of life will not be surprised that sex is used to mask
this avoidance.
For those who run away one much tested subterfuge can be recommended
in particular. That person first acquires a new idea, a particular ideal. Against
this ideal all those whom one meets are measured. This results in no one
measuring up. All diverge from that ideal and when we reject and exclude them,
we then appear to be reasonable and justified. Only when we have selected and
examined a particular case do we find that the people who choose so sensibly
would have said "no" from the outset, even without having to resort to an ideal.
The ideal contains wishful goals of candor, sincerity, courage, etc.. These
concepts can be extended at our pleasure as far as we wish, exceeding all human
measures. We, therefore, have the power to wish for something that heretofore
was "made" unattainable by us.
The subterfuge by which we do not have to love, because we love
something that is unattainable, has various possibilities for becoming concrete.
We can love a person who appeared to us for only a short period of time, made
an impression, disappeared and can no longer be found. We would have to
search the whole world in order to find him. At first, we are touched when we
hear of such fervent and faithful love. The requirement for realizing such love on
this earth, that is to search the whole world to find that person, is super human
and challenges our already aroused suspicions.
We also can make a person unreachable. Often, the suitor at the outset has
the impression that he is not going to get far. This then becomes the starting
point for more extensive action. He believes it impossible to live without the
person he loves, woos that person although every objective outsider would
consider it unlikely that there would ever be requited love. The person even
admits that to himself. Often, one can observe that the courting was conducted in
a form that provoled a negative response, in that, for example, it was noticeably
vehement, or took place at a time when there was absolutely no guarantee that
living together would be possible.

Courting of this kind is bent on an unhappy love relationship. The vast
number of those who steer in their courting toward unhappy love is truly
surprising. If viewed objectively, one might believe that such behavior is
contrary to human nature. However, we are unable to recognize from external
indications that we are dealing here with individuals who are only "bolters."
Individual Psychology's illumination explains that an unhappy love represents an
excellent hiding place for such people. If unhappy people live with hapless love
for five or ten years, they actually are secure for that time from any other
solution to that problem. They clearly have suffered and have paid for having
succeeded in their intention. However, they reached in good conscience the goal
for a solution to the problem of love and marriage, of which they were not aware
and which they did not understand, and now feel justified. Their deepest tragedy
is the fact that this goal and its attainment, which did not solve anything at all, is
not in consonance with the reality of this world and with the logic of human
coexistence. Only this deepest insight can finally be the corrective intercession.
Tendencies to love people who already have made other choices in their
love life must always mean a "no." The history of prominent persons can teach
us a lesson in this regard: in our complicated civilization such people have
grown up with an extreme passion for stealing, taking from others. The desire to
covet married women is always followed by new endeavors, to conquer the
object of love, even when such actions often appear to be most honorable.
Richard Wagner seems to have been this type of person. His poetic creations
almost always appear to be interwoven with the idea and the complication of a
hero who desires a woman who already is possessed by another. Richard
Wagner's life seems to follow this path as well.
Generally, the feeling of insecurity dictates many forms of sexual
relationships. There are young men who find sympathy only for older women
based on the ill-founded idea that the problems of living together are made easier
in such a relationship. They also betray their feeling of weakness by a certain
need for maternal care. They are among the most pampered people who have a
great need for support and about whom one can say, "They still need a nanny."
They represent the type of person who cannot get enough security in relations
with the other sex, and who is seriously troubled meeting with someone from the
other sex. In our culture there is a frighteningly large number of such insecure
people; they openly display the blemishes of this phase of our development: the
fear of love and marriage. This is not an atypical phenomenon, but a general
characteristic of our time. Our society is fraught with bolters. Feeling pursued
and persecuted, they are constantly in flight from some unhappy and failed
situation. There are men who are isolated and in hiding; there are women who

fear to go out into the streets convinced that all men seek a romantic relationship
with them, and that they always will only be molested. Here, pure vanity plays
its game and can totally ruin a person's life.
Experience and insight can be applied positively as well as negatively.
Among the latter, we have found that the exaggerated rectification of a mistake
itself can be a mistake. The antithesis of restraint and taciturnity is candor. We
thus find people who by being candid make mistakes. There are people who tend
to offer themselves to others. While it is nice to acknowledge one's love freely,
we are, nevertheless, also imbued with the truth that in our culture, which is
difficult to cope with, this can lead to serious mistakes. There is no one who
would not have some trouble dealing easily with such an offer. Not only the pain
of remorse and regret will burden the person who made the hasty offer of love,
but the partner also will have trouble allowing his feelings of love to unfold
freely. Apprehension ensues that the offer of love was not genuine or, because of
the common misuse of love and existing tensions resulting from the struggle
within the sexes, the offer is suspect of concealing harmful intentions. There are
no hard and fast rules; we must take into account the particularity of the partner
and adhere to the reality of our culture. It would seem advisable today to rein in
one's predilections.
Among , love, requited and to an even greater measure, unrequited, plays a
special role. We might say that unrequited love is such a common experience in
our time that there could hardly be anyone who has not been burdened by it.
However, among those who are particularly sensitive, the artist plays an
exceptionally prominent role. This is more apparent because in art the artists
seek a life "next to life;" they see themselves active not in real life, but look for a
substitute world in which reality is all but cast out. Clearly, they attain the rank
of artist only when they create characters in a manner that makes them
acceptable in the real world. Every art becomes such only when it encompasses a
universal value by which artists through their creations find the way back to the
reality of the community.
In detouring from the reality of life lies a tendency to perceive as hostile
and troubling the reality of life's emphasis on the institution of love and
marriage. We encounter numerous artists who look upon the ties that are part of
life literally as bonds, shackles, or barriers to which they give limitless form
even in their fantasies. They are barely able to overcome these perceived
immeasurable obstacles and find themselves in their relationships with the other
sex facing an insolvable problem by displaying not only the actions of a lover,
but concurrently and in greater measure, the actions of one who takes flight from
love. This is expressed in their thoughts and in their creations, which reflect the

problems of mankind in an accentuated form. The partner in some way is
perceived as overpowering and soon the love affair takes on the character of a
dangerous venture. These thoughts are found almost verbatim in the works of
poets and writers. All problematic natures have the same characteristics because
all are extremely ambitious and sensitive, regarding any denigration of their
power status as a serious affront or simply as a danger. In that vein, the poet
Baudelaire said: "I could never think of a beautiful woman without also sensing
immense danger."
The sight of a person entering what he presumes to be the "danger zone”
presents us with a series of movements that are defensive and protective in
nature. Hebbel in letters sent in his youth to his friend, describes his feelings
somewhat as follows: "Of course I am living here again across the street from
the most beautiful girl in town and have fallen head over heels in love with her.
Hopefully, the antidote here also will be next to the poison.... And when I see her
lover climb through her window again today, I shall then be done with her." This
is the consequence of an impression from which we should have expected a
different outcome.
The woman as danger is an invariable ideal in art. We need only scrutinize
the paintings of Rops, who depicted women as danger, alarming, or at least as
overwhelmingly powerful. Art today is mainly masculine, conveying the male
tradition, raising primarily male problems, and revealing women as enchanting
or dreadful figures, which they actually are in the eyes of many men. Women
cannot keep up with such a masculine ideal of our time and find difficulties in
taking up art not because they lack in talent, but because they cannot serve the
exaggerated male ideal. The introduction to "A Thousand and One Nights"
describes how the author is shocked by the guile and deceptiveness of the
woman who saves her life from the man with incredible inventiveness. Even the
oldest literate art, the Bible for example, which captivates every person from
earliest childhood with its distinctive mood, is infused by the constantly
accompanying thought that women represent a danger, so that a child grows up
shy, emotional, handicapped, and timid with regard to them. One of the greatest
creations of art, The Iliad, describes with great precision the calamity caused by
a woman. All literature and art resounds with the problem of our time: Women
as danger. Grillparzer says of himself: "I have rescued myself from love by
escaping into art."
We cannot readily predict how the tendency toward unhappiness will affect
a person. His total attitude toward life, his lifeline, becomes significant in this
respect. If we have a person before us who loses courage when difficulties arise
and who stops being active, then a ruined love affair could mean that his life will

also be in ruin. The unhappy love itself does not lead to this consequence. The
person who has it in him to be spurred on by difficulties will be able to bestir
himself out of an unhappy love affair and attain greatness. An unhappy love is
neither tragic nor restorative; either consequence can be drawn from it,
depending on whether the consequences are drawn by a courageous or a broken
down person. Common psychology often points to the great achievements that
come out of an unhappy love affair, sometimes recommending it as a cure. We
know people who have achieved greatness even without having to experience an
unhappy love. The correct kernel in this half-truth is that the artist is attracted to
and fascinated by the problem of love to an exceptional degree.
The life of Goethe in this regard is particularly instructive. He always saw
danger in the female; he was constantly in flight from love. The underlying
thread in "Faust" is the eternal search for a solution to the problems of love. He
constructed his world out of his own tensions, feelings, and striving, dissatisfied
with the reality of life, magically producing common human characteristics
before our eyes. The greatness of his art evokes in us the feeling of harmony
whenever he sounds that timeless song of tension between the sexes in which
people diffidently fear that devotion equals loss of one's personality, sexual
dependency, or slavery.
Mention should also be made here of Schleiermacher, who has a wonderful
treatise in which he tries to show that love is no simple matter, that it is foolish
to believe that when a person goes out into the world he already knows
something of love. Everyone actually should undergo a certain preparation, a
simplified pre-school. Even this idealist of the purest sort, highly esteemed by
the most religious people, cannot close his eyes to the fact that in matters of
love, people cannot easily find the way to one another. In my lectures on the
knowledge of human nature, which are attended regularly by about 500 people,
most questions raised are about love, which indicates that people have greater
difficulty in that area than, for instance, in their occupations.
Why are there so few happy love relationships? Mankind has not yet
attained full maturity in matters of love because we are deficient in the area of
human fellowship. We are too defensive because we are too fearful. One need
only consider the difficulties encountered with the idea of educating children of
both sexes together, co-education, which really has no other purpose than to
overcome fear among the sexes early in life, and to provide youth the
opportunity to get to know one another better.
There is no cure in the form of a fixed rule for behavior for problems in
affairs of love. The experiences of Individual Psychology show anew each day
that the peculiarities of human sexuality are a facet of the total personality which

in each case has to be comprehended individually. We must understand the
context of all expressions of an individual, his personality and his relationship to
those around him in order to change his failed sexuality. The line of movement
of a person will also assert itself in love. It will force a person sometimes to look
for an unhappy love and to persist in it, or it will allow for accepting such a
situation more easily, leaving the individual to go on with life and progress. If
these are people filled with ambition, unable to accept any kind of rejection, then
this ambition may seem to lead to suicide, given that our society fosters
subordination. Such a situation gives rise to the opportunity for a highly tragic
situation that combines fleeing from life's responsibilities with revenge against
society as well as against individual persons.
Love relationships are enhanced and refined through the cultivation of the
social feeling that encompasses all people. Love relationships are not formed
suddenly, but indicate a long period of preparation. Sexual attraction between
people is always present, but it requires certain conditions before it is felt and
becomes apparent as love. The stirrings of love began in those distant days when
such feelings were colored neither erotically nor sexually, when only the broad
stream of social feeling poured forth in the form of devotion and kindness, when
only a universal human relationship was apparent, which (such as between
mother and child) connects people instantly. It did not become what we call
love, that enduring bond between individuals serving mankind eternally and
ensuring its stability. It is both a bond and a perpetuation. These relationships
cannot be formed arbitrarily, but must be left to their own designs. An
understanding of such matters has not yet matured because the individual is
capable of deceiving himself about these processes in his own soul. Both sexes
are only too easily led into the maelstrom of prestige politics, playing a role of
which neither is capable, disturbing the innocence and spontaneity of their lives.
This process fills them with a prejudice in the face of which every vestige of
happiness and joy must simply disappear.
Whoever has absorbed these thoughts will not, of course, wander on this
earth flawlessly, but will at least remain aware of the right path and will steadily
diminish rather than magnify his mistakes.
Chapter XXVIII
Psychological Attitude of Women Toward Sex1 2
[1926]
Definitive bases for the study of this question are not easily found. The
scientific orientation these days is to study the language of blood, to draw
conclusions from the valence of the endocrine glands and from their correlation,
and make the assumption that physical stability will produce an ideal sexual

behavior.
Yet, even at this point the question arises: What is the ideal form that we
envision as we weigh and measure? Is the goal of female sexual development
dependent only on the fitness of her ovaries, on their supporting mechanism, and
on their distractions? What are the arbiter's conditions for what is good and bad?
Is that judgment based on the attainment of the greatest pleasure, the largest
number of children, giving free vent to the drives? Does he demand equality of
the sexes or the subordination of one to the other?
There are so many questions, so many goals in the development of a
woman, so many demands for sexual lifestyles. The literature on this human
problem is immense. The works of poets, writers, painters, and sculptors
disperse more light than scientific works in this field, which themselves are
accompanied by a flood of pseudo-scientific foolishness, is dispersed by. They
range from the Bible and pass via fables and fairy tales to modern works of
fiction, drama, and lyrical poetry written by men and women in which erotic
problems are touched or developed. Since art to this day is almost exclusively
the work of men, just as is science, it reflects primarily the knowledge of males
on the inner life of the female. Not infrequently, however, there are powerful
unresolved questions that remind us of what has been said by ancient and
modern writers wrestling with this puzzle: "Women are a riddle!"
The impact of men making judgments is undoubtedly sinister and
denigrates the woman as a male object, or a victim of her female drives. The
observer often does not look beyond a woman trying to be beautiful and beyond
her task to bear children. In addition, the apparent lack of character, intellectual
freedom, objectivity, the ability to earn a living, and public involvement are
deemed to be so important that the only reason that seems left to justify a
woman's existence is love, and the care of the next generation. Such judgments
affect a woman's outlook enormously. For the most part, women will speak in
consonance with the attributes assigned them by men, and seem to accept the
role ascribed to them. In an exaggerated revolt, George Sand slashes this system
with: "The virtuousity of woman--that is a good invention by men!"
1 Originally published as "Psychische Einstellung der Frau zum
Sexualleben" in the Handbuch der Normalen und Pathologischen Physiologie"
Volume 14, Part 1, pages 
802-807, 1926. Reproduction, Development, and Growth. Berlin, publisher:
Julius Springer, 1926. 
2 New translation by Gerald L. Liebenau, 2003. Editing asssistance by Kurt A.
Adler, M.D., Ph.D.

When one looks at this subject closely, it becomes apparent that aside from
the physical basis for the sexual attitude of women there are other, much more
powerful influences that determine a woman's sexual life. In very general terms,
we should take into account the spirit of the times, the number, or greater
number, of women, and the significant male influence regarding prerogatives in
courting, his more stable economic situation, and his better intellectual and
practical education. As far as we know, the raising of girls for the role of a
woman takes all these factors into account and tries to adjust them. A woman's
sexual attitude based solely on physical attributes, as sexuality isolated from all
other factors, is found primarily in idiots or the demented. Otherwise, every form
of sexual life entails a preconceived and ready attitude with regard to love.
One thing is certain: female sexuality is by no means uniform, but is
dependent on various factors. Even if a certain uniformity can be observed at
different times, in different places, by different people, among different age
groups, as is the case with fashions, it is easy to understand that despite all
appearances of uniformity ("It is her constant complaining of aches and pains for
which there is only one cure"), every individual attitude evinces significant
differences. Whoever concludes from the commonly held wish to get her man a
desire for a natural, but also socially necessary, sexual readiness should
remember that a woman is limited by tradition, personal pride, and economics,
which are just as important in choosing a partner as sexual impulses.
Organically, sexual impulses are much more manageable and alterable by the
lifestyle of the individual and by her final goal, and can be disciplined to follow
different directions. The traces of the sexual drive from early childhood are
modulated by the surrounding culture and are either repressed or aroused, like all
other drives, by the effect on the girl of individual events or experiences that are
not only sexually derived. If the upbringing of a girl in its totality formed her
into an obviously passive person, her sexual behavior will reflect that passive
trait.
We are capable only in individual cases to determine all the influences that
affect the erotic expression of a woman. One cannot expect to arrive at an actual
causality from the ways she expresses herself, or from the psychological attitude
of a woman toward her sex life. All organic feelings and organic impulses, all
experiences pass through the filter of the personality and are individually
perceived. From the standpoint of an ideal type, every evaluation of the factors
cited above, every feeling of worth and its expression is developed more or less
erroneously. A woman will experience and evaluate a romantic approach,
courting, the internal and external disposition of a partner in light of the goal that
she sees for her way of life. Eroticism never is a purely animalistic sexual drive,

as viewed by Schopenhauer, as only nature's way of enticing for the purpose of
propagation. Rather, it is an essential part of human social feelings which
reflects the total personality and thus also the degree of interaction with society,
and a readiness for life with another person.
Individual Psychological research established that the development of the
ability to love could be strengthened by certain conditions and threatened by
others. A person’s childhood situation is critical, as is timely preparation of girls
for their future female role. The belief in one's own powers, an optimistic view
of the future, the ability to relate to others, a tendency to bring joy, an uncritical
feeling of belonging to the female sex, and respect for the role of woman are
conducive elements. Ignorance of one's own female role, or uncertainty brought
on during several childhood years, strong bonding to only one person in the
family, general feelings of frailty or inferiority, a loveless upbringing, lack of
selfconfidence and mistrust of others, ugliness, but also beauty, and above all a
contempt for women can interfere with a readiness for love, whatever the
circumstances.
The conditions that existed during a girl's childhood are of greatest
importance. Parents in a bad marriage, a father who is coarse, a drunkard,
careless, and openly unfaithful cause a daughter to fear that she will succumb to
the same fate as that of her deeply hurt mother. The attitude of women with this
background toward men, even under the most favorable sexual circumstances,
will never be free of doubt, misgivings, and inhibitions. Their goal and final
purpose, not to have to experience degradation, which they certainly assume to
be a part of their female role, forces them to renounce such a role, and to bring
into their lives a means to protect themselves that we later see in the form of
inhibition, nervous symptoms, and perversion. Running parallel with these
symptoms we find a philosophy of life, a logic, habits, a disciplining in their
sexual drives, yes, the entire course of their life is one that turns them away from
men. Depending on the personality that was already developed in early
childhood and their experiences and more or less wrong attitudes, the natural
erotic final goal becomes a surrogate final goal. This substitute goal3is always in
a peripheral area (perversions of all types and accentuating some aspects of
eroticism) or fulfills the goal only partly (frigidity), showing early fear of men,
halfheartedness, or loathing, or has a masculine influence that shows up in the
sex life, as well as in a generally male orientation in life. Such a limited or full
rejection of the female role is also expressed in characteristic ways. Aversion to
pregnancy and nursing are common characteristics; in milder cases it leads to the
child, as opposed to the husband, becoming the final goal. In most cases that fit
this category, nervous symptoms of all types prevent the harmonic development

of a sexual life. The tendency toward prostitution and exaggerated polygamous
tendencies show the resentment of the female role. A significant manifestation of
such a rejection is vaginismus.
If we are looking for a uniform point of view to understand all these
disparaging manifestations of the female role, we shall find it in the
dissatisfaction of girls with their status in society, nurtured by an assumed or real
overwhelming role of men, which leads to an aggressive stance. This aggressive
posture can range from an open revolt to an apathetic submissiveness. The force
for change encompasses ideals that range from gynarchy to emancipation and
are expressed by women in their personal lives in a hundred forms of "masculine
protest."4 In his anthropology, Kant points to the same experience. In his
collection of wedding songs from all ages and nations, Herder discovered the
same sad theme throughout. The commonly held superstition that women are
inferior, their almost total exclusion from the highest ranks in the sciences and
the arts, the reasons for which lie partly in their poor preparation and partly in
the masculine character of artistic expression--women often attain the greatest
achievement in dance and the performing arts--generally causes embitterment
and early discouragement. No wonder that such widely felt dissatisfaction with
the female role leads women to mimic men in fashions, desires, fantasies, and in
their general as well as in their sex lives. No wonder that in estimates by
experienced physicians, the percentage of frigid women, despite a healthy sexual
constitution, is approximately 70%.
3Adler: Ueber den nervösen Charakter, 3rd edition, Munich, J.F. Bergmann,
1922.
Aside from these conditions that stand in the way of a free development of
a socially and culturally, but also inseparable from them, acceptable sexuality,
the lack of, or poor, preparation for love presents a serious obstacle to a
harmonious sex life. Mutual suspicions, extensive selfishness, the tendency to
grow beyond the partner and the fear of becoming submissive to him, hinder a
natural devotion, and poison the love relationship. Women who lack in beauty
fear a quick cooling off by their husbands; beautiful women feel depressed,
believe themselves only to be sex objects, and feel an affront to their human
dignity. This often results from their partner's bachelor habits, unfavorable
sexual relations, or a misunderstanding of the unique nature of male sexuality.
Ineptness, brutality, or bruising a partner's sensibilities at the first encounter can
have lasting effects. Similarly, jealously limiting a partner's freedom of
movement early in marriage, fearful experiences in childhood, an unexpected or
forced pregnancy, preconceived ideas about pain and danger to the woman are

factors that do not diminish the feeling of inferiority.
During the development of the sexual drive, however, the awakened
impulses force autoerotic and onanistic behavior. This can bring about
satisfaction through masturbation either earlier or later in life, caused either by
seduction, or on its own, and can either be encouraged or inhibited by the social
and cultural environment of the child. While masturbation in itself is harmless, it
can lead men toward autoerotism, a ready outlet that can reduce sexual tension,
inhibit a normal sexual development, and reinforce arguments against
masturbation.
The difference between our views and those of the “somatic” is very great.
We emphasize cultural problems and mistakes, poor behavior, and lack of
preparation. The constitutionalists consider these factors to be insignificant or
attribute them to an insufficiency in internal secretions. We would counter those
arguments as follows:
4 Adler: Praxis und Theorie der Individualpsychologie, 2nd edition, Munich, J.F.
Bergmann, 1923.
1. Even the most perfect organism can fail because of defects or mistakes. 
2. In some respects, we have given sufficient consideration to the inferiority of
organs and the internal secretion of glands, admittedly always in an important
purely organic context, which is: how this inferiority is expressed in relation to
the demands of the prevailing culture and how it effects the selfesteem leading to
a depressed self-respect. 
3. In the case of women with antisocial sexual attitudes the physical and spiritual
disciplining that ensues creates other values and interests. It also secondarily
changes the organic basis of the sexual functions, the adverse effects of which
lead to new problems. External, function-inducing stimulation will be restrained,
impulses of the organ will be deterred or deferred, the organ will be placed into
an artificial state of rest and by the forcibly changed lifestyle can be damaged
even further. When girls go on a “hunder strike,” possibly always induced by the
"masculine protest" arising from a rejection of the female role, ovary and gland
secretion diminishes. However, even before that, the sexual apparatus is turned
off by other ways of gratifying the inner life. 
Therefore, it is understandable that all so-called "female" characteristics to the
greatest extent are subordinated to the social power relationship between men
and women. It is that power relationship that causes characteristics, that forms
them, and that can destroy them. Even such seemingly inborn traits as
anticipating a suitor, passivity, restraint, feeling of shame, motherhood, and
monogamy are greatly dependent on trends of the times, and are directed by the
final goal. Insinuated characteristics of exhibitionism, often justified by fashions,

can still be considered moderate, obvious ways of expression betray an excessive
nature. 
In this connection, and with the demeaning of the partner, one often finds a
fetishlike exaggeration of irrelevancies that can inhibit the choice of partner as
much as an idealized image of the partner. Both can lead to the failure of a
fulfilling relationship. They often are merely poorly understood excuses for
allowing every choice of a partner to fail. Otherwise we find the choice of a
partner as well as self-restricting the sexual drive responding to manifold
motives. Early childhood impressions, one's image of the father, brothers, of
one's own nation, often have a great influence. As long as the choice of a partner
is uninhibited it will always correspond to the shortcomings and preferences of
the individual's attitude. A woman with a resolute feeling of power, rarely found,
will give preference to men with like feelings. Girls who secretly wish for
superiority will tend to be attracted to weaklings and cripples or chose someone
beneath their social standing. The same is true for those who tend to be attracted
to significantly older or younger men. Often, an urge for motherhood will be
fortified in the most fruitless ways by trying to save or uplift a hopeless partner
or by ignoring the rules of normal eroticism.
Lesbian love, sexual fantasies, masturbation and seminal emissions are a
masculine protest and betray a fear of men and their rejection. Homosexual
dreams, generally wrongly assumed to be harmful, are not proof of
homosexuality, but an indication of wrong training. Tendencies toward
polygamy, excessive flirting, attempts at compromising oneself, coquettish
fantasies, screaming after a man, are indications of attempts at ending a
marriage. Adultery always is a sign of a revolt against the man, an act of revenge
covered by a purposefully bristling eroticism.
The first signs of menstruation often send signals of aggression if the woman has
been poorly prepared for the female role. Frequently such protest is inflamed at
the onset of every menstrual period. In the absence of organic causes pains
suffered at such time are occasioned by capricious contractions, by stopping the
blood flow, and by the discontent and rejection of the event. This theory is
supported in marriage by the disappearance of pains with a reconciliation of the
female role. The common belief that a menstrual period constitutes
uncleanliness, or an illness, propagated often even by physicians, affects the self
esteem of the woman and often leads to discord. A rise in erotic feelings (even
though not dangerous) appears frequently during that time. 
Women who see beauty and youth as almost the only meritorious quality about
being a female, regard the approach of menopause, and menopause itself, as a
most fatal and fateful event. Lost is the last remnant of their belief in their own

worth. Often from depression and despair growing out of the aging process they
try to regain their selfesteem by making excessive demands on those around
them. Some plunge into destructive conflicts through eroticism, which does not
vanish during that time but everywhere is rejected, derided, and not taken
seriously. The faulty attitude toward life takes its revenge on man and woman.
This is not to undervalue the organic basis of eroticism, but a necessary
observation after having uncovered the preponderant impact of a faulty and
misleading attitude. 
In closing, if we are to mention the most inadequately accepted premises for a
healthy psychological attitude by women toward their sexual lives, they would
be the following: 
1. Early enlightenment regarding the inalterability of the sexual role and the
need to reconcile oneself with it. 
2. Education and preparation toward a love life that is in consonance with social
feeling. 
3. Respect of the female role. 
4. Affirmation of life and humanity
Comprehensive Works
Heymans, G., Die Psychologie der Frauen (The Psychology of Women)
Heidelberg: C. Winter 1910.
Weininger, O. Geschlecht und Charakter (Gender and Character) 17th Edition,
Vienna: Braumüller 1918.
Vaerting, Wahrheit und Irrtum in der Geschlechtspsychologie, (Truth and Error
in the Psychology of Sex), Karlsruhe, G. Braun, 1923.
Mill, J. St. Die Hörigkeit der Frau (The Subservience of Woman) Berlin 1869.
Schirmacher, K. The Modern Women's Movement, Leipzig, Teubner 1905.
Elllen Key, Ueber Liebe und Ehe, (On Love and Marriage), Berlin, S. Fischer
Moebius, Ueber den physiologischen Schwachsinn des Weibes (On the
Physiological Dementia of Woman) 5th Ed., Halle 1903.
Bachofen, J. Das Mutterrecht (Martriarchy), Stuttgart 1861.
Aschner, Die Konstitution der Frau und ihre Beziehungen zur Gerburtshilfe
und Gynäkologie (The Woman's Constitution and her Relationship to Midwifery
and Gynecology) 1924.
Liepmann, W., Psychologie der Frau (Psychology of Woman), 2nd Ed. 1922.
Sellheim, H., Das Geheimnis vom Ewig-Weiblichen (The Secret of Eternal
Femininity) 2nd Ed. Stuttgart, Enke 1924.
Deutsch, H., Psychoanalyse der weibl. Sexualfunctionen (Psychoanalysis of
Female Sexual Functions), 1925.
Chapter XXIX

Man's Psychosexual Behavior1 2
[1926]
The principal viewpoints on this subject agree with those that we had to
draw on in our discussion of the love life of the female. We always measure
against an imagined male ideal type and then sense the difference between that
and what is required for an effective relationship between men and women. Our
evaluation of male characteristics is also measured in those same terms. It is only
that since time immemorial our culture, either silently or openly, has conceded
privileges in his love relationships to the man that are not granted to the woman.
The freedom given to the man in his love life is primarily conditioned by the
freedom generally allotted him in life. It is significantly increased by not having
to endure pregnancy resulting from sexual activity, by his role in courting, and
by a tradition that ascribes immense powers to him.
Furthermore, and in consonance with the foregoing, there is a relaxed
gentleman's morality which, in the context of our current sexual morals, does not
set the same narrow limits that apply to women.
The male sexual impulse is often displayed in various degrees of intensity
long before puberty. However, it can tend to take a wrong turn in boyhood, in
puberty, or later in life. Thus, a man's behavior will also be influenced by his
sexual development. This becomes even more understandable when one
considers that there is no fixed measure for the sexual drive, and because a man's
expression of it can be influenced greatly to be increased or diminished.
These influences and psychological directions become apparent in
boyhood. Sexual preparation first of all consists of firmly establishing a boyhood
role that grows into a mature understanding of sexual problems, and toward
setting goals courageously for love and marriage. Our culture with its trappings
somewhat eases the caregiver's workload. Different clothing, games, and
methods of rearing attempt to give the maturing process a correct direction. The
environment, analogies from the animal world, and educational incursions
mostly from enlightenment by other boys, provide insight into the secrets of sex.
Lectures, theater, the movies, as well as seduction, complete the process.
Furthermore, a boy's impending philosophy of life is shaped by his constant
encounters with the facts of love and marriage, by educational methods that
advance as a precondition a social solution for love and marriage problems, and
by a growing sexual drive that seeks solutions according to which the boy’s
future world is formed.
1 Originally published as "Psychosexuelle Haltung des Mannes" in Handb.
norm. path. Physiol., Vol 14, No. 1, p. 808-812, 1926. 

2 New translation by Gerald L. Liebenau, 2003.
In his early years, a boy's attitude toward the other gender displays a clearly
hostile and superior behavior. Angry rejection of being dressed like a girl or,
worse, to be seen as girl-like, often are exaggerated signs of discovering one's
own sex. In later boyhood years, even with co-education, the feeling of
superiority develops and, as if under some obligation, girls are denied equality.
"A boy proudly turns away from girls!"
In the midst of this there appear indications of affection and love; even at
ages 4, 5 and 6 there are friendly, critical, or mischievous tendencies. A
penchant for bantering and physical attacks is common.
The sexual drive can give rise to onanism as early as in the first years.
Seduction at times can be the cause for mutual masturbation in early childhood,
and, particularly in the slums, can lead to regular sexual intercourse. It is
noteworthy in the development of boys practicing mutual onanism how easily
the road is taken toward homosexuality rather than following the normal route.
The deciding turn toward onanism followed by most boys, only to try and escape
later, frequently occurs at 14 years of age. At that point in puberty, the bottled up
sexual drive is released by more or less frequent seminal discharges. Indications
of fatigue and a poor complexion at such times almost always are signs of fear of
illness or of some kind of harmful development. Onanism and seminal
discharges in puberty and boyhood can easily be endured. If they persist for
many years, they can be seen as an attempt at excluding women.
Forming an image of ideal girls takes place in puberty and shortly
thereafter. It most often reflects traits of someone close to the boy. This ideal
image often undergoes a change at a later stage just as other ideals often
disappear. Not infrequently there exists a fear of staining that ideal image, or the
girl who embodies it. There is also plenty of room in the fantasy world for the
wildest images in which onanism is often the seducing force longing to transfer
the sensual to reality. Next to the purity of the sensual, there is often a propensity
for coarser sensualities or for engaging in sexual relations for which the line of
least resistance lies primarily in prostitutes or servant girls. Both are age-old
outlets that are impediments to love and marriage, and which in some cases
persist for ever. Either choice is often given encouragement by educated and
uneducated caregivers. Only those who reject the voices that deem early sexual
relations essential can avoid it, and those who are not afraid of a love and
marriage in which each partner supports the rights of the other.
Social customs and traditions such as parties, dances and mutually
organized affairs promote and support the growing appreciation for girls. The
training for a relationship between the sexes is continuous. In thoughts, in the

streets, in the theater, and in pictures there are constant stimulants that help the
cause of love and marriage. Obviously, a decision for marriage is closely
affected by practical considerations and in particular by the means of earning a
living. Until those are resolved, there is much time for men to become sexually
irresponsible or succumb to venereal disease.
When a man marries at that point, he has to deal not only with the demands
of marriage3, but also with the personal demands that he brings with him, which
frequently have no place in marriage and harm the relationship. The new
situation becomes the touchstone for his readiness for marriage. Whatever the
situation, his preparation for marriage will always reflect his philosophy of life
and his attitude toward women. Already his selection of a wife is guided by the
ideals he formed with regard to the demands he makes on her and on his
marriage.
Depending on whether he had a satisfactory experience with his mother and
sister and had standing in their eyes, the partner a man chooses will either have
similar or different physical and intellectual qualities. If he is a man who yearns
for affection, he will choose a girl from whom he can expect pampering. If he
prefers to get his way by being aggressive, he will look for someone who
appears to be strong, or else find someone who by nature, strength, and physique
will give him the chance to control. That such a selection process leads to many
mistakes should not be surprising. This is particularly true because no woman
will endure subjugation for long.
If a man is properly prepared for marriage, everything in the course of that
marriage as well as his sexual behavior will depend on his partner. If she can
also be in harmony with him then both will have a satisfactory sexual
relationship to the end of their lives. Such cases are rare, which proves the
inadequacy of the preparation of the individual for marriage. In good marriages,
sexual relations are closely linked to an unconditional camaraderie with which
both partners easily overcome or eliminate unpleasant situations. In such a
marriage, there will be plenty of room for children to be included in that
camaraderie. Sexual problems will be solved mutually, not under orders by one,
and no one will feel himself an object. Sexual activity will not be dimmed until
late in life, often beyond the age of 60, when it slowly begins to die out. The
sexual relationship will not lack anything and will give no reason for resentment,
repulsion, or unhappiness.
Quite the contrary is the case of those poorly prepared, among whom there
are two major types. Their lack of preparation will under all conditions become
painfully apparent in their new situation after puberty, when there is a possibility
and even a desire for sex. A feeling of insecurity, a lack of selfconfidence in

himself is reflected in his sexual relations threatening the woman and, given how
he devotes himself to her, can endanger her own selfconfidence. Poorly prepared
men will lack a straightforwardness which is a prime requirement for a healthy
eroticism. In their behavior, they will take detours and follow deviations that in
their most extreme forms will manifest open homosexuality and autoeroticism.
However, all other displacements of sexual goals such as fetishism, sadism,
masochism, and perverse habits uncover long existing insecurity and attempt to
satisfy personal pleasures instead of accepting of social norms. These are
measures taken to avoid making decisions about one's own worth or the lack of
it.
3 Adler, “Die Ehe als Aufgabe” (Marriage as a Task (responsibility), in Buch der
Ehe (Book on Marriage), published by H. Keyserling, Celle, Campmann, 1925.
Sexual relations with prostitutes and the tendency toward easy and
uncommitted ties betray the same weakness. Understanding this dynamic allows
one to recognize in a Don Juan and in the emphasis on polygamous tendencies
the degree of despondency in such men who never want to complete anything
and prefer to seek cheap successes. Eroticism is a "togetherness" (Nietzsche), the
achievement of two equal partners. The striving of one at the expense of the
other has no place in love; to satisfy vanity is a corruption that destroys eroticism
because it ignores the rules of love.
The ardor of the sexual drive is changeable and probably not applicable as a
formula for every type of person. It can be seen as inflamed in someone who
previously has displayed moderate behavior and vice versa. Certainly, being
preoccupied with sex in pictures, lectures, and in conversations can create sexual
tension since inhibitions, whether justified or not, are thereby shed. To some
degree, habitiual abstinence leads to an increase in sexual tension. Both practices
have often had superficial therapeutic effects. It is well known that a denial of
sexual satisfaction leads to increasing desire, and that indulgence causes the
senses to dull.
Man's erotic behavior is, as we have seen, dependent on various factors. We
cannot determine whether there is a primary sexual impulse that is without any
influence, nor do we have a measure for its strength because we are always
looking at the strong influences. With the exception of one case, we are unable
to have any views on the strength of the sexual drive in men who have rejected
love and marriage totally because in most cases there is a disciplining for
rejection and the presence of inhibitions arising from the neurotic character of
the individual. The exception is the eunuch and those with crippled sexual
organs as found, for example, in hypopituitarism following early castration, and
in certain illnesses such as in diabetes, serious kidney problems, in tabes

dorsalis, etc. In such cases we conclude, based on obvious facts and organically
caused impotentia coeundi, that there is no sexual drive. We also find it
understandable that with age the sexual drive decreases and that it disappears at
approximately 70 years of age.
The most common form of impotentia coeundi, however, is premature
ejaculation and ejaculatory incompetence. These are always erroneously caused
psychological inhibitions that can be eliminated. The most effective means is a
transformation into a courageous, self-conscious, and humane personality. Such
a change should proceed in a carefully considered manner and in accordance
with the basic principles of Individual Psychology. However, we cannot deny
that it can also occur as a reaction to something said or done by the physician
without either being aware that the patient had grown more courageous.
Occasionally, and not very reliably, the same effect can also be attributed
without a doubt to medication, to the so-called aphrodisiacs. Frequently, the
mere visit to a physician in such cases strengthens the patient and requires only
encouragement from the doctor. In such cases any type of therapy can be
successful.
Since time immemorial, the wise and foolish have tried to find ways to
increase the sexual impulse. Prayers, amulets, magic potions, erotic pictures and
animal testes, eventually extracts from the last, according to advice from
BrownSéquards, were used to aid declining masculine sexual powers. Lately,
Steinach and his follower Woronoff, among others, attempted to reach the same
goal by unilateral elimination of testis or their implantation. Failures from these
proceedings are significantly greater than possible successes. Steinach's views on
"puberty glands" are still under discussion, but increasingly find detractors.
More as a theory and less as a fact is the view discussed in the article on
"Homosexuality" that the sexual attitude of the man toward the woman in the
first instance, or solely, depends on the valance of male sexual glands.
Alternatively, according to Schopenhauer, Möbius, Fliess, Weininger, and
Hirschfeld, it depends on the female impact on the physical constitution of the
male. Steinach's experimental work used by many as evidence--increasing
masculinity in female rats and vice versa--by effecting change in sexual glands
affirms only crass contrasts and not the fine nuances that we see in men. In any
case, it is questionable whether even the most extreme artificial means to effect
femininity in men, for example following castration, or the implantation of
ovaries with all their possible physical results, would cause a psychological
transformation such as those described for rats. The numerous cases of
pseudohermaphrodites, who as a result of their training and upbringing assumed
female characteristics without notable changes in sexual glands, the eunuchs and

eunuchoid, whose masculine behavior is unquestionable, argue that the
psychological grounding in humans plays a far greater role than in animals.
The importance of inhibitions, or the lack of them, in men's sexual behavior
toward women is seen in their love life. Psychological despondency can defeat
ardor or inflame it when other women are encountered. Thoughts of revenge
against one woman can easily ignite love for another. Sexuality often can also
break down when a bachelor opposed to marriage feels threatened by an
impending marriage. Satyriasis, a constant arousal of the genitals, occasionally
results (except in cases of leukemia) from a continual denial of sexual
intercourse. In cases of depression, the lack of inhibitions can be cited as the
cause of sexual arousal. Both an increase and a decline in sensual desires are
seen in paralytics, alcoholics, and among those suffering from age dementia.
We thus conclude that the type and degree of sexual behavior in men, as in
women, depends on their personality. In general, sexual activity reflects the
personality. Where sexual organs are relatively normal, a man's successful
activity depends on his preparation and training.
Comprehensive Works
Flies, W., Der Ablauf des Lebens (The Course of Life), Vienna, Deuticke, 1906.
Tandler, 
Die 
biologischen 
Grundlagen 
der 
sekundären
Geschlechtscharaktere 
(Biological 
Principless 
of 
Secondary 
Gender
Characteristics), Berlin, Julius Springer, 1913.
Weininger, Geschlecht und Charakter (Sex and Character), 17th Ed. Vienna,
Braumüller.
Hirschfeld, Magnus, Jahrbuch für sexuelle Zwischenstufen (Yearbook for Sexual
Interstages), Stuttgart, Püttmann
Müller, Robert, Sexualbiologie, Berlin, L. Marcus, 1907.
Ellis, Havelock, Die Psychologie des normalen Geschlechtstriebes (The
Psychology of the Normal Sex Drive).
Ellis, Havelock, Handbuch der Sexualwissenschaft (Handbook of Sexology),
published by R. Moll, Leipzig, 1912.
Rosleder, H. Die funktionsstörungen der Zeugung (Functional Sexual Disorders)
2nd Edition.
Freud, 3 Abhandlungen zur Sexualtheorie (3 Treaties on Sexual Theories) 5th
Edition, Psychoanalytischer Verlag, Vienna.
Freud, Gesammelte Werke, (Collected Works) the same publisher as above.
Chapter XXX
Manifestations of Puberty1 2
[1926]
The signs of puberty are conspicuous because of the physical as well as

psychological maturing process. It begins and ends somewhat earlier in girls
than boys. The organic maturing process affects every organ, even where
damaged, or when reproductive organs have been lost. In the latter case, the only
differences are less marked secondary sexual characteristics. Psychological
maturing can be halted either temporarily or permanently by inappropriate or
faulty upbringing.
Poets, scientists, and common sense have observed essentially two ways
that puberty makes itself felt allowing for a dual viewpoint. On the one hand, we
become aware of qualitatively and quantitatively greater abilities. These include
an ability to integrate oneself socially and professionally, abstract thinking, a
tendency toward fulfillment, a drive for social and better relations with the other
sex, discovering one's self, developing a life plan, and participating in various
activities. Often there is also a propensity for idealism, discovering a philosophy
of life, exploring the inner life, idealizing and intellectualizing sex, and taking a
position on the value of life!
These manifestations can be perceived vividly when one begins to relate
this period to the childhood years, and then compares them with the maturing
youth between the ages of 13 to 21.
If measured against adulthood, however, the inadequacies during this
period will become much more pronounced. We then note awkwardness and
clumsiness coming from a lack of familiarity with motor organs that have grown
larger and stronger. We also see shyness and modesty in unfamiliar situations,
despite behavior that seems critical, skeptical, and an exaggerated striving for
acceptance, ecstasies, fascination, and an exuberance with phrases and slogans
as if these would solve the mystery of life. Furthermore, this phase also is
marked by a denial of earlier accepted values, and by principled opposition to
any demands, directed even against cultural values. It is a period fraught with
extravagances and misbehavior expressed in protest, and open or secret revolt
against a feeling of inferiority stemming from childhood.
During puberty, a person seems to become more or less alienated from the
rest of society which at times becomes so pronounced that for some it seems
natural that juveniles during that period possess their own rights and lifestyle.
During the last few decades, particularly in Germany, youth organizations
appeared that may have some positive worth in and of themselves, but which in
their opposition to our culture exhibit animosity toward society, at times
isolation, hostility toward parents, and a flight from females.
1 Originally published as "Pubertätserscheinungen" in the Handb. norm.
path. Physiol., Vol 14, No. 1, p. 842-844, 1926. 

2 New translation by Gerald L. Liebenau, 2003.
An impartial examination of puberty finds no significant new lines of force.
All manifestations appearing in this period can be easily attributed to advanced
stages that were developed during childhood. Puberty is like an experiment in
facing future expectations, as it approaches the next stage in life with maturing
organs and greater and more complex physical and psychological sexual
demands. Maturing children assume an attitude toward life and its demands that
can be anticipated, given their upbringing. In their interpersonal relationships,
and in the relations of the "I" to "thou", abide traces or forces of a congenial and
friendly philosophy of life that is dependent on the degree to which they
acquired social feelings in childhood. In seeking an occupation, there is either a
movement toward acceptance or escape depending on the strength or weakness
of the belief in their own powers. Values and beliefs developed about sex during
the early years, the early sexual goals, become far more distinct in an
environment of greater freedom and tolerance on the part of adults with regard to
the behavior of their children. Responses to these values and beliefs, and to other
problems arising from puberty, reach back over time but never disregard the
impact of social feelings, the striving for esteem, and the feeling of inferiority.
Beginning with childhood, the lack of preparation as it affects the
individual's social, professional, or sexual life results primarily from inadequate
training for life, and from a neglect to form an independent, selfconfident
character. Life in our culture necessitates training and an optimistic, determined
attitude, or else conflicts and discord are inevitable. This becomes apparent as
early as in childhood, in school, in the family and in the attitude toward friends.
In particular, it harmfully affects one's independence and decisiveness causing
greater sensitivity and leads to a path of least resistance. As puberty approaches
adulthood and decisions must be made, we frequently see that covert as well as
overt steps are taken to stray from cultural ways so as to avoid challenges.
Once it has been understood that these awkward manifestations, the fruits
of puberty, are attempts at compensation emanating from a sense of weakness,
then much of what is known as puberty manifestations, as the effects of puberty,
has been resolved into a progressive but faulty readying for coming of age. With
generally inadequate preparation during childhood, there should be no surprise
when the tests of puberty bring conflicts. Blame for the general discouragement
found among the young must be ascribed to a lack of courage in large segments
of our population, to an upbringing that instills cowardice, subjects the child to
pampering, or is lacking in affection, and exaggerates expectations for the future.
To a large extent, this leads to excuses, pretexts, and escape when faced by
urging demands.

Particular attention should be paid to frequent efforts using stirred up
conflicts to escape the problems of society, one's profession, or love. This often
results in lifestyles that mimic strength, but in fact arise from weakness. Often
senseless conflicts, mostly springing from a fear of failure, ensue inside and
outside the family against real or perceived authority that demand all of one's
strength, create hatred, loathing, and a loss of interest in one's work. A normal
ability to love is artificially suppressed by training toward perversions because
they appear to enhance one's own superiority. A tendentiously aroused
selfcentered culture points to a harmful choking of social feeling, leads to
detrimental isolation, and is always linked to hypersensitivity and immeasurable
ambition that constantly creates conflicts and greater isolation.
Numerous nervous symptoms arise as signs of a retreat in this critical
situation, such as obsessive neuroses, hysteria, neurasthenia, anxiety neuroses,
and as a total breakdown, insanity in youth. Also, the path toward waywardness
and criminality, as well as prostitution, is an expression of discouragement with
normal life roles. Statistics for suicide begin to rise during puberty since the
tendency for cowardly or vengeful resolutions of conflicts seems to easily gain
the upper hand in such people.
Next to these unpleasantly visible manifestations of puberty, there are also
enhanced values. There is a continuation and progress of all sorts in
achievements and abilities. Independence, dependability, and the feeling of
belonging become more apparent. Extensive training and practiced skills are
reflected in greater interests. The greater dexterity acquired over time gives the
maturing person a certain direction in his activities and in following a vocation.
While apparent talents for the arts and sciences seem to disappear during this
period, in some cases creative abilities reach surprising levels of originality. The
lifestyle formed to that point takes on greater force and in the struggle for
independence becomes more clearly definable; ideals based mostly on things
seen, acquired by listening, and gained through experience point to the purpose
of the future life that is now unfolding.
Comprehensive Works
Boehler, Charlotte, Seelenleben des Jugendlichen (The spiritual life of
juveniles), 2nd edition, Jena, Gustav Fischer, 1923.
Hall, Stanley: Adolescence, New York, Editor D. Appleton, 1918.
Spranger, Eduard, Psychologie des Jugendalter (Psychology of Adolescence),
4th edition, Quelle & Meyer, 1925.
Tumlirz, Otto, Die Reifejahre (The years of maturity), Leipzig, Klinkhardt,
1924.
Adler, Alfred, Praxis und Theorie der Individualpsychologie, 2nd edition,

Munich, J. F. Bergmann, 1924.
Chapter XXXI
Homosexuality1 2
[1926]
Homosexuality can be traced to the dawn of civilization. Descriptions of
pederasty have been preserved from antiquity. At times and among various
peoples these perversions have been found as a mass phenomenon. Its wide
dispersal in some regions of the Orient and in ancient Greece is well known.
Today, homosexuals are found everywhere, among the well-to-do and the poor,
among women and men of all ages, and in all countries. They almost always
tend to become a mass phenomenon which is given renown and support by their
organizations and support groups. Their extensive dispersal over the whole
world since time immemorial contributes much to bolster a conviction that
homosexuals are unalterable.
Many scientists and their followers are of the opinion that civilization has
led to a weakening of sexual instincts. This view, which we do not share, seems
to find support in the animal world where only domesticated animals have been
observed to perform homosexual acts. In recent times Freud sought to explain
the frequency of homosexual tendencies by theorizing the existence of an
inherited homosexual component in the sexual drive that prevails, under
otherwise favorable circumstances, whenever normal sexuality is suppressed.
Wide circles have learned of Freud's arguments according to which civilization
leads to the repression of sexuality, while on the other hand a culture is formed
out of a displaced sexuality.
The secret of a widely spread occasional homoeroticism and its fragmented
practice by both sexes is uncovered in the course of a deep psychological
examination of an individual's life and by the study of a child's inner life.
Homosexual acts or fantasies and fondling occur in addition to masturbation and
heterosexuality. On the one hand, homosexual contacts are advanced almost
regularly by opportunities that avail themselves in prisons, under strict
supervision in asylums, among convicts, in barracks, and in homes. On the other
hand, they result from children being seduced by adults, etc. This perversion,
however, is also acted out among married couples and other heterosexuals. All
possible forms of fellatio, pederasty, and mutual onanism are found either
together or in isolation. Mutual onanism is a preferred practice. In many
instances these practices are confined to exhibitionism, fondling, and fantasies.
1 Originally published as "Homosexualität" in the Handb. norm. path.
Physiol., Vol 14, No. 1, p. 881-886, 1926.

2 New translation by Gerald L. Liebenau, 2003.
Not infrequently other sexual perversions were noted to occur together,
such as sadism, masochism, and fetishism. Neurotic and psychological
conditions often are described as complementing or causing these practices. I
have never seen a case where a neurosis, an obsessive or anxiety neurosis, was
not also present.3 A connection with morphine and cocaine is also not rare.
A number of common long held observations have been noted by recent
researchers: 
1. The person’s nature 
2. Behavior 
3. Anomalies in sexual organs 
4. A contempt for the other sex 
5. Homosexual dreams and fantasies 
6. Early indications in childhood 
7. Occurrences within a family
Until the last decade, it was assumed that homosexuality had its origin in
profligacy, arrogance, and excesses. Physicians came to understand only lately
that a large number of homosexuals strongly reject these propensities and seek
healing.
The findings cited above and the rejection of homosexuality led to a belief
in inherent factors. Since no case of a complete cure for homosexuality was
widely known, this belief found firm grounds. What had been overlooked were
the numerous cases where homosexuality was "overcome." As cures were later
found and given publicity, another assumption was made. Krafft-Ebing was
perhaps one of the first who differentiated between an acquired and an inborn
homosexuality and who came upon the idea of the presence of a female brain
part in the case of male homosexuals. Binet and Scrunch-Nothing, as did later
Freud, believed in a sexual trauma or experience in childhood that became a
fixation and later determined the nature of the sexual drive. In the course of his
subsequent investigation, Freud arrived at the theory that homosexuality was an
originally displaced and then newly experienced part of the libido that occurs
perhaps in all neurotics as a predilection and fantasy.
Steinach's perceptions and attempts at cures relate to assumptions made by
Krafft-Ebing, Magnum Hirschfeld and Weiniger and shift the cause of
homosexuality in the direction of a deficiency in the appropriate sex gland. The
best known is Magnum Hirschfeld's theory of "intermediary stages." According
to his concept, physical and psychological forms of expression in men and
women depend on the "androgyny and gynandry" hormones that work together

with hermaphroditic and homosexual manifestations. As a result of numerous
examinations and verifications, I was able to establish in 1914 that
homosexuality always derives from psychological causes and that certain
physical characteristics can provide an impetus. Kraepelin is also of the opinion
that homosexuality is conditioned by exogenous factors. Holl ascribed a part of
these cases to endogenous causes but finds psychotherapy necessary. Older
views such as those of Naecke, Kernau, and Havelock Ellis agree with
Hirschfeld that homosexuality is basically bi-sexuality and that the blame lies in
an incomplete sexual differentiation.
3 See Adler: Ueber den nervösen Charakter, 3rd ed. Munich, J.F. Bergmann.
As we have noted, a significant turning point in understanding
homosexuality took place when we learned that so many homosexuals found
their orientation a torture from which they would like to be freed at any cost. I
have demonstrated that homosexuals who complain about their "unhappy
predisposition" actually do little to eliminate their depravity. In fact, they
conclude from their lack of success and with their demonstration of good will
that they cannot be saved and now seek amelioration and justification. From an
examination of their whole personality, I frequently also found that
homosexuals' pride in being "different" is compensation for a deeply-seated
feeling of inferiority and impotence with regard to women, and that a disdain for
women provides a fictitious gratification. With regard to a "fixation" of
childhood experiences, my doubts were fully justified. In the cases that have
come before me the question is: What are the circumstances that produce such a
fixation?
We can now approach another question. Why is it that most people express
hostility toward homosexuality? Why is it seen to be a sin, a vice, as criminal
behavior, and why is it punishable in most civilized countries? Freud and his
followers are content with the answer: Because the other people suppressed or
sublimated their homosexuality. This explanation in of itself is unlikely,
probably cannot be proven, does not relate to the facts, but is derived from a
psychoanalytical theory. The logic of human social coexistence, the drive for the
procreation of mankind, in short the innate social feeling emphatically rejects
this. That punishment or removal from society can deal with this situation is a
mistaken notion of our culture. Homosexuality, however, no more so than incest
or offenses against the public, can expect, as is frequently promoted, lasting
recognition. We expect in the future a more correct attitude toward this problem,
a voluntary resolution against punishment and for healing.
A discussion of the seven major arguments in favor of an inborn
homosexuality, cited above, will demonstrate that they are indefensible. 

1. Male homosexuals often are described as feminine; female homosexuals as
masculine. Observations focus on the individual's complexion, the pelvic region,
the brow, chest, beard and pubes, the voice, hands and feet. The frequency with
which these anomalies occur in connection with homosexuality cannot be
denied. It relates primarily to passive men and active, homosexual women. They
point as secondary sexual characteristics to inborn or early-acquired
malfunctioning sexual glands. The same manifestations, however, are also found
in totally normal people, so that their exclusive significance for homosexuality
can rightly be argued. Such variety in their nature, given the same physical
characteristics, indicates more strongly that a sexual attitude has nothing to do
with physical characteristics, but depends on how individuals perceive them and
on their expectations. I have seen feminine men with totally stunted and useless
external genitalia who have no homosexual interests. I doubt that they could
have been seduced, just as I doubt this to be possible in the case of children or
prisoners. 
Most homosexuals are of an average normal type. In the way they express
themselves, others are exemplary representatives of their sex. Nothing points to
an anomaly in their sexual glands. They obviously do not allow their physical
nature to be evidence to the contrary. 
2. We can deal more briefly with the behavior of homosexuals. Whatever
physical characteristics give their deportment the appearance of being sexually
different, it is in the practical expression of homosexuality that a new sense and
dignity is acquired4. It is in their behavior that long-studied and practiced
movements patterned after the other sex become apparent and later become
evidence of homosexuality. Again, it is not a majority of homosexuals who
employ these means. Behavior appropriate to one's sex is found just as
frequently. These are habits borrowed for a particular purpose, theatrical
manners, priggishness, languished looks, false anxiety, dependency, and
coquettishness in men. In women, it is expressed in tomboy behavior, cynicism,
recklessness, and authoritarianism. It is not surprising that homosexuals are
recognizable from their behavior, and it is equally not surprising that they
recognize each other; they make it clear to one another. 
3. Anomalies in sexual organs have been widely described in the literature. They
are found no less frequently in normal persons. In my study "Ueber
Minderwertigkeit von Organen" (Inferior organs)(Urban and Schwarzenberg,
Vienna, 1907), I concluded that possibly all organ inferiorities are accompanied
by signs of inferior sexual organs. If that conclusion were turned around, then
sexual organ anomalies would point to an inferiority of other organs so that the
individual, biologically, would tend to feel weak. This feeling of weakness

would first be manifested in tendencies toward seeking greater security and
greater concern about life's problems. In special cases, it would tend to avoid
solving life's problems or finding easier ways to solve them. In the context of all
other critically examined facts, the conclusion is that homosexuality is an
attempt at problem-solving by people with little courage who want to get around
sexual problems. This view is also supported by our earlier position on genitalia
anomalies that factors such as a phimosis or an enlarged clitoris never are reason
for becoming homosexual, but that it is more likely the perception of the
individual that in comparison to the norm he or she is not sufficiently well
equipped. 
4. Contempt for the other gender early in life can only be seen as causa movens,
or as a sign of inborn homosexuality, when observed superficially. It is much
more the result of seeking tendentious security against the norm that requires for
its support the manifold experiences and events from childhood as far as these
are useful. It might at one time have been an exaggerated respect or fear of the
parent who is not of one's own gender becoming generalized and causing a
permanent rejection. Given the same situation, if there had been an excess of
pampering and a one-sided bonding, it can cause avoidance for fear of never
being able to share the same warmth again. Insecure boys are often affected by
the mostly negative descriptions of women, and by the almost hostile
presentation of women in literature, beginning with the Bible. Girls frequently
are affected by the often exaggerated pains and dangers associated with sexual
activity, with giving birth, the mystery surrounding love and men, problems in
marriage, and the irresponsibility of men. 
The insecure child more easily will accept all this as being true and a reason to
prepare for love by avoidance. In the course of lengthy training along that path
the child will eventually see only the shadow side of the other gender. 
5. Some writers see in homosexual dreams and fantasies evidence that
homosexuality is an inborn or incorrigible development. It is a bold but incorrect
assumption, which also applies to many other assumptions that having been
widely broadcast by word of mouth and in writings has contributed to
strengthening homosexuality. Since science has found that dreams and fantasies
are figurative expressions of psychological forms of movement--a view that has
been accepted for some time--we should make a greater effort to see movement
in dreams and fantasies as an expression of the individual's nature, and not look
for actualities; we should see what should be and not what is. Even Freud, whose
dream interpretation represented significant progress, gave too little credit to this
condition. His ineradicable tendency to see sexual desires in every dream, to see
sexual symbols in all interpretations, prevented him from deriving the general

line of movement out of sexual expressions. Accordingly, since the dream is a
probing examination in the sense of training, then homosexual dreams and
fantasies, if they do not represent a sexual dialect for other relationships in life,
at best can only be understood as an attempt to support a presumed
homosexuality; it does not allow for great certainty. 
In this connection, we must also mention the very significant training of
homosexuals during their waking state which greatly supports this perversion,
but which is often falsely seen as evidence for an inborn homosexuality:
attention is being diverted constantly from the other gender to oneself. This is
the most important path leading toward stereotyping homosexuality and making
it mechanistic. 
6. Homosexuals in fact often state that since earliest childhood they had shown a
very strong, one-sided tendency toward their own gender, or that they noticeably
preferred the habits and games of the other gender. Such a penchant probably is
nothing other than poor preparation for the real gender role and often can often
be understood in light of childhood situations. Therefore, we can see in the
weak, or in the only child, a faulty upbringing that will dominate and push a boy
toward a girl's role. Such an inappropriate role can be significantly reinforced, if
the child for some time had been unaware of his true gender role or if, stemming
from pampering, he was brought up to become passive, instilling in him hope
that a girl's role would be more satisfying. In the case of a girl, the parents'
original wish for a boy may have impacted so strongly on her upbringing that
boy attributes were forced on her. Frequently, there is an early awakening of
affection, including a sexual one, for the same gender. It is something that can
easily be won and gratified. Early normal sexual relations, on the other hand, are
exposed to unequal severe dangers and frequently to punishment, so that even
the dangers that are inherent in normal relations cause fear of the other sex in the
early maturing person. It is easy to see how these early signs refute the
inadequate evidence for an innate homosexuality presented above. 
7. Some writers find the occurrence of this perversion within families as further
evidence of an innate homosexuality. If one examines this more closely, it will
become clear that the lack of courage and insecurity of family members who
have a similar nature led them along that same course, or that a uniformly
mistaken tradition for upbringing in that family brought about these same or
similar results. This is particularly true in cases where pathological pampering or
extreme discipline had been a long-standing tradition within a family. I have
often seen perverse children brought up by nuns who in similar ways were very
disciplinarian or domineering. 
Our presentation provides sufficient grounds to believe that homosexuality arises

from a failure to raise a child into a genuinely social human being. An Individual
Psychological examination will clearly establish insufficient preparation for a
gender role, the faulty application of principles in the person's upbringing, and
the mistaken interpretation of physical deficiencies. These symptoms sharply
point to a rejection of the other sex and are contrary to preserving the human
race. For that reason, homosexuality is rightfully seen as socially contradictory.
It is an expression of strong discouragement and a hopeless pessimism that can
confine homosexuals for life to a small circle far from the other gender. Hence,
every escalation of life's problems, every general increase in insecurity in human
relationships greatly affects the grwoing number of homosexuals, and makes
them a mass phenomenon. History has shown that when women moved more
prominently into the forefront of public life, the large army of male weaklings
gladly sought to distance themselves increasingly from women and, aside from
other ways of gaining greater security, also see a security blanket in
homosexuality. 
Healing and improvement come through influencing the psyche. This will not be
easy work in well established cases. The task is similar to convincing a coward
who seeks escape from life's demands to accept them unconditionally. Other
therapeutic efforts such as hormone therapy, implanting sexual glands, etc. have
had no encouraging results; I have seen a number of failed efforts. However, in
less serious cases, self-cures have succeeded. Under the influence of any
encouraging procedure, healing still is possible. If one is looking for the simplest
and broadest formulation, it is that homosexuality is a misunderstood stopgap
measure that has gone awry.
4 Schwarz, Oswald: Das psychologische Problem in der Sexualpathologie
(The psychological problem in sexual pathology), Wiener klinische
Wochenschreiben, 1922, No. 11 (Note: this is a weekly publication).
Comprehensive Works
Krafft-Ebing, Psychopathia sexual, Stuttgart.
Hirschfeld, M., Jahrbuch für sex. Zwischenstufen (Yearbook for sexual
intermediary stages) Stuttgart, J. Püttmann.
Bloch, Iwan, Sexualpathologie, Bonn, Marcus u. Weber, 1922.
Freud, S, 3 Abhandlungen zur Sexualtheorie und andere Schriften (3 treaties on
theory of sex and other writings) Psychologischer Verlag.
Alfred Adler, Ueber den nervösen Charakter, 3rd Edition, 1923; Praxis und
Theorie der Individualpsychologie, 2nd Edition, Munich, J. F. Bergmann, 1924,
and Zum Problem der Homosexualität, Munich, Reinhardt, 1918.
Kronfeld, Arthur, Ueber Gleichgeschlechtlichkeit (On homosexualit), Stuttgart,

J. Püttmann, 1922.
Schwarz, O. Psychogenese und Psychotherapie körperlicher Symptome, Berlin,
Julius Springer, 1925.
Marcuse, M., Handwörterbuch der Sexualwissenschaft, (Handbook for
Sexology).
Chapter XXXII
Sadism, Masochism, and Other Perversions1 2
[1926]
1. Sadism and Masochism
The word "sadism" is associated with the notorious Marquis de Sade whose
atrocities during the French Revolution led to his arrest by the Jacobins. His
books, such as Justine, contain probably the most repugnant descriptions of
sexual cruelties. Krafft-Ebing created the term “masochism” after the author
Sacher-Masoch whose life and novels reflect the character traits of a submissive
man, willing to submit to a strong woman. These manifestations, which pertain
to this treatise, have attracted public attention over the last decade and not
infrequently occupied judicial courts and forensic experts. The expression
"passive and active algolagnia,"3 selected by Schrenck-Notzing, applies fully to
the above concepts. We have found these and other perversions in ancient
cultures and in today's secret societies. As is the case with homosexuals, those
gripped by these perversions have a tendency to join together clandestinely for
their mutual gratification. Prostitutes play a significant role in this area. Either of
their own free will or against it, prostitutes wish to accommodate
sadomasochists. They appear at times either as sadistic or masochistic partners
and possess the appropriate supply of whips, belts, manacles, etc. They also ply
their trade under the guise of massagers or "educational disciplinarians."
Sadistic and masochistic fantasies probably occur more often than any other
form of algolagnia. They begin as early as in childhood, at the age of six or
seven. At times they are caused by stories and fairy tales during which clearly
noticeable sexual feelings are awakened. Often beatings arouse sexual feelings
that fill fantasies with visions of beatings or being beaten. In such cases
indications of sexuality, lustful feelings, erections, and masturbation reach quite
far back into childhood.
It is, of course, a matter of terminology whether excessive obedience and
industriousness unaccompanied by sexual feelings also can be called
masochistic. It also is a sign of arbitrariness to consider feminine lifestyles
generally as masochistic and to regard men as sadistic for pursuing romantic
relationships more actively. We can subscribe just as little to the view, expressed

in Freudian teachings, that all hideous acts by individuals, Caesarian delusions,
mass murderers, arsonists, even entire nations are sadistic, stigmatized or
hypnotized and can be classed as masochists. However, where the sexual drive
has become aligned with aggression and acquiescence, the case becomes much
stronger. As easy as it may seem to arrive at a compulsive neurosis of algolagnia
from fantasies and sexual acts, such as beatings associated with erotica, being
beaten, shackling, raping, and sex murder, it is just as difficult in the absence of
lustful feelings to come to the same conclusion because of dreams, bad habits
and practices, or from tendencies to brawl or beat someone. The tendency of
children and adults to watch cruel scenes, to be cruel to animals, and listen to
cruel stories often stems solely from a tendency to shut out feelings of weakness
through training. A more positive conclusion can be arrived at with a
psychological examination of the total personality.
1 Originally published as "Sadismus, Masochismus, und andere
Perversionen" in the Handb. norm. path. Physiol., Vol 14, No. 1, p. 887-894,
1926. 
2 New translation by Gerald. L. Liebenau, 2003. 
3 Editor’s note: algolagnia = sadism or masochism; receiving sexual pleasure
from giving or receiving pain.
The degeneracy of sadomasochism ranks among the most terrible
deviations. It is the duty of the physician to get over his loathing and to remain
objective when listening to the most repulsive situations thought up by the
human mind. Fouling of every sort, urinating and defecating into every possible
part of the masochist's body and of the sadist's victim, in fantasy and in reality,
are not rare. In light of such crudeness by those afflicted with this illness, it is
difficult to discuss seriously with them the facts that innate factors or
dysfunctioning glands are the immediate cause for their acts. The psychological
condition of such extravagances is so apparent that the following testimony
hardly seems necessary. Every attempt to apply theories based on biology, or on
a sexual constitutionality, on causality, or on science is shattered in the face of
these manifestations.
On the other hand, every theory of perversion must accept these
observations when they result from a psychological examination. Above all, they
must accept that these sexual peculiarities conform to the inherent nature of the
total personality. A truly considerate human being will probably never be found
among such persons. Not only does the sexual problem appear to have been
unresolved in such cases, but also the other two important questions in life, those
that pertain to the community and to work. A certain degree of discouragement,

a pessimistic outlook on life, underlies these personalities and all endeavors
spring from a feeling of weakness and not from strength. A lack of
compatibility, camaraderie, friendship and social contacts reaching back to
childhood is apparent. The diminished contacts with others have such wide-
ranging psychological meaning that all the knowledge of "depth psychology" or
"sympathetic psychology" cannot deplete it. Even outward success by such a
patient must not allow one to be deceived, since it is often derived from other
than his own sources of strength. We have also found that an occasional
excessive regard for family or the exclusive preference of one parent is the result
of fear and a careful attempt at excluding the rest of human society.
In line with this "distancing oneself from the forefront of life" is the
exclusion of a normal sexual partner and normal sexual relations. These
autobiographical expressions of a patient, always reaching into childhood, do not
disclose the direction of inborn drives, as is assumed by many writers, but reveal
an earlier faulty training. Even a normal attitude can be sustained only with
continuous training, which incessantly seeks experiences making use of fantasy.
Development toward sadism and masochism always has a recognizable
prehistory and progresses with manifold fluctuations. Only the goal of carefully
excluding and debasing the norm remains the same. Closely associated is the
constant effort to harden oneself against rising inhibitions, and finding pleasure
in deviations and even atrocities. In time, a certain security and support is found,
a lifesaver exceeding all measures against the norm. "Driven into flight, he
believes himself to be the hunter." For this reason the development of the
perversion provides the clearest path toward the total personality. The
insignificance of causality or even inborn drive-anomalies in these forms of
expression is seen in the frequent transitions from sadism to masochism and
from homosexuality to masochism or sadism. In every person there are traits of
defiance and obedience, of dominance and submissiveness that serve the striving
for worthiness. This explains how the pervert can be a sadist and also a
masochist; it also explains the tendency to flight in perversions.
Another positive finding concerns precocious sexual arousal from fear
caused by experiences or fantasies. It seems undeniable to me that fear can
stimulate not only the nerves leading to the heart, intestines, bladder, sweat
glands, etc., but also to the sexual organs. It seems to me that this connection
affects only certain types of people, or that in only those types can it clearly be
seen. Perhaps there are indications here of an inferiority not unlike those that I
described in my "Studie über Minderwertigkeit von Organen." The credibility of
a connection between fear and libido would, of course, be more understandable
to this type of person than to others. However, in making this physical and

psychological connection, there lies the temptation to venture into very
dangerous and forbidden situations, to conjure them up in fact or fantasy, or to
try and put oneself into the fearful situation of another. I have often found such
thoughts in girls who see the female role as one of being bullied, who persist in
those fantasies, and who in all possible ways avoid reality. With ardent training,
the sexual drive can be tied to all kinds of situations and goals as soon as the
normal goal has been eliminated from fear of failure. The lack of courage that
has been stressed here with regard to perverts should also make sense when
applied to masochists. The same can be said of sadists. The victims are always
children or the defenseless; the sexual desire is always along the path of least
resistance.
The school of Freud and his predecessors have a strong tendency to regard
sadism as biological, as a constituent drive component related to and belonging
to the male sexual drive. Masochism similarly is seen as "coupled" with the
female sexual drive. Ever since the days of the romantics (Bader, for example),
and even long before that, it was a common practice, even among scientists--it
was always so among the common people--to see ordinary events either as a
tendency for gaining power or in a sexual context without being aware of one's
own prejudices or one's "unconscious" precepts, i.e. that all forms of human
expression occur in a social context and that, psychologically, there is always a
striving for power, for esteem, and for security. In their sexual lives, however,
people have a response to the exhorting attitudinal questions regarding human
companionship, the other sex, and their own values. In their sexual behavior the
line is always clearly: how to adjust, gain standing, gain recognition, superiority,
and security; how to increase one's selfesteem within society.
A careful analysis of these facts provides the following insights: sadists,
like masochists (as all perverts) follow a path of weakness. Sadists at least try to
give the appearance of having power, a secret, often an unconscious super
maleness, when they are in situations of unquestioned superiority. We find the
masochist where there is an overemphasis on avowing weakness.
In the human psyche, masochism can never be the final result and can never
mean quiescence. Masochism always extends beyond itself, pushing to eliminate
the norm or to continue as sadism and as an acceleration of sexuality
accompanied by a feeling of denigration that seeks to falsify the value and
meaning of sexuality, but also creates a sense of satisfaction that serious sexual
relationships will never come to fruition. The yearning for an "absence of
conflicts" (Seif) propels a person toward this false road; the diminished
"selfesteem and its disruption" (Weinmann) appear in the masochistic
perversion.

Even in this weakest expression of the psyche, masochism on occasion, like
self-flagellation with thoughts of penance, ludicrously seeks self-justification
that never is devoid of the compensating upwards line. Partly, it entails an
actively negative attitude toward the partner, who is openly stigmatized as a
suppressor, a tormentor, and is besmirched. It also is an accusation and
condemnation of repression in childhood, nature, and human society for
tolerating such cravings and pain. A critical, humiliating behavior toward others
and a tendency toward isolation is also regularly seen. Compensation, therefore,
goes in the direction of hate.
Human knowledge derived from psychology helps us find another form of
compensation by which masochism seems to appear and is “fixed” as a power
position. The partner debases himself or herself to accept the dictates of the
masochist and share his despicable antisocial role.
We must now also consider the attempts made by those from other
disciplines to solve the puzzle of sadism/masochism, and by doing so gain clues
for all other perversions. The best-known attempt stems from the French school
that sees a "fixing of childhood sexual experiences." As tempting as that theory
may be, it fails when asked why one experience and not others was fixed
permanently. Or, as Wexberg said: a child who establishes and forms such
experiences permanently was already neurotic and furthermore merely exhibits a
development toward neurosis.
Freud's hypothesis that all nervous manifestations, including neurosis, are a
regression to an early biological state of the sexual libido draws its strength from
a historical or physical comparison: The ebbing of a force (libido) upon
encountering an obstacle (an actual conflict). In that process Freud finds that
early phases in the development of the libido (or its sexual components) come
alive. He finds sadism and masochism also to be such components.
The following objections can be raised against this thesis: One, since the
present and future are reflected in every stage of development, regression in
Freud's sense can never be considered. Otherwise, every psychological action
would be a regression since it always reaches back to past experiences. Two, a
mixture of activity and passivity constantly takes place at all times and in every
period of history. The wish to suffer (so as to gain some advantage at some later
time) is very desirable to the human psyche because it has the gift of foresight.
The existence of such a strong tendency is conceivable only as part of the feeling
of inferiority. Three, the "phases" of libido development are totally tied to
outward circumstances and conform to those so closely that one can establish
that there are no other erotic ties or desires for pleasure than those corresponding
to external circumstances and to the inadequately developed sexual drive. The

question of how a child becomes perverted comes down to the answer: by dint of
circumstances. More important for neurosis-psychology is the question of why a
person retains a perversion. Is it not possible that he fears that a normal solution
would lead to failure? Because he fears not being loved?
Algolagnia, as we advanced here, is the expression of a strong feeling of
inferiority and misguided compensation. The sadist becomes the "triumphant
vanquished," the masochist the defeated victor. Outwardly, the algolagnist is
always frightfully excited, uncomfortable, and fearful. The sadist helps by
identifying with his victim. I have always been able to show with my patients
that for them fear and excitement were connected with sexual arousal in different
ways, but certainly more so than was the case with others. This is the type who
when exceedingly discouraged will avoid a normal solution for erotic problems
and will force sexual arousal under simpler circumstances, in seemingly less
dangerous situations, dodging real dangers, and directing his fears toward
fantasies or act as if playing a game. Tendencies toward sadism are more likely
to be found among children who grow up under strong pressures and who cannot
abide that other children fare better.
In another sense, we have advanced here also to an organic substratum.
Therapy for algolagnia is difficult. Stated briefly, it has to take into account
individual patterns of feelings of inferiority and compensation in order to
eliminate them. It must also make a real effort to deal with removing the peculiar
hypnosis to which the patient subjected himself by relating fear to sexual
arousal, leading him to believe that his perception is natural and, therefore,
indestructible. It must accomplish all this in the face of a cultural life that is
successfully forcing us at every step of the way to replace and change "natural"
forms of expression in favor of those socially more acceptable. Without
encouraging the patient, any success is precluded.
Laws also must accept this thesis and where crimes were committed call for
humane supervision and healing.
2. Fetishism
After all that has been said above on perversions, we can now be brief.
Characteristic for fetishism has always been the exaggeration of an object or a
body part that normally would only play a minor erotic role. With this tendency,
everything can magically be turned into a love object. Most frequently adored
objects are pieces of clothing and necessities. Also very common is an
exaggerated attention paid to body parts such as feet, hands, eyes, legs, breast
lines, etc., which, obviously, also applies to romantic relationships. Possibly
every person in love has a fetish (eyes, hair, posture) which is not particularly
remarkable because it is so common and does not usually interfere with normal

sexual relations, which it only accompanies and heightens. Among such fetishes
are using crass language, mirrors, a perfume, etc. Some people are affected by
cripples, depraved persons, foreigners, other races, and subordinates.
Most writers on this subject often end their theses at the point where the
social significance of perversion begins. Most stress that the individual became
fixed in a phase preparatory to reaching the norm or one accompanying the
norm. They also establish constituent parts of psychopathy, degeneration or, as
in psychoanalysis, sexuality, along with conflicts. We believe that what happens
with fetishism is more important. Then we find that in diverting the sexuality to
fetishism, the sexual partner experiences disparagement and is debased. No
longer is the individual given sexual rank and dignity, which is ascribed to
incidental details. The struggle between the sexes for superiority also shows its
guile in fetishism. It makes the pervert more dependent on incidentals, decreases
his dependence on his partner, and, with regard to the other sex, alleviates his
fears and feeling of weakness. Fetishism, like all other perversions, is the
expression of a feeling of inferiority, which, guided by personal experiences and
training, seeks compensation along the wrong path.
From that standpoint a connection between fetishism and other perversions
as well as neurosis and criminal tendencies can easily be understood. 
It also is not surprising that fetishism is primarily found among visualizers. 
We find the same to be true for exhibitionism where a passive depravity, that is,
an even stronger form of discouragement, is found in the perversity of the
voyeur.
3. Exhibitionism
Laségue introduced the concept “exhibitionism” in the study of perversions
in 1877. It comprises sexual deviations that seek and find sexual gratification by
violating modesty with exposing oneself. Both types of individuals are visual
who in their sexual expressions had not advanced beyond showing and peeping,
or who place too much emphasis on the tendency to violate the feelings of
shame. Such persons' lack of courage and inactivity also can easily be seen in
their lifestyle. This does not preclude the possibility that with weaker people
they will play the tyrant. Exhibitionism also is a struggle against the social norm
and a tendency to scare and corrupt children by exposing oneself; exposing
others is to disparage them. This perversion, therefore, relates closely to sadism.
Children revolting against the persons who rear them often display
exhibitionist acts while in the phase of searching for their sexual role and also
later. It would be unfair to consider this a perversion. Nothing is as inaccessible
to a child, and as likely to be met with punishment, as the norm of adult sexual
relations. Therefore, what remains in erotic activity will appear to the naive

observer as analogous to a perversion.
Similar for us is the lusting of mentally retarded exhibitionists, whereas
such tendencies as part of a sexual experience appear to be the norm. Because of
a lack of inhibitions, and also cowardliness, which often is at the base of
psychological failures for manicdepressives, schizophrenics, progressive
paralytic, alcoholics and the age-demented, exhibitionism is the predominant and
most extreme sexual achievement. In line with this we have noted stronger
expressions to display and view that are normal and within normal bounds of
eroticism, for example when using mirrors, that result from a lack of
selfconfidence that leads to a compulsion to be demonstrative.
Therapy for this perversion, next to training, has to aspire to change the
entire personality for a courageous attitude toward life and society. Influencing a
person toward that goal with other kinds of cures may be possible in especially
mild cases.
4. Sodomy
An extreme form of discouragement and despair among erotic possibilities
are sexual acts with animals in which the exclusion of a human partner is raised
to the debasement of a partner in the form of an animal. The path in this
perversely wrong direction can be facilitated by detention and isolation,
preceded by mental training and hardening of feelings, i.e. toughening up. The
same applies to an exclusive association with certain animals. Mental retardation
and an inherent lack of social feeling can further such tendencies.
5. Necrophilia
This perversion, by which a sexual act is performed by men on the corpses
of women, can also be attributed to the desire for a totally defenseless partner. It
presumes the loss of belief in one's sexual ability and sexual drive and an
extensive denial of a social relationship in taking pleasure from sex. Men such as
these who are afraid of life and who engage in such acts are aided by the
reassuring feeling of not having to assume responsibilities, or the need to have
regard for any consequences. The attraction in this perversion lies in the easily
attainable feeling of having unlimited dominance over the dead partner.
From this vantage point we gain insight into the psychology of the killer for
pleasure whose sexual gratification is linked to being master over life and death,
a caricature god, who takes pleasure in the defenselessness of his victims. The
close link with sadism is obvious.
Comprehensive Works
Krafft-Ebing, Psychopathia sexualis, Stuttgart
Moll and H. Ellis, Die Funktionsstörungen des Sexuallebens (Sexual
disfunctions), Leipzig, 1912

Schrenck-Notzing, Die Sugesstionstherapie bei krankhaften Erscheinungen
des Geschlechtssinnes (Suggestion therapy for symptoms of pathological sexual
orientation), Stuttgart 1892
Marquis de Sade, Justine
Freud, 3 Abhandlungen zur Sexualtheorie, 1923, and Traumdeutung, 1924,
Psychoanalytikal Verlag
Adler, Psychologie des Geschlechtslebens, Munich, Reinhardt 1922
Adler, Ueber den nervösen Charakter, 3rd ed. and Praxis und Theorie der
Individualpsychologie, 2nd ed., Munich, J. F. Bergmann, 1923
Bloch, Beiträge zur Aetiologie der Psychpathia sexualis, Dresden, Dohrn, 1902
Eulenberg, Sadismus und Masochismus, 2nd ed. Berlin, Julius Springer 1911
Moll, Eulenburgs Enzyklopädie, 1908
Cramer, Die Beziehungen des Exhibitionismus zum Strafgesetz, Aerztl.
Sachvers.-Zeit, Berlin 1897, P. 233
Boissier and Lachause, Perversions sexuelles a forme obsedante, Arch de neurol.
1893, October
Krafft-Ebing, Pscyhopathia sexualis, 13th ed. Stuttgart, Enke 1907
Reimann, Exhibitionismus eines nicht erweislich Geisteskranken, Zeitschr. f.
Medizinalbeamte u. Krankenhausärzte, Berlin 1898

Haberda, see Casper-Limans handbook for forensic medicine
Maschka, handbook for forensic medicine
A. Moll, Eulenburg's Encyclopedia - Epaulard, vampirism, Lyon, A. Storck et.
Co. 1902.
Chapter XXXIII
Sexual Neurasthenia1 2
[1926]
This article's title stems from Beard. The well-established definition for
neurasthenia is found in Krafft-Ebing: "Irritable weakness in nerve functions
associated with sexual activities." Other authors have failed to reach beyond that
definition in their effort to define neurasthenia as a unique illness.
Little satisfactory guidance can be derived from traditional literature for the
etiology of this complex of symptoms. The assumption of a neuropathic
disposition sees it at least in a context with other psychological manifestations,
admittedly not without shifting it into the darkness of what is regarded as general
human degeneration. Even less convincing are pronouncements on masturbation,
sexual excesses, abnormal sexual relations, coitus interruptus, sexual abstinence,
advanced gonorrhea, and mood arousals. Treating these factors etiologically at
least recognizes their significance as symptoms or side effects, since the person
afflicted with "sexual neurasthenia," in a context of these indicators, already was
neurotic.
The symptomenkomplex treating illnesses under this title are in men: weak
erections, a failure to ejaculate, frequent nocturnal emissions, premature
ejaculation, impotence, spermatorrhoea, excessively extended periods of
erections, painful glands, painful urethra; in women: nocturnal and daytime
emissions, frigidity, and vaginismus. For both sexes it is a compulsion for
masturbation. Some authorities tend to consider all forms of perversion as sexual
neurasthenia.
These symptoms, except when they appear only occasionally, start either
soon or long after puberty and often persist for a long period of time. Under
whatever the conditions and in spite of medications and hydropathic and
endocrinological treatments, the affliction can be approached psychologically.
To understand the various forms of affliction, it helps to examine them from a
common perspective. From that perspective, in general, all sexual neuroasthenics
have had a conspicuous lifestyle. It is apparent from that lifestyle that they seem
ill-prepared for love. This same failing, if not always as obvious, can also be
seen in their other relationships. People thus afflicted have stood out for their
hypersensitivity since childhood. They are characteristically ambitious, vain,
impatient, careful, and fearful. Characteristically, they are also critical,

pessimistic, restrained, and isolated. Vacillating moods show their inability to
maintain a happy and spirited disposition. Their zest for life which shows itself
from time to time (termed "periodically" by authorities) is always forced and
should be seen as compensating for a feeling of inferiority. Kretschmer's effort
to divide such people into "pyknics" and "schidzoids" is inadequate since it
ignores or considers too lightly the common base, the shared feeling of
inferiority, and the nervous character stemming from it. Besides, it never matters
what someone brings into life, but what he makes of it.
1 Originally published as "Sexualneurasthenie" in the Handb. norm. path.
Physiol., Vol. 
14, No. 1, Pages 895-899, 1926. 
2 New translation by Gerald L. Liebenau, 2003.
In the case of these widely found people confidence in themselves is
diminished. The resulting disposition and the consequences that follow cannot
be attributed to anything physical, but must be seen psychologically. This
becomes even more evident when various successful cures, in particular through
the insight into the deeper lying connections achieved by Individual Psychology
and the benefits derived from encouragement, convinced us that these illnesses
cannot be explained by causality, but by a wrong attitude toward life.
We are forced by our experience to examine every abnormal sexual
expression from an understanding of the total person and not the other way
around, as taught by Freudian psychology. However, the fact that some of the
suffering mentioned above arises from deeply rooted conditions for which
fantasy prepared the alleviative groundwork should not be ignored. Examples
are seminal emissions and ejaculatio praecox. Based on my experience, other
afflictions, particularly parethesia, hyperesthesia, painful sensations and
spermatorrhea, are related to frustrated arousals, protracted coitus and similar
onanisms. I have observed a number of cases in which such abuses cause slight
or extensive bleeding from the urinary tract leading to a diagnosis of irritation in
the lower tract. The same may be true for frequent and extended erections, which
other authorities also explain as ejaculatio praecox. In all such cases, however,
underlying or supporting psychological connections should be examined, as in
cases of ejaculatio praecox where there are always indications of nervous
impatience and a fear of creating stronger ties. Regarding the latter, I have
observed that fear of having children resulted in a failure to have orgasms and an
inability to ejaculate.
Frequent seminal emissions and obsessive masturbation after puberty point
first of all to a fear of women. We find this to be the erotic expression of an

isolated person. There are authorities that attribute such symptoms to being
infatuated with one's own body, narcissism (Naecke). In fact, such narcissism is
secondary, a product of necessity that arises from the exclusion of other sexual
objects. Similar sexual manifestations, if they are a cause for concern, could
mean a hint to the physician for him to put an end to the patient's hesitation and,
using the power of his authority, encourage him to engage in sexual relations. It
shows intent to avoid responsibility.
By the way, we do not recommend relations with prostitutes. The patient
must be brought to learn to love and to have honest relationships with women.
The cheap and cowardly escape into prostitution makes it more difficult to find
the right solution and promotes the feeling of inferiority.
Vaginismus, painful cramps of the muscles of the vagina, is the body's way
of saying "No!" An Individual Psychological examination in such cases would
show tendencies toward isolation, rejection of an underdeveloped female role,
fear of losing selfesteem, denigration, and disappointment. Violent treatment by
the man and pain during intercourse, even small injuries to the vagina, can either
cause or increase cramps in women who are so disposed. Occasionally, an
unusually strong hymen can be the critical factor in cramping.
In cases of vaginismus, as well as in frigidity, a sensitive clitoris can have
been caused by masturbation. Frigidity is always a sign of a lack of passion
toward one man or men in general. Frigid women do not " go along." The
psychological causes are the same as for vaginismus. They differ only in that the
latter represent a defensive female position while frigidity reflects passive
resistance. Frigid women in general will express docility and complacency in
their relationships. Frigidity may have always existed, but it can also have
started as a result of a disappointment after having experienced normal sexual
relations. The impetuous intent of having sexual relations with another man is
often to prove the shortcomings of the former partner.
The findings of Individual Psychology3, especially the evidence presented
for nervous symptoms as forms of expression, contributed significantly to an
understanding of psychoneurosis. In fact, these findings are so significant that no
school of neurology or any practicing physician can approach a neurological
problem without making reference to Individual Psychology.
It would be an irreparable mistake to wrench symptoms out of their natural
context and to examine them in isolation. Such a mistake, still generally made in
neuropsychology, would be like removing a note from a melody to examine it by
itself. In order to understand a nervous symptom one must keep in mind its
social context and how it interacts socially.
Therefore, the most important question with regard to all nervous

symptoms not organically based is what is happening at that moment? The
answer for psychic impotence is that the sexual ties are ignored. If the ailing
person were to be asked what he wishes to do, his response would be what
everyone would expect him to say. However, if he were asked for reasons why
he is not doing what he wants to do, the answer will be more substantial than one
would expect. The person will then bring up fear of sexual diseases, a "poor"
relationship, concerns of leading an innocent girl astray, and a hundred other
arguable reasons that are the first line of defense. The physician will be unable to
respond to these explanations unless he takes our position that a sexual
relationship without love is vulgar. The only sure way to avoid sexual diseases is
love; it also prevents the other harmful consequences. The physician should not
promote something vulgar, even if he cannot eliminate it from this world.
3 Adler: Praxis und Theorie der Individualpsychologie, 2nd ed., Munich, J. F.
Bergmann. Also, "Zeitschrift für Individualpsychologie," Vienna VI, Joanellig.
6, 3 annual issues.
Having dealt with this aspect, we arrive at the second level of defense, the
fear of disgrace. Popular belief grounded in an oversimplified view of human
nature, such as “protesting too much” and inferring the opposite, puts this matter
squarely. The fear of being disgraced, or failing, is a much more important
motive than the one presented earlier. It actually is the provocateur of the other
defense. As long as it exists, the sexual aspect has been eliminated so that
desires, feelings, and even words, no longer have any meaning.
Therefore, according to Individual Psychology, the feeling of inferiority is
the basis for impotence. It is a far superior clarifying principle, particularly
since, therapeutically, it provides a far more defensible position. Consequently,
our conviction (that the feeling of inferiority is at the base of impotence) remains
unshakable as long as we recognize and carefully pursue the consequences of
what we surmise. Impotence as an illness arises only in those who in their lives
generally exhibit a faltering attitude, who restrict their activities and yet set
themselves the highest goals, and who then arrive at a synthesis that keeps them
from having to make decisions for fear of failure.
Such a lifestyle, simply put, is maintained by those who start out trying to
do much, but who get little done, whose relationships with others are minimal
and are achieved only with difficulty, and whose love relationships never come
to full fruition.
I have shown that if a person were to ignore everything that handicaps or
aggravates life, the ways of avoiding responsibility, inhibitions, paralysis, and
the symptoms of neurosis, that person’s personality, if correctly assessed, would
project thought processes, attitudes, deportment, and forms of expression that

would lead to the same handicaps as caused by the symptoms we have named.
They would differ only in that those psychological manifestations do not
produce a determined attitude or result in decisive actions. However, in our case,
instead of these expected consequences, the symptom results in impotence. It is
as if the psychological events that we noted above had weakened the essential
spirit, as if a contrary rationale stood in the way of the fervently desired goal of
sexual satisfaction.
However, this contrary rationale with relatively strong comparable
symptoms does not occur accidentally, or by thoughtlessness, or baseless
weaknesses. Rather, it arises from the impotence of a total personality whose
final goal is to attain unchallenged superiority or, at a minimum, a condition in
which there is a "total absence of conflict."4 The patient's impotence is
evidenced by his weakness and lack of courage, which manifests itself in one of
life's primary directions: the patient circumvents aggressiveness that he fervently
seeks. While the language of his mouth, his thoughts, and his wishes give
expression to his yearnings, his body and his sexual organs speak another
language, a language that proclaims his cowardice.
This also explains the various forms that impotence takes. Under some
ameliorating conditions, sexual intercourse is possible. It may occur where there
is a loving, cooperative partner and no consequences, or sex with persons of a
lower social order, with adolescents, or with older women. It may also occur
when the body or mind are aroused or with the help of a friendly and patient
partner, until venereal disease or disappointments set in. Sex in cases of
impotence may also take place after a physician's encouragement, after
consuming alcohol or by taking medication, or with external stimulants, etc.
How often this can happen depends upon the person’s suggestibility or
gullibility. It should also be recognized that these ameliorating circumstances
fail as often as they succeed.
4 Seif, L., "Das Ziel der Konfliktlosigkeit," Internationale Zeitschrift für
Individualpsychology, Vol. 2.
It should be understood that these various circumstances sometimes bring
about success leaving both the physician and patient believing that the methods
applied are correct. In fact, success is due only to the momentary or persistent
lifting of courage, whether known or unknown to the physician.
In any case, a psychological examination will show that this type of patient
has problems establishing relationships with others. They are not social people;
their interest in current or future social relationships is minimal. The natural fate
of such people due to their philosophy of life, unless their attitude is changed, is

that their seed will be fruitless.
References
Ellis, H., “Die Funktionsstörungen des Sexuallebens” (Sexual dysfunctions),
Handbook for Sexual Studies, ed. v.A. Moll, Leipzig, 1912.
Rohleder, H., Die Funktionsstörungen der Zeugung,. 2nd ed.
Freud, S., Excerpts from Psychologie des Liebesleben. Zur Einführung des
Narzissmus (Introduction to narcissism), Collected works, publisher of
psychoanalytical works, 1924.
Löwenfeld, Ueber sexuelle Konstitution, Wiesbaden, 1911.
Allers, R., "Psychologie des Geschlechtsleben" (Sexual psychology), from the
Handbook for Comparative Psychology, Munich, Reinhardt, 1922.
Adler, Ueber den Nervösen Charakter, 3rd ed., Munich, 1924, and the well
established texts on neuroses.
Chapter XXXIV
Problem Children1 2
[1926]
When a child is observed doing something wrong, we should investigate the
roots of such behavior. What is its cause? Are there any reasons? Or was there a
time when the child was tempted by something to change from acting positively
to negatively. Once we have the reasons clearly in hand, we begin to eliminate
the causes. This task, however, can be accomplished only when we have a good
relationship with the child, when we can win over the child to open himself up to
us, and allow us to learn about his innermost self. Only then can we be effective.
I consider it impossible for us to attain this goal while struggling with the
child. There will always be misbehavior on the part of the child, if he is under
pressure. We must forego a rigid system of penalties, and give up the idea that a
child who lies and steals must be punished immediately. Parents who have a
problem child often say, "We tried kindness, but it was useless. We tried to be
strict, but that was useless. What should we do?" While I do not assume that
kindness is a panacea, it is necessary in order to win the child over for what we
have planned for him, and for what follows, which is to change the whole
person. This is because the mistakes that are immediately apparent and with
which we must begin are only the surface manifestations. There is nothing to be
gained if a child is punished for lying, and thereby becomes more guarded. The
child will now become more careful and shy, and will try to hide more, and at
some point will feign compliance by tricks and other futile measures. This brings
me to discuss the child's inner life.
What can already be observed during the first days of the child's life is the
development of a feeling for affection. The child begins to take an interest in his

environment, which of course, is the mother, who is the first person to whom
this interest flows. This is an important process since it means that the child has
awakened from his isolation and formed a world for himself in which there are
other people who play a role, that he learns to interrelate with them. It is not only
the function of the mother to bring the child into this world, but it is as important
a task for her to become a fellow human being, another person on whom the
child can depend and whom he can trust, someone who will support the child.
Thus the child through his interrelationship with the mother attains the beginning
of social feelings; he no longer is alone with his needs but enters a new
relationship, which at the beginning is that of a child and his mother.
1 Abridged version of a lecture presented on March 3, 1926 in Chemnitz
followed by a discussion. Originally published by Otto Rühle/Alice Rühle:
Schwer erziehbare Kinder: eine Schriftenfolge, Issue #1, Dresden (Verlag am
anderen Ufer) 1926, pp. 9-40. Reprinted as "Schwer erziehbare Kinder" in Alfred
Adler: Psychotherapie und Erziehung, Ausgewählte Aufsätze Band I: 1919-1929,
p. 119-134. 
2 New translation by Gerald L. Liebenau, 2003. Editing assistance by Kurt A.
Adler, M.D., Ph.D.
We can now see where the future development starts and where the first
mistakes begin. The first stage serves only as preparation for the larger units that
consist of family and the environment. This is the beginning of the social being.
The individual is not alone, he does not exist for himself, he is not closed
off, but through the function of the mother has to find a transition to a point
where he sees himself connected to society and where he considers himself a
part of society. That is the direction in which his style of life has to be
developed. This transition can fail if the child has no mother, or possibly when
the child has been entrusted to people who do not assume the function of the
mother, as is the case with foster children who are not given love, who are
passed from one to another, and for whom no one has affection. Under such
conditions, children seek a way of life that isolates them because they believe
that others are hostile toward them. In such cases, we can already guess which
particular characteristics these children will assume. Always cast out, always
badgered, always treated harshly, such children will grow up as if living in
hostile territory. Although the case I cited is extreme, we can observe the same
results among many children who grew up under similar conditions. The
transition here toward social feeling has not succeeded well.
This is very significant since a child raised under such conditions will
always exist in isolation, will not approach others, will not relate to them, and

will lack all those functions that are predicated on the development of a social
feeling. Are these perhaps unimportant matters? They are the most important
that a human being has to consider. Not only is such a person incapable of
maintaining friendships, but all worthy characteristics such as loyalty,
helpfulness, readiness to care for others, and consideration of shortcomings of
others will be lacking. All those who deal with children will be reminded of the
many who grew up under such adverse circumstances. They know about these
children who are inconsiderate of their comrades, their parents, and their
teachers, who are disagreeable, who are always fighting, and always acting
rudely. When these cases are examined more closely, it turns out that the mother
was either incompetent or absent, or for whatever reasons failed to carry out her
natural duties and responsibilities.
We must not cast too much blame on the mother alone who, perhaps
because of her job or misfortune, might not have been able to do more and her
child, therefore, had to go without. However, as a result of her negligence, the
mother totally destroyed the foundation on which a child is raised. The best way
to create hatred in a child is to use corporal punishment. Where is the measure
by which we can determine when the child gives up trying to connect with the
mother? We have come to know innumerable people, not only children but also
adults, whose lives were wasted solely because the link with the mother and with
society as a whole has failed. There is no contradiction for us when we must
assume that the mother loved her child, but acted wrongly. Also, we cannot
blame her; she did not know better. This is how we see these lonely children,
who assume an aggressive attitude, who are malcontents, unable to cooperate
with others toward a common goal, who under favorable circumstances might on
occasion be able to live by themselves, but who are defeated by the coldness that
emanates from them. This might not be understood by everyone, but is felt by
all. This is how these children approach all other important functions, -
thoroughly ill prepared.
The development of language, for example, is predicated on this contact
between people. It develops from intimate contact and more than that, it
becomes a new bond to connect the individual to others. We regularly find that
the development of language is hampered when the child does not relate
properly to others. This is so in innumerable cases where we can always find
children whose speech development was retarded, children whose speech was
hampered by stuttering, and where we can always establish not that the mother
lacked in love, but that the relationship of the child to others was unsuccessful. I
have seen enough children who because of their stuttering were also teased. We
shall not be able to eliminate such situations unless we can uncover the causes.

We must establish the ability of these children to strengthen their contacts.
However, first it is necessary to uncover the course that the lives of these
children have taken. This will not be possible for those who use a heavy hand in
disciplining their child. Only those succeed who stop and think how to gain the
child’s respect. I have seen a nine-year old child who was taken from his mother
early in life and who was raised by a woman farmer who had no understanding
for the child. When the child entered school, the child was practically unable to
speak.. The child saw everyone else as an enemy; his lack of language
development made him unable to establish contact with others. He became no
one's friend; he had nothing to offer others. This left no other choice but to
remove this child from his present location and to transfer him into another
community, in order for him to establish relationships with other children.
It is not only language that is threatened by such illfated development. It
also applies to the development of the mind for the child to gain acceptance from
others. Whatever I assume or believe to be correct reasoning is how I expect
every sensible person to reason. Where can I test this when I have no contact
with others? I cannot do this when I confront others as an enemy, and others
confront me similarly. We will thus find in such children that their mental
development is below average.
For the person who lives alone, morality is the most superfluous thing in the
world. An isolated person needs no morality. That is a manifestation of social
feeling, a function of community, a style of life of people who interrelate and
who are connected. When we find a child lacking in morals, we can be sure that
here the contact with others is in trouble. Until we have reestablished this, it
would be unthinkable that the child could be taught moral values. This applies
also to all aesthetic feelings, etc. In short, everything that distinguishes a person
is related to the development of the social feeling.
Let us examine for a moment the very curious but tragic development of
such a child who feels that he lives in a hostile world. He has the worst
expectations for his future and is oppressed by his situation. He always feels
himself the weakest and the smallest and never experiences what it means to be
loved. This is how he comes to think very little of himself. He will think of
himself as inferior. This will be manifested by his never making friends and by
showing signs of being fearful. All pedagogues find that such a child has a great
tendency toward waywardness and cowardice. Cowardice cannot be argued
away by the fact that such a child climbs trees. That is not courage. Courage
exists only in useful activities.
When you first begin to examine a child, you should first draw a very
uncomplicated picture, a simple diagram consisting of a vertical line. Then you

say to yourself: on the left side of the line are the useful movements of the child
and on the right side those that are useless. On the right side, there are no
expressions of courage and of virtue, even when they appear to be such. It is not
possible for us to consider chivalry as something useful in children who band
together in a gang and run wild; their entire behavior falls into the region of
uselessness.
Let us examine the behavior of such children when, for example, they leave
their families to enter school. Today, this includes all children and schools are
charged to recognize failings in children and correct them. Children with
problems are beset by hostility, fearful, and always afraid that someone will deal
unfairly with them. They always strive to escape school for some place where
they might feel halfway protected, and always seek to break away again from
others. Such children are poor material for school, insufficiently prepared with
the required strong social feelings and a firm belief in themselves. These are
children who have no confidence in their own powers and in their future. This
becomes immediately apparent as reflected in their poor performance. In the first
days of school they are regarded among the worst. Soon this will be reflected in
their poor marks, which proves to them that school is no different from what
they had experienced before. They will be strengthened in their conviction that
this life is a vale of tears, that one can escape trouble only with cunning,
cleverness, etc., and that it would be best to leave school. Their behavior reflects
this attitude.
I had said earlier that often their capabilities and development had suffered
seriously, but that was not their fault. They did not learn to be orderly or to
concentrate. Suddenly all this is being expected of them and when they cannot
do it, they are punished. It is almost like removing a note from a melody, or a
measure, and then trying to understand the piece. This measure has meaning
only in the context of the entire piece. Only after I have learned the melody of a
child can I understand the origin of a mistake. It is necessary to approach this
matter thoroughly and not to think that the upbringing of a child, the education
of an adult, or of an entire nation, can be accomplished by imposing additional
burdens. Everything happens for good reasons and is in the context of the entire
development of the child.
In the most extreme cases, the future life of such children is, of course,
extremely calamitous. They are seen in school as foreign bodies. They
experience there the same kind of life as they had before. The world seems for
them to have no other ways of expressing itself towards them than with hostility,
a bad attitude, and by treating them poorly. When then someone believing this to
be the right thing to do beats such a child, it is what the child had actually

expected, and his perception of the world will be confirmed.
I do not wish to pursue the course of the life of such children except to the
point where they lost faith in their future and the hope that there is still
something to be achieved in school. That is the moment when they become
wayward. It is impossible for anyone to always feel good-for-nothing, worthless.
He must find some means of escape. That is why we see children tending to go
so far toward the useless side that we regard them as wayward. The course is
always the same; that is also clear. I have not met a wayward student who had
not fully given up hope of having any success in school. What conclusions do
we draw from that? We must organize schools so that children will not lose faith
in themselves. In the end, these children leave school with poor marks, derided,
criticized, punished, with a growing disbelief in their own powers and now are
expected to prove to society that they can be useful in their work. These children
already lost faith in their ability to achieve anything. If they are now tested to
determine their competency, it will become apparent that they are less
experienced and more indecisive than the others. They don't know themselves
what they want to become and whatever they say is empty words. These are the
children who fail in every vocational test. They get nowhere; they have totally
lost faith and are so poorly prepared for every test that slowly but surely the
thought arises and a striving in them is awakened to prove in some way to the
others that they are not mere trash.
Something they always hear and is said abusively is: "You will end as a
criminal; you are a good for nothing; you can't do anything!" It invariably falls
on fruitful soil. After all, does not the child already believe himself unable to do
anything? That is always being reinforced from all sides. And now, for these
children to eke out an existence and to escape from this feeling of shame and
degradation, the flight into uselessness begins. It was already that way in school
when they tried to avoid that institution at any cost. Whenever they could they
stayed away from school, going so far as to forge notes excusing their absences
and falsifying report cards so that parents and teachers were mostly unaware of
their true situation. When parents and teachers say: "You can't get around me!"
such a child thinks: "How often did you not catch me; I must be very clever in
what I am doing!" Instead of going to school, the child seeks out-of-the way
places. There he will find others who already took the same route, who carefully
tried out how to accomplish this, and who already know how one can distinguish
himself in being useless, how to reinforce one’s belief in himself, and how to
show himself to be “a real man.” Frequently, the youngest members of such
gangs are prodded on by leaders who then remain in the background in order for
the fledglings to deal with the police. Then the novices find new inspiration for

acting more cleverly. Since the path toward usefulness seems closed for these
children, they remain on the useless side. And this whole misfortune started with
these wayward children never seeing themselves as fellow human beings.
The treatment for such children can only be one that reestablishes their
contact with society. Whoever has succeeded in this knows how happy such a
child feels when he has a new experience, when someone who is himself a
considerate person approaches him, and who does not slacken in his efforts to
help that child find his proper place, and establish contact with others. Often this
inability to make contacts is something seemingly unimportant, such as a child
failing to play with other children early on and consequently not socializing, or if
that child’s guardian is someone who, although loving the child, is a lonely
person. That person then fails to promote contacts for the child. There are
numerous trivial things in the home, in family life, that so frequently lead to
problems, but which with a little effort could benefit the whole family. For
example, I regard it as very important that the entire family eats together during
meal times. However, these occasions must be recognized as opportunities for
establishing closer contact with children. This cannot be done with a sour face,
with keeping the rod nearby, or by lecturing children on their shortcomings.
Whenever it is at all possible, I recommend that the day begin with eating
breakfast together, and not with everyone eating at different times, or with
someone still in bed while another is on the way to school. There are other
mistakes that are made in this context, not only the one whereby the child is
scolded at the table so that the child thinks:" Oh, if this would only end and I no
longer would have to see these people!" Of course, it is just as bad if someone at
the table pulls out the newspaper and begins to read. That should not be done
because the child can easily be led to think: "Why am I staying here?" Of course,
it is necessary to maintain contact with children outside of meal times until they
are able to transfer that relationship to others. Therefore, it seems very important
to me that children have social contacts beginning at age three.
In establishing contact, where the mother plays an enormous role, another
even greater mistake can be made. It comes about when the mother creates such
a strong bond that the child has nothing left for anyone else. The circle of life
that is thus created, mother - child, is such that everything else is excluded. This
observation applies to pampered children. The mother in her supremacy, of
course, is the support for the child. The mother is always ready to help, always
genial, always in demand by the child. This mother protects the child from
everything, is always fearful for him and at his side, does not allow the child to
function, to move, or to play by himself. Since this mother does everything for
this child, there is nothing left for the child to do. The child does not even have

to think any more, nor does he have to act since the mother acts for him. We can
thus see that the problems with such a child are almost the same as with the first
type. These children are excluded from society, the most important and the
largest community. They experience only the mother who in turn has excluded
all others. Frequently the father notices this mistaken development and will try
to avert it by, for example, introducing a stricter upbringing. What happens then?
The child grows even closer to the mother and excludes the father even more.
The child no longer wants to have anything to do with him. The father and
mother must consult with each other and arrive at a plan that would prevent the
child from being driven even further from the father. It is not that difficult for a
father to win over a child, but he must consider that not much has been
accomplished by this. We must take care that other people are also brought into
contact with the child.
The fearful child belongs to this group of pampered children since fear is
nothing other than a cry for help, which we can recognize at every step in such
children. It affects the child physically to the point where he can no longer stand
up on his own and must always find something to lean on. If the mother is
nearby, the child will lean on her. Such children cry when left alone by the
mother. Obviously, this becomes a major task for the mother and in that way one
mistake in upbringing avenges itself against the person who made it. The child
has adopted a faulty lifestyle and no amount of scolding will help. This also goes
for situations where the child makes trouble, does not want to go to sleep, and
disturbs the sleep of others, all for only one purpose: to force the mother to come
to the child. In their sleep, such children can feel isolation so strongly that they
become afflicted with suddenly crying out, which is a development that
identifies them as neurotic children, and the neurologist is called on to intercede.
Not infrequently this same failing is the cause of children wetting their beds.
This then becomes nothing more than a sign that the child speaks with his whole
body, with his bladder, and declares: I must not be left alone; I must be paid
attention to; I must always be protected! Such children are often severely
punished, but always unsuccessfully. Whenever we hear of children being
severely abused, it concerns mostly bedwetting. With such children we regularly
find someone in their immediate environment who disregards all forms of
propriety and mistreats them horribly. However, such a situation can be dealt
with much easier and with more humanity. Punishment does not change
children. Changes in children can come about only by recognizing that they have
such strong feelings of insecurity that they want to appeal to their mother even at
night. These children are no different from, for example, children who become
fussy at night, who insist that their covers must be straightened out, the light

remain on, and the door be kept open. Such children are poorly prepared for
school. Should it surprise us when those children do poorly? When such
children, frightened and crying, are brought to school with great effort, and there
they find a friendly teacher, much more friendly than they had expected, and
who fortuitously pays attention to them, then everything can work out well.
Otherwise, the situation will become even worse. These children are tardy, fail
to do their homework, lose their books and their book bags, and sit in class
without participating. When they are tested it turns out that they cannot
concentrate. Their memory seems to have suffered, which is really not the case,
but their mind is on something else as is their concentration. They also relate
poorly to their classmates and can establish contact only where they are met with
the most warmth.
Such children suddenly are apt to change from being affectionate to
something quite different. The craving of pampered children increases
automatically. It always becomes greater and the demands these children make
of their mothers often cannot be satisfied. However, they insist on having their
demands met and one day there will be a moment when they start to tyrannize
their mother by yelling and stamping their feet. The beginning of this behavior
has its origin much earlier. Often these are children of whom their mother says:
This used to be such an affectionate child. Did this child become someone else?
Absolutely not. If one were to meet all the demands of such a child, he would
stop yelling. However, that no longer can be done easily. The same behavior
applies to this type of child in school. This child, like the other type, requires
special consideration while he develops and keeps in step with the other
children. Not enough attention is being paid to this problem today.
I am convinced that everyone who observes children from our vantage
point comes to the same conclusion: that such children must be brought up
slowly, that one must have patience, that one must always draw attention to their
vulnerabilities by trying with whatever it takes to make them independent. They
are messy, and when I hear that, then a person always comes to mind whose task
is to make order. However, I also see that figure appear when there is talk of a
child who lies. It is always as if I see a strong hand placed on the child’s head
from which that child tries to escape. This escaping manifests itself in the lie.
There is another group of children that must be included here. These are the
children who were born with weak or inferior organs. They are in the same
situation as the others. They are experiencing every insignificant task as
oppressive, have the feeling that they are not up to their tasks, do not hear or see
too well, and have suffered from being incapable of doing certain things. They
are particularly difficult to raise and nourish. They suffer from cramps, are

disturbed during the day and at night, cannot sleep peacefully, have
underdeveloped lungs, and suffer from physical weakness. Here also, the organic
condition that caused the feeling of being weak can become extremely severe in
such children. Clearly, all such afflicted children will strive to overcome their
problems. Among them, remarkably, will be many artists who suffer from some
type of visual problems, and many musicians whose hearing is poor, not only
with some occasional ear infections, but with innate hearing problems.
Beethoven, Bruckner, etc. are well known examples. However, they overcame
their difficulties and not lose courage in their striving. They derived new
strength from their struggle with obstacles. Among painters are even those who
have difficulties distinguishing colors, or are even color blind and yet achieved
greatness. When their works are examined, we find that these artists can be
extremely discriminating because they had the courage to deal with their
disability and did not give in to their problems. Shortcomings in children can be
to their advantage under certain circumstances, but only when we do not
undermine their courage. When we do so, we expose them to a most cruel fate.
When we imagine that this basic principle applies not only to children, but also
to adults, to entire groups, and to a nation, we will discover a wonderful unity in
all this.
We expect from educators and parents that they guide the striving in
children to useful activities and not deter the courage to strive. These are the two
demands that we must make of anyone raising children and of educators.
Only courageous, selfconfident people can endure this world. It offers
something only to those who are in concert with its problems, who do not fear its
many ramifications, but try to overcome them. For that reason, from this
unalterable relationship of man to earth and man to man, to which the struggle
between the two sexes can be added, clearly are derived the right principles for
our lives and our work, for the endowment of our lifestyles, and our
development. We can allow as valid only those principles that recognize this
interrelationship, that are appropriate to form out of human beings the right
inhabitants for this earth, genuine fellow human beings living within a social
organization, people who are able to solve the problems of life with wisdom.
During the discussion at the conclusion of this lecture, the following questions
were raised:
1. Is it possible that the causes for a person to be wayward are inherent in
the child's genetic make-up?
2. Can we allow our children to be with problem children without having to
resort to corporal punishment? Is it correct to integrate problem children with
others or should they be taught in separate classes?

3. Is it correct to segregate especially talented children?
Answer to the first question:
If there were children whose genetic make-up is so impaired that they could
no longer be helped, leaving them to become wayward, it would not pay to have
teachers, particularly to teach those children. However, no one has ever
determined a degree of impairment in a person's genetic make-up that would
justify giving up on that individual. It is the other way around so that when
caregivers are not able to bring up a child properly, they use genetics as an
excuse. I have seen children with a very poor genetic make-up who were among
the best, and I have seen children with a very good genetic make-up who
counted among the worst. When an educator thinks that he cannot get anywhere
because of the child's genetic make-up (and I am not including here children
with organic impairments), then I would like to recommend that the educator
should let someone else try, who will approach the child from the standpoint that
I have advocated. It is certain that there are difficult cases, and we have often
sweated blood with such children, but it still worked. If I were to assume that in
certain cases nothing could be done because of what the child inherited, I would
be even more confident that I could successfully attain acceptable results with all
children, those with good as well as those with poor genetic makeups. In short:
we can always spoil a child, whether he has good or bad genes. Consequently,
the genetic make-up cannot play as significant a role, as it is still believed to be
the case today, especially from a medical standpoint where normally every
pedagogical perspective is missing. Obviously there is a connection, which must
be highlighted, such as when a child with inferior organs--which would be the
case with a poor genetic makeup--would more likely develop a strong feeling of
inferiority. To have been able to establish this, however, is an achievement of
our science and is the starting point for all of our treatments. We soon see that
there is a connection: It is that a child with poor genes living under favorable
conditions conducts himself at least as well as a child with good genes living
under adverse conditions. When a child with weak organs then experiences
adverse conditions, if we can find no appropriate plan for raising that child, then
it is quite possible that education here is useless, and that only poor results will
ensue. I consider it inappropriate for an educator to adopt this standpoint, since
he must above all else be actively optimistic and must transfer that optimism to
his children. Before children are pushed aside because of their genetic make-up,
our method should first be tried.
Response to the second question:
Should problem children be allowed to attend regular schools? Within a
family, there is no choice. The decision depends upon the degree of seriousness.

Serious cases must be treated specially. For certain types of degeneration, the
public school is inappropriate. In such cases, it often is necessary to remove
those children even from their families.
Answer to the third question:
As you must have gathered from my discussion, I do not believe in talent.
Everything is self-developed creativity. Goethe says: Genius probably is only
diligence! Every normal child can accomplish what school and teacher expect of
him. When classes are organized according to the adage "free reign to the
competent," that is, by talented students and those lacking in talent, the result is
often significant failure, as has been shown where there are only talented classes.
I would like to point out one danger that is faced by educators when they
believe too much in talent. When they tell a child that he is talented, it is often
possible that the child will no longer make any effort and become arrogant.
Socially, this is wrong. That, however, is not the worst. When such a child faces
difficulties in the course of his life, he then frequently fears defeat more than he
seeks success. He begins to falter and to have doubts, nervous illnesses follow,
and the child becomes stymied and can no longer progress. We need only think
of prodigies. They often end up badly. Then there is the other side, the so-called
child lacking in talent, which, to tell the truth, I do not accept. That is the reason
that I am opposed to segregating the talented from the untalented children. I do
not believe that any success will result. I do know, however, that this will not
help the talented, and that the untalented will be harmed.
One must learn to treat a child as an equal. This will be easier for the person
who tends to find equality in another person. Whoever lacks that tendency will
have difficulty seeing himself as a child’s equal partner. That is a precondition.
All education must strive to direct the natural feeling of inferiority toward the
useful side and to let it develop usefully. This requires equality. I do not believe
in competent or incompetent children; I believe that this applies only to
educators.
Chapter XXXV
Individual Psychology1 2
[1926]
Under this title, my well-founded science of human nature has received
wide publicity because of its effectiveness in treating and curing problem as well
as neglected children, and neurotics. However, its value as a prophylaxis against
these psychological defects in the development of the individual, that is, its
significance in the field of education, enjoys progressively increasing
recognition. Today, there probably is no direction in the field of psychology that
does not agree with Individual Psychology on major issues. There is no need to

undertake significant changes in its basic scientific principles, despite the earlier
assaults by poorly informed opponents.
Individual Psychology saw as its first task to illuminate more clearly
physical-psychological problems. It took its point of departure for its
observations from the fields of biology and medical pathology. It established
(Adler, "Studie über Minderwertigkeit von Organen," Vienna, 1907, Publisher,
Urban and Schwarzenberg3) that the child can feel the full significance and
usefulness of his organism and in an atmosphere of an increasing feeling of
inferiority the child strives to gain a sense of his full worth, of being whole and
able to overcome the problems encountered in nature and by social conditions.
This period of a striving for power that is conditioned by the individual's
insufficiencies and external problems is followed by tendencies that seek to
direct all inner strengths and opportunities toward the development of a dimly
imagined goal of perfection. Whatever we later see as psychological processes,
movements, forms of expression, etc. also capabilities and "talents," originate
from this individually practiced training, the creative power of the individual,
which seeks confusedly a fictitious final goal, a finale. Accordingly, we have
every right to call our science Individual Psychology.
The creative striving of the child, however, also takes place in an
individually established environment that has its own unique problems.
Consequently, beginning with the child's initial striving toward his final goal--
corresponding to his success in finding himself ("Ichfindung"), as early as during
the first two years of life--all psychological expressions are reactions that
correspond to the tension that a child experiences in a given situation. Therefore,
the absolute conditions of his organs or their functions are not critical, but rather
how these relate to the conditions in the environment. Since these also are
individual experiences of the child, we cannot consider absolute values as a basis
for psychological development. Therefore, we can count only on the impressions
of a child which are dependent on hundreds of influences and errors that are
never causally perceived, but can be understood only empathically and through
knowledge of the individual's style of life.
1 First appeared in E. Saupte (publ.): Einführung in die neuere Psychologie
(Introduction into the more recent psychology), Osterwick/Harz (Published by
Zickfeld) 1926, pages 
364-372. Reprinted as "Individualpsychologie" Alfred Adler: Psychotherapie
und Erziehung, Ausgewählte Aufsätze Band I: 1919-1929, p. 158-168. 
2 New translation by Gerald L. Liebenau, 2003. Editing assistance by Kurt A.
Adler, M.D., Ph.D. 

3 See Volume 2 of The Collected Clinical Works of Alfred Adler.
Therefore, the way in which the end goal, the finale, is examined becomes
essential. Aside from the fact that we can never scrutinize a person other than as
an integrated human being and, consequently, as a goal and methodically
directed unity, his life and systematic actions call for an integrated goal. Setting
a goal for even the most minor action governs the unity of the personality, and
its unique configuration, the style of life. The teleology of the person's inner life
is established out of an inner necessity, but in its uniqueness is a creation of the
individual.
If an individual's goal were to be known to us, which in the form above--
overcoming of problems--is only vaguely revealed to us, we could then claim
that we can understand and explain what the psychological expressions are
trying to tell us. We could then also know why they arose, what someone was
able to accomplish with what he inherited and why he did not act otherwise, and
how in order for him to gain his goal, his character traits were formed and his
emotions, feelings, logic, morality and aesthetics were fashioned. We could then
also understand the reason and the degree to which he detoured from our perhaps
normal way, if we could establish that his goal is too remote from ours, or even
too far away from the absolute logic of human social existence. We are, after all,
capable of identifying the composer from a melody unknown to us, or recognize
the style of architecture from some ornament, i.e. to relate parts to a whole.
Hardly anyone gives an account of life in such artistic forms. Character study
tells us nothing about particular errors. If we could arrive at an individual's
perceived goal from an examination of the ornaments and melodies in his life,
and on that basis develop the entire style of life, we could then deal with him
with almost scientific certitude and with near mathematical correctness. We
could then do without examining the usefulness of the science of Individual
Psychology, since we could then predict how someone would act in any given
situation.
In sheer untiring work, the school of Individual Psychology appears to have
succeeded in solving this problem. (See Adler, Ueber den nervösen Charakter,4
Praxis und Theorie, Handbuch der Individualpsychologie, published by
Wexberg, Heilen und Bilden.) The system that we have at our disposal in order
to determine the goal and style of life of an individual, whether child or adult,
whether poorly developed or neurotic, is built on empirically attained facts
available to anyone. Because of our way of examining these facts from a finale
and contextually, we can see them in a better light, thus integrating and
connecting them. We learned simultaneously in every psychological movement

the individual’s past, present, future, and final goal, at the same time that we also
were able to view the person's situation in early childhood as well the creation of
his personality.
4 See Volumes 1-6 of The Collected Clinical Works of Alfred Adler.
The course of life including the psychological aspect is a movement
directed toward a finale. As soon as we are able to accept this viewpoint as more
than mere words, when we take this assertion seriously, then it follows that
under the pressure of the final goal, every partial inner movement is integrated
into the whole action line and is preparation for every subsequent movement.
However, the deepest meaning of this entire process is its unfolding towards a
totality. Consequently, every step in the course of life is also a planned
consummation of the striving after fulfillment; compensation has the task of
redressing negatives, to enable rising from "below" to "above."
This compensatory movement, the deepest meaning of human life, is based
on creative power. It established culture to safeguard the human race, just as it
created all forms of individual expression and the style of life in response to
strains emanating from the outside world. These are tireless attempts and
safeguards to balance the forces of man--world--society. The final goal of all
inner striving will therefore be: harmony, security, adaptation, and wholeness.
The affirmation of such a congruence or incongruence naturally is not
achieved on the basis of scientific or mathematical principles, but according to
an individually felt impression, which again is totally dependent on an
individually and concretely formed final goal of fulfillment. Depending on how
someone sees a secure final goal by relating it to reality, whether that is in the
role of a coachman, a general, the role of a horse, a devoted physician, or a
savior of mankind--whether seen in a child's fantasy, or as experienced in one's
choice of occupation--is how he will experience and evaluate the viewpoint he
has developed. Behind all these actually perceived "concrete" final goals there
always lies the individual’s creative yearning to achieve harmony, as does his
readiness for the realities of life and above all, courage and selfconfidence.
Furthermore, they determine an individual's behavior and attitude, his bearing or,
to put it in the common language of the psychologist, his character, his
temperament, his emotions, his feelings, wants, the width and breadth of his
logic, the focus of his attention, and his actions. As the final, determining
authority in this relational system, we can assume a sense of worth and a sense of
individuality, which, to the degree that they are satisfied, govern that person’s
actions in light of his individually perceived tasks of life.
In this entire relational system there are no mathematically ascertainable
measures. It is not the individual’s physical or psychological makeup and not his

inherited talents that affect that person’s life in the broadest sense, but how the
individual’s style of life, formed during his first three years, makes use of them.
For example, a person might have an aptitude for sounds, if such can be assumed
to exist, which can easily remain totally underdeveloped with too much or too
little care. With the right training and appropriate encouragement, however, it
can be awakened, even created. His biographer relates that despite all efforts,
Charles the Great could not learn to read or write because he lacked inherent
talent. Today, having learned educational methods from Pestalozzi and others,
we no longer count on such talents. We can quietly get over venerating
ingenious achievements once we have some understanding about how these
occurred, when we apply the perspective of Individual Psychology, and when we
take into account that genius person’s schooling, his continual courageous
struggle with problems, and his early training.
In the same way, we must reject in the child the causal relevance of
circumstance, environment, or experience. Their meaning and effect unfold as
one might say as an intermediate psychological metabolism. They are
assimilated by the early-acquired style of life of the child. Therefore, it is not
inconceivable that a parasite can grow up in a highly moral family, or a
meritorious person among dissolute people. The same experience will never
affect two people in exactly the same way, and experience makes sense only to
the point permitted by the style of life. To arrive at absolutely correct reasoning
and to act accordingly obviously is impossible for a human being. And, whether
there is any causality in the broad range of possibilities for errors is unlikely. For
that reason, and because of the immense multiplicity of competing causes, it is
hardly more than a pious wish that an observation of the inner life based on
causality can be made. Consequently, all life and its individual forms follow that
uniform action line which is the root of individuality. Thus, every psychological
phenomenon has more meaning than common sense can recognize. Only in its
entire context can we recognize whether a lie means bragging or avoiding,
whether a charitable act is an act of compassion or an expression of self-
importance, whether compassion reveals a sense of community or self-
promotion. The same sounds express something different coming from Richard
Wagner or Liszt. All forms of psychological expression rest on the striving for
superiority. However, all contain individual nuances of this striving, and the
devotion to community that relates this individual to others.
The feeling of community which man inherits requires constant
development beginning in earliest childhood. Without its unfolding, the
individual will experience difficulties in his ability to adapt himself to society.
We come to this conclusion not only for socialconsiderations, as those narrow-

minded critics assume. It is also not our personal desire or our conviction that by
developing the feeling of community mankind will see better days. We must also
not take pride in being original in this striving. All religious, legal, national, and
social entities essentially have always attempted to make social existence easier
and more advantageous, and prescribed particular forms of life that would seem
to guarantee the preservation of the human race. Individual Psychology joins in
this striving, but more than other psychologies, it points out the obstacles that lie
in the path of expanding the feeling of community, and seeks better methods to
accomplish this objective.
There are no other values in life than those that are verified by the feeling
of community. Name any other worthwhile achievement that has value for any
other reason than its usefulness for society. The feeling of inferiority in the child
arising out of weakness increases and grows as he becomes aware of or barely
senses how little he has to offer of value to society.
It will be clear to everyone that every increase in striving after personal
power harms the unfolding of the feeling for community. Lacking such a feeling,
however, is of immense importance for the psychological development of a
child's style of life. This is because the most important psychological functions
and their thriving relate directly to the feeling of community. Language,
intellect, morality, and aesthetics require for their application and development
the interaction with another person. The relationship with people and an
understanding of human nature are indispensable preconditions for successful
social activities, skills that cannot be acquired in theory. And since true
happiness is inseparable from the feeling of giving, it is clear that a social person
is much closer to happiness than the isolated person striving for superiority.
Individual Psychology has very clearly expounded the belief that anyone who is
deeply unhappy, the neurotic and the desolate person, in their youth were not
able to develop the feeling of community, courage, optimism, and selfconfidence
that stem directly from the sense of belonging. This sense of belonging that
cannot be denied anyone, against which there are no arguments, can be won only
by being involved, cooperating, experiencing, and being useful to others. Out of
these actions emerges a lasting, genuine feeling of worthiness. There are three
critical questions in life by which an individual can be measured as a social
being: by how he relates to himself, by his productive work, and by his ability to
love. The style of the individual is best determined by how close he comes to
answering these questions, how far from the answers he stops, and how he tries
to avoid answering them, in particular when having to make an urgent decision.
It can now readily be seen that he who is secure in his community and, therefore,
the well prepared person, will also keep his courage and will pursue useful

solutions.
This is unlike the person who distances himself from society and its
problems. Too involved with promoting his own powers, yet dependent on the
opinions of others who seem to wish him ill and are seen mostly as adversaries,
that person anticipates victory with uncertainty and discouragement. He then
finds that his frightened ambition confronts him and bars his forward progress in
anticipation of a defeat. It should not surprise us that among this large number of
people we should encounter those whose feelings of inferiority were always very
powerful. There is no greater deterrent to developing a sense of community than
a strong feeling of inferiority.
Individual Psychology now has solved a large part of the problem of
uncovering those errors and mistakes that gave rise to a heightened feeling of
inferiority when the style of life was formed. The effect of such a false start by
some children can be changed later only through deep self-reflection. Few of the
relatively serious neurotics, desolate persons, or problem children are able to
accomplish this objectivity. At that point, the method of Individual Psychology
with its unique techniques has to be employed. Essentially, it is a method of
extensive encouragement. We require first of all that every preconception of an
innate aptitude must be relinquished. We see all great achievements as the result
of good schooling, unbroken courage, and an early beginning of the right
training. No arguments against these three factors can be admitted. All opposing
arguments will be exposed as spineless prevarications of a cowardly feeling of
inferiority and as deception to avoid judging one's own worth. They may also be
shown to be ineffectual attempts to appear important, arguments that might be
used in cases of delinquent or unlawful behavior. Neurotic symptoms and the
manifestations of problem children are defense mechanisms, safeguards,
arranged escapes, and self-constructed barriers to avoid being revealed as
inferior. Of particular significance in the course of this investigation was finding
the importance of overcoming problems at their inception to avoid lifelong
difficulties. This discovery seems to lead to an apparent paradox, which is that
great achievements regularly seem to stem from courageously overcoming
obstacles, not from an innate aptitude. They appear more likely to indicate the
lack of “aptitude.”
Individual Psychology has, however, also solved the task of clarifying the
most obvious problems: those that during the first three years of life give rise to
the stronger feeling of inferiority, and, thereby, create the problematic style of
life that leads to regular deviations from the norm. This opened an avenue for
introducing a prophylaxis in child-rearing years to avoid neuroses, psychoses,
and delinquency: the recognition given by pedagogues to Individual Psychology,

just as Individual Psychology has demonstrated its value as the only scientific
method for studying human nature. It allows drawing conclusions about an
individual’s style of life, as well as that of an entire population, from a mass of
isolated clues, memories, dreams, fantasies, and conscious as well as
unconscious impulses. It proclaims equality for children, the elderly, and women
and has found the reasons for undervaluing correctable shortcomings in our
culture and in our perceptions.
We have uncovered the most profound reason for the onset of an excessive
feeling of inferiority in three situations during the period of early child
development. Its greatest harm occurs when the child begins to discover himself
(Ichfindung), apparent at the end of the first year, when he clearly begins to feel
his relative weakness to meet the demands of the world around him. Out of this
situation the child acquires a perspective that lasts throughout his life and
constantly falsifies his experience of the world around him. He becomes skillful
in efforts at compensating. Uncertainty becomes his steady companion in all of
his activities. Only those character traits are more strongly advanced that reflect
an increasing propensity for superiority or allow skillful ways of avoidance.
Egotistical traits and a tendency toward isolation become very apparent.
Pessimistic moods, a fear of new situations, and a tendency to deviate become
evident in all areas. Discouragement sets in easily and leads to ceasing newly
started activities. Social contact with others is always inadequate. Such children
are most sensitive to praise, while censure often seriously cripples them.
We identify the largest category of such children as those who were born
with inferior organs and who experience their deficiency as a burden in life. A
subsequent improvement in their condition does not change their pessimistic
outlook with regard to the questions of life because by then they already have
established their style of life by which they interpret and assimilate all events
and experiences. Overcoming their deficiencies, in particular those of their
sensory organs, not infrequently leads to greater technical skills, which such
persons then turn into artistic achievements Becoming adept at playing or using
an instrument provides fewer opportunities for, and does not necessitate, the
development of artistic skills. History is replete with tales of musicians who had
poor hearing, and artists and poets with poor eyesight. Left-handedness
represents such an innate inferiority. It is understandable that the end result of
struggling for selfassertion depends on manifold factors, among which
discouragement assumes the greatest role.
The second large category, perhaps the largest, represents pampered
children. They lead symbiotic lives and for that reason alone cannot gain a
feeling of selfesteem (Weinmann). They always arrive at a stage in their life

when the pampering they are given is insufficient, when they are forced out of
their paradise. They were never able to get beyond the hallowed function of the
mother, the experience of having a mother (or a similar person) on whom they
can depend absolutely. Therefore, they will always miss in their lives that
original warmth and will be unable to find harmony with another person.
This experience of closeness with another person never occurs in the third
category: children who were brought up without love. They found only enemies
everywhere and their attitude is accordingly: as if they lived in a hostile land.
There are many variations and degrees within each of these categories. At
times, alternate forms of harm can occur: exaggerated expectations, problems
among siblings, believing in superstitions about lacking talent, etc.
A detailed explanation of the methods for treatment is called for at this
point. It can be found in the author's writings cited below.5 We emphasize as
significant: education for courage and independence, having patience in difficult
cases, avoidance of any pressure by asserting purposeless authority, avoidance of
any form of denigration by derision, scolding, and punishment. Above all, no
child must lose faith in his future!
In the case of the three categories of children, the same course must be
followed as soon as signs of faltering are observed later in life. Most
importantly, their confidence must be gained in order to help them achieve a
place in the community. In other words, we must make up for what was
neglected earlier.
5 Ueber den nervösen Charakter, (3rd Edition, 1922). 
Praxis und Theorie der Individualpsychologie, (2nd Edition, 1924). Studie über
Minderwertigkeit von Organen, (Study of the inferiority of organs). Heilen und
Bilden, (2nd Edition, 1922). 
Internationale Zeitschrift für Individualpsychologie, volumes 1-4. Handbuch der
Individualpsychologie, Munich (Bergmann) 1926.
Chapter XXXVI
Marriage as a Responsibility1 2Further Thoughts on Marriage
[1926]
The greatest problem in fulfilling one's marriage responsibilities is neither
incompetence nor modern man's attitude toward monogamy. Homo sapiens by
nature tend to be neither monogamous nor polygamous. Greater spiritual values,
however, are in such preponderance in favor of monogamy that only cowards
tend to avoid it. For cowards to succeed in avoiding marriage requires steering
their inclination in another direction. Then they will feel in accord with their
inadequacy. The unmarried state, polygamy, or polyandrous tendencies and

perversions always bear out an avoidance of marriage responsibilities.
Unfaithfulness is so contrary to the responsibilities of marriage that it seems to
me akin to a release from them, a compromise at odds with marriage. Whenever
I had the opportunity to observe such marriages, their dissolution took place in
an atmosphere where extreme anger could justifiably be expected. Breaking the
marriage vows then is justified by finding a new love, "love excuses everything,"
and increasingly stimulated sexuality, heightened by anger, provides
ameliorating circumstances. Obviously, predicaments such as a long period of
separation, a chronic illness, or one partner's infirmity can cast a different light
on unfaithfulness; those circumstances might be likened to the termination of a
marriage caused by death. However, I have often observed how after the death
of one partner, fear of another marriage is clothed in self-reproach, or, as has
often been attempted, the marriage with the deceased is continued (in fantasy).
Differences in social classes do not appear to us to be insurmountable.
Initial problems will disappear with some patience, particularly when social
relationships develop in tandem. On the other hand, the antagonism of in-laws
can often be devastating. In most cases, one they are battle-tested people well
aware of the influence they exert. Their son or daughter had always been under
their control. Then when their child tries to act independently for the first time,
he or she is tortured with malicious prognoses for the future, or is sent to the
marriage bed cursed by the parents. Small wonder that the couple mistrusts each
other and becomes fearful, setting off in wrong directions, and testing every step
as to whether the parents were not correct in their assessment. Add to this the ill
humor of the partner who was the target of hostility, and one can see that it
requires a very forgiving person not to allow such a dowry to poison one's
attitude. Of course, parents have a right to counsel their children in the choice of
their partners, even to influence them. However, as soon as the ties are
established, they are also bound with all their powers to support the marriage and
the accompanying responsibilities. This also applies to those whose relationship
with the couple is not close, so that only positive influences surround the married
couple. This principle clearly arises out of social feelings and almost
instinctively creates a negative attitude toward those who harm a marriage.
1 Originally published as "Die Ehe als Aufgabe" in Bereitschaft, 6 (7), p. 4-
6, March, 
1926. 
2 New translation by Gerald L. Liebenau, 2003.
A considerable difference in age is generally not advantageous. I have often
found that in such cases one or both partners are weak. The choice of partner in

such cases is conditional, as if otherwise misgivings would arise, or as if the joy
of marriage would not come of itself, but must be attained by subterfuge.
The marriage situation reveals, like an experiment, whether the parties were
properly prepared for marriage. People poorly prepared for a social life, for their
job, or for love, who always had bad luck, who always changed jobs, friends, or
lovers will also fail in their responsibilities in marriage. Neurotic people also are
not promised a happy marriage; they will constantly demand privileges. It would
be a true blessing for marriages, mankind in general, and future generations if
before every marriage, counseling would be provided by Individual
Psychologists with the object of filling gaps in improper preparation and
improving poor attitudes.
Even where there is unwavering confidence, the often painful past should
be discussed. Such discussions between married couples often are useless, if not
harmful, because the other partner usually hears something different from what
is being said. Sometimes it would be more favorable to hold such discussions
beyond the scope of the marriage itself, so as to draw on a wider range of
experience that would be useful to each partner.
Bad habits from the past can also disturb the harmony of marriage.
Disorderliness, pedantry, hypersensitivity, spitefulness, slovenliness in behavior
and language, shamelessness, domination, irascibility, screaming, etc. reflect
poor preparation and also prevent the partner from making the marriage work.
Often these indications become apparent with insurmountable force only after
the yearning for marriage was lost, and responsibility for the marriage given up.
The, on.y a lack of strength causes marriages that had long been failures to break
up many years later.
There are no counseling facilities for these problems, just as there are none
for those who leave one failed marriage and, usually with their old failings, enter
into another marriage. These inadequacies that stem from childhood have been
practiced for a long time, and can be remedied only by proper psychological
methods because those afflicted never know at what point they must begin
making corrections. Wrong perception of life has become so much a part of such
people that they twist and turn all experiences until they seem right to them.
Then they continue in their past patterns.
As can be seen from our discourse, next to the few who look on marriage as
a responsibility that must be exercised humanely, there are many others who fail.
Those are the people who do not recognize their responsibilities, or who expect
them to be met either by their partner or favorable circumstances.
Chapter XXXVII
The Function of the Mother1 2 [1926]

The development of innate social feeling is tied directly to the personality
of the mother. It is the mother who imparts the human experience to the child
during that stage when he experiences his self-awareness (Ichfindung). Prior to
that state, the child sees only objects that are either advantageous or
disadvantageous to him. Out of this framework of objects appears the mother
who imparts to the child the experience of an absolutely dependable person. In
all cases of "youthful schizophrenia" (dementia praecox), I found something
lacking that is apparent only to the eyes of an Individual Psychologist.
An example is a mother who never got beyond her domestic duties and who
cared only for her husband. For a long time, her first born was her only child and
the center of attention. However, he was turned over to a nursemaid, who then
began to pay more attention to the father than to the child. Being in the shadow
of the first, the second child had to suffer even more, therefore, failing to gain
self confidence. There are many cases where children are deprived of the
mothering experience just because the parents are in a happy marriage. In the
case that was described (the discussion following a lecture by Dr. Wilhelm in
Vienna on the prophylaxis and treatment of "youthful schizophrenia"), the child
was never afforded this experience: the father a tyrant, the mother cared for
nothing, and a nursemaid, a busybody, was unable to impart to the child the
experience of an absolutely dependable person. In principle, it is questionable
whether a nursemaid is capable of imparting such an experience. Thus, the
child's first experience was disturbing. People who have undergone such an
interaction develop a hostile attitude toward life that got its start early in their
childhood. They believe themselves confronted by a hostile world with which
they have no intention of becoming too closely involved.
If the mother does not function in her natural capacity, the tragedy that
inevitably ensues is that the child is poorly prepared for life. The child will
encounter failures and suffer many wounds, which will seem to reinforce his
belief of being forced to live in a hostile world. This increasingly hardens him in
his attitude toward others.
A change is possible only if someone who takes over the function of the
mother brings up the child. The task in treating the person in the case described
above is to have the patient question his attitude and then reintroduce him to a
social life. His hostility made itself felt in all aspects of his life. In matters of
love, he was unable to make the right connections and had to confine himself to
sordid erotic experiences. At work, he seemed efficient at first but the more
discouraged he became, the more he withdrew from useful endeavors. What
remained, what he was able to do for himself, was done compulsively.3

1 Originally published as “Die Funktion der Mutter” in Gemeinschaft,
Volume 1, No. 5, 
1926. 
2 New translation by Gerald L. Liebenau, 2003.
In connection with the compulsiveness of this patient, Dr. Adler spoke
about compulsive ideas and compulsive acts by obsessive-compulsive neurotics,
schizophrenics, and melancholics. Psychologically, they are not different since
such individuals attempt to remain useless and try to keep from having to
become useful. Manifestations of obsessiveness in cases of dementia praecox
appear to us as obsessive manifestations devised by the patient so as to busy
himself uselessly.
Very extreme cases do not exist since we shall always find traces of a social
feeling. That is also the point where treatment begins in trying to win back the
patient. For that we must start at the most accessible point. Many people's illness
start when they reach the stage where they should begin to have an experience
with love. We shall find in all cases of schizophrenia an absence of romantic
relationships. To establish such relationships is difficult, as will be the challenge
facing the professional, but one must always try in spite of that. It seems that the
most practical way would be to place the patient in an absolutely dependable
environment, which means to assume the function of the mother.
3 Translator’s note: What appeared up to this point as a lecture by Dr. Adler
continues from this point forward as a summation by a reporter of the remainder
of the talk. Chapter XXXVIII
A Case of Fear of Cancer1 2 [1926]
A 54 year-old man who looks much older is physically deteriorated and
apparently very fearful, having experienced poor health over a number of years.
He has sought relief from one physician after another. As a scholar, his
profession provides him with only a meager income. Evidently from among the
many problems that people face in life, neurotics are often quite capable of
solving the problem of making a living. This can be explained by the fact that
the question "how am I going to make a living?" is most compelling for them.
We also often find people who solve the problem of finding work with such
intensity that they have no energy left for anything else (Dickens' Christmas
tales).
Our patient was of this type. He was not socially well adjusted and the
friends he made were mostly dining companions whom he discontinued seeing
during the war. He was a bachelor who lived with his two older sisters. His
physical complaints went back ten years and began with having difficulty

swallowing, which occurred, however, only when he ate alone. The question
arises whether he did not already have digestive problems as a child. He was the
youngest and the only boy among several girls. He had made an early decision to
pursue an academic career; therefore he was particularly well treated and
pampered. He had an encrusted tongue (Landkartenzunge), and external
indications of an inferior stomach and intestines.
His complaints were met with little sympathy; everyone laughed at him.
One day he became aware of a sore on his tongue and subsequently visited a
number of physicians, fearing that it was cancerous. A dentist treated him for
some time without any significant improvement. The patient then noted that he
was salivating excessively and since then constantly thought about cancer.
From a clinical standpoint, this is a case of phobia or hypochondria, which
in our opinion requires a careful psychological examination pointing toward the
condition of melancholia.3 There is no danger of suicide in our case; the patient
lives quietly and practices his profession. Always very reticent in his love life,
he has only occasionally kissed a girl. Three years ago in a dance parlor, he met
a much younger woman with whom he started an affair. This woman took him
seriously and asked him several times whether he intended to marry her. At that
point, his fear of cancer began. This fear of cancer solved the problems he felt
regarding his affair and marriage.
1 Originally published as “Ein Fall von Karzinomangst” in Geminschaft,
Volume 1, No. 
5, 1926. 
2 New translation by Gerald L. Liebenau, 2003. 
3 See Adler’s "Melancholia and Paranoia" (from Praxis und Theorie der
Individualpsychologie) in The Collected Clinical Works of Alfred Adler: Volume
4.
We never expect to hear from a patient anything other than what is related
to his goal. This also applies to his thinking, which only affirms whatever fits his
life goal. A person's goal can be ascertained only from what moves him. In the
case above, there are only sparse indications: This person's goal is to stop short
before resolving the problems of his life. This is probably not a simple matter to
carry out, since the logic of human coexistence pulls everyone into the stream of
events. Our patient, therefore, must twist his rationale until he is accepted as a
sick person who is not competent to deal with life's problems. He is now so
preoccupied with his fear of cancer that he can do or think of nothing else. We
can see here a similarity with obsessive-compulsive neurosis. The patient's
thoughts are always fixed on his birthplace. That is where Paradise lies for him,

the goal of his striving for esteem. Such a person must also relate in particular
ways to money. He is very thrifty, which he admits to with certain pride. As his
sisters who until now had mothered and cared for him grow older, he faces a
situation that will throw him off his accustomed course.
A series of dreams give evidence of this: The waiter who collects the bills
at the tavern where the patient dined with his companions appeared in his dream.
He also recalled white and red carnations. In a second dream the same waiter
appeared again and also Johann Strauss, who played some role. Another dream
brought him back to the same tavern where he ordered half a sausage. The waiter
as well as the half sausage undoubtedly represent the patient's miserliness;
Johann Strauss indicates the patient's acquaintance with the girl in the dance
parlor; red and white carnations are the struggle between two political parties,
one of which being the patient’s. The religious difference between him and the
girl also appears as an insurmountable barrier.
Then he dreamed again, this time that he was visiting his married sister who
lives in his hometown. Everything was very festive; he wore tails. In this context
we can already see the influence of the treatment that involves making him
aware of his despondent attitude toward life. At least in his dream he is
preoccupied with marriage, but as this dream develops it is also doomed to be
stalemated. His true final goal is apparent everywhere. He is stopped short when
he comes close to a resolution of his life's problems and then complains about it.
His illness is represented to us as the endpoint of his progress.
In a fifth dream, he walks along Kärntner Street, but finds that all the other
pedestrians are barred from his view. It shows us by extension a rejection of
prostitutes and any thoughts of finding an amenable girl friend. In this dream we
see the continuation of an admittedly still unfulfilled solution to his life's
problems. His condition improves relative to this progress. The meaning of his
illness can be understood in this troubled question: Since I don't dare to get
married, who will pamper me after the death of my sisters?
Chapter XXXIX
A Contribution to the Problem of Distance1 2
[1926]
As is well known, Individual Psychological research encountered early the
problem that it called "the problem of distance." This discovery was of
fundamental significance. It gave us a basis from which we were able to conduct
further research. It says that it enables us to measure the deviation of the neurotic
aberration of a person in terms of how far he is from solving the three great
questions of life. The first question concerns social relations. It addresses the
individual's relationship with others and asks whether or not relationships were

established more or less correctly. From the degree of failure and from the
distance to solving this question of life, we were able to draw conclusions about
that individual's personality to gain something in our study of human nature.
This applies also to the second question of life, matters concerning a person's
occupation. If he was still far from resolving this question and he displayed
problems in that area, we were then able to establish that he evaded resolving
this second question. The third question concerns sex, love, and marriage. We
were able to judge a person by how far away he was from solving problems in
that area, and by what means he bypassed a solution.
We had thus found a point of view from which we steadfastly could judge a
person's attitude. I would now like to present an example of how this distancing
is manifested in neurosis. We all know people who have difficulties in making
contact, have no friends, avoid socializing, and are always shy whenever they
meet another person. We also are familiar with the reactions that ensue, such as
blushing, blanching, the hesitant handshake, stuttering, etc. These are signs of a
failing inclination to establish contact.
I recently had another opportunity to observe such a person. Life is full of
such people. They reject every contact and have no desire to accept the totality
of which they are a part. Their whole life reflects this tendency which,
obviously, is enmeshed with many safeguards, among which nervous symptoms
play a significant role. One person may develop headaches when he is required
to approach someone, or some calamity occurs whenever he is to meet someone.
His whole attitude takes on a nervous character that prevents contact with others.
We thus find him soon living the life of an eccentric; everyone knows and
avoids him. He is curt with people, never opens himself up, soon breaks off
contact and lives, as one might say, disjointedly. Every contact is broken off
immediately. His style of life reflects this pattern.
1 Originally published as "Ein Beitrag zum Distanzproblem" in the
Internationale Zeitschrift für Individualpsychologie, Vol. IV, p.141-143, 1926. 
2 New translation by Gerald L. Liebenau, 2003. Editing assistance by Kurt A.
Adler, M.D., Ph.D.
I was soon able to establish the connection in a particular patient. He was
one of several children who could claim more or less rightly that he was the least
loved. He never believed that anyone had any feelings of warmth for him. His
feeling of inferiority was rooted in his belief that he lacked the power to make
himself loveable. Therefore, he tended to avoid people. Nevertheless, he was
successful in his job.3 The reason for his success is that he was able to immerse
himself all alone in his work. It is understandable, and also characteristic, that

such people find work in which they are isolated. It also is understandable that
they can solve their job problems only conditionally. Had this person, for
example, been so unlucky as to have been given a job where he had to work with
others, he would have failed. His ideal that guided him led him to this particular
job in which he was able to satisfy his inclination. This man distanced himself
from women and tried not to become romantically involved. Even when he once
began to like a particular woman and grew to love her, he made an effort to
break off the relationship, especially after he heard that some other women at a
party referred to him as boring.
He also had a nervous symptom that had already been treated
unsuccessfully the world over. He was a nail-biter. He constantly bit his nails
down to the quick. He explained this tendency which he could not stop with:
"Actually, I like doing it which is the reason that I will not stop." We, however,
see another reason with which he agreed readily. He always hid his hands when
speaking with me, which means also that he did not want to show them to me
because he feared that I might say: "Despite your hands, you can still be
sociable." I need hardly point out to Individual Psychologists that this symptom
was one of his safeguards against social contacts from which he feared an
affirmation of his feeling of inferiority after his sad experiences in childhood.
In this context, I should like to relate a dream this man had. Curiously,
neurotics often use our expressions. They talk of feelings of inferiority, distance,
contacts, etc. as if they had read our material, although they themselves don't
understand it. Not only do they speak in such terms, but they also dream them
along with our images and expressions. This man, for example, dreamed the
following: "After a long absence, I return to my family's home. The nursemaid
who never loved me opens the door, and says to me: ' I knew that it would be
you; I recognized you by your ringing of the door bell.' When I asked him about
this he explained: 'Yes, I always ring the bell repeatedly so that I ‘break the
contact.’'4 He does not recognize that this is what he had always heard from me.
3 Such an occurrence is not rare. One often finds a peculiar, desperate, or
artificial solution. Total failure in work related activities would be life
threatening. The neurotic rarely goes that far. 
4 “Breaking the circuit” in German uses the same words applied to breaking up
contact with another person.
This cannot be explained by a lack of intelligence. The patient is a highly
intelligent person. However, his attention was diverted so much, he was so
preoccupied with arguments against establishing contact, that he has been unable
to see the connection between his symptoms and his style of life. His whole

nature entails constantly breaking off contact. His dream contains everything
that we expect of him and we can draw no other conclusion but that this person
intentionally averts his attention from the connection and from seeing things in
the context in which they exist. In that lies the essence of initiating a treatment
during which this connection must always be shown to him.
With this case, I wanted to show primarily how breaking off contacts and
the tendency not to establish contacts intrudes into all personal relationships, and
at times even becomes automatic. Sometimes we can recognize the innermost
kernel of an individual by a single act, however, only when it is in consonance
with his total personality.
Chapter XL
Neurosis and the Lie1 2
[1926]
The psychological study of the lie came at the outset of my efforts to clarify
neurosis. It is immensely difficult to differentiate between a lie in its broadest
sense, living a lie, and the neurosis. The following case will illustrate this point.
A 28 year old man who was in his family's business with his older brother,
had worked for a long time with little advancement and without gaining much
confidence in his work. Increasingly, he withdrew from contact with customers.
Eventually he went to bed, complained about tiredness and displayed signs of
serious depression. He also complained that people could tell from looking at
him that he masturbated.3 Despite his depression, the patient frequents all forms
of entertainment and has a noticeable mania for excesses and boastfulness. At a
recent anniversary party in Vienna, given by a headwaiter in a wellknown coffee
house, the patient approached the host, congratulated him and told him how long
and from where he had known him. Not a word of that was true. He merely
wanted to "be there." The patient is not engaged in productive activities and
always complains about being depressed, which he enjoys doing often.
The style of life of this patient is as follows: He is the second son in his
family. His older brother is successful and since the younger is unable to become
his brother's equal, he has given up trying and seeks escape into illness. At the
same, time he sees his prestige diminished by an active and lively younger sister.
His situation at home encountered resistance and he, therefore, moved away and
now lives in Vienna. However, here also, the shadow of his brother does not
leave him. In his boastfulness, he always makes himself appear bigger than he is.
His constant lies have the purpose of making him seem important and instead of
striving for actual superiority, he strives only to shine on the useless side of life,
bypassing progress in order to avoid any real failures. If, however, one were to

observe more closely his true style of life, how he tries to save himself by
seeking escape into illness, one must come to the conclusion that his illness is
also a facesaving lie.4 This person who has become accustomed to confronting
every difficult situation with a lie, which he fails to recognize (unconsciously),
also lies consciously. One time he will lie "consciously" and another time
"unconsciously." There is little difference, when seen as part of the whole,
between a "conscious" and an "unconscious" embodiment of the direction of his
life. Sometimes he tries to moderate his situation by arranging to become ill, at
other times he tries the same by boasting.
1 A paper based on a lecture. Originally published as "Neurose und Lüge"
in the Internationale Zeitschrift für Individualpsychologie, Vol. IV, p.173-174,
1926. 2 New translation by Gerald L. Liebenau, 2003. 
3 This is a common fear of the masturbator who is afraid that his fear of being
discovered will betray him. Obviously, this is closely related to the superstition
concerning selfabuse, as well as to the justified feeling of guilt for having
breached a requirement of social interest.
Lately, he took a turn for the worse. His sister approached him to find out
whether he was ready to go to work. Immediately, he wrote a letter home in
which he described his condition in the most bleak terms. He again was
depressed and in that state visited a dance hall where he remained for two hours.
Afterwards, he took a walk in the Prater and accosted two girls. He told them of
his depressed state and thought himself to be very interesting. He explained that
the reason for his depression was his bride, who lived nearby, and who expected
a child from a count. When asked to name the count, he told the girls that it was
Count Pietro.
This count is the concrete form of his falsely created bogeyman. He is the
one to whom he thinks he is not equal, the substitute for another embodiment of
his feeling of insecurity: his admired, overrated brother. When we ask ourselves
which helps him more in his flight from resolving the problem with his brother,
his lying or his neurosis, we must conclude that it is the neurosis. The latter not
only presents a greater danger for others, but it also offers a justification that he
cannot find in an open lie. Necessitated by his social interest, he is engaged in
the struggle for the appearance of honesty and also for his personal worth. While
using his illness to threaten the social and material well-being of his family, in
particular that of his mother who stands by the older brother, he rescues at the
same time the appearance of parity with his brother, which he does not expect to
achieve, and which he avoids trying to achieve by being ill.
The obsessive masturbation is also clarified. In his eroticism, he also feels

threatened by Count Pietro. Here again he refrains from a solution, or finds a
partial solution that averts a defeat.
4 See Adler, "Lebenslüge in der Neurose und Psychose" (Sham Existence in
Neurosis and Psychosis). Internationale Zeitschrift für Individualpsychologie,
Vol. I, 1913, Dr. Zilahi, Wien VI, Joanelligasse 6. Also see Chapter VII in The
Collected Clinical Works of Alfred Adler, Volume 4.
Chapter XLI
Individual-Psychological Profile of a Compulsion Neurosis1 2 3
[1926]
This is the profile of a thirty-year old woman from a lower middle-class
family with strong religious beliefs. Her indifference to marriage is apparent and
must somehow be related to her style of life. She has a number of siblings
among whom is an older sister who leaves everyone else behind her when it
comes to charm and intellect.
At the outset of treatment, the patient volunteers early memories that reveal
an important clue to an inferiority complex that obviously is at the source of her
problem with marriage. Despite her own desires, she appears to avoid marriage
because she fears well-accustomed setbacks from another woman (originally the
sister). We suspect that an increasing feeling of inferiority results from her
having been pampered when, for two years, she was the youngest in her family.
That situation drastically changed. Such sudden changes affect most children
adversely to various degrees. For many children such an unwelcome situation
occurring when their personality is developing heightens feelings of inferiority,
influencing some of them to become productive, however, influencing more of
them to become unproductive, in maladjustments or in neuroses. Often such a
turning can be explained by the nature of things, in particular in firstborn
children. Our patient gave the appearance of wanting to be more perfect than her
siblings, therefore suffering because the others overwhelmed her.
Early in her life, it was apparent that she had a tendency to avoid problems.
Her inferiority feelings were apparent in her shyness, reticence, tendency to
isolate herself, and deprecation of others to whom she had been close. Her fear
of failure caused her to get nothing done and she was soon seen as incompetent
and clumsy. She had no close girl friends and she avoided all social life. Even
before the onset of puberty, she suffered from morally and religiously obsessive
thoughts. She reproached herself for having sinned and having made mistakes
for which she tried to atone with prayers and vows to change. Her vows
appeared to have been forced on her by fear that a lack of repentance would send
someone close to her to Hell.

According to Individual Psychology, when obsessive thoughts and actions
are stripped of their contents, what remains is an essentially formal movement
that clearly leads from an inferior position to a superior one. It seems to have no
purpose and affects no change whatsoever in person-to-person relationships.
When faced by even the slightest opposition or any competition, especially from
the favored sister, the patient assumes the attributes of someone who is perfect
and free of sin. She attends diligently to any shortcomings in herself, even those
that are minor or even silly, with the idea of being more righteous and working
more assiduously than others on making herself faultless. She is not aware of the
superior position she thus ascribes to herself, but assumes it nevertheless. She
does not think that she is now superior to her sister, but is beginning to
compensate for her feelings of inferiority. From the unbearable situation of
inferiority to her sister, the patient developed a striving for superiority, which for
the time being can serve her as a comforting relief from her feeling of
worthlessness and can promise a victory in the future. For this easing she is
willing to pay whatever price, even more gladly when she considers what she
gains for herself, and gradually gains from others, which is a legitimate excuse
for being afflicted with an illness that will relieve her of having to do something
useful, or at least lead to fewer demands being made of her. But she cannot
complain and suffer enough because the more she suffers, the greater is her
claim to holiness.
1 Based on a lecture at the Internat. Verein für Individualpsychologie,
Sektion Wien. 
2 Originally published as "Individualpsychologie Skizze einer Zwangsneurose"
in the Internationale Zeitschrift für Individualpsychologie, Vol. IV, p.253-256,
1926. 
3 New translation by Gerald L. Liebenau, 2003.
The second part of her obsessive thoughts, as if to confirm the first, takes
the same striving upward: it is in her power to decide whether or not someone
should be condemned to Hell. A short vow out of her mouth and that person is
redeemed. This is a case where a belief in possessing almost godlike powers can
be seen close at hand. Furthermore, the worry and anxiety that the patient
experiences when she fails to use her powers is brought to light. Like the
obsession with proclaiming vows of redemption, her worry and anxiety are a
way of holding on to power and maintaining a style of life that provides relief
from the feeling of inferiority. The creative powers of this woman, who is too
cowardly for practical solutions, barely suffice for this fictitious, life-deluding
arrangement.

When she reached the age of 24, she experienced another setback. A young
man, as weak as she, courted her. At the first objection of his sister, he stopped
courting even before the couple became well acquainted.
That event was another defeat in an important aspect of her life where she
might have gained a feeling of having reached parity with her sister.
Discouragement progressed and we could have prophesied from similar cases
that this patient would remove herself even further from the great issue in life,
that which concerns love. In fact, until her cure, she had lost all interest in men.
However, even the approach of the young man mentioned earlier could
have removed the thin cover overlaying the basis of her feelings. She herself
characterized the man as a puppet. It is the tragic fate of those who are
discouraged that similarly discouraged partners can attract them so easily and
thus reinforce their own difficulties. Generally, in cases of discouragement,
problems build up over time. The fragility of such relationships was
demonstrated very clearly in this case.
At this point, I always hear from our esteemed critics the question: where is
the "masculine protest?" Where is the feeling of female inferiority? There still
are authorities who wish to dispense with Individual Psychology quickly and
who think that the essence of our views lies in the masculine protest. They fail to
understand that the masculine protest is only one important substantiation of the
fundamental striving for superiority. It is not much different from a boy trying to
realize this striving by playing bus driver, or being a general. It is possible, of
course, that it is not easy to see these connections. Perhaps a simple question will
bring us closer to a clarification. Why was the development of this woman
different from the female norm? Because she was not as beautiful as her sister.
We conclude from this that she had the impression that a woman must be
beautiful in order to play her role. This overemphasis on beauty in women is
purely a male device that leads to the constant dependency of women on the
judgment of men, and is total nonsense. It dominates men as well as women and
significantly shrinks women's possibilities in life. This applies in particular to
discouraged women, which includes all neurotic women, where this particular
attitude is always present. Male privileges in our culture allow the perversion of
an important principle of natural selection by empowering men to allow beauty
to become the guarantor of a healthy future generation. Our patient, who also
believed this to be true, found herself automatically forced to avoid the role of
woman and gave up striving in that role. Instead, she sought her role in a
fictitious power posture in which she acted as if she had accomplished
something, or merely played along out of necessity, which is what she did when
her male partner turned out to be a puppet and possibly not even a man. Of

course, when young, she had many visions of a better life as a man.
There is no doubt that this patient experienced a feeling of inferiority as a
woman. Where, however, is the rejection of men? Well, her entire neurotic style
of life is a protest against the role of women. It is a striving after masculine
power in developing her life along the lines of her father and not assuming the
role of her mother. It seems, however, that clearer evidence is needed. Here it is:
One day she discovered unequivocal indications of homosexual tendencies.
Compare this case with my development of the thesis on homosexuality in
the text on normal and pathological physiology, publisher J. Springer, Berlin,
1926. Psychoanalytical publications constantly present articles in which we are
accused of having forgotten love and the erotic. It is only that we have not been
trained along those lines, nor are we obligated to observe all psychological
manifestations from that point of view. We had more important things to do. We
had to show that eroticism in a person always assumes a form, in childhood as
well as in adulthood, that relates to the style of life of the individual within a
given situation. Therefore, it would have been simple to guess, following her
setback on the way to normal love, that this woman would exclude men from her
life with her protest against men and avoidance of the female role, and that she,
therefore, had to bend her obviously existing erotic feelings. "The victim
becomes the aggressor."
One of her several physicians, caught up in sexual psychological babble,
attempted to cure her by promoting sexual experiences. The result was a state of
disorientation that lasted for a week and only slowly abated. Perhaps, it might be
argued, this was only a case of the woman being confused. That also should have
been sufficient evidence--that this patient was unfit for a romantic relationship,
and if anyone still doubts that the feeling of inferiority must first be assuaged
before such a person can be awakened to life. Since she fell prey to the mistaken
belief widely held by women and men that her full duty consisted of enchanting
men, and since she did not trust herself to fulfill that obligation, forceful pressure
toward becoming sexually active could only result in panic. A large number of
psychoses and some neuroses arise in such panic moods, which usually remain a
mystery to neurologists. In such a state of bewilderment all genuine values are
slighted.
Other aspects of this woman's obsessive thinking concern an extensive
abuse of religious practices that seem to be particularly suitable for reinforcing
the striving for power. These practices presume powers that can be ascribed only
to a god. It is now in her hands to cast judgment over the fate of others whether
they go to Heaven or are condemned to Hell. Another obsessive thought that
plagued her, particularly when eating, was that she might be able to poison

someone merely by glancing at them, or with words. By the way, the human
psyche is quite receptive to such a foolish notion. It is no greater in the case of
this woman than are powers ascribed to persons who are believed to possess an
evil eye, or to witches. A remnant of such superstitions can be found in
clairvoyants. If this matter is more closely examined, roots of this foolishness
can be seen in the widely spread superstition that there are inherited powers that
cannot, and never will be, attained by others.
Many neurologists and psychologists raise a question here, which also
occurs to patients, regarding a peculiar and unbelievable aspect of this matter:
Why, if these symptoms provide such powers, does the patient suffer so greatly?
Let us assume that the patient enjoys the feeling of power, as we have found
with poisoners, but without resulting in any real gain in power. In that case we
probably would find melancholia or schizophrenia. This would mean that the
patient had loosened the ties of social interest to the point where she became
devoid of the logic and understanding that unites all of us. This is not the case
with obsessive thoughts where the patient recognizes his own ideas as foolish.
However, as foolish as they appear in the light of other people's goals, as a
means of absolving oneself of responsibilities which one is afraid to carry out,
they appear quite suitable. Furthermore, in terms of his non-productive activities,
such a person finds himself fully justified. Such justification would be lost
would that person also want to enjoy his neurotic actions. Therefore, he suffers.
Extensive suffering is also necessary because the patient not only expresses
himself, but he shocks everyone in his immediate surroundings. Could he do this
were he to enjoy himself?
Thirdly, his suffering from these obsessive thoughts is closely connected
with presumed magical powers derived from his generosity, his righteousness.
The more he suffers, the more clearly he feels his powers. Actually, he cannot
suffer enough since his suffering is the only piece in the entire obsessive system
that seeks to incorporate itself into the real world; it is the only aspect that is
worth anything. Out of his suffering grows the assurance of his greatness. To the
observers of the obsessive neurosis who see only his suffering, his powers are
not apparent. We must teach him to pay attention to the ostensible increase in his
powers, because of which, in his impotence with regard to his responsibilities, he
engendered the neurosis.
Replacing the neurotic frame of reference with one that is typical of a true
fellow-human being, the task of Individual Psychology, is the same as
encouraging the patient. This was also the case here: to reestablish the woman's
social, professional, and romantic capacities. The wasted time that had passed
may well be regretted. However, the neurosis, thanks to the current level of

science, has brought the patient to a point from which she has a better
perspective on life, and from which she can live life more usefully for the
common good. To her, who walked through the fire of Individual Psychology,
applies the Biblical adage that there is more joy in Heaven for a penitent sinner
than for 99 righteous men.
Chapter XLII
Occupational Aptitude and Occupational Interest1 2
[1926]
In occupational counseling, aptitude is the decisive, extensive, and
overriding factor. The needs of the enterprise, the interest of the employer, but
also the welfare of the person being counseled require from the counselor that he
establish conclusively the position for which the applicant is best suited, where
he is most useful to the enterprise and to society as a whole.
The course a counseling session takes, however, is determined primarily by
the statements of the candidate with regard to his interests. As soon as these have
been clearly enunciated, the examination becomes focused and specific since the
physician now establishes whether there are any reasons against the candidate's
choice. The examination and the tests will then be given in light of the particular
occupation. A knowledge of the market place and of the economy comes into
play. Then, depending upon the outcome, complemented by an evaluation of the
candidate's school performance, the school's evaluation, and the wishes of the
parents, counseling continues and the originally selected occupation is either
approved or disapproved.
If approved, the employment office provides advice or should be called
upon to do so. If rejected, the interest of the candidate in a particular pursuit is
no longer a factor and the counselor now has the task of finding an appropriate
occupation. If he succeeds in finding a new line of work from the results of the
above examination, as well as having gained the candidate's approval, his task in
this case has been completed. I need hardly mention that in this process the
counselor has to apply an educator's touch in order to win the candidate over to
his viewpoint.
If we are forced to go against the candidate’s occupational interest, it seems
to us that the most cogent reason, that is when dealing with a mentally stable
person, would be the physician's veto because of a negative medical finding. In
many respects we are on firm grounds with such a medical opinion based on a
physical examination. In some cases it will then be more expedient, or sufficient,
merely to take precautions, such as recommending that the candidate postpone
starting a job, so as not to challenge his inclination toward a particular field. In
some cases, other more favorable circumstances can also be involved. For

example, easier work requirements, or employment by one's father, relative, or
acquaintance. Part-time work should also be considered, as well as a more
suitable position in a related field.
1 Originally published as “Berufseignung und Berufsneigung” in Jugend &
Beruf, Vol. 1, pages 89-93, 1926. 
2 New translation by Gerald L. Liebenau, 2003.
Of course, we must raise objections where we can expect any harm
resulting from the occupation whether to the worker or to the public, despite the
candidate's interests. There are, however, other harmful effects that become
apparent when choosing a job or as a result of testing that would not only argue
for rejecting particular employment, but that might also show seriously
aggravating conditions that could develop over time. Such cases must be handled
very carefully and I am not sure how to evaluate the following concerns for the
ordinary practice. However, they can be indicators for more intensive research
since the observations that pertain here are based on precepts that cannot be
overlooked. Unfortunately, evidence for excluding certain occupations can only
readily be found in prominent cases, in higher professions that have artistic
attributes. In such cases, however, there exists clear proof that physical or
psychological impairments can be overcome with intensive training, good
schooling, and encouragement, and that excellent achievement is possible. As
early as in 1907, I noted this in my "Studie über Minderwertigkeit von Organen"
and since then have often pointed to the fact and constantly emphasized that
truly outstanding achievement is always attained only in a struggle with inner or
external difficulties.
As examples, who among occupational counselors would have advised the
profession of public speaking to the stuttering, weak, Demosthenes? Who would
have suggested the study of music to Beethoven having diagnosed his inherited
otosclerosis and knowing its ominous outcome? There are artists with
outstanding achievements who are nearsighted, cross-eyed, astigmatic, and
unable to distinguish colors clearly. Napoleon is described to us by those who
viewed his body as feminine, obese, and with a tender skin. We probably would
have thought other types more suitable as warriors. Should this not allow us to
conclude that physical and psychological conditions, even if found
unsatisfactory at the time of occupational counseling, can be overcome if we
help the candidate along the right path?
If we set aside for the moment counseling centers in large enterprises where
every job applicant must take a test, I think I can say that hardly any applicant is
ever seen in public counseling centers who is in the process of overcoming his

shortcomings. We may assume, however, that among the multitude of applicants
who are not able to pass an examination there are many who, with an honest
effort, could do better in the examination. What does this say about the aptitude
of those candidates?
In the case of the large enterprises, it can rightly be assumed that aptitude
tests are designed in general with greater consideration for the business than for
the applicant and society. The successful applicants are those who are ahead of
the others in their preparation and training and save the enterprise the time,
effort, and money that need not be expended on them. If we evaluate the
successful candidates, we will find that they belong to a group of people who
had always done well on tests in school and in life. Usually the findings of the
occupational tests concur with those established in schools. Most of the time
these successful candidates distinguish themselves when compared with those
who failed for a lack of courage, decisiveness, initiative, and endurance. They
look with confidence to the future, believe in their abilities, and are not easily
upset. The family influence in these cases is more favorable, they always stood
on the sunny side of life, and they attained independence more quickly. In the
future they will be able to resolve more easily problems concerning friendships,
camaraderie, social relations, political affairs, love and marriage. In times of
trouble they will find a way out more quickly and will adjust more easily to
occupational changes. They also were children who had long ago chosen their
career. This gave them an enormous advantage since they were able to make
appropriate physical and mental preparation for their jobs. Since they established
firm goals early in life and often also experienced favorable circumstances, they
were known as "talented."
The development of the child's inner life occurs under teleological
influences. By giving it form and direction, the psychological dynamic is always
affected by the child's goal, his guiding idea. The fiction of a terminating finale
is the answer to the child's feeling of inferiority. Introduced into this
conventional compensatory striving so as to gain greater self esteem, the
occupation and success in it need early roots for inner fulfillment. In the child's
early "occupational fantasies" (see Kramer in Heilen und Bilden, Bergmann
publisher, Munich, 2nd ed.) the groping and searching appear clearly alongside
early training. The girl works on her doll's clothing; the mother provides
encouragement by becoming actively involved. The child continues with her
efforts and slowly the conviction arises that the child has the talents to become a
seamstress. If there is no encouragement, the child will not gain in selfesteem
and will doubt her ability to pay attention, concentrate, comprehend, and
remember since these functions are influenced by the desired goal. It should

already be clear at this point that it really does not matter what inherent
capabilities the child may possess, but what the child does with what he or she
was born with.
Under certain circumstances, the child overcomes the indifference and
disdain with which his first efforts were met. In fact, little confidence shown a
child can spur special efforts. Such struggles to overcome difficulties often
produce steeled natures, an acceptance of resistance, and an acceptance to deal
with it. It is only sad that we do not know the degree of resistance that needs to
be engendered, just as in developing exceptional individuals we lack an
educational catechism. On the other hand, many a mistake can be avoided when
physical barriers are involved. I will try to prove this with left-handed persons.
Dr. Alice Friedmann and I have established (see the article in the 6th issue
of the third volume of "Internationale Zeitschrift für Individualpsychology") that
there are a large number of unrecognized left-handed people whose development
shows characteristic features. What is of interest to us at this point is the
frequency of incidents of clumsiness during the childhood of left-handed persons
fated to conform to a culture of right-handed people. This often includes writing,
one of the most fundamental achievements in the life of a child, which becomes
proportionally much more difficult for left-handed children to master than it is
for right-handed children. Depending on the degree to which they are
encouraged and protected, they will overcome their shortcomings to a greater or
lesser extent. Those who succeed in overcoming this problem will exceed their
right-handed classmates in writing and drawing. Those who become discouraged
acquire a deeper feeling of inferiority. They will try not only to avoid having to
prove themselves in writing and drawing, but also in all other aspects of life,
including their jobs.
If we summarize what we have said about the physical and psychological
problems of childhood and note the results, we arrive at a conclusion that will
seem paradoxical to many: That the chances for greater occupational aptitude are
better for encumbered children; such aptitude, of course, must be utilized. We
recall the words of the poet: "He who overcomes, wins!"
It is easy to assume that in occupational counseling we shall come upon
similar cases of immature and developmentally impaired individuals. Often the
step taken by a person toward occupational counseling in the absence of a firm
goal springs from a longing for encouragement with help from a well meaning
friend, and less often out of ignorance or from bewilderment. The occupational
counselor is never given a blank page. The discovery of what is buried deep, the
recognition of clues, the deciphering of what has long discouraged an individual
and then eliminating it is a counselor's most satisfying assignment. He can

approach such a task only as a psychologist.
If this line of reasoning makes sense, one has to understand above anything
else that the large number of job applicants who are rejected as a result of
occupational testing by sizable enterprises will be affected adversely, even when
treated most humanely. In most cases it is those candidates who had often, or
always, been told of their lack of aptitude. Now the most important bridge into
their future has collapsed. They were always left in the shadows. Their families
had failed to prepare them properly for school and in school they endured unjust
punishment. The system of bad marks and punishment gnaws at them constantly,
and does not improve their preparation for life. When they left school, their
selfesteem had sunk markedly. There is still one road open to them to become
useful for society: the job. Here again they are caught for lack of preparation and
are rejected. Small wonder if they don't look on their most recent rejection as
further confirmation of their pessimistic outlook.
I don't need to explain what happens when a person becomes desperate. I
shall underscore only that occupational interests and aptitude must be furthered
in school, that the school is the only institution that can cure an impaired
spiritual development, and that school reform is on the right path if it furthers the
expert psychologist and educator rather than advancing authority.
In the context of my presentation, one important question remains and
needs to be resolved soon. It is most likely that, aside from cases with serious
failings and infirmities that can turn harmful, every accomplishment by an
average person can be mastered by everyone else. It becomes notable and
striking when someone is adept in many areas. Such a circumstance, however,
does not diminish the value of the technique of psychology; rather it indicates its
usefulness in another area in that it provides evidence of failings that would still
have to be eliminated in school. A successful occupational consultation only
indicates the degree to which the candidate has been successfully prepared. It
cannot make a determination regarding that person's future, and even less answer
the question whether the individual can augment or significantly improve his
preparation. At a minimum and as encouragement, this possibility should be
raised with a rejected applicant.
I shall skip recommendations that spring from these observations, but in
conclusion will establish the part that occupational interest plays from our
standpoint. It reveals, if no serious errors on the part of the candidate have been
uncovered, the future course of action he has decided to follow. It shows us how
he generally feels about people and how he adjusts to them, how he believes he
can make himself matter and raise his self esteem. We can presume that he is
mentally and physically better prepared when following this direction toward his

chosen occupation, that he is better trained, and that he is hopeful about being
successful. The earlier he makes his decision, the greater his awareness of his
role in his job and the more fruitful the results. And we can also assume that
until he undergoes occupational, testing his choice will remain unshaken. In
many instances, therefore, occupational interest coincides with occupational
aptitude.
The weight ascribed to a candidate’s occupational interest in counseling is
significant. It will be still further reinforced by the awareness that his
occupational interest puts the responsibility for his future work on the applicant.
If he lets himself be dissuaded from his choice of occupation, if he listens to the
advice of his counselor, then it is quite possible that he will expect all sorts of
advantages from his new choice, but will himself contribute less because he will
seek to share responsibility with others. The outcome of such a negative attitude,
particularly in weak individuals, who are the kind who eagerly look for others to
take responsibility, is not unusual and often is seen in nervous people who, as
soon as they embark on a job, start planning to change it.
Some sort of occupational aptitude can be found in everyone. However,
there are many people who openly admit, or make it known, that they have no
aptitude for any occupation. Then there are those who want to work only under
certain, often unfulfillable, conditions. Those are the people who should avail
themselves of Individual Psychological treatment before seeking a job.
Chapter XLIII
Individual Psychology 
Its Significance in Treating Neuroses, in Upbringing, and for a Philosophy
of Life1 2
[1926]
The immense progress made in medicine allows us to forget easily that
numerous children are born with weak, inferior organs, and are not able to meet
the demands of life. The causes almost always lie in damaged genes, in
alcoholism, syphilis, and more often inherited inferior organs. Many of these
children sooner or later are ruined. Most of them, however, are saved by care,
the skill of physicians, or through the power of their own resistance. Many
display weaknesses of their organism throughout their lives; others regain their
equilibrium by a spurt of growth, or attain greater than normal functional
achievements by way of overcompensation. I have described these processes in
great detail.3
At that time, I also pointed out that the increase in impetus as well as
dealing with the tasks of life often necessitates overcoming great difficulties and

that the long-lasting disposition of the individual in such cases is characterized
by a constant and deeply sensed feeling of inferiority. This feeling is
significantly stronger than the insecurity normally experienced by children.
From this feeling of weakness stems also a pessimistic, doubting, and uncertain
perspective, a tendentious apperception that urges from a feeling of insecurity
toward calming and secure goals. All functions of a child's psyche, in particular
attentiveness, intellect, drives, feelings, and judgments lose their independence
in order to serve a secure final goal that conceivably would help the child in
gaining some form of superiority. The teleology of the psychic life thereby
becomes more apparent.
Included in this system are all inborn defects of the sensory organs,
nearsightedness, blindness in one eye, astigmatism, hearing problems,
respiratory complaints, digestive tract disorders, and problems with excretory
organs, glands of inner secretion, the brain, and central nervous system. All of
these, to which left-handedness should be added because it is so common,
influence solving the childhood tasks of life. These defects force children to train
harder, thereby creating methodically another viable auxiliary structure for these
psychic functions. Defective eyes and ears always become more acute to catch
those nuances that can still be seen or heard. They will evaluate these
perceptions better, and sometimes foster artistic expressions, or soon give up any
attempt at enrichment and dejectedly abandon any effort to enrich their
capabilities. The attitude toward these early difficulties can become binding for
one's whole attitude toward life. Impaired movement, such as in cases of severe
rickets, will produce a greater interest in the whole process of movement;
problems in obtaining food lead to goals that ensure the supply of food. The
awkwardness of left-handed people in our right-handed culture will encourage
more intensive practice that can either succeed or fail.
1 Originally published as "Die Individualpsychologie, Ihre Bedeutung für
die Behandlung der Norvosität, für die Weltanschauung" in Scientia, Issue 39
(1926), pp. 409-418, 1926. Reprinted in Alfred Adler: Psychotherapie und
Erziehung, Ausgewählte Aufsätze Band I: 1919-1929, p. 169-177. 
2 New translation by Gerald L. Liebenau, 2003. 
3 Studie über Minerwertigkeit der Organe, Vienna/Berlin (Publisher Urban und
Schwarzenberg) 1907. See Volume 2 of The Collected Clinical Works of Alfred
Adler.
In this kind of training certain qualities like interest, imagination, degree of
activity, self-evaluation by the child, goals, courage, selfconfidence or
cowardliness, and indecisiveness become apparent. This first struggle of the

child for selfassertion shows already the strength of his determination, his
strength or weakness in overcoming difficulties. A child's upbringing and
earliest preparation in the broadest sense greatly influence his earliest attitude.
The development of the whole personality in these cases is under very great
pressure of the ultimate goal that even day and night dreams reflect this line of
development as if they mirror the melody of the individual. As for character
traits, naturally those will emerge that are forced by a presumed threatening
situation and a feeling of having been demeaned. Specifically, the tendency to
overcome threatening situations will engender ambitious striving, arrogance,
vanity, and hypersensitivity, in addition to excessive caution as is typical of
people who feel that they live in a hostile environment. A defensive posture
toward other people, expressed by irritability, incompatibility, and egocentric
behavior, will become apparent. If faith is lost in oneself, dealing with others, or
meeting life's problems, then we find open dejection, fear, fruitless jealousy, and
barren dissatisfaction. Such people always are apt to use excuses and pretexts as
a last resort to uphold their personality. But the dark secret they try to hide, that
so clearly can be recognized in their behavior, can easily be uncovered as if they
were of no value, because every decision, every test in life fills them with
trembling and fear and most of the time they can find ameliorating
circumstances to break off whatever they start. They seek and find their alibis
and justifications by pointing to their weaknesses, heritage, upbringing, and to
all kinds of harm mostly caused by themselves, or they identify with an illness
and force physical symptoms on themselves. It is precisely their naturally weak
organs and their frequent sicknesses that imbued them with an understanding for
the nature and value of illnesses and soon the early training aiming at superiority
gives way to a goal of turning away from life problems. Their whole life and
suffering is then the image of discouragement.
The grounds for the feeling of inferiority are not always organ inferiority.
The same condition of insecurity also arises with children who were too heavily
burdened. This is the case with children who grew up in abject poverty, or who
were cast out of favorable into unfavorable situations. The great scientist, Binet,
demonstrated a parallel between capability and body weight in school children
that we consider important confirmation of our experience. Similarly, problems
spiral as soon as children are cut off from love and affection. The feeling of
community and the ability to establish contacts suffer and a trust in others
remains undeveloped. These individuals also cannot easily shed their feeling of
strangeness around others. They feel disappointed, demeaned, and cheated.
Children can also be severely harmed when exaggerated expectations are made
of them. The fear of being unable to meet those expectations increases and can

easily lead to tendencies that Shakespeare expressed with the words: "Therefore
I am determined to become a villain!" (Richard III). Exaggerated expectations
can also bring about discouragement and be concealed in neurosis.
A third, widely seen type that arises out of unfavorable childhood situations
is found among pampered children. They never experience difficulties, do not
exercise their capabilities and, therefore, shrink from every obstacle. They live
their entire lives in the expectation that others will do everything for them. These
children are also characterized by exaggerated ambitions and insufficient
stamina. They end up with manifold excuses behind the front lines of life,
outside the demands of the situation.
Among contemporary researchers, only Janet has recognized the deeper
meaning of the feeling of inferiority in many forms. No one has brought out so
sharply the importance of courage, the activity of life, as Bergson. The merit and
significance of Individual Psychology lies in having recognized the social
feeling as an innate prevailing melody that can be found in every expression of
the inner life. It further established as a second prevailing melody the
omnipresent feeling of inferiority from which emanates a continual striving after
power and prestige. This inner motion is also apparent in every form of human
expression. We can, therefore, claim that we have understood a particular
psychological expression only when we establish the extent to which both
currents are involved. We also believe that we have contributed to clarifying the
dimly held concept of the unconscious in that we isolated the uncomprehending
aspect of the prevailing melody and gave it a name. The depth of this melody
can be shown by an example from earliest childhood memories. A thirty-year
old man who suffered from panic attacks as soon as he tried to undertake any
task thinks that he remembers sitting at a window at age three, looking out.
These two experiences permit constructing this man's basic principles in life as
well as his goal: To be a bystander and not an actor. Only now does this
childhood memory begin to make sense; it begins to speak and to resound. It
tells us that this person in his childhood, obviously as the result of pampering
and frailty, had experienced a situation in which passivity had become a correct
and accepted way of life. In following this way of living, he learned to expect
nothing from himself but everything from others, to experience his superiority,
and to pay little heed to the needs of others. It is impossible to consider this a
form of "repression," but only a mistake, a misunderstanding that he shares with
the vast majority of mankind. For the person who understands this point, the first
act in the life of an individual often already reflects, in a miraculous way, the
Finale, the Fifth Act.
The superior ability of Individual Psychology to elucidate psychological

conditions will be shown in two cases of serious neurosis. 
The first case: A thirty-year old man suffered from a tendency to find sadistic
satisfaction when observing children being beaten. His social problem remains
unsolved. He has no friends, never socializes, has no interest in others; his job
situation is unresolved. He does not work and lives from gains in stock market
ventures made in the past. The primary problem in his life, the erotic problem,
which was alluded to above, has also not been solved. 
His earliest childhood memories are that of Moloch4 to whom children are
sacrificed. His father was kind and indulgent. His mother was morally strict and
righteous, but also very critical and inordinately ambitious. As a child, the
patient trembled from fear of his mother's nagging whenever he undertook
anything. Shy and withdrawn in school, he was teased by fellow students for a
speech defect, his name, and his prominent ears (an indication of degeneration).
He behaves like a person who has lost faith in himself, but always finds other,
thoroughly illogical, reasons for his behavior. 
In early childhood, he showed inferior intestines, bladder, and sexual organs
(early sexual development; arousal through fear). He believed that as a
consequence of a hernia in childhood, his future success was barred. In his
striving for prestige, he sought the path of least resistance, rejected all social
tasks, and scorned all achievements. No one should get more or be happier than
he is! In this state of resentment, he tormented and harassed children, sensing in
their fears his own earlier childhood fears which had resulted in sexual arousal. 
The second case: A thirty-year old woman complained of agoraphobia, of being
afraid of love, and of marriage. Her mother always told her that she was ugly.
She learned early how to mollify her mother by having a boy. She grew up
hating her role as a woman. Her intellectual development was excellent. She fell
prey to the first man who enticed and flattered her, and who then mistreated her.
Since then, she considered any approach as an attempt to deceive her. She has
such a low feeling of selfesteem that she is constantly afraid of being revealed as
worthless and feels safe only within the four walls of her home. There she
tyrannizes every member of her family in all possible ways. 
All symptoms of neuroses and psychoses are forms of expressing
discouragement. Any improvement comes about solely from encouraging the
sufferer. Every physician and school of neurology is effective only to the extent
that they succeed in giving encouragement. Occasionally, a layman can also
succeed in this approach. It is practiced deliberately only by Individual
Psychology. 
Only medical science classifies social failures as types of illnesses. It does this
because the unusual safeguards and brake mechanisms are strikingly analogous

to illnesses. Individual Psychology takes the view that the behavior of the
neurotic reflects the style of life and the deleterious way of living of someone
who does not feel himself capable of meeting normal tasks. 
Such detours can most clearly be recognized in early childhood at home and in
school. Actually, all failures in upbringing are always to be understood as a
consequence of an artificially cultivated feeling of inferiority. Recalcitrant
children display either the frenzied lifestyle of an active revolt, such as
arrogance, meanness, inconsiderateness, neglect, or the characteristics of passive
resistance, such as laziness, lying, and indolence. In their behavior, they
demonstrate a timid withdrawal from fulfilling their tasks. Above all, they fear
outward signs of incompetence. Therefore, they prefer punishment or being
scolded for laziness to being regarded as inferior. Their reeducation succeeds
only with encouragement. This requires the removal of many kinds of mistakes
in their basic view of life. Frequently, we find the following mistaken beliefs:
that one can never be as important as one’s father or mother; that one is lacking
in masculinity; that one always needs someone for support; that one is never able
to please another; that one will die prematurely; that everyone is an enemy; that
one can attain anything only with cunning; that one has a self-imposed defect or
has acquired such by his upbringing; that one is a degenerate; that one can have
anything with little effort; that one has to produce outstanding achievements
quickly and at any time, etc. In girls, faults are primarily an attribute of the male-
dominated culture that says the female is worthless, and has value only as an
object for the male, to be beautiful and to look young, etc. 
These faults bar all progress. They lead to discouragement in children, create
unavoidable failures and promote their fatalistic, pessimistic view of the world.
The terrible tragedy of these circumstances can be measured by what we have
found in children. They become neglected and tend toward criminality when
their faith in the future, their abilities in school, and their esteem in the eyes of
the other sex have been lost. 
The most frequent basic mistake in children, however, lies in their exaggerated
perception of the seemingly immense importance of inherited endowment. It
harms those presumed to be talented by unleashing expectations under which the
child can break down. Similarly, those who appear not to be talented are led to
believe that all their efforts will fail. In the upbringing of children, this danger
must be avoided at all cost. Parents and educators will succeed more easily in
this if they consider that really meaningful achievement can be attained only in a
struggle with difficulties, and that success never comes easily. Had Beethoven's
hearing problem been recognized early, no one would have believed in his
talents any more so than a stranger might have been convinced of the future

greatness of the stuttering Demosthenes. "Whoever overcomes will win!" and
"Genius--that is perhaps nothing but diligence," said Goethe. 
The presumption that there are innate character traits is a considerable burden for
the child and the educator. It can mislead both to refrain from interceding in any
way. There is considerable evidence against this prevalent presumption. Among
other contrary arguments, Individual Psychological research has shown that the
birth order of a child among siblings has a much greater influence on the
development of character than presumably innate characteristics. Thus, firstborn
are typically conservative and have a tendency to exploit power, while the
second-born child of the same sex always acts as if under pressure and tries to
succeed in everything. The youngest is mostly contrary to type and overtakes the
others, or is extremely indolent. The strong agreement on this point can be seen
in that, for example, the picture of the youngest in fables of all times and among
all peoples, including the Bible (the Joseph legend), is presented in similar ways.
For everyone's benefit, we never fail to point out that an only child and the older
boy with a younger sister present the most difficult rearing problems.5
Individual Psychology sees its main mission as carrying its teachings and
experience beyond treating the ill, raising children, and educating the individual.
It seeks to become a prophylaxis and a philosophy of life. Bound by the cosmos,
imprisoned in this not overly generous earth crust, connected by the feebleness
of his organs, and more so by belonging to a social entity by virtue of language,
reason, ethics, aesthetics, and sex, man is forced to answer inevitable questions.
It is as if he faced a mathematical problem which demands an absolutely correct
answer that he can never completely find. His courage, his optimism, his trained
abilities are necessary responses to a genuine need that also sustains a constant
feeling of inferiority which is a significant factor of his psychic life. All styles of
life, all culture, and all psychological phenomena represent the last of
diminishing his sense of insecurity. The individual variations, the large or small
mistakes that occur in these efforts, all form the picture of the unique
personality. 
All great accomplishments of mankind are derived from the absolute logic of
human social relationships. They always follow a direction seeking security,
alleviating the onslaughts of nature, and fostering a social existence (forming
social groups, passing laws, establishing religion). Individual Psychology is also
an attempt to ameliorate the process that nature has imposed on man. This
process is unrelenting--much stricter than we are ourselves. It threatens with near
extinction the nervous, the lost, and the criminal. Incompetence in work or in
social life, the decline of whole families and nations are the markers along this
road. Unhappiness, criminality, alcoholism, sexual diseases, perversions, all

forms of impotence, prostitution, fear of having children, frigidity, and rejection
of love and marriage are signs of the threatening disaster. The key to changing
man's destiny, formed out of ignorance and mistakes, rests only in the principles
of Individual Psychology. Its philosophy of life is the strongest safeguard,
promoting security based on strength and not on weakness.

4 Editor’s note: Moloch was the sun god of the Canaanites in old Palestine
and sometimes associated with the Sumerian Baal, although Moloch was entirely
malevolent. In the 8th
6th century BCE, firstborn children were sacrificed to him by the Israelites in the
Valleye of Hinnom, south-east of Jerusalem. These sacrifices to the sun god
were made to renew the strength of the sun fire. This ritual was probably
borrowed from surrounding nations, and was also popular in ancient Carthage.
Moloch was represented as a huge bronze statue with the head of a bull. The
statue was hollow, and inside there burned a fire which colored the Moloch a
glowing red. Children were placed on the hands of the statue. Through an
ingenious system the hands were raised to the mouth (as if Moloch were eating)
and the children fell into the fire where they were consumed by the flames. The
people gathered before the Moloch were dancing on the sounds of flutes and
tambourines to drown out the screams of the victims. According to some
sources, the Moloch in the Old Testament is not a god, but a specific form of
sacrifice.
5 Adler, Praxis und Theorie der Individualpsychologie, Second Edition,
Wiesbaden (Publisher, Bergman).
Index
A
above · 3, 6, 7, 10, 18, 26, 34, 37, 41, 42, 51, 53, 55, 57, 59, 71, 75, 76, 83,
88, 94, 
97, 113, 114, 124, 130, 131, 134, 137, 142, 147, 149, 160, 163, 164, 173, 176, 
187, 190, 195 
abuse · 180, 185 
accusation · 140 
accuse · 25 
achievement · 27, 31, 37, 64, 72, 73, 78, 91, 94, 115, 122, 143, 160, 166, 188,
197 activity · 7, 40, 47, 50, 52, 119, 121, 123, 133, 141, 143, 193, 194 
active · 7, 13, 25, 49, 52, 93, 109, 110, 131, 137, 180, 185, 196 
adapt · 75, 165 
adaptation · 164 
adjustment · 29, 63, 64 
affect · 23, 29, 110, 113, 165, 182 
affection · 28, 29, 47, 77, 82, 101, 102, 120, 121, 126, 134, 151, 152, 194
aggression · 117, 138 
agoraphobia · 39, 42, 87, 195 

alcohol · 45, 48, 150 
alcoholism · 31, 105, 192, 198 
alienation · 29 
ambition · 4, 13, 14, 22, 23, 25, 35, 53, 71, 72, 78, 98, 111, 127, 166 ambitious ·
14, 20, 21, 22, 33, 83, 104, 109, 146, 193, 195 
ambivalence · 18, 19 
analogy · 53 
anger · 13, 32, 49, 87, 88, 170 
anthropology · 16, 115 
antithesis · 108 
anxiety · 97, 127, 130, 132, 183 
apperception · 16 
arrangement · 36, 41, 43, 183 
arrogance · 4, 21, 31, 73, 78, 130, 193, 196 
art · 27, 32, 71, 102, 109, 110, 112, 127, 196 
artist · 46, 47, 109, 110 
artists · 47, 109, 158, 168, 188 
as if · 13, 15, 20, 25, 28, 29, 35, 44, 48, 49, 50, 62, 71, 76, 78, 80, 86, 99, 120, 
125, 141, 149, 152, 158, 168, 171, 178, 183, 184, 193, 197 
assertion · 164 
association · 5, 63, 143 
assumption · 41, 112, 130, 133, 146 
assumptions · 130, 133 
attention · 6, 13, 33, 40, 44, 50, 76, 85, 87, 88, 104, 126, 133, 137, 142, 157, 158,
164, 173, 179, 186, 189 
attitude · 4, 8, 12, 19, 25, 28, 33, 44, 46, 71, 73, 87, 96, 97, 100, 101, 102, 106, 
110, 113, 114, 116, 117, 120, 121, 123, 126, 131, 139, 140, 143, 147, 149, 150, 
153, 154, 155, 164, 168, 170, 171, 173, 176, 177, 184, 191, 193 avoiding · 17,
76, 105, 149, 165, 170 
avoidance · 2, 99, 107, 133, 167, 168, 170, 184 
awareness · 57, 62, 73, 173, 191 
awkward · 126 
awkwardness · 125, 193

B
Baudelaire, Charles · 109 
beauty · 75, 86, 114, 115, 117, 184 
becoming · 2, 4, 7, 21, 63, 81, 88, 103, 107, 114, 115, 132, 133, 182, 185, 189
being · 2, 8, 12, 15, 16, 17, 19, 21, 25, 27, 28, 31, 32, 34, 36, 39, 41, 42, 44, 48,
49, 51, 53, 57, 59, 63, 65, 66, 67, 71, 72, 73, 74, 75, 76, 77, 78, 80, 82, 84,
87, 
93, 94, 95, 97, 101, 102, 103, 104, 105, 106, 108, 110, 117, 120, 121, 122, 129, 
131, 132, 133, 134, 137, 138, 139, 140, 141, 144, 147, 149, 152, 154, 155, 157, 
158, 162, 163, 165, 166, 167, 171, 173, 176, 180, 181, 182, 183, 184, 185, 186, 
187, 191, 194, 195, 196 
belief · 18, 28, 33, 42, 44, 48, 51, 52, 68, 71, 72, 77, 92, 114, 117, 126, 130, 144,
149, 154, 156, 166, 173, 178, 183, 185 
belonging · 27, 50, 71, 114, 127, 139, 166, 197 
below · 41, 153, 164, 168 
Bergson, Henri · 194 
birth order · 82, 84, 85, 197 
biting · 22 
blind · 159 
blindness · 192 
Bloch, Iwan · 136, 145 
blushing · 177 
boastfulness · 52, 55, 180 
body · 13, 75, 94, 138, 142, 147, 148, 149, 150, 157, 188, 194

C
case · 3, 5, 18, 19, 20, 33, 35, 36, 37, 39, 42, 43, 50, 52, 53, 59, 67, 73, 76,
80, 81, 
84, 86, 87, 88, 96, 97, 100, 103, 107, 111, 113, 116, 121, 122, 123, 125, 130, 
132, 134, 137, 138, 141, 147, 149, 150, 152, 158, 160, 168, 173, 175, 176, 179, 
180, 183, 185, 186, 187, 188, 194, 195 
cases · 2, 7, 17, 19, 28, 30, 33, 34, 37, 47, 48, 50, 57, 59, 67, 68, 72, 73, 78, 85,
96, 97, 99, 100, 105, 106, 113, 114, 120, 121, 122, 123, 127, 130, 131, 132, 134,
137, 138, 143, 147, 148, 150, 152, 153, 155, 160, 167, 168, 170, 171, 173, 174,
183, 187, 188, 189, 190, 191, 192, 193, 195 
castration · 122, 123 
causality · 16, 23, 44, 46, 50, 62, 63, 113, 138, 139, 147, 165 
caution · 67, 193 
central nervous system · 192 
change · 61, 63, 76, 111, 115, 120, 122, 123, 141, 143, 151, 157, 158, 168, 173, 
182, 183, 191 
character · 19, 24, 49, 59, 72, 73, 83, 96, 105, 109, 112, 115, 122, 126, 137, 147, 
163, 164, 167, 177, 193, 197 
character traits · 19, 137, 163, 167, 193, 197 
characteristics · 42, 48, 72, 76, 81, 83, 88, 109, 110, 114, 116, 119, 123, 125,
130, 131, 132, 152, 196, 197 
child · 2, 3, 4, 5, 8, 11, 13, 18, 19, 20, 21, 24, 27, 28, 29, 30, 32, 33, 34, 40, 42,
44, 
45, 46, 47, 50, 54, 55, 56, 57, 59, 65, 71, 72, 77, 80, 81, 82, 83, 84, 87, 92, 94, 
96, 97, 98, 101, 102, 103, 110, 111, 114, 115, 126, 129, 133, 134, 140, 141, 
143, 151, 152, 153, 154, 155, 156, 157, 158, 159, 160, 161, 162, 163, 164, 165, 
166, 167, 168, 173, 175, 181, 189, 190, 192, 193, 194, 195, 197 children · 1, 2,
3, 4, 5, 20, 27, 29, 30, 32, 33, 34, 47, 50, 55, 57, 59, 65, 68, 70, 72, 76, 77, 81,
82, 83, 84, 93, 94, 96, 97, 101, 102, 111, 112, 121, 126, 129, 132, 134, 138, 139,
141, 143, 147, 152, 153, 154, 155, 156, 157, 158, 159, 160, 161, 167, 168, 171,
173, 178, 182, 189, 190, 192, 193, 194, 195, 196, 198 
choice · 21, 39, 61, 86, 100, 105, 116, 120, 153, 160, 164, 171, 187, 191 clean ·
10, 14 
cognitive · 89 
collective · 95 
common sense · 23, 105, 125, 165 

community · 4, 20, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30, 31, 34, 46, 51, 57, 63, 64, 70, 71, 72, 
75, 76, 91, 101, 103, 104, 109, 138, 153, 157, 165, 166, 169 
communal · 23, 24, 46, 47, 62, 63, 70 
communal life · 23, 24 
comparison · 132, 141 
compensation · 18, 20, 68, 73, 75, 126, 131, 140, 141, 142, 164 
compensatory · 164, 189 
competition · 183 
complex · 100, 120, 126, 131, 146 
compulsion · 14, 16, 17, 48, 75, 78, 103, 143, 146 
compulsive · 18, 138, 174, 176 
concentrate · 154, 158, 189 
concentration · 158 
concept · 10, 16, 46, 72, 75, 89, 90, 102, 103, 130, 143, 194 
conception · 44 
conflict · 24, 46, 51, 75, 141, 149 
conscience · 56, 90, 107 
conscious · 4, 45, 62, 103, 122, 167, 181 
constitution · 115, 123 
contact · 5, 14, 22, 23, 24, 25, 28, 29, 40, 57, 82, 94, 153, 154, 156, 158, 168,
177, 
178, 179, 180 
contempt · 25, 56, 84, 114, 130 
contribution · 90 
cooperate · 8, 153 
cooperation · 2, 29 
cosmos · 197 
courage · 3, 19, 22, 23, 25, 29, 30, 35, 36, 42, 47, 48, 49, 50, 51, 52, 55, 68, 71, 
72, 76, 80, 94, 107, 110, 126, 132, 134, 139, 143, 149, 150, 154, 158, 159, 164, 
166, 167, 168, 189, 193, 194, 197 
courageous · 14, 37, 48, 52, 61, 73, 96, 97, 110, 122, 143, 159, 165 coward · 54,
134 
cowardice · 52, 97, 126, 149, 154 
craving · 93, 158 
craving for power · 93 
creative · 75, 78, 127, 162, 164, 183 
creative power · 75, 162, 164, 183 
creativity · 160 
crime · 28, 46, 49, 55, 56, 57, 80, 81, 93 

criminal · 32, 46, 48, 49, 50, 52, 53, 55, 80, 81, 131, 142, 155, 198 criminality ·
31, 48, 49, 50, 51, 54, 58, 81, 127, 196, 198 
critical · 9, 32, 114, 120, 125, 127, 140, 147, 148, 166, 195 
cruel · 138, 159 
cruelty · 13 
cry · 12, 157 
crying · 34, 87, 157 
culture · 3, 4, 37, 71, 75, 84, 92, 104, 108, 113, 116, 119, 126, 127, 129, 131,
164, 
167, 184, 190, 193, 196, 197 
cure · 26, 44, 51, 77, 81, 95, 110, 111, 113, 130, 183, 185, 190 
curse · 68, 98 
cyclothymia 
cyclothymic · 36

D
Darwin, Charles · 102 
death · 12, 14, 18, 40, 99, 144, 170, 176 defeat · 35, 52, 97, 123, 161, 166, 181,
183 defense · 93, 148, 149, 167 
defiance · 13, 20, 34, 139 
deficiency · 130, 168 
degeneracy · 138 
delinquency · 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 50, 167
delinquent · 2, 3, 5, 6, 167 
delirium · 26 
delusion · 6, 73, 99
delusions · 95, 138 
Demosthenes · 188, 197 
dependence · 57, 142 
dependency · 110, 132, 184 
depression · 20, 21, 35, 36, 37, 65, 66, 77, 117, 123, 180, 181 
depressed · 1, 66, 115, 116, 180, 181 
depth · 5, 8, 98, 138, 194 
depth psychology · 138 
despair · 13, 54, 73, 117, 143 
destruction · 93 
detour · 28 
detours · 18, 28, 121, 196 
development · 8, 9, 10, 11, 16, 20, 24, 25, 28, 29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 37, 42, 47, 50,
57, 63, 64, 70, 71, 76, 77, 88, 91, 92, 102, 103, 104, 108, 112, 114, 115, 119,
120, 133, 139, 140, 141, 151, 152, 153, 154, 157, 159, 162, 163, 165, 166, 167,
168, 173, 184, 189, 190, 193, 195, 197 
dexterity · 127 
diagnosis · 53, 147 
difficulty · 48, 80, 93, 100, 111, 149, 161, 175 
difficulties · 3, 17, 28, 29, 33, 37, 47, 67, 72, 83, 96, 103, 104, 105, 110, 111,
158, 161, 165, 167, 177, 183, 188, 189, 192, 193, 194, 197 
discipline · 48, 134 
discontent · 47, 117 
discontentment · 48 
discouraged · 14, 17, 20, 23, 26, 35, 36, 37, 42, 49, 70, 82, 84, 88, 141, 174, 183,

184, 190 
discouragement · 17, 18, 20, 21, 22, 23, 29, 33, 37, 42, 51, 52, 58, 68, 73, 78, 97,
115, 126, 127, 134, 138, 142, 143, 166, 168, 183, 193, 194, 196 disease · 65 
disparage · 143 
disparagement · 142 
disposition · 113, 146, 147, 192 
distance · 3, 17, 22, 40, 41, 134, 177, 178 
distrust · 95 
division of labor · 23, 101 
dog 
dogs · 51 
dominance · 19, 22, 25, 26, 97, 139, 144 
dominant · 104 
Don Juan · 122 
double vie · 18 
doubt · 14, 18, 19, 114, 122, 132, 184, 189 
doubting · 192 
dream · 40, 41, 42, 43, 56, 83, 94, 133, 176, 178, 179 
dreams · 35, 42, 43, 53, 117, 130, 133, 138, 167, 176, 193 
dreams · 35, 42, 43, 53, 117, 130, 133, 138, 167, 176, 193 
drive · 18, 49, 53, 93, 113, 115, 116, 119, 120, 122, 125, 129, 130, 131, 138,
139, 141, 144 
drives · 4, 28, 57, 76, 93, 112, 113, 114, 139, 192

E
early memories · 182 
eating · 87, 156, 185 
economy · 187
economic · 13, 21, 77, 90, 93, 113 
education · 2, 5, 11, 27, 39, 45, 70, 71, 73, 86, 92, 94, 95, 111, 113, 120, 155,
160, 
161, 162, 168 
educator · 7, 9, 18, 20, 91, 159, 187, 190, 197 
educators · 4, 6, 9, 11, 59, 80, 90, 159, 160, 161, 197 
ego · 23, 99 
egotism · 4, 95, 97 
eldest child · 84 
emotion 
emotional · 18, 49, 91, 110 
empathy · 6 
encourage · 23, 24, 36, 97, 193 
encouragement · 17, 26, 72, 88, 120, 122, 147, 150, 165, 167, 188, 189, 190,
191, 196 
endocrine · 112 
enemy · 13, 58, 153, 196 
enemies · 52, 95, 168 
energy · 19, 35, 44, 175 
energetic · 87 
enuresis · 35 
environment · 3, 19, 28, 31, 50, 84, 88, 97, 101, 115, 119, 126, 151, 152, 157, 
162, 165, 174, 193 
epileptic 
epilepsy · 56 
epoch 
epochs · 62 
equal · 50, 72, 75, 85, 93, 122, 161, 180, 181 
equality · 36, 37, 51, 63, 71, 73, 83, 105, 112, 120, 161, 167 
equilibrium · 192 
error · 20, 31, 44, 49, 61 
Esau · 83 

escape · 2, 3, 23, 29, 42, 46, 49, 95, 101, 105, 120, 126, 134, 148, 154, 155, 158, 
180 
ethics · 30, 72, 75, 197 
Eulenberg, Albert · 145 
evil · 17, 74, 81, 95, 103, 185 
evolution · 30, 63, 92 
examination · 2, 5, 16, 23, 49, 53, 75, 83, 96, 126, 129, 131, 133, 134, 138, 148, 
150, 163, 175, 187, 188 
examinations · 130 
exclusion · 36, 115, 139, 143, 147 
excuse · 41, 49, 57, 67, 77, 84, 87, 103, 116, 126, 159, 170, 183, 193, 194 
excuses · 49, 103, 116, 126, 170, 193, 194 
exhibitionism · 116, 130, 142, 143 
exhibitionist · 143 
expectation · 30, 50, 52, 194 
expecting · 65 
experience · 5, 32, 50, 59, 62, 74, 106, 109, 110, 113, 114, 115, 121, 127, 130, 
140, 143, 147, 155, 156, 157, 164, 165, 167, 168, 171, 173, 174, 194, 197

F
failure · 2, 10, 25, 33, 34, 48, 50, 51, 80, 81, 88, 90, 97, 116, 127, 134, 139,
141, 146, 147, 149, 160, 177, 178, 182, 196 
failures · 1, 26, 28, 29, 30, 33, 36, 46, 52, 53, 54, 100, 143, 171, 173, 180, 196
fairy tale · 112, 137 
family · 2, 4, 5, 20, 21, 26, 29, 35, 36, 54, 55, 76, 77, 80, 81, 82, 83, 84, 88, 96,
100, 103, 104, 105, 114, 126, 127, 130, 134, 138, 152, 156, 160, 165, 178, 180, 
181, 182, 189, 196 
fantasy · 14, 120, 130, 138, 139, 147, 164, 170 
fate · 16, 31, 64, 65, 68, 75, 83, 90, 98, 114, 150, 159, 183, 185 
father · 4, 18, 19, 21, 29, 39, 40, 42, 45, 54, 55, 65, 84, 86, 87, 88, 97, 114, 116, 
157, 173, 184, 187, 195, 196 
fatigue · 120 
fear · 4, 33, 35, 37, 39, 40, 43, 47, 49, 50, 51, 52, 57, 77, 78, 97, 104, 108, 110, 
111, 114, 115, 117, 120, 127, 133, 134, 138, 139, 141, 147, 148, 149, 157, 159, 
167, 170, 176, 180, 182, 193, 194, 195, 196, 198 
feeling · 4, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 23, 26, 27, 28, 31, 33, 34, 35, 36, 38, 42, 43, 46,
49, 
50, 51, 52, 53, 54, 56, 62, 66, 67, 68, 71, 73, 75, 76, 77, 78, 82, 83, 89, 91, 98, 
99, 101, 102, 103, 105, 108, 110, 111, 113, 114, 115, 116, 117, 120, 121, 125, 
126, 127, 131, 132, 138, 140, 141, 142, 143, 144, 147, 148, 149, 151, 152, 153,
154, 155, 158, 160, 161, 162, 165, 166, 167, 168, 173, 174, 178, 180, 181, 182,
183, 184, 185, 189, 190, 192, 193, 194, 196, 197 
feeling of community · 28, 31, 53, 54, 56, 89, 98, 165, 166, 194 feeling of
inferiority · 18, 19, 20, 23, 26, 36, 38, 42, 43, 50, 52, 68, 71, 73, 78, 
82, 83, 99, 115, 125, 126, 131, 141, 142, 147, 148, 149, 160, 161, 162, 166, 
167, 178, 182, 183, 184, 185, 189, 190, 192, 193, 194, 196, 197 feeling of
superiority · 120 
feeling of worth · 113, 166, 183 
fellatio · 129 
fellow man · 101 
female · 40, 41, 84, 97, 110, 112, 113, 114, 115, 116, 117, 119, 123, 130, 131,
139, 148, 184, 196 
feminine · 131, 137, 188 
fetish · 142 
fetishism · 121, 130, 142 

fiction · 41, 112, 189 
fictional · 23 
fictitious · 24, 38, 131, 162, 183, 184 
fictitious goal · 24 
fictitious superiority · 38 
flagellation · 140 
Fliess, Wilhelm · 123 
forget · 91, 98, 192 
form · 2, 16, 17, 30, 40, 51, 53, 66, 74, 75, 77, 81, 83, 99, 103, 107, 109, 111,
112, 113, 114, 122, 126, 137, 140, 142, 143, 159, 163, 168, 181, 184, 189, 192,
194, 197 
free will · 137 
freedom · 61, 98, 104, 112, 115, 119, 126 
Freud · 10, 90, 124, 129, 130, 131, 133, 136, 139, 141, 145, 150 
friendship · 18, 65, 66, 138 
frigidity · 31, 78, 114, 146, 148, 198 
future · 9, 10, 18, 28, 29, 35, 64, 65, 74, 75, 76, 78, 80, 89, 91, 100, 114, 120,
126, 127, 131, 141, 150, 152, 154, 155, 164, 168, 170, 171, 183, 184, 189, 190,
191, 195, 196, 197

G
game · 17, 18, 21, 108, 141 
games · 5, 21, 23, 67, 119, 133 
genital 
genitals · 123 
genius · 12, 21, 46, 55, 94, 165 
glance · 9, 17, 20, 48 
glands · 50, 112, 116, 123, 131, 132, 134, 138, 139, 146, 192 
goal · 7, 11, 14, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 22, 23, 26, 31, 36, 39, 42, 45, 46, 48, 50, 61,
63, 66, 71, 72, 73, 78, 88, 90, 91, 99, 100, 106, 107, 112, 113, 114, 116, 123,
139, 143, 149, 151, 153, 162, 163, 164, 176, 189, 190, 192, 193, 194 goal of
perfection · 162 
God · 14, 62, 90 
Goethe · 13, 104, 110, 160, 197 
greed · 3, 62 
grief · 22, 65 
Grillparzer, Franz · 110 
group · 7, 63, 92, 93, 94, 103, 157, 158, 188 
guidance · 86, 146 
guiding line · 37 
guilt · 17, 54, 180

H
handshake · 177 
handwriting · 22 
happy · 41, 90, 111, 147, 156, 171, 173
happiness · 14, 100, 111, 166 
hate · 46, 49, 140 
hate · 13, 46, 50, 88, 93, 127, 152 
headache
headaches · 177 
heart · 36, 39, 46, 139 
Hebbel, Christian Friedrich · 109 
Herder, Johann Gottfried · 115 
hero · 21, 22, 53, 84, 108
heroism · 52 
hesitiation 
hesitating attitude · 69 
Hirschfeld, Magnus · 123, 124, 130, 136 
homosexuality · 117, 120, 121, 130, 131, 132, 133, 134, 135, 139, 184 
homosexual · 129, 130, 131, 132, 133, 184 
hostility · 3, 28, 46, 126, 131, 154, 155, 170, 174 
hostile · 28, 33, 59, 70, 76, 109, 120, 133, 152, 154, 168, 173, 193 human · 2, 9,
20, 21, 23, 25, 27, 28, 29, 30, 31, 32, 36, 37, 38, 44, 45, 46, 47, 51, 
57, 60, 63, 68, 69, 71, 74, 75, 76, 77, 78, 80, 82, 83, 85, 89, 90, 91, 92, 94, 98, 
100, 101, 102, 103, 104, 106, 107, 110, 111, 112, 114, 115, 131, 134, 138, 140, 
141, 143, 146, 149, 152, 156, 159, 162, 163, 164, 165, 166, 167, 173, 176, 177, 
185, 186, 194, 197 
human nature · 20, 32, 68, 69, 107, 110, 149, 162, 166, 167, 177 
humane · 46, 104, 122, 142 
humiliation · 50 
humility · 13, 47 
hunger · 12, 13, 14, 18, 57 
hypersensitivity · 127, 146, 171, 193 hypnosis · 141 
hypnotic · 17 
hypothesis · 141 
hysteria · 127

I
idea · 19, 30, 32, 40, 41, 47, 54, 57, 81, 89, 90, 96, 105, 107, 108, 111, 130,
151, 183, 189 
ideal · 4, 7, 14, 19, 76, 99, 101, 106, 107, 109, 112, 113, 119, 120, 178 
idealism · 125 
Iliad · 110 
illness · 6, 13, 23, 36, 37, 39, 44, 49, 51, 57, 77, 117, 120, 138, 146, 149, 170,
174, 176, 180, 183, 193 
image · 14, 116, 120, 193 
images · 120, 178 
imagination · 193 
imitation · 4 
impatience · 3, 29, 147 
impatient · 147 
imperfection 
imperfect · 20 
impotence · 31, 83, 131, 146, 148, 149, 186, 198 
inaccessibility 
inaccessible · 30, 143 
inborn · 20, 81, 116, 130, 131, 133, 139, 192 
incest · 63, 131 
incomplete · 4, 131 
incompleteness · 5 
independence · 17, 29, 34, 35, 42, 97, 102, 126, 127, 168, 189 
independent · 11, 47, 126, 158 
Individual Psychology · 2, 3, 5, 8, 9, 10, 11, 16, 17, 18, 20, 25, 26, 30, 31, 35,
36, 42, 44, 47, 50, 62, 63, 68, 69, 70, 71, 72, 73, 81, 82, 89, 90, 91, 92, 93, 94,
95, 99, 107, 111, 122, 147, 148, 149, 162, 163, 165, 166, 167, 182, 184, 186,
192, 194, 195, 196, 197 
individuality · 17, 19, 164, 165 
indolence · 105, 196 
inferiority · 18, 19, 27, 30, 31, 36, 42, 48, 50, 58, 62, 63, 76, 82, 87, 92, 93, 94,
95, 102, 106, 114, 116, 132, 139, 141, 147, 149, 166, 167, 168, 178, 182, 183,
184, 194 
inferiority complex · 92, 93, 95, 182 
inferiority feeling · 76, 182 

infidelity · 65, 67 
inhibition · 114 
inner conflict · 61 
insane · 26 
insecurity · 27, 28, 29, 30, 53, 63, 71, 76, 81, 82, 95, 105, 108, 121, 134, 157,
181, 192, 193, 197 
insight · 19, 50, 69, 75, 91, 103, 108, 119, 144, 147 
intelligence · 19, 179 
intelligent · 105, 179 
intention · 49, 105, 107, 173 
intentions · 48, 77, 106, 108 
interest · 2, 8, 9, 10, 11, 20, 22, 30, 57, 72, 74, 98, 127, 150, 151, 187, 189, 191,
193, 195 
interpersonal · 72, 126 
intuition · 8 
irritability · 193 
isolation · 8, 28, 29, 47, 50, 63, 72, 76, 103, 126, 127, 129, 140, 143, 148, 151,
152, 157, 167

J
Jacob · 55, 83 
Janet, Pierre · 194 
jealousy · 49, 50, 193
jealous · 66 
Jewish 
Jew · 56 
joy · 66, 111, 114, 171, 186

K
Kant. Emanuel · 44, 62, 115 Kaus, Otto · 96 
Kraepelin, Emil · 131 
Kramer, Josef · 189 
Kretschmer · 147

L
language · 30, 52, 90, 112, 142, 149, 153, 164, 171, 197 law · 32, 71, 90, 98
laws · 27, 31, 61, 75, 103, 170, 197
laziness · 196
lazy · 3, 36, 56
leadership · 88, 94
leader · 46, 88, 94 
learning · 28, 86 
left-handedness · 192 
libido · 99, 130, 139, 141 
life plan · 7, 125 
life problems · 47, 193 
life tasks · 49 
logic · 4, 17, 19, 20, 22, 23, 24, 26, 27, 28, 30, 46, 51, 73, 75, 90, 102, 108, 114,
131, 163, 164, 176, 185, 197 
love · 18, 26, 27, 28, 31, 35, 46, 47, 53, 55, 57, 65, 66, 67, 71, 73, 76, 77, 79, 82, 
90, 95, 97, 100, 101, 103, 104, 105, 106, 107, 108, 109, 110, 111, 113, 114, 
115, 117, 119, 120, 122, 123, 126, 133, 142, 146, 147, 148, 149, 152, 153, 166, 
168, 170, 171, 174, 175, 177, 178, 183, 184, 189, 194, 195, 198 loyalty · 75, 152
lying · 8, 33, 100, 147, 151, 181, 196

M
male · 84, 109, 112, 113, 114, 115, 119, 123, 130, 134, 139, 184, 196
manicdepressive · 20, 36, 143
mania · 20, 21, 35, 37, 180
mankind · 18, 30, 31, 61, 62, 63, 64, 73, 74, 75, 77, 90, 94, 98, 103, 104,
105, 109, 111, 131, 164, 165, 171, 195, 197 
marriage · 31, 65, 66, 76, 77, 78, 88, 95, 97, 98, 100, 101, 103, 106, 107, 108,
109, 114, 115, 117, 119, 120, 121, 122, 123, 133, 170, 171, 172, 173, 176, 177,
182, 189, 195, 198 
marry · 66, 78, 106, 175 
Marx · 62, 91 
masculine protest · 93, 115, 116, 117, 184 
masculinity · 95, 123, 196 
masculine · 93, 101, 109, 114, 115, 116, 117, 123, 131, 184 
masochism · 59, 121, 130, 137, 138, 139, 140, 141 
masturbation · 115, 117, 120, 129, 137, 146, 147, 148, 181 
mathematics · 88 
mature · 84, 101, 119 
maturity · 1, 78, 111, 128 
May, Karl · 10 
melancholia · 20, 66, 175, 185 
memory · 74, 158, 194 
menopause · 117 
menstruation · 117 
mental health · 51 
mind · 5, 13, 14, 18, 23, 34, 45, 54, 62, 72, 92, 93, 94, 105, 138, 148, 150, 153,
158 
misbehavior · 125, 151 
mistrust · 47, 76, 114 
modesty · 19, 24, 125, 143 
Moebius, Paul Julius · 118 
Moll, Albert · 124, 145, 150 
monogamy · 116, 170 
mood · 13, 27, 42, 110, 146 
morality · 18, 19, 90, 92, 119, 153, 163, 166 
morphine · 130 

mother · 21, 29, 35, 39, 40, 41, 42, 43, 45, 47, 54, 55, 56, 57, 65, 77, 82, 86, 87,
88, 96, 97, 98, 111, 114, 121, 151, 152, 153, 156, 157, 158, 168, 173, 174, 181,
184, 189, 195, 196 
motives · 49, 93, 105, 116 
movement · 12, 18, 19, 73, 94, 99, 111, 115, 126, 133, 164, 182, 193 
Müller · 124 
murder · 48, 52, 53, 54, 56, 57, 74, 138 
murderer · 54, 56, 81 
muscles · 87, 148 
music · 188

N
Naecke, Paul · 131, 147 
nagging · 195 
narcissism · 99, 147, 150 
nation · 4, 77, 116, 155, 159 
national · 12, 95, 165 
need · 11, 26, 30, 53, 56, 62, 78, 86, 89, 103, 104, 106, 108, 109, 111, 117, 144,
161, 162, 178, 187, 188, 190, 197 
negativism · 76 
neglect · 54, 69, 77, 78, 126, 196
neglected child · 98, 162 
neurasthenia · 127, 146 
neurosis · 8, 18, 19, 23, 25, 26, 28, 30, 31, 37, 38, 40, 42, 47, 48, 49, 50, 51, 58,
67, 69, 76, 90, 93, 99, 130, 138, 140, 141, 142, 149, 176, 177, 180, 181,
186, 
194, 195 
neuroses · 20, 42, 49, 67, 72, 90, 127, 150, 167, 182, 185, 196 neurotic · 25, 31,
39, 41, 42, 43, 47, 48, 49, 50, 51, 52, 53, 68, 82, 84, 99, 122, 140, 146, 157, 164,
166, 177, 178, 184, 185, 186, 196 
Nietzsche, Friedrich · 21, 122 
normal · 3, 26, 36, 37, 47, 50, 51, 52, 55, 66, 80, 83, 87, 89, 94, 106, 115, 116, 
120, 123, 127, 129, 131, 132, 134, 139, 141, 142, 143, 148, 160, 163, 184, 192, 
196

O
obedience · 20, 137, 139 
objective · 28, 107, 138 
obstacle · 44, 115, 141, 194 
obstinacy · 72 
occupation · 39, 71, 77, 101, 126, 164, 177, 187, 188, 189, 191 Oedipus complex
· 19 
onanism · 120, 129 
only child · 42, 82, 134, 153, 173, 197 
opinion · 8, 10, 73, 80, 84, 129, 131, 175, 187 
Oppenheim (Hermannn and David) · 45 
opponent · 14, 52, 72 
optimism · 72, 160, 166, 197 
optimistic · 94, 114, 126, 160 
oral · 88 
organ · 23, 44, 50, 68, 71, 116, 125, 132, 193
organ inferiority · 23, 193 
orientation · 23, 112, 114, 145 
overburdening · 82 
overcoming · 41, 51, 163, 167, 188, 190, 192 
oversensitivity
overcompensation · 192

P
pain · 18, 108, 115, 140, 148 
painter · 56 
palpitation
palpitations · 39 
pampering · 3, 35, 50, 55, 82, 121, 126, 133, 134, 168, 194 
pampered · 39, 42, 45, 47, 55, 57, 70, 82, 88, 108, 156, 157, 158, 168, 175, 182,
194 
paralysis · 149 
parent · 1, 5, 133, 138 
parents · 1, 2, 4, 5, 6, 8, 29, 34, 40, 45, 49, 55, 56, 59, 77, 87, 88, 90, 96, 101,
126, 134, 152, 155, 159, 170, 173, 187 
passivity · 116, 141, 194 
passive · 25, 78, 84, 93, 113, 131, 134, 137, 142, 148, 196 
patient · 7, 8, 9, 17, 20, 25, 35, 36, 37, 39, 41, 42, 43, 48, 51, 66, 67, 73, 90, 122, 
138, 139, 141, 147, 149, 150, 173, 174, 175, 176, 178, 179, 180, 182, 183, 184, 
185, 186, 195 
pattern · 19, 20, 28, 33, 48, 51, 104 
peace · 10 
pedantry · 171 
perception · 4, 132, 141, 155, 171, 196 
perfection · 72 
personal superiority · 23, 26, 76, 104 
personality · 7, 8, 17, 19, 30, 31, 33, 41, 42, 46, 72, 73, 74, 81, 88, 103, 110, 111,
113, 114, 122, 123, 131, 138, 139, 143, 149, 163, 164, 173, 177, 179, 182, 193, 
197 
perspective · 34, 46, 48, 62, 71, 72, 93, 96, 105, 146, 160, 165, 167, 186, 192
perverse · 121, 134 
perversion · 31, 114, 129, 131, 133, 134, 138, 139, 140, 141, 142, 143, 144, 146, 
184 
pessimism · 50, 71, 78, 134 
philosophy · 11, 26, 30, 31, 44, 49, 51, 68, 71, 89, 103, 114, 119, 121, 125, 126, 
150, 197, 198 
phobia · 175 
physician · 7, 13, 17, 20, 40, 41, 56, 65, 67, 69, 90, 96, 122, 138, 147, 148, 150, 
164, 175, 187, 196 

physique · 121 
pity · 54 
play · 1, 19, 21, 33, 49, 52, 57, 66, 67, 91, 101, 137, 142, 143, 151, 156, 160,
177, 
184, 187 
pleasure · 17, 18, 20, 34, 36, 78, 97, 107, 112, 139, 141, 144 
poet · 109, 190 
poetry · 91, 112 
politics · 111 
possession · 54, 55 
poverty · 194 
power · 4, 12, 13, 14, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 28, 33, 40, 47, 50, 52, 62, 66, 76, 78, 83,
90, 92, 94, 104, 107, 109, 116, 140, 147, 162, 166, 178, 183, 184, 185, 192, 
194, 197 
practical · 7, 8, 11, 29, 44, 45, 71, 72, 113, 120, 132, 174, 183 
pragmatism · 44 
praise · 168 
precocious · 139 
predestination · 21 
pregnancy · 54, 78, 96, 97, 98, 114, 115, 119 
pregnant · 97 
prejudice · 95, 111 
preparation · 27, 28, 35, 36, 37, 41, 47, 48, 52, 53, 55, 57, 68, 70, 85, 94, 105, 
110, 111, 114, 115, 116, 117, 119, 121, 123, 126, 133, 134, 152, 164, 171, 188, 
190, 191, 193 
prestige · 21, 33, 53, 72, 90, 99, 111, 180, 194, 195 
pride · 22, 31, 75, 80, 84, 102, 113, 131, 165, 176 
primitive · 62 
problem · 1, 3, 5, 6, 8, 27, 33, 34, 41, 63, 64, 68, 84, 96, 97, 98, 99, 103, 107,
109, 
110, 112, 131, 132, 138, 148, 151, 158, 159, 160, 162, 163, 166, 170, 175, 177, 
181, 182, 190, 195, 197 
problem child · 5, 6, 33, 68, 99, 151, 159, 160, 167 
profession · 2, 17, 28, 126, 175, 188 
proof · 73, 77, 117, 188 
prostitute · 65 
prostitution · 114, 127, 148, 198 
protection · 76, 77 
psyche · 17, 20, 25, 27, 46, 68, 100, 102, 134, 140, 141, 185, 192 

psychic · 43, 44, 45, 89, 148, 192, 193, 197 
psychology · 2, 8, 10, 16, 44, 57, 68, 69, 92, 95, 110, 138, 140, 141, 144, 147, 
150, 162, 191 
psychological · 5, 7, 8, 9, 16, 17, 18, 19, 22, 24, 25, 30, 33, 43, 46, 47, 48, 52,
53, 61, 63, 64, 68, 69, 76, 78, 82, 83, 84, 90, 98, 113, 117, 119, 122, 123, 125,
126, 129, 130, 132, 133, 138, 139, 141, 143, 146, 147, 148, 149, 150, 162, 163,
164, 165, 166, 171, 175, 180, 184, 185, 188, 189, 190, 194, 195, 197 
psychosis · 8, 17, 20, 22, 23, 25, 31, 36, 37, 38, 48, 51 
psychotic · 31 
psychotherapist · 7, 8, 9 
punishment · 1, 2, 3, 12, 32, 33, 34, 50, 59, 62, 74, 131, 134, 143, 152, 159, 168, 
190, 196 
purpose · 7, 23, 48, 55, 61, 62, 63, 64, 70, 77, 89, 105, 106, 111, 113, 114, 127, 
132, 157, 180, 183 
purposeful · 63

R
race · 21, 102, 134, 164, 165 
radius · 47, 48 
rage · 87 
rational · 23, 74 
readiness · 4, 29, 113, 114, 121, 152, 164 
reality · 7, 11, 18, 23, 26, 30, 35, 59, 75, 83, 86, 102, 108, 109, 110, 120, 138,
139, 164 
reason · 19, 26, 37, 42, 57, 62, 63, 74, 77, 81, 90, 99, 102, 103, 105, 112, 121, 
132, 133, 134, 139, 153, 159, 161, 163, 165, 166, 167, 168, 178, 181, 187, 197
reasoning · 153, 165, 190 
regression · 99, 141 
rejection · 31, 51, 52, 55, 85, 111, 114, 116, 117, 120, 122, 130, 133, 134, 148, 
176, 184, 190, 198 
religion · 31, 75, 91, 197 
religious · 95, 110, 165, 176, 182, 185 
remorse · 108 
repression · 129, 140, 194 
repressed · 113 
resentment · 114, 121, 195 
resistance · 4, 52, 81, 86, 106, 120, 126, 139, 148, 180, 189, 192, 195, 196
responsibility · 3, 4, 10, 47, 49, 51, 53, 54, 97, 98, 121, 147, 149, 171, 172, 191
responsible · 5, 10, 32, 49, 67 
retreat · 98, 127 
revenge · 23, 46, 50, 105, 111, 117, 123 
revolution · 12, 13, 14 
ridicule · 82 
rigid · 151 
role · 4, 6, 10, 33, 48, 57, 66, 73, 84, 91, 98, 101, 109, 111, 113, 114, 115, 116, 
117, 119, 123, 133, 134, 137, 139, 140, 142, 143, 148, 151, 156, 160, 164, 168, 
176, 177, 184, 191, 195 
Rousseau, Jean-Jacques · 12 
rule · 46, 47, 111 
rules · 62, 74, 75, 77, 103, 108, 116, 122

S
sadism · 59, 121, 130, 137, 139, 140, 141, 143, 144 
sadistic · 59, 137, 138, 195 
safeguarding 
safeguards · 20, 164, 167, 177, 178, 196 
salvation · 57, 94 
Sand, Georges · 113 
scheme · 5, 104 
schizoid · 99 
schizophrenia · 173, 174, 185 
school · 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 14, 21, 28, 32, 33, 34, 35, 39, 40, 42, 48, 52, 68, 69, 73, 82,
83, 86, 87, 88, 90, 94, 101, 110, 126, 139, 140, 148, 153, 154, 155, 156, 157,
158, 160, 163, 187, 189, 190, 191, 194, 196 
Schopenhauer, Arthur · 113, 123 
Schrenck-Notzing, Albert Freiherr von · 137, 145 
science · 8, 11, 27, 62, 112, 133, 138, 160, 162, 163, 186, 196 
second child · 173 
security · 30, 31, 36, 50, 53, 57, 71, 82, 93, 108, 132, 133, 134, 139, 140, 164,
197 seduction · 115, 119 
self · 1, 2, 6, 11, 17, 18, 19, 36, 44, 47, 48, 52, 53, 55, 57, 61, 68, 69, 70, 71, 72,
73, 76, 78, 80, 83, 86, 87, 90, 93, 94, 97, 102, 114, 116, 117, 121, 122, 125, 126,
127, 135, 140, 143, 148, 151, 159, 160, 164, 165, 166, 167, 168, 170, 173, 180,
189, 190, 191, 193, 196 
selfassertion · 71, 168, 193 
selfconfidence · 47, 53, 55, 61, 77, 83, 90, 94, 114, 121, 143, 164, 166, 193 self-
determination · 87 
selfenhancement · 68, 86 
selfesteem · 55, 57, 80, 90, 117, 148, 168, 189, 190, 196 
self-evaluation · 69, 193 
self-justification · 140 
selfpreservation · 18, 102 
self-reproach · 170 
semblance · 50, 52 
sensitive · 109, 148, 168 
sensitiveness · 93 
sex · 48, 52, 77, 97, 103, 104, 105, 107, 108, 109, 113, 114, 115, 119, 120, 121,

122, 125, 126, 130, 132, 134, 136, 138, 140, 142, 144, 150, 177, 196, 197 
sexual · 25, 34, 35, 49, 53, 65, 66, 76, 77, 86, 103, 104, 105, 106, 108, 110, 112,
113, 114, 115, 116, 117, 119, 120, 121, 122, 123, 125, 126, 129, 130, 131, 132,
133, 134, 136, 137, 138, 139, 140, 141, 142, 143, 144, 145, 146, 147, 148, 149,
150, 185, 195, 198 
sexuality · 75, 97, 111, 113, 115, 129, 131, 137, 140, 142, 170 
Shakespeare · 59, 74, 194 
shame · 101, 116, 143, 155 
shock · 56, 70 
shyness · 101, 125, 182 
significance · 2, 3, 13, 16, 29, 30, 53, 82, 131, 142, 146, 162, 167, 177, 194 
significant · 9, 26, 27, 30, 31, 45, 48, 51, 53, 57, 64, 71, 77, 78, 84, 110, 113,
114, 126, 131, 133, 137, 148, 152, 160, 162, 168, 175, 177, 191, 197 
simplicity · 78 
sin · 131, 183 
skin · 188 
sleep · 13, 20, 157, 158 
social · 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 13, 20, 21, 24, 25, 27, 28, 30, 31, 35, 41, 47, 48, 50, 51, 52,
53, 54, 55, 56, 57, 62, 63, 68, 70, 71, 72, 74, 75, 76, 77, 78, 81, 86, 89, 90, 91,
94, 96, 100, 102, 103, 105, 111, 114, 115, 116, 117, 119, 122, 125, 126, 127,
131, 134, 138, 140, 142, 143, 144, 148, 150, 152, 153, 154, 156, 159, 162, 163,
165, 166, 170, 171, 173, 174, 177, 178, 180, 181, 182, 185, 186, 189, 194, 195,
196, 197 
social context · 63, 140, 148 
social interest · 20, 30, 48, 50, 51, 52, 53, 54, 55, 56, 57, 68, 72, 90, 180, 181,
185 
society · 1, 4, 5, 17, 27, 28, 30, 37, 46, 47, 48, 49, 50, 57, 62, 64, 71, 74, 76, 77,
78, 81, 90, 92, 101, 103, 104, 108, 111, 114, 115, 125, 126, 131, 138, 140, 143,
152, 153, 155, 156, 157, 164, 165, 166, 187, 188, 190 
sociology · 89 
Socrates · 18 
soul · 26, 56, 75, 84, 111 
spasms · 87 
speech · 28, 102, 153, 195 
sperm · 146 
spontaneity · 111 
status · 5, 46, 84, 105, 109, 115 
stealing · 108 
Steinach, Eugen · 123, 130 

Stern, William · 89 
stomach · 56, 57, 175 
stress · 142 
striving · 3, 4, 11, 16, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 24, 26, 28, 38, 42, 47, 61, 62, 68, 69,
72, 73, 76, 78, 82, 86, 90, 93, 94, 99, 104, 110, 122, 125, 126, 139, 140, 155,
158, 159, 162, 164, 165, 166, 176, 180, 183, 184, 185, 189, 193, 194, 195
striving for security · 42 
striving for significance · 18, 19, 47, 69 
stuttering · 153, 177, 188, 197 
style of life · 23, 48, 49, 53, 106, 152, 153, 163, 164, 165, 166, 167, 168, 178,
179, 180, 182, 183, 184, 196 
subjective · 37, 84 
submissiveness · 4, 115, 139 
success · 1, 51, 53, 62, 72, 131, 138, 142, 150, 155, 161, 163, 189, 195, 197 
suffering · 13, 17, 19, 30, 53, 63, 77, 99, 123, 147, 185, 193 
suggestibility · 150 
suggestion · 17, 88 
suicide · 18, 28, 51, 54, 66, 87, 111, 127, 175 
superiority · 18, 19, 20, 24, 26, 37, 48, 66, 71, 82, 83, 84, 90, 99, 104, 116, 127,
140, 142, 149, 165, 166, 167, 180, 183, 184, 192, 193, 194 
superior · 34, 66, 95, 120, 149, 183, 195 
superstition · 38, 52, 68, 77, 115, 180, 185 
suspicion · 56 
syle · 19, 23, 48, 49, 51, 53, 106, 152, 153, 163, 164, 165, 166, 167, 168, 178,
179, 180, 182, 183, 184, 196 
symbol 
symbols · 133 
sympathy · 108, 175 
sympathetic · 138 
symptom · 40, 148, 149, 178 
symptoms · 19, 22, 25, 43, 45, 49, 82, 114, 127, 134, 145, 146, 147, 148, 149,
167, 177, 179, 185, 193, 196

T
Tandler, Julius · 124
teacher · 2, 5, 33, 34, 41, 69, 87, 88, 157, 160
teachers · 1, 2, 3, 5, 8, 34, 40, 87, 152, 155, 159
teleology · 16, 23, 24, 61, 163, 192 
teleological · 16, 189 
temperament · 164 
tendentious apperception · 192 
tension · 76, 110, 115, 122, 163 
the question · 44, 65, 73, 106, 112, 131, 141, 168, 175, 184, 191 
theoretical · 7, 8, 89 
thinking · 34, 45, 78, 125, 176, 185 
thirst · 18 
thought · 13, 17, 20, 21, 27, 28, 39, 41, 42, 49, 52, 53, 54, 55, 56, 62, 66, 68, 78,
104, 110, 138, 149, 155, 175, 181, 185, 188 
thrifty · 176 
time · 1, 2, 3, 4, 10, 13, 14, 17, 19, 20, 21, 26, 28, 31, 32, 33, 36, 37, 39, 40, 42,
49, 50, 54, 56, 57, 61, 62, 63, 65, 67, 68, 73, 74, 78, 83, 88, 93, 101, 102, 104,
105, 106, 107, 108, 109, 117, 119, 120, 123, 126, 127, 133, 134, 139, 141, 146,
151, 164, 170, 171, 173, 175, 176, 180, 181, 183, 186, 188, 192, 193, 196 
timidity · 105 
training · 3, 5, 34, 41, 42, 43, 49, 51, 52, 53, 54, 55, 56, 94, 117, 120, 123, 126,
127, 133, 138, 139, 142, 143, 162, 165, 167, 188, 189, 193 
trait · 113 
traits · 24, 84, 116, 120, 139, 167 
trauma · 130 
treatment · 8, 20, 23, 24, 26, 36, 39, 40, 41, 51, 52, 65, 67, 83, 148, 156, 168,
173, 174, 176, 179, 182, 191 
truth · 20, 30, 33, 61, 62, 64, 90, 92, 108, 110, 161 
truth · 76 
tyrant · 143, 173

U
ugliness · 114 
uncertainty · 27, 114, 166 
unconscious · 90, 140, 167, 181, 194 
understanding · 2, 8, 16, 18, 19, 20, 23, 29, 31, 34, 41, 48, 66, 68, 71, 75, 89, 91,
92, 100, 102, 104, 111, 119, 131, 147, 148, 153, 165, 166, 185, 193 unfaithful ·
65, 114
unfaithfulness · 78, 170
unhappy · 66, 72, 106, 107, 108, 110, 111, 131, 166 
unhappiness · 110, 121 
unique · 4, 11, 17, 19, 36, 68, 85, 104, 115, 146, 162, 163, 167, 197 
uniqueness · 64, 163 
unity · 11, 17, 18, 42, 72, 81, 159, 163 
universe · 61, 62, 74 
upward striving · 99

V
vain · 18, 28, 52, 54, 56, 146 
value · 8, 18, 27, 40, 46, 51, 55, 75, 77, 90, 91, 109, 125, 140, 162, 166, 167,
191, 193 
values · 61, 76, 78, 116, 125, 126, 127, 140, 154, 163, 166, 170, 185 vanity · 3,
6, 13, 18, 19, 24, 29, 31, 33, 52, 73, 74, 108, 122, 193 
venereal disease · 31, 54, 77, 121, 150 
vertical · 154 
virtue · 62, 63, 104, 154, 197

W
Wagner, Richard · 108, 165 
war · 12, 21, 35, 56, 84, 92, 93, 95, 175 
weakness · 33, 37, 47, 48, 49, 52, 62, 63, 71, 78, 82, 105, 108, 122, 126, 127,
132,
138, 140, 142, 146, 149, 158, 166, 167, 192, 193 
weapon · 47 
Weber, Frederick · 136 
Weininger, Otto · 118, 123, 124 
Wexberg, Erwin · 7, 10, 68, 140, 163 
Wild · 154 
willfulness · 74 
wisdom · 13, 76, 159 
wish · 7, 10, 32, 35, 59, 62, 65, 84, 86, 96, 99, 101, 104, 105, 107, 113, 116, 134,
137, 141, 155, 165, 166, 184 
woman · 4, 21, 56, 65, 66, 85, 93, 97, 98, 108, 109, 112, 113, 114, 115, 116, 117,
119, 121, 123, 137, 153, 175, 182, 183, 184, 185, 186, 195 
work · 2, 3, 5, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 13, 17, 21, 23, 25, 26, 27, 28, 30, 34, 36, 39, 40,
41, 
42, 47, 48, 49, 54, 55, 68, 69, 79, 86, 88, 90, 91, 96, 101, 103, 112, 123, 127, 
130, 134, 138, 155, 158, 159, 163, 166, 171, 174, 175, 178, 180, 181, 187, 191, 
195, 198 
world · 3, 8, 10, 12, 22, 25, 27, 28, 31, 39, 42, 45, 46, 61, 62, 63, 64, 71, 72, 74, 
76, 90, 92, 97, 106, 107, 108, 109, 110, 119, 120, 129, 148, 151, 153, 154, 155, 
159, 164, 167, 173, 178, 186, 196 
worthlessness · 49, 69

Y
younger · 23, 53, 54, 55, 56, 83, 84, 116, 175, 180, 197 youngest · 82, 83, 156,
175, 182, 197
youngest child · 83
Appendix: Basic Principles of Classical Adlerian Psychology
Henry T. Stein, Ph.D.1
Alfred Adler (1870-1937) developed the first holistic theory of personality,
psychopathology, and psychotherapy that was intimately connected to
humanistic philosophy of living. His lectures and books for the general public
are characterized by a crystal clear common sense. His clinical books and
journal articles reveal an uncommon understanding of mental disorder, a deep
insight into the art of healing, and a great inspiration for encouraging optimal
human development. Adler's essential principles are as follows.
Unity of the Individual
Thinking, feeling, emotion, and behavior can only be understood as
subordinated to the individual's style of life, or consistent pattern of dealing with
life. The individual is not internally divided or the battleground of conflicting
forces. Each aspect of the personality points in the same direction.
Goal Orientation
There is one central personality dynamic derived from the growth and
forward movement of life itself. It is a future-oriented striving toward a goal of
significance, superiority, or success. In mental health, it is a realistic goal of
socially useful significance or superiority over general difficulties; in mental
disorder, it is an unrealistic goal of exaggerated significance or superiority over
others. The early childhood feeling of inferiority, for which one aims to
compensate, leads to the creation of a fictional final goal which subjectively
seems to promise future security and success. The depth of the inferiority feeling
usually determines the height of the goal which then becomes the "final cause"
of behavior patterns.
Self-Determination and Uniqueness
The goal may be influenced by hereditary and cultural factors, but it
ultimately springs from the creative power of the individual, and is consequently
unique. Usually, individuals are not fully aware of their goal. Through the
analysis of birth order, repeated coping patterns, and earliest memories, the
psychotherapist infers the goal as a working hypothesis.
1 This brief overview was first published in 1997 on the Classical Adlerian

Psychology web site at http://go.ourworld.nu/hstein/principl.htm. A more
comprehensive exposition of principles, “Classical Adlerian Theory and
Practice,” may be found in Volume 1 of The Collected Clinical Works of Alfred
Adler, or on the web at http://go.ourworld.nu/hstein/theoprac.htm.
Social Context
As an indivisible whole, a system, the human being is also a part of larger
wholes or systems--the family, the community, all of humanity, our planet, the
cosmos. In these contexts, we meet the three important life tasks: occupation,
love and sex, and our relationship with other people--all social challenges. Our
way of responding to our first social system, the family constellation, may
become the prototype of our world view and attitude toward life.
The Feeling of Community
Each human being has the capacity for learning to live in harmony with
society. This is an innate potential for social connectedness which has to be
consciously developed. Social interest and feeling imply "social improvement,"
quite different from conformity, leaving room for social innovation even through
cultural resistance or rebellion. The feeling of genuine security is rooted in a
deep sense of belonging and embeddedness within the stream of social
evolution.
Mental Health
A feeling of human connectedness, and a willingness to develop oneself
fully and contribute to the welfare of others, are the main criteria of mental
health. When these qualities are underdeveloped, feelings of inferiority may
haunt an individual, or an attitude of superiority may antagonize others.
Consequently, the unconscious fictional goal will be selfcentered and
emotionally or materially exploitive of other people. When the feeling of
connectedness and the willingness to contribute are stronger, a feeling of
equality emerges, and the individual's goal will be self-transcending and
beneficial to others.
Treatment
Adlerian individual psychotherapy, brief therapy, couple therapy, and
family therapy follow parallel paths. Clients are encouraged to overcome their
feelings of insecurity, develop deeper feelings of connectedness, and to redirect
their striving for significance into more socially beneficial directions. Through a
respectful Socratic dialogue, they are challenged to correct mistaken
assumptions, attitudes, behaviors and feelings about themselves and the world.
Constant encouragement stimulates clients to attempt what was previously felt as
impossible. The growth of confidence, pride, and gratification leads to a greater
desire and ability to cooperate. The objective of therapy is to replace

exaggerated self-protection, selfenhancement, and self-indulgence with
courageous social contribution.

