
A
Biographical Note
nanda Kentish Coomaraswamy (1877-1947) was born in Colombo to Sir
Muthu Coomaraswamy, a prominent Tamil legislator, and Elizabeth Clay
Beeby, an Englishwoman. Following the death of his father, Ananda was brought
up in England and went to Wycliffe College in Stroud, Gloucestershire.
After graduating from London University with a degree in botany and
geology, Coomaraswamy carried out extensive surveys on the mineralogy of
Ceylon (now Sri Lanka). On 19 June 1902, he married Ethel Mary Partridge, a
photographer who travelled with him to Ceylon.
While in Ceylon, he formed the Ceylon Social Reform Society, dedicated to
the revival of traditional arts and crafts, social values and customs of Sinhalese
heritage. He was also keenly interested in Indian art and culture, and published
several books, catalogues and articles on the same. He formed a close friendship
with the Tagore family, contributing to literary works of the Swadeshi
movement.
Coomaraswamy’s domestic life suffered due to his increasing immersion in
studies and Ethel filed for divorce, returning to England in 1913. Later he met
and married Ratna Devi, a singer. The couple had a son and a daughter named
Narada and Rohini respectively.
In 1917, he was invited by the Boston Museum of Fine Arts to serve as the
first Keeper/Curator of Indian Art. He later became a Research Director for
Indian, Persian and Muslim Art. However, tragedy struck with the death of his
son, followed by that of his second wife.
Eventually Coomaraswamy married twice more, both women several years
his junior, and had a son, Rama. He continued writing on Indian art, dance,
drama and music.
Coomaraswamy died on 8 September 1947 and his ashes were scattered in
the river Ganga in accordance with his wishes.


The Dance Of Shiva
(a) Cosmic Dance of Nataraja Brahmanical bronze. South Indian. 12th Century.
Madras Mueseum.

THE DANCE OF SHIVA
Fourteen Essays
By
ANANDA COOMARASWAMY

First published in 2013 by Rupa Publications India Pvt. Ltd.
7/16, Ansari Road, Daryaganj New Delhi 110002
Edition copyright © Rupa Publications India Pvt. Ltd. 2013
All rights reserved.
No part of this publication may be reproduced, transmitted, or stored in a retrieval system, in any form or by
any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording or otherwise, without the prior permission of
the publisher.
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1
This book is sold subject to the condition that it shall not, by way of trade or otherwise, be lent, resold, hired
out, or otherwise circulated, without the publisher’s prior consent, in any form of binding or cover other
than that in which it is published.

Contents
Introduction
What has India Contributed to Human Welfare?
Hindu View of Art: HISTORICAL
Hindu View of Art: THEORY OF BEAUTY
That Beauty is a State
Buddhist Primitives
The Dance of Shiva
Indian Images with Many Arms
Indian Music
Status of Indian Women
Sahaja
Intellectual Fraternity
Cosmopolitan View of Nietzsche
Young India

Individuality, Autonomy and Function
Note: What has India Contributed to Human Welfare

List of Illustrations
Cosmic Dance of Nataraja, 12th Century
1. a. Avalokiteshvara Bodhisattva, 8th Century
b. Shiva and Parvati on Mt. Kailasa, 8th Century
2. a. Deer. Mamallapuram, 8th Century
b. Elephants, Mamallapuram, 8th Century
3. Krishna Disguised as a Milkmaid, 17th Century
4. Anjanta Fresco, 6th or 7th Century
5. a. Temple at Badami, 8th Century
b. Monkey family, Mamallapuram, 8th Century
6. a. Seated Buddha, Gandhara, 1st Century.
b. Dryad, Sanchi, 2nd century, B.C.
c. Lay Worshippers at a Buddha Shrine, 2nd Century
7. Buddha in Samadhi, 2nd Century
8. Standing Bodhisattva, 2nd Century.
9. Standing Buddha, Ceylon, 2nd Century.
10. Standing Buddha, 2nd Century.
11. Standing Images of Buddha, 2nd Century.
12. Brahma, Elephanta, 8th Century

13. Durga as Chandi slaying Mahista, 8th Century
14. Death of Hiranyakashipu. Elura, 8th Century
15. Chamber-music of an aristocratic society, 18th Century
16. Todi Ragini (a musical mode), 18th Century
17. Madhu-madhavi Ragini, 16th Century
18. Toda Ragini, 18th Century
19. A Hindu lady at her toilet, 18th Century
20. Chand Bibi, called Chand Sultan, 18th Century
21. Hindu Marriage, about 1600 A.D.
22. Radha in her kitchen, Krishna at the window, 8th Century
23. “Where each is both,” 8th Century
24. a. School of Philosophy, 18th Century
25. a. One of the gates of Jaipur.
b. Laying a wrap in Madura
26. The Bathing Ghat at Benares

I
Introduction
first encountered ‘The Dance of Shiva’ in the Indian Institute of Advanced
Study library in Shimla. I was working on my PhD thesis, and thanks to my
husband being a Fellow at the Institute, I had access to the wonderful library
collection there. One of my chapters dealt with Shiva in the form of Nataraja,
exemplified in the icons in stone and bronze of the Chola period. I remember
reading with awe the description that Coomaraswamy gave of the philosophical
dimensions of Shiva's dance, thereby interpreting the icon of Nataraja to be the
perfect amalgam of the mythical, philosophical and aesthetic aspects of Indian
culture. I was greatly moved by Coomaraswamy's interpretation, and in fact it
influenced my reading of the rich iconographic material that I was working with,
in the context of south India.
One of the major arguments that Coomaraswamy makes with regard to
Shiva’s dance relates to its cosmic significance, symbolizing the creation,
maintenance and destruction of the universe, and ultimately its rejuvenation. In
other words, the dance of Shiva is the signifier of cosmic activity envisaged in
five aspects (pancakritya): srishti or creation, sthiti or maintenance, samhara or
destruction, tirobhava or disappearance/concealment and anugraha or grace. In
fact, the pancakshara (five syllables) in Shiva’s name – na-ma-shi-va-ya, are
themselves seen as representing this five-fold creative activity of the God. What
Shiva creates is the manifest and unmanifest world; what he destroys are the
illusory bonds that fetter not only the world at large, but every individual soul in
the cosmos. The symbolism of fire, a visual connect between the earth and sky,
the perceived and the intuitive, and the tangible and the intangible, is analyzed
through the association of Shiva’s dance with the burning grounds. This is then
represented in the beautiful circle of fire – the tiruvasi – that encompasses the
icon of Shiva as Nataraja in the Indic imagination. The ananda or bliss of
Shiva’s dance, ultimately, is to meditate upon the breaking of maya (illusion), the
trampling of mala, anava and avidya (‘evil’), and the freeing of the soul from the
bonds of karma (causality/rebirth). I am certain that no one who reads this essay
on The Dance of Shiva can remain unmoved by it, which explains why from
Rabindranath Tagore to Fritjoff Capra to Romain Rolland, luminaries have
lavished praise on it.
Ananda Kentish Coomaraswamy was born on 22nd August, 1877 in
Colombo. His father was Sir Mutu Coomaraswamy, a distinguished figure in

Sinhala political life, who became a Tamil representative of the Legislative
Council in the system of separate electorates introduced during British colonial
rule. His mother was an Englishwoman, Elizabeth Clay Beebe. When his father
died two years after his birth, his mother returned to England, with infant
Ananda in tow. He received the best of education apparently, and was awarded
the Bachelors degree in Geology and Botany in 1900. He was appointed the
Director of the Minerological Suvey of Ceylon in 1903, and continued to hold
the post until 1907. He travelled around the country extensively, a job
requirement, and in the process got to learn about the traditional arts and crafts
of Sri Lanka. His first publication Medieval Sinhalese Art (1908) was the result
of these initial efforts, and remains one of the best catalogues of the region’s
craft traditions.
Perhaps his travels inspired him, or it could be that actually living in the
colony instead of the metropolis led him to understand the significance of
nationalism in the Indian sub-continent and in Sri Lanka. And of course, one
can’t forget that his father himself was a well known political figure. At any rate,
Coomaraswamy entered the public domain not merely as a government servant
but also as a social reformer with a political agenda. He founded the Ceylon
Social Reform Society in 1905, and published a journal The Ceylon National
Review from 1906 to 1911.1 The philosophy behind this organization and its
activities was to retrieve and rejuvenate the traditional society of Sri Lanka,
embodied in the village communities that were untouched by the phony
westernization of the educated urban population. In a rather Gandhian manner,
he declared that the village truly could bring about modern progress, and not
industrialization, because the community ensured that the economic security of
all its members was ensured.2 Coomaraswamy’s romantic idealization of the
illiterate village who carried with him an intrinsic knowledge about the
unbreakable bonds between nature, life and a higher being (he often used the
term interchangeably with God), despite the unkind criticism, did not stem from
any parochialism. On the contrary, he often talked of two essential requisites for
social reform. First, that the basis for the revitalization of society should be
cultural pluralism, and hence all Sri Lankans should be taught Sanskrit, Pali,
Sinhala and Tamil so that they could truly appreciate their culture. Related to
this, that the Sri Lankan heritage cannot be separated from the Indian one.
Second, what was ideally the requirement of the modern times was the blending
of the superior features of Eastern civilization with the best features of the west.3
From the 1930s, it is believed that Comaraswamy was greatly influenced by
the Traditionalist movement spearheaded by Rene Guenon in France, and

particularly its evocation of the Philosophia Perennis. The latter affirmed the
creation of all religions and philosophies from one primordial source, which
explained the essential unity and truth of all great traditions.4 Coomaraswamy’s
constant exhortation, when talking of Hindu and Buddhist art, of the underlying
symbolism, cultural ideas and values that coloured every aspect of art and
architectural design led him to express this idea of the perennial flow of the
philosophical core of particularly the Eastern civilizations. Hence, when he
pointed to the villager or someone rooted to the community as carrying with him
this sense of the past, he was essentially referring to this value system. He was
convinced that no study of Indian art, or indeed of any culture, would be
complete with a clinical analysis of measurement and structure or even with
written texts as the authority. For him, the ordinary artisan who was illiterate but
who had learned his craft from his father, who had learned from his father before
him, carried this sense of what constituted the essence of that religion and
symbolic universe. This is why, no matter which part of the sub-continent you
went to, you would feel, despite the regional variations, a sense of déjà-vu hit
you.
These then were the concerns that informed Ananda Coomaraswamy’s
writings, be they academic analyses of early Indian architecture or his more
polemical essays on nationalism. Today, it is the fashion to debunk
Coomaraswamy and his philosophy of art, and most scholars would try to
distance themselves from his interpretative frameworks. He has been roundly
condemned for his exoticization and romanticizing of Indian (what he meant
actually was ‘South Asian’) culture and tradition. Some have even accused him
of over reading the sources. His ideas are seen as bordering on obscurantism,
and he is condemned for valorizing patriarchal and other regressive social
norms. This is especially with regard to his more political and reformist essays.
Over the past decade, teaching a course on the history of early Indian art and
architecture in JNU, Coomaraswamy has re-entered my frames of reference in
major way. I find myself faced with a peculiar problem when I discuss the work
of stalwarts like Coomaraswamy and another legend in the field of art, Stella
Kramrisch. Students refuse to read them unmediated by the fashionistas of the
art history world, and very often there is an empty echoing of the sophisticated
critiques of the apparently ‘traditionalist’ view-point. Coomaraswamy was no
fool, and he vehemently denied the label of traditionalist that he accused some
critics as employing for the sake of convenience, to avoid acknowledging the
core questions he and others were raising: 1) that the appreciation of ancient art
in the 19th and early 20th centuries was mired in the cultural degeneration of

contemporary Europe, and 2) the ‘manufacture’ of the art object had removed it
from the realm of art to that of commerce.5 It may have been appropriate for him
to talk of the European colonial domination with regard to the first point. In
many ways, his critique of modern art and art sensibilities anticipated the more
sophisticated articulation by Walter Benjamin, titled ‘The Work of Art in the
Age of Mechanical Reproduction’ (1938). Although Coomaraswamy was deeply
suspicious of Marxists, Benjamin’s ideological positioning led him to reflect
deeply on contexts of production as well. He says: “Even the most perfect
reproduction of a work of art is lacking in one element: its presence in time and
space, its unique existence at the place where it happens to be. This unique
existence of the work of art determined the history to which it was subject
throughout the time of its existence.”6 Again, “that which withers in the age of
mechanical reproduction is the aura of the work of art. This is a symptomatic
process whose significance points beyond the realm of art. One might generalize
by saying: the technique of reproduction detaches the reproduced object from the
domain of tradition.”7 Obviously, Coomaraswamy was not alone in recognizing
the refashioning of taste, culture and particularly consumption by modernity in
post-industrialized societies of the West. But possibly what attracts the plentiful
criticism that is laid at his door is his open avowal of the philosophy of
Perennialism.
To my mind, no one who has traveled the length and breadth of India, and
indeed South Asia, would dispute Coomaraswamy’s claim about how the local
knowledge-keepers whom we tend to dismiss summarily, often reveal deep
insights into the history and culture of that site, locality and even region. More
importantly, I have read a number of scholarly works that describe, enumerate
and categorize monuments that leave me untouched – they could be talking
about anything under the sun, they are that banal. Even worse for me is the high
theoretical spiel that gets thrown at us ever so often in the name of art
appreciation, where when I do manage to plod through some of these I wonder if
we’re talking about the same object/monument/culture!
I am not advocating an uncritical acceptance of Coomaraswamy’s ideas and
writings. But I do think that by pushing his insights outside our frames of
analyses, we would be doing him and ourselves a great disservice.
The Dance of Shiva remains one of my favourite readings, and in this
collection of essays, we have an interesting mix of scholarly wisdom, social
activism and political rhetoric. This year, we have just passed the 135th birth
anniversary of Ananda Comarswamy, and I am happy that, in a fitting tribute to
the great thinker, Rupa is reissuing this volume. The academic and the general

reader will find this volume valuable as much for the insights it gives you into
the life and times of Ananda Comaraswamy as for its scholarship.
R. Mahalakshmi
Centre for Historical Studies
Jawaharlal Nehru University
 
1. Brow, James, Utopia’s New-Found Space: Images of the Village Community in the Early Writings of
Ananda Coomaraswamy’, Modern Asian Studies, 1999, p. 70.
2. Ibid, p. 72.
3. Ibid, p. 71.
4. Sedgwick, Mark, Against the Modern World: Traditionalism and the Secret Intellectual History of the
Twentieth Century, Oxford University Press, Oxford and New York, 2004, p. 23.
5. Coomaraswamy, Ananda K., ‘Note on Review by Richard Florsheim of Is Art A Superstition or Way of
Life’, The Art Bulletin, 20:4, 1938, p. 443.
6. Benjamin, Walter, The Work of Art in the Age of Mechanical Reproduction, 1938, p. 3.
7. Ibid, p.

E
~ What Has India Contributed to Human Welfare?* ~
ACH RACE contributes something essential to the world’s civilization in
the course of its own self-expression and self-realization. The character
built up in solving its own problems, in the experience of its own misfortunes, is
itself a gift which each offers to the world. The essential contribution of India,
then, is simply her Indianness; her great humiliation would be to substitute or to
have substituted for this own character (svabhava) a cosmopolitan veneer, for
then indeed she must come before the world empty-handed.
If now we ask what is most distinctive in this essential contribution, we must
first make it clear that there cannot be anything absolutely unique in the
experience of any race. Its peculiarities will be chiefly a matter of selection and
emphasis, certainly not a difference in specific humanity. If we regard the world
as a family of nations, then we shall best understand the position of India which
has passed through many experiences and solved many problems which younger
races have hardly yet recognized. The heart and essence of the Indian experience
is to be found in a constant intuition of the unity of all life, and the instinctive
and ineradicable conviction that the recognition of this unity is the highest good
and the uttermost freedom. All that India can offer to the world proceeds from
her philosophy. This philosophy is not, indeed, unknown to others—it is equally
the gospel of Jesus and of Blake, Lao Tze, and Rumi—but nowhere else has it
been made the essential basis of sociology and education.
Every race must solve its own problems, and those of its own day. I do not
suggest that the ancient Indian solution of the special Indian problems, though its
lessons may be many and valuable, can be directly applied to modern conditions.
What I do suggest is that the Hindus grasped more firmly than others the
fundamental meaning and purpose of life, and more deliberately than others
organized society with a view to the attainment of the fruit of life; and this
organization was designed, not for the advantage of a single class, but, to use a
modern formula, to take from each according to his capacity, and to give to each
according to his needs. How far the rishis succeeded in this aim may be a matter
of opinion. We must not judge of Indian society, especially Indian society in its
present moment of decay, as if it actually realized the Brahmanical social ideas;
yet even with all its imperfections Hindu society as it survives will appear to
many to be superior to any form of social organization attained on a large scale

anywhere else, and infinitely superior to the social order which we know as
“modern civilization.” But even if it were impossible to maintain this view—and
a majority of Europeans and of English-educated Indians certainly believe to the
contrary—what nevertheless remains as the most conspicuous special character
of the Indian culture, and its greatest significance for the modern world, is the
evidence of a constant effort to understand the meaning and the ultimate purpose
of life, and a purposive organization of society in harmony with that order, and
with a view to the attainment of the purpose.1 The Brahmanical idea is an Indian
“City of the gods”—as devanagari, the name of the Sanskrit script, suggests.
The building of that city anew is the constant task of civilization; and though the
details of our plans may change, and the contours of our building, we may learn
from India to build on the foundations of the religion of Eternity.
Where the Indian mind differs most from the average mind of modern
Europe is in its view of the value of philosophy. In Europe and America the
study of philosophy is regarded as an end in itself, and as such it seems of but
little importance to the ordinary man. In India, on the contrary, philosophy is not
regarded primarily as a mental gymnastic, but rather, and with deep religious
conviction, as our salvation (moksha) from the ignorance (avidya) which for ever
hides from our eyes the vision of reality. Philosophy is the key to the map of life,
by which are set forth the meaning of life and the means of attaining its goal. It
is no wonder, then, that the Indians have pursued the study of philosophy with
enthusiasm, for these are matters that concern all.
There is a fundamental difference between the Brahman and the modern
view of politics. The modern politician considers that idealism in politics is
unpractical; time enough, he thinks, to deal with social misfortunes when they
arise. The same outlook may be recognised in the fact that modern medicine lays
greater stress on cure than on prevention, i.e., endeavours to protect against
unnatural conditions rather than to change the social environment. The Western
sociologist is apt to say: “The teachings of religion and philosophy may or may
not be true, but in any case they have no significance for the practical reformer.”
The Brahmans, on the contrary, considered all activity not directed in accordance
with a consistent theory of the meaning and purpose of life as supremely
unpractical.
Only one condition permits us to excuse the indifference of the European
individual to philosophy; it is that the struggle to exist leaves him no time for
reflection. Philosophy can only be known to those who are alike disinterested
and free from care; and Europeans are not thus free, whatever their political
status. Where modern Industrialism prevails, the Brahman, Kshattriya, and

Shudra alike are exploited by the Vaishya,2 and where in this way commerce
settles on every tree there must be felt continual anxiety about a bare
subsistence; the victim of Industry must confine his thoughts to the subject of
tomorrow’s food for himself and his family; the mere Will to Life takes
precedence of the Will to Power. If at the same time it is decided that every
man’s voice is to count equally in the councils of the nation, it follows naturally
that the voice of those who think must be drowned by that of those who do not
think and have no leisure. This position leaves all classes alike at the mercy of
unscrupulous individual exploitation, for all political effort lacking a
philosophical basis becomes merely opportunist. The problem of modern Europe
is to discover her own aristocracy and to learn to obey its will.
It is just this problem which India long since solved for herself in her own
way. Indian philosophy is essentially the creation of the two upper classes of
society, the Brahmans and the Kshattriyas. To the latter are due most of its
forward movements; to the former its elaboration, systematization, mythical
representation, and application. The Brahmans possessed not merely the genius
for organization, but also the power to enforce their will; for, whatever may be
the failings of individuals, the Brahmans as a class are men whom other Hindus
have always agreed to reverence, and still regard with the highest respect and
affection. The secret of their power is manifold; but it is above all in the nature
of their appointed dharma, of study, teaching, and renunciation.
Of Buddhism I shall not speak at great length, but rather in parenthesis: for
the Buddhists never directly attempted to organize human society, thinking that,
rather than concern himself with polity, the wise man should leave the dark state
of life in the world to follow the bright state of the mendicant.3 Buddhist
doctrine is a medicine solely directed to save the individual from burning, not in
a future hell, but in the present fire of his own thirst. It assumes that to escape
from the eternal recurrence is not merely the summum bonum, but the whole
purpose of life; he is the wisest who devotes himself immediately to this end; he
the most loving who devotes himself to the enlightenment of others.
Buddhism has nevertheless deep and lasting effects on Indian state-craft. For
just as the Brahman philosopher advised and guided his royal patrons, so did the
Buddhist ascetics. The sentiment of friendliness (metteya), through its effect
upon individual character, reacted upon social theory.
It is difficult to separate what is Buddhist from what is Indian generally; but
we may fairly take the statesmanship of the great Buddhist Emperor Ashoka as
an example of the effect of Buddhist teaching upon character and policy. His
famous edicts very well illustrate the little accepted truth that “in the Orient,

from ancient times, national government has been based on benevolence, and
directed to securing the welfare and happiness of the people.”4 One of the most
significant of the edicts deals with “True Conquest.” Previous to his acceptance
of the Buddhist dharma Ashoka had conquered the neighbouring kingdom of the
Kalingas, and added their territory to his own; but now, says the edict, His
Majesty feels “remorse for having conquered the Kalingas, because the conquest
of a country previously unconquered involves the slaughter, death, and carrying
away captive of the people. That is a matter of profound sorrow and regret to His
Sacred Majesty . . . . His Sacred Majesty desires that all animate beings should
have security, self-control, peace of mind, and joyousness . . . My sons and
grandsons, who may be, should not regard it as their duty to conquer a new
conquest. If perchance they become engaged in a conquest by arms, they should
take pleasure in patience and gentleness, and regard as (the only true) conquest
won by piety. That avails both for this world and the next.”
In another edict “His Sacred and Gracious Majesty the King does reverence
to men of all sects, whether ascetics or householders.” Elsewhere he announces
the establishment of hospitals, and the appointment of officials “to consider the
case where a man has a large family, has been smitten by calamity, or is
advanced in years”; he orders that animals should not be killed for his table; he
commands that shade and fruit trees should be planted by the high roads; and he
exhorts all men to “strive hard.” He quotes the Buddhist saying, “All men are my
children.” The annals of India, and especially of Ceylon, can show us other
Buddhist kings of the same temper. But it will be seen that such effects of
Buddhist teachings have their further consequences mainly through benevolent
despotism, and the moral order established by one wise king may be destroyed
by his successors. Buddhism, so far as I know, never attempted to formulate a
constitution or to determine the social order. Just this, however, the Brahmans
attempted in many ways, and to a great extent achieved, and it is mainly their
application of religious philosophy to the problems of sociology which forms the
subject of the present discussion.
The Kshattriya-Brahman solution of the ultimate problems of life is given in
the early Upanishads.5 It is a form of absolute (according to Shankaracharya) or
modified (according to Ramanuja) Monism. Filled with enthusiasm for this
doctrine of the Unity or Interdependence of all life, the Brahman-Utopists set
themselves to found a social order upon the basis provided. In the great epic6
they represented the desired social order as having actually existed in a golden
past, and they put into the mouths of the epic heroes not only their actual
philosophy, but the theory of its practical application—this, above all, in the long

discourses of the dying Bhishma. The heroes themselves they made ideal types
of character for the guidance of all subsequent generations; for the education of
India has been accomplished deliberately through hero-worship. In the
‘Dharmashastra’ of Manu7 and the ‘Arthashastra’8 of Chanakya—perhaps the
most remarkable sociological documents the world possesses—they set forth the
picture of the ideal society, defined from the standpoint of law. By these and
other means they accomplished what has not yet been effected in any other
country in making religious philosophy the essential and intelligible basis of
popular culture and national polity.
What, then, is the Brahman view of life? To answer this at length, to
expound the Science of the Self (Adhyatma-vidya), which is the religion and
philosophy of India, would require considerable space. We have already
indicated that this science recognizes the unity of all life—one source, one
essence, and one goal—and regards the realisation of this unity as the highest
good, bliss, salvation, freedom, the final purpose of life. This is for Hindu
thinkers eternal life; not an eternity in time, but the recognition here and now of
All Things in the Self and the Self in All. “More than all else,” says Kabir, who
may be said to speak for India, “do I cherish at heart that love which makes me
to live a limitless life in this world.” This inseparable unity of the material and
spiritual world is made the foundation of the Indian culture, and determines the
whole character of her social ideals.
How, then, could the Brahmans tolerate the practical diversity of life, how
provide for the fact that a majority of individuals are guided by selfish aims, how
could they deal with the problem of evil? They had found the Religion of
Eternity (Nirguna Vidya); what of the Religion of Time (Saguna Vidya)?
This is the critical point of religious sociology, when it remains to be seen
whether the older idealist (it is old souls that are idealistic, the young are short-
sighted) can remember his youth, and can make provision for the interest and
activities of spiritual immaturity. To fail here is to divide the church from the
everyday life, and to create the misleading distinction of sacred and profane; to
succeed is to illuminate daily life with the light of heaven.
The life or lives of man may be regarded as constituting a curve—an arc of
time-experience subtended by the duration of the individual Will to Life. The
outward movement on this curve—Evolution, the Path of Pursuit—the Pravritti
Marga—is characterized by self-assertion. The inward movement—Involution,
the Path of Return—the Nivritti Marga—is characterized by increasing Self-
realisation.9 The religion of men on the outward path is the Religion of Time; the
religion of those who return is the Religion of Eternity. If we consider life as one

whole, certainly Self-realisation must be regarded as its essential purpose from
the beginning; all our forgetting is but that we may remember the more vividly.
But though it is true that in most men the two phases of experience
interpenetrate, we shall best understand the soul of man—drawn as it is in the
two opposite, or seeming opposite, directions of Affirmation and Denial, Will
and Will-surrender—by separate consideration of the outward and the inward
tendencies. Brahmans avoid the theological use of the terms “good” and “evil,”
and prefer to speak of “knowledge” and “ignorance” (vidya and avidya), and of
the three qualities of sattva, rajas, and tamas. As knowledge increases, so much
the more will a man of his own motion, and not from any sense of duty, tend to
return, and his character and actions will be more purely sattvic. But we need not
on that account condemn the self-assertion of the ignorant as sin; for could Self-
realization be where self-assertion had never been? It is not sin, but youth, and to
forbid the satisfaction of the thirst of youth is not a cure; rather, as we realize
more clearly every day desires suppressed breed pestilence. The Brahmans
therefore, notwithstanding the austere rule appointed for themselves, held that an
ideal human society must provide for the enjoyment of all pleasures by those
who wish for them; they would say, perhaps, that those who have risen above the
mere gratification of the senses, and beyond a life of mere pleasure, however
refined, are just those who have already tasted pleasure to the full.
For reasons of this kind it was held that the acquisition of wealth (artha) and
the enjoyment of sense-pleasure (kama), subject to such law (dharma10) as may
protect the weak against the strong, are the legitimate preoccupations of those on
the outward path. This is the stage attained by modern Western society, of which
the norm is competition regulated by ethical restraint. Beyond this stage no
society can progress unless it is subjected to the creative will of those who have
passed beyond the stage of most extreme egoism, whether we call them heroes,
guardians, Brahmans, Samurai, or simply men of genius.
Puritanism consists in a desire to impose the natural asceticism of age upon
the young, and this position is largely founded on the untenable theories of an
absolute ethic and an only true theology. The opposite extreme is illustrated in
industrial society, which accepts the principles of competition and self-assertion
as a matter of course, while it denies the value of philosophy and discipline.
Brahman sociology, just because of its philosophical basis, avoided both
errors in adopting the theory of svadharma, the “own-morality” appropriate to
the individual according to his social and spiritual status, and the doctrine of the
many forms of Ishvara, which is so clumsily interpreted by the missionaries as
polytheistic. However much the Brahmans held Self-realization to be the end of
life, the summum bonum, they saw very clearly that it would be illogical to

impose this aim immediately upon those members of the community who are not
yet weary of self-assertion. It is most conspicuously in thjs understanding
tolerance that Brahman sociology surpasses other systems.
At this point we must digress to speak briefly of the doctrine of
reincarnation, which is involved in the theory of eternal recurrence. This
doctrine is assumed and built upon by Brahman sociologists, and on this account
we must clearly understand its practical applications. We must not assume that
reincarnation is a superstition which, if it could be definitely refuted (and that is
a considerable “if”), would have as a theory no practical value. It is a façon de
parler, valid only for so long as we attribute a real being to, the Ego that “is not
my Self”; in truth, as Sankara says, “the Lord is the only transmigrant,”—and
That art thou, not “what thou callest ‘I’ or ‘myself.’” Even atoms and electrons
are but symbols, and do not represent tangible objects like marbles, which we
could see if we had large enough microscopes; the practical value of a theory
does not depend on its representative character, but on its efficacy in resuming
past observation and forecasting future events. The doctrine of reincarnation
corresponds to a fact which everyone must have remarked; the varying age of
the souls of men, irrespective of the age of the body counted in years. “A man is
not an elder because his head is grey” (Dhammapada, 260). Sometimes we see
an old head on young shoulders. Some men remain irresponsible, self-assertive,
uncontrolled, unapt to their last day; others from their youth are serious, self-
controlled, talented, and friendly. We must understand the doctrine of
reincarnation at any rate as an artistic or mythical representation of these facts.
To these facts the Brahmans rightly attached great importance, for it is this
variation of temperament or inheritance which constitutes the natural inequality
of men, an inequality that is too often ignored in the theories of Western
democracy.
We can now examine the Brahmanical theory a little more closely. An
essential factor is to be recognized in the dogma of the rhythmic character of the
world-process. This rhythm is determined by the great antithesis of Subject and
Object, Self and not-Self, Will and Matter, Unity and Diversity, Love and Hate,
and all other “Pairs.” The interplay of these opposites constitutes the whole of
sensational and registrateable existence, the Eternal Becoming (samsara), which
is characterized by birth and death, evolution and involution, descent and ascent,
srishti and samhara. Every individual life—mineral, vegetable, animal, human,
or personal god—has a beginning and an end, and this creation and destruction,
appearance and disappearance, are of the essence of the world-process and
equally originate in the past, the present, and the future. According to this view,
then, every individual ego (jivatman), or separate expression of the general Will

to Life (ichchha, trishna), must be regarded as having reached a certain stage of
its own cycle (gati). The same is true of the collective life of a nation, a planet,
or a cosmic system. It is further considered that the turning point of this curve is
reached in man, and hence the immeasurable value which Hindus (and
Buddhists) attach to birth in human form. Before the turning point is reached—
to use the language of Christian theology—the natural man prevails; after it is
passed, regenerate man. The turning point is not to be regarded as sudden, for
the two conditions interpenetrate, and the change of psychological centre of
gravity may occupy a succession of lives; or if the turning seems to be a sudden
event, it is only in the sense that the fall of a ripe fruit appears sudden.
According to their position on the great curve, that is to say, according to
their spiritual age, we can recognize three prominent types of men. There is first
the mob, of those who are preoccupied with the thought of I and Mine, whose
objective is self-assertion, but are restrained on the one hand by fear of
retaliation and of legal or after-death punishment, and on the other by the
beginnings of love of family and love of country. These, in the main, are the
“Devourers” of Blake, the “Slaves” of Nietzsche. Next there is a smaller, but still
larger number of thoughtful and good men whose behaviour is largely
determined by a sense of duty, but whose inner life is still the field of conflict
between the old Adam and the new man. Men of this type are actuated on the
one hand by the love of power and fame, and ambition more or less noble, and
on the other by the disinterested love of mankind. But this type is rarely pan-
human, and its outlook is often simultaneously unselfish and narrow. In times of
great stress, the men of this type reveal their true nature, showing to what extent
they have advanced more or less than has appeared. But all these, who have but
begun to taste of freedom, must still be guided by rules. Finally, there is the
much smaller number of great men—heroes, saviours, saints, and avatars—who
have definitely passed the period of greatest stress and have attained peace, or at
least have attained to occasional and unmistakable vision of life as a whole.
These are the “Prolific” of Blake, the “Masters” of Nietzsche, the true Brahmans
in their own right, and partake of the nature of the Superman and the
Bodhisattva. Their activity is determined by their love and wisdom, and not by
rules. In the world, but not of it, they are the flower of humanity, our leaders and
teachers.
These classes constitute the natural hierarchy of human society. The
Brahman sociologists were firmly convinced that in an ideal society, i.e., a
society designed deliberately by man for the fulfilment of his own purpose
(purushartha),11 not only must opportunity be allowed to every one for such
experience as his spiritual status requires, but also that the best and wisest must

rule. It seemed to them impossible that an ideal society should have any other
than an aristocratic basis, the aristocracy being at once intellectual and spiritual.
Being firm believers in heredity, both of blood and culture, they conceived that it
might be possible to constitute an ideal society upon the already existing basis of
occupational caste. “If,” thought they, “we can determine natural classes, then let
us assign to each its appropriate duties (svadharma, own norm) and appropriate
honour; this will at once facilitate a convenient division of necessary labour,
ensure the handing down of hereditary skill in pupillary succession, avoid all
possibility of social ambition, and will allow to every individual the experience
and activity which he needs and owes.” They assumed that by a natural law, the
individual ego is always, or nearly always, born into its own befitting
environment. If they were wrong on this point, then it remains for others to
discover some better way of achieving the same ends. I do not say that this is
impossible; but it can hardly be denied that the Brahmanical caste system is the
nearest approach that has yet been made towards a society where there shall be
no attempt to realise a competitive quality, but where all interests are regarded as
identical. To those who admit the variety of age in human souls, this must appear
to be the only true communism.
To describe the caste system as an idea or in actual practice would require a
whole volume. But we may notice a few of its characteristics. The nature of the
difference between a Brahman and a Shudra is indicated in the view that a
Shudra can do no wrong,12 a view that must make an immense demand upon the
patience of the higher castes, and is the absolute converse of the Western
doctrine that the King can do no wrong. These facts are well illustrated in the
doctrine of legal punishment, that that of the Vaishya should be twice as heavy
as that of the Shudra, that that of the Kshattriya twice as heavy again, that of the
Brahman twice or even four times as heavy again in respect of the same offence;
for responsibility rises with intelligence and status. The Shudra is also free of
innumerable forms of self-denial imposed upon the Brahman; he may, for
example, indulge in coarse food, the widow may remarry. It may be observed
that it was strongly held that the Shudra should not by any means outnumber the
other castes; if the Shudras are too many, as befell in ancient Greece, where the
slaves outnumbered the freemen, the voice of the least wise may prevail by mere
weight of numbers.
Modern craftsmen interested in the regulation of machinery will be struck by
the fact that the establishment and working of large machines and factories by
individuals was reckoned a grievous sin; large organizations are only to be
carried on in the public interest.13

Given the natural classes, one of the good elements of what is now regarded
as democracy was provided by making the castes self-governing; thus it was
secured that a man should be tried by his peers (whereas, under Industrial
Democracy, an artist may be tried by a jury of tradesmen, or a poacher by a
bench of squires). Within the caste there existed equality of opportunity for all,
and the caste as a body had collective privileges and responsibilities. Society
thus organized has much the appearance of what would now be called Guild
Socialism.
In a just and healthy society, function should depend upon capacity; and in
the normal individual, capacity and inclination are inseparable (this is the
‘instinct of workmanship’). We are able accordingly to recognize, in the theory
of the Syndicalists, as well as in the caste organization of India, a very nearly
ideal combination of duty and pleasure, compulsion and freedom; and the words
vocation or dharma imply this very identity. Individualism and socialism are
united in the concept of function.
The Brahmanical theory has also a far-reaching bearing on the problems of
education. “Reading,” says the Garuda Purana, “to a man devoid of wisdom, is
like a mirror to the blind.” The Brahmans attached no value to uncoordinated
knowledge or to unearned opinions, but rather regarded these as dangerous tools
in the hands of unskilled craftsmen. The greatest stress is laid on the
development of character. Proficiency in hereditary aptitudes is assured by
pupillary succession within the caste. But it is in respect of what we generally
understand by higher education that the Brahman method differs most from
modern ideals; for it is not even contemplated as desirable that all knowledge
should be made accessible to all. The key to education is to be found in
personality. There should be no teacher for whom teaching is less than a
vocation (none may “sell the Vedas”), and no teacher should impart his
knowledge to a pupil until he finds the pupil ready to receive it, and the proof of
this is to be found in the asking of the right questions. “As the man who digs
with a spade obtains water, even so an obedient pupil obtains the knowledge
which is in his teacher.”14
The relative position of man and woman is also very noteworthy. Perhaps
the woman is in general a younger soul, as Paracelsus puts it, “nearer to the
world than man.” But there is no war of words as to which is the superior, which
inferior; for the question of competitive equality is not considered. The Hindu
marriage contemplates identity, and not equality.15 The primary motif of
marriage is not merely individual satisfaction, but the achievement of
Purushartha, the purposes of life, and the wife is spoken of as

sahadharmacharini, “she who cooperates in the fulfillment of social and
religious duties.” In the same way for the community at large, the system of
caste is designed rather to unite than to divide. Men of different castes have more
in common than men of different classes. It is in an Industrial Democracy, and
where a system of secular education prevails, that groups of men are effectually
separated; a Western professor and a navvy do not understand each other half so
well as a Brahman and a Shudra. It has been justly remarked that “the lowest
pariah hanging to the skirts of Hindu society is in a sense as much the disciple of
the Brahman ideal as any priest himself.”
It remains to apply what has been said to immediate problems. I have
suggested that India has nothing of more value to offer to the world than her
religious philosophy, and her faith in the application of philosophy to social
problems. A few words may be added on the present crisis16 and the relationship
of East and West. Let us understand first that what we see in India is a
cooperative society is a state of decline. Western society has never been so
highly organized, but in so far as it was organized, its disintegration has
proceeded much further than is yet the case in India. And we may expect that
Europe, having sunk into industrial competition first, will be the first to emerge.
The seeds of a future cooperation have long been sown, and we can clearly
recognize a conscious, and perhaps also an unconscious, effort towards
reconstruction.
In the meantime the decay of Asia proceeds, partly of internal necessity,
because at the present moment the social change from cooperation to
competition is spoken of as progress, and because it seems to promise the
ultimate recovery of political power, and partly as the result of destructive
exploitation by the Industrialists. Even those European thinkers who may be
called the prophets of the new age are content to think of a development taking
place in Europe alone. But let it be clearly realized that the modern world is not
the ancient world of slow communications; what is done in India or Japan today
has immediate spiritual and economic results in Europe and America. To say that
East is East and West is West is simply to hide one’s head in the sand.17 It will be
quite impossible to establish any higher social order in the West so long as the
East remains infatuated with the, to her, entirely novel and fascinating theory of
laissez-faire.
The rapid degradation of Asia is thus an evil portent for the future of
humanity and for the future of that Western social idealism of which the
beginnings are already recognizable. If, either in ignorance or in contempt of
Asia, constructive European thought omits to seek the cooperation of Eastern

philosophers, there will come a time when Europe will not be able to fight
Industrialism, because this enemy will be entrenched in Asia. It is not sufficient
for the English colonies and America to protect themselves by immigration laws
against cheap Asiatic labour; that is a merely temporary device, and likely to do
more harm than good, even apart from its injustice. Nor will it be possible for
the European nationalist ideal that every nation should choose its own form of
government, and lead its own life,18 to be realized, so long as the European
nations have, or desire to have, possessions in Asia. What has to be secured is
the conscious cooperation of East and West for common ends, not the subjection
of either to the other, nor their lasting estrangement. For if Asia be not with
Europe, she will be against her, and there may arise a terrible conflict, economic,
or even armed, between an idealistic Europe and a materialized Asia.
To put the matter in another way, we do not fully realize the debt that Europe
already owes to Asiatic thought, for the discovery of Asia has hardly begun.
And, on the other hand, Europe has inflicted terrible injuries upon Asia in
modern times.19 I do not mean to say that the virus of “civilization” would not
have spread through Asia quite apart from any direct European attempts to effect
such a result—quite on the contrary; but it can not be denied that those who have
been the unconscious instruments of the degradation of Asiatic society from the
basis of dharma to the basis of contract have incurred a debt.
The “clear air” of Asia is not merely a dream of the past. There is idealism,
and there are idealists in modern India, even amongst those who have been
corrupted by half a century of squalid education. We are not all deceived by the
illusion of progress, but, like some of our European colleagues, desire “the
coming of better conditions of life, when the whole world will again learn that
the object of human life is not to waste it in a feverish anxiety and race after
physical objects and comforts, but to use it in developing the mental, moral, and
spiritual powers, latent in man.”20 The debt, then, of Europe, can best be paid—
and with infinite advantage to herself—by seeking the cooperation of modern
Asia in every adventure of the spirit which Europe would essay. It is true that
this involves the hard surrender of the old idea that it is the mission of the West
to civilize the East; but that somewhat Teutonic and Imperial view of Kultur is
already discredited. What is needed for the common civilization of the world is
the recognition of common problems, and to cooperate in their solution. If it be
asked what inner riches India brings to aid in the realization of a civilization of
the world, then, from the Indian standpoint, the answer must be found in her
religions and her philosophy, and her constant application of abstract theory to
practical life.

 
* First published in the ‘Athenæum,’ London, 1915.

T
Hindu View of Art
I.HISTORY OF AESTHETIC
HE EARLIEST Indian art of which we have any information or
concerning which we are able to draw reasonably certain inferences, we
may designate as Vedic, since we can hardly undertake here the discussion of the
perhaps contemporary culture of the early Dravidians. Vedic art was essentially
practical, about painting and sculpture we have no knowledge, but the carpenter,
metal-worker and potter and weaver efficiently provided for man’s material
requirements. If their work was decorated, we may be sure that its ‘ornament’
had often, and perhaps always, a magical and protected significance. The ends of
poetry were also practical. The Vedic hymns were designed to persuade the gods
to deal generously with men:
“As birds extend their sheltering wings,
Spread your protection over us.”
—RIGVEDA
Much of this poetry is descriptive; it is nature-poetry in the sense that it deals
with natural phenomena. Its most poetical quality is its sense of wonder and
admiration, but it is lyrical in any other sense. It has no tragic or reflective
elements, except in some of the later hymns, and there is no question of
‘aesthetic contemplation,’ for the conception of the sympathetic constantly
prevails. The poet sometimes comments on his own work, which he compares to
a car well-built by a deft craftsman, or to fair and well-woven garments, or to a
bride adorned for her lover; and this art it was that made the hymns acceptable to
the gods to whom they were addressed. Vedic Aesthetic consisted essentially in
the appreciation of skill.
The keynote of the Upanishads (500 B.C.) and Pali Buddhism is the search
for truth. The ancient hymns had become a long-established institution, taken for
granted; ritual was followed solely for the sake of advantage in this world or the
next. Meanwhile the deeper foundations of Indian culture were in the process of
determination in the mental struggle of the ‘dwellers in the forest.’ The language
of the Upanishads combines austerity with passion, but this passion is the

exaltation of mental effort, remote from the common life of men in the world.
Only here and there we find glimpses of the later fusion of lyric and religious
experience, when, for example, in the Brihadaranyaka Upanishad, the bliss of
atman intuition, or the intuition of the self, is compared with the happiness of
earthly lovers in self-forgetting preoccupied with deeper speculations to exhibit a
conscious art, or to discuss the art of their times; in this age there is no explicit
Aesthetic.
When, however, we consider the Indian way of regarding the Vedas as a
whole, we shall find implicit in the word ‘shruti’ a very important doctrine; that
the Veda is eternal, the sacred books are its temporal expression, they have been
‘heard.’ This is not a theory of ‘revelation’ in the ordinary sense, since the
audition depends on the qualification of the hearer, not on the will and active
manifestation of a god. But it is on all fours with later Hindu view which treats
the practice of art as a form of yoga, and identifies aesthetic emotion with that
felt when the self perceives the Self.
In Pali Buddhism generally, an enthusiasm for the truth, unsurpassed even in
the Upanishads, is combined with monastic institutionalism and a rather violent
polemic against the joys of the world. Beauty and personal love are not merely
evanescent, but are snares to be avoided at all costs; and it is clearly indicated
that the early Buddhists Aesthetic is strictly hedonistic. The indications of this
point of view are summed up in the following pages of the Visuddhi Marga:
“Living beings on account of their love and devotion to the sensations excited by
forms and the other objects of sense, give high honour to painters, musicians,
perfumers, cooks, elixier-prescribing physicians, and other like persons who
furnish us with objects of sense.”
In the Upanishads on the one hand, and in the teachings of Buddha on the
other, the deepest problems of life were penetrated; the mists of the Vedic dawn
had melted in the fire of austerity (tapas), and life lay open to man’s inception as
a thing of which the secret mechanism was no more mysterious. We can only
scarcely exaggerate the sense of triumph with which the doctrines of the Atman
or Self and the gospel of Buddha permeated Indian society. The immediate result
of the acceptance of these views appeared in an organiszed and deliberate
endeavour to create a form of society adapted for the fulfillment of the purposes
of life as seen in the light of new philosophies. To the ideal of the saint in
retirement was very soon added that of the man who remains in the world and
yet acquires or possesses the highest wisdom—“It was with works that Janaka
and others came unto adeptship” (Gita, iii. 20). There was now also evolved the
doctrine of union (karma-yoga) set forth in the Bhagavad Gita, as leading even
the citizen on the path of salvation. The emergence of a definitely Brahmanical

rather than a Buddhist scheme of life is to be attributed to the fact that the
practical energies of Buddhists were largely absorbed within the limits of its
monasticism; the Buddhists in the main regard Nirvana not merely as the
ultimate, but as the sole object of life. But the Brahmans never forgot that this
life is the field alike of Pursuit and Return. Their scheme of life is set forth at
great length in the Sutra literature, the Dharma Shastras and the Epics (in
general, 4th—1st centuries B.C.).
This literature yields sufficient material for an elucidation of the orthodox
view of art. But notwithstanding the breadth of the fourfold plan, we find in this
literature the same hedonistic Aesthetic and puritanical applications as
characteristic of Pali Buddhism. Thus, Manu forbids the householder to dance or
sing or play on musical instruments, and rekons architects, actors and singers
amongst the unworthy men who should not be invited to the ceremony of
offerings to the dead. Even Chanakya, though he tolerates musicians and actors
classes them with courtsans. The hedonistic theory still prevailed. In later times
the ‘defence’ of any art, such as poetry or drama, was characteristically based on
the fact that it could contribute to the achievement of all or any of the Four Aims
of Life.
Meanwhile the stimulus of discovered truth led not only to this austere
formulation of a scheme of life (typically in Manu), but also to the development
of yoga as a practice for the attainment of the desired end; and in this
development an almost equal part was taken by Brahmans and Buddhists
(typically in Patanjali and Nagarjuna).
We shall digress here, and partially anticipate to discuss briefly the important
part once played in Indian thought by the concept of Art as Yoga, a subject
sufficient in itself for a whole volume. It will be remembered that the purpose of
Yoga is mental concentration, carried so far as the overlooking of all distinction
between the subject and the object of contemplation; a means of achieving
harmony or unity of consciousness.
It was soon recognized that the concentration of the artist was of this very
nature; and we find such texts as Shukracharya’s:
“Lets the imager establish images in temples by meditation on the deities
who are the objects of his devotion. For the successful achievement of this yoga
the lineaments of the image are described in books to be dwelt upon in detail. In
no other way, not even by direct and immediate vision of an actual object, is it
possible to be so absorbed in contemplation, as thus in the making of images.”
The manner in which the lesser crafts constitute a practice (acharya)
analogous to that of (samprajanta) yoga is indicated incidentally by
Shankaracharya in the commentary on the Brahma Sutra, 3, 2, 10. The subject of

discussion is the distinction of swoon from waking; in swoon the senses no
longer perceive their objects. Shankaracharya remarks, “True, the arrowmaker
perceives nothing beyond his work when he is buried in it; but he has
nevertheless consciousness and control over his body, both of which are absent
in the fainting person.” The arrowmaker seems to have afforded, indeed, a
proverbial instance of single-minded attention, as we read in the Bhagavata
Purana.
“I have learned concentration from the maker of arrows.”
A connection between dream and art is recognized in a passage of the Agni
Purana,1 where the imager is instructed, on the night before beginning his work,
and after ceremonial purification, to pray “O thou Lord of all gods, teach me in
dreams how to carry out all the work I have in my mind.” Here again we see an
anticipation of modern views, which associate myth and dream and art as
essentially similar and representing the dramatisation of man’s innermost hopes
and fears.
The practice of visualisation referred to by Shukracharya, is identical in
worship and in art. The worshipper recites the dhyana mantram describing the
deity and forms a corresponding mental picture, and it is then to this imagined
form that his prayers are addressed and offerings are made. The artist follows
identical prescriptions, but proceeds to represent the mental picture in a visible
and the objective form, by drawing or modeling. Thus, to take an example from
Buddhist sources:2
The artist (sadhaka, mantrin, or yogin, as he is variously—and significantly
—called), after ceremonial purification, is to proceed to a solitary place. There
he is to perform the “Sevenfold Office,” beginning with the invocation of the
hosts of Buddhas and Bodhisattvas, and the offering to them of real and
imaginary flowers. Then he must realize in thought the four infinite moods of
friendliness, compassion, sympathy, and impartiality. Then he must meditate
upon the emptiness (shunyata) or non-existence of all things, for “by the fire of
the idea of the abyss, it is said, there are destroyed beyond recovery the five
factors” of ego-consciouness.3 Then only should he invoke the desired divinity
by the utterance of the appropriate seedword (bija) and should identify himself
completely with the divinity to be represented. Then finally on pronouncing the
dhyana mantram, in which the attributes are defined, the divinity appears
visibily, “like a reflection,” or “as in a dream” and this brilliant image is the
artist’s model.
This ritual is perhaps unduly elaborated, but in essentials it shows a clear
understanding of the psychology of the imagination. These essentials are the

setting aside the transformations of the thinking principles;4 self-identification
with the object of the work;5 and vividness of the final image.6
There are abundant literary parallels for this conception of art as yoga. Thus
Valmiki, although he was already familiar with the story of Rama, before
composing his own Ramayana sought to realize it more profoundly, and sipping
water according to rule (i.e. ceremonial purification), he set himself to yoga-
contemplation of his theme. By virtue of his yoga-power he clearly saw before
him Rama, Lakshmana and Sita, and Dashratha, together with his wives, in his
kingdom laughing, talking, acting and moving as if in real life . . . by yoga-
power that righteous one beheld all that had come to pass, and all that was to
come to pass in the future, like nelli fruit7 on the palm of his hand. And having
truly seen all by virtue of his concentration, the generous sage began forth of the
history of Rama.”8
Notice here particularly that the work of art is completed the work of
transcription or representation is begun.9 “The mind of the sage,” says Chuang
Tzu, “being in repose, becomes the mirror of the universe, the speculum of all
creation.” Croce is entirely correct when he speaks of “the artist, who never
makes a stroke with his brush without havinh previously seen it with his
imagination” and remarks that the externalization of a work of art “implies a
vigilant will, which persists in not allowing certain visions, intuitions, or
representations to be lost.”10
It should be understood that yoga (‘union’) is not merely a mental exercise
or a religious discipline, but the most practical preparation for any undertaking
whatever. Hanuman, for example, before searching the Ashoka grove for Sita,
“prayed to the gods and ranged the forest in imagination till he found her”; then
only did he spring from the walls of Lanka, like an arrow from a bow, and enter
the grove in the flesh. Throughout the east, whatever Hindu or Buddhist thought
have deeply penetrated, it is family believed that all knowledge is directly
accessible to the concentrated and ‘one-pointed’ mind, without the direct
intervention of the senses. Probably all inventors, artists and mathematicians are
more or less aware of this as a matter of personal experience. In the language of
psycho-analysis, this concentration preparatory to undertaking a specific task is
“the willed introversion of a creative mind, which, retreating before its own
problem and inwardly collecting its forces, dips atleast for a moment into the
source of life in order there to wrest a little more strength from the mother for
the completion of its work,” and the result of this reunion is “a fountain of youth
and new fertility.”11
We spoken so far of yoga, but for the artist this was rather a means than an

end. Just as in Mediaeval Europe, so too, and perhaps even more conspicuously
in India, the impulse to iconolatry derived from the spirit of adoration—the
loving and passionate devotion to a personal divinity, which we know as bhakti.
Patanjali, in the Yoga Sutra, mentions the Lord only as one amongst other
suitable objects of contemplation, and without the use of any image being
implied; but the purpose of the lover is precisely to establish a personal relation
with the Beloved, and the plastic symbol is created for this end. A purely abstract
philosophy or a psychology like that of Early Buddhism does not demand
aesthetic expression; it was the spirit of worship which built upon the foundation
of Buddhist and Vedantic thought the mansions of Indian religion, which shelter
all those whom purely intellectual formulae could not satisfy—the children of
this world who will not hurry along the path of Release, and the mystics who
find a foretaste of freedom in the love of every cloud in the sky and flower at
their feet.
This was indeed a return to superstition, or at any rate to duality; but what in
this world is not a dream and a superstition?—certainly not the atoms of science.
And for all those who are yet idealists there are, as there must be, idols provided.
The superstitions of Hinduism, like those of Christianity, accomplished more for
the hearts of men than those of modern materialism. It may well be doubted if art
and idolatry and art, are not inseperable.12
Let us observe here that the purpose of the imager was neither self-
expression nor the realization of beauty. He did not choose his own problems,
but like the Gothic sculptor, obeyed a hieratic cannon.13 He did not regard his
own or his fellows’ work from the standpoint of connoisseurship or æstheticism
—not, that is to say, from the standpoint of the philosopher, or aesthete, but from
that of a pious artisan. To him the theme was all in all, and if there is a beauty in
his work, this did not arise from aesthetic intention,14 but from a state of mind
which found unconscious expression. In every epoch of great and creative art we
observe an identical phenomenon—the artist is preoccupied with his theme. It is
only in looking backward, and as philosophers rather than artists—or if we are
also artists, a rare combination, then with the philosophic and not the aesthetic
side of our mind—that we perceive that the quality of beauty in a work of art is
really quite independent of its theme. Then we are apt to forgot that beauty has
never been reached expect through the necessity that was felt to deal with the
particular picture, or stand up to dance, and having nothing in us that we feel
must be said and said clearly at all costs, we are surprised that the result is
insipid and lacks conviction; the subject may be lovely, the dancer may be
ravishing, but the picture and the dance are not rasavant. The theory of beauty is

a matter for philosophers, and artists strive to demonstrate it at their own risk.
The Indian imager was concerned with his own problem. It is interesting to
see the kind of man he was expected to be. According to one of the Shilpa
Shastras “The Shilpan (artificer) should understand the Atharva Veda, the thirty-
two Shilpa Shastras, and the Vedic mantras by which the deities are invoked. He
should be one who wears a sacred thread, a necklace of holy beads, and a ring of
kusha grass on his finger; delighting in the worship of God, faithful to his wife,
avoiding a strange women, piously acquiring a knowledge of various sciences,
such a one is indeed craftsman.”15 Elsewhere it is said “the painter must be a
good man, no sluggard, not given to anger; holy learned, self-controlled, devout
and charitable, such should be his character.”16 It is added that he should work in
solitude, or when another artist is present, never before a layman.
In this connection it is very important to realize that the artisan or artist
possessed an assured status in the form of a life contract, or rather an hereditary
office. He was trained from his childhood as his father’s disciple, and followed
his father’s calling as a matter of course. He was member of a guild, and guilds
were recognized, and protected by the king. The artificer was protected from
competition and undercutting; it is said: “That any other than Shilpan should
build temples, towns, seaports, tanks or wells, is comparable to the sin of
murder.”17 This was guild socialism in a non-competitive society.18
The earliest impulses of Indian art appear to have been more or less practical
and secular, and it is perhaps to this fact that we may partly trace the distrust of
art exhibited by the early hedonists. On the other hand, the dominant motifs
governing its evolution from the third century B.C. onwards, and up to the close
of the eighteenth century, are devotion (bhakti) and reunion (yoga). Neither of
these is peculiar to India, but they exhibit there a peculiar character which leaves
its mark on everything Hindu or Buddhist. Let us follow these traces in very
summary reference to actual documents.
I have discussed in another chapter the beginnings of Buddhist art.19 It is in
the southern primitives of Amaravati and Anuradhapura rather than in the semi-
Roman figures of the North-west that we can best observe the development of an
art that is distinctively Indian. This is the main stream; and it is these types from
which the suave and gracious forms of Gupta sculpture derive, and these in turn
became the models of all Buddhist art in China. In India proper, they grow more
and more mouvemente, more dramatic and vigorous, in the classic art of Elura
and Elephanta, Mamallapuram and Ceylon, and form the basis of the immense
developments of colonial Buddhist and Hindu art in Java and Cambodia. Gupta
and classic painting are preserved at Ajanta.

The tender humanism and the profound nature sympathies which are so
conspicuous in the painting of Ajanta and the sculpture of Mamallapuram are
recognizable equally in the work of poets like—Ashvaghosha and Arya Shura
and dramatists like Kalidasa. Ashvaghosha says of Prince Siddhartha that one
day as he was riding in the country “he saw a piece of land being ploughed, with
the path of plough broken like waves of water. . . And regarding the men as they
ploughed, their faces soiled by the dust, scorched by the sun, chafed by the wind,
and their cattle bewildered by the burden of drawing, the All-noble One felt the
uttermost compassion; and alighting from the back of his horse, he passed
slowly over the earth, overcome with sorrow—pondering the birth and
destruction proceeding in the world, he grieved. Nor can anything be more
poignant than Shanti Deva’s expression of his sense of the eternal movement and
unsubstantiality of life—“Who is a kinsman, who a friend, and unto whom?”
The literature of love is no less remarkable. We recognize here, just as in the
painting and sculpture, what is eternal in all art, and universal—impassioned
vision based on understanding, correlated with cloudless thought and devoid of
sentimentality. There is every reason to believe too that this was the time of
highest attainment in music. Lastly, this was a time of progress in the field of
pure science, especially mathematics and astronomy. From the forth to the end of
eight century we must regard as golden age of Indian civilization. This was the
period of Wei and T’ang in China. Eastern Aisa represented then to all intents
and purposes the civilization of the world.
After the ninth or tenth century there is a general, though certainly not
universal, decline in orthodox art, of which the formulae were rapidly
stereotyped in their main outlines, and rendered florid in their detail. Classical
Sanskrit literature also came to an end in a forest of elaborate embroidery. But
great forces (sometimes grouped under the designation of the Pauranic
Renaissance) had long been at work preparing the way for the emergence of the
old cults of Shiva and Vishnu in forms which gave renewed inspiration to art—
sculpture and poetry in the South, and poetry and painting in the North. In these
devotional faiths was completed the cycle of Indian spiritual evolution from pure
philosophy to pure mysticism, from knowledge to love. The inner and outer life
were finally unified a development entirely analogous to that of Zen Buddhism
in the Far East. The transparency of life so clearly expressed in the paintings of
Ajanta indicated with a renewed emphasi—above all in the Radha-Krishna cults
—and in all the Northern Vaishnava poetry and painting—the tradition in which
Rabindranath Tagore is the latest singer, and of which the theory is plainly set
forth in his song:

Not my way of salvation, to surrender the world!
Rather for me the taste of Infinite Freedom
While yet I am bound by a thousand bonds to the wheel . . .
In each glory of sound and sight and scent
I shall find Thy infinite joy abiding:
My passion shall burn as the flame of salvation,
The flower of my love shall become the ripe fruit of devotion.
But such a theory is now rather a survival of all that was universal in Indian
religion, rather than a new point of departure. The current Aesthetic of
‘educated’ India—a product of a wide miscomprehension of Western culture and
a general surrender to Nonconformist ethics—is again realistic and hedonistic,
and perhaps for the first time illustrative, personal, and sentimental.

W
Hindu View of Art
II.THEORY OF BEAUTY
E HAVE so far discussed the Hindu view of art mainly from the
internal evidence of the art itself. There remains, what is more exactly
pertinent to the title of those chapters, to discuss the Hindu Aesthetic as it is
expressly formulated and elaborated in the abundant Sanskrit and Hindi
literature on Poetics and the Drama.1 We shall find the general conclusions are
reached which are applicable, not only to literature, but to all arts alike.
The discussion begins with the Defence of Poesy. This is summed up in the
statement that it may contribute to the achievement of all or any of the Four
Ends of Life. A single word rightly employed and understood is compared to the
‘cow of plenty,’ yielding every treasure; and the same poem that is of material
advantage to another or upon another occasion.
The question follows: What is the essential element in poetry? According to
some authors this consists in style or figures, or in suggestion (vyanjana, to
which we shall recur in discussing the varieties of poetry). But the greater
writers refute these views and are agreed that the one essential element in
poetry2 is what they term Rasa, or Flavour. With this term, which is the
equivalent of Beauty or Aesthetic Emotion3 in the strict sense of the philosopher,
must be considered the derivative adjective rasavant ‘having rasa,’ applied to a
work of art, and the derivative substantive rasika, one who enjoys rasa, a
connoisseur or lover, and finally rasasvadana, the tasting of rasa, i.e., aesthetic
contemplation.
A whole literature is devoted to the discussion of rasa and the conditions of
its experience. The theory, as we have remarked, is worked out in relation to
poetry and drama, especially the classic drama of Kalidasa and others. When we
consider that these plays are essentially secular in subject and sensuous in
expression, the position arrived at regarding its significance will seem all the
more remarkable.
Aesthetic emotion—rasa—is said to result in the spectator—rasika—though
it is not effectively caused, through the operation of determinants (vibhava),
consequents 
(anubhava), 
moods 
(bhava) 
and 
involuntary 
emotions
(sattvabhava).4 Thus:
DETERMINANTS: the aesthetic problem, plot, theme, etc., viz: the hero and

other characters and the circumstances of time and place. In the terminology of
Croce these are the “physical stimulants to aesthetic reproduction.”
CONSEQUENTS: deliberate manifestations of feeling, as gestures, etc.
MOODS: transient moods (thirty-three in number) induced in the characters
by pleasure and pain, e. g., joy, agitation, impatience,, etc. Also permanent
(nine), viz: the Erotic, Heroic, Odious, Furious, Terrible, Pathetic, Wondrous and
Peaceful.
INVOLUNTARY EMOTIONS: emotional states originating in the inner nature;
involuntary expressions of emotion such as horripilation, trembling, etc. (eight in
all).
In order that a work may be able to evoke rasa one5 of the permanent moods
from a master-motif to which all other expressions of emotion are subordinate.6
That is to say, the first essential of a rasavant work is unity—
As a king to his subjects, as a guru to his disciplies,
Even so the master-motif is lord of all other motifs.7
If, on the contrary, a transient emotion is made the motif of the whole work,
this “extended development of a transient emotion tends to the absence of rasa,”8
or as we should now say, the work becomes sentimental. Pretty art which
emphasizes passing feelings and personal emotion is neither beautiful nor true: it
tells us of meeting again in heaven, it confuses time and eternity, loveliness and
beauty, partiality and love.
Let us remark in passing that while the nine permanent moods correspond to
an identical classification of rasas or flavours as nine in number, the rasa of
which we speak here is an absolute, and distinct from any one of these. The
‘nine rasas’ are no more than the various colourings of one experience, and are
arbitrary terms of rhetoric used only for convenience in classification: just as we
speak of poetry categorically as lyric, epic, dramatic, etc., without implying that
poetry is anything but poetry. Rasa is tasted—beauty is felt—only by empathy,
‘Einfïhlung’ (sadharana); that is to say by entering into, feeling, the permanent
motif; but it is not the as the permanent motif itself, for, from this point of view,
it matters not with which of the permanent motifs we have to do.
It is just here that we see how far Hindu Aesthetic had now departed from its
once practical and hedonistic character: the Dasharupa declares painly that
Beauty is absolutely independent of the sympathetic—“Delightful or disgusting,
exalted or lowly, cruel or kindly, obscure or refined, (actual) or imaginary, there

is no subject that cannot evoke rasa in man.”
Of course, a work of art may and often does afford us at the same time
pleasure in a sensuous or moral way, but this sort of pleasure is derived directly
from its material qualities, such as tone or texture, assonance, etc., or the ethical
peculiarity of its theme, and not from its aesthetic qualities: the aesthetic
experience is dependent of this, and may even, as Dhanamjaya says, be derived
in spite of sensuous or moral displeasure.
Incidentally we may observe that the fear of art which prevails amongst
Puritans arises partly from the failure to recognize that aesthetic experience does
not depend on pleasure or pain at all: and when this is not the immediate
difficulty, then from the distrust of any experience which is “beyond good and
evil” and so devoid of a definitely moral purpose.
The tasting of rasa—the vision of beauty—is enjoyed, says Vishvanatha,
“only by those who are competent thereto”: and he quotes Dharmadatta to the
effect that “those devoid of imagination, in the theatre are but as the wood-work,
the walls, and the stones.” It is the matter of common experience that it is
possible for a man to devote a whole life time to the study of art, without having
once experienced aesthetic emotion: “historical research” as Croce express it,
“directed to illumine a work of art by placing us in a position to judge it, does
not alone suffice to bring it to birth in our spirit,” for “pictures, poetry, and every
work of art produce no effect save on souls prepared to receive them.”
Vishvanatha comments very pertinently on this fact when he says that “even
some of the most eager students of poetry are seen not to have a right perception
of rasa.” The capacity and genius necessary for appreciation are partly native
(‘ancient’) and partly cultivated (‘contemporary’): but cultivation alone is
useless, and if the poet is born, so too is the rasika, and criticism is akin to
genius.
Indian theory is very clear that instruction is not the purpose of art. On this
point Dhanamjaya is sufficiently sarcastic:
“As for any simple man of little intelligence,” he writes, “who says that from
dramas, which distil joy, the gain is knowledge only, as in the case of history and
the like (mere statement, narrative, or illustration)—homage to him, for he has
averted his face what is delightful.”9
The spectator’s appreciation of beauty depends upon the effort of his own
imagination, “just as in the case of children playing with the clay elephants.”10
Thus, technical elaboration (realism) in art is not by itself the cause of rasa: as
marked by Rabindranath Tagore “in our country, those of the audience who are
appreciative, are content to perfect in their own mind by the force of their own

feeling.”11 This is not different from what is said by Shukracharya with reference
to images: “the defects of images are constantly destroyed by the power of the
virtue of the worshipper who has his heart always set on God.” If this attitude
seems to us dangerously uncritical, that is to say dangerous to art, or rather to
accomplishment, let us remember that it prevailed everywhere in all periods of
great creative activity: and that the decline of art has always followed the decline
of love and faith.
Tolerance of an imperfect work of art may arise in two ways: the one
uncritical, powerfully swayed by the sympathetic, and too easily satisfied with a
very inadequate correspondence between content and form, the other creative
very little swayed by considerations of charm, and able by force of true
imagination to complete the correspondence of content and form which is not
achieved or not preserved in the original. Uncritical tolerance is content with
prettiness or edification, recoils from beauty that is ‘difficult’: creative tolerance
is indifferent to prettiness or edification, and is able from a mere suggestion,
such as an awkward ‘primitive’ or a broken fragment, to create or recreate a
perfect experience.
Also, “the permanent motif becomes rasa through the rasika’s own capacity
for being delighted—not from the character of the hero to be imitiated, nor
because the work aims at the production of aesthetic emotion.”12 How many
works which have “aimed at the production of aesthetic emotion,” that is to say,
which were intended to be beautiful, have failed of their purpose!
The degrees of excellence in poetry are discussed in the Kavya Prakasha and
the Sahitya Darpana. The best is where there is a deeper significance than that
of the literal sense. In minor poetry, the sense overpowers the suggestion. In
inferior poetry, significantly described as ‘variegated’ or ‘romantic’ (chitra), the
only artistic quality consists in the ornamentation of the literal sense, which
conveys no suggestion beyond its face meaning. Thus narrative and descriptive
verse take a low place, just as portraiture does in plastic art: and indeed, the
Sahitya Darpana excludes the last kind of poetry altogether. It is to be observed
that the kind of suggestion meant is something more than implication or double
entendre: in the first case we have to do with mere abbreviation, comparable
with the use of the words, etc., in the second we have a mere play on words.
What is understood to be suggested is one of the nine rasas.
It is worth nothing that we have here a departure from, and I think, an
improvement on Croce’s definition ‘expression is art.’ A mere statement,
however completely expressive, such as: “The man walks,” or (a+b)2 = a2+
2ab+b2, is not art. Poetry is indeed a kind of sentence:13 but what kind of

sentence?” A sentence ensouled by rasa,14 i.e., in which one of the nine rasas is
implied or suggested: and the savouring of this falvour, rasavandana, through
empathy, by those possessing the necessary sensibility is the condition of beauty.
What then are rasa and rasavandana, beauty and aesthetic emotion? The
nature of this experience is discussed by Vishvanatha in the Sahitya Darpana:15
“It is pure, invisible, self-manifested, compounded equality of joy and
consciousness, free of admixture with any other perception, the very twin
brother of mystic experience (Brahmasvandana sahodarah), and the very life of
it is supersensuous (lokottara) wonder.”16 Further, “It is enjoyed by those who
are competent thereto, in identity,”17 just as the form of God is itself the joy with
which it is recognized.”
For that very reason it cannot be an object of knowledge, its perception
being invisible from its very existence. Apart from perception it does not exist. It
is not on that account to be regarded as eternal in time or as interrupted: it is
timeless. It is again, supersensuous, hyperphysical (alaukika), and the only proof
of its reality is to be found in experience.18
Religion and art thus names for one and the same experience—an intuition
of reality and of identity. This is not of course, exclusively a Hindu view: it has
been expounded by many others, such as the Neo-platonists, Hsieh Ho, Geothe,
Blake, Schopenhauer and Schiller. Nor is it refuted by Croce. It has recently
restated as follows: “In those moments of exaltation that art can give, it is easy to
believe that we have been possessed by an emotion that comes from the world of
reality. Those who take this view will have to say that there is in all things the
stuff out of which art is made—reality. The peculiarity of the artist would seem
to be that he possesses the power of surely and frequently seizing reality
(generally behind pure form), and the power of expressing his sense of it, in pure
form always!”19
Here pure form means from not clogged with unaesthetic matter such as
associations.
It will be seen that this view is monistic: the doctrine is the universal
presence of reality is that of the immanence of the Absolute. It is inconsistent
with a view of the world as absolute maya, or utterly unreal, but it implies that
through the false world of everyday experience may be seen by those of
penetrating vision (artists, lovers and philosophers) glimpses of the real
substrate. This world is the formless as we perceive it, the unknowable as we
know it.
Precisely as love is reality experienced by the lover, and truth is reality as
experienced by the philosopher, so beauty is reality as experienced by the artist:

and these are three phases of the Absolute. But it is only through the objective
work of art that the artist is able to communicate his experience, and for this
purpose any theme proper to himself will serve, since the Absolute is manifested
equally in the little and the great, animate and inanimate, good and evil.
We have seen that the world of Beauty, like the Absolute, cannot be known
objectively. Can we then reach this world by rejecting objects, by a deliberate
purification of art from all associations? We have already seen, however, that the
mere intention to create beauty is not sufficient: there must exist an object of
devotion. Without a point of departure there can be no fight and no attainment:
here also “one does not attain to perfection by mere renunciation.”20 We can no
more achieve Beauty than we can find Release by turning our backs on the
world: we cannot find our way by a mere denial of things, but only in learning to
see those things as they really are, infinite or beautiful. The artist reveals this
beauty wherever the mind attaches itself: and the mind attaches itself, not
directly to the Absolute, but to objects of choice.
Thus we return to the earth. If we supposed we should find the object of
search elsewhere, we were mistaken. The two worlds, of spirit and matter,
Purusha and Prakriti, are one: and this is as clear as it to the lover or the
philosopher. Those Philistines to whom it is not so apparent, we should speak of
as materialist or as nihilists—exclusive monists, to whom the report of the
senses is either all in all, or nothing at all. The theory of rasa set forth according
to Vishvanatha and other aestheticians, belongs to totalistic monism; it marches
with the Vedanta. In a country like India, where thought is typically consistent
with itself, this is no more than we had a right to expect.

I
That Beauty Is a State
T IS very generally held that natural objects such as human beings, animals
or landscapes, artificial objects such as factories, textiles or works of
international art, can be classified as beautiful or ugly. And yet no general
principle of classification has ever been found: that which seems to be beautiful
to one is described as ugly by another. In the words of Plato “Everyone chooses
his love out of the objects according to his own taste.”
To take, for example, the human type: every race, and to some extent every
individual, has an unique ideal. Nor can we hope for a final agreement: we
cannot expect the European to prefer the Mongolian features, nor the Mongolian
the European. Of course, it is very easy for each to maintain the absolute value
of his own taste and to speak of other types as ugly; just as a hero of chivalry
maintains by force of arms that his own beloved is far more beautiful than any
other. In like manner the various sects maintain the absolute value of their own
ethics. But it is clear that such claims are nothing more than statements of
prejudice, for who is to decide which racial ideal or which morality is “best”? It
is a little too easy to decide that our own is best; we are at the most entitled to
believe it the best for us. This relativity is nowhere better suggested than in the
classic saying attributed to Majnun, when it was pointed out to him that the
world at large regarded his Lalia as far from beautiful. “To see the beauty of
Laila,” he said, “requires the eyes of Majnun.”
It is the same with works of art. Different artist are inspired by different
objects; what is attractive and stimulating to one is depressing and unattractive to
another, and the choice also varies from race to race and epoch to epoch. As to
the appreciation of such works, it is the same; for men in general admire only
such works as by the education or temperament they are predisposed to admire.
To enter into the spirit of an unfamiliar art demands a greater effort than most are
willing to make. The classic scholar starts convinced that the art of Greece has
never been equaled or surpassed, and never will be; there are many who think,
like Michelangelo, that because Italian painting is good, therefore good painting
is Italian. There are many who never yet felt the beauty of Egyptian sculpture or
Chinese or Indian painting or music: that they have also the hardihood to deny
their beauty, however, proves nothing.
It is also possible to forget that certain works are beautiful: the eighteenth
century had thus forgotten the beauty of Gothic sculpture and primitive Italian

painting, and the memory of their beauty was only restored by a great effort in
the course of the nineteenth century. There may also exist natural objects or
works of art which humanity only very slowly learns to regard as in any way
beautiful; the western aesthetic appreciation of desert and mountain scenery, for
example is no older than the nineteenth century; and it is notorious that artists of
the highest rank are often not understood till long after their death. So that the
more we consider the variety of human election, the more we must admit the
relativity of taste.
And yet there remain philosophers firmly convinced that an absolute Beauty
(rasa)1 exists, just as others maintain the conception of absolute Goodness and
absolute Truth. The lovers of God identify these absolutes with Him (or It) and
maintain that He can only be known as perfect Beauty, Love and Truth. It is also
widely held that the true critic (rasika) is able to decide which works of art are
beautiful (rasavant) and which are not; or in simpler words, to distinguish works
of genuine art from those that have no claim to be so described. At the same time
we must admit the relativity of taste, and the fact that all gods (devas and
Ishvaras) are modelled after the likeness of men.
It remains, then, to resolve the seeming contradictions. This is only to be
accomplished by the use of more exact terminology. So far have I spoken of
‘beauty’ without defining my meaning, and have used one word to express a
multiplicity of ideas. But we do not mean the same thing when we speak of a
beautiful girl and a beautiful poem; it will be still more obvious that we mean
two different things, if we speak of beautiful weather and a beautiful picture. In
point of fact, the conception of beauty and the adjective “beautiful” belong
exclusively to aesthetic and should only be used in aesthetic judgment. We
seldom make any such judgments when we speak of natural objects as beautiful;
we generally mean that such objects as we call beautiful are congenial to us,
practically or ethically. Too often we pretend to judge a work of art in the same
way, calling it beautiful if it represents some form or activity of which we
heartily approve, or if it attracts us by the tenderness or gaiety of its colour, the
sweetness of its sound and the charm of its movement. But when we thus pass
judgment on the dance in accordance with the sympathetic attitude towards the
dancer’s charm or skill, or the meaning of the dance, we ought not to use the
language of pure aesthetic. Only when we judge a work of art aesthetically we
may speak of the presence or absence of beauty, we may call the work rasavant
or otherwise; but when we judge it from the standpoint of activity, practical or
ethical, we ought to use a corresponding terminology, calling the picture, song or
actor “lovely” that is to say lovable, or otherwise, the action “noble,” the colour
“brilliant,” the gesture “graceful,” or otherwise, and so forth, and it will be seen

that in doing this we are not really judging the work of art as such, but only the
material and the separate parts of which it is made, the activities they represent,
or the feelings they express.
Of course, when we come to choose such works of art to live with, there is
no reason why we should not allow the sympathetic and ethical considerations to
influence our judgment. Why should the ascetic invite annoyance by hanging in
his cell some representation of the nude, or the general select a lullaby to be
performed upon the eve of battle? When every ascetic and every soldier has
become an artist there will be no more need for works of art: in the meanwhile
ethical selection of some kind is allowable and necessary. But in this selection
we must clearly understand what we are doing, if we would avoid any infinity of
error, culminating in that type of sentimentality which regards the useful, the
stimulating and the moral elements in works of art as the essential. We ought not
to forget that he who plays the villain of the piece may be a greater artist than he
who plays the hero. For beauty—in the profound words of Millet—does not
arise from the subject of a work of art, but from the necessity that has been felt
of representing that subject.
We should only speak of a work of art as good or bad with reference to its
aesthetic quality; only the subject and the material of the work are entangled in
relativity. In other words, to say that a work of art is more or less beautiful, or
rasavant, is to define the extent to which it is a work of art, rather than a mere
illustration. However the element of sympathetic magic in such a work may be,
however important its practical applications, it is not in these that its beauty
consists.
What, then, is Beauty, what is rasa, what is it that entitles us to speak of
divers works as beautiful or rasavant? What is this sole quality which the most
dissimilar works of art possess in common? Let us recall the history of a work of
art. There is (1) an aesthetic intuition on the part of the original artist,—the poet
or creator; then (2) the internal expression of this intuition,—the true creation or
vision of beauty, (3) the indication of this by external signs (language) for the
purpose of communication,—the technical activity; and finally,(4) the resulting
stimulation of the critic or rasika to reproduction of the original intuition, or of
some approximation to it.
The source of the original intuition may, as we have seen, be any aspect of
life whatsoever. To one creator the scales of a fish suggest a rhythmical design,
another is moved by certain landscapes, a third elects to speak of hovels, a fourth
to sing of palaces, a fifth may express the idea that all things are enlinked,
enlaced and enamoured in terms of the General Dance, or he may express the
same idea equally vividly by saying that “not a sparrow falls to the ground

without our Father’s knowledge.” Every artist discovers beauty, and every critic
finds it again when he tastes of the same experience through the medium of
external signs. But where is this beauty? We have seen that it cannot be said to
exist in certain things and not in others. It may then be claimed that beauty exists
everywhere and this I do not deny, though I prefer the clearer statement that it
may be discovered anywhere. If it could be said to exist everywhere in a material
and intrinsic sense, we could pursue it with our cameras and scales, after the
fashion of the experimental psychologists: but if we did so we should only
achieve a certain acquaintance with average taste—we should not discover a
means of distinguishing forms that are beautiful from forms that are ugly. Beauty
can never thus be measured, for it does not exist apart from the artist himself,
and the rasika who enters into his experience.2
All architecture is what you do to it when you look upon it. Did you think it
was in the white or grey stone? Or the lines of the arches and cornices?
All music is what awakes in you when you are reminded of it by the
instruments,
It is not the violins and the cornets . . . nor the score of the baritone singer
It is nearer and further than they.3
When every sympathetic consideration has been excluded, however, there
still remains a pragmatic value in the classification of works of art as beautiful or
ugly. But what precisely do we mean by these designations as applied to objects?
In the works called beautiful we recognize a correspondence of theme and
expression, content and form at variance. In time and space, however, the
correspondence never amounts to an identity: it is our own activity, in the
presence of the work of art, which completes the ideal relation, and it is in this
sense that beauty is what we “do to” a work of art rather than a quality present in
the object. With reference to the object, then “more” or “less” beautiful will
imply a greater or less correspondence between content, and form, and this is all
that we can say of the object as such: or in other words, art is good that is good
of its kind. In the stricter sense of completed internal aesthetic activity, however,
beauty is absolute and cannot have degrees.
The vision of beauty is spontaneous, in just the same sense as the inward
light of the lover (bhakta). It is a state of grace that cannot be achieved by
deliberate effort; though perhaps we can remove hindrances to its manifestation,
for there are many witnesses that the secret of all art is to be found in self-
forgetfulness.4 And we know that this state of grace is not achieved in the pursuit
of pleasure; the hedonists have their reward, but they are in bondage to
loveliness, while the artist is free in beauty.

It is further to be observed that when we speak seriously of works of art as
beautiful, meaning that are truly works of art, valued as such apart from subject,
association, or technical charm, we still speak elliptically. We mean that the
external signs—poems, pictures, dances, and so forth—are effective reminders.
We may say that they possess significant form. But this can only mean that they
possess that kind of form which reminds us of beauty, and awakens in us
aesthetic emotion. The nearest explanation of significant form should be such
form as exhibits the inner relations of things; or, after Hsieh Ho, “which reveals
the rhythm of the spirit in the gestures of living things.” All such works as
possess significant form are linguistic; and, if we remember this, we shall not
fall into the error of those who advocate the use of language for language’s sake,
nor shall we confuse the significant forms, or their logical meaning or moral
value, with the beauty of which they remind us.
Let us insist, however, that the concept of beauty has originated with the
philosopher, not with the artist: he has been ever concerned with saying clearly
what had to be said. In all ages of creation the artist has been in love with his
particular subject—when it is not so, we see that his work is not ‘felt’—he has
never set out to achieve the Beautiful, in the strict aesthetic sense, and to have
this aim is to invite disaster, as one who should seek to fly without wings.
It is not to the artist that one should say the subject is immaterial: that is for
the philosopher to say to the philistine who dislikes a work of art for no other
reason than that he dislikes it.
The true critic (rasika) perceives the beauty of which the artist has exhibited
the signs. It is not necessary that the critic should appreciate the artist’s meaning
—every work of art is a kamadhenu, yielding many meanings—for he knows
without reasoning whether or not the work is beautiful, before the mind begins to
question what it is “about.” Hindu writers say that the capacity to feel beauty (to
taste rasa) cannot be acquired by study, but is the reward of merit gained in the
past life; for many good men and would-be historians of art have never
perceived it. The poet is born, not made; but so also is the rasika, whose genius
differs in degree, not in kind, from that of the original artist. In western
phraseology we should express this by saying that experience can only be bought
by experience; opinions must be earned. We gain and feel nothing merely when
we take it on authority that any particular works are beautiful. It is far better to
be honest, and to admit that perhaps we cannot see their beauty. A day may come
when we shall be better prepared.
The critic, as soon as he becomes an exponent, has to prove his case; and he
cannot do this by any process of argument, but only by creating a new work of
art, the criticism. His audience, catching the gleam at second-hand—but still the

same gleam, for there is only one—has then the opportunity to approach the
original work a second time, more reverently.
When I say that works of art are reminders, and the activity of the critic is
one of reproduction, I suggest that the vision of even the original artist may be
rather a discovery than a creation. If beauty awaits discovery everywhere, that is
to say that it waits upon our recollection (in the sufi sense and in Wordsworth’s):
in aesthetic contemplation as in love and knowledge, we momentarily recover
the unity of our being released from individuality.
There are no degrees of beauty; the most complex and the simplest
expression remind us of one and the same state. The sonata cannot be more
beautiful than the simplest lyric, nor the painting than the drawing, merely
because of their greater elaboration. Civilized art is not more beautiful than the
savage art, merely because of its possibly more attractive ethos. A mathematical
analogy is found if we consider large and small circles; these differ only in their
content, not in their circularity. In the same way, there cannot be any continuous
progress in art. Immediately a given intuition has attained to perfectly clear
expression, it remains only to multiply and repeat this expression. This repetition
may be desirable for many reasons, but it almost invariably involves a gradual
decadence, because we soon begin to take the experience for granted. The
vitality of tradition persists only so long as it is fed by intensity of imagination.
What we mean by creative art, however has no necessary connection with
novelty of subject, though that is not excluded. Creative art is the art that reveals
beauty where we should have otherwise overlooked it, or more clearly than we
have yet received. Beauty is sometimes overlooked just because certain
expressions have become what we call “hackneyed”; then the creative artist
dealing with the same subject restores our memory. The artist is challenged to
reveal the beauty of all experiences, new and old.
Many have rightly insisted that the beauty of a work of art is dependent of its
subject, and truly, the humility of art, which finds its inspiration everywhere, is
identical with the humility of Love, which regards alike a dog and a Brahman—
and of Science, to which the lowest form is as significant as the highest. And this
is possible, because it is one and the same undivided all. “If a beauteous form we
view, ‘Tis His reflection shining through.”
It will now be seen in what sense we are justified in speaking Absolute
Beauty, and in identifying this beauty with God. We do not imply by this that
God (who is without parts) has a lovely form which can be the object of
knowledge; but that in so far as we see and feel beauty, we see and are one with
Him. That God is the first artist does not mean that he created forms, which
might not have been lovely had the hand of the potter slipped: but that every

natural object is an immediate realization of His being. This creative activity is
comparable with aesthetic expression in its non-volitional character; no element
of choice enters into that world of imagination and eternity, but there is always
perfect identity of intuition-expression, soul and body. The human artist who
discovers beauty here or there is the ideal guru of Kabir, who “reveals the
Supreme Spirit wherever the mind attaches itself.”

T
Buddhist Primitives
he EARLY Buddhist view of art is strictly hedonistic. Just as little as Early
Buddhism dreamed of an expression of its characteristic ideas through
poetry, drama, or music, so little was it imagined that the arts of sculpture and
painting could be anything but worldly in their purpose and effect. The arts were
looked upon as physical luxuries, and loveliness as a snare. “Beauty is nothing to
me,” says the Dasa Dhamma Sutta, “neither the beauty of the body nor that that
comes of dress.” The Brethren was forbidden to allow the figures of men and
women to be painted on monastery walls, and were permitted only
representations of wreaths and creepers.1 The psychological foundations of this
attitude is nowhere more clearly revealed than in a passage of the Visuddhi
Marga, where we find that painters, musicians, perfumers, cooks, and elixir-
prescribing physicians are all classed together as purveyors of sensuous luxuries,
whom others honour “on account of love and devotion to the sensations excited
by forms and other objects of sense.” This is the characteristic Hinayana position
throughout, and it is, of course, conspicuous also in the Jaina system, and in
certain phases of Brahmanical thought, particularly in the period contemporary
with early Buddhism.
It is only in the third and second centuries B.C. that we find the Buddhists
patronizing craftsmen and employing art for edifying ends. From what has just
been said, however, it will be well understood that there had not at this time
come into being any truly Buddhist or Brahmanical idealistic art; and thus “Early
Buddhist” art was necessarily the popular Brahmanical art and animistic art of
the day, adapted to Buddhist requirements. The only exception to this rule is that
special phase of Early Buddhist art which is represented by the capital of the
Ashoka columns, of which the forms are not merely non-Buddhist, but of extra
Indian origin.2
the Indian non-Buddhist art that we have evidence of in the age of Ashoka
and in the period immediately following Ashoka, is chiefly with the cult of
nature-spirits—the Earth Goddess, the Nagas or Serpent kings of the waters, and
the Yaksha kings who rule the Four Quarters. The Maurya types are represented
by the well-known free-standing female figure at Besnagar,3 and the Parkham
figure4 now in the Mathura Museum. The early Buddhist art of Sanchi and
Bharhut, probably slightly later, reflects the prevalence of the animistic cults in

placing low-relief figures of the Yaksha, guardians of the four Quarters, as
protectors of the entrance gateways.5 That the nature-spirits should thus act as
guardians of Buddhist shrines reflects the essential victory of Buddhism,
precisely as the story of the Naga Muchalinda, who, in the literary tradition,
shelters the Buddha during the week of storms.
Besides the Guardians of the Quarters we find at Sanchi figures of beautiful
Yakshinis or dryads, whose function may be partly protective, but is also in large
degree honorary and decorative. The Yakshini figure here reproduced [Fig. VI,
b] is typical of all that is best in the art of Sanchi; but in what different world this
happy dryad moves from that of the Pali Suttas, where orthodox Buddhism tries
to prove that “as the body when dead is repulsive, so also is it when alive!”
Buddhist monasticism—to use the language of Blake—sought consistently to
bolt and bar the “Western Gates”: but our Sanchi dryad rather seems to say “the
soul of sweet delight can never be defiled.”
The art of Sanchi is essentially pagan, and this appears not only in its
fearless happiness, untinged by puritan misgiving or by mystic intuition, but also
in the purely representative and realistic technique. It was in the main a later
Mahayana and Vaishnava achievement of the Indian lyric spirit to discover that
the two worlds of spiritual purity and sensuous delight need not, and perhaps
ultimately cannot, be divided.
In any case the Sanchi art is plainly not an expression of Early Buddhist
feeling: and so also it is not primitive, but, on the contrary, it is the classic
achievement of an old popular art already long practised in less permanent
materials. If there is at this time any Buddhist art that can be fairly called
primitive, it is only to be recognized in architecture, where the simple forms of
early shtupas, and their undecorated railings, and the severe design of the early
excavated chaitya-halls truly reflect the intellectual and austere enthusiasm of
Early Buddhism.
Another part of the art of Bharhut railing and the Sanchi gateways is devoted
to the illustration of edifying legends, particularly stories of the former lives of
the Buddha, and of the last incarnation. The work is delicately executed in low
relief—we know from a contemporary inscription that amongst the craftsmen
who contributed to the decoration of the Sanchi toranas were the “ivory workers
of Bhilsa”—and afford us a remarkable record of Indian life, with its
characteristic environment, manners and cults set out with evident realism and a
wealth of circumstantial detail. But for all their interest these reliefs, too, are
essentially illustrations of edifying anecdotes, and only to a limited extent—less,
for example, than the similar, but, of course, very much later, illustrations at
Borobodur—directly express the Early Buddhist view of life and death.

There is however, one respect in which that view is perfectly reflected; in the
fact that the figure of the master himself is nowhere represented. Even in the
group of episodes which illustrates the Great Renunciation—Prince Siddhattha’s
departure from home, riding upon the back of the horse Kanthaka, and attended
by the groom Channa—Kanthaka’s back is bare, and we see only the figures of
the Devas who lift up the feet of the horse lest men should be roused by the
sound of his hoofs, while the presence of the Prince is only indicated by the
parasol of dominion borne beside the horse. In other compositions the Buddha is
represented by symbols such as the Wisdom Tree or the conventionally
represented footprints, the “Feet of the Lord” [Fig. VI, C]. It will be realized at
once that the absence of the Buddha figure from the world of living men—
where, however, there yet remain the traces of his ministry, literally footprints on
the sands of time—is a true artistic rendering of the Master’s guarded silence
respecting the after-death state of those who have attained Nirvana: “the Perfect
One is released from this, that his being should be gauged by the measure of the
corporeal world,” he is released from “name and form.” In the omission of the
figure of the Buddha, the Early Buddhist art is truly Buddhist: for the rest, it is
an art about Buddhism, rather than Buddhist art.
Changes were meanwhile proceeding in the material of Buddhist belief. This
belief is no longer merely intellectual, but has undergone an emotional
development akin to that which finds expression in the bhakti doctrine of the
Bhagvad Gita:
Even they that be born of sin, even women, traffickers, and serfs, if they turn
to Me, come to the Supreme Path: be assured, O son of Kunti, that none who is
devoted to Me is lost.
Similarly we find, even in so early a text as the Majjhima Nikaya that those
who have not yet even entered the Paths, “are sure of heaven if they have love
and faith towards Me.” Gradually the idea of Buddhahood replaces that of
Arahatta: the original agnosticism is ignored, and the Buddha is endowed with
all the qualities of transcendental godhead as well as with the physical
peculiarities or perfections of the Superman (maha-purusha). The Buddha thus
conceived, together with the Bodhisattvas or Buddhas-to-be, presently engaged
in the active work of salvation, became the object of a cult and was regarded as
approachable by worship. In all this we see not merely an internal development
of metaphysics and theology, but also the influence of the lay community: for a
majority of men, and still more the majority of women, have always been more
ready to worship than to know.
At Amaravati we still find that the Buddha is represented by symbols, but it
may be clearly seen from the passionate devotion of those who worship at the

symbol-shrines—and many of these are women, as in the case of the fragment
here reproduced in Fig VI, C—that the One adored must have been conceived in
other terms than those of a purely intellectual psychological analysis. Even
before the Buddha figure is represented in official Buddhist art, the Buddha had
become an object of adoration, a very personal god: and it cannot surprise us that
the Master’s figure should soon appear wherever Bhuddist piety erected shrines
and monuments. We know that images of Hindu gods were already in use in the
second century, B.C., and it is highly probable that Buddha figures were in
similar private use long before they took their place in a public cult.
Before, however, we speak of the Buddha images, we must refer to a second
phase of religious experience, which plays a great part alike in the development
of Buddhism and Hinduism. This is the practice of Yoga, whereby enlightenment
and emancipation are sought to be attained by meditation calculated to release
the individual from empirical consciousness. Even in the earliest Buddhist praxis
it would be difficult to exaggerate the part which these contemplative exercises
play in the spiritual history of the Brethren, and to a lesser extent of laymen, for
while the most abstract meditations lead to the attainment of Nirvana and the
station of “No-Return,” the lesser no less certainly led to rebirth in the higher
heavens. It is just for purposes of meditation that lonely places and roots of trees
are so highly praised in the Buddhist literature, and of this the classic example is
that of the Buddha himself, who reached the final enlightenment while seated in
yogi-fashion at the foot of the Wisdom-tree. The essence of the method lies in
the concentration of thought upon a single point, carried so far that the duality of
subject and object is resolved into a perfect unity—“when,” in the words of
Schelling, “the perceiving self merges in the self-perceived. At that moment we
annihilate time and the duration of time; we are no longer in time, but time, or
rather eternity itself, is in us.” A very beautiful description of the yogi is given as
follows in the Bhagvad Gita,6 and as quoted here in a condensed form applies
almost equally to Buddhist and Barhmanical practice, for the yoga is a praxis
rather than a form of sectarian belief:—
Abiding alone in a secret place, without craving and without possessions, he
shall take his seat upon a firm seat, neither over-high nor over-low, and with the
working of the mind and of the senses held in check, with body, head and neck
maintained in perfect equipoise, looking not round about him, so let him
meditate, and thereby reach the peace of the Abyss: and the likeness of one such,
who knows the boundless joy that lies beyond the senses and is grasped by
intuition, and who swerves not from the truth, is that of a lamp in a windless
place that does not flicker.
Long before the Buddha image became a cult object, the familiar form of the

seated yogi must have presented itself to the Indian mind in inseparable
association with the idea of a mental discipline and of the attainment of the
highest station of self-oblivion; and when the development of imagery followed
there was no other form which could have been made a universally recognized
symbol of Him-who-had-thus-attained.
This figure of the seated Buddha-yogi, with a far deeper content, is as purely
monumental art as that of the Egyptian pyramids; and since it represents the
greatest ideal which Indian sculpture ever attempted to express, it is well that we
find preserved even a few magnificent examples of comparatively early date.
Amongst these the colossal figure at Anuradhapura is almost certainly the best
[Fig. VII]. The same ancient Buddhist site affords examples of a Bodhisattva,
here reproduced on Fig. VIII, and of two standings Buddhas, illustrated in Figs
IX and X, while nearly related to these are the standing figures of Buddhas lately
excavated at Amaravati, reproduced on Fig. XI. To all these works we may fairly
assign the honoured name of primitives, since their massive forms and austere
outline are immediately determined by the moral grandeur of the thesis and the
suppressed emotion of its realization, without any intrusion of individually or
parade of skill. The fullness of the modeling expresses a high degree of vitality,
but does not yet show the conscious elegance and suavity of Gupta types.
We are not in position to precisely date these Buddhist primitives of
Anuradhapura and Amaravati, but they may not be earlier than the first or
second century A.D. and can hardly be later than the third or fourth. In
describing these works as primitive, it is not, of course, suggested that they are
the earliest of Buddha figures extant, nor that all of them are absolutely free
from any element of western formulation, but merely that in them the primitive
inspiration is better preserved than anywhere else. I have already suggested that
the figures of the seated Buddha, if not the standing types, probably came into
use as cult objects a good deal earlier, perhaps in the second century B.C.; and if
these were generally made in wood or other impermanent materials, this would
be in accord with all that we know of the general development of Indian plastic
art and architecture. In any case, as M. Foucher points out,7 the conventional
character of the Buddha of the Kanishka reliquary denote un art déjà stereotype,
et . . . suffit pour reporter d’au moins cent ans en arriere et faire par suite
remonter au er siècle avant notre ere la creation du type plastique du
Bienheureux.
The same may be said of the Bodhisattvas. Indra and Brahma were perhaps
the types from which the sculptural representations of Avalokiteshvara and
Maitreya were evolved, and Mr. Spooner has recorded his view that this
evolution “was an accomplished fact prior to any form of the Gandhara school

with which we are yet familiar,” pointing out here too that “the forms of both are
stereotyped” already in the earliest examples from Gandhara.8
We have so far left out of account the abundant and well-known Graeco-
Buddhist art of Gandhara, dating from the 1st to the 4th century A.D., as well as
the school of Mathura, which in part derives from the older art of Sanchi and
Bharhut, and is partly dependent upon Gandhara. The omission is not, as
M.Foucher would suggest, “par engouement d’estheticien ou rancune de
nationaliste”,9 but because we are here concerned to discover the sources of
inspiration of Buddhist imagery and to learn how this inspiration was first and
most fully expressed. That many western formulae were absorbed into Indian art
through Gandhara does not touch the question of feeling; we must avoid the
common error of confusing “Formensprache” with “Geist.” It is even easy to
exaggerate the importance of the western formulae, as such, for whatever else in
Buddhist art is borrowed, the cross-legged figure seated upon a lotus throne is
entirely Indian in form as well as in idea; and besides this seated figure, the
standing Buddha and the images of all the Buddhist gods are but of secondary
importance.
For several reasons, it seems probable that the actual Gandhara sculptures
are mainly the work of western craftsmen employed by the Gandhara kings to
interpret Buddhist ideas, rather than Indian workmen under western guidance;
and if some of the workmen were Indian by birth, they nevertheless did not give
expression to Indian feeling. We have the parallel modern example of the late
Raja Ravi Varma, who, despite the nominally Indian subject matter of his
paintings, entirely fails to reflect the Indian spirit.
The manner in which the western formulae have been gradually Indianized,
alike in the northwest and in the school of Mathura, and thus, as Professor Oskar
Munsterberg remarks, “first developed under national and Buddhist inspiration
into a new and genuine art,”10 has been studied in considerable detail by many
scholars; but what is equally or more significant for our enquiry is the manner in
which certain Indian formulae and Indian ideas are misrepresented at Gandhara,
for misrepresentation necessarily implies the pre-existence of a type to be
misinterpreted. The plainest case is afforded by the Buddha figure seated on a
“lotus throne” (padmasana). In Gandhara sculpture the seated figure is
uncomfortably and unstably balanced on a lotus flower that is far too small, and
with its pointed petals, like an artichoke,11 suggests a seat of penance rather than
of ease [Fig. VI, a]. The true sense of the padmasana is, of course, to indicate
spiritual purity or divinity, and the symbol is only appropriately combined with
that of the seated yogi, when this function is fulfilled without detracting from the

one essential quality of repose. It is specially emphasized in yoga texts that the
seat of the yogi is to be firm and easy, “sthira-sukha,” and where this condition
is overlooked, it is impossible to recognize an immediate expression of the
original thesis.
The foregoing argument supports the view already mentioned, that the
seated Buddha image in the age of Kanishka was “déjà stereotype.” It takes us,
however, somewhat further, for in connection with the far stronger, though to
archaeologists less convincing, aesthetic evidence, it shows plainly that
Gandhara sculpture is not primitive Buddhist art. When, then, are we to look for
the prototype of the seated figure thus “déjà stereotype?” Can we postulate a
Roman yogi, seated on a lotus throne, and with hands in the dhyani mudra, to set
beside the Lateran Sophocles of which the influence is evident in standing
images? The suggestion is sufficiently absurd to need no refutation. The seated
Buddha, as we have already suggested on a priori grounds, can only be of Indian
origin; and this is being so, it will be seen how great an exaggeration is involved
in speaking of the “Greek Origin of the Image of Buddha.”
It has been sufficient for our purpose to explain in what senses Gandhara
sculpture cannot be regarded as primitive and autochthonous Buddhist art; it has
not been necessary to emphasize also how little the smug and complacent
features of the Gandhara Buddhas and Bodhisattvas, and their listless and
effeminate gestures, reflect the intellectual vigour or the devotional passion of
Buddhist thought. For the benefit of M. Foucher, however, and of other scholars
who may suppose, with him, that Mr. Havell, Professor Munsterberg, and I, have
cared more for Indian art than for art, I may point out that our estimate of
Gandhara sculpture as of small aesthetic significance must not be taken as
evidence of any prejudice against the art of Europe; it simply indicates
concurrence in the view that “in the long sands and flats of Roman realism the
stream of Greek inspiration is lost forever.” To admire Gandhara art, as art, is not
a compliment to the greatness of the Greeks, but only shows how far that
greatness has been misunderstood. If it is possible for a European critic to write
of the mosaics of the Galla Placidia at Ravenna that they are “still coarsely
classical,” and that “there is a nasty, woolly realism about the sheep, and about
the good shephered more than a suspicion of the stodgy, Graeco-Roman
Apollo,”12 then surely we may criticize the sculptures of Gandhara in the same
terms without incurring charges of bad faith.
To resume: Early Buddhist art is popular, sensuous and animistic Indian art
adapted to the purposes of the illustration of Buddhist anecdote and the
decoration of Buddhist monuments; Gandhara art is mixed, and misinterpreted
equally both eastern and western formulae, which must be older than itself,

while it is not Buddhist in expression; the earliest Indian primitives of Buddhist
art properly so called are probably lost. In northern India the absence of
primitives is partly to be accounted for by the fact that Buddhist inspiration was
there absorbed, not in direct creation, but in adapting Graeco-Roman motifs to
its own spiritual ends. In southern India and Ceylon the same energy working in
greater isolation found a more direct expression; and though the earliest
masterpieces may be lost, there are still preserved at Anuradhapura and
Amravati magnificent works, which we may fairly speak of as Buddhist
primitives.13

A
The Dance of Shiva
“The Lord of Tillai’s Court a mystic dance performs; what’s that, my dear?”
—Tiruvacagam, XII, 14.
mongst The greatest of the names of Shiva is Nataraja, Lord of Dancers,
or King of Actors. The cosmos is His theatre, there are many different
steps in His repertory, He Himself is actor and audience— When the Actor
beateth the drum,
Everybody cometh to see the show;
When the Actor collecteth the stage properties
He abideth alone in His happiness.
How many various dances of Shiva are known to His worshippers I cannot
say. No doubt the root idea behind all of these dances is more or less one and the
same, the manifestation of primal rhythmic energy. Shiva is the Eros Protogonos
of Lucian, when he wrote: “It would seem that dancing came into being at the
beginning of all things, and was brought to light together with Eros, that ancient
one, for we see this primeval dancing clearly set forth in the choral dance of the
constellations, and in the planets and fixed stars, their interweaving and
interchange and orderly harmony.”
I do not mean to say that the most profound interpretation of Shiva’s dance
was present in the minds of those who first danced in frantic, and perhaps
intoxicating energy, in honour of the pre-Aryan hill—god, afterwards merged in
Shiva. A great motif in religion or art, any great symbol, becomes all things to all
men; age after age it yields to men such treasure as they find in their own hearts.
Whatever the origins of Shiva’s dance, it became in time the clearest image of
the activity of God which any art or religion can boast of. Of the various dances
of Shiva I shall only speak of three, one of them alone forming the main subject
of interpretation. The first is an evening dance in the Himalayas, with a divine
chorus, described as follows in the Shiva Pradosha Stotra: “Placing the Mother
of the Three Worlds upon a golden throne, studded with precious gems,
Shulapani dances on the heights of Kailasa, and all the gods gather round Him:
“Sarasvati plays on the vina, Indra on the flute, Brahma holds the time-making
cymbals, Lakshmi begins a song, Vishnu plays on a drum, and all the gods stand
round about: “Gandharvas, Yakshas, Patagas, Uragas, Siddhas, Sadhyas,
Vidyadharas, Amaras, Apsarases, and all the beings dwelling in the three worlds

assemble there to witness the celestial dance and hear the music of the divine
choir at the hour of twilight.”
This evening dance is also referred to in the invocation preceding the Katha
Sarit Sagara.
In the pictures of this dance, Shiva is two-handed, and the cooperation of the
gods is clearly indicated in their position of chorus. There is no prostrate Asura
trampled under Shiva’s feet. So far as I know, no special interpretations of this
dance occur in Shaiva litreture.
The second well known dance of Shiva is called the Tandava, and belongs to
His tamasic aspect as Bhairava or Vira-bhadra. It is performed in cementries and
burning grounds, where Shiva, usually in ten armed form dances wildly with
Devi, accompanied by troops of capering imps. Representations of this dance are
common amongst ancient sculptures, as at Elura, Elephanta, and also
Bhuvaneshvara. The tandava dance is in origin that of a pre-Aryan divinity, half-
god, half-demon, who holds his midnight revels in the burning ground. In later
times, this dance in the cremation ground, sometimes of Shiva, sometimes of
Devi, is interpreted in Shaiva and Shakta litreture in a most touching and
profound sense.
Thirdly, we have the Nadanta dance of Nataraja before the assembly (sabha)
in the golden hall of Chidambaram or Tillai, the centre of the Universe, first
revealed to gods and rishis after the submission of the latter in the forest of
Taragram, as related in the Koyil Puranam. The legend, which has after all, no
very close connection with the real meaning of the dance, may be summarized as
follows: In the forest of Taragram dwelt multitudes of heretical rishis, following
of the Mimamsa. Thither proceeded Shiva to confute them, accompanied by
Vishnu disguised as a beautiful woman, and Ati-Sheshan. The rishis were at first
led to violent dispute amongst themselves, but their anger was soon directed
against Shiva, and they endeavoured to destroy Him by means of incantations. A
fierce tiger was created in sacrificial fires, and rushed upon Him; but smiled
gently, He seized it with the nail of His little finger, stripped off its skin, and
wrapped it about Himself like a silken cloth.1 Undiscouraged by failure, the
sages renewed their offerings, and produced a monstrous serpent, which
however, Shiva seized and wreathed about His neck like a garland. Then He
began to dance; but there rushed upon Him a last monster in the shape of a
malignant dwarf, Muyalaka. Upon him the God pressed the tip of His foot, and
broke the creature’s back, so that it writhed upon the ground; and so, His last foe
prostrate, Shiva resumed the dance, withnessed by gods and rishis.
Then Ati-Sheshan worshipped Shiva, and prayed above all things for the
boon, once more to behold this mystic dance; Shiva promised that he should

behold the dance again in sacred Tillai, the centre of the Universe.
This dance of Shiva in Chidambaram or Tillai forms the motif of the South
Indian copper images of Shri Nataraja, the Lord of the Dance. These images
vary amongst themselves in minor details, but all express one fundamental
conception. Before proceeding to enquire what these may be, it will be necessary
to describe the image of Shri Nataraja as typically represented. The images, then,
represent Shiva dancing, having four hands, with braided and jeweled hair of
which the lower locks are whirling in the dance. In his hair may be seen a
wreathing cobra, a skull, and the mermaid figure of Ganga; upon it rests the
crescent moon, and it is crowned with a wreath of Cassia leaves. In His right ear
He wears a man’s earring, a woman’s in the left; He is adorned with necklaces
and armlets, a jewelled belt, anklets, bracelets, finger and toe-rings. The chief
part of His dress consists of tightly fitting breeches, and He wears also a
fluttering scarf and a sacred thread. One right hand holds a drum, the other is
uplifted in the sign of do not fear: one left hand holds fire, the other points down
upon the demon Muyalaka, a dwarf holding a cobra; the left foot is raised. There
is a lotus pedestal, from which springs an encircling glory (tiruvasi), fringed
with flame, and touched within by the hands holding drum and fire. The images
are of all sizes, rarely if ever exceeding four feet in total height.
Even without reliance upon literary references, the interpretation of this
dance would not be difficult. Fortunately, however, we have the assistance of a
copious contemporary literature, which enables us to fully explain not only the
general significance of the dance, but equally, the details of its concrete
symbolism. Some of the peculiarities of the Nataraja images, of course, belong
to the conception of Shiva generally, and not to the dance in particular. Such are
the braided locks, as of a yogi: the Cassia garland: the skull of Brahma: the
figure of Ganga, (the Ganges fallen from heaven and lost in Shiva’s hair): the
cobras: the different earrings, betokening the dual nature of Mahadev, ‘whose
half is Uma’: and the four arms. The drum also is a general attribute of Shiva,
belonging to his character of Yogi, though in the dance, it has further a special
significance. What then is the meaning of Shiva’s Nadanta dance, as understood
by Shaivas? Its essential significance is given in texts such as the following:
“Our Lord is the Dancer, who, like the heat latent in firewood, diffuses His
power in mind and matter, and makes them dance in their turn.”2
The dance, in fact, represents His five activities (Pancakritya), viz: Shrishti
(overlooking, creation, evolution), sthiti (preservation, support), Samhara
(destruction, evolution), Tirobhava (veiling, embodiment, illusion, and also,
giving rest), Anugraha (release, salvation, grace). These, separately considered,
are the activities of the deities Brahma, Vishnu, Rudra, Maheshvara and

Sadashiva.
This cosmic activity is the central motif of the dance, Further quotations will
illustrate and explain the more detailed symbolisms. Unmai Vilakkam, verse 36,
tells us: “Creation arises from the drum: protection proceeds from the hand of
hope: from fire proceeds destruction: the foot held aloft gives release.” It will be
observed that the fourth hand points to this lifted foot, the refuge of the soul.
We have also the following from Chidambara Mummani Kovai: “O my
Lord, Thy hand holding the sacred drum has made and ordered the heavens and
earth and other worlds and innumerable souls. Thy lifted hand protects both the
conscious and unconscious order of thy creation. All these worlds are
transformed by Thy hand bearing fire. Thy sacred foot, plated on the ground,
gives an abode to the tired soul struggling in the toils of causality. It is Thy lifted
foot that grants eternal bliss to those that approach Thee. These Five-Actions are
indeed Thy Handiwork.”
The following verses from the Tirukuttu Darshana (Vision of the Sacred
Dance), forming the ninth tantra of Tirumular’s Turimantram, expand the central
motif further: “His form is everywhere: all-pervading in His Shiva-Shakti:
Chidambaram is everywhere, everywhere His dance:
As Shiva is all and omnipresent,
Everywhere is Shiva’s gracious dance made manifest.
His five-fold dances are temporal and timeless.
His five-fold dances are His Five Activities.
By His grace He performs the five acts,
This is the sacred dance of Uma-Sahaya.
He dances with Water, Fire, Wind and Ether,
Thus our Lord dances ever in the court.”
Visible to those who pass over Maya and Mahamaya (illusion and super-
illusion) “Our Lord dances His eternal dance.
The form of Shakti is all delight—
This united delight is Uma’s body:
This form of Shakti arising in time
And uniting the twain is the dance
His body is Akash, the dark cloud therein is Muyalaka,
The eight quarters are His eight arms,
The three lights are His three eyes,
Thus becoming, He dances in our body as the congregation.”

This is His dance. Its deepest significance is felt when it is realized that it
takes place within the heart and the self. Everywhere is God: that Everywhere is
the heart. Thus also we find another verse: “The dancing foot, the sound of the
tinkling bells,
The songs that are sung and the varying steps,
The form assumed by our Dancing Gurupara—
Find out these within yourself, then shall your fetters fall away.”
To this end, all else but the thought of God must be cast out of the heart, that
He alone may abide and dance therein. In Unmai Vilakkam, we find: “The silent
sages destroying the threefold bond are established where their selves are
destroyed. There they behold the sacred and are filled with bliss. This is the
dance of the Lord of the assembly, ‘whose very form is Grace’.”
With this reference to the ‘silent sage’ compare the beautiful words of
Tirumular: “When resting there they (the yogis who attain the highest place of
peace) lost themselves and become idle….Where the idlers dwell is the pure
Space. Where the idlers sport is the Light. What the idlers know is Vedanta.
What the idlers find is the deep sleep therein.”
Shiva is a destroyer and loves the burning ground. But what does He
destroy? Not merely the heavens and earth at the close of a world-cycle, but the
fetters that bind each separate soul.”3 Where and what is the burning ground? It
is not the place where our earthly bodies are cremated, but the hearts of His
lovers, laid waste and desolate. The place where the ego is destroyed signifies
the state where illusion and deeds are burnt away: that is the crematorium, the
burning-ground where Shri Nataraja dances, and whence He is named
Sudalaiyadi, Dancer of the burning-ground. In this simile, we recognize the
historical connection between Shiva’s gracious dance as Nataraja, and His wild
dance as the demon of the cemetery.
This conception of the dance is current also amongst Shaktas, especially in
Bengal, where the Mother rather than the Father-aspect of Shiva is adored. Kali
is here the dancer, for whose entrance the heart must be purified by fire, made
empty by renunciation. A Bengali Hymn to Kali voices this prayer: “Because
Thou lovest the Burning-ground,
I have made a burning-ground of my heart—
That Thou, Dark One, haunter of the Burning-ground,
Mayest dance Thy eternal dance.
Nought else is within my heart, O Mother;
Day and night blazes the funeral pyre:

The ashes of the dead, strewn all about,
I have preserved against Thy coming,
With death-conquering Mahakala neath Thy feet
Do Thou enter in, dancing Thy rhythmic dance,
That I may behold Thee with closed eyes.”
Returning to the South, we find that in other Tamil texts the purpose of
Shiva’s dance is explained. In Shivajnana Siddhiyar, Supaksha, Sutra V, 5, we
find, “For the purpose of securing both kinds of fruit to the countless souls, our
Lord, with actions five, dances His dance.” Both kinds of fruit, that is Iham,
reward in this world, and Param, bliss in Mukti.
Again, Unmai Vilakkam, v. 32, 37, 39 inform us
“The Supreme Intelligence dances in the soul. . . for the purpose of removing
our sins. By these means, our Father scatters the darkness of illusion (maya),
burns the thread of causality (Karma) stamps down evil (mala, anava, avidya),
showers Grace, and lovingly plunges the soul in the ocean of Bliss (ananda).
They never see rebirths, who behold this mystic dance.”
The conception of the world process as the Lord’s pastime or amusement
(lila) is also prominent in the Shaiva scriptures. Thus Tirumular writes, “The
perpetual dance is His play.” This spontaneity of Shiva’s dance is so clearly
expressed in Skryabin’s Poem of Ecstasy that the extracts following will serve to
explain it better than any more formal exposition—what Skryabin wrote is
precisely what the Hindu Imager moulded: “The Spirit (purusha)playing,
The Spirit longing,
The Spirit with fancy (yoga-maya) creating all,
Surrenders himself to the bliss (ananda)of love…
Amid the flowers of His creation (prakriti), He lingers in a kiss…
Blinded by their beauty, He rushes, He frolics, He dances,
He whirls . . . .
He is all rapture, all bliss, in this play (lila)
Free, divine, in this love struggle.
In the marvelous grandeur of sheer aimlessness,
And in the union of counter-aspirations
In consciousness alone, in love alone,
The Spirit learns the nature (svabhava) of His divine being…
O, my world, my life, my blossoming, my ecstasy!
Your every moment I create
By negation of all forms previously lived through:

I am eternal negation (neti, neti) . . . .
Enjoying this dance, choking in this whirlwind,
Into the domain of ecstasy, He takes swift flight.
In this unceasing change (samara, nitya bhava), in this flight, aimless, divine
The Spirit comprehends Himself,
In the power of will, alone, free,
Ever creating, all-irradiating, all vivifying,
Divinely playing in the multiplicity of forms, He comprehends Himself…
‘I already dwell in thee, O, my world,
Thy dream of me-’twas I coming into existence…
And thou art all—one wave of freedom and bliss . . .’
By a general conflagration (maha-pralaya) the universe (samsara) is
embraced
The Spirit is at the height of being, and He feels the tide unending
Of the divine power (shakti) of free will. He is all-daring:
What menaced, now is excitement,
What terrified, is now delight….
And the universe resounds with the joyful cry I am.”4
This aspect of Shiva’s immanence appears to have given rise to the objection
that he dances as do those who seek to please the eyes of mortals; but it is
answered that in fact He dances to maintain the life of the cosmos and to give
release to those who seek Him. Moreover, if we understand even the dances of
human dancers rightly, we shall see that they too lead to freedom. But it is nearer
the truth to answer that the reason of His dance lies in His own nature, all his
gestures are own-nature-born (svabhava-jah) spontaneous, and purposeless—for
His being is beyond the realm of purposes.
In a much more arbitrary way the dance of Shiva is identified with the
Pancakshara, or five syllables of the prayer Shi-va-ya-na-ma, ‘Hail to Shiva.’ In
Unmai Vilakkam we are told: “If this beautiful Five Letters be meditated upon,
the soul will reach the land where there is neither light nor darkness, and there
Shakti will make it One with Shivam.”5
Another verse of Unmai Vilakkam explains the fiery arch (tiruvasi): The
Panchakshara and the Dance are identified with the mystic syllable ‘Om,’ the
arch being the kombu or hook of the ideograph of the written symbol: “The arch
over Shri Nataraja is Omkara; and the akshara which is never separate from the
Omkara is the contained splendor. This is the Dance of the Lord of
Chidambaram.”

The Tiru-Arul-Payan however (Ch. ix. 3) explains the tiruvasi more
naturally as representing the dance of Nature, contrasted with Shiva’s dance of
wisdom.
“The dance of nature proceeds on one side: the dance of enlightenment on
the other. Fix your mind in the centre of the latter.”
I am indebted to Mr. Nallasvami Pillai for a commentary on this:
The first dance is the action of matter—material and individual energy. This
is the arch, tiruvasi, Omkara, the dance of Kali. The other is the Dance of Shiva
—the akshara inseparable from the Omkara—called ardhamatra or the fourth
letter of the Pranava—Chaturtam and Turiyam. The first dance is not possible
unless Shiva wills it and dances Himself.
The general result of this interpretation of the arch is, then, that it represents
matter, nature, Prakriti; the contained splendor, Shiva dancing within and
touching the arch with head, hands and feet, is the universal omnipresent spirit
(Purusha). Between these stands the individual soul, as ya is between shi-va and
na-ma.
Now to summarize the whole interpretation we find that The Essential
Significance of Shiva’s Dance is threefold: First, it is the image of his Rhythmic
Play as the Source of all Movement within the Cosmos, which is Represented by
the Arch: Secondly, the Purpose of his Dance is to Release the Countless souls of
men from the Snare of Illusion: Thirdly the Place of the Dance, Chidambaram,
the Centre of the Universe, is within the Heart.
So far I have refrained from all aesthetic criticism and have endeavoured
only to translate the central thought of the conception of Shiva’s dance from
plastic to verbal expression, without reference to the beauty to verbal expression,
without reference to the beauty or imperfection of individual works. But it may
not be out of place to call attention to the grandeur of this conception itself as a
synthesis of science, religion and art. How amazing the range of thought and
sympathy of those rishi-artists who first conceived such a type as this, affording
an image of reality, a key to the complex tissue of life, a theory of nature, not
merely satisfactory to a single clique or race, nor acceptable to the thinkers of
one century only, but universal in its appeal to the philosopher, the lover, and the
artist of all ages and all countries. How supremely great in power and grace this
dancing image must appear to all those who have striven in plastic forms to give
expression to their intuition of Life!
In these days of specialization, we are not accustomed to such a synthesis of
thought: but for those who ‘saw’ such images as this, there could have been no
division of life and thought into watertight compartments. Nor do we always
realize, when we criticize the merits of individual works, the full extent of the

creative power which, to borrow a musical analogy, could discover a mode so
expressive of fundamental rhythms and so profoundly significant and inevitable.
Every part of such an image as this is directly expressive, not of any mere
superstition or dogma, but of evident facts. No artist of today, however great,
could more exactly or more wisely create an image of that Energy which science
must postulate behind all phenomena. If we would reconcile Time with Eternity,
we can scarcely do so otherwise than by the conception of alternations of phase
extending over vast regions of space and great tracts of time. Especially
significant, then, is the phase alternation implied by the drums, and the fire
which ‘changes,’ not destroys. These are but visual symbols of the theory of the
day and night of Brahma.
In the night of Brahma, Nature is inert, and cannot dance till Shiva wills it:
He rises from His rapture, and dancing sends through inert matter pulsing waves
of awakening sound, and lo! matter also dances appearing as a glory round about
Him. Dancing, He sustains its manifold phenomena. In the fulness of time, still
dancing, he destroys all forms and names by fire and gives new rest. This is
poetry; but none the less, science.
It is not strange that the figure of Nataraja has commanded the adoration of
so many generations past: familiar with all skepticisms, expert in tracing all
beliefs to primitive superstitions, explorers of the infinitely great and infinitely
small, we are worshippers of Nataraja still.

C
Indian Images with Many Arms
ERTAIN WRITERS, speaking of the many-armed images of Indian art,
have treated this peculiarity as an unpardonable defect. “After 300 A.D.,”
says Mr. Vincent Smith, “Indian sculpture properly so-called hardly deserves to
be reckoned as art. The figures of both men and animals become stiff and
formal, and the idea of power is clumsily expressed by the multiplication of
members. The many-headed, many-armed gods and goddesses whose images
crowd the walls and roofs of mediaeval temples have no pretentions to beauty,
and are frequently hideous and grotesque.”1 Mr. Maskell speaks of “these
hideous deities with animals’ heads and innumerable arms.”2 Sir George
Birdwood considers that “the monstrous shapes of the Puranic deities are
unsuitable for the higher forms of artistic representation; and this is possibly why
sculpture and painting are unknown as fine arts in India.”3 Quotations of this
kind could be multiplied, but enough has been given to show that for a certain
class of critics there exists the underlying assumption that in Indian art the
multiplications of limbs or heads, or addition of any animal attributes, is in itself
a very grave defect, and fatal to any claim for merit in the works concerned.
In reply to criticisms of this kind it would be useless to cite examples of
Greek art such as the victory of Samothrace or the head of Hypnos: of Egyptian,
such as the figures of Sekhet or other animal divinities: of Byzantine or
mediaeval angles: or modern works such as some of M. Rodin’s. For it is clear
that all these, if the critics be consistent, must suffer equal condemnation.
Let me digress at this point to class the critics: for I fear that I ought to
apologize for putting forward in this chapter what is obvious. The difficulty is
one that has been raised exclusively by philologists and historians: in a
considerable experience I have never heard these objections raised by artist or by
connoisseurs. These notes are dedicated, then, only to the philologist and the
historian, and may be neglected by all others.
The condemnations quoted are certainly to be justified if we are to agree to
find the final aim of art in representation: then let us seek the most attractive
models and carefully copy them.
But this test of verisimilitude has never been anything more than the result
of a popular misunderstanding. Let us submit the Indian, Greek or Egyptian
figures to recognized standards, and to criticism a little more penetrating than is

involved in merely counting heads or arms.
Leonardo says that that figure is most worthy of praise which by its action
best expresses the passion that animates it.
Hsieh Ho demands that the work of art should exhibit the fusion of the
rhythm of the spirit with the movement of living things.
Mr. Holmes suggests that a work of art must possess in some degree the four
qualities of Unity, Vitality, Infinity and Repose.
In other words, a work of art is great in so far as it expresses its own theme
in a form at once rhythmic and impassioned: through a definite pattern it must
express a motif deeply felt.
From this point of view it would seem that we must take each work of art
upon its own merits. To apply the simplest tests just quoted—I wish to speak
with the greatest possible simplicity—an image with many arms or heads may be
called an inferior work of art, or inartistic, if it lacks any one of the four qualities
demanded by Mr. Holmes, or as we may say, if it is not ‘felt.’ But if it has such
qualities, if it is felt, need we further concern ourselves with arithmetic?
The artist does not chose his own problems: he finds in the canon instruction
to make such and such images in such and such a fashion—for example, an
image of Nataraja with four arms (FRONTISPIECE), of Brahma with four
heads, Fig. XII, of Mahisha-mardini with ten arms, Fig. XIII, or of Ganesa with
an elephant’s head. Our critics are bold enough to assert that in obeying these
instructions he cannot create a work of art. It would have been fairer and more
moderate to suggest that the problems propounded are often very difficult; this
would have left open the way to recognize a successful effort, if such could be
found. To have overcome the difficulties would then be a proof of artistic
capacity—and I suppose it should be the aim of the historian of art to discover
such proofs.
The accompanying illustration, Fig. XIII, shows a Javanese figure of
Mahisha-mardini with ten arms, slaying the demon Mahisha. She is here a dread
avenging power: yet she is neither cruel nor angry, but rather sad with the
sadness of those who are wise, playing an inevitable part, though at heart no
more than the spectator of a drama. This entire figure, damaged as it is, shows
what tenderness may be expressed, even in tamasic images. And this peace and
tenderness find expression in the movement of the whole figure, and not by any
arbitrary means: no part of the whole is at war with any other, and this is what
we mean by unity. It would indeed by futile to condemn an image such as this
because it has ten arms. Or take the Nataraja image of the primal rhythmic
energy underlying all phenomenal appearances and activity: here is perpetual
movement, perpetually poised—the rhythm of the spirit.

The death of Hiranyakashipu, Fig. XIV, is a work that may be called
grotesque. We have long learnt however that this cannot be use as a mere term of
abuse. It would be difficult to imagine a more splendid rendering of the well
known theme of impious king who met his death at the hands of the avenging
deity in man-lion form. The hand upon the shoulder, the shrinking figure with
the mocking smile that has had no time to fade—what could be more terrible?
These are figures expressing by their action their animating passions: or if not
so, then none have ever been. It would be unkind to contrast a work such as this
with the ‘truth to nature’ of the Laokoon.
In these figures we cannot speak of the many arms as ‘additional members’
because in a human being they might appear to be such. We have here a work of
art which is, or is not a unity. If a work is a unity we can no more speak of added
elements, than we can speak of ornaments in a work of art as something added to
an expression that would not otherwise be beautiful. It is not by addition or
removal that we create. Before these works we can only ask, are these, or are
they not, clear and impassioned expressions of their subject matter? All
unprejudiced and component observers would then agree that amongst Indian
images there are some of which we can say that they are such adequate
expressions, and of others that they are not: but to recognise those and these
require a rather more subtle approach than that involved in the arithmetical
process of counting arms or heads.
Certain developments in the most modern art could be quoted in comparison
with the Indian complex figures, and indeed, the method of these is more than
modern. Some painters of the present day have sought by many strange devices
to create a synthetic and symphonic art representing a continuity of thought or
action, and an interpretation of ideas belonging to more than a single phase of
personality—an art of interpretation. And if, as we now realise, even the human
personality is compound, we should understand that this must be even more true
of cosmic divinity, who is, indeed, able by a division of upadhis, to function in
many places at one time. To reflect such conceptions in art demands a synthetic
rather than a representative language. It might well be claimed, then, that this
method adopted sometimes in India, sometimes in Egypt, sometimes in Greece,
and still employed, has proved successful from the practical point of view, of
pure expression, the getting said what had to be said: and this is after all the sure
and safe foundation of art.
These forms remains potentially equally satisfactory, too, whether as
philosophers we regard them as purely abstract expressions, or with the artists
themselves regard them as realistic presentations of another order of life than our
own, deriving from a deva-loka, other than the world we are familiar with, but

not necessarily unknowable or always invisible. The distinction in any case is
slight, for the images equally belong to a world of their own, however we regard
them.
The criticism of the philologists ultimately resolves itself into a complaint
that the art is not always representative (‘true to nature’). I have tried to show
that it is true to experience and feeling. But aside from that, whatever in a work
of art is ostensibly representative must be judged according to the logic of the
world it represents—even if that would be no other than the idea-world of the
sadhanas and dhyana mantrams. All worlds are idea-worlds of one kind or
another, and we should also remember that ‘recognition’ does not necessarily
imply any real knowledge of things in themselves—we do not know that men
have really two arms, that is merely an ‘intelligible representation.’ It is no
criticism of a fairy tale to say that in our world we meet no fairies: we should
rather, and do actually, condemn on the score of insincerity, a fairy tale which
should be so made as to suggest that in the writer’s world there were no fairies. It
is no criticism of a beast-fable to say that after all animals do not talk English or
Sanskrit. Nor is it a criticism of an Indian icon to point out that we know no
human beings with more than two arms.

1a. Avalokiteshvara Bodhisattva. . Buddhist bonze Ceylon, 8th Century.
Museum of Fine Arts, Boston.

1b. Shiva and Parvati on Mt. Kailasa. Brahmanical stone sculpture. Elura, 8th
Century.
2a. Deer, Mamallapuram. 8th Century.
2b. Elephants, Mamallapuram. 8th Century.

3. Krishna disguised as a milkmaid. Rajput Painting, 17th Century. Mueseum of
Fine Arts, Boston.

4. Ajanta fresco: right, Bodhisattva; left, coronation. Buddhist Painting of 6th or
7th Century.

5a. Temple at Badami, 8th Century.

5b. Monkey family. Stone sculpture. Mamallapuram, 8th Century.
6a. Seated Buddha, Gandhara. 1st Century, A.D

6b. Dryad, Sanchi. 2nd Century, B.C.
6c. Lay workshippers at a Buddha Shrine. Amaravati. 2nd Century, A.D.

7. Buddha in Samadhi. Stone sculpture, Ceylon. 2nd Century, A.D.


8. Standing Bodhisattva. Stone sculpture, Ceylon. 2nd Century, A.D.


9. Standing Buddha. Stone sculpture, Ceylon. 2nd Century, A.D.


10. Standing Buddha. Stone sculpture, Ceylon. 2nd Century, A.D.

11. Standing images of Buddha. Stone sculpture. 2nd Century, A.D. Amaravati.

12. Brahma. Brahmanical stone sculpture, Elephanta. 8th Century.


13. Durga as Chandi slaying Mahisha. Brahmanical bronze. Java. 8th Century.
14. Death of Hiranyakashipu. Brahmanical stone scuplture. Elura, 8th Century.

15. Chamber-music of an aristocratic society. Late Mughal Painting, 18th

Century.

16. Todi Ragini (a musical mode). Rajput painting, 16th Century. Museum of
Fine Arts, Boston.

17. Madhu-madhavi Ragini (a musical mode). ‘The sweet, sweet rumbling of

thunder is heard.’ Rajput painting, 16th Century, Museum of Fine Arts, Boston.
18. Todi Ragini (a musical mode). Rajput painting, 18th Century. Calcutta
School of Art.

19. A Hindu lady at her toilet. Rajput drawing, 18th Century. Collection of the
author.


20. Chand Bibi, called Chand Sultan. Defender of Ahmadnagar against Akbar,
1695. Rajput painting, 18th Century. Collection of Lady Herringham.


21. Hindu marriage. From a Mughal painting, about 1600.
22. Radha in her kitchen: Krishna at the window. Rajput painting. 8th Century.
Lahore Museum.


23. “Where each is both.” Rock-cut sculpture. Brahmanical. Elura. 8th Century.
24. A School of Philosophy. Rajput painting. 18th Century. Collection of the
author.

25a. One of the gates of Jaipur. (Photograph by Mr. Thornton Oakley.)

25b. Laying a warp in Madura.

26. The Bathing Ghat at Benares.
To appreciate any art, moreover, we ought not to concentrate our attention
upon its peculiarities—ethical or formal—but should endeavour to take for
granted whatever the artist takes for granted. No motif appears bizarre to those
who have been familiar with it for generations: and in the last analysis it must
remain beyond the reach of all others so long as it remains in their eyes primarily
bizarre.
If circumstances then compel the philologist and the historian to classify the
extant materials for the study of Indian art, their studies will be more valuable
the more strictly they are confined to the archaeological point of view. For those
should not air their likes and dislikes in Oriental art, who when they speak of art
mean mere illustration: for there they will rarely meet with what they seek, and
the expression of their disappointment becomes wearisome.

M
Indian Music
USIC HAS been a cultivated art in India for at least three thousand
years. The chant is an essential element of Vedic ritual; and the
references in later Vedic literature, the scriptures of Buddhism, and the
Brahmanical epics show that it was already highly developed as a secular art in
centuries preceding the beginning of the Christian era. Its zenith may perhaps be
assigned to the Imperial age of the Guptas—from the fourth to the sixth century
A.D. This was the classic period of Sanskrit literature, culminating in the drama
of Kalidasa; and to the same time is assigned the monumental treatise of Bharata
on the theory of music and drama.
The art music of the present day is a direct descendant of these ancient
schools, whose tradition have been handed down with comments and expansion
in the guilds of the hereditary musicians. While the words of a song may have
been composed at any date, the musical themes communicated orally from
master to disciple are essentially ancient. As in other arts and in life, so here also
India presents to us the wonderful spectacle of the still surviving consciousness
of the ancient world, with a range of emotional experience rarely accessible to
those who are preoccupied with the activities of over-production, and
intimidated by the economic insecurity of a social order based on competition.
The art music of India exists only under cultivated patronage, and in its own
intimate environment. It corresponds to all that is most classical in the European
tradition. It is the chamber-music of an aristocratic society, where the patron
retains musicians for his own entertainment and for the pleasure of the circle of
his friends: or it is temple music, where the musician is the servant of God. The
public concert is unknown, and the livelihood of the artist does not depend upon
his ability and will to amuse the crowd. In other words, the musician is
protected. Under these circumstances he is under no temptation to be anything
but the musician; his education begins in infancy, and his art remains a vocation.
The civilizations of Asia do not afford to the insufficient amateur those
opportunities of self-expression which are highly appreciated in Europe and
America. The arts are nowhere taught as a social accomplishment; on the one
hand there is the professional, proficient in a traditional art, and on the other the
lay public. The musical cultivation of the public does not consist in “everybody
doing it,” but in appreciation and reverence.
I have indeed heard the strange objection raised that to sing the music of

India one must be an artist; and this objection seems to voice a typically
democratic disapproval of superiority. But it would be nearly as true to say that
the listener must respond with an art of his own, and this would be entirely in
accord with Indian theories of aesthetic. The musician in India finds a model
audience—technically critical, but somewhat indifferent to voice production.
The Indian audience listens rather to the song than to the singing of the song:
those who are musical, perfect the rendering of the song by the force of their
own imagination and emotion. Under these conditions the actual music is better
heard than where the sensuous perfection of the voice is made a sine qua non:
precisely as the best sculpture is primitive rather than suave, and we prefer
conviction to prettiness—“It is like the outward poverty of God,1 whereby His
glory is nakedly revealed.” None the less the Indian singer’s voice is sometimes
of great intrinsic beauty, and sometimes used with sensitive intelligence as well
as skill. It is not, however, the voice that makes the singer, as so often happens in
Europe.
Since Indian music is not written, and cannot be learnt from books, except in
theory, it will be understood that the only way for a foreigner to learn it must be
to establish between himself and his Indian teachers that special relationship of
disciple and master which belongs to Indian education in all its phases: he must
enter into the inner spirit and must adopt many of the outer conventions of
Indian life, and his study must continue until he can improvise the songs under
Indian conditions and to the satisfaction of Indian professional listeners. He must
possess not only the imagination of an artist, but also a vivid memory and an ear
sensitive to microtonal inflections.
The theory of scale is everywhere a generalization from the facts of song.
The European art scale has been reduced to twelve fixed notes by merging nearly
identical intervals such as D sharp and E flat, and it is also tempered to facilitate
modulation and free change of key. In other words, the piano is out of tune by
hypothesis. Only this compromise, necessitated in the development of harmony,
has made possible the triumphs of modern orchestration. A purely melodic art,
however, may be no less intensely cultivated, and retains the advantages of pure
intonation and modal colouring.
Apart from the keyed instruments of modern Europe there scarcely exists an
absolutely fixed scale: at any rate, in India the thing fixed is a group of intervals,
and the precise vibration value of a note depends on its position in a progression,
not on its relation to a tonic. The scale of twenty-two notes is simply the sum of
all the notes used in all the songs—no musician sings a chromatic scale from C
to C with twenty-two stopping places, for this world be a mere tour de force.
The ‘quarter-tone’ or shruti is the microtonal interval between two

successive scale notes: but as the theme rarely employs two and never three
scale notes in succession, the microtonal interval is not generally conspicuous
except in ornament.
Every Indian song is said to be in particular raga or ragini—ragini being the
feminine of raga, and indicating an abridgement or modification of the main
theme. The raga, like the old Greek and the ecclesiastical mode, is a selection of
five, six, or seven notes, distributed along the scale; but the raga is more
particularized than a mode, for it has certain characteristic progressions, and a
chief note to which the singer constantly returns. None of the raga employs more
than even substantive notes, and there is no modulation: the strange tonality of
the Indian song is due to the use on unfamiliar intervals, and not to the use of
many successive notes with small divisions.
The raga may be best defined as a melody-mould or the ground plan of a
song. It is this ground plan which the master first of all communicates to the
pupil; and to sing is to improvise upon the theme thus defined. The possible
number of ragas is very large, but the majority of systems recognize thirty-six,
that is to say six ragas, each with five raginis. The origin of the ragas is various:
some, like paharic, are derived from local folk-song, other, like Jog, from the
songs of wandering ascetics, and still others are the creation of great musicians
by whose names they are known. More than sixty are mentioned in a Sanskrit-
Tibetan vocabulary of the seventh century, with names such as ‘With-a-voice-
like-a-thundercloud,’ ‘Like-the-god-Indra,’ and ‘Delighting-the-heart.’ Amongst
the raga names in modern use may be cited ‘Spring,’ ‘Evening beauty,’ ‘Honey-
flower,’ ‘The swing,’ ‘Intoxication.’
Psychologically the word raga, meaning colouring or passion, suggests to
Indian ears the idea of mood; that is to say that precisely as in ancient Greece,
the musical mode has definite ethos. It is not the purpose of the song to repeat
the confusion of life, but to express and arouse particular passions of body and
soul in man and nature. Each raga is associated with an hour of the day or night
when it may be appropriately sung, and some are associated with particular
seasons or have definite magic effects. Thus there is still believed the well-
known story of a musician whose royal patron arbitrarily insisted on hearing a
song in the Dipak raga, which creates fire: the musician obeyed under protest,
but as the song proceeded, he burst into flames, which could not be extinguished
even though he sparng into the waters of the Jamna. It is just because of this
element of magic, and the association of the ragas with the rhythmic ritual of
daily and seasonal life, that their clear outlines must not be blurred by
modulation: and this is expressed, when the ragas are personified as musical
genii, by saying that ‘to sing out of the raga’ is to break the limbs of these

musical angels. A characteristic story is related of the prophet Narada, when he
was still but a learner. He thought that he had mastered the whole art of music;
but the all-wise Vishnu, to curb his pride, revealed to him in the world of the
gods, a spacious building where there lay men and women weeping over their
broken arms and legs. They were the ragas and raginis, and they said that a
certain sage of the name of Narada, ignorant of music and unskillful in
performance, had sung them amiss, and therefore their features were distorted
and their limbs broken, and until they were sung truly there would be no cure for
them. Then Narada was humbled, and kneeling before Vishnu prayed to be
taught the art of music more perfectly: and in due course he became the great
musician priest of the gods.
Indian music is a purely melodic art, devoid of any harmonized
accompaniment other than a drone. In modern European art, the meaning of each
note of the theme is mainly brought out by the notes of the chord which are
heard with it; and even in unaccompanied melody, the musician hears an implied
harmony. Unaccompanied folk song does not satisfy the concert-goer’s ear; as
pure melody it is the province only of the peasant and the specialist. This is
partly because the folk-air played on the piano or written in staff notation is
actually falsified; but much more because under the conditions of European art,
melody no longer exists in its own right, and music is a compromise between
melodic freedom and harmonic necessity. To hear the music of India as Indians
hear it one must recover the sense of a pure intonation and must forget all
implied harmonies. It is just like the effort which we have to make when for the
first time, after being accustomed to modern art, we attempt to read the language
of early Italian or Chinese painting, where there is expressed with equal
economy of means all that intensity of experience which nowadays we are
accustomed to understand only through a more involved technique.
Another feature of Indian song—and so also of the instrumental solo—is the
elaborate grace. It is natural that in Europe, where many notes are heard
simultaneously, grace should appear as an unnecessary elaboration, added to the
note, rather than a structural factor. But in India the note and the microtonal
grace compose a closer unity, for the grace fulfils just that function of adding
light and shade which in harmonised music is attained by varying degrees of
assonance. The Indian song without grace would seem to Indian ears as bald as
the European art song without the accompaniment which it presupposes.
Equally distinctive is the constant portamento, or rather, glissando. In India
it is far more the interval than the note that is sung or played, and we recognize
accordingly a continuity of sound: by contrast with this, the European song,
which is vertically divided by the harmonic interest and the nature of the keyed

instruments which are heard with the voice, seems to unaccustomed Indian ears
to be “full of holes.”
All the songs, except the ‘alaps’ are in strict rhythms. These are only difficult
to follow at a first hearing because the Indian rhythms are founded, as in
prosody, on contrasts of long and short duration, while European rhythms are
based on stress, as in dance or marching. The Indian musician does not mark the
beginning of the bar by accent. His fixed unit is a section, or group of bars which
are not necessarily alike, while the European fixed unit is typically the bar, of
which a varying number constitute a section. The European rhythm is counted in
multiples of 2 or 3, the Hindu in sums of 2 or 3. Some of the countings are very
elaborate: Ata Tala, for example, is counted as 5 plus 5 plus 2 plus 2. The
frequent use of cross rhythms also complicates the form. Indian music is modal
in times as well as melody. For all these reasons it is difficult to grasp
immediately the point at which a rhythm begins and ends, although this is quite
easy for the Indian audience accustomed to quantitative poetic recitation. The
best way to approach the Indian rhythm is to pay attention to the phrasing, and
ignore pulsation.
The Indian art-song is accompanied by drums, or by the instrument known
as a tambura, or by both. The tambura is of the lute tribe, but without frets: the
four very long strings are tuned to sound the dominant, the upper tonic twice,
and the octave below, which are common to all ragas: the pitch is adjusted to suit
the singer’s voice. The four strings are fitted with simple resonators—shreds of
wool between the string and the bridge—which are the source of their ‘life’: and
the strings are continuously sounded, making a pedal point background very rich
in overtones, and against this dark ground of infinite potentiality the song stands
out like an elaborate embroidery. The tambura must not be regarded as a solo
instrument, nor as an object of separate interest like the piano accompaniment of
a modern song: its sound is rather the ambient in which the song lives and moves
and has its being.
India has, besides the tambura, many solo instruments. By far the most
important of these in the vina. This classic instrument, which ranks with the
violin of Europe and the koto of Japan, and second only to the voice in sensitive
response, differs chiefly from the tambura in having frets, the notes being made
with the left hand and the strings plucked with the right. The delicate nuances of
microtonal grace are obtained by deflection of the strings, whole passages being
played in this manner solely by a lateral movement of the left hand, without a
fresh plucking. While the only difficulty in playing the tambura is to maintain an
even rhythm independently of the song, the vina presents all the difficulties of
technique that can be imagined, and it is said that at least twelve years are

required to attain proficiency.
The Indian singer is a poet, and the poet a singer. The dominant subject
matter of the songs is human or divine love in all its aspects, or the direct praise
of God, and the words are always sincere and passionate. The more essentially
the singer is a musician, however, the more the words are regarded merely as the
vehicle of the music: in art-song the words are always brief, voicing a mood
rather than telling any story, and they are used to support the music with little
regard to their own logic—precisely as the representative element in a modern
painting merely serves as the basis for an organization of pure form or colour. In
the musical form called alap—an improvisation on the raga theme, this
preponderance of the music is carried so far that only meaningless syllables are
used. The voice itself is a musical instrument, and the song is more than the
words of the song. This form is especially favoured by the Indian virtuoso, who
naturally feels a certain contempt for those whose first interest in the song is
connected with the words. The voice has thus a higher status than in Europe, for
the music exists in its own right and not merely to illustrate the words.
Rabindranath Tagore has written on this.
When I was very young I heard the song, ‘Who dressed you like a
foreigner?’, and that one line of the song painted such a strange picture in my
mind that even now it is sounding in my memory. I once tried to compose a song
myself under the spell of that line. As I hummed the tune, I wrote the first line of
the song, ‘I know thee, thou stranger,’ and if there were no tune to it, I cannot tell
what meaning would be left in the song. But by the power of the spell of the tune
the mysterious figure of that stranger was evoked in my mind. My heart began to
say, ‘There is a stranger going to and fro in this world of ours—her house is on
the further shore or an ocean of mystery—sometimes she is to be seen in the
autumn morning, sometimes in the flowery midnight—sometimes we receive an
intimation of her in the depths of our heart—sometimes I hear her voice when I
turn my ear to the sky.’ The tune of my song led me to the very door of that
stranger who ensnares the universe and appears in it, and I said:
‘Wandering over the world
I come to thy land:
I am a guest at thy door, thou stranger.’
One day, many days afterwards, there was someone going along the road
singing:
‘How does that unknown bird go to and away from the cage?
Could I but catch it, I would set the chain of my mind about its feet!’

I saw that folk-song, too, said the very same thing! Sometimes the unknown
bird comes to the closed cage and speaks a word of the limitless unknown—the
mind would keep it forever, but cannot. What but the tune of a song could report
the coming and going of that unknown bird? Because of this I always feel a
hesitation in publishing a book of songs, for in such a book the main thing is left
out.
This Indian music is essentially impersonal: it reflects an emotion and
experience which are deeper and wider and older than the emotion or wisdom of
any single individual. Its sorrow is without tears, its joy without exultation and it
is passionate without any loss of serenity. It is in the deepest sense of the words
all-human. But when the Indian prophet speaks of inspiration, it is to say that the
Vedas are eternal, and all that the poet achieves by his devotion is to hear or see:
it is then Sarasvati, the goddess of speech and learning, or Narada, whose
mission it is to disseminate occult knowledge in the sound of the strings of his
vina, or Krishna, whose flute is forever calling us to leave the duties of the world
and follow Him—it is these, rather than any human individual, who speak
through the singer’s voice, and are seen in the movements of the dancer.
Or we may say that this is an imitation of the music in heaven. The master
musicians of India are always represented as the pupils of a god, or as visiting
the heaven world to learn there the music of the spheres—that is to say, their
knowledge springs from a source far within the surface of the empirical activity
of the waking consciousness. In this connection it is explained why it is that
human art must be studied, and may not be identified with the imitation of our
everyday behavior.2 When Shiva expounds the technique of the drama to
Bharata—the famous author of the Natya Shastra—he declares that human art
must be subject to law, because in man the inner and outer life are still in
conflict. Man has not yet found Himself, but all his activity proceeds from a
laborious working of the mind, and all his virtue is self-conscious. What we call
our life is uncoordinated, and far from the harmony of art, which rises above
good and evil. It is otherwise with the gods, whose every gesture immediately
reflects the affections of the inner life. Art is an imitation of that perfect
spontaneity—the identity of intuition and expression in those who are of the
kingdom of heaven, which is within us. Thus it is that art is nearer to life than
any fact can be; and Mr. Yeats has reason when he says that Indian music,
though its theory is elaborate and its technique so difficult, is not an art, but life
itself.
For it is the inner reality of things, rather than any transient or partial
experience that the singer voices. “Those who sing here,” says Shankaracharya,
“sing God”: and the Vishnu Purana adds, “All songs are a part of Him, who

wears a form of sound.”3 We could deduce from this a metaphysical
interpretation of technique. In all art there are monumental and articulate
elements, masculine and feminine factors which are unified in perfect form. We
have here the sound of the tambura which is heard before the song, during the
song, and continues after it: that is the timeless Absolute, which as it was in the
beginning, is now and ever shall be. On the other hand there is the song itself
which is the variety of Nature, emerging from its source and returning at the
close of its cycle. The harmony of that undivided Ground with this intricate
Pattern is the unity of Spirit and Matter. We see from this why this music could
not be improved by harmonisation, even if harmonisation were possible without
destroying the modal bases: for in breaking up the ground into an articulate
accompaniment, we should merely create a second melody, another universe,
competing with the freedom of the song itself, and we should destroy the peace
on which it rests.
This would defeat the purpose of the singer. Here in this ego-conscious
world we are subject to mortality. But this mortality is ail illusion, and all its
truths are relative: over against this world of change and separation there is a
timeless and spaceless Peace which is the source and goal of all our being—"that
noble Pearl,” in the words of Behmen, “which to the World appears Nothing, but
to the Children of Wisdom is All Things.” Every religious teacher offers us those
living waters. But the way is hard and long: we are called upon to leave houses
and lands, fathers and mothers and wives to achieve an end which in our
imperfect language we can only speak of as Non-existence. Many of us have
great possessions, and the hardest of these to surrender are our own will and
identity. What guarantee have we that the reward will be commensurate with the
sacrifice?
Indian theory declares that in the ecstasies of love and art we already receive
an intimation of that redemption. This is also the katharsis of the Greeks, and it
is found in the aesthetic of modern Europe when Goethe says
For beauty they have sought in every age
He who perceives it is from himself set free—
aus sich entrückt. We are assured by the experience of aesthetic
contemplation that Paradise is a reality.
In other words the magical effects of a song in working mere miracles are far
surpassed by its effects upon our inner being. The singer is still a magician, and
the song is a ritual, a sacred ceremony, an ordeal which is designed to set at rest

that wheel of the imagination and the senses which alone hinder us from contact
with reality. But to achieve this ordeal the hearer must cooperate with the
musician by the surrender of the will, and by drawing in his restless thought to a
single point of concentration: this is not the time or place for curiosity or
admiration. Our attitude towards an unknown art should be far from the
sentimental or romantic, for it can bring us nothing that we have not already with
us in our own hearts: the peace of the Abyss which underlies all art is one and
the same, whether we find it in Europe or in Asia.

I
Status of Indian Women
N THE Mahabharata there is reported a conversation between Shiva and
Uma. The Great God asks her to describe the duties of women, addressing
her, in so doing, in terms which acknowledge her perfect attainment of the
highest wisdom possible to man or god—terms which it would be hard to
parallel anywhere in western literature. He says:
“Thou that dost know the Self and the not-Self, expert in every work:
endowed with self-restraint and perfect same-sightedness towards every
creature: free from the sense of I and my—thy power and energy are equal to my
own, and thou hast practised the most severe discipline. O Daughter of
Himalaya, of fairest eyebrows, and whose hair ends in the fairest curls, expound
to me the duties of women in full.”
Then She, who is queen of heaven, and yet so sweetly human, answers:
“The duties of woman are created in the rites of wedding, when in presence
of the nuptial fire she becomes the associate of her Lord, for the performance of
all righteous deeds. She should be beautiful and gentle, considering her husband
as her god and serving him as such in fortune and misfortune, health and
sickness, obedient even if commanded to unrighteous deeds or acts that may lead
to her own destruction. She should rise early, serving the gods, always keeping
her house clean, tending to the domestic sacred fire, eating only after the needs
of gods and guests and servants have been satisfied, devoted to her father and
mother and the father and mother of her husband. Devotion to her Lord is
woman’s honour, it is her eternal heaven; and O Maheshvara,” she adds, with a
most touching human cry,
“I desire not paradise itself if thou are not satisfied with me!”
“She is a true wife who gladdens her husband,” says Rajashekhara in the
Karpura Manjari. The extract following is from the Laws of Manu:
“Though destitute of virtue, or seeking pleasure elsewhere, or devoid of
good qualities, a husband must be constantly worshipped as a god by a faithful
wife . . . If a wife obeys her husband, she will for that reason alone be exalted in
heaven.”
“The production of children, the nurture of those born, and the daily life of

men, of these matters woman is visibly the cause.”
“She who controlling her thoughts, speech and acts, violates not her duty to
her Lord, dwells with him after death in heaven, and in this world is called by
the virtuous a faithful wife.”
Similar texts from a variety of Indian sources could be indefinitely
multiplied.
If such are the duties of women, women are accorded corresponding honour,
and exert a corresponding influence upon society. This power and influence do
not so much belong to the merely young and beautiful, nor to the wealthy, as to
those who have lived—mothers and grandmothers—or who follow a religious
discipline—widows or nuns. According to Manu: ‘A master exceedeth ten tutors
in claim to honour; the father a hundred masters; but the mother a thousand
fathers in right to reverence and in the function of teacher.’ When Rama accepted
Kaikeyi’s decree of banishment, it was because ‘a mother should be as much
regarded by a son as is a father.’ Even at the present day it would be impossible
to over-emphasize the influence of Indian mothers not only upon their children
and in all household affairs, but upon their grown-up sons to whom their word is
law. According to my observation, it is only those sons who have received an
‘English’ education in India who no longer honour their fathers and mothers.
No story is more appropriate than that of Madalasa and her son Vikranta to
illustrate the position of the Indian mother as teacher. As Vikranta grew up day
by day, the Markandeya Purana relates, Madalasa ‘taught him knowledge of the
Self1 by ministering to him in sickness; and as he grew in strength and there
waxed in him his father’s heart, he attained to knowledge of the Self by his
mother’s words.’ And these were Madalasa’s words, spoken to the baby crying
on her lap:
“My child, thou art without a name or form, and it is but in fantasy that thou
hast been given a name. This thy body, framed of the five elements, is not thine
in sooth, nor art thou of it. Why dost thou weep? Or, maybe, thou weepest not; it
is a sound self-born that cometh forth from the king’s son . . . In the body dwells
another self, and therewith abideth not the thought that ‘This is mine,’ which
appertaineth to the flesh. Shame that man is so deceived!”
Even in recent times, in families where the men have received an English
education unrelated to Indian life and thought, the inheritance of Indian modes
of thought and feeling rests in the main with women; for a definite philosophy of
life is bound up with household ritual and traditional etiquette and finds
expression equally in folktale and cradle-song and popular poetry, and in those
pauranic and epic stories which constitute the household Bible literature of India.
Under these conditions it is often the case that Indian women, with all their

faults of sentimentality and ignorance, have remained the guardians of a spiritual
culture which is of greater worth than the efficiency and information of the
educated.
It is according to the Tantrik scriptures, devoted to the cult of the Mother of
the World, that women, who partake of her nature more essentially than other
living beings, are especially honored; here the woman may be a spiritual teacher
(guru), and the initiation of a son by a mother is more fruitful than any other.
One doubts how far this may be of universal application, believing with
Paracelsus that woman is nearer to the world than man, of which the evidence
appears in her always more personal point of view. But all things are possible to
women such as Madalasa.
The claim of the Buddhist nun—‘How should the woman’s nature hinder
us?’—has never been systematically denied in India. It would have been
contrary to the spirit of Indian culture to deny to individual women the
opportunity of saintship or learning in the sense of closing to them the schools of
divinity or science after the fashion of the Western academies in the nineteenth
century. But where the social norm is found in marriage and parenthood for men
and women alike, it could only have been in exceptional cases and under
exceptional circumstances that the latter specialised, whether in divinity, like
Auvvai, Mira Bai, or the Buddhist nuns, in science, like Lilavati, or in war, like
Chand Bibi or the Rani of Jhansi. Those set free to cultivate expert knowledge of
science or to follow with undivided allegiance either religion or any art, could
only be the sannyasini or devotee, the widow, and the courtesan. A majority of
women have always, and naturally, preferred marriage and motherhood to either
of these conditions. But those who felt the call of religion, those from whom a
husband’s death removed the central motif of their life, and those trained from
childhood as expert artists, have always maintained a great tradition in various
branches of cultural activity, such as social service or music. What we have to
observe is that Hindu sociologists have always regarded these specializations as
more or less incompatible with wifehood and motherhood; life is not long
enough for the achievement of many different things.
Hinduism justifies no cult of ego-expression, but aims consistently at
spiritual freedom. Those who are conscious of a sufficient inner life become the
more indifferent to outward expression of their own or any changing personality.
The ultimate purposes of Hindu social discipline are that men should unify their
individuality with a wider and deeper than individual life, should fulfill
appointed tasks regardless of failure or success, distinguish the timeless from its
shifting forms, and escape the all-too-narrow prison of the ‘I and mine.’
Anonymity is thus in accordance with the truth; and it is one of the proudest

distinctions of the Hindu culture. The names of the ‘authors’ of the epics are but
shadows, and in later ages it was a constant practise of writers to suppress their
own names and ascribe their work to a mythical or famous poet, thereby to gain
a better attention for the truth that they would rather claim to have ‘heard’ than to
have ‘made.’ Similarly, scarcely a single Hindu painter or sculptor is known by
name; and the entire range of Sanskrit literature cannot exhibit a single
autobiography but little history. Why should women have sought for modes of
self-advertisement that held no lure even for men? The governing concept of
Hindu ethics is vocation (dharma); the highest merit consists in the fulfilment of
‘one’s own duty,’ in other words, in dedication to one’s calling. Indian society
was highly organized; and where it was considered wrong for a man to fulfil the
duties of another man rather than his own, how much more must a confusion of
function as between woman and man have seemed wrong, where differentiation
is so much more evident. In the words of Manu: ‘To be mothers were women
created, and to be fathers men;’ and he added significantly 'therefore are
religious sacraments ordained in the Veda to be observed by the husband
together with the wife.’2
The Asiatic theory of marriage, which would have been perfectly
comprehensible in the Middle Ages, before the European woman had become an
economic parasite, and which is still very little removed from that of Roman or
Greek Christianity, is not readily intelligible to the industrial democratic
consciousness of Europe and America, which is so much more concerned for
rights than for duties, and desires more than anything else to be released from
responsibilities—regarding such release as freedom. It is thus that Western
reformers would awaken a divine discontent in the hearts of Oriental women,
forgetting that the way of ego-assertion cannot be a royal road to realisation of
the Self. The industrial mind is primarily sentimental, and therefore cannot
reason clearly upon love and marriage; but the Asiatic analysis is philosophic,
religious and practical.
Current Western theory seeks to establish marriage on a basis of romantic
love and free choice; marriage thus depends on the accident of ‘falling in love.’
Those who are ‘crossed in love’ or do not love are not required to marry. This
individualistic position, however, is only logically defensible if at the same time
it is recognized that to fall out of love must end the marriage. It is a high and
religious ideal which justifies sexual relations only as the outward expression
demanded by passionate love and regards an intimacy continued or begun for
mere pleasure, or for reasons of prudence, or even as a duty, as essentially
immoral; it is an ideal which isolated individuals and groups have constantly
upheld; and it may be that the ultimate development of idealistic individualism

will tend to a nearer realisation of it. But do not let us deceive ourselves that
because the Western marriage is nominally founded upon free choice, it
therefore secures a permanent unity of spiritual and physical passion. On the
contrary, perhaps in a majority of cases, it holds together those who are no
longer ‘in love’; habit, considerations of prudence, or, if there are children, a
sense of duty often compel the passionless continuance of a marriage for the
initiation of which romantic love was felt to be a sine qua non. Those who now
live side by side upon a basis of affection and common interest would not have
entered upon marriage on this basis alone.
If the home is worth preserving under modern conditions—and in India at
any rate, the family is still the central element of social organization, then
probably the ‘best solution’ will always be found in some such compromise as is
implied in a more or less permanent marriage; though greater tolerance than is
now usual must be accorded to exceptions above and below the norm. What are
we going to regard as the constructive basis of the normal marriage?
For Hindu sociologists marriage is a social and ethical relationship, and the
begetting of children the payment of a debt. Romantic love is a brief experience
of timeless freedom, essentially religious and ecstatic, in itself as purely
antisocial as every glimpse of Union is a denial of the Relative; it is the way of
Mary. It is true the glamour of this experience may persist for weeks and months,
when the whole of life is illumined by the partial merging of the consciousness
of the lover and beloved; but sooner or later in almost every case there must
follow a return to the world of unreality, and that insight which once endowed
the beloved with innumerable perfections fades in the light of commonsense.
The lovers are fortunate if there remains to them a basis of common interest and
common duty and a mutuality of temperament adequate for friendship, affection
and forbearance; upon this chance depends the possibility of happiness during
the greater part of almost every married life. The Hindu marriage differs from
the marriage of sentiment mainly in putting these considerations first. Here, as
elsewhere, happiness will arise from the fulfillment of vocation, far more than
when immediate satisfaction is made the primary end. I use the term vocation
advisedly; for the Oriental marriage, like the Oriental actor’s art, is the
fulfillment of a traditional design, and does not depend upon the accidents of
sensibility. To be such a man as Rama, such a wife as Sita, rather than to express
oneself,’ is the aim. The formula is predetermined; husband and wife alike have
parts to play; and it is from this point of view that we can best understand the
meaning of Manu’s law, that a wife should look on her husband as a god,
regardless of his personal merit or demerits—it would be beneath her dignity to
deviate from a woman’s norm merely because of the failure of a man. It is for

her own sake and for the sake of the community, rather than for his alone, that
life must be attuned to the eternal unity of Purusha and Prakriti.
Whatever the ultimate possibilities of Western individualism, Hindu society
was established on a basis of group morality. It is true that no absolute ethic is
held binding on all classes alike; but within a given class the freedom of the
individual is subordinated to the interest of the group, the concept of duty is
paramount. How far this concept of duty trenches on the liberty of the individual
may be seen in Rama’s repudiation of Sita, subsequent to the victory in Lanka
and the coronation at Ayodhya; although convinced of her perfect fidelity, Rama,
who stands in epic history as the mirror of social ethics, consents to banish his
wife, because the people murmur against her. The argument is that if the king
should receive back a wife who had been living in another man’s house, albeit
faithful, popular morality would be endangered, since others might be moved by
love and partiality to a like rehabilitation but with less justification. Thus the
social order is placed before the happiness of the individual, whether man or
woman. This is the explanation of the greater peace which distinguishes the
arranged marriage of the East from the self-chosen marriage of the West; where
there is no deception there can be no disappointment. And since the conditions
on which it is founded do not change, it is logical that Hindu marriage should be
indissoluble; only when social duties have been fulfilled and social debts paid, is
it permissible for the householder to relinquish simultaneously the duties and the
rights of the social individual. It is also logical that when the marriage is
childless, it is permissible to take a second wife with the consent—and often at
the wish—of the first.
It is sometimes asked, what opportunities are open to the Oriental woman?
How can she express herself? The answer is that life is so designed that she is
given the opportunity to be a woman—in other words, to realize, rather than to
express herself. It is possible that modern Europe errs in the opposite direction.
We must also remember that very much which passes for education nowadays is
superficial; some of it amounts to little more than parlor tricks, and nothing is
gained by communicating this condition to Asia, where I have heard of modern
parents who desired that their daughters should be taught ‘a little French’ or ‘a
few strokes on the violin.’ The arts in India are professional and vocational,
demanding undivided service; nothing is taught to the amateur by way of social
accomplishment or studied superficially. And woman represents the continuity
of the racial life, an energy which cannot be divided or diverted without a
corresponding loss of racial vitality; she can no more desire to be something
other than herself, than the Vaishya could wish to be known as a Kshattriya, or
the Kshattriya, as a Brahman.

It has been shown in fact, some seventy-five per cent of Western graduate
women do not marry; and apart from these, if it be true that five-sixths of a
child’s tendencies and activities are already determined before it reaches school
age, and that the habits then deeply rooted cannot be greatly modified, if it be
true that so much depends on deliberate training while the instincts of the child
are still potential and habits unformed, can we say that women whose social
duties or pleasures, or self-elected careers or unavoidable wage slavery draws
them into the outer world, are fulfilling their duty to the race, or as we should
say, the debt of the ancestors? The modern suffragist declares that the state has
no right to demand of woman, whether directly or indirectly, by bribe or pressure
of opinion, that she considers herself under any obligation, in return for the
protection afforded her, to produce its future citizens. But we are hardly likely to
see this point of view accepted in these days when the right of society to
conscript the bodies of men is almost universally conceded. It is true that many
who do not acquiesce in the existing industrial order are prepared to resist
conscription in the military sense, that is to say, conscription for destruction; but
we are becoming accustomed to the idea of another kind of conscription, or
rather co-operation, based on service, and indeed, according to either of the two
dynamic theories of a future society—the syndicalist and the individualistic—it
must appear that without the fulfillment of function there can exist no rights.
From the co-operative point of view society has an absolute right to compel its
members to fulfill the functions that are necessary to it; and only those who, like
the anchorite, voluntarily and entirely renounce the advantages of society and the
protection of law have a right to ignore the claims of society.3 From the
individualist point of view, on the other hand, the fulfillment of function is
regarded as a spontaneous activity, as is even now true in the cases of the thinker
and the artist; but even the individualist does not expect to get something for
nothing, and the last idea he has is to compel the service of others.
I doubt if anyone will deny that it is the function or nature of women, as a
group—not necessarily in every individual case—in general, to be mothers, alike
in spiritual and physical senses. What we have to do then, is not to assert the
liberty of women to deny the duty or right of motherhood, however we regard it,
but to accord this function a higher protection and honour than it now receives.
And here, perhaps, there is still something to be learnt in Asia. There the
pregnant woman is auspicious, and receives the highest respect; whereas in
many industrial and secular Western societies she is an object of more or less
open ridicule, she is ashamed to be seen abroad, and tries to conceal her
condition, sometimes even by means that are injurious to her own and the child’s
health. That this was not the case in a more vital period of European civilization

may be seen in all the literature and art of the Middle Ages, and particularly in
the status of the Virgin Mary, whose motherhood endeared her to the folk so
much more nearly than her virginity.
To avoid misunderstanding, let me say in passing, that in depicting the life of
Hindu women as fulfilling a great ideal, I do not mean to indicate the Hindu
social formula as a thing to be repeated or imitated. This would be a view as
futile as that of the Gothic revival in architecture; the reproduction of period
furniture does not belong to life. A perfection that has been can never be a
perfection for us.
Marriage was made for man, not man for marriage. One would gladly accept
for Europe very soon, and for Asia in due time, temporary marriage, the
endowment of motherhood, and matriarchal succession, or whatever other forms
our own spiritual and economic necessity may determine for us—not because
such forms may be absolutely better than the Asiatic or mediaeval European
institutions, but because they correspond more nearly to our inner life. In
comparing one social order with another, I have no faith in any millennium past
or future, but only in the best attainable adaptation of means to ends; and, ‘let the
ends determine the means,’ should be the evidence of our idealism.
Let us now return to the Indian Sati and try to understand her better. The root
meaning of the word is essential being, and we have so far taken it only in the
wide sense. But she who refuses to live when her husband is dead is called Sati
in a more special sense, and it is only so that the word (suttee) is well-known to
Europeans. This last proof of the perfect unity of body and soul, this devotion
beyond the grave, has been chosen by many Western critics as our reproach; we
differ from them in thinking of our ‘suttees’ not with pity, but with
understanding, respect, and love. So far from being ashamed of our ‘suttees’ we
take a pride in them; that is even true of the most ‘progressive’ amongst us. It is
very much like the tenderness which our children’s children may some day feel
for those of their race who were willing to throw away their lives for ‘their
country right or wrong,’ though the point of view may seem to us then, as it
seems to so many already, evidence rather of generosity than balanced judgment.
The criticism we make on the institution of Sati and woman’s blind devotion
is similar to the final judgment we are about to pass on patriotism. We do not, as
pragmatists may, resent the denial of the ego for the sake of an absolute, or
attach an undue importance to mere life; on the contrary we see clearly that the
reckless and useless sacrifice of the ‘suttee’ and the patriot is spiritually
significant. And what remains perpetually clear is the superiority of the reckless
sacrifice to the calculating assertion of rights. Criticism of the position of the
Indian woman from the ground of assertive feminism, therefore, leaves us

entirely unmoved: precisely as the patriot must be unmoved by an appeal to self-
interest or a merely utilitarian demonstration of futility. We do not object to
dying for an idea as ‘suttees’ and patriots have died; but we see that there may be
other and greater ideas we can better serve by living for them.
For some reason it has come to be believed that Sati must have been a man-
made institution imposed on women by men for reasons of their own, that it is
associated with feminine servility, and that it is peculiar to India. We shall see
that these views are historically unsound. It is true that in aristocratic circles Sati
became to some degree a social convention,4 and pressure was put on unwilling
individuals, precisely as conscripts are even now forced to suffer or die for other
people’s ideas; and from this point of view we cannot but be glad that it was
prohibited by law in 1829 on the initiative of Raja Ram Mohan Roy. But now
that nearly a century has passed it should not be difficult to review the history
and significance of Sati more dispassionately than was possible in the hour of
controversy and the atmosphere of religious prejudice.
It is not surprising that the idea of Sati occupies a considerable place in
Indian literature. Parvati herself, who could not endure the insults levelled
against her husband by her father, is the prototype of all others. In the early
Tamil lyrics we read of an earthly bride whom the Brahmans seek to dissuade
from the sacrifice; but she answers that since her lord is dead, the cool waters of
the lotus pool and the flames of the funeral pyre are alike to her. Another pleads
to share her hero’s grave, telling the potter that she had fared with her lord over
many a desert plain, and asking him to make the funeral urn large enough for
both. Later in history we read of the widowed mother of Harsha that she replied
to her son’s remonstrances:
“I am the lady of a great house; have you forgotten that I am the lioness-
mate of a great spirit, who, like a lion, had his delight in a hundred battles?”
A man of such towering genius and spirituality as Kabir so takes for granted
the authenticity of the impulse to Sati that he constantly uses it as an image of
surrender of the ego to God; and indeed, in all Indian mystical literature the
love-relation of woman to man is taken unhesitatingly as an immediate reflection
of spiritual experience. This is most conspicuous in all the Radha-Krishna
literature. But here let us notice more particularly the beautiful and very
interesting poem of Muhammad Riza Nau’i, written in the reign of Akbar upon
the ‘suttee’ of a Hindu girl whose betrothed was killed on the very day of the
marriage. This Musulman poet, to whom the Hindus were ‘idolaters,’ does not
relate his story in any spirit of religious intolerance or ethical condescension; he
is simply amazed ‘that after the death of men, the woman shows forth her
marvelous passion.’ He does not wonder at the wickedness of men, but at the

generosity of women; how different from the modern critic who can see no
motive but self-interest behind a social phenomenon that passes his
comprehension!
This Hindu bride refused to be comforted and wished to be burnt on the pyre
of her dead betrothed. When Akbar was informed of this, he called the girl
before him and offered wealth and protection, but she rejected all his persuasion
as well as the counsel of the Brahmans, and would neither speak nor hear of
anything but the Fire.
Akbar was forced, though reluctantly, to give his consent to the sacrifice, but
sent with her his son Prince Daniyal who continued to dissuade her. Even from
amidst the flames, she replied to his remonstrances, ‘Do not annoy, do not annoy,
do not annoy.’ ‘Ah,’ exclaims the poet:
"Let those whose hearts are ablaze with the Fire of Love learn courage from
this pure may!
Teach me, O God, the Way of Love, and enflame my heart with this maiden’s
Fire.”
Thus he prays for himself; and for her:
"Do Thou, O God, exalt the head of that rare hidden virgin, whose purity
exceeded that of the Houris,
Do Thou endear her to the first kissing of her King, and graciously accept
her sacrifice.”
Matter of fact accounts of more modern ‘suttees’ are given by Englishmen
who have witnessed them. One which took place in Baroda in 1825 is described
by R. Hartley Kennedy, the widow persisting in her intention in spite of “several
fruitless endeavours to dissuade her.” A more remarkable case is described by
Sir Frederick Halliday. Here also a widow resisted all dissuasion, and finally
proved her determination by asking for a lamp, and holding her finger in the
flame until it was burnt and twisted like a quill pen held in the flame of a candle;
all this time she gave no sign of fear or pain whatever. Sir F. Halliday had
therefore to grant her wish, even as Akbar had had to do three centuries earlier.
It is sometimes said by Indian apologists that at certain times or places in
India—amongst the Buddhists, or the Marathas, or in the epics—there was no
purdah; or that certain historic or mythic individual women were not secluded.
Such statements ignore the fact that there are other kinds of seclusion than those
afforded by palace walls. For example, though Rama, Lakshman and Sita had
lived together in forest exile for many years in closest affection, it is expressly
stated that Lakshman had never raised his eyes above his brother’s wife’s feet, so

that he did not even know her appearance. To speak more generally, it is
customary for Hindus, when occasion arises for them to address an unknown
woman, to call her ‘mother’ irrespective of her age or condition. These unseen
walls are a seclusion equally absolute with any purdah. One result is that the
streets of an Indian city by night are safer for a woman than those of any city in
Europe. I have known more than one European woman, acquainted with India,
express her strong conviction of this.
Western critics have often asserted that the Oriental woman is a slave, and
that we have made her what she is. We can only reply that we do not identify
freedom with self-assertion, and that the Oriental woman is what she is, only
because our social and religious culture has permitted her to be and to remain
essentially feminine. Exquisite as she may be in literature and art, we dare not
claim for ourselves as men the whole honour of creating such a type, however
persistently the industrious industrial critic would thrust it upon us.
The Eastern woman is not, at least we do not claim that she is, superior to
other women in her innermost nature; she is perhaps an older, purer and more
specialized type, but certainly an universal type, and it is precisely here that the
industrial woman departs from type. Nobility in women does not depend upon
race, but upon ideals; it is the outcome of a certain view of life.
Savitri, Padmavati, Sita, Radha, Uma, Lilavati, Tara—our divine and human
heroines—have an universal fellowship, for everything feminine is of the
Mother. Who could have been more wholly devoted than Alcestis, more patient
than Griselda, more loving than Deirdre, more soldier than Joan of Arc, more
Amazon than Brynhild?
When the Titanic sank, there were many women who refused—perhaps
mistakenly, perhaps quite rightly—that was their own affair—to be rescued
without their husbands, or were only torn from them by force; dramatic
confirmation of the conviction that love-heroism is always and everywhere the
same, and not only in India, nor only in ages past, may be stronger than death.
I do not think that the Indian ideal has ever been the exclusive treasure of
any one race or time, but rather, it reappears wherever woman is set free to be
truly herself, that is wherever a sufficiently religious, heroic and aesthetic culture
has afforded her the necessary protection. Even the freedom which she seeks in
modern self-assertion—which I would grant from the standpoint of one who will
not govern—is merely an inverted concept of protection, and it may be that the
more she is freed the more she will reveal the very type we have most adored in
those who seemed to be slaves. Either way would be happier for men than the
necessity of protecting women from themselves, and the tyranny of those who
are not capable of friendship, being neither bound nor free.

The cry of our Indian Sati, “Do not annoy, do not annoy,” and “No one has
any right over the life of another; is not that my own affair?” is no cry for
protection from a fate she does not seek; it is individualistic, and has been
uttered by every woman in the world who has followed love beyond the grave.
Deirdre refused every offer of care and protection from Conchubar: “It is not
land or earth or food I am wanting,” she said, “or gold or silver or horses, but
leave to go to the grave where the sons of Usnach are lying.” Emer called to
Cuchullain slain: “Love of my life, my friend, my sweetheart, my one choice of
the men of the world, many is the women, wed or unwed, envied me until today,
and now I will not stay living after you.”
Irish women were free, but we are used even more to look on the old
Teutonic type as representative of free and even amazonian womanhood. We do
not think of Brynhild, Shield-may and Victory-wafter, as compelled by men to
any action against her will, or as weakly submissive. Yet when Sigurd was slain
she became ‘suttee’; the prayers of Gunnar availed as little as those of
Conchubar with Deirdre. He “laid his arms about her neck, and besought her to
live and have wealth from him; and all others in like wise letted her from dying;
but she thrust them all from her, and said that it was not the part of any to let her
in that which was her will.” And the second heroic woman figured in the saga,
wedded to Sigurd, though she did not die, yet cried when he was betrayed:
Now am I as little
As the leaf may be
Amid wind-swept wood,
Now when dead he lieth.
“She who is courteous in her mind,” says the Shack-tafelsk, “with shyness
shall her face be bright; of all the beauties of the body, none is more shining than
shyness.” This theory of courtesy, of supreme gentleness—“full sweetly bowing
down her head,” says the English Merlin, “as she that was shamefast,” runs also
through all mediaeval chivalry. Yet it is about this shy quiet being, a mystery to
men, that the whole mediaeval world turns; “first reserve the honour to God,”
says Malory, “and secondly, the quarrel must come of thy lady.” Like Uma and
Sita, Virgin Mary is the image of a perfect being—
For in this rose conteined was
Heaven and earth in litel space—

and for a little while, in poetry and architecture, we glimpse an idealisation of
woman and woman’s love akin to the praise of Radha in the contemporary songs
of Chandidas and Vidyapati.
But for our purpose even more significant than the religious and knightly
culture, the product of less quickly changing conditions, and impressive too in its
naïveté, is the picture of the woman of the people which we can gather from
folk-song and lyric. Here was a being obviously strong and sensible, not without
knowledge of life, and by no means economically a parasite. If we study the folk
speech anywhere in the world we shall see that it reveals woman, and not the
man, as typically the lover; when her shyness allows, it is she who would pray
for man’s love, and will serve him to the utmost. Industrialism reverses this
relation, making man the suppliant and the servant, a condition as unnatural as
any other of its characteristic perversions.
The woman of the folk does not bear resentment. Fair Helen, who followed
Child Waters on foot, and bore his child in a stable, is overheard singing:
Lullaby, my owne deere child!
I wold thy father were a king,
Thy mother layd on a beere.
Is she not like the Bengali Malanchamala, whose husband had married a
second wife, and left her unloved and forgotten—who says, “though I die now,
and become a bird or a lesser creature or whatever befall me, I care not, for I
have seen my darling happy?”
If woman under industrialism is unsatisfied, it would be difficult to say how
much man also loses. For woman is naturally the lover, the bestower of life:
Conjunction with me renders lifelong.
I give youth when I enter upon amorousness.
Her complaint is not that man demands too much, but that he will accept too
little.
Long time have I been waiting for the coming of my dear;
Sometimes I am uneasy and troubled in my mind,
Sometimes I think I’ll go to my lover and tell him my mind
But if I should go to my lover, my lover he will say me nay,
If I show to him my boldness, he’ll ne’er love me again.8
And it is to serve him, not to seek service from him that she desires:

In the cold stormy weather, when the winds are a-blowing,
My dear, I shall be willing to wait on you then.1
The Oriental woman, perhaps is not Oriental at all, but simply woman. If the
modern woman could accept this thought, perhaps she would seek a new way of
escape, not an escape from love, but a way out of industrialism. Could we not
undertake this quest together?
It is true that the modern woman is justified in her discontent. For of what
has she not been robbed? The organization of society for competition and
exploitation has made possible for the few, and only the very few, more physical
comfort and greater security of life; but even these it has robbed of all poise, of
the power to walk or to dress or to marry wisely, or to desire children or lovers,
or to believe in any power not legally exteriorised. From faith in herself to a
belief in votes, what a descent!
Decade after decade since the fourteenth century has seen her influence
reduced. It was paramount in religion, in poetry, in music, in architecture and in
all life. But men, when they reformed the church and taught you that love was
not a sacrament without the seal of clerical approval; when they forced your
music into modes of equal temperament; when they substituted knowledge for
feeling and wisdom in education8, when they asked you to pinch your shoes and
your waists, and persuaded you to think this a refinement, and the language of
Elizabethan poetry coarse; when at last they taught you to become Imperialists,
and went away alone to colonies and civilize the rest of the world, leaving you in
England with nothing particular to do; when, if you have the chance to marry at
all, it is ten or fifteen years too late—who can wonder that you are dissatisfied,
and claim the right to a career of your own “not merely to earn your livelihood,
but to provide yourself with an object in life?”9 How many women have only
discovered an object in life since the energies of men have been employed in
activities of pure destruction? What a confession! To receive the franchise would
be but a small compensation for all you have suffered, if it did not happen that
we have now seen enough of representative government and the tyranny of
majorities to understand their futility. Let women as well as men, turn away their
eyes from the delusions of government, and begin to understand direct action,
finding enough to do in solving the problems of their own lives, without
attempting to regulate those of other people. No man of real power has either
time or strength for any other man’s work than his own, and this should be
equally true for women. Aside from all questions of mere lust for power or
demand for rights, untold evils have resulted from the conviction that it is our

God-given duty to regulate other people’s lives—the effects of the current
theories of ‘uplift,’ and of the ‘white man’s burden’ are only single examples of
this; and even if the intentions are good, we need not overlook the fact that the
way to hell is often paved with good intentions.
Meanwhile there lies an essential weakness in the propaganda of
emancipation, inasmuch as the argument is based on an unquestioning
acceptance of male values. The so-called feminist is as much enslaved by
masculine ideals as the so-called Indian nationalist is enslaved by European
ideals. Like industrial man, the modern woman values industry more than
leisure, she seeks in every way to externalise her life, to achieve success in
men’s professions, she feigns to be ashamed of her sexual nature, she claims to
be as reasonable, as learned, as expert as any man, and her best men friends
make the same claims on her behalf. But just in proportion as she lacks a
genuine feminine idealism, inasmuch as she wishes to be something other than
herself, she lacks power.
The claim of women to share the loaves and fishes with industrial man may
be as just as those of Indian politicians. But the argument that women can do
what men can do (“we take all labour for our province,” says Olive Schreiner)
like the argument that Indians can be prepared to govern themselves by a course
of studies in democracy, implies a profound self-distrust. The claim to equality
with men, or with Englishmen—what an honour! That men, or Englishmen, as
the case may be, should grant the claim—what condescension!
If there is one profound intuition of the non-industrial consciousness, it is
that the qualities of men and women are incommensurable. “The sexes are
differently entertained,” says Novalis, “man demands the sensational in
intellectual form, woman the intellectual in sensational form. What is secondary
to the man is paramount to the woman. Do they not resemble the Infinite, since it
is impossible to square (quadriren) them, and they can only be approached
through approximation?” Is not the Hindu point of view possibly right; not that
men and woman should approach an identity of temperament and function, but
that for the greatest abundance of life, there is requisite the greatest possible
sexual differentiation?
What is it that great men—poets and creators, not men of analysis—demand
of women? It is, surely, the requirements of the prolific, rather than of the
devourers, which are of most significance for the human race, which advances
under the guidance of leaders, and not by accident. The one thing they have
demanded of women is Life.
To one thing at least the greatest men have been always indifferent, that is,
the amount of knowledge a woman may possess. It was not by her learning that

Beatrice inspired Dante, or the washerwoman Chandidas. When Cuchullain
chose a wife, it was Emer, because she had the six gifts of beauty, voice, sweet
speech, needlework, wisdom and charity. We know only of Helen that “strangely
like she was to some immortal spirit;” in other words, she was radiant. Radha’s
shining made the ground she stood on bright as gold. The old English poet wrote
of one like her
Her luve lumes liht
As a launterne a nyht.
It is this radiance in women, more than any other quality, that urges men to
every sort of heroism, be it martial or poetic.
Everyone understands the heroism of war; we are not surprised at Lady
Hamilton’s adoration of Nelson. But the activity of war is atavistic, and highly
civilized people such as the Chinese regard it with open contempt. What
nevertheless we do not yet understand is the heroism of art, that exhausing and
perpetual demand which all creative labour makes alike on body and soul. The
artist must fight a continual battle for mastery of himself and his environment;
his work must usually be achieved in the teeth of violent, ignorant and often
well-organised opposition, or against still more wearing apathy, and in any case,
even at the best, against the intense resistance which matter opposes to the
moulding force of ideas, the tamasic quality in things. The ardent love of women
is not too great a reward for those who are faithful. But it is far more than the
reward of action, it is the energy without which action may be impossible. As
pure male, the Great God is inert, and his ‘power’ is always feminine, and it is
she who leads the hosts of heaven against the demons.
When man of necessity spent his life in war or in hunting, when women
needed a personal physical as well as a spiritual protection, then she could not do
enough for him in personal service; we have seen in the record of folk-song and
epic how it is part of woman’s innermost nature to worship man. In the words of
another Indian scripture, her husband is for her a place of pilgrimage, the giving
of alms, the performance of vows, and he is her spiritual teacher—this according
to the same school which makes the initiation of son by mother eight times more
efficacious than any other. What we have not yet learnt is that like relations are
needed for the finest quality of life, even under conditions of perpetual peace;
the tenderness of women is as necessary to man now, as ever it was when his
first duty was that of physical warfare, and few men can achieve greatness, and
then scarcely without the danger of a one-sided development, whose

environment lacks this atmosphere of tenderness. Woman possesses the power of
perpetually creating in man the qualities she desires, and this is for her an
infinitely greater power than the possession of those special qualities could ever
confer upon her directly.
Far be it from us, however, to suggest the forcing of any preconceived
development upon the modern individualist. We shall accomplish nothing by
pressing anything in moulds. What I have tried to explain is that notwithstanding
that the formula of woman’s status in Oriental society may have ere now
crystallised—as the formulae of classic art have become academic—nevertheless
this formula represented once, and still essentially represents, although ‘unfelt’
in realisation, a veritable expression of woman’s own nature. If not so, then the
formula stands self-condemned. I do not know if through our modern idealistic
individualism it may be possible to renounce all forms and formulae for ever—I
fear that it is only in heaven that there shall be neither marrying nor giving in
marriage—but were that the case, and every creature free to find itself, and to
behave according to its own nature, then it is possible, at least, that the ‘natural’
relation of woman to man would after all involve the same conditions of magic
that are implied in the soon-to-be-discarded conventional and calculated forms
of mediaeval art and Oriental society. If not, we must accept things as they really
are—however they may be.
Meanwhile, it would be worthwhile to pause before we make haste to
emancipate, that is to say, reform and industrialise the Oriental woman. For it is
not for Asia alone that she preserves a great tradition, in an age that is otherwise
preoccupied. If she too should be persuaded to expend her power upon externals,
there might come a time on earth when it could not be believed that such women
had ever lived, as the ancient poets describe; it would be forgotten that woman
had ever been unselfish, sensuous and shy. Deirdre, Brynhild, Alcestis, Sita,
Radha, would then be empty names. And that would be a loss, for already it has
been felt in Western schools that we “are not furnished with adequate womanly
ideals in history and literature.”10
The industrial revolution in India is of external and very recent origin; there
is no lack of men, and it is the sacred duty of parents to arrange a marriage for
every daughter: there is no divergence of what is spiritual and what is sensuous:
Indian women do not deform their bodies in the interests of fashion: they are
more concerned about service than rights: they consider barrenness the greatest
possible misfortune, after widowhood. In a word, it has never happened in India
that women have been judged by or have accepted purely male standards. What
possible service then, except in a few externals, can the Western world render to
Eastern women? Though it may be able to teach us much of the means of life, it

has everything yet to relearn about life itself. And what we still remember there,
we would not forget before we must.

T
Shajha
Shajha, shajha, everyone speaks of shajha, But who knows what shajha means?
—Chandidas
he last achievement of all thought is a recognition of the identity of spirit
and matter, subject and object; and this reunion is the marriage of Heaven
and Hell, the reaching out of a contracted universe towards its freedom, in
response to the love of Eternity for the productions of time. There is then no
sacred or profane, spiritual or sensual, but everything that lives is pure and void.
This very world of birth and death is also the great Abyss.
In India we could not escape the conviction that sexual love has a deep and
spiritual significance. There is nothing with which we can better compare the
‘mystic union’ of the finite with its infinite ambient—that one experience which
proves itself and is the only ground of faith—than the self-oblivion of earthly
lovers locked in each other’s arms, where ‘each is both.’ Physical proximity,
contact, and interpenetration are the expressions of love, only because love is the
recognition of identity. These two are one flesh, because they have remembered
their unity of spirit. This is moreover a fuller identity than the mere sympathy of
two individuals; and each as individual has now no more significance for the
other than the gates of heaven for one who stands within. It is like an algebraic
equation where the equation is the only truth, and the terms may stand for
anything. The least intrusion of the ego, however, involves a return to the
illusion of duality.
This vision of the beloved has no necessary relation to empirical reality. The
beloved may be in every ethical sense of the word unworthy—and the
consequences of this may be socially or ethically disastrous: but nevertheless the
eye of love perceives her divine perfection and infinity, and is not deceived. That
one is chosen by the other is therefore no occasion of pride: for the same
perfection and infinity are present in every grain of sand, and in the raindrop as
much as in the sea.
To carry through such a relationship, however, and to reach a goal, to really
progress and not merely to achieve an intimation—for this it is necessary that
both the lover and the beloved should be of one and the same spiritual age and of
the same moral fibre. For if not, as Chandidas says, the woman who loves an
unworthy man will share the fate of a flower that is pierced with thorns, she will
die of a broken heart: and the youth who falls in love with a woman of lower

spiritual degree will be tossed to and fro in great unrest and will give way to
despair.
Because the stages of human love reflect the stations of spiritual evolution, it
is said that the relationship of hero and heroine reveals an esoteric meaning, and
this truth has been made the basis of the well known allegories of Radha and
Krishna, which are the dominant motif of mediaeval Hinduism. Here, illicit love
becomes the very type of salvation: for in India, where social convention is so
strict, such a love involves a surrender of all that the world values, and
sometimes of life itself. When Krishna receives the milkmaids, and tells them he
owes them a debt that can never be paid, it is because they have come to him
“like the vairagi who has renounced his home”—neither their duties nor their
great possessions hindered them from taking the way of Mary. The great seducer
makes them his own.
All this is an allegory—the reflection of reality in the mirror of illusion. This
reality is the inner life, where Krishna is the Lord, the milkmaids are the souls of
men, and Brindaban the field of consciousness. The relation of the milkmaids
with the Divine Herdsman is not in any sense a model intended to be realised in
human relationships, and the literature contains explicit warnings against any
such confusion of planes.
The interpretation of this mystery, however, is so well known as to need no
elaboration. But there is a related cult, which is called Sahaja,1 which constitutes
a practical discipline, a ‘rule,’ and what we have to speak of here concerns this
more difficult and less familiar teaching.
In sahaja, the adoration of young and beautiful girls was made the path of
spiritual evolution and ultimate emancipation. By this adoration we must
understand not merely ritual worship (the Kumari Puja), but also ‘romantic
love.’
This doctrine seems to have originated with the later Tantrik Buddhists.
Kanu Bhatta already in the tenth century wrote Sahaja love songs in Bengal. The
classic exponent, however, is Chandidas, who lived in the fourteenth century.
Many other poets wrote in the same sense. Chandidas himself was called a
madman—a term in Bengali which signifies a man of eccentric ideas who
nevertheless endears himself to everyone. He was Brahman and a priest of the
temple of Vashuli Devi near Bolpur. One day he was walking on the river bank
where women were washing clothes. By some chance there was a young girl
whose name was Rami: she raised her eyes to his. There was a meeting of Dante
and Beatrice. From this time on Chandidas was filled with love. Rami was very
beautiful: but in Hindu society what can a washerwoman be to a Brahman? She
could only take the dust of his feet. He, however, openly avowed his love in his

songs, and neglected his priestly duties. He would fall into a dream whenever he
was reminded of her.
The love songs of Chandidas were more like hymns of devotion: “I have
taken refuge at your feet, my beloved. When I do not see you my mind has no
rest. You are to me as a parent to a helpless child. You are the goddess herself—
the garland about my neck—my very universe. All is darkness without you, you
are the meaning of my prayers. I cannot forget your grace and your charm—and
yet there is no desire in my heart.”
Chandidas was excommunicated, for he had affronted the whole orthodox
community. By the good offices of his brother he was once on the point of being
taken back into society, on condition of renouncing Rami forever, but when she
was told of this she went and stood before him at the place of the reunion—
never before had she looked upon his face so publicly—then he forgot every
promise of reformation, and bowed before her with joined hands as a priest
approaches his household goddess.
It is said that a divine vision was vouchsafed to certain of the Brahmans
there present—for Rami was so transfigured that she seemed to be the Mother of
the Universe herself, the Goddess: that is to say that for them, as for Chandidas
himself, the doors of perception were cleansed, and they too saw her divine
perfection. But the rest of them saw only the washerwoman, and Chandidas
remained an outcast.
He has explained in his songs what he means by Sahaja. The lovers must
refuse each other nothing, yet never fall. Inwardly, he says of the woman, she
will sacrifice all for love, but outwardly she will appear indifferent. This secret
love must find expression in secret: but she must not yield to desire. She must
cast herself freely into the sea of contempt, and yet she must never actually drink
of forbidden waters: she must not be shaken by pleasure or pain. Of the man he
says that to be a true lover he must be able to make a frog dance in the mouth of
a snake, or to bind an elephant with a spider’s web. That is to say, that although
he plays with the most dangerous passions, he must not be carried away. In this
restraint, or rather, in the temper that makes it possible, lies his salvation. "Hear
me,” says Chandidas, "to attain salvation through the love of woman, make your
body like a dry stick—for He that pervades the universe seen of none, can only
be found by one who knows the secret of love.” It is not surprising if he adds
that one such is hardly to be found in a million.
This doctrine of romantic love is by no means unique: we meet with it also
at the summit levels of European culture, in the thirteenth century. “And so far as
love is concerned,” says a modern Russian (Kuprin), "I tell you that even this
has its peaks which only one out of millions is able to climb.”

Before attempting to understand the practice of Sahaja we must define the
significance of the desired salvation—the spiritual freedom (moksha) which is
called the ultimate purpose, the only true meaning of life, and by hypothesis the
highest good and perfection of our nature. It is a release from the ego and from
becoming: it is the realisation of self and of entity—when ‘nothing of ourself is
left in us.’ This perfect state must be one without desire, because desire implies a
lack: whatever action the jivan mukta or spiritual freeman performs must
therefore be of the nature of manifestation, and will be without purpose or
intention. Nothing that he does will be praiseworthy or blameworthy, and he will
not think in any such terms,—as the Mahabharata says, with many like texts,
‘He who considers himself a doer of good and evil knows not the truth, I trow.’
Nothing that the freeman does will be ‘selfish,’ for he has lost the illusion of the
ego. His entire being will be in all he does, and it is this which makes the virtue
of his action. This is the innocence of desires.
Then and then only is the lover free—when he is free from willing. He who
is free to do what he will—but first, as Nietzsche says, he must be such as can
will, or as Rumi expresses it, must have surrendered will. This is by no means
the same as to do what one likes, or avoid what one does not like, for he is very
far from free who is subject to the caprices or desires of the ego. Of course, if the
doors of perception were cleansed we should know that we are always free (‘It is
nought indeed but thine own hearing and willing that do hinder thee, so that thou
dost not hear and see God’)—for the world itself is manifestation and not the
handiwork of the Absolute. The most perfect love seeks nothing for itself,
requiring nothing, and offers nothing to the beloved, realizing her infinite
perfection which cannot be added to: but we do not know this except in moments
of perfect experience.
Very surely the love of woman is not the only way to approach this freedom.
It is more likely by far the most dangerous way, and perhaps for many an
impossible way. We do not however write to condemn or to advocate, but to
explain.
In reading of romantic love we are apt to ponder over what is left unsaid.
What did the writers really mean? What was the actual physical relation of the
Provencal lover to his mistress, of Chandidas to Rami? I have come to see now
that even if we knew this to the last detail it would tell us nothing. He who looks
upon a woman with desire (be it even his wife) has already committed adultery
with her in his heart, for all desire is adultery. We remember that saying, but do
not always remember that the converse is also true—that he who embraces a
woman without desire has added nothing to the sum of his mortality. Action is
then inaction. It is not by non-participation but by non-attachment that we live

the spiritual life. So that he in Sahaja who merely represses desire, fails. It is
easy not to walk, but we have to walk without touching the ground. To refuse the
beauty of the earth—which is our birthright—from fear that we may sink to the
level of pleasure seekers—that inaction would be action, and bind us to the very
flesh we seek to evade. The virtue of the action of those who are free beings lies
in the complete coordination of their being—body, soul and spirit, the inner and
outer man, at one.
The mere action, then, reveals nothing. As do the slaves of passion impelled
by purpose and poverty, so do the spiritually free, out of the abundance of the
bestowing virtue. Only the searcher of hearts can sift the tares from the wheat; it
is not for mortal man to judge of another’s state of grace.
When we say that the Indian culture is spiritual, we do not mean that it is not
sensuous. It is perhaps more sensuous than has ever been realised—because a
sensuousness such as this, which can classify three hundred and sixty kinds of
the fine emotions of a lover’s heart, and pause to count the patterns gentle teeth
may leave on the tender skin of the beloved, or to decorate her breasts with
painted flowers of sandal paste—and carries perfect sweetness through the most
erotic art—is inconceivable to those who are merely sensual or by a superhuman
effort are merely self-controlled. The Indian temperament makes it possible to
speak of abstract things même entre les baisers.
For this to be possible demands a profound culture of the sexual relationship
—something altogether different from the “innocence” of Western girlhood and
the brutal violence of the “first night” and the married orgy. The mere
understanding of what is meant by Sahaja demands at least a racial if not an
individual education in love—an education related to athletics and dancing,
music and hygiene. The sexual relation in itself must not be so rare or so exciting
as to intoxicate: one should enjoy a woman as one enjoys any other living thing,
any forest, flower or mountain that reveals itself to those who are patient. One
should not be forced to the act of love by a merely physical tension: minutes
suffice for that, but hours are needed for the perfect ritual. What the lover seeks
should be the full response, and not his mere pleasure: and by this I do not mean
anything so sentimental as “forbearance” or “self-sacrifice,” but what will please
him most. Under these conditions violence has no attractions: in Arabia, Burton
tells us, the Musalmans respected even their slaves, and it was “pundonor,” a
point of culture, that a slave, like any other woman, must be wooed. (There has
been no actual slavery in India, or very little.)
Lafcadio Hearn has pointed out the enormous degree to which modern
European literature is permeated with the idea of love. This is however as
nothing compared with what we find in the Vaishnava literature of Hindustan.

There, however, there is always interpretation: in European romantic literature
there is rarely anything better than description. That should be only a passing
phase, for the real tendency of Western sexual freedom is certainly idealistic, and
its forms are destined to be developed until the spiritual significance of love is
made clear.
Under the sway of modern hedonism, where nothing is accepted as an end,
and everything is a means to something else, the preconditions for understanding
Sahaja scarcely exist. Sahaja has nothing to do with the cult of pleasure. It is a
doctrine of the Tao, and a path of non-pursuit. All that is best for us comes of
itself into our hands—but if we strive to overtake it, it perpetually eludes us.
In the passionless spontaneous relation of Sahaja, are we to suppose that
children are ever to be begotten? I think not. It is true that in early times it was
considered right for the hermit who has renounced the world and the flesh to
grant the request of a woman who comes to him of her own will and desires a
child. But this is quite another matter—and incidentally a wise eugenic
disposition, removing an objection to monasticism which some have found in its
sterilisation of the best blood. The Sahaja relation, on the contrary, is an end in
itself, and cannot be associated with social and eugenic ideas. Those who are
capable of such love must certainly stand on the plane of the ‘men of old,’ who
did not long for descendants, and said ‘Why should we long for descendants, we
whose self is the universe? For longing for children is longing for possessions,
and longing for possessions is longing for the world: one like the other is merely
longing.’2 We cannot admit such a longing in Sahaja. It is however just possible
that such a relation as this might be employed by the Powers for the birth of an
avatar: and in such a case we should understand what was meant by immaculate
conception and virgin birth—she being virgin who has never been moved by
desire.
The Sahaja relation is incommensurable with marriage, categorically
regarded as contract, inasmuch as this relation is undertaken for an end, the
definite purpose of 'fulfilling social and religious duties,’ and in particular, of
paying the ‘debt to the ancestors’ by begetting children.
Those whose view of life is exclusively ethical will hold that sexual intimacy
must be sanctified, justified or expiated by at least the wish to beget and to
accept the consequent responsibilities of parenthood. There is, indeed, something
inappropriate in the position of those who pursue the pleasures of life and evade
by artificial means their natural fruit. But this point of view presupposes that the
sexual intimacy was a sought pleasure: what we have discussed is something
quite other than this, and without an element of seeking.
It is only by pursuing what is not already ours by divine right that we go

astray and bring upon ourselves and upon others infinite suffering—to those who
do not pursue, all things will offer themselves. What we truly need, we need not
strive for.
It will be seen from all this how necessary it is that sexual intimacy should
not in itself be considered an unduly exciting experience. It is more than likely
also that those who are capable of this spontaneous control will have been
already accustomed to willed control under other circumstances: and a control of
this kind implies a certain training. We may remark in passing that in ‘birth
control’ we see an objection to the use of artificial means—an objection
additional to what is obvious on aesthetic grounds—in the fact that such means
remove all incentive to the practice of self-control. Those who have good reason
to avoid procreation at any time, should make it a point of pride to accomplish
this by their own strength—and in any case, no man who has not this strength
can be sure of his ability to play his part to perfection, but may at any time meet
with a woman whom he cannot satisfy.
How is one to avoid in such a relation as Sahaja the danger of self-
deception,3 the pestilence of suppressed desires, and even of physical overstrain
and tension?
For very highly perfected beings it may be true that those subtle exchanges
of nervous energy which are effected in sexual intercourse—and are necessary to
full vitality—can be effected by mere intimacy, in a relation scarcely passionate
in the common sense. We read, indeed, of other worlds where even generation
may be effected by an exchange of glances. But it is given to few to function
always on such a plane as this. Are we then to forbid to those who need the
consolations of mortal affection—are we to forbid to these the passionless
intimacy of Sahaja? Why should we do so? Even for those who cannot renounce
the sheltered valleys of the personal life forever, it is well sometimes to breathe
the cold air of the perpetual snows. We should add that ‘to whom chastity is
difficult, it is to be dissuaded’: in order to be sure of our ground we should not
attempt the practise of a degree of continence beyond our power. We should also
be careful not to ‘mix our planes’ or to make one thing an excuse for another. We
must recognize everything for what it really is—the relative as relative, the
absolute as absolute—and render unto Caesar those things, and only those,
which are lawfully his.
We are now, perhaps, in a better position to know what is meant by
Chandidas when he speaks of the difficulties and the meaning of Sahaja. What
he intends by ‘never falling’ (sati) is a perpetual uncalculated life in the present,
and the maintenance, not of deliberate control, but of unsought, unshaken
serenity in moments of greatest intimacy: he means that under circumstances of

temptation none should be felt—not that temptation should be merely overcome.
And to achieve this he does not pray to be delivered from temptation, but courts
it.
Here nothing is to be done for one another, but all for love. There is to be no
effort to evoke response, and none to withhold it. All this is far removed from
the passion and surrender, the tricks of seduction, and the shyness, of the
spiritual allegory and of the purely human experience.

Intellectual Fraternity *
“To mark by some celebration the intellectual fraternity of mankind.”
ALIKE to those who grieve for Europe in her hour of civil war, and to those
who would offer tribute at the shrine of William Shakespeare, it must appear
appropriate and significant to publish tokens of the brotherhood of man in art.
For it is likely the prestige of Empire may be completely shattered in the present
conflict of rival imperialisms: it may appear henceforth a matter for shame to
exercise political domination over men of another race: and where until lately it
has been the custom to proclaim the conqueror’s civilizing purposes, a common
civilization of the world will demand of us a mutual understanding carried at
least so far that we may substitute for the endeavor to do one another good, an
effort based on common needs and human purposes, conceived in intellectual
fraternity. None has been more distinguished than William Shakespeare,* in his
profound appreciation of the common humanity of an infinite variety of man.
Civilization must henceforth be human rather than local or national, or it cannot
exist. In a world of rapid communications it must be founded in the common
purposes and intuitions of humanity, since in the absence of common motives,
there cannot be cooperation for agreed ends. In the decades lately passed—in
terms of ‘real duration,’ now so far behind us—it has, indeed, been fashionable
to insist upon a supposed fundamental divergence of European and Asiatic
character: and those who held this view were not entirely illogical in thinking the
wide earth not wide enough for Europe and Asia to live in side by side. For
artificial barriers are very frail: and if either white or yellow ‘peril’ were in truth
an essentially inhuman force, then whichever party believed itself to be the only
human element, must have desired the extermination, or at least the complete
subordination of the other.
But the premises were false: the divergences of character are superficial, and
the deeper we penetrate, the more we discover an identity in the inner life of
Europe and Asia. Can we, in fact, point to any elemental experience or to any
ultimate goal of man which is not equally European and Asiatic? Does one not
see that these are the same for all ages and continents? Who that has breathed the
clear mountain air of Upanishads, of Guatama, Shankara and Kabir, of Rumi, of
Laotse and Jesus (I mention so far Asiatic prophets only) can be alien to those
who have sat at the feet of Plato and Kant, Tauler, Behmen and Ruysbroeck,
Whitman, Nietzsche and Blake? The latter may well come to be regarded as the

supreme prophet of a post-industrial age, and it is significant that one could not
find in Asiatic scripture a more typically Asiatic purpose than is revealed in his
passionate will to be delivered from the bondage of division:
"I will go down to self-annihilation and Eternal Death, Lest the Last
Judgment come and find me unannihilate, And I be seized and giv’n into the
hands of my own Selfhood.”
But it is not only in Philosophy and Religion—Truth and Love—but also in
Art that Europe and Asia are united: and from this triple likeness we may well
infer that all men are alike in their divinity. Let us only notice here the singular
agreement of Eastern and Western theories of Drama and Poetry, illustrating
what has been said with special reference to the hero of our celebration: for the
work of Shakespeare is in close accordance with Indian canons of Dramatic Art.
“I made this Drama,” says Brahma, “to accord with the movement of the
world, whether at work or play, in peace or laughter, battle, lust or slaughter—
yielding the fruit of righteousness to those who are followers of a moral law, and
pleasures to the followers of pleasure—informed with the divers moods of the
soul—following the order of the world and all its weal and woe. That which is
not to be found herein is neither craft nor wisdom, nor any art, nor is it Union.
That shall be Drama which affords a place of entertainment in the world, and a
place of audience for the Vedas, for philosophy and for the sequence of events.”
And poetry is justified to man inasmuch as it yields the fourfold Fruit of Life
—Virtue, Pleasure, Wealth and Spiritual Freedom. The Western reader may
inquire, “How Spiritual Freedom?” and the answer is to be found in the
disinterestedness of aesthetic contemplation, where the spirit is momentarily
freed from the entanglement of good and evil. We read in the dramatic canon of
Dhanamjaya, for example:
“There is no theme, whether delightful or disgusting, cruel or gracious, high
or low, obscure or plain, of fact or fancy, that may not be successfully employed
to communicate aesthetic emotion.”
We may also note the words of Chuang Tzu
“The mind of the sage being in repose, becomes the mirror of the Universe.”
. . . and compare them with those of Whitman, who avows himself not the
poet of goodness only, but also the poet of wickedness.
It is sometimes feared that the detachment of the Asiatic vision tends
towards inaction. If this be partly true at the present moment, it arises from the
fullness of the Asiatic experience, which still contrasts so markedly with

European youth. If the everlasting conflict between order and chaos is for the
present typically European, it is because spiritual wars no less than physical
must be fought by those who are of military age. But the impetuosity of youth
cannot completely compensate for the insight of age, and we must demand of a
coming race that men should act with European energy, and think with Asiatic
calm—the old ideal taught by Krishna upon the field of battle:
“Indifferent to pleasure and pain, to gain and loss, to conquest and defeat,
thus make ready for the fight . . . . As do the foolish, attached to works, so
should the wise do, but without attachment, seeking to establish order in the
world.”
Europe, too, in violent reaction from the anarchy of laissez-faire, is
conscious of a will to the establishment of order in the world. But European
progress has long remained in doubt, because of its lack of orientation. It is
significant that the discovery of Asia should coincide with the present hour of
decision: for Asiatic thought again affirms the unity and interdependence of all
life, at the moment when Europe begins to realize that the Fruit of Life is not
easily attainable in a society based upon division. In honouring the genius of
Shakespeare, then, we do not merely offer homage to the memory of individual,
but are witnesses to the intellectual fraternity of mankind: and it is that fraternity
which assures us of the possibility of cooperation in a common task, the creation
of a social order founded on Union.
 
* Contributed to the “Book of Homage to Shakespeare," edited by Israel Gollancz, London 1916.

C
Cosmopolitan View of Nietzsche
ERTAINLY, Nietzsche was not a philosopher in the strict sense of the
word. He is essentially a poet and sociologist, and above all, a mystic. He
stands in the direct line of European mysticism, and though less profound,
speaks with the same voice as Blake and Whitman. These three might, indeed,
be said to voice the religion of modern Europe—the religion of Idealistic
Individualism. If it were realised that his originality does not consist in an
incomprehensible and unnatural novelty, but in a poetic restatement of a very old
position, it might be less needful to waste our breath in the refutation of theses
he never upheld.
It is true that we find in his work a certain violence and exaggeration: but its
very nature is that of passionate protest against unworthy values, Pharisaic
virtue, and snobisme, and the fact that this protest was received with so much
execration suggests that he may be a true prophet. The stone which the builders
rejected: Blessed are ye when men shall revile you. Of special significance is the
beautiful doctrine of the Superman—so like the Chinese concept, of the Superior
Man, and the Indian Maha Purusha, Bodhisattva and Jivan-mukta.
Amongst the chief marks of the mystic are a constant sense of the unity and
interdependence of all life, and of the interpenetration of the spiritual and
material—opposed to Puritanism, which distinguishes the sacred from the
secular. So too is the sense of being everywhere at home—unlike the religions of
reward and punishment, which speak of a future paradise and hell, and attach an
absolute and eternal value to good and evil. “All things,” he says, “are enlinked,
enlaced and enamored”: “I conjure you, my brethren, remain true to the earth,
and believe not those who speak to you of super earthly hopes”: “For me—how
could there be an outside of me? There is no outside”: “Every moment beginneth
existence, around every ‘Here’ rolleth the ball ‘There.’ The middle is
everywhere”: “Becoming must appear justified at every instant . . . the present
must not under any circumstances be justified by a future, nor the past be
justified for the sake of the present.” All these are characteristic mystic
intuitions, or logical deductions from monism, in close accord with the
Brahmanical formula, “That art thou.”
The doctrine of the Superman, whose virtue stands “beyond good and evil,”
who is at once the follower and the leader and saviour of men, has been put
forward again and again in the world’s history. A host of names for this ideal

occur in Indian literature: he is the Arhat (adept), Buddha (enlightened), Jina
(conqueror), Tirthakara (finder of the ford), the Bodhisattva (incarnation of the
bestowing virtue), and above all Jivan-mukta (freed in this life), whose actions
are no longer good or bad, but proceed from his freed nature.
Let us see what Nietzsche himself has to say of the Superman. “Upward
goeth our course onward from genera to super-genera. But a horror to me is the
degenerating sense, which saith ‘All for myself.’” Is that the doctrine of
selfishness? As well accuse the Upanishad, where it declares that all things are
dear to us for the sake of the Self. For the monist there is no true distinction of
selfish and unselfish, for all interests are identical. Self-realization is perfect
service, and our supreme and only duty is to become what we are (That art thou).
This is idealistic individualism, and this doctrine of inner harmony is valid on all
planes,1 for we are not saved by what we do, only by what we are. “Ye
constrain,” he says, “all things to flow towards you and into you, so that they
shall flow back again out of your fountain as the gifts of your love. Verily, an
appropriator of all values must such a bestowing love become: but healthy and
holy call I this selfishness . . . But another selfishness there is, an all-too-poor
and hungry kind, which would always steal—with the eye of the thief it looketh
upon all that is lustrous: with the craving of hunger it measureth him who hath
abundance: and ever doth it prowl round the table of bestowers.” It is the author
of a supposed apotheosis of the “Blonde Beast,” who exclaims: “Better to perish
than to fear and hate: far better to perish than to be feared and hated!”
Nietzsche has certainly a contempt for pity—that is, for sentimentalizing
over one’s own sufferings or those of others. Naturally, life is hard: for the
higher man it should be ever harder by choice. “My suffering and my fellow-
suffering—what matter about them!” “Ye tell me ‘Life is hard to bear.’ But for
what purpose should ye have your pride in the morning and your resignation in
the evening?” This is certainly different from the “greatest happiness of the
greatest number,” which Western democracies have made their aim.
It is hardly worthwhile to refer to those who bracket our poet-philosopher
and mystic with the Trietschkes and Crambs, and would make him one of the
prime instigators of a “Euro-Nietzschean” war. It would be easy to show by
quotation how he scorned alike the mediocrity of Germany and England, and
how he regarded France as “still the seat of the most intelligent and refined
culture of Europe,” and contrasted the French esprit with “our German infirmity
of taste.” Better than this, however, will be to show how well he understood the
fundamental unity of Europe—a unity of suffering now, but then as now a unity
of movement, by the side of which the present hatreds assume the proportions of
a mere episode—and how little he could ever have associated patriotism with

greatness:
“Owing,” he says, “to the morbid estrangement which the nationality-craze
has induced and still induces amongst the nations of Europe, owing also to the
short-sighted and hasty-handed politicians, who with the help of this craze, are at
present in power, and do not suspect to what extent the disintegrating policy they
pursue must necessarily be only an interlude policy—owing to all this, and much
more that is altogether unmentionable at present, the most unmistakable signs
that Europe wishes to be one, are now overlooked, or arbitrarily and falsely
misinterpreted. With all the more profound and large-minded men of this
century, the real general tendency of the mysterious labour of their souls was to
prepare the way for that new synthesis and tentatively to anticipate the European
of the future; only in their simulations, or in their weaker moments, in old age,
perhaps, did they belong to the ‘fatherlands’—they only rested from themselves
when they became ‘patriots.’ ” And what may be said to prove the truth of this
sense of European unity, which even ten years ago might have seemed a too
brilliant generalization, is the fact that we see now, that not only Europe, but the
whole world, and in precisely the same way, through the mysterious labours of
great men, has long striven to be one, and is now, perhaps for the first time in
history, within a measurable distance of realizing its unconscious purpose.
The “Will to Power” has nothing to do with tyranny—it is opposed alike to
the tyranny of the autocrat and the tyranny of the majority. The Will to Power
asserts that our life is not to be swayed by motives of pleasure or pain, the “pairs
of opposites,” but is to be directed towards its goal, and that goal is the freedom
and spontaneity of the Jivan-mukta. And this is beyond good and evil. This also
set out in the Bhagavad Gita: the hero must be superior to pity
(ashocyananvashocastvam); resolute for the fray, but unattached to the result,
for, as Whitman expresses it, “battles are lost in the same spirit in which they are
won.” If he be wounded, he will urge his comrades onward, rather than ask them
to delay to condole with him: and he will not insult them by supposing that they
in their turn would do otherwise. “Let your love be stronger than your pity”: but
that is not self-love, it is not even neighbour-love or patriotism—“Higher than
love to your neighbour is love to the furthest and future ones; higher still than
love to men is love to things and phantoms . . . ‘Myself do I offer unto my love,
and my neighbour as myself’—such is the language of all creators.” “Ah! that ye
understood my word,” he says: “do ever what ye will—but first be such as can
will. . . . He who cannot command himself shall obey.” This is infinitely remote
from the doctrine of “getting our own way” or “doing what we like”—“a horror
to us,” as he says, “is the degenerating sense, which saith ‘All for myself.’”
The teaching of Nietzsche is a pure nishkama dharma: “Do I then strive after

happiness? I strive after my work!” and “All those modes of thinking,” he says,
“which measure the worth of things according to pleasure and pain, are plausible
modes of thought and naïvetés, which everyone conscious of creative powers
and an artist’s conscience will look down upon with scorn.” For the Superman,
as we should say, is not swayed by the pairs of opposites. ‘Do what ye will’: this
doctrine is neither egotistic nor altruistic. Not egotistic, for to yield to all the
promptings of the senses, to be the slave of caprice, is to be moulded by our
environment, and the very reverse of far-willing: it is precisely himself the
Superman may not spare. It is not altruistic, for where there is naught external to
myself, there can be no altruism. The highest duty is that of self-realization.
“Physician, heal thyself,” exclaims Nietzsche: “then wilt thou also heal thy
patient. Let it be his best cure to see with his eyes him who maketh himself
whole.” This is nothing but the old doctrine of Chuang Tzu: “The sages of old
first got Tao for themselves, and then got it for others. Before you possess this
yourself, what leisure have you to attend to the doings of wicked men? Cherish
and preserve your own self, and all the rest will prosper of itself.” It reminds us
also of Jesus: “First cast out the mote from thine own eye.”
The leaders of humanity have never been such as have acted from a sense of
duty, in the ordinary sense of the word. Duty is but a means of playing safe for
those who lack the Bestowing Virtue. The activity of genius is not an obedience
to rules, but dedication of life to what is commanded from within, even though it
should appear to all others as evil.
Was Jesus humble, or did He
Give any proofs of humility?
When but a child He ran away,
And left His parents in dismay:
These were the words upon His tongue
“I am doing My Father’s business.”
What constitutes the virtue of any action is the complete coordination of the
actor. We should act according to our own nature: and when that nature has
developed to its fullest stature, then what is divine attains complete
manifestation. It is with preoccupations such as this that Nietzsche exclaims with
such profound conviction:
“That ye might become weary of saying: ‘that an action is good because it is
unselfish.’ Ah! my friends! That your very self be in your action, as the mother is
in the child: let that be your formula of virtue.”

This is the very prayer of Socrates, “and may the outward and inward man
be at one”—all else is hypocrisy. The inferior man regulates his life by externals:
inasmuch as he is constrained by desire for long life, reputation, riches, rank or
offspring, he is not free. The superior man is of another sort, and of him it may
be said, with Chuang Tzu, “that they live in accordance with their own nature. In
the whole world they have no equal. They regulate their life by inward things.”
“What are not the powerful doing?” says the Prema Sagara. “Who knows
their course of action? They, indeed, do nothing for themselves; but to those that
do them honour and seek their aid, they grant their prayers. Such is their path,
that they appear united to all; but upon reflection thou shalt perceive that they
stand aloof from all, as the lotus leaf from water.” “The man of perfect virtue”
(Superman), says Chuang Tzu again, “in repose has no thoughts, in action no
anxiety. He recognizes no right, nor wrong, nor good, nor bad. Within the Four
Seas, when all profit—that is his pleasure; when all share—that is his repose.
Men cling to him as children who have lost their mothers; they rally round him
as wayfarers who have missed their road.” For his is the Bestowing Virtue.
According to Ashvaghosha, too, “it is said that we attain to Nirvana and that
various spontaneous displays of activity are accomplished.” The Bodhisattvas do
not consider the ethics of their behaviour: “they have attained to spontaneity of
action, because their discipline is in unison with the wisdom and activity of all
Tathagatas.” “Jesus was all virtue, because he acted from impulse and not from
rules.” When Nietzsche says that the Superman is the meaning of the earth he
means what we mean when we speak of a Bodhisattva, or of a Jivan-mukta. This
type which represents the highest attainment and purpose of humanity is the
most difficult thing for self-assertive minds to grasp. A being “beyond good and
evil,” a law unto himself. “How wicked!” exclaims the ordinary man: “for even I
feel it my duty to conform to the rules of morality and to restrain my selfish
desires.”
Thus we shall never comprehend the selfishness which Nietzsche and other
mystics praise, if we interpret it according to the lights of those who believe that
all actions should be praiseworthy. The pattern of man’s behaviour is not to be
found in any code, but in the principles of the universe, which is continually
revealing to us its own nature. Consider the lilies . . .
There exists a voluptuousness that is not sensuality, a passion for power that
is not self-assertion, and a selfishness that is more generous than any altruism.
These are distinctions which Nietzsche himself is careful to insist upon, and only
willful misunderstanding ignores it. It is precisely of the great man who fails that
he says: “Once they thought of becoming heroes; but sensualists are they now.”
“Art thou the victorious one (jina),” he says, “the self-conqueror, the ruler of thy

passions, the master of thy virtues? Thus do I ask thee. Or does the animal speak
in thy wish, and necessity? or isolation? or discord in thee?” “What I warn
people against . . . confounding debauchery, and the principle ‘laisser aller’ (i. e.
‘never mind’) with the Will to Power—the latter is the exact reverse of the
former.” “And verily, it is no commandment for today and tomorrow to learn to
love oneself. Rather is it of all arts the finest, subtlest, last and patientest.” “True
and ideal selfishness consists in always watching over and restraining the soul,
so that our productiveness may come to a beautiful termination.”
So far, then, from a doctrine of self-indulgence, it is a form of asceticism or
ardor (tapas) which Nietzsche would have us impose on ourselves, if we are
strong enough. This was precisely the view of Manu when he established a
severe rule of life for the Brahman, and one far easier for the Shudra. And
understanding this, Nietzsche has praised the institution of caste, for he thought
it right that life should grow colder towards the summit. As the Markandeya
Purana pronounces, a Brahman should do nothing for the sake of enjoyment.
Those who have comprehended the decline and fall of Western civilization
will recognize in Nietzsche the reawakening of the conscience of Europe.

I
Young India
N ORDER to understand Young India, one must understand the world. What
is the meaning of youth or age in cycles of civilization, as well as in
individuals? In terms of reality, this is not a question of dates or years, but of
experience. India is at once unbelievably old and incredibly young, utterly
sophisticated and pathetically naïve. Her great achievements of the past—in
philosophy, art and social organization—possess an indestructible value, and
there can be no true citizenship of the world of which the roots do not reach back
into this ground, at least as far as they reach back into the classic culture of the
Mediterranean. There is no point at which the speculation, experiment, success
or failure which constitute Indian civilization do not touch the vital problems of
the present day. And yet we cannot say that modern India has created anything.
We stand in the West at the close of the great cycle of Christian civilization
which attained its zenith, let us say, in the twelfth or thirteenth century when the
creative will of man swept far beyond its personal boundaries, striving to
establish an order in the outer world to correspond with the universal order of the
world of imagination or eternity. From the thirteenth to the twentieth century one
can follow the progressive decay of life—the ever fainter expression of the
creative will, loosening social integration, the substitution of contract for status,
the advancement of material and moral to the exclusion of spiritual values, the
decline of vision, up to this present hour of pure chaos, when life and art are
evidence of centuries of aimlessness.
The war in Europe is no unfortunate accident, but the inevitable outcome of
European civilization. How clearly this was already apparent towards the close
of the nineteenth century is to be seen in the remarkable words of Viscount
Torio, published in 1890: “Occidental civilization . . . must ultimately end in
disappointment and demoralization . . . Peaceful equality can never be attained
until built up among the ruins of annihilated Western States and the ashes of
extinct Western peoples.” And, indeed, we cannot be surprised that the
philosophy of internecine peace should have been transferred at last to the
visible field of battle.
We feel that the intention this war has been to make the world safe for
exploitation; this might have been accomplished by a decisive victory on either
side. And “Victory breeds hatred: because the conquered are unhappy,’1 The best

one could hope for was that the struggle would go on long enough and be
sufficiently inconclusive to destroy the prestige of Imperialism and exploitation
for many centuries. Nevertheless, democracy understood politically as the
tyranny of a majority is no more congenial to liberty than an autocracy, for it
implants or assumes in every one the desire to govern. But those only are worthy
to govern, as the Chinese say, who would rather be excused. Representative
government has everywhere been found to involve no more than the victory of
the most powerful interests. And even revolts have not created liberty—
The Iron hand crushed the tyrant’s head
And became a tyrant in his stead.
Every oppressed nationality oppresses some other or embraces the
oppression of class by class. Our sympathies are then not only with the
oppressed, but with the oppressor, for both alike are in need of salvation from the
same group of false values. The liberty that we concede is of far greater
significance to us than any liberty we can take by force or receive by gift.
Perhaps we ought not to include the Russians in these criticisms. In Russia
more clearly than anywhere else, the religion of Europe—the idealistic
individualism of Blake and Whitman and Nietzsche—has found expression in art
and action. It is a tragic reflection that those who laid down their arms were not
wrong, but only too right. Yet we cannot collectively abandon the use of force in
a day or establish the kingdom of heaven in a week: to find the Paradise still
upon earth is possible only for the individual, never for the race . . . If we cannot
see our way to the end of all government, however, we can see that the least
amount of government it is possible to live with is the best, and the less we are
mixed up with it the better for us: or, rather, the better we are, the less we shall
wish to be involved in it. Needless to say, in refusing to govern, we do not refuse
to cooperate: but to accomplish this, we must serve, not one another, but ends
beyond ourselves.
Let us pause now to see what has been going on in India, and first to
consider the past as it survives side by side with the Young India that is the final
subject of our argument. Broadly contrasted with the opportunist industrial order
of today (“a desperately precarious institutional situation”),2 where the whole
energy of man is used up in making sure of mere existence, the civilization of
India presents to us the spectacle of something stable and leisurely: and this not
merely by virtue of some kind of inertia, but as the result of deliberate
organization based on a definite view (definite, whether right or wrong) of the

meaning and purpose of life. The principles of government are defined, not by
the interested, but by the disinterested; that is to say, by the philosopher who has
no personal ends to serve and no “stake in the country”; he is the law-giver, and
the status of the executive power is inferior. In a stable cooperative society the
achievement of mere life, the solution of the bare economic problem, is taken for
granted, and there remains abundant energy for the pursuit of the real ends of
life. These were defined in India in the famous formula of “Human Aim”
(purushartha), on the one hand temporarily as vocational activity (function, or
duty), winning wealth and enjoying pleasure; and on the other hand eternally as
spiritual freedom. Obviously the latter object is the main concern of all higher
men.
Here are the criteria of ethical judgment. That is a priori right, which tends
to the achievement of one or all of these ends (all being good in their degree or
kind), and that is wrong, which involves the attainment of any end not
appropriate to the individual concerned, or involves a failure to attain what is
appropriate. We speak of right or wrong accordingly as purely relative to
individuality and circumstance; and since all men are really unlike, it requires
but a slight development of the doctrine of “own-morality” of the vocational
groups, which is the basis of organized ethics, to reach the pure individualism
which is the ultimate religion alike of Asia and modern Europe. The individual
who attains this ground of liberty is called in India “jivan-mukta,” free in this
life, since nothing of himself is left in him. This is the concept of superman; but
it demands also the entirety of man at every stage of development. There can be
no doubt that this latter end of spiritual freedom—to become what we are—
dominated in India all others; so that the connotation of success in India has but
little in common with its connotation in America.
Let us speak of two conspicuous features of the Hindu social order. First, the
caste system. This system, of which the lines are drawn at once ethnically and
culturally (not pecuniarily), represents an integration (not a division) of society
in vocational groups internally democratic, and outwardly answerable to other
groups only for the fulfillment of their ‘own function.’ It is somewhat as if, for
example, the farmers of the whole United States should be answerable to the
community at large only for the production of good and sufficient food, in return
for the means of production guaranteed to them, while as a group they should
remain completely autonomous in all other respects, e. g., in matters of marriage
and divorce, education, wages and hours of labor, etc., while none could be
called on for any other public service than their own. In place of States, then, we
should have nation-wide, someday perhaps worldwide, vocational groups
directly founded on the instinct of workmanship and the inheritance of aptitude.

It was assumed in India that heredity determined birth in the appropriate
environment. This may have been true of an ordered society like that of ancient
India, but it could not apply to the melting pot, and we may expect that the
coming development of syndicalism will differ chiefly from the caste system in
permitting intermarriage and choice or change of occupation under certain
conditions, though still recognizing the general desirability of marriage within
the group and of following one’s parent’s calling. In such a reinstatement of the
instinct of workmanship in the West and a certain relaxation of caste rule in the
East, it is possible to foresee a common sociological agreement of the workers of
the world.
Secondly, marriage. In India the home is still the foundation of all social
thought; in Europe and America the home as determined by existing tradition is
already a lost cause—a profound distinction, and yet, under the same influences
the same result is bound to succeed even in India, though the ancient order may
be long in dying. The Indian marriage is an impersonal contract, undertaken as a
social debt, by men and women alike, not for happiness, but for the fulfillment
of social and religious duties. It is not based on romantic love or passion, and it
is indissoluble, just because it is undertaken for ends that are realizable apart
from individual interest. To be perfect wife or husband is not so much a question
of personal adaptation as of education, since ethical culture is achieved through
hero-worship and the general knowledge of epic literature. The end is a perfect
harmony based on self-forgetfulness—an order exquisite in form, and possibly
superior to the romantic concept of the harmony of selves which underlies the
modern theory of marriage or liaison based on love, but incongruous with our
necessity to prove for ourselves the spiritual and dynamic value of passion.
One further observation on the past: it was from beginning to end an era of
proficiency in handicraft, rather than of ingenious mechanism. The industrial arts
attained an unsurpassed perfection with great economy of means. Sculpture had
already declined, but painting and architecture were still at a very high level at
the end of the eighteenth century. Music, poetry and dancing survive today,
however, precariously.
In the nineteenth century we have to remark two special conditions beside
the survival of the past in the present. First, that the Indian culture was already
decadent, that is to say, suffering from the inevitable consequences of all
formulation. The formula, however admirable, is inherited rather than earned, it
becomes an end instead of a means, and its meaning is forgotten, so that it is
insecure. Secondly, political subjection coincided with the impact of the
industrial revolution and of the dead weight of empirical science apprehended
simply as the basis of economic success. All this implied a transvaluation of all

values, in an arbitrary rather than a constructive sense—in the main a
degradation of values and a diversion of energy compressing into half a century
a process that has occupied five hundred years in Europe.
Let us emphasize again that the war is merely the evidence and not the cause
of European chaos: there is immediate hope for Europe since he that is down
need fear no fall. Western civilization stands at the beginning of a new
movement, and is not without renewed religious motivation. But India affords
the most tragic spectacle of the world, since we see there a living and
magnificent organisation, akin to, but infinitely more complete than that of
mediaeval Europe, still in the process of destruction. Inheriting incalculable
treasure, she is still incalculably poor, and most of all in the naiveté with which
she boasts of the poverty that she regards as progress. One questions sometimes
whether it would not be wiser to accelerate the process of destruction than to
attempt to preserve the broken fragments of the great tradition.
It is hard to realize how completely the continuity of Indian life has been
severed. A single generation of English education suffices to break the threads of
tradition and to create a nondescript and superficial being deprived of all roots—
a sort of intellectual pariah who does not belong to the East or the West, the past
or the future. The greatest danger for India is the loss of her spiritual integrity. Of
all Indian problems the educational is the most difficult and most tragic. As
things now stand it is dominated by political considerations in the sense that
loyalty is more essential than personality in a teacher—even university
professors are subject to espionage and their activity to censorship: it is
dominated by economic considerations, too, for the present system is really a
vested interest in the hands of Macmillans and Longmans and the younger
graduates of English universities, while the power of the missionary school is
derived from the contributions of those who are interested much more in
proselytizing than in education. In all government and missionary institutions
there is the widest possible divergence between the ideals of the school and the
ideals of the home: the teachers do not in one case in a hundred effect any real
contact with their pupils, whatever they may believe to the contrary.
Modern pedagogic theory teaches us that the aim of education should be not
so much the levelling up of faculties and the production of uniform types as the
intensive cultivation of the faculties we have. Ruskin was never more right than
when he said that education means finding out what people have tried to do, and
helping them to do it better. There has been no “finding out” in India, but only a
complete inversion of values. And what does this imply? From the home to the
world, from freedom of the spirit it was the aim of every great Hindu to attain,
from the great example of Bhishma and Rama, from the pursuit and acquisition

of Yoga, from the celestial songs of Radha and Krishna, from the knowledge
which is in unity to the knowledge of manifold things, this was a descent from
the Himalayas to the plains.3 It is true that this was inevitable. The English, in
spite of Macaulay and Cramb, are not entirely to blame for it. A renunciation of
what appears to be obsolete is justified; political and economic problems cannot
be ignored; man and man’s world are still to be explored: but with all that there
has been too little love, too much of snobism, too indiscriminate a taste, and too
little distaste, and now only the greatest souls by a supreme effort can achieve a
synthesis of the past and the future.
In the midst of all these conditions we have seen the rise of Indian
Nationalism, the growth of Young India. Fundamentally this has been a political
movement covering a wide range of purposes, from those of the Moderates who
desire to see a gradual progress towards colonial self-government, to those of the
Extremists who would like to see the last Englishmen driven out of India at the
earliest opportunity.
There is no question but that India has had and still has many just
grievances, some inseparable from any foreign domination and some peculiar to
the present situation. For example, Indians are excluded to a very large extent
from the higher paid posts of the civil and educational service: while India is
freely open to British economic exploitation, Indian settlers are arbitrarily
excluded from other parts of the Empire. The system of police espionage and the
searching of private houses, the censorship of private correspondence, the law
against the possession of arms, the not infrequent imprisonment and even
deportation of influential men without charge or trial, and particular measures
such as the partition of Bengal are constant provocatives of a very natural
resentment. The color prejudice is such that educated Indians are often insulted
by Englishmen in railway trains and to all intents and purposes are excluded
from English society. Many of these grievances depend immediately on the fact
that India is never regarded by the Englishman as his home: a conquest resulting
in the establishment of an English dynasty related by marriage to the Indian
aristocracy (however the latter might have resented it), and identified with Indian
interests, would have involved far more vital integrations than now exist. This
was what happened in the case of the Mughals. As it is, the sympathy between
rulers and ruled and the common understanding are admittedly less than was the
case fifty years ago.
A large part of the Indian unrest is, of course, economic, and due to the
disturbance of settled conditions by industrial competition, and the impact of the
era of technology upon an era of handicraft. Conditions of this kind are not so
much traceable to foreign domination as to worldwide economic disorder. As for

the war, it can only be said to concern the Indians indirectly, or rather, they are
directly concerned only because of the political association with Britain. It is
interesting to note that two particular grievances have been remedied since the
outbreak of the war: the excise duty on cotton has been removed, and very
recently, Indians have been allowed to qualify as commissioned officers. It is
certain that far-reaching changes in the direction of self-government will be
made immediately after the war, and this must result equally from the actual
situation and from the principles of freedom to which the Allies have declared
their allegiance. It is, however, with a certain distaste that one is compelled to
enumerate these various grievances and to refer to the inevitable resentments
they must evoke: for Indian national idealism has a wider significance than the
redress of grievances.
Moderate nationalism has found expression not only in political, but also in
economic, social and educational activities. Economically in the Swadeshi
(‘own-country’) movement, which, despite the heroic idealism of communities
and individuals, in the main represents a rather pathetic endeavour to ‘get back’
at European trade, without much reference to the quality or desirability of
particular industries or the conditions of manufacture. Indian economists are still
or have remained until very recently in the early Victorian stage, enthusiastic
believers in factory production and laissez-faire. Even in Western universities the
student is rarely brought in touch with current thought, and this is still more true
of universities in India. The Indian student has little opportunity to realize that
the accepted forms of European thought are necessarily far behind its real
development. Western society is in process of such rapid change that it must be
regarded as tragic or ridiculous that the prestige of power should have provoked
imitation: and this at the best implies provincialism, for sociological, like
sartorial fashions, travel round the world at second hand long after they have
been forgotten at their source. Creation or death.
Social endeavor has been in the nature of what is here known as “uplift,” and
has been especially directed to the elevation of the depressed classes, the
reduction of caste institutionalism, and the “emancipation” of women. A
recrudescence of puritanism, like a return to the early Buddhist fear of the world,
but really of Christian missionary and bourgeois origin, and no better reasoned
than similar movements in modern America, leads to the condemnation of
exquisite national costumes as “indecent” and to absurd apologies for classic
literature and art: and the dancer has been driven from the temple to the streets.
We must class here also as Moderate activities such movements as are
represented by the Bengal National College, the Fergusson College, Poona, the
diffusion of popular education in Baroda, and part of the work of the Arya

Samaj, and the Servants of India. The effects are meritorious rather than
inspiring. Sometimes the genuine English educationalist, seeking to restore the
Indian classics or vernaculars to their real place in Indian curricula, is met by the
determined opposition of the Nationalists: and it is not without reason that
Professor Patrick Geddes, who, I am glad to say, has been entrusted with the
organization of the Hindu University at Benares4 has remarked that it would be a
mistake to allow the Europeanized Indian graduates to have their way with
Indian education: “that would be continuing our mistake,” as he says, “not
correcting it.”
There have been somewhat parallel developments in religion, typified in the
eclecticism of the Brahmo Samaj—a sort of Unitarianism combining Hindu
philosophy with Nonconformist ethics.
The keynote of most of these activities, as of the political programme of the
National Congress and the Moderate press, is to be recognized in a complete
acceptance of European models, and, indeed, of European sources of inspiration:
they represent the just wish of Indians to do for themselves what is now done or
left undone by others. But this is a somewhat uninspiring and insufficient
programme, regarded from the standpoint of futurist Europeans, who expect
from the East, not a repetition of their own mistakes, but a positive contribution
to the solution of problems that face the whole world, and no longer merely a
single race or continent.
The beauty and logic of Indian life belong to a dying past: the nineteenth
century has degraded much and created nothing. If any blame for this is to be
laid on alien shoulders, it should be only in the sense that if it must be that
offences come, woe unto them through whom they come. It is an ungrateful and
unromantic task to govern a subject race. England could not in any case have
inspired a new life: the best she could have done would have been to understand
and conserve through patronage and education the surviving categories of Indian
civilization—architecture, music, handicrafts, popular and classic literature, and
schools of philosophy—and that she failed here is to have been found wanting in
imagination and sympathy. It should not have been regarded as the highest ideal
of Empire “to give to all men an English mind.”
If I speak now of the Idealists as distinguished from the Moderates, it is
because they alone possess a genuine sense of the future. Needless to say, it is
not the idealist who is “impatient”: it is the opportunist who has not the patience
to pursue a distant end. It should also be emphasized that there is never a hard
and fast line separating the Idealist from the Moderate; these are types that may
be combined in a single individual, and are almost always represented in any
group. I also dismiss the questions of disloyalty and sedition as irrelevant for the

present discussion: and as I have said elsewhere, loyalty is too often
sentimentality or interest and disloyalty no more than irritation—if loyalty were
always friendship and disloyalty detachment one could welcome either.
The first reaction of the idealist is recognizable in disillusion. He begins to
see that people are not inspired or made happy by government but by themselves
—he loses faith in politics, and turns to direct action, more often than otherwise,
educational. He is no longer deceived by the prestige of European power—very
often he has lived for many years in Europe or America, and has learnt to regard
both “progress” and “civilization” with distaste and distrust. He begins to see
things as they really are and regards his Indian life no longer with
disparagement, but with a new understanding and affection. He begins to see that
life is an art, and is rather a means than an end.
The first expression of national idealism is then a rehabilitation of the past.
We have turned from the imitation of European formulae to follow the historical
development of our own beliefs, our architecture, sculpture, music and literature,
and of all the institutions, social and religious, with which they are inseparably
intertwined; and to preserve and defend the Prolific against the Devourers. This
is fundamentally a process of creative introspection preparatory to renewed
activity.
It does not matter that the realization of what we have lost has come too late:
this was inevitable. For a moment, perhaps, we desired to turn back the hands of
the clock, but that was only sentimentality, and it was not long before we
remembered that fresh waters are ever flowing in upon us. We have learnt that
we are exiled; but we would not and cannot return. In India, as in Europe, the
vestiges of ancient civilization must be renounced: we are called from the past
and must make our home in the future. But to understand, to endorse with
passionate conviction, and to love what we have left behind us is the only
possible foundation for power. If the time has hardly yet come for the creation of
new values—and it cannot long be delayed—let us remember that time and
suffering are essential to all creation.
We see now springing up all over India societies of literary or historical
research or sociological experiment, and schools of national education. In
Bengal, for example, the Sahitya Parishad (library, MSS. and research), in the
United Provinces the Nagari Pracharini Sabha (Hindu texts and a great
dictionary), in Poona the Gayan Samaj (study and encouragement of pure
music), in Madura the Tamil Sangam (modelled after the old Tamil literary
academies), religious organizations such as the Arya Samaj (in part), the
Ramakrishna order, the Vivekananda societies, and the Theosophical society (in
part): and the Buddhist revival in Ceylon. There are signs of life even in the

universities, though the most interesting development in this direction is the
newly established Hindu University in Benares, which gives at least an equal
place to indigenous and to foreign learning. A time must come and will come
when Indian universities will become more places of pilgrimage for foreign
students. Beside this there are many individual Indian scholars publishing their
results in association with European savants, with the Archaeological Survey of
India or through the various Asiatic societies or in separate volumes. Private
collections of ancient works of art are being made and interest is taken in
museums and the preservation of ancient monuments.
The inner meaning of most of these activities is to be found in the concept of
National Education: a return to the aims of Oriental education in general, the
development of personality rather than the mere acquisition of knowledge, and
above all, a reunion of those links of understanding which have been so roughly
broken: and to the end that we may see the last of those “educated” Indians who
are Indian only in name. Up till now the sterility of higher education in India has
been far more unfortunate than the absence of elementary literary education for
the masses and for women. The latter have always possessed and have not yet
lost, what the progressive amongst the men have lost, the incalculable advantage
of familiarity through oral tradition with an epic literature vast in amount and
saturated with a great philosophy. To some extent, indeed, India may be said to
be now a land of cultivated peasants and uncultivated leaders—“Their ordinary
Plowmen and Husbandmen,” said Knox without exaggeration, “do speak
elegantly and are full of compliment. And there is no difference between the
ability and speech of a Countryman and a Courtier”—a fact which affords us a
good deal of food for reflection.
Amongst the schools of national education two or three are of special
importance: Sir Rabindranath Tagore’s school at Bolpur, the Kalasala at
Masulipatam, and the Gurukula of the Arya Samaj at Hardwar. In all these the
mother tongue is made the medium of instruction, and English takes a second
though still very important place: there had been danger of creating an educated
class unable to express itself perfectly in any language. The Gurukula, it has
been said very truly, is perhaps the most fascinating educational experiment in
the world. It is for boys of all castes, from the highest to the lowest, and no
distinctions are made. Tuition is free and the teachers are unpaid. The first seven
years are devoted entirely to Sanskrit, religion and physical culture, and the
twelve years following to Western literature, science and laboratory work: at the
age of twenty-five the man is ready to go out into the world. During the whole of
this time the pupils remain in charge of their teacher, without returning home,
nor are they permitted to meet any women except their mothers. There are

institutions for the education of girls on somewhat similar but less severe lines:
since the marriage of spiritual equals is taken for granted in the foundations of
Hindu society. The most conspicuous feature of the system is its return to the
impersonal and philosophic concepts of culture which have always been
characteristic of the East, and the combination of this ancient wisdom with
modern and practical knowledge.
At the same time the return of idealism has brought with it a renewed
appreciation of indigenous art and popular mythology, and has sought expression
in creative activity. These matters have been closed books to the politicians and
social reformers: even now there is perhaps no country in the world so
completely lacking in cultivated and conscious taste as modern India, for as we
have said, all that is so beautiful in the life that we see by riverside, in temples or
homes, and in the streets, is merely an inheritance, and those who have been
mis-educated would gladly exchange it all for the cheapest commercial art of
Western stores and music halls and for the villa architecture of a London suburb.
There has been a revival of painting in Bengal, inspired by Abanindronath
Tagore and his brother, nephews of the well known poet. But important as this
movement has been, its main significance belongs to appreciation rather than
production. It may be compared rather to the work of the pre-Raphaelites than to
that of the great post-Impressionists—the time for these has, not yet arrived. It
has proved impossible for those who have not seen the ancient gods to represent
them: and the powers to be are not yet seen or heard, only the movement of their
dance is faintly felt.
But for the great idealists of younger India, nationalism is not enough.
Patriotism is parochial, and even banal, and there are finer parts great souls may
play. Certainly not as missionaries or propagandists—the day has gone by for
sectarian groupings and for invitations to be “one of us”: but as equally
concerned with all others in the exploration of the thousand paths that have
never yet been trodden. It is life, and not merely Indian life that claims our
loyalty. The pursuit of mere liberty is not enough: it is not his happiness, but his
task that concerns the idealist. For those who pursued distant end there is no time
to devote to what is momentary.
Freedom is always open to those who are free. And free for what? For the
very same ends that are foreseen by the idealists of Europe: how could there be a
divergence of idealism from idealism? The chosen people of the future cannot be
any nation or race, but an aristocracy of the earth uniting the virility of European
youth to the serenity of Asiatic age. Already the leaders of thought in every
nation understand each other very well, and all significant movements are
international and worldwide—as has always been the case to a greater extent

than we are apt to realize. We only await the declaration of peace to renew our
camaraderie with the other idealists, and meanwhile we will not betray our
common cause. The flowering of humanity is more to us than the victory of any
party. The only condition of a renewal of life in India, or elsewhere, should be a
spiritual, not merely an economic and political awakening, and it is on this
ground alone that it will ever be possible to bridge the gulf which has been
supposed to divide the East from the West.
To the idealist all interests are identical because all life is one. The only and
real significance of Young India for the world will be revealed in the great men
who are given to the common life: one great philosopher, poet, painter, scientist
or singer shall be accounted in the last judgment more than all the concessions
won by all the Congresses in a hundred years.
And so while India is occupied with national education and social
reconstruction at home, she must also throw in her lot with the world: what we
need for the creation of a common civilization is the recognition of common
problems, and to cooperate in their solution.
Meanwhile it is not sufficient for the Western world to stand aside from the
development of Asia, with idle curiosity or apprehension wondering what will
happen next. There is serious danger that the degradation of Asia will ultimately
menace the security of European social idealism, for the standing of idealism is
even more precarious in modern Asia than in modern Europe: and that would be
a strange nemesis if European post-Industrialists should ultimately be defeated
by an Industrialism or Imperialism of European origin established in the East!
Asia is like the artist in the modern city—doing nothing great, mainly
because nothing heroic is demanded of him: it is enough if he pleases and
amuses us, we do not take him seriously. It is with something of this romantic
attitude that Europe and America have regarded India. The merely philological
studies of the universities have been conducted in such an arid fashion as to be
comparatively inaccessible to artistic spirits: on the other hand, Indian thought
has been popularized and perverted in many forms that are vague, mysterious,
and feminine, and so brought into disrepute. What is really needed is a point of
view which is practical, rather than scholastic or sentimental: some power to
grasp what is essential disentangled by clear thinking from a mass of incorrect
assumptions. The challenge of the East is very precise: To what end is your life?
Without an answer to this question there may indeed be change, but progress is
impossible; for without a sense of direction, who knows if we do not return upon
our footsteps in everlasting circles? I conclude then with this reminder: that the
future of India depends as much upon what is asked of her as upon what she is.


T
~ Individuality, Autonomy and Function1 ~
HE object of government is to make the governed behave as the governors
wish. This is true of ‘good’ and ‘bad’ government alike, and alike of the
rule of a conqueror, of a hereditary monarchy and of majority government by
representation.
The repudiation of tyranny must ultimately involve a repudiation of majority
rule. Consider a community of five. It is impossible to deny that the rule of three,
in so far as it affects the other two, is as much an arbitrary constraint as the rule
of one affecting the other four. It is very liable to be less intelligent. In any case,
however, the rule of three becomes, on the basis of votes, a rule of two: and a
majority government will mean the rule of two over three.
Inasmuch, however, as each of the five is unique, and ‘one law for the lion
and the ox is oppression,’ there can be no entirely just solution outside the
autonomy of each. This, which is widely admitted to be true for nations, is no
less true for individuals.
From an existing tyranny it is possible to arrive at an individual autonomy in
two ways. In the first place four of the five may revolt against the arbitrary rule
of the one, setting up in place of it the rule of the majority. The remaining two
may then assert their ‘right’ of self-determination as against the majority.
Ultimately each of the five will become autonomous: each, as it were, sitting
armed in his own house, prepared to repel the intruder. This may be described as
a disintegration sanctioned by the presumed diversity of interests which a
pluralistic philosophy must assert.
Since, however, each still desires to govern (to feel it one’s ‘duty’ to govern
is only the same thing in other words), and nothing prevents the exercise of
governing powers but fear of resistance, the desire will be translated into action
as soon as opportunity affords: and one, or a group of two, three, or four of the
five must be regarded as merely awaiting (consciously or unconsciously) the
favorable moment. In the meantime co-operation for common ends is excluded
by mutual suspicion: each of the five will have to exercise all of the functions
necessary to the existence of an individual, and only a fraction of the activity of
each will be vocational. This is the inevitable consequence of resistance, and of
that sort of desire to take part in government which finds expression in the
demand for votes.

The anarchy approached by self-assertion, however justified, is therefore the
anarchy of chaos: resistances, however inevitable, can of itself only create an
unstable equilibrium, which must tend to reconstitute the status quo ante.
The second approach to individual autonomy is through renunciation—a
repudiation of the will to govern. As we are speaking in terms of time, we must
conceive of this idea as originating with one of the five, and spreading to the
others. Let us, however, ignore the transition period, and suppose that the idea of
government has become, for each of the five, even more distasteful than the idea
of being governed.
In this situation there is nothing to prevent a recognition of common
interests, or co-operation to achieve them (co-operation is not government). This
will be an integration founded on the presumed identity of all interests which a
monistic philosophy must assert. Neither of the five will expect to receive from
any of the others something for nothing: but the principle of mutual aid or co-
operation will permit each one to fulfill his own function. Activity will be
vocational, that is to say, willing.
The anarchy approached by renunciation is thus anarchy of spontaneity: only
a renunciation of the will to govern could create a stable equilibrium. Everyone
who believes in the self-determination of national groups is to that extent an
anarchist. And while we must acknowledge that a state of entire liberty can
never be attained, because the will to govern can never be totally eradicated,
nevertheless it can be shown that activity based on anarchic principles may be
and often is far more immediately and practically effective than an activity of
control. Contrast, for example, the result of granting a large measure of
autonomy to the Boers with the consequences of withholding it in Ireland.
“The last ideal of a future state,’’ says Dmitri Merezhkovski, “can only
consist in the creation of new religious forms of thought and affairs; a new
religious synthesis between the individual and society, composed of unending
love and unending liberty.” Far be it from me to assert that such a millennium
could ever be realized. But he who knows not whither he saileth knows not which
is a fair or a foul wind for him. It cannot be unwise to shape our course towards
the desired haven. So much, at least, is possible to every individual: and only he
is an individualist in truth, who does not will to govern any other than himself.
The ‘will to govern’ must not be confused with the ‘will to power.’ The will
to govern is the, will to govern others: the will to power is the will to govern
oneself.
Those who would be free should have the will to power without the will to
govern. If such as these are chosen to advise the executive, which cannot be
entirely dispensed with, this should tend to the greatest degree of freedom and

justice practically possible.

Notes
WHAT HAS INDIA CONTRIBUTED TO HUMAN WELFARE
1 Lest I should seem to exaggerate the importance which Hindus attach to
Adhyatmavidya, the Science of the Self, I quote from the ‘Bhagavad Gita,’ ix. 2:
“It is the kingly science, the royal secret, sacred surpassingly. It supplies the only
sanction and support to righteousness, and its benefits may be seen even with the
eyes of the flesh as bringing peace and permanence of happiness to men”; and
from Manu, xii. 100: “Only he who knows the Vedashastra, only he deserves to
be the Leader of Armies, the Wielder of the Rod of Law, the King of Men, the
Suzerain and Overlord of Kings.”
The reader who desires to follow up the subject of this essay is strongly
recommended to the work of Bhagavan Das, ‘The Science of Social
Organization,’ London and Benares, 1910.
2 Brahman, Kshattriya, Vaishya, Shudra—the four primary types of
Brahmanical sociology, viz., philosopher and educator, administrator and soldier,
tradesman and herdsman, craftsman and labourer.
3 Dhammapada, 87; also the Jatakamala of Arya Shura, xix, 27.
4 Viscount Torio in The Japan Daily Mail, November 19th-20th, 1890. The
whole essay, of which a good part is quoted in Lafcadio Hearn’s ‘Glimpses of
Unfamiliar Japan,’ is a searching criticism of Western polity, regarded from the
standpoint of a modern Buddhist.
5 Deussen, The Philosophy of the Upanishads, translated by A.S. Geden,
London, 1906.
6 The ‘Mahabharata’ and ‘The Ramayana,’ translated by R. C. Dutt,
Everymans Library.
7 This most important document is best expounded by Bhagavan Das, The
Science of Social Organization, London and Benares, 1910; also translated in
full in the ‘‘Sacred Books of the East,” vol. xxv. “Herein,” says Manu (i. 107,
118), “are declared the good and evil results of various deeds, and herein are
expounded the eternal principles of all the four types of human beings, of many
lands, nations, tribes, and families, and also the ways of evil men.”
8 N. N. Law, Studies in Ancient Hindu Polity, London, 1914. The following
precept may serve as an example of the text: that the king who has acquired new
territory “should follow the people in their faith, with which they celebrate their
national, religious, and congregational festivals and amusements.”

9 It is a common convention of Indianists to print the word “self” in lower
case when the ego (jivatman) is intended, and with a capital when the higher
self, the divine nature (paramatman), is referred to. Spiritual freedom—the true
goal—is the release of the self from the ego concept.
10 Dharma is that morality by which a given social order is protected. “It is
by Dharma that civilization is maintained” (Matsya Purana, cxlv. 27). Dharma
may also be translated as social norm, moral law, order, duty, righteousness, or
as religion, mainly in its exoteric aspects.
11 Purushartha. This is the Brahmanical formula of utility, forming the
standard of social ethics. A given activity is useful, and therefore right, if it
conduces to the attainment of dharma, artha, kama and moksha (function,
prosperity, pleasure, and spiritual freedom), or any one or more of these without
detriment to any other. Brahmanical utility takes into account the whole man.
Industrial sociologists entertain a much narrower view of utility: “It is with
utilities that have a price that political economy is mainly concerned”
(Nicholson, Principles of Political Economy, ed. 2, p. 28).
12 Manu, x. 126.
13 Manu, xi. 63, 64, 66. ‘A truly progressive society is only possible where
there is unity of purpose. How rapidly the social habit can then be changed is
well illustrated by the action of many of the Allied Governments in taking
control of several departments of industrial production. It is only sad to reflect
that it needed a great disaster to compel so simple an act as the limitation of
profits. In the same way vast sums are now spent on caring for the welfare of an
army of soldiers who would be, and will again be, left to the tender mercies of
the labour market in times of peace. If the nation were as united in peace by a
determination to make the best of life how much could not be accomplished at a
fraction of the cost of war? If a nation can co-operate for self-defence, why not
also for self-development?’
14 Manu, ii. 218.
15 Manu, ix. 45. “The man is not the man alone; he is the man, the woman,
and the progeny. The Sages have declared that the husband is the same as the
wife.”
16 1 do not only refer to the two world wars, as such, but civilization at the
parting of the ways.
17 1 should like to point out here that Mr. Lowes Dickinson’s return to this
position (‘An Essay on India, China, and Japan,’ and ‘Appearances,’ both
1914), is very unfortunate. He says the religion of India is the Religion of
Eternity, the religion of Europe the Religion of Time, and chooses the latter.

These phrases, by the way, are excellent renderings of Pravritti dharma and
Nivritti dharma. So far as Mr. Dickinson’s distinction is true, in so far that is as
India suffers from premature vairagya, and Europe from excessive activity, so
far each exhibits an excess which each should best be able to correct. But an
antithesis of this sort is only conceptually possible, and no race or nation has
ever followed either of the religions exclusively. All true civilization is the due
adjustment of the two points of view. And just because this balance has been so
conspicuously attained in India, one who knows far more of India than Mr.
Dickinson remarks that she “may yet be destined to prepare the way for the
reconciliation of Christianity with the world, and through the practical
identification of the spiritual with the temporal life, to hasten the period of that
third step forward in the moral development of humanity, when there will be no
divisions of race, creed, or class, or nationality between men, by whatsoever
name they may be called, for they will all be one in the acknowledgment of their
common Brotherhood” (Sir George Birdwood, Sva, p. 355).
18 The ideal of self-determination (sva-raj) for which the Allies claimed to
be fighting in both world wars.
19 For example—and without the least ill-will—the English in India who
unconsciously created social confusion simply because they could not
understand what they saw, and endeavored to fit a co-operative structure into the
categories of modern political theory.
20 “S. C. Basu, The Daily Practice of the Hindus, 2nd ed., p. 4.
HINDU VIEW OF ART: HISTORICAL
1 Agni Purana, ch, xliii. Cf. Patanjali, Yoga Sutra, 1, 38. For the theory of
dreams see also Katha Upanishad, v. 8, and Brihadaranyaka Upanishad, iv. 3, 9-
14 and 16-18.
2 Condensed from Foucher, Iconographie Bouddhique, 11, 8-11.
3 Similar views are met with again and again in modern aesthetic. Goethe
perceived that he who attains to the vision of beauty is from himself set free:
Riciotto Canudo remarks that the secret of all art is self-forgetfulness: and
Laurence Binyon that “we too should make ourselves empty, that the great soul
of the universe may fill us with its breath (Ideas of Design in East and West,
Atlantic Monthly, 1913).
4 Wagner speaks of “an internal sense which becomes clear and active when
all the others, directed outward, sleep or dream" (Combarieu, Music, its Laws

and Evolution, p. 63). That God is the actual theme of all art is suggested by
Shankaracharya in the commentary on the Brahma Sutra, i, i, 20-21, where he
indicates the Brahman as the real theme of secular as well as spiritual songs: and
according to Behmen, “It is nought indeed but thine own hearing and willing that
do hinder thee, so that thou dost not see and hear God (Dialogues on the Super
sensual Life).
5 Cf. the phrase “Devam bhutva, devam yajet”: to worship the god become
the god. That which remains for us object, remains unknown.
6 “He who does not imagine in stronger and better lineaments,’’ said Blake,
“and in stronger and better light than his perishing mortal eye can see, does not
imagine at all.”
7 Phyllanthus emblica, the round fruit of which is about the size of an
ordinary marble. The simile is a common Indian formula for clear insight.
8 Ramayana, Balakandam.
9 Cf. Coomaraswamy and Duggirala, The Mirror of Gesture, Introduction, p.
3. So Vasubandhu speaks of the poet as seeing the world, like a jujube fruit,
lying within the hollow of his hands (Vasavadatta, invocation). “It seems to me,”
William Morris wrote, “that no hour of the day passes that the whole world does
not show itself to me”: and Magnusson records of him, referring to Sigurd the
Volsung and other poems, that “in each case the subject matter had taken such a
clearly definite shape in his mind, as he told me, that it only remained to write it
down.”
10 Croce, Aesthetic, pp. 162, 168.
11 Jung, Psychology of the Unconscious, pp. 330, 336.
12 “The lineaments of images,” says Shukracharya, “are determined by the
relation which subsists between the adorer and the Adored.” Cf. the Shaiva
invocation “Thou that dost take the forms imagined by thy worshippers.”
13 We cannot assert this too strongly of orthodox or classic (shastriya) Hindu
art. Rajput painting is more romantic, but even there the theme is pre-determined
in literature, and the pictures, though they are not illustrations in the
representative sense of the word, are pictures for verses just as much as the
Ajanta paintings or the reliefs of Borobodur.
14 “Even the misshapen image of a god,” says Shukracharya, “is to be
preferred to the image of a man, however charming”: in full accord with our
modern view, that prefers conviction to prettiness.
15 From a Tamil version of a Shilpa Shastra, quoted by Kearns, Indian
Antiquary, vol. v., 1876.
16Grünwedel, Mythologie des Buddhismus, p. 192. Cf. Cezanne, “I have

never permitted anyone to watch me while I work. I refuse to do anything before
anyone” (quoted W. H. Wright, Modern Painting, p. 152).
17 Kearns, loc. cit.
18 The Sociology is discussed more fully in Sir George Birdwood’s
Industrial Arts of India, and Sva, and my Mediaeval Sinhalese Art and The
Indian Craftsman.
19 The beginnings of Hindu art also go back to the second or third century B.
C., but apart from a few coins, little or nothing has been preserved of earlier date
than the third or fourth century A. D. But its origins are recognizable in the
Harappa culture of the third millennium B. C. Mohenjs-Daro-Harappa.
HINDU VIEW OF ART: THEORETICAL
1 Especially Vishvanatha in the Sahitya Darpana, ca. 1450 A. D. (trans.
Bibliotheca Indica, Ballantyne). Also in the Agni Purana, and the Vyakti Viveka.
2 As remarked by W. Rothenstein, “What is written upon a single work
should enable people to apply clear principles to all works they may meet with”
(Two Drawings by Hok’sai, 1910). Also Benedetto Croce, “laws relating to
special branches are not conceivable” (Aesthetic, p. 350).
3 Such words as saundarya and rupa should be translated as loveliness or
charm.
No one suggests that metre makes poetry. This error was hardly to be
expected in a country where even the dryest treatises on law and logic are
composed in metre. Metrical poetry is padya kavya, prose poetry is gadya kavya,
but it is rasa that makes them poetry.
4 Dhanamjaya, Dasharupa, iv. 1.
5 Or any two rasas combined.
6 Dasharupa, iv. 46.
7 Bharata, Natya Shastra, 7, 8.
8 Dasharupa, iv. 45.
Blake, too, says that “Knowledge of Ideal Beauty is not to be acquired. It is
born with us.” And as P’u Sung-ling remarks “Each interprets in his own way
the music of heaven; and whether it be discord or not, depends upon antecedent
causes” (Giles, Strange Stories from a Chinese Studio, p. xvii).
9 Dasharupa, 1, 6.
10 Dasharupa, iv. 50. Cf. Goethe. “He who would work for the stage . . .
should leave Nature in her proper place and take careful heed not to have

recourse to anything but what may be performed by children with puppets upon
boards and laths, together with sheets of cardboard and linen”—quoted in ‘The
Mask,’ Vol. v. p. 3.
11 Jiban-smriti, pp. 134-5.
12 Dasharupa, iv. 47.
13 The likeness of aesthetic to linguistic is indicated in Dasharupa, iv. 46.
14 Vakyam rasatmakam vacakam—Sahitya Darpana, 3.
15 vv. 33, 51, 53, 54.
16 Wonder is defined as a kind of expanding of the mind in ‘admiration.’
17 The expression rasasvadana is fictitious, because rasasvadana is rasa, and
vice versa. In esthetic contemplation, as in perfect worship, there is identity of
subject and object, cause and effect.
18 The rasika is therefore unable to convince the Philistine by argument: he
can but say, Taste and see that it is good—for I know in what I have believed.
19 Clive Bell, Art, p. 54.
20 Bhagavad Gita, 111, 14.
THAT BEAUTY IS A STATE
1 Rasa, rasavant and rasika are the principal terms of Indian aesthetics,
explained in the preceding chapter.
2 Cf. “The secret of art lies in the artist himself”—Kuo Jo Hsu, (12th
century), quoted in The Kokka, No. 244.
3 Walt Whitman.
4 E. G. Riciotto Canudo: “It is certain that the secret of all art . . . lies in the
faculty of self-oblivion”—(Music as a Religion of the Future).
BUDDHIST PRIMITIVES
1 Cullavagga, vi, 3, 2.
2 Vishvakarma, 80, 81.
3 Vishvakarma, 64.
4 Vishvakarma, 26.
5 A much later example of the same arrangement is illustrated in
Vishvakarma, 75.
6 Bhagavad Gita, vi, 10-21—omitting the theistic elements.

7 Foucher (A.), L’Origine grecque de I’Image du Bouddha, Paris, 1913. p.
31.
8 Spooner, D. B. Archaeological Survey of India, Ann. Rep., 1907-8 (1911),
p. 144.
9 Foucher (A.), loc. cit., p. 41.
10 A characteristic example may be studied in Vincent Smith, History of Fine
Art in India and Ceylon, Plate xxiv.
11 Münsterberg (0.), Chinesische Kunstgeschichte, p. 117, n.
12 Bell (Clive), Art, p. 128.
13 Early Buddhist art in China and Japan is also “primitive” in the aesthetic
sense, precisely as Christian art in Europe preserved its primitive inspiration for
six hundred years, because “some new race was always catching the inspiration
and feeling and expressing it with primitive sensibility and passion.”
THE DANCE OF SHIVA
1 A similar story is elsewhere related about an elephant; and these legends
account for the elephant or tiger skin, which Shiva wears.
2 
Kadavul 
Mamunivar’s 
Tiruvatavurar 
Puranam, 
Puttarai-vatil,
Venracarukkam, stanza 75, translated by Nallasvami Pillai, Shivajnanabodham,
p. 74. This could also be rendered:
Like heat latent in firewood, he fills all bodies:
Our Father dances, moving all souls into action, know ye!
Compare Eckhart, “Just as the fire infuses the essence and clearness into the
dry wood, so has God done with man.”
3 Cf. Marcel Schwob. Le Livre de Monelle. “This is the teaching: Destroy,
destroy, destroy. Destroy within yourself, destroy all around you. Make room for
your soul and for other souls. Destroy, because all creation proceeds from
destruction . . . . For all building up is done with debris, and nothing in the world
is new but shapes. But the shapes must be perpetually destroyed . . . Break every
cup from which you drink.”
4 From the translation by Lydia L. Pimenoff Noble, published in the Boston
Symphony Orchestra Programme, October 29, 1917.
5 See Nandikeshvara, The Mirror of Gesture, translated by Coomaraswamy

and Duggirala, p.11.
INDIAN IMAGES WITH MANY ARMS
1 Imperial Gazetteer of India, 1910, vol. II.
2 Ivories, 1915, p. 332.
3 Industrial Arts of India, 1880, p.125. If the fine arts were until recently
“unknown in India,” perhaps this can be explained by the remark of B. H.
Baden-Powell, who says that “In a country like this we must not expect to find
anything that appeals to mind or deep feeling.” For “unknown” to Sir George
Birdwood or Mr. Baden-Powell need not imply anything more than
“unrecognized.”
It is fair to say that Mr. Vincent Smith’s opinions have been considerably
modified since 1910.
INDIAN MUSIC
1 Maheshvara, who wanders through the world a penniless and naked
ascetic.
2 This is like the principle of ‘conscious control’ advanced by F. M.
Alexander in Man’s Supreme Inheritance.
3 Cf. the Granth Sahib (Japji xxvii): “How many musicians, how many ragas
and raginis and how many singers sing Thee?”
STATUS OF INDIAN WOMEN
1 ‘Knowledge of the Self’—Adhyatmavidya referred to above, p. 7.
2 Jahangir observes in his ‘Memoirs’ that the Hindu woman ‘is the half of a
man, and his companion in religious ceremonies.’ Cf. the Prema Sagara, ch.
xxiv: ‘without a wife a sacrifice is not fruitful.’
3 A vigorous society can well afford to support, and in the interests of
spiritual value will gladly support, so far as support is necessary, not only
thinkers and artists, whose function is obvious, but also a certain number of
thorough-going rebels who to all appearances are mere idlers. But the idler,
whether anchorite or courtezan, must not demand to be supported in luxury, and
must recognize that whatever he or she receives is given in love, and not

according to law.
4 ‘Social conventions’ are rarely ‘man-made laws’ alone.
5 Nizami.
6 Eastern Counties folksong.
7 Somerset folksong.
8 Cf. The Great State, p. 127.
9 From an advertisement in the Englishwoman’s Year Book, 1911.
10 Stanley Hall, Youth, ed. 1909, p. 286.
SAHAJA
1 Root meaning cognate, or innate, and hence, “spontaneous.”
2 Brihadaranyaka Upanishad.
3 “How nicely can doggish lust beg for a piece of spirit, when flesh is denied
it!”—Nietzsche.
4 Since writing this I learned with regret that this was no longer the case.
COSMOPOLITAN VIEW OF NIETZSCHE
1 See, for example, Artzibashef’s Sanine, where the one man who is at peace
with himself, though far from a highly spiritual type, is still the most lovable.
YOUNG INDIA
1 Dhammapada.
2 Veblen, The Instinct of Workmanship.
3 Dinesh Chandra Sen, History of Bengali Language and Literature.
4 Since writing this I have learned with regret that this is no longer the case.
INDIVIDUALITY, AUTONOMY AND FUNCTION
1 Sva-bhava, sva-rajya, sva-dharma.

The End

