


An Imprint of HarperCollinsPublishers 


THE ATHEIST'S BIBLE. Copyright © 2007 by Tonie Doe Media. All rights 
reserved. Printed in the United States of America. No part of this 
book may be used or reproduced in any manner whatsoever without 
written permission except in the case of brief quotations embodied in 
critical articles and reviews. For information, address HarperCollins 
Publishers, 10 East 53rd Street, New York, NY 10022. 
HarperCollins books may be purchased for educational, business, 
or sales promotional use. For information, please write: Special 
Markets Department, HarperCollins Publishers, 10 East 53rd Street, 
New York, NY 10022. 
Every effort has been made to track the quotations back to their 
original sources. If any errors have mistakenly occurred, they will be 
corrected in subsequent editions. 
An extension of this copyright page appears on page 191. 
FIRST EDITION 
Designed by Cassandra J. Pappas 
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data 
is available upon request. 
ISBN: 978-0-06-134915-7 
ISBN-10: 0-06-134915-1 
07 
08 
09 
10 
11 
ID/RRD 
10 
9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1 

Editor's Note 
A substantial number of the quotes in this volume 
come from works of fiction. It is important to note that 
authors do not necessarily agree with the words, ideas, 
or opinions expressed by the characters they create. 

CONTENTS 
Introduction 
ix 
i. Genesis 
1 
ii. The Word 
6 
iii. The 
Gospel 
11 
iv. Book of Enlightenment 
16 
v. Our Forefathers Who Art in Heaven 22 
vi. Book of Reason 
28 
vii. Scientosophy 
41 
viii. The Tao of Disbelief 
50 
ix. Book 
of 
Questions 
55 
x. Revelations 
61 
xi. The Good Book 
65 
xii. The Brimstone Chronicles 
71 

xiii. Proverbs 
74 
xiv. Book of Common Virtue 
80 
XV. Book of Knowledge 
92 
xvi. Book of Truth 
100 
xvii. Book of Inspiration 
104 
xviii. Book of Laughter 
110 
xix. A Book of Her Own 
119 
XX. 
Book of Mark (Twain) 
125 
xxi. Book of Bertrand (Russell) 
131 
xxii. Book of George (Santayana) 
134 
xxiii. Book of Thomas (Paine) 
136 
xxiv. Book of Robert (G. Ingersoll) 
140 
XXV. Book of Woody (Allen) 
146 
xxvi. Book of Voltaire 
148 
xxvii. Book of Elbert (Hubbard) 
150 
xxviii. Book of Friedrich (Nietzsche) 
153 
xxix. Bierce's Dictionary (Ambrose) 
156 
XXX. 
Reflections 
159 
xxxi. Paradise Now 
163 
xxxii. Apocalyptus 
173 
xxxiii. Exodus 
174 
Acknowledgments 
177 
Index 
179 

INTRODUCTION 
The world would be astonished if it knew how 
great a proportion of its brightest ornaments— 
of those most distinguished even in popular 
estimation for wisdom and virtue—are complete 
skeptics in religion. 
—JOHN STUART MILL 
The world would be astonished if it knew how 
great a proportion of its brightest ornaments— 
of those most distinguished even in popular 
estimation for wisdom and virtue—are complete 
skeptics in religion. 
—JOHN STUART MILL 
The reason there are so many opinions is that no 
one knows the Truth. 
—JOAN KONNER, editor 

THE 
ATHEIST'S 
BIBLE 

Perhaps our role on this planet is not to worship God-
but to create Him. 
—ARTHUR C. CLARKE 
Epicurus' old questions are yet unanswered. Is [God] 
willing to prevent evil, but not able? then is he impo-
tent. Is he able, but not willing? then is he malevolent. Is 
he both able and willing? whence then is evil? 
—DAVID HUME 

Men . . . have had the vanity to pretend that the whole 
creation was made for them, whilst in reality the whole 
creation does not suspect their existence. 
—CAMILLE FLAMMARION 
Fear was the gods' begetter in this world. 
—PETRONIUS 
We are here because one odd group of fishes had a pecu-
liar fin anatomy that could transform into legs for ter-
restrial creatures; because the earth never froze entirely 
during an ice age; because a small and tenuous species, 
arising in Africa a quarter of a million years ago, has 
managed, so far, to survive by hook and by crook. We 
may yearn for a "higher" answer—but none exists. 
—STEPHEN JAY GOULD 
As for me, I've long resolved not to think whether man 
created God or God man. 
—FYODOR DOSTOYEVSKY 
2 THE 
ATHEIST'S 
BIBLE 

Geology shows that fossils are of different ages. Pale-
ontology shows a fossil sequence, the list of species 
representing changes through time. Taxonomy shows 
biological relationships among species. Evolution is the 
explanation that threads it all together. Creationism is 
the practice of squeezing one's eyes shut and wailing 
"Does not!" 
—ANONYMOUS 
If you believe that there is a God, a God that made your 
body, and yet you think that you can do anything with 
that body that's dirty, then the fault lies with the manu-
facturer. 
—LENNY BRUCE 
Genesis 3 

From the point of view of a tapeworm, man was created 
by God to serve the appetite of the tapeworm. 
—EDWARD ABBEY 
The idea of God is the sole wrong for which I cannot for-
give mankind. 
—MARQUIS DE SADE 
Men create the gods after their own image, not only with 
regard to their form but with regard to their mode of 
life. 
—ARISTOTLE 
We shall tell ourselves that it would be very nice if there 
were a God who created the world and was a benevolent 
Providence, and if there were a moral order in the uni-
verse and an after-life; but it is a very striking fact that 
all this is exactly as we are bound to wish it to be. 
—SIGMUND FREUD 
4 
THE ATHEIST'S BIBLE 

Brute force crushes many plants. Yet the plants rise 
again. The Pyramids will not last a moment compared 
with the daisy. And before Buddha or Jesus spoke the 
nightingale sang, and long after the words of Jesus and 
Buddha are gone into oblivion the nightingale still will 
sing. Because it is neither preaching nor teaching nor 
commanding nor urging. It is just singing. And in the 
beginning was not a Word, but a chirrup. 
—D. H. LAWRENCE 
At the beginning there was the Word—at the end just the 
Cliché. 
—STANISLAW JERZY LEC 
Genesis 5 

All great truths begin as blasphemies. 
—GEORGE BERNARD SHAW 
God is a word to express, not our ideas, but the want of them. 
—JOHN STUART MILL 
Atheists are often charged with blasphemy, but it is a crime 
they cannot commit.... When the Atheist examines, 
denounces, or satirizes the gods, he is not dealing with 
persons but with ideas. He is incapable of insulting God, 
for he does not admit the existence of any such being. 
—G. W. FOOTE 
6 

I have too much respect for the idea of God to hold Him 
responsible for such an absurd world. 
—GEORGES DUHAMEL 
Man is, and always has been, a maker of gods. 
—JOHN BURROUGHS 
The whole religious complexion of the modern world is 
due to the absence from Jerusalem of a Lunatic Asylum. 
—HAVELOCK ELLIS 
Whatever we cannot easily understand we call God; this 
saves much wear and tear on the brain tissues. 
—EDWARD ABBEY 
Since it is obviously inconceivable that all religions can 
be right, the most reasonable conclusion is that they are 
all wrong. 
—CHRISTOPHER HITCHENS 
The Word 7 

Heresy is only another word for freedom of thought. 
—GRAHAM GREENE 
Faith is doubt. 
—EMILY DICKINSON 
It is historically true that a large proportion of infidels 
in all ages have been persons of distinguished integrity 
and honour. 
—JOHN STUART MILL 
All thinking men are atheists. 
—ERNEST HEMINGWAY 
All children are atheists—they have no idea of God. 
—BARON D'HOLBACH 
8 
THE ATHEIST'S BIBLE 

It is, I think, an error to believe that there is any need of 
religion to make life seem worth living. 
—SINCLAIR LEWIS 
I count religion but a childish toy, 
And hold there is no sin but ignorance. 
—CHRISTOPHER MARLOWE 
If there is a God, a caring God, then we have to figure he's 
done an extraordinary job of making a very cruel world. 
—DAVE MATTHEWS 
THEOLOGY—An effort to explain the unknowable by put-
ting it into terms of the not worth knowing. 
—H. L. MENCKEN 
The universe runs itself, and the eternal laws inherent in 
Nature suffice, without any first cause or prime mover. 
—MARQUIS DE SADE 
The Word 
9 

Martyrdom ... is the only way in which a man can 
become famous without ability. 
—GEORGE BERNARD SHAW 
I contend that we are both atheists. I just believe in one 
fewer god than you do. When you understand why you 
dismiss all the other possible gods, you will understand 
why I dismiss yours. 
—STEPHEN HENRY ROBERTS 
In some awful, strange, paradoxical way, atheists tend to 
take religion more seriously than the practitioners. 
—JONATHAN MILLER 
10 
THE ATHEIST'S BIBLE 

For it is with the mysteries of our Religion, as with whole -
some pills for the sick, which swallowed whole, have the 
virtue to cure, but chewed, are for the most part cast up 
again without effect. 
—THOMAS HOBBES 
Marx was wrong. Religion is not the opiate of the people. 
Opium suggests something soporific, numbing, dulling. 
Too often religion has been an aphrodisiac for horror, a 
Benzedrine for bestiality. At its best it has lifted spirits 
and raised spires. At its worst it has turned entire civili-
zations into cemeteries. 
—PHILLIP ADAMS 
11 

[Religion is] the fashionable substitute for Belief. 
—OSCAR WILDE 
If I were personally to define religion I would say that 
it is a bandage that man has invented to protect a soul 
made bloody by circumstance. 
—THEODORE DREISER 
The Church is the world's great lost and found department. 
—ROBERT L. SHORT 
Religion is what keeps the poor from murdering the 
rich. 
—NAPOLEON BONAPARTE 
In church, sacred music would make believers of us all— 
but preachers can be counted on to restore the balance. 
—MIGNON MCLAUGHLIN 
12 
THE ATHEIST'S BIBLE 

Emotional excitement reaches men through tea, tobac-
co, opium, whiskey and religion. 
—GEORGE BERNARD SHAW 
What mean and cruel things men can do for the love of 
God. 
—W. SOMERSET MAUGHAM 
Men never do evil so completely and cheerfully as when 
they do it from religious conviction. 
—BLAISE PASCAL 
Generally speaking, the errors in religion are danger-
ous; those in philosophy only ridiculous. 
—DAVID HUME 
The Gospel 13 

Well, I've often thought that the Bible should have a dis-
claimer at the front saying, "This is fiction." I mean, 
walking on water? I mean, it takes an act of faith. 
—IAN MCKELLEN 
Religion hides many mischiefs from suspicion. 
—CHRISTOPHER MARLOWE 
The devil can cite Scripture for his purpose. 
—WILLIAM SHAKESPEARE 
Every dogma has its day. 
—ISRAEL ZANGWILL 
Most sermons sound to me like commercials—but I can't 
make out whether God is the Sponsor or the Product. 
—MIGNON MCLAUGHLIN 
14 THE ATHEIST'S 
BIBLE 

The religions of mankind must be classed among the 
mass-delusions of this kind. No one, needless to say, 
who shares a delusion ever recognizes it as such. 
—SIGMUND FREUD 
The Bible, you know, is rather a disappointment: it has 
never done for humanity what it should have done. 
—CHRISTOPHER MORLEY 
The Gospel 15 

There was a time when religion ruled the world. It is 
known as the Dark Ages. 
—RUTH HURMENCE GREEN 
FAITH: The effort to believe that which your common-
sense tells you is not true. 
—ELBERT HUBBARD 
An actually existent fly is more important than a possi-
bly existent angel. 
—RALPH WALDO EMERSON 
16 

Where it is a duty to worship the sun, it is pretty sure to 
be a crime to examine the laws of heat. 
—JOHN MORLEY 
The beginning of wisdom is the awareness that there is 
insufficient evidence that a god or gods have created us 
and the recognition that we are responsible in part for 
our own destiny. 
—PAUL KURTZ 
Now faith is the substance of things hoped for, the evi-
dence of things not seen. 
—SAINT PAUL (Hebrews 11:1) 
Blind faith is an ironic gift to return to the Creator of 
human intelligence. 
—ANONYMOUS 
Book of Enlightenment 17 

How many observe Christ's Birth-day! How few, 
his Precepts! O! 'tis easier to keep Holidays 
than Commandments. 
—BENJAMIN FRANKLIN 
[Religious thought is] an attempt to find an out where 
there is no door. 
—ALBERT EINSTEIN 
Indeed, speaking generally, religion is the chef d'oeuvre of 
training, namely training the ability to think.... There 
is no absurdity, however palpable, which cannot be 
firmly implanted in the minds of all, if only one begins 
to inculcate it before the early age of six by constantly 
repeating it to them with an air of great solemnity. For 
the training of man, like that of animals, is completely 
successful only at an early age. 
—ARTHUR SCHOPENHAUER 
l8 
THE ATHEIST'S BIBLE 

If God wants us to do a thing he should make his wishes 
sufficiently clear. Sensible people will wait till he has 
done this before paying much attention to him. 
—SAMUEL BUTLER 
I cannot believe in a God who has neither humor nor 
common sense. 
—W. SOMERSET MAUGHAM 
QUESTION: How do you know you're God? 
ANSWER: Simple. When I pray to him, I find I'm talking 
to myself. 
—PETER O'TOOLE 
We owe almost all our knowledge, not to those who have 
agreed, but to those who have differed. 
—CHARLES CALEB COLTON 
Book of Enlightenment 19 

Human life has no meaning independent of itself.... 
The meaning of life is what we choose to give it. 
—PAUL KURTZ 
Mankind has been punished long and heavily for having 
created its gods; nothing but pain and persecution have 
been man's lot since gods began. There is but one way 
out of this blunder: Man must break his fetters which 
have chained him to the gates of heaven and hell, so that 
he can begin to fashion out of his reawakened and illu-
mined consciousness a new world upon earth. 
—EMMA GOLDMAN 
We don't know one millionth of one percent about any-
thing! 
—THOMAS EDISON 
The church says the earth is flat, but I know that it is 
round, for I have seen the shadow on the moon, and I 
have more faith in a shadow than in the church. 
—FERDINAND MAGELLAN 
20 
THE ATHEIST'S BIBLE 

The present age .. . prefers the sign to the thing sig-
nified, the copy to the original, fancy to reality, the 
appearance to the essence . .. for in these days illusion 
only is sacred, truth profane. 
—LUDWIG FEUERBACH 
Three-quarters of the American population literally 
believes in religious miracles. The numbers who believe 
in the devil, in resurrection, God does this and that-
astonishing. These are numbers that you have nowhere 
in the industrial world. 
—NOAM CHOMSKY 
They say that God is everywhere, and yet we always think 
of Him as somewhat of a recluse. 
—EMILY DICKINSON 
Men will wrangle for religion; write for it; fight for it; die 
for it; any thing but—live for it. 
—CHARLES CALEB COLTON 
Book of Enlightenment 21 

Mystery [the divinity of Jesus Christ] is made a conve-
nient Cover for absurdity. 
—JOHN ADAMS 
But it does me no injury for my neighbour to say there 
are twenty gods, or no god. It neither picks my pocket 
nor breaks my leg. 
—THOMAS JEFFERSON 
22 

The Bible is not my book nor Christianity my profes-
sion. 
—ABRAHAM LINCOLN 
Every other sect suppos[es] itself in possession of all 
truth, and that those who differ are so far in the wrong; 
like a man traveling in foggy weather, those at some dis-
tance before him on the road he sees wrapped up in the 
fog, as well as those behind him, and also the people in 
the fields on each side, but near him all appears clear, 
tho' in truth he is as much in the fog as any of them. 
—BENJAMIN FRANKLIN 
May it not suffice for me to say .. . that, of course, like 
every other man of intelligence and education, I do 
believe in organic evolution. It surprises me that at this 
late date such questions should be raised. 
—WOODROW WILSON (1922) 
Our Forefathers Who Art in Heaven 
23 

Religion is excellent stuff for keeping common people 
quiet. 
—NAPOLÉON BONAPARTE 
The world is my country; to do good my religion. 
—THOMAS PAINE 
I prayed for freedom twenty years but received no an-
swer until I prayed with my legs. 
—FREDERICK DOUGLASS 
If I should go out of church whenever I hear a false senti-
ment, I could never stay there five minutes. 
—RALPH WALDO EMERSON 
Do you think I am superstitious? I am a super-atheist. 
—MOHANDAS K. GANDHI 
24 
THE ATHEIST'S BIBLE 

I want nothing to do with any religion concerned with 
keeping the masses satisfied to live in hunger, filth and 
ignorance. I want nothing to do with any order, religious 
or otherwise, which does not teach people that they are 
capable of becoming happier and more civilized, on this 
earth, capable of becoming true man, master of his fate 
and captain of his soul. 
—JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 
Every step which the intelligence of Europe has taken 
has been in spite of the clerical party. 
—VICTOR HUGO 
It is ridiculous to think that a supreme being—whatever 
it is—cares about human affairs. Don't we believe that it 
would be defiled by so gloomy and complex a responsi-
bility? 
—PLINY THE ELDER 
Religious hatreds ought not be propagated at all, but 
certainly not on a tax-exempt basis. 
—JAMES A. MICHENER 
Our Forefathers Who Art in Heaven 
25 

Organized religion is making Christianity political rath-
er than making politics Christian. 
—LAURENS VAN DER POST 
The number, the industry, and the morality of the Priest-
hood, & the devotion of the people have been manifestly 
increased by the total separation of the Church from the 
State. 
—JAMES MADISON 
And of all Plagues with which Mankind are Curst, 
Ecclesiastick Tyranny's the worse. 
—DANIEL DEFOE 
Who does not see that the same authority which can es-
tablish Christianity, in exclusion of all other Religions, 
may establish with the same ease any particular sect of 
Christians, in exclusion of all other Sects? 
—JAMES MADISON 
26 
THE ATHEIST'S BIBLE 

A tyrant ... should always show a particular zeal in the 
cult of the gods. People are less afraid of being treated 
unjustly by those of this sort, that is if they think that the 
ruler is god-fearing and pays some regard to the gods; 
and they are less ready to conspire against him, if they 
feel that the gods themselves are his friends. 
—ARISTOTLE 
I'm frankly sick and tired of the political preachers across 
this country telling me as a citizen that if I want to be a 
moral person, I must believe in "A," "B," "C," and "D." 
Just who do they think they are? And from where do they 
presume to claim the right to dictate their moral beliefs to 
me? And I am even more angry as a legislator who must 
endure the threats of every religious group who thinks it 
has some God-granted right to control my every roll call 
in the Senate. I am warning them today: I will fight them 
every step of the way if they try to dictate their moral con-
victions to all Americans in the name of "conservatism." 
—BARRY GOLDWATER 
The need for religion will end when man becomes sen-
sible enough to govern himself. 
—FRANCISCO FERRER GUARDIA 
Our Forefathers Who Art in Heaven 27 

Question with boldness even the existence of a god; 
because, if there be one, he must more approve of the 
homage of reason, than that of blindfolded fear. 
—THOMAS JEFFERSON 
The fact that a believer is happier than a skeptic is no 
more to the point than the fact that a drunken man is 
happier than a sober one. 
—GEORGE BERNARD SHAW 
28 

It is vain to ask of the gods what a man is capable of sup -
plying for himself. 
—EPICURUS 
Theology is a thing of unreason altogether, an edifice 
of assumptions and dreams, a superstructure without a 
substructure. 
—AMBROSE BIERCE 
Gullibility and credulity are considered undesirable 
qualities in every department of human life—except 
religion.... Why are we praised by godly men for sur-
rendering our "godly gift" of reason when we cross their 
mental thresholds? 
—CHRISTOPHER HITCHENS 
This story of the redemption will not stand examination. 
That man should redeem himself from the sin of eating 
an apple, by committing a murder on Jesus Christ, is the 
strangest system of religion ever set up. 
—THOMAS PAINE 
Book of Reason 
29 

You can't convince a believer of anything; for their be-
lief is not based on evidence, it's based on a deep-seated 
need to believe. 
—CARL SAGAN 
There is no God; it is as clear as the sun and as evident 
as the day that there is no God, and still more, that there 
can be none. 
—LUDWIG FEUERBACH 
I get letters constantly from people saying, "Oh, God will 
look after it." But He never has in the past, I don't know 
why they think He will in the future. 
—BERTRAND RUSSELL 
There's never been anything, however absurd, that 
myriads of people weren't prepared to believe, often so 
passionately that they'd fight to the death rather than 
abandon their illusions. To me, that's a good operational 
definition of insanity. 
—ARTHUR C. CLARKE 
30 
THE ATHEIST'S BIBLE 

All religions, with their gods, their demigods, and their 
prophets, their messiahs and their saints, were created 
by the credulous fancy of men who had not attained the 
full development and full possession of their faculties. 
—MIKHAIL A. BAKUNIN 
The most formidable weapon against errors of every 
kind is Reason. I have never used any other, and I trust 
I never shall. 
—THOMAS PAINE 
What is wanted is not the will to believe, but the wish to 
find out, which is the exact opposite. 
—BERTRAND RUSSELL 
When lip service to some mysterious deity permits 
bestiality on Wednesday and absolution on Sunday-
cash me out. 
—FRANK SINATRA 
Book of Reason 31 

All religions promise a reward beyond this life in eter-
nity for excellences of the will or of the heart, but none 
for excellences of the head, of the understanding. 
—ARTHUR SCHOPENHAUER 
The Christian religion not only was at first attended with 
miracles, but even at this day cannot be believed by any 
reasonable person without one. 
—DAVID HUME 
Without cultural sanction, most or all of our religious 
beliefs and rituals would fall into the domain of mental 
disturbance. 
—JOHN F. SCHUMAKER 
Do not let yourself be deceived: great intellects are 
skeptical. 
—FRIEDRICH NIETZSCHE 
32 
THE ATHEIST'S BIBLE 

If this is your God, he's not very impressive. He has so 
many psychological problems; he's so insecure. He de-
mands worship every seven days. He goes out and creates 
faulty humans and then blames them for his own mis-
takes. He's a pretty poor excuse for a Supreme Being. 
—GENE RODDENBERRY 
I find the whole business of religion profoundly inter-
esting. But it does mystify me that otherwise intelligent 
people take it seriously. 
—DOUGLAS ADAMS 
If we think that this search for God is a vain search, and 
that there is no reality to be discovered . . . then the 
history of religion becomes a study of the aberrations of 
the human mind. 
—CYRIL BAILEY 
An atheist... is a man who destroys chimeras harmful 
to the human race, in order to lead men back to nature, 
to experience, and to reason. 
—BARON D'HOLBACH 
Book of Reason 33 

Perhaps the whole root of our trouble, the human trou-
ble, is that we will sacrifice all the beauty of our lives, 
will imprison ourselves in totems, taboos, crosses, 
blood sacrifices, steeples, mosques, races, armies, flags, 
nations, in order to deny the fact of death, which is the 
only fact we have. 
—JAMES BALDWIN 
I would believe any religion that could prove it had 
existed since the beginning of the world. But when I see 
Socrates, Plato, Moses, and Mohammed I do not think 
there is such a one. All religions owe their origin to 
man. 
—NAPOLEON BONAPARTE 
Indeed, when religious people quarrel about religion, or 
hungry people about their victuals, it looks as if they had 
not much of either among them. 
—BENJAMIN FRANKLIN 
34 
THE ATHEIST'S BIBLE 

I have seldom met an intelligent person whose views 
were not narrowed and distorted by religion. 
—JAMES BUCHANAN 
Those who take refuge behind theological barbed wire 
fences, quite often wish they could have more freedom 
of thought, but fear the change to the great ocean of sci-
entific truth as they would a cold bath plunge. 
—LUTHER BURBANK 
Amaterial resurrection seems strange, and even absurd, 
except for purposes of punishment; and all punishment, 
which is to revenge rather than correct, must be morally 
wrong. And when the World is at an end, what moral or 
warning purpose can eternal tortures answer? 
—LORD BYRON 
Book of Reason 35 

I shall not, as far as I am concerned, try to pass myself 
off as a Christian in your presence.* I share with you the 
same revulsion from evil. But I do not share your hope, 
and I continue to struggle against this universe in which 
children suffer and die. 
—ALBERT CAMUS 
All religions have this in common, that they are an out-
rage to common sense, for they are pieced together out of 
a variety of elements, some of which seem so unworthy, 
sordid, and at odds with man's reason that any strong 
and vigorous intelligence laughs at them. 
—PIERRE 
CHARRON 
The idea that He would take his attention away from the 
universe in order to give me a bicycle with three speeds 
is just so unlikely that I can't go along with it. 
—QUENTIN CRISP 
* Attributed to statements Camus made at the Dominican Monastery of Latour-
Maubourgin 1948. 
36 
THE ATHEIST'S BIBLE 

I cannot persuade myself that a beneficent and omnip-
otent God would have designedly created . . . that a cat 
should play with mice. 
—CHARLES DARWIN 
Faith is a fine invention 
For gentlemen who see; 
But microscopes are prudent 
In an emergency! 
—EMILY DICKINSON 
Faith is believing things by definition, which are not jus -
tified by reason. If it were justified by reason, it wouldn't 
be faith. 
—COLIN MCGINN 
Book of Reason 37 

Dogmas of every kind put assertion in the place of reason 
and give rise to more contention, bitterness, and want of 
charity than any other influence in human affairs. 
—SIR ARTHUR CONAN DOYLE 
If God listened to the prayers of men, all men would 
quickly have perished; for they are for ever praying for 
evil against one another. 
—EPICURUS 
Parsons always seem to be specially horrified about things 
like sunbathing and naked bodies. They don't mind pov-
erty and misery and cruelty to animals nearly as much. 
—SUSAN ERTZ 
In the long run nothing can withstand reason and 
experience, and the contradiction which religion offers 
to both is all too palpable. 
—SIGMUND FREUD 
38 
THE ATHEIST'S BIBLE 


It is an insult to God to believe in God. For on the one 
hand it is to suppose that he has perpetrated acts of in-
calculable cruelty. On the other hand, it is to suppose 
that he has perversely given his human creatures an in-
strument—their intellect—which must inevitably lead 
them, if they are dispassionate and honest, to deny his 
existence. It is tempting to conclude that if he exists, it 
is the atheists and agnostics that he loves best, among 
those with any pretensions to education. For they are the 
ones who have taken him most seriously. 
—GALEN STRAWSON 
The Way to see by Faith is to shut the Eye of Reason. 
—BENJAMIN FRANKLIN 
40 
THE ATHEIST'S BIBLE 


There is no personal salvation, there is no national sal-
vation, except through science. 
—LUTHER BURBANK 
My mind is incapable of conceiving such a thing as a 
soul. I may be in error, and man may have a soul; but I 
simply do not believe it. 
—THOMAS EDISON 
Once miracles are admitted, every scientific explanation 
is out of the question. 
—JOHANNES KEPLER 
Anything that we scientists can do to weaken the hold of 
religion should be done and may in the end be our great-
est contribution to civilization. 
—STEVEN WEINBERG 
43 
THE ATHEIST'S BIBLE 

If we are going to teach "creation science" . . . as an alter-
native to evolution, then we should also teach the stork 
theory as an alternative to biological reproduction. 
—JUDITH HAYES 
The most incomprehensible thing about the world is 
that it is comprehensible. 
—ALBERT EINSTEIN 
There is a very intimate connection between hypnotic 
phenomena and religion. 
—HAVELOCK ELLIS 
Science .. . has opened our eyes to the vastness of the 
universe and given us light, truth and freedom from 
fear where once was darkness, ignorance and super-
stition. 
—LUTHER BURBANK 
Scientosophy 
43 


Religions are conclusions for which the facts of nature 
supply no major premises. 
—AMBROSE BIERCE 
In science it often happens that scientists say, "You know 
that's a really good argument; my position is mistaken," 
and then they actually change their minds and you never 
hear that old view from them again. They really do it. It 
doesn't happen as often as it should, because scientists 
are human and change is sometimes painful. But it hap-
pens every day. I cannot recall the last time something 
like that has happened in politics or religion. 
—CARL SAGAN 
Science can destroy religion by ignoring it as well as by 
disproving its tenets. No one ever demonstrated, so far 
as I am aware, the nonexistence of Zeus or Thor, but they 
have few followers now. 
—ARTHUR C. CLARKE 
Scientosophy 
45 

One of the most frightening things in the Western world, 
and this country in particular, is the number of people 
who believe in things that are scientifically false. If 
someone tells me that the earth is less than 10,000 years 
old, in my opinion he should see a psychiatrist. 
—FRANCIS CRICK 
It seems to me that the idea of a personal God is an 
anthropological concept which I cannot take seriously. 
I feel also not able to imagine some will or goal outside 
the human sphere. 
—ALBERT EINSTEIN 
Our knowledge of the historical worth of certain reli-
gious doctrines increases our respect for them, but does 
not invalidate our proposal that they should cease to be 
put forward as the reasons for the precepts of civiliza-
tion. . .. We may now argue that the time has probably 
come . .. for replacing the effects of repression by the 
results of the rational operation of the intellect. 
—SIGMUND FREUD 
46 
THE ATHEIST'S BIBLE 

Some people think of God as an outsized, light-skinned 
male with a long white beard, sitting on a throne some-
where up there in the sky, busily tallying the fall of ev-
ery sparrow. Others—for example, Baruch Spinoza and 
Albert Einstein—considered God to be essentially the 
sum total of the physical laws which describe the uni-
verse. I do not know of any compelling evidence for 
anthropomorphic patriarchs controlling human destiny 
from some hidden celestial vantage point, but it would 
be madness to deny the existence of physical laws. 
—CARL SAGAN 
Faith is the great cop-out, the great excuse to evade the 
need to think and evaluate evidence. Faith is belief in 
spite of, even perhaps because of, the lack of evidence. 
—RICHARD DAWKINS 
Scientosophy 
47 

This century will be called Darwin's century. He was 
one of the greatest men who ever touched this globe. He 
has explained more of the phenomena of life than all of 
the religious teachers.. . . His doctrine of evolution, his 
doctrine of the survival of the fittest, his doctrine of the 
origin of species, has removed in every thinking mind 
the last vestige of orthodox Christianity. He has not only 
stated, but he has demonstrated . . . that the Bible is a 
book written by ignorance—at the instigation of fear. 
—ROBERT G. INGERSOLL 
Science has done more for the development of Western 
civilization in one hundred years than Christianity did 
in eighteen hundred. 
—JOHN BURBOUGHS 
When the masses become better informed about sci-
ence, they will feel less need for help from supernatural 
Higher Powers. 
—FRANCISCO FERRER GUARDIA 
48 
THE ATHEIST'S BIBLE 

Gods are fragile things; they may be killed by a whiff of 
science or a dose of common sense. 
—CHAPMAN COHEN 
Religion is an illusion and it derives its strength from its 
readiness to fit in with our instinctual wishful impulses. 
—SIGMUND FREUD 
Don't believe without evidence. Treat things divine with 
marked respect—don't have anything to do with them. 
—AMBROSE BIERCE 
Nature and Nature's laws lay hid in night; 
God said, "Let Newton be!" and all was light. 
—ALEXANDER POPE 
Not to be absolutely certain is, I think, one of the essen-
tial things in rationality. 
—BERTRAND RUSSELL 
Scientosophy 
49 

It is clear that he who adheres to the Church's teach-
ing as to an infallible rule, assents to all points of that 
teaching. 
—SAINT THOMAS AQUINAS 
I cannot be angry at God, in whom I do not believe. 
—SlMONE DE BEAUVOIR 
If there were not God, there would be no atheists. 
—G. K. CHESTERTON 
50 

Religion provides the solace for the turmoil that it creates. 
—BYRON DANELIUS 
I am a deeply religious nonbeliever.... This is a some-
what new kind of religion. 
—ALBERT EINSTEIN 
There can be no Creator, simply because his grief at the 
fate of his creation would be inconceivable and unen-
durable. 
—ELIAS CANETTI 
Those who love God are not always the friends of their 
fellow-men. 
—ROBERT G. INGERSOLL 
Don't look for God where He is needed most; if you didn't 
bring Him there, He isn't there. 
—MIGNON MCLAUGHLIN 
The Tao of Disbelief 51 

Only the atheist realizes how morally objectionable it 
is for survivors of a catastrophe to believe themselves 
spared by a loving God while this same God drowned 
infants in their cribs. 
—SAM HARRIS 
To be absolutely certain about something, one must 
know everything or nothing about it. 
—OLIN MILLER 
I'm an atheist. There's a lot about the Catholic Church 
I don't approve of, simply because they don't approve 
of me. 
—IAN MCKELLEN 
Some like to understand what they believe in. Others 
like to believe in what they understand. 
—STANISLAW JERZY LEC 
52 
THE ATHEIST'S BIBLE 

Men make themselves believe that they believe. 
—MICHEL EYQUEM DE MONTAIGNE 
Thanks be to God, I am still an atheist. 
—Luis BUÑUEL 
It has even been said that the highest praise of God is to 
be found in the denial of Him by the atheist, who con-
siders creation to be perfect enough to dispense with a 
Creator. 
—MARCEL PROUST 
God bless those pagans. 
—HOMER SIMPSON 
We must believe in free will; we have no choice. 
—ISAAC BASHEVIS SINGER 
The Tao of Disbelief 53 


If he is infinitely good, what reason should we have to 
fear him? If he is infinitely wise, why should we have 
doubts concerning our future? If he knows all, why warn 
him of our needs and fatigue him with our prayers? If he 
is everywhere, why erect temples to him? 
—PERCY BYSSHE SHELLEY 
When I was in Ireland performing my one-man show.. . 
I told the audience I was an atheist and a woman got up 
and said, "Yes, but is it the God of the Catholics or the 
God of the Protestants in whom you do not believe?" 
—QUENTIN CRISP 
55 

Isn't it enough to see that a garden is beautiful without 
having to believe that there are fairies at the bottom of 
it too? 
—DOUGLAS ADAMS 
The biblical account of Noah's Ark and the Flood is per-
haps the most implausible story for fundamentalists to 
defend. Where, for example, while loading his ark, did 
Noah find penguins and polar bears in Palestine? 
—JUDITH HAYES 
On his deathbed, Henry David Thoreau was asked by his 
aunt: " Henry, have you made your peace with God? " Tho -
reau answered, "I did not know we had ever quarrelled." 
—EDWARD WALDO EMERSON 
Somewhere, and I can't find where, I read about an 
Eskimo hunter who asked the local missionary priest, 
"If I did not know about God and sin, would I go to hell? " 
"No," said the priest, "not if you did not know." "Then 
why," asked the Eskimo earnestly, "did you tell me?" 
—ANNIE DILLARD 
56 
THE ATHEIST'S BIBLE 

If absolute power corrupts absolutely, where does that 
leave God? 
—GEORGE DAACON 
We have fools in all sects, and impostors in most; why 
should I believe mysteries no one can understand, be-
cause written by men who chose to mistake madness for 
inspiration and style themselves Evangelicals? 
—LORD BYRON 
So if, as I have shown, gods do not have a human appear-
ance, and if, as you firmly believe, they are unlike any-
thing in the heavens, why do you hesitate to deny that 
they exist? You lose your nerve, and it is wise of you to do 
so, though your fear on this account is not of the people 
but of the gods themselves. 
—CICERO 
Book of Questions 
57 

It is told that the great Angelo, in decorating a church, 
painted some angels wearing sandals. A cardinal look-
ing at the picture said to the artist: "Whoever saw angels 
with sandals?" Angelo answered with another question: 
"Whoever saw an angel barefooted?" 
—ROBERT G. INGERSOLL 
/ am one of the lingering bad ones, and so do / slink 
away, and pause, and ponder, and ponder, and pause, 
and do work without knowing why—not surely for this 
brief world, and more sure it is not for Heaven. 
—EMILY DICKINSON 
Subtract from the New Testament the miraculous and 
highly improbable, and what will be the remainder? 
—GEORGE ELIOT 
Why should I fear death? If I am, death is not. If death 
is, I am not. Why should I fear that which cannot exist 
when I do? 
—EPICURUS 
58 
THE ATHEIST'S BIBLE 

We enter church, and we have to say, "We have erred and 
strayed from Thy ways like lost sheep," when what we 
want to say is, "Why are we made to err and stray like 
lost sheep?" 
—THOMAS HARDY 
QUESTION: I just wanted to know if you believe in God. 
ANSWER: NO, but I don't disbelieve in her either. 
—ARTHUR C. CLARKE 
Must then a Christ perish in torment in every age to save 
those that have no imagination? 
—GEORGE BERNARD SHAW 
I'm not a bad guy! I work hard, and I love my kids. So 
why should I spend half my Sunday hearing about how 
I'm going to Hell? 
—HOMER SIMPSON 
Book of Questions 59 

Christ and Moses standing in the back of St. Pat's, look-
ing around. Confused, Christ is, at the grandeur of 
the interior, the baroque interior, the rococo baroque 
interior. Because his route took him through Spanish 
Harlem, and he was wondering what the hell fifty Puerto 
Ricans were doing living in one room when that stained 
glass window is worth ten G's a square foot? 
—LENNY BRUCE 
Philosophy is questions that may never be answered. 
Religion is answers that may never be questioned. 
—ANONYMOUS 
60 
THE ATHEIST'S BIBLE 

It is told that the great Angelo, in decorating a church, 
painted some angels wearing sandals. A cardinal look-
ing at the picture said to the artist: "Whoever saw angels 
with sandals?" Angelo answered with another question: 
"Whoever saw an angel barefooted?" 
—ROBERT G. INGERSOLL 
I am one of the lingering bad ones, and so do I slink 
away, and pause, and ponder, and ponder, and pause, 
and do work without knowing why—not surely for this 
brief world, and more sure it is not for Heaven. 
—EMILY DICKINSON 
Subtract from the New Testament the miraculous and 
highly improbable, and what will be the remainder? 
—GEORGE ELIOT 
Why should I fear death? If I am, death is not. If death 
is, I am not. Why should I fear that which cannot exist 
when I do? 
—EPICURUS 
58 
THE ATHEIST'S BIBLE 

TRAVELER: God has been mighty good to your fields, 
Mr. Farmer. 
FARMER: YOU should have seen how he treated them when 
I wasn't around. 
—ANONYMOUS 
When I was a young boy, my father taught me that to be 
a good Catholic, I had to confess at church if I ever had 
impure thoughts about a girl. That very evening I had to 
rush to confess my sin. And the next night, and the next. 
After a week, I decided religion wasn't for me. 
—FIDEL CASTRO 
From time to time, as we all know, a sect appears in our 
midst announcing that the world will very soon come to 
an end. Generally, by some slight confusion or miscal-
culation, it is the sect that comes to an end. 
—G. K. CHESTERTON 
62 
THE ATHEIST'S BIBLE 

I turned to speak to God 
About the world's despair; 
But to make bad matters worse 
I found God wasn't there. 
—ROBERT FROST 
Every event, or appearance, or accident which seems 
to deviate from the ordinary course of nature has been 
rashly ascribed to the immediate action of the Deity. 
—EDWARD GIBBON 
God, Satan, Paradise and Hell all vanished one day in 
my fifteenth year, when I quite abruptly lost my faith. I 
recall it vividly. I was at school in England by then. The 
moment of awakening happened, in fact, during a Latin 
lesson, and afterwards, to prove my new-found atheism, 
I bought myself a rather tasteless ham sandwich, and 
so partook for the first time of the forbidden flesh of 
the swine. No thunderbolt arrived to strike me down. I 
remember feeling that my survival confirmed the cor-
rectness of my new position. 
—SALMAN RUSHDIE 
Revelations 63 

I believe in God; I just don't trust anyone who works for him. 
—ANONYMOUS 
The three great apostles of practical atheism, that make 
converts without persecuting, and retain them without 
preaching, are Wealth, Health, and Power. 
—CHARLES CALEB COLTON 
From the first moment I looked into that horror on 
September nth, into that fireball, into that explosion 
of horror, I knew it. I knew it before anything was said 
about those who did it or why. I recognized an old com-
panion. I recognized religion. 
—MONSIGNOR LORENZO ALBACETE 
All gods are dead except the god of war. 
—ELDRIDGE CLEAVER 
Don't wait for the Last Judgment. It takes place every day. 
—ALBERT CAMUS 
64 
THE ATHEIST'S BIBLE 

Properly read, the Bible is the most potent force for 
atheism ever conceived. 
—ISAAC ASIMOV 
Our Bible reveals to us the character of our God with 
minute and remorseless exactness.... It is perhaps 
the most damnatory biography that exists in print any-
where. 
—MARK TWAIN 
65 

You believe in a book which has talking animals, wizards, 
witches, demons, sticks turning into snakes, food falling 
from the sky, people walking on water, and all sorts of 
magical, absurd, and primitive stories; and you say that/ 
am the one who is mentally ill? 
—DAN BARKER 
In a heated controversy over the wisdom of giving the 
Bible to slaves, [Frederick Douglass] asserted that it 
would be "infinitely better to send them a pocket com-
pass and a pistol." 
—BENJAMIN QUARLES 
The Bible. That is what fools have written, what imbe-
ciles command, what rogues teach, and young children 
are made to learn by heart. 
—VOLTAIRE 
66 
THE A T H E I S T ' S BIBLE 

I am convinced now that children should not be sub-
jected to the Rightfulness of the Christian religion.... 
If the concept of a father who plots to have his own son 
put to death is presented to children as beautiful and as 
worthy of society's admiration, what types of human be-
havior can be presented to them as reprehensible? 
—RUTH HURMENCE GREEN 
The continually progressive change to which the mean-
ing of words is subject, the want of a universal language 
which renders translation necessary, the errors to which 
translations are again subject, the mistakes of copyists 
and printers, together with the possibility of willful 
alteration, are of themselves evidences that human 
language, whether in speech or in print, cannot be the 
vehicle of the Word of God. 
—THOMAS PAINE 
It seems that if our species ever eradicates itself through 
war, it will not be because it was written in the stars but 
because it was written in our books; it is what we do with 
words like "God" and "paradise" and "sin" in the pres-
ent that will determine our future. 
—SAM HARRIS 
The Good Book 
67 

It's the generally accepted privilege of theologians to 
stretch the heavens, that is, the Scriptures, like tanners 
with a hide. 
—DESIDERIUS ERASMUS 
The Gospels actually taught this: Before you kill somebody, 
make absolutely sure he isn't well connected. 
—KURT VONNEGUT, JR. 
There is much in the Bible against which every instinct of 
my being rebels, so much that I regret the necessity which 
has compelled me to read it through from beginning 
to end. I do not think that the knowledge which I have 
gained of its history and sources compensates me for the 
unpleasant details it has forced upon my attention. 
—HELEN KELLER 
68 
THE ATHEIST'S BIBLE 

In religion, 
What damned error but some sober brow 
Will bless it and approve it with a text, 
Hiding the grossness with fair ornament? 
—WILLIAM SHAKESPEARE 
The Bible, itself the ultimate curse, is an in-depth pro-
file of the divine spleen. 
—RUTH HURMENCE GREEN 
As to the book called the Bible, it is blasphemy to call it 
the word of God. It is a book of lies and contradictions, 
and a history of bad times and bad men. There are but a 
few good characters in the whole book. 
—THOMAS PAINE 
When I think of all the harm [the Bible] has done, I 
despair of ever writing anything to equal it. 
—OSCAR WILDE 
The Good Book 
69 

The Old Testament is responsible for more atheism, 
agnosticism, disbelief—call it what you will—than any 
book ever written; it has emptied more churches than 
all the counterattractions of cinema, motor bicycle and 
golf course. 
—A. A. MILNE 
"The Good Book"—one of the most remarkable euphe-
misms ever coined. 
—ASHLEY MONTAGU 
70 
THE ATHEIST'S BIBLE 

Civilization will not attain to its perfection, until the last 
stone from the last church falls on the last priest! 
—EMILE ZOLA 
To aim to convert a man by miracles is a profanation of 
the soul. 
—RALPH WALDO EMERSON 
* "The Brimstone Chronicles" derives its name from preachers who scare their 
congregations into belief in and submission to God through fear of hell and dam-
nation. The quotes in this chapter demonstrate that Atheists can be as intemper-
ate, unreasonable and extreme as fire-and-brimstone preachers. 
71 

Religion has done more to bust-up humanity than any-
thing. 
—WHOOPI GOLDBERG 
Examine the religious principles which have, in fact, 
prevailed in the world. You will scarcely be persuaded 
that they are any thing but sick men's dreams. 
—DAVID HUME 
There is one notable thing about our Christianity ... it 
is still a hundred times better than the Christianity of 
the Bible, with its prodigious crime—the invention of 
Hell. Measured by our Christianity of today, bad as it is, 
hypocritical as it is, empty and hollow as it is, neither the 
Deity nor His Son is a Christian, nor qualified for that 
moderately high place. 
72 
THE ATHEIST'S BIBLE 

God is the immemorial refuge of the incompetent, the 
helpless, the miserable. They find not only sanctuary in 
His arms, but also a kind of superiority, soothing to their 
macerated egos: He will set them above their betters. 
—H. L. MENCKEN 
I find it necessary to wash my hands after I have come 
into contact with religious people. 
—FRIEDRICH NIETZSCHE 
All your Western theologies, the whole mythology of them, 
are based on the concept of God as a senile delinquent. 
—TENNESSEE WILLIAMS 
Christianity is the most ridiculous, the most absurd and 
bloody religion that has ever infected the world. 
—VOLTAIRE 
The Brimstone Chronicles 
73 

Religion is regarded by the common people as true, by 
the philosophers as false, and by the rulers as useful. 
—SENECA THE YOUNGER 
It is an heretic that makes the fire, 
Not she which burns in't. 
—WILLIAM SHAKESPEARE 
But no public m a n . . . ever believes that the Bible means 
what it says: he is always convinced that it says what he 
means. 
—GEORGE BERNARD SHAW 
74 

I have heard an atheist defined as a man who had no in-
visible means of support. 
—JOHN BUCHAN 
Give a man a fish, and you'll feed him for a day; give him 
a religion, and he'll starve to death while praying for a 
fish. 
—ANONYMOUS 
A simple man believes anything, 
but a prudent man gives thought to his steps. 
—PROVERBS, 14:15 
One's convictions should be proportional to one's evi-
dence. 
—SAM HARRIS 
Proverbs 75 

To know a person's religion we need not listen to his 
profession of faith but must find his brand of intoler-
ance. 
—ERIC HOFFER 
Art raises its head where religions decline. 
—FRIEDRICH NIETZSCHE 
As the caterpillar chooses the fairest leaves to lay her eggs 
on, so the priest lays his curse on the fairest joys. 
—WILLIAM BLAKE 
A faith which cannot survive collision with the truth is 
not worth many regrets. 
—ARTHUR C. CLARKE 
Religion is for people who are afraid to go to hell, whereas 
spirituality is for people like me who have been there. 
—DAVE MUSTAINE 
76 
THE ATHEIST'S BIBLE 
i 

The religion of one age is the literary entertainment of 
the next. 
—RALPH WALDO EMERSON 
For every credibility gap, there is a gullibility fill. 
—RICHARD CLOPTON 
He, who begins by loving Christianity better than Truth, 
will proceed by loving his own Sect or Church better than 
Christianity, and end in loving himself better than all. 
—SAMUEL TAYLOR COLERIDGE 
A dream is a scripture, and many scriptures are nothing 
but dreams. 
—UMBERTO Eco 
As men's prayers are a disease of the will, so are their 
creeds a disease of the intellect. 
—RALPH WALDO EMERSON 
Proverbs 77 

A myth is a religion in which no one any longer believes. 
—JAMES K. FEIBLEMAN 
Lighthouses are more helpful than churches. 
—BENJAMIN FRANKLIN 
There is in every village a torch: the schoolmaster—and 
an extinguisher: the parson. 
—VICTOR HUGO 
Praying is like a rocking chair—it'll give you something 
to do, but it won't get you anywhere. 
—GYPSY ROSE LEE 
Nothing is so firmly believed as what is least known. 
—MICHEL EYQUEM DE MONTAIGNE 
78 
THE ATHEIST'S BIBLE 

Absolute faith corrupts as absolutely as absolute power. 
—ERIC HOFFER 
All religions are equally sublime to the ignorant, useful 
to the politician, and ridiculous to the philosopher. 
—LUCRETIUS 
Two hands working can do more than a thousand clasped 
in prayer. 
—ANONYMOUS 
Proverbs 
79 

The greatest tragedy in mankind's entire history may be 
the hijacking of morality by religion. 
—ARTHUR C. CLARKE 
There seems to be a terrible misunderstanding on the 
part of a great many people to the effect that when you 
cease to believe you may cease to behave. 
—Louis KRONENBERGER 
We have just enough religion to make us hate, but not 
enough to make us love one another. 
—JONATHAN SWIFT 
80 

Christian morality (so called) has all the characters of a 
reaction; it is, in great part, a protest against Paganism. 
Its ideal is negative rather than positive; passive rather 
than active; Innocence rather than Nobleness; Absti-
nence from Evil, rather than energetic Pursuit of Good: 
in its precepts (as has been well said) "thou shalt not" 
predominates unduly over "thou shalt." 
—JOHN STUART MILL 
Morality is of the highest importance—but for us, not for 
God. 
—ALBERT EINSTEIN 
Wherever morality is based on theology, wherever the 
right is made dependent on divine authority, the most 
immoral, unjust, infamous things can be justified and 
established. 
—LUDWIG FEUERBACH 
I don't think the belief in God has very much to do with 
people's moral quality as people. 
—COLIN MCGINN 
Book of Common Virtue 
81 

Atheism, and the related conviction that we have just 
one life to live, is the only sure way to regard all our fel-
low creatures as brothers and sisters. 
—CHRISTOPHER HITCHENS 
The happiest people I have known have been those who 
gave themselves no concern about their own souls, but 
did their uttermost to mitigate the miseries of others. 
—ELIZABETH CADY STANTON 
You can pray for someone even if you don't think God 
exists. 
—GORDON ATKINSON 
The peak of tolerance is most readily achieved by those 
who are not burdened by convictions. 
—ALEXANDER CHASE 
82 
THE ATHEIST'S BIBLE 

I have no choice but to be guilty. ... God is unthinkable 
if we are innocent. 
—ARCHIBALD MACLEISH 
Moral indignation is jealousy with a halo. 
-H. G. WELLS 
Man's responsibility increases as that of the gods de-
creases. 
—ANDRÉ GIDE 
The trouble with religious morality comes not from 
morality's being inescapably pure, but from religion's 
being incurably unintelligible. 
—BERNARD WILLIAMS 
It is only by dispelling the clouds and phantoms of Reli-
gion, that we shall discover Truth, Reason, and Morality. 
—BARON D'HOLBACH 
Book of Common Virtue 83 

I believe that our obligation is to make life better because 
it's our obligation to each other as human beings. Not in 
relation to eternal rewards and infernal punishments. 
—SUSAN JACOBY 
Men become civilized, not in proportion to their will-
ingness to believe, but in proportion to their readiness 
to doubt. 
—H. L. MENCKEN 
There is a story... which is fairly well known, told about 
when missionaries came to Africa, that they had the Bi-
ble and we, the natives, had the land. And then they said, 
"Let us pray," and we dutifully shut our eyes. And when 
we opened them, why, they now had the land and we had 
the Bible. 
—DESMOND TUTU 
We are punished by our sins, not for them. 
—ELBERT HUBBARD 
84 
THE ATHEIST'S BIBLE 

It is wonderful how much time good people spend fight-
ing the devil. If they would only expend the same amount 
of energy loving their fellow men, the devil would die in 
his own tracks of ennui. 
—HELEN KELLER 
[For St. Francis of Assisi,] religion was not a thing like a 
theory but a thing like a love-affair. 
—G. K. CHESTERTON 
Atheism leaves a man to sense, to philosophy, to natural 
piety, to laws, to reputation; all which may be guides to 
an outward moral virtue, though religion were not; but 
superstition dismounts all these and erecteth an abso-
lute monarchy in the minds of men. 
—FRANCIS BACON 
What remains, then, for those who cannot pray.... This 
alone, and this is enough: To love virtue, to love truth. 
—JOHN BURROUGHS 
Book of Common Virtue 85 

All religions have based morality on obedience, that is 
to say, on voluntary slavery. That is why they have always 
been more pernicious than any political organization. 
For the latter makes use of violence, the former—of the 
corruption of the will. 
—ALEXANDER HERZEN 
I don't believe in God. My God is patriotism. Teach a 
man to be a good citizen and you have solved the prob-
lem of life. 
—ANDREW CARNEGIE 
This is my simple religion. No need for temples. No 
need for complicated philosophy. Your own mind, your 
own heart, is the temple; your philosophy is simple 
kindness. 
—THE DALAI LAMA 
86 
THE ATHEIST'S BIBLE 

Science ... has been accused of undermining morals— 
but wrongly. The ethical behavior of man is better based 
on sympathy, education and social relationships, and 
requires no support from religion. Man's plight would, 
indeed, be sad if he had to be kept in order through fear 
of punishment and hope of rewards after death. 
—ALBERT EINSTEIN 
"Heaven help us!" said the old religion; the new one, 
from its very lack of that faith, will teach us all the more 
to help one another. 
—GEORGE ELIOT 
My only wish is ... to transform friends of God into 
friends of man, believers into thinkers, devotees of 
prayer into devotees of work, candidates for the hereaf-
ter into students of this world, Christians who, by their 
own profession and admission, are "half animal, half 
angel," into persons, into whole persons. 
—LUDWIG FEUERBACH 
Book of Common Virtue 87 

I'm an atheist, and that's it. I believe there's nothing we 
can know except that we should be kind to each other 
and do what we can for other people. 
—KATHARINE HEPBURN 
He who has made great moral progress ceases to pray. 
—IMMANUEL KANT 
I have been astonished that Men could die Martyrs for 
religion—I have shudder'd at it—I shudder no more—I 
could be martyr'd for my Religion—Love is my religion— 
I could die for that. 
—JOHN KEATS 
God give me unclouded eyes and freedom from haste. 
God give me a quiet and relentless anger against all pre-
tense and all pretentious work and all work left slack and 
unfinished. God give me a restlessness whereby I may 
neither sleep nor accept praise till my observed results 
equal my calculated results or in pious glee I discover and 
assault my error. God give me strength not to trust God! 
—SINCLAIR LEWIS 
88 
THE ATHEIST'S BIBLE 

Strange is our situation here upon earth. Each of us 
comes for a short visit, not knowing why, yet sometimes 
seeming to divine a purpose. From the standpoint of 
daily life, however, there is one thing we do know: that 
man is here for the sake of other men—above all for those 
upon whose smile and well-being our own happiness 
depends, and also for the countless unknown souls with 
whose fate we are connected by a bond of sympathy. 
—ALBERT E I N S T E I N 
Thus was I forced, through seeing the error of their 
foundation, to abandon all belief in every religion which 
had been taught to man. But my religious feelings were 
immediately replaced by the spirit of universal char-
ity—not for a sect or a party, or for a country or a colour, 
but for the human race, and with a real and ardent desire 
to do them good. 
—ROBERT OWEN 
Book of Common Virtue 
89 

I believe in salvation through economic, social and spir-
itual freedom. 
—ELBERT HUBBARD 
Religion is an insult to human dignity. With or without it 
you would have good people doing good things and evil 
people doing evil things. But for good people to do evil 
things, that takes religion. 
—STEVEN WEINBERG 
Pointing to another world will never stop vice among us; 
shedding light over this world can alone help us. 
—WALT WHITMAN 
I believe in the equality of man; and I believe that reli-
gious duties consist in doing justice, loving mercy, and 
endeavoring to make our fellow-creatures happy. 
—THOMAS PAINE 
90 THE ATHEIST' S BIBLE 

Not one man in ten thousand has goodness of heart or 
strength of mind to be an atheist. 
—SAMUEL TAYLOR COLERIDGE 
So many gods, so many creeds, 
So many paths that wind and wind, 
While just the art of being kind 
Is all the sad world needs. 
—ELLA WHEELER WILCOX 
Book of Common Virtue 91 

The liberation of the human mind has never been 
furthered by such learned dunderheads; it has been fur-
thered by gay fellows who heaved dead cats into sanctu-
aries and then went roistering down the highways of the 
world, proving to all men that doubt, after all, was safe— 
that the god in the sanctuary was finite in his power, and 
hence a fraud. 
—H. L. MENCKEN (and GEORGE JEAN NATHAN) 
I have, therefore, described religion as the metaphysics 
of the people. 
—ARTHUR SCHOPENHAUER 
92 

The more I study religions the more I am convinced that 
man never worshipped anything but himself. 
—RICHARD FRANCIS BURTON 
The Atheist does not say "There is no God," but he says, 
"I know not what you mean by God; I am without idea of 
God; the word 'God' is to me a sound conveying no clear 
or distinct affirmation." 
—CHARLES BRADLAUGH 
God is a holding place for everything we don't under-
stand. 
—BETTY SUE FLOWERS 
Doubt is not a pleasant condition, but certainty is a 
ridiculous one. 
—VOLTAIRE 
Book of Knowledge 93 

What's the difference between the Lone Ranger and 
God? There really is a Lone Ranger. 
—EDWARD ABBEY 
Human kind cannot bear very much reality. 
—T. S. ELIOT 
Of religion I know nothing—at least, in its favor. 
—LORD BYRON 
Religion has treated knowledge sometimes as an enemy, 
sometimes as a hostage; often as a captive, and more 
often as a child. 
—CHARLES CALEB COLTON 
God, Immortality, Duty ... how inconceivable was the 
first, how unbelievable the second, and yet how peremp-
tory and absolute the third. 
—GEORGE ELIOT 
94 
THE ATHEIST'S BIBLE 

If ignorance of nature gave birth to gods, knowledge of 
nature is made for their destruction. 
—PERCY BYSSHE SHELLEY 
Although atheism might have been logically tenable be-
fore Darwin, Darwin made it possible to be an intellec-
tually fulfilled atheist. 
—RICHARD DAWKINS 
Fear prophets... and those prepared to die for the truth, 
for as a rule they make many others die with them, often 
before them, at times instead of them. 
—UMBERTO ECO 
I can live with doubt and uncertainty. I think it's much 
more interesting to live not knowing than to have an-
swers which might be wrong. 
—RICHARD P. FEYNMAN 
Book of Knowledge 95 

Truth is tough. It will not break, like a bubble, at a touch; 
nay, you may kick it about all day, like a football, and it 
will be round and full at evening. 
—OLIVER WENDELL HOLMES 
You never see animals going through the absurd and 
often horrible fooleries of magic and religion.... Only 
man behaves with such gratuitous folly. It is the price he 
has to pay for being intelligent, but not, as yet, quite in-
telligent enough. 
—ALDOUS HUXLEY 
I wouldn't want my doctor thinking that intelligent de-
sign was an equally plausible hypothesis to evolution any 
more than I would want my airplane pilot believing in 
the flat Earth. 
—JAMES LANGER 
Know then thyself, presume not God to scan, 
The proper study of Mankind is Man. 
—ALEXANDER POPE 
96 
THE ATHEIST'S BIBLE 

For me, it is far better to grasp the Universe as it really 
is than to persist in delusion, however satisfying and 
reassuring. 
—CARL SAGAN 
Religions are like glow-worms: they need darkness in 
order to shine. A certain degree of general ignorance is 
the condition for the existence of any religion, the ele-
ment in which alone it is able to live. 
—ARTHUR SCHOPENHAUER 
Modest doubt is called the beacon of the wise. 
—WILLIAM SHAKESPEARE 
I am against religion because it teaches us to be satisfied 
with not understanding the world. 
—RICHARD DAWKINS 
Book of Knowledge 97 

Reality is that which, when you stop believing in it, 
doesn't go away.* 
—PHILIP K. DICK 
Well I don't think we're for anything. We're just products 
of evolution. You can say "Gee, your life must be pretty 
bleak if you don't think there's a purpose." But I'm an-
ticipating having a good lunch. 
—JAMES WATSON 
What do I know about God and the purpose of life? I 
know that this world exists. 
—LUDWIG WITTGENSTEIN 
* This was Dick's response, in 1972, to a Canadian college student who was work-
ing on a paper for a philosophy class and asked him for a one - sentence definition 
of reality. 
98 
THE ATHEIST'S BIBLE 

The memory of my own suffering has prevented me from 
ever shadowing one young soul with any of the supersti-
tions of the Christian religion. 
—ELIZABETH CADY STANTON 
Just think of the tragedy of teaching children not to 
doubt. 
—CLARENCE DARROW 
Book of Knowledge 99 

For what is Truth? In matters of religion, it is simply the 
opinion that has survived. In matters of science, it is the 
ultimate sensation. 
—OSCAR WILDE 
Religion is fundamentally opposed to everything I hold 
in veneration—courage, clear thinking, honesty, fair-
ness, and, above all, love of the truth. 
—H. L. MENCKEN 
100 

It can do truth no service to blink the fact, known to all 
who have the most ordinary acquaintance with liter-
ary history, that a large portion of the noblest and most 
valuable moral teaching has been the work, not only 
of men who did not know, but of men who knew and 
rejected, the Christian faith. 
—JOHN STUART MILL 
Truth is more of a stranger than fiction. 
—MARK TWAIN 
Most religions have merely canonized a few products of 
ancient ignorance and derangement and passed them 
down to us as though they were primordial truths. This 
leaves billions of us believing what no sane person could 
believe on his own. 
—SAM HARRIS 
Book of Truth 101 

The concepts of truth may differ. But all admit and re-
spect truth. That truth I call God. For sometime I was 
saying, "God is Truth," but that did not satisfy me. So 
now I say, "Truth is God." 
—MOHANDAS K. GANDHI 
The truths of religion are never so well understood as by 
those who have lost the power of reasoning. 
—VOLTAIRE 
Religion is about turning untested belief into unshake-
able truth through the power of institutions and the pas -
sage of time. 
—RICHARD DAWKINS 
If devotion to truth is the hallmark of morality, then 
there is no greater, nobler, more heroic form of devotion 
than the act of a man who assumes the responsibility of 
thinking.. .. The alleged short-cut to knowledge, which 
is faith, is only a short-circuit destroying the mind. 
—AYN RAND 
102 
THE ATHEIST'S BIBLE 

The history of our race, and each individual's experi-
ence, are sown thick with evidence that a truth is not 
hard to kill and that a lie told well is immortal. 
—MARK TWAIN 
The truth never flaunted a sign. 
—EMILY DICKINSON 
I am a friend of truth, but no friend at all to martyrdom. 
—VOLTAIRE 
It is so little true that martyrs offer any support to the 
truth of a cause that I am inclined to deny that any martyr 
has ever had anything to do with the truth at all. 
—FRIEDRICH NIETZSCHE 
Book of Truth 103 

Belief? What do I believe in? I believe in sun. In rock. In 
the dogma of the sun and the doctrine of the rock. I be-
lieve in blood, fire, woman, rivers, eagles, storm, drums, 
flutes, banjos, and broom-tailed horses. 
—EDWARD ABBEY 
If I had to choose a religion I think I should become a 
worshipper of the sun. The sun gives to all things life and 
fertility. It is the true God of the earth. 
—NAPOLEON BONAPARTE 
104 

I believe in Michael Angelo, Velasquez, and Rembrandt; 
in the might of design, the mystery of color, the redemp-
tion of all things by Beauty everlasting, and the message 
of Art that has made these hands blessed. 
—GEORGE BERNARD SHAW 
I feel no need of any faith than my faith in human beings. 
Like Confucius of old, I am so absorbed in the wonder of 
earth and the life upon it that I cannot think of heaven 
or angels. 
—PEARL S. BUCK 
Joy in the universe, and keen curiosity about it all—that 
has been my religion. 
—JOHN BURROUGHS 
The fairest thing we can experience is the mysterious. It 
is the fundamental emotion which stands at the cradle of 
true art and true science. 
—ALBERT EINSTEIN 
Book of Inspiration 105 

The church of this country is not only indifferent to the 
wrongs of the slave, it actually takes sides with the op-
pressors. . .. For my part, I would say, welcome infidel-
ity! welcome atheism! welcome anything! in preference 
to the gospel, as preached by those Divines! They convert 
the very name of religion into an engine of tyranny, and 
barbarous cruelty, and serve to confirm more infidels, 
in this age, than all the infidel writings of Thomas Paine, 
Voltaire, and Bolingbroke, put together, have done! 
—FKEDERICK DOUGLASS 
Nothing is at last sacred but the integrity of our own 
mind. 
—RALPH WALDO EMERSON 
Secularism .. . has no mysteries, no mummeries, no 
priests, no ceremonies, no falsehoods, no miracles, and 
no persecutions. It considers the lilies of the field, and 
takes thought for the morrow. It says to the whole world, 
Work that you may eat, drink, and be clothed; work that 
you may enjoy; work that you may not want; work that 
you may give and never need. 
—ROBERT G. INGERSOLL 
106 
THE ATHEIST'S BIBLE 

It was, of course, a lie what you read about my religious 
convictions, a lie which is being systematically repeated. 
I do not believe in a personal God and I have never de-
nied this but have expressed it clearly. If something is in 
me which can be called religious then it is the unbound-
ed admiration for the structure of the world so far as our 
science can reveal it. 
—ALBERT EINSTEIN 
Like many people, I have no religion, and I am just sit-
ting in a small boat drifting with the tide. I live in the 
doubts of my duty.. . . I think there is dignity in this, just 
to go on working. 
—FEDERICO FELLINI 
Atheism in its negation of gods is at the same time the 
strongest affirmation of man, and through man, the 
eternal yea to life, purpose, and beauty. 
— E M M A GOLDMAN 
Book of Inspiration 
107 

Let us use our energy and our initiative to solve our 
problems without relying on prayers and wishful think-
ing. When we have faith in ourselves, we will find we do 
not have to have faith in gods. 
—RUTH HURMENCE GREEN 
I would do anything—light candles, say chants, recite 
prayers, give alms—on the off-chance that one of them 
would work. 
—ANN RICHARDS 
My Imagination is a Monastery and I am its Monk. 
—JOHN KEATS 
There is no God any more divine than Yourself. 
—WALT WHITMAN 
I believe in God, only I spell it Nature. 
—FRANK LLOYD WRIGHT 
108 
THE ATHEIST'S BIBLE 

The natural is so awesome that we need not go beyond 
it. 
—RUTH HURMENCE GREEN 
I can very well do without God both in my life and in my 
painting, but I cannot, ill as I am, do without something 
which is greater than I, which is my life—the power to 
create. 
—VINCENT VAN GOGH 
Book of Inspiration 109 

CREATOR—A comedian whose audience is afraid to laugh. 
—H. L. MENCKEN 
If only God would give me some clear sign! Like making 
a large deposit in my name at a Swiss bank. 
—WOODY ALLEN 
If Jesus had been killed twenty years ago, Catholic school 
children would be wearing little electric chairs around 
their necks instead of crosses. 
—LENNY BRUCE 
110 

Good God, how much reverence can you have for a Su-
preme Being who finds it necessary to include such phe-
nomena as phlegm and tooth decay in His divine system 
of creation? 
—JOSEPH HELLER 
No man of any humor ever founded a religion. 
—ROBERT G. INGERSOLL 
Forgive, 0 Lord, my little jokes on Thee 
And I'll forgive Thy great big one on me. 
—ROBERT FROST 
I once wanted to become an atheist. I gave up the idea. 
They have no holidays. 
—HENNY YOUNGMAN 
As long as there are tests, there will be prayer in schools. 
—ANONYMOUS 
Book of Laughter 111 

I'm not normally a praying man, but if you're up there, 
please save me, Superman. 
—HOMER SIMPSON 
Why should we take advice on sex from the Pope? If he 
knows anything about it, he shouldn't. 
—GEORGE BERNARD SHAW 
I do not believe in God. I believe in cashmere. 
—FRAN LEBOWITZ 
God is love, but get it in writing. 
—GYPSY ROSE LEE 
112 
THE ATHEIST'S BIBLE 

CHRISTIAN: One who believes that the New Testament is 
a divinely inspired book admirably suited to the spiri-
tual needs of his neighbor. 
—AMBROSE BIERCE 
The total absence of humor from the Bible is one of the 
most singular things in all literature. 
—ALFRED NORTH WHITEHEAD 
If Jesus was Jewish, how come he has a Mexican name? 
—ANONYMOUS 
Every man thinks God is on his side. The rich and pow-
erful know He is. 
—JEAN ANOUILH 
Book of Laughter 113 

There are three religious truths: 
1. Jews do not recognize Jesus as the Messiah. 
2. Protestants do not recognize the Pope as the leader 
of the Christian faith. 
3. Baptists do not recognize each other in the liquor 
store or at Hooters. 
—ANONYMOUS 
Man is a dog's ideal of what God should be. 
—HOLBROOK JACKSON 
But why do born-again people so often make you wish 
they'd never been born the first time? 
—KATHARINE WHITEHORN 
An atheist is a guy who watches a Notre Dame—SMU 
football game and doesn't care who wins. 
—DWIGHT D. EISENHOWER 
114 THE ATHEIST'S 
BIBLE 

Orthodoxy is my doxy—heterodoxy is another man's 
doxy. 
—WILLIAM WAKBURTON 
Nah, there's no bigger atheist than me. Well, I take that 
back. I'm a cancer screening away from going agnostic 
and a biopsy away from full-fledged Christian. 
—ADAM CAHOLLA 
When suffering comes, we yearn for some sign from 
God, forgetting we have just had one. 
—MIGNON MCLAUGHLIN 
I want to play the role of Jesus. I'm a logical choice. Hook 
the part. I'm a Jew. And I'm a comedian... . And I'm an 
atheist, so I'd be able to look at the character objectively. 
Who else could do that? 
—CHARLIE CHAPLIN 
Book of Laughter 115 

God wanted to have a holiday, so He asked St. Peter for 
suggestions on where to go. 
"Why not go to Jupiter?" asked St. Peter. 
"No, too much gravity, too much stomping around," 
said God. 
"Well, how about Mercury?" 
"No, it's too hot there." 
"Okay," said St. Peter, "what about Earth?" 
"No," said God, "They're such horrible gossips. 
When I was there 2000 years ago, I had an affair with a 
Jewish woman, and they're still talking about it." 
—ANONYMOUS 
It's hard to be religious when certain people are never 
incinerated by bolts of lightning. 
—BILL WATTERSON 
ll6 
THE ATHEIST'S BIBLE 

The atheist, by merely being in touch with reality, ap-
pears shamefully out of touch with the fantasy life of his 
neighbors. 
—SAM HARRIS 
When I was a kid I used to pray every night for a new 
bicycle. Then I realized that the Lord doesn't work that 
way. So I stole one and asked Him to forgive me. 
—EMO PHILIPS 
Dear Lord, the gods have been good to me, and I am 
thankful. For the first time in my life everything is ab-
solutely perfect just the way it is. So here's the deal. You 
freeze everything as it is, and I won't ask for anything 
more. If that is okay, please give me absolutely no sign. 
Okay, deal. In gratitude, I present you this offering of 
milk and cookies. If you want me to eat them for you, 
give me no sign. That will be done (gulp, gulp, munch, 
munch, munch). 
—HOMER SIMPSON 
Book of Laughter 117 

We must respect the other fellow's religion, but only in 
the sense and to the extent that we respect his theory that 
his wife is beautiful and his children smart. 
—H. L. MENCKEN 
What if everything is an illusion and nothing exists? In 
that case, I definitely overpaid for my carpet. 
—WOODY ALLEN 
ll8 
THE ATHEIST'S BIBLE 

So long as [women themselves] mistake superstition for 
religious revelation, they will be content with the posi-
tion and opportunities assigned them by scholastic the-
ology. ... Their religious nature is warped and twisted 
through generations .. . which fact, by the way, is the 
greatest stumbling block in the path of equal suffrage 
to-day. 
—ELIZABETH CADY STANTON 
I am influenced in my own conduct at the present time by 
far higher considerations, and by a nobler idea of duty, 
than I ever was while I held the evangelical beliefs. 
—GEORGE ELIOT 
119 

I do not believe in God, because I believe in man. What-
ever his mistakes, man has for thousands of years past 
been working to undo the botched job your God has 
made. 
—EMMA GOLDMAN 
An omnipotent, all-knowing tyrant is not so different 
from earthly dictators who made everything and every-
body mere cogs in the machine which they controlled. 
An atheism that rejects such a God is amply justified. 
—KAREN ARMSTRONG 
All religions are the same: religion is basically guilt, with 
different holidays. 
—CATHY LADMAN 
I distrust those people who know so well what God wants 
them to do, because I notice it always coincides with 
their own desires. 
—SUSAN B. ANTHONY 
120 
THE ATHEIST'S BIBLE 


She was a good Christian woman with a large respect for 
religion, though she did not, of course, believe any of it 
was true. 
—FLANNERY O'CONNOR 
I find it interesting that the meanest life, the poorest ex-
istence, is attributed to God's will, but as human beings 
become more affluent, as their living standard and style 
begin to ascend the material scale, God descends the 
scale of responsibility at a commensurate speed. 
—MAYA ANGELOU 
Religion is probably, after sex, the second oldest re-
source which human beings have available to them for 
blowing their minds. 
—SUSAN SONTAG 
122 
THE ATHEIST'S BIBLE 

By the year 2000, we will, I hope, raise our children to 
believe in human potential, not God. 
—GLORIA STEINEM 
I have endeavoured to dissipate these religious super-
stitions from the minds of women, and base their faith 
on science and reason, where I found for myself at last 
that peace and comfort I could never find in the Bible 
and the church. 
—ELIZABETH CADY STANTON 
The philosophy of Atheism represents a concept of life 
without any metaphysical Beyond or Divine Regulator. 
It is the concept of an actual, real world with its liberat-
ing, expanding and beautifying possibilities, as against 
an unreal world, which, with its spirits, oracles, and 
mean contentment has kept humanity in helpless deg-
radation. 
— E M M A GOLDMAN 
A Book of Her Own 123 

There ain't no answer. There ain't going to be any answer. 
There never has been an answer. That's the answer. 
—GERTRUDE STEIN 
Back in my early childhood, I had learned that God 
doesn't fight on any army's side. So there was little point 
in praying. Nonetheless, before every battle prayers 
were read, all kinds of incantations were recited, staged 
by all sorts of preachers. We attended these ceremonies, 
and I saw how the soldiers stood in place, as though 
they couldn't believe their ears. ... I couldn't believe 
it either, but I counted for nothing. . . . Since then, I've 
given up any belief in God, in a "light" that leads us, or 
anything of this sort. Goethe has said, "If God created 
this world, then he should review his plan." 
—MARLENE DIETRICH 
No Gods, No Masters.* 
—MARGARET SANGER 
* "No Gods, No Masters" was printed on the masthead of Margaret Sanger's femi-
nist journal The Woman Rebel. This slogan originally appeared on a sign carried by 
Industrial Workers of the World (IWW) union members at the strike in Lawrence, 
Massachusetts, in 1912. The sign read: "Arise!!! Slaves of the World!!! No God! No 
Master! One for all and all for one." 
124 
THE ATHEIST'S BIBLE 



Blasphemy? No, it is not blasphemy. If God is as vast as 
that, He is above blasphemy; if He is as little as that, He 
is beneath it. 
Man is a marvelous curiosity... . He thinks he is the 
Creator's pet.... He even believes the Creator loves 
him; has a passion for him; sits up nights to admire him; 
yes, and watch over him and keep him out of trouble. 
He prays to Him, and thinks He listens. Isn't it a quaint 
idea? 
If Christ were here now, there is one thing he would not 
be—a Christian. 
Man is the Religious Animal.... He is the only animal 
that has the True Religion—several of them. He is the 
only animal that loves his neighbor as himself, and cuts 
his throat if his theology isn't straight. He has made a 
graveyard of the globe in trying his honest best to smooth 
his brother's path to happiness and heaven. 
Book of Mark (Twain) 127 

The church is always trying to get other people to reform; 
it might not be a bad idea to reform itself a little, by way 
of example. 
One of the proofs of the immortality of the soul is that 
myriads have believed it. They also believed the world 
was flat. 
Nothing exists; all is a dream. God—man—the world—the 
sun, the moon, the wilderness of stars—a dream, all a 
dream; they have no existence. Nothing exists save empty 
space—and you! 
[The Bible] has noble poetry in it . .. and some good 
morals; and some execrable morals; and a wealth of ob-
scenity; and upwards of a thousand lies. 
Many of these people have the reasoning faculty, but no 
one uses it in religious matters. 
128 
THE ATHEIST'S BIBLE 

If the cholera or black plague should come to these 
shores, perhaps the bulk of the nation would pray to be 
delivered from it, but the rest would put their trust in the 
Health Board of the City of New York. 
What God lacks is convictions—stability of character. He 
ought to be a Presbyterian or a Catholic or something—not 
try to be everything. 
The best minds will tell you that when a man has begot-
ten a child he is morally bound to tenderly care for it, 
protect it from hurt, shield it from disease, clothe it, 
feed it, bear with its waywardness, lay no hand upon it 
save in kindness and for its own good, and never in any 
case inflict upon it a wanton cruelty. God's treatment of 
his earthly children, every day and every night, is the 
exact opposite of all that, yet those best minds warmly 
justify these crimes, condone them, excuse them, and 
indignantly refuse to regard them as crimes at all, when 
he commits them. 
Book of Mark (Twain) 
129 

Nothing agrees with me. If I drink coffee it gives me 
dispepsia; if I drink wine it gives me the gout; if I go to 
church it gives me dysentery. 
A man is accepted into a church for what he believes and 
he is turned out for what he knows. 
[Go to] heaven for climate, and hell for society. 
130 
THE ATHEIST'S BIBLE 

No man treats a motorcar as foolishly as he treats an-
other human being. When the car will not go, he does 
not attribute its annoying behavior to sin; he does not 
say, "You are a wicked motorcar, and I shall not give you 
any more petrol until you go." He attempts to find out 
what is wrong and set it right. 
One is often told that it is a very wrong thing to attack 
religion, because religion makes men virtuous. So I am 
told; I have not noticed it. 
131 

If I were granted omnipotence, and millions of years to 
experiment in, I should not think Man much to boast of 
as the final result of all my efforts. 
The fundamental cause of the trouble is that in the mod-
ern world the stupid are cocksure while the intelligent 
are full of doubt. 
So far as I can remember, there is not one word in the 
Gospels in praise of intelligence. 
I am suggesting that, in all our beliefs, we should admit a 
"probable error." If you believe (say) that democracy is 
better than fascism, you should still admit the possibili-
ty of error, though the possibility may be very small. The 
possibility may be so small that you are willing to kill and 
die for your belief, yet the knowledge that the possibility 
exists may keep you from advocating large-scale perse-
cutions and cruelties such as are almost always practiced 
by those who admit no doubts. 
132 
THE ATHEIST'S BIBLE 

To teach how to live without certainty, and yet without 
being paralyzed by hesitation, is perhaps the chief thing 
that philosophy, in our age, can still do for those who 
study it. 
I believe that when I die I shall rot, and nothing of my 
ego will survive. I am not young, and I love life. But 
I should scorn to shiver with terror at the thought of 
annihilation. Happiness is nonetheless true happiness 
because it must come to an end, nor do thought and love 
lose their value because they are not everlasting.* 
And if there were a God, I think it very unlikely that He 
would have such an uneasy vanity as to be offended by 
those who doubt His existence. 
* Originally published in 1925, in a small book titled What I Believe. That same 
book was used as a piece of evidence in 1940, when the New York City court system 
deemed Russell morally unfit to teach at City College. 
Book of Bertrand (Russell) 133 

Prayer, among sane people, has never superseded prac-
tical efforts to secure the desired end. 
I can always say to myself that my atheism, like that of 
Spinoza, is true piety towards the universe and denies 
only gods fashioned by men in their own image, to be 
servants of their human interests. 
Fanaticism consists in redoubling your effort when you 
have forgotten your aim. 
134 

Religions are the great fairy-tales of the conscience. 
That fear first created the gods is perhaps as true as any-
thing so brief could be on so great a subject. 
Each religion, so dear to those whose life it sanctifies, 
and fulfilling so necessary a function in the society that 
has adopted it, necessarily contradicts every other reli-
gion, and probably contradicts itself: 
The idea of Christ is much older than Christianity. 
Religion is the natural reaction of the imagination when 
confronted by the difficulties of a truculent world. 
Faith in the supernatural is a desperate wager made by 
man at the lowest ebb of his fortunes. 
Book of George (Santayana) 135 

I do not believe in the creed professed by the Jewish 
Church, by the Roman Church, by the Greek Church, by 
the Turkish Church, by the Protestant Church, nor by any 
church that I know of. My own mind is my own church. 
One good schoolmaster is of more use than a hundred 
priests. 
136 

To argue with a man who has renounced the use and 
authority of reason, and whose philosophy consists 
in holding humanity in contempt, is like administer-
ing medicine to the dead, or endeavoring to convert an 
atheist by scripture. 
No falsehood is so fatal as that which is made an article 
of faith. 
Accustom a people to believe that priests, or any other 
class of men, can forgive sins, and you will have sins in 
abundance. 
The declaration which says that God visits the sins of the 
fathers upon the children ... is contrary to every principle 
of moral justice. 
Book of Thomas (Paine) 
137 

Whenever we read the obscene stories, the voluptuous 
debaucheries, the cruel and torturous executions, the 
unrelenting vindictiveness, with which more than half 
the Bible is filled, it would be more consistent that we 
called it the word of a demon, than the Word of God. It 
is a history of wickedness, that has served to corrupt and 
brutalize mankind; and, for my own part, I sincerely 
detest it, as I detest everything that is cruel. 
What is it the Bible teaches us?—rapine, cruelty, and 
murder. What is it the Testament teaches us?—to believe 
that the Almighty committed debauchery with a woman 
engaged to be married, and the belief of this debauchery 
is called faith. 
All the tales of miracles with which the Old and New Tes-
tament are filled, are fit only for impostors to preach and 
fools to believe. 
138 
THE ATHEIST'S BIBLE 

Of all the tyrannies that afflict mankind, tyranny in 
religion is the worst: every other species of tyranny is 
limited to the world we live in; but this attempts a stride 
beyond the grave, and seeks to pursue us into eternity. 
The story of Jesus Christ appearing after he was dead is 
the story of an apparition, such as timid imaginations 
can always create in vision, and credulity believe. 
All national institutions of churches, whether Jewish, 
Christian or Turkish, appear to me no other than human 
inventions, set up to terrify and enslave mankind, and 
monopolize power and profit. 
Book of Thomas (Paine) 
139 

If a man would follow, today, the teachings of the Old 
Testament he would be a criminal. If he would strictly 
follow the teachings of the New, he would be insane. 
The inventor of the plow did more good than the maker 
of the first rosary—because, say what you will, plowing is 
better than praying. 
With soap, baptism is a good thing. 
140 

In Nature there are neither rewards nor punishments-
there are consequences. 
Yes; if a man really believes that God once upheld slav-
ery; that he commanded soldiers to kill women and 
babes; that he believed in polygamy; that he persecuted 
for opinion's sake; that he will punish forever, and that 
he hates an unbeliever, the effect in my judgment will be 
bad. It always has been bad. This belief built the dun-
geons of the Inquisition. This belief made the Puritan 
murder the Quaker. 
Book of Robert (G. Ingersoll) 141 
Few nations have been so poor as to have but one god. 
Gods were made so easily, and the raw material cost so 
little, that generally the god market was fairly glutted, 
and heaven crammed with these phantoms. 

If the founder of Christianity had plainly said: "It is not 
necessary to believe in order to be saved; it is only nec-
essary to do, and he who really loves his fellow-men, 
who is kind, honest, just and charitable, is to be forever 
blest"—if he had only said that, there would probably 
have been but little persecution. 
The old doctrine that God ... rewarded the virtuous 
and punished the wicked is gradually fading from the 
mind. We know that some of the worst men have what 
the world calls success. We know that some of the best 
men lie upon the straw of failure. We know that honesty 
goes hungry, while larceny sits at the banquet. We know 
that the vicious have every physical comfort, while the 
virtuous are often clad in rags. 
Fear believes—courage doubts. Fear falls upon the 
earth and prays—courage stands erect and thinks. Fear 
retreats—courage advances. Fear is barbarism—courage 
is civilization. Fear believes in witchcraft, in devils and 
in ghosts. Fear is religion, courage is science. 
142 
THE ATHEIST'S BIBLE 

The hands that help are better far than the lips that 
pray. 
The churches have no confidence in each other. Why? 
Because they are acquainted with each other. 
The notion that faith in Christ is to be rewarded by an 
eternity of bliss, while a dependence upon reason, 
observation, and experience merits everlasting pain, is 
too absurd for refutation, and can be relieved only by 
that unhappy mixture of insanity and ignorance, called 
"faith." 
Labor is the only prayer that Nature answers; it is 
the only prayer that deserves an answer—good, honest, 
noble work. 
The inspiration of the Bible depends upon the ignorance 
of him who reads. 
The churches have no confidence in each other. Why? 
Because they are acquainted with each other. 
The notion that faith in Christ is to be rewarded by an 
eternity of bliss, while a dependence upon reason, 
observation, and experience merits everlasting pain, is 
too absurd for refutation, and can be relieved only by 
that unhappy mixture of insanity and ignorance, called 
"faith." 
Labor is the only prayer that Nature answers; it is 
the only prayer that deserves an answer—good, honest, 
noble work. 
Book of Robert (G. Ingersoll) 143 
The inspiration of the Bible depends upon the ignorance 
of him who reads. 

It may be that ministers really think that their prayers do 
good and it may be that frogs imagine that their croaking 
brings spring. 
The clergy know, I know, that they know that they do not 
know. 
Christianity has such a contemptible opinion of human 
nature that it does not believe a man can tell the truth 
unless frightened by a belief in God. No lower opinion 
of the human race has ever been expressed. 
I cannot see why we should expect an infinite God to do 
better in another world than he does in this. 
Honest investigation is utterly impossible within the 
pale of any church, for the reason, that if you think the 
church is right you will not investigate, and if you think 
it wrong, the church will investigate you. 
144 
THE ATHEIST'S BIBLE 

As long as every question is answered by the word "god," 
scientific inquiry is simply impossible. 
I have little confidence in any enterprise or business or 
investment that promises dividends only after the death 
of the stockholders. 
Book of Robert (G. Ingersoll) 145 

Well, I believe that there's somebody out there who watch-
es over us. Unfortunately, it's the government. 
You know, if it turns out that there is a God, I don't think 
that he's evil. I think the worst you can say about him is 
that basically he's an underachiever. 
I was thrown out of NYU my freshman year for cheating 
on my metaphysics final. You know, I looked within the 
soul of the boy sitting next to me. 
146 

To you I'm an atheist. ... To God I'm the loyal opposi-
tion. 
Eternal nothingness is O.K. if you're dressed for it. 
I don't believe in an afterlife, although I am bringing a 
change of underwear. 
I don't want to achieve immortality through my work. I 
want to achieve it through not dying. 
I don't believe in an afterlife, although I am bringing a 
change of underwear. 
I don't want to achieve immortality through my work. I 
want to achieve it through not dying. 
Book of Woody (Allen) 147 

Sect and error are synonymous terms. 
The atheist preserves his reason, which checks his pro-
pensity to mischief, while the fanatic is under the influ-
ence of a madness which is constantly urging him on. 
There is no sect in geometry; one does not refer to a 
Euclidean or Archimedean. 
148 

[Theological religion] is the source of all imaginable 
follies and disorders; it is the mother of fanaticism and 
civil discord; it is the enemy of mankind. 
I always said a very short prayer to God; here it is: "My 
God! make my enemies very ridiculous!" God heard my 
prayer. 
If God created us in his own image, we have more than 
reciprocated. 
Nothing can be more contrary to religion and the clergy 
than reason and common sense. 
If we believe absurdities, we shall commit atrocities. 
I always said a very short prayer to God; here it is: "My 
God! make my enemies very ridiculous!" God heard my 
prayer. 
If God created us in his own image, we have more than 
reciprocated. 
If we believe absurdities, we shall commit atrocities. 
Nothing can be more contrary to religion and the clergy 
than reason and common sense. 
Book of Voltaire 149 

DOGMA: A lie imperiously reiterated and authoritatively 
injected into the mind of one or more persons who be-
lieve they believe what some one else believes. 
Theology is an attempt to explain a subject by men who 
do not understand it. The intent is not to tell the truth 
but to satisfy the questioner. 
150 

GOD: I. The John Doe of philosophy and religion. 2. The 
first atheist. 
A creed is an ossified metaphor. 
Formal religion was organized for slaves: it offered them 
consolation which earth did not provide. 
And that what we call God's justice is only man's idea of 
what he would do if he were God. 
I believe in sunshine, fresh air, friendship, calm sleep, 
beautiful thoughts. 
Book of Elbert (Hubbard) 151 

Theology, by diverting the attention of men from this 
life to another, and by endeavoring to coerce all men 
into one religion, constantly preaching that this world is 
full of misery but the next world would be beautiful—or 
not, as the case may be—has forced on men the thought 
of fear, where otherwise there might have been the hap-
py abandon of Nature. 
Give us a Religion that will help us live—we can die with-
out assistance. 
152 
THE ATHEIST'S BIBLE 

The Christian resolve to find the world ugly and bad has 
made the world ugly and bad. 
God is a thought—it maketh all the straight crooked, and 
all that standeth reel. 
[Stendhal] robbed me of the best atheist joke which pre-
cisely I could have made: "God's only excuse is that he 
does not exist." 
153 

Better songs would they have to sing, for me to believe in 
their Savior: more! like saved ones would his disciples 
have to appear unto me! 
Mystical explanations are considered deep. The truth is 
that they are not even superficial. 
Two great European narcotics, alcohol and Christianity. 
[Jesus] died too early; he himself would have disavowed 
his doctrine had he attained to my age! 
The fact that faith may in certain circumstances save, 
the fact that salvation as the result of an idée fixe does not 
constitute a true idea, the fact that faith moves no moun-
tains, but may very readily raise them where previously 
they did not exist—all these things are made sufficiently 
clear by a mere casual stroll through a lunatic asylum. 
154 
THE ATHEIST'S BIBLE 

God is dead; but given the way of men, there may still 
be caves for thousands of years in which his shadow will 
be shown. 
What? Is man just one of God's mistakes? Or is God just 
one of man's? 
The spiritualization of sensuality is called love: it is a 
great triumph over Christianity. 
"Faith" means the will to avoid knowing what is true. 
There is not enough love and goodness in the world for 
us to be permitted to give any of it away to imaginary 
things. 
What? Is man just one of God's mistakes? Or is God just 
one of man's? 
The spiritualization of sensuality is called love: it is a 
great triumph over Christianity. 
"Faith" means the will to avoid knowing what is true. 
There is not enough love and goodness in the world for 
us to be permitted to give any of it away to imaginary 
things. 
Book of Friedrich (Nietzsche) 155 

CLERGYMAN, n. A man who undertakes the management 
of our spiritual affairs as a method of bettering his tem-
poral ones. 
FAITH, n. Belief without evidence in what is told by one 
who speaks without knowledge, of things without par-
allel. 
FAITH, n. Belief without evidence in what is told by one 
who speaks without knowledge, of things without par-
allel. 
HEATHEN, n. A benighted creature who has the folly to 
worship something that he can see and feel. 
156 

IMPIETY, n. Your irreverence toward my deity. 
INFIDEL, n. In New York, one who does not believe in the 
Christian religion; in Constantinople, one who does. 
PRAY, v. To ask that the laws of the universe be annulled 
in behalf of a single petitioner confessedly unworthy. 
REDEMPTION, n. Deliverance of sinners from the penalty 
of their sin, through their murder of the deity against 
whom they sinned. 
RELIGION, n. A daughter of Hope and Fear, explaining to 
Ignorance the nature of the Unknowable. 
REVERENCE, n. The spiritual attitude of a man to a god 
and a dog to a man. 
Bierce's Dictionary (Ambrose) 
157 

SAINT, n. A dead sinner revised and edited. 
SCRIPTURES, n. The sacred books of our holy religion, as 
distinguished from the false and profane writings on 
which all other faiths are based. 
158 
THE ATHEIST'S BIBLE 

Men are most apt to believe what they least understand. 
—MICHEL EYQUEM DE MONTAIGNE 
If I were not an atheist, I would believe in a God who 
would choose to save people on the basis of the totality 
of their lives and not the pattern of their words. I think 
he would prefer an honest and righteous atheist to a TV 
preacher whose every word is God, God, God, and whose 
every deed is foul, foul, foul. 
—ISAAC ASIMOV 
159 

If someone were to prove to me—right this minute—that 
God, in all his luminousness, exists, it wouldn't change 
a single aspect of my behavior. 
—Luis BUÑUEL 
If I am a fool, it is, at least, a doubting one; and I envy no 
one the certainty of his self-approved wisdom. 
—LORD BYRON 
I have been into many of the ancient cathedrals—grand, 
wonderful, mysterious. But I always leave them with 
a feeling of indignation because of the generations of 
human beings who have struggled in poverty to build 
these altars to an unknown god. 
—ELIZABETH CADY STANTON 
I give money for church organs in the hope that the organ 
music will distract the congregation's attention from the 
rest of the service. 
—ANDREW CARNEGIE 
160 
THE ATHEIST'S BIBLE 

We have men sold to build churches, women sold to 
support the gospel, and babes sold to purchase Bibles 
for the poor heathen! all for the glory of God and the good 
of soul! The slave auctioneer's bell and the church-going 
bell chime in with each other, and the bitter cries of the 
heart-broken slave are drowned in the religious shouts 
of his pious master. Revivals of religion and revivals in 
the slave trade go hand in hand together. 
—FREDERICK DOUGLASS 
I cannot imagine a God who rewards and punishes the 
objects of his creation, whose purposes are modeled af-
ter our own—a God, in short, who is but a reflection of 
human frailty. 
—ALBERT EINSTEIN 
Childhood ... is full of deep sorrows, the meaning of 
which is unknown. Witness colic and whooping-cough 
and dread of ghosts, to say nothing of hell and Satan, 
and an offended Deity in the sky, who was angry when I 
wanted too much plum-cake. 
—GEORGE ELIOT 
Reflections 161 

My earlier views of the unsoundness of the Christian 
scheme of salvation and the human origin of the scrip-
tures have become clearer and stronger with advanc-
ing years, and I see no reason for thinking I shall ever 
change them. 
—ABRAHAM LINCOLN 
Difference in Opinions hath cost many Millions of Lives: 
For instance, whether Flesh be Bread, or Bread be Flesh; 
whether the Juice of a certain Berry be Blood or Wine. 
—JONATHAN SWIFT 
162 
THE ATHEIST'S BIBLE 

Do not pass by my epitaph, traveler. 
But having stopped, listen and learn, then go your way. 
There is no boat in Hades, no ferryman Charon, 
No caretaker Aiakos, no dog Cerberus. 
All we who are dead below 
Have become bones and ashes, but nothing else. 
I have spoken to you honestly, go on, traveler, 
Lest even while dead I seem loquacious to you. 
—ANCIENT ROMAN TOMBSTONE 
What do I know of man's destiny? I could tell you more 
about radishes. 
—SAMUEL BECKETT 
163 


Does not Eternity appear dreadful to you. I often get 
thinking of it and it seems so dark to me that I almost 
wish there was no Eternity. To think that we must forever 
live and never cease to be. It seems as if Death which all 
so dread because it launches us upon an unknown world 
would be a relief to so endless a state of existence. 
—EMILY DICKINSON 
We try hard in science to stamp out the influence of 
wishful thinking, whereas so much of religious thought 
seems to be nothing else: "I must believe in the afterlife 
because how could I face it if my life was going to termi-
nate at death?" 
—STEVEN WEINBERG 
Peacefully they will die... and beyond the grave they will 
find nothing but death. But we shall keep the secret, and 
for their happiness we shall allure them with the reward 
of heaven and eternity. 
—FYODOR DOSTOYEVSKY 
Paradise Now 
165 

I believe that life should be lived so vividly and so in-
tensely that thoughts of another life, or of a longer life, 
are not necessary. 
—MARJORY STONEMAN DOUGLAS 
Assure a man that he has a soul and then frighten him 
with old wives' tales as to what is to become of it after-
wards, and you have a hooked fish, a mental slave! 
—THEODORE DREISER 
All are inclined to believe what they covet, from a lot-
tery-ticket up to a passport to Paradise; in which, from 
description, I see nothing very tempting. 
—LORD BYRON 
Millions long for immortality who don't know what to do 
with themselves on a rainy Sunday afternoon. 
—SUSAN ERTZ 
l66 
THE ATHEIST'S BIBLE 

The one inalienable right is to go to destruction in your 
own way. 
—ROBERT FROST 
HEAVEN: The Coney Island of the Christian imagination. 
—ELBERT HUBBARD 
I am a hopeless materialist. I see the soul as nothing else 
than the sum of activities of the organism plus personal 
habits—plus inherited habits, memories, experiences, of 
the organism. I believe that when I am dead, I am dead. I 
believe that with my death I am just as much obliterated 
as the last mosquito you and I squashed. 
—JACK LONDON 
Paradise Now 167 

Personally, I should not care for immortality in the least. 
There is nothing better than oblivion, since in oblivion 
there is no wish unfulfilled. We, had it before we were 
born, yet did not complain. Shall we then whine because 
we know it will return? 
—H. P. LOVECRAFT 
I see life as a dance. Does a dance have to have a mean-
ing? You're dancing because you enjoy it. 
—JACKIE MASON 
My hereafter is here. I am where I'm going, for I am 
mulch. It's a great comfort to know that in my mulch-
hood I may nourish a row of parsnips. 
—FRANK MCCOURT 
From my rotting body flowers shall grow, and I shall be 
in them. 
—EDVARD MUNCH 
168 
THE ATHEIST'S BIBLE 

What time has been wasted during man's destiny in the 
struggle to decide what man's next world will be like! 
The keener the effort to find out, the less he knew about 
the present one he lived in. 
—SEAN O'CASEY 
Ask yourself whether the dream of heaven and greatness 
should be left waiting for us in our graves—or whether it 
should be ours here and now and on this earth. 
—AYN RAND 
The world is so exquisite, with so much love and moral 
depth, that there is no reason to deceive ourselves with 
pretty stories for which there's little good evidence. Far 
better, it seems to me, in our vulnerability, is to look 
Death in the eye and to be grateful every day for the brief 
but magnificent opportunity that life provides. 
—CARL SAGAN 
Paradise Now 169 

To work hard, to live hard, to die hard, and then to go to 
hell after all would be too damned hard. 
—CARL SANDBURG 
Heaven, as conventionally conceived, is a place so inane, 
so dull, so useless, so miserable, that nobody has ever 
ventured to describe a whole day in heaven, though 
plenty of people have described a day at the seaside. 
—GEORGE BERNARD SHAW 
It's an incredible con job, when you think of it, to believe 
something now in exchange for life after death. Even 
corporations, with all their reward systems, don't try to 
make it posthumous. 
—GLORIA STEINEM 
Life is an opportunity, and it is pregnant with meanings. 
But the life that you live depends upon your choice. 
—PAUL KURTZ 
170 
THE ATHEIST'S BIBLE 

The idea of a good society is something you do not need 
a religion and eternal punishment to buttress; you need 
a religion if you are terrified of death. 
—GORE VIDAL 
It is a curious thing... that every creed promises a para-
dise which will be absolutely uninhabitable for anyone 
of civilized taste. 
—EVELYN WAUGH 
Certainty about the next life is simply incompatible with 
tolerance in this one. 
—SAM HARRIS 
That it will never come again 
Is what makes life so sweet. 
—EMILY DICKINSON 
Paradise Now 171 

Listen, people! 
Life is a giant, invisible scale with two sides: 
Good and Bad. 
You and your beliefs 
Are the weights. 
The things you do each day 
Determine the balance. 
Your conscience is a flawless 
Judge and jury. 
The only question is what you want. 
I'm tellin' you the natural facts 
For what it's worth. 
Listen to me, people. 
You make your own heaven and hell 
Right here on earth. 
—THE TEMPTATIONS, 
"You Make Your Own Heaven and Hell Right Here" 
172, 
THE ATHEIST'S BIBLE 

I don't know that atheists should be regarded as citizens, 
nor should they be regarded as patriotic. This is one na-
tion under God. 
—GEORGE H. W. BUSH 
* "Apocalyptus" is an invented word derived from the biblical word "apocalypse." 
Apocalyptus is a weed of bias and prejudice that sprouts in the garden of free 
speech. 
173 

Here lies an atheist 
All dressed up 
And no place to go. 
—EPITAPH 
174 

175 

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
I would like to thank Sara Bader and Liel Liebovitz for 
their remarkable research and for their sustaining en-
thusiasm and belief in this project. I am deeply grateful to 
Robert R. Worth for his suggestions and his keen edito-
rial eye. Thanks, also, to Patty Romeu, Jen Banbury, Josie 
Peltz, Diane Garvey Nesin and Christina Lowery for their 
diligent detective work. 
177 

INDEX 
ABBEY, EDWARD (1927—1989), U.S. environmentalist and writer: 4, 7, 
94,104 
ADAMS, DOUGLAS (1952—2001), English science fiction writer: 33, 56 
ADAMS, JOHN (1735-1826), second president of the United States: 22 
ADAMS, PHILLIP (b. 1939), Australian writer, filmmaker, and radio 
personality: 11 
ALBACETE, MONSIGNOR LORENZO (b. ca. 1941), U.S. theologian and 
writer: 64 
ALLEN, WOODY (Allen Stewart Konigsberg) (b. 1935), U.S. comedian, 
filmmaker and writer: 110,118,146-47 
ANGELOU, MAYA (Marguerite Johnson) (b. 1928), U.S. poet and 
writer: 122 
ANOUILH, JEAN (1910—1987), French playwright: 113 
ANTHONY, SUSAN B. (1820—1906), U.S. women's rights activist: 120 
AQUINAS, SAINT THOMAS (ca. 1225-1274), Italian philosopher and 
theologian: 50 
ARISTOTLE (384-322 B.C.), Greek philosopher: 4,27 
ARMSTRONG, KAREN (b. 1944), English writer and former nun: 120 
179 

ASIMOV, ISAAC (1920—1992), Russian-born U.S. science fiction 
writer: 65,159 
ATKINSON, GORDON (b. 1961), U.S. minister and writer: 82 
BACON, FRANCIS (1561-1626), English philosopher and statesman: 85 
BAILEY, CYRIL (1871-1957), English classical scholar: 33 
BAKUNIN, MIKHAIL, A. (1814-1876), Russian revolutionary and 
anarchist: 31 
BALDWIN, JAMES (1924-1987), U.S. writer: 34 
BARKER, DAN (b. 1949), U.S. former minister turned atheist activist: 66 
DE BEAUVOIR, SIMONE (1908—1986), French writer and feminist: 50 
BECKETT, SAMUEL (1906-1989), Irish playwright and novelist: 163 
BIERCE, AMBROSE (1842-ca.1914), U.S. writer: 29,45,49,113, 156-58 
BLAKE, WILLIAM (1757-1827), English poet and artist: 76 
BONAPARTE, NAPOLÉON (1769-1821), French emperor: 12, 24, 34,104 
BRADLAUGH, CHARLES (1833-1891), English social reformer and 
secularist: 93 
BRUCE, LENNY (1926—1966), U.S. comedian: 3, 60, 110 
BUCHAN, JOHN (1875-1940), Scottish writer and statesman: 75 
BUCHANAN, JAMES (1791—1868), fifteenth president of the United 
States: 35 
BUCK, PEARL S. (1892-1973), U.S. writer: 105 
BUNUEL, LUIS (1900-1983), Spanish film director: 53,160 
BURBANK, LUTHER (1849—1926), U.S. plant breeder: 35, 42, 43 
BURROUGHS, JOHN (1837-1921), U.S. naturalist and writer: 8,48,85,105 
BURTON, RICHARD FRANCIS (1821—1890), English explorer and writer: 93 
BUSH, GEORGE H. W. (b. 1924), forty-first president of the United States: 173 
BUTLER, SAMUEL (1835-1902), English writer: 19 
BYRON, GEORGE GORDON (Lord Byron)(1788-i824), English poet: 35, 
57, 94,160, 164,166, 
180 
Index 

CAMUS, ALBERT (1913—1960), Algerian-born French writer: 36, 64,164 
CANETTI, ELIAS (1905-1994), Bulgarian-born English writer: 51 
CARNEGIE, ANDREW (1835-1919), Scottish-born U.S. industrialist and 
philanthropist: 86,160 
CAROLLA, ADAM (b. 1964), U.S. comedian: 115 
CASTRO, FIDEL (b. 1987), Cuban president: 62 
CHAPLIN, CHARLIE (Charles Spencer Chaplin) (1889-1977), English 
comic actor and film director: 115 
CHABRON, PIERRE (1541-1603), French philosopher and theologian: 36 
CHASE, ALEXANDER, (b. 1926), U.S. journalist and editor: 82 
CHESTERTON, G. K. (1874-1936), English writer: 50, 63, 85 
CHOMSKY, NOAM (b. 1938), U.S. linguist and political activist: 21 
CICERO, MARCUS TULLIUS (106-43 B.C.). Roman philosopher, orator 
and statesman: 57 
CLARKE, ARTHUR C. (b. 1917), English science-fiction writer: 1, 30, 45, 
59,76,80 
CLEAVER, ELDRIDGE (1935-1998), U.S. civil rights activist: 64 
CLIFFORD, W. K. (1845—1879), English mathematician and 
philosopher: 44 
CLOPTON, RICHARD (data unknown): 77 
COHEN, CHAPMAN (1868-1954), English writer and atheist activist: 49 
COLERIDGE, SAMUEL TAYLOR (1773—1834), English poet, critic, and 
philosopher: 77, 91 
COLTON, CHARLES CALEB (ca. 1780-1832), English author and 
clergyman: 19, 31, 64, 94 
CRICK, FRANCIS (1916-2004), English biophysicist: 46 
CRISP, QUENTIN (1908-1999), English writer, performer, and gay 
rights activist: 36, 55 
DAACON, GEORGE (data unknown), Canadian journalist: 57 
Index 
181 

DALAI LAMA (b. 1935), supreme head of Tibetan Buddhism: 86 
DANELIUS, BYRON (data unknown), U.S. educator: 51 
DARROW, CLARENCE (1857-1938), U.S. lawyer: 99,164 
DARWIN, CHARLES (1809-1882), English naturalist and writer: 37 
DAWKINS, RICHARD (b. 1941), English biologist: 47, 95, 97,102 
DEFOE, DANIEL (1660-1731), English writer: 26 
DICK, PHILIP K. (1928—1982), U.S. science fiction writer: 98 
DICKINSON, EMlLY (1830-1886), U.S. poet: 8, 21, 37, 58,103,121,165, 
171 
DIETRICH, MARLENE (1901-1992), German-born U.S. actress and 
singer: 124 
DILLARD, ANNIE (b. 1945), U.S. writer: 56 
DOSTOYEVSKY, FYODOR (1821-1881), Russian writer: 2,165 
DOUGLAS, MARJORY STONEMAN (1890-1998), U.S. writer and environ-
mentalist: 166 
DOUGLASS, FREDERICK (ca. 1818—1895), U.S. writer and civil rights 
leader: 24, 106,161 
DOYLE, SIR ARTHUR CONAN (1859-1930), English writer and physi-
cian: 38 
DREISER, THEODORE (1871-1945), U.S. writer and editor: 12,166 
DUHAMEL, GEORGES (1884-1966), French writer: 7 
ECO, UMBERTO (b. 1932), Italian writer, literary critic and historian: 
77-95 
EDISON, THOMAS (1847—1931), U.S. inventor: 20, 42 
EINSTEIN, ALBERT (1879-1955), German-born U.S. physicist: 18,43, 
44,46,51, 8i, 87, 89,105,107,161 
EISENHOWER, DWIGHT D. (1890-1969), thirty-fourth president of the 
United States: 114 
ELIOT, GEORGE (Mary Ann Evans) (1819-1880), English writer and 
poet: 58, 87, 94,119,121,161 
182 
Index 

ELIOT, T. S. (Thomas Stearns) (1888—1965), U.S.-born English poet, 
playwright and critic: 94 
ELLIS, HAVELOCK (1859-1939), English psychologist: 7, 43 
EMEHSON, EDWARD WALDO (1844—1930), U.S. writer and editor: 56 
EMERSON, RALPH WALDO (1803—1882), U.S. poet and essayist: 16, 41, 
56, 71, 77, 106 
EPICHRUS (341-270 B.C.), Greek philosopher: 29, 38, 58 
ERASMUS, DESIDERIUS (ca.1466—1536), Dutch scholar: 68 
ERTZ, SUSAN (1894—1985), U.S. writer: 38, 166 
FEIBLEMAN, JAMES K. (1904-1987), U.S. philosopher and writer: 78 
FELLINI, FEDERICO (1920-1993), Italian film director and screen-
writer: 107 
FERRES GUARDIA, FRANCISCO (1859-1909), Spanish political theo-
rist: 27, 48 
FEUERBACH, LUDWIG (1804-1872), German philosopher: 21, 30, 81, 87 
FEYNMAN, RICHARD P. (1918-1988), U.S. physicist: 95 
FLAMMARION, CAMILLE (1842—1925), French astronomer and writer: 2 
FLOWERS, BETTY SUE (b. 1947), U.S. scholar and poet: 93 
FOOTE, G. w. (1850-1915), English writer, editor, publisher: 6 
FRANKLIN, BENJAMIN (1706-1790), U.S. statesman, scientist and 
writer: 18, 23, 34, 40, 78 
FREUD, SIGMUND (1856-1939), Austrian psychiatrist: 4,15, 38, 46, 49 
FROST, ROBERT (1874-1963), U.S. poet: 63, 111, 167 
GANDHI, MOHANDAS K. (Mahatma) (1869—1948), Indian nationalist 
and spiritual leader: 24, 102 
GARDNER, HELEN H. (1853—1925), U.S. writer and women's rights 
activist: 121 
GIBBON, EDWARD (1737—1794), English historian: 63 
GIDE, ANDRÉ (1869-1951), French writer and critic: 83 
Index 
183 

GOLDBERG, WHOOPI (b. 1955), U.S. actress and comedian: 73 
GOLDMAN, EMMA (1869-1940), Lithuanian-born U.S. anarchist: 30, 
107, 130, 133 
GOLDWATER, RARRY (1909—1998), U.S. politician: 27 
GOULD, STEPHEN JAY (1941-3003), U.S. paleontologist: 3 
GREEN, RUTH HURMENCE (1915—1981), U.S. Writer: 16, 67, 69, 108, 109 
GREENE, GRAHAM (1904—1991), English writer: 9 
HARDY, THOMAS (1840-1938), English writer and poet: 59 
HARRIS, SAM (b. 1967), U.S. writer: 53, 67, 75, 101,117,171 
HAYES, JITDITH (b. 1945), U.S. writer: 43, 56 
HELLER, JOSEPH (1923—1999), U.S. writer: 111 
HEMINGWAY, ERNEST (1899-1961), U.S. writer: 8 
HEPHURN, KATHARINE (1907—2003), U.S. actress: 88 
HERZEN, ALEXANDER (1812-1870), Russian writer and political 
activist: 86 
HITCHENS, CHRISTOPHER (b. 1949), English writer: 7, 39, 82 
HOBBES, THOMAS (1588-1679), English philosopher: 11 
HOFFER, ERIC (1903-1983), U.S. writer and labor leader: 76, 79 
D'HOLRACH, RARON (Paul-Henri-Dietrichd'Holbach) (1733-1789), 
German-born French writer, philosopher, and encyclopedist: 8, 
33,83 
HOLMES, OLIVER WENDELL, (1809-1894), U.S. writer and physician: 96 
HUBBARD, ELBERT (1856-1915), U.S. writer: 16, 84, 90,150-53, 167 
HUGO, VICTOR (1803—1885), French writer: 35, 78 
HUME, DAVID (1711-1776), Scottish philosopher: 1,13, 33, 72 
HUXLEY, ALDOUS (1894-1963), English writer: 96 
HUXLEY, JULIAN (1887—1975), English biologist and writer: 39 
INGERSOLL, RORERT G.(1833-1899), U.S. lawyer and orator: 48, 51, 58, 
106,111,140-45 
184 
Index 

JACKSON, HOLBROOK (1874—1948), English writer: 114, 
JACOBY, SUSAN (b. 1945), U.S. writer: 84 
JEFFERSON, THOMAS (1743-1826), third president of the United 
States: 22, 28 
KANT, IMMANUEL (1724-1804), German philosopher: 88 
KEATS, JOHN (1795-1821), English poet: 88, 108 
KELLER, HELEN (1880-1968), U.S. writer and activist for the blind: 68, 85 
KEPLER, JOHANNES (1571-1630), German astronomer: 42 
KRONENBERGER, LOUIS (1904-1980), U.S. writer, editor and critic: 80 
KURTZ, PAUL (b. 1925), U.S. philosopher and writer: 17, 20, 164,170 
LADMAN, CATHY (b. 1955), U.S. comedian: 120 
LANGER, JAMES (b. 1934), U.S. theoretical physicist: 96 
LAWRENCE, D. H. (1885-1930), English writer, playwright and poet: 5 
LEBOWITZ, FRAN (b. 1946), U.S. writer: 112 
LEC, STANISLAWJERZY (1909-1966), Polish writer: 5, 52 
LEE, GYPSY ROSE (Rose Louise Hovick) (1914—1970), U.S. burlesque 
performer: 78,112 
LEWIS, SINCLAIR (1885-1951), U.S. writer: 9, 88 
LINCOLN, ABRAHAM (1809—1865), sixteenth president of the United 
States: 23,162 
LONDON, JACK (1876-1916), U.S. writer: 167 
LOVECRAFT, H. p. (1890-1937), U.S. writer: 168 
LUCRETIUS (Titus Lucretius Carus) (ca. 94—55 B.C.), Roman poet and 
philosopher: 79 
MACLEISH, ARCHIBALD (1892—1982), U.S. poet, playwright and Librar-
ian of Congress: 83 
MADISON, JAMES (1751—1836), fourth president of the United States: 26 
MAGELLAN, FERDINAND (ca. 1480—1521), Portuguese navigator and 
explorer: 20 
Index 
185 

MARLOWE, CHRISTOPHER (1564-1593), English playwright and 
poet: 9,14 
MASON, JACKIE (b. 1934), U.S. comic: 168 
MAUGHAM, w. SOMERSET (1874—1965), French-born English 
novelist: 13, 19 
MATTHEWS, DAVE (b. 1967), South African-born U.S. singer and 
songwriter: 9 
MCKELLEN, IAN (b. 1939), English actor: 14, 53 
MCCOURT, FRANK (b. 1931), U.S.-born Irish-American writer : 168 
MCGINN, COLIN (b. 1950), English philosopher: 37, 81 
MCLAUGHLIN, MIGNON (1913-1983), U.S. writer and editor: 13,14, 51, 
115 
MENCKEN, H. L. (1880—1956), U.S. journalist: 73, 84, 93,100,110,118 
MICHENER, JAMES A. (1907—1997), U.S. writer: 25 
MILL, JOHN STUART (1806—1873), English philosopher and 
economist: ix, 6, 8, 81, 101 
MILLER, JONATHAN (b. 1934), English writer and director: 10 
MILLER, OLIN (1918-2002), U.S. writer: 52 
MILNE, A. A. (1882-1956), English playwright and children's book 
writer: 70 
MONTAGU, ASHLEY (1905-1999), English-born U.S. anthropologist: 70 
MONTAIGNE, MICHEL EYQUEM DE (1533-1592), French writer: 53, 78, 
159 
MONTESQUIEU, CHARLES-LOUIS DE SECONDAT, BARON DE LA BRÈDE ET DE 
(1689-1755), French political philosopher: 61 
MORLEY, CHRISTOPHER (1890-1957), U.S. writer: 15 
MORLEY, JOHN (1838—1923), English writer and politician: 17 
MUNCH, EDVARD (1863-1944), Norwegian painter: 168 
MUSTAINE, DAVE (David Scott Mustaine) (b. 1961), U.S. singer, song-
writer and guitarist: 76 
186 
Index 

NATHAN, GEORGE JEAN (1882-1958), theater critic and editor: 92 
NEHRU, JAWAHARLAL (1889—1964), Indian statesman: 25 
NIETZSCHE, FRIEDRICH (1844—1900), German philosopher: 32, 73, 76, 
103, 153-55 
O'CASEY, SEAN (1884-1964), Irish playwright: 169 
O'CONNOR, ELANNERY (1925-1964), U.S. writer: 122 
O'TOOLE, PETER (b. 1932), Irish-born English actor: 19 
OWEN, ROBERT (1771-1858), English social reformer: 89 
PAINE, THOMAS (1737-1809), English-bomU.S. political 
philosopher: 24, 29, 31, 41, 67, 69, 90,136-39 
PASCAL, BLAISE (1623—1662), French mathematician and 
philosopher: 13 
PETRONIUS (Petronius Arbiter) (birth unknown—ca. A.D. 66), 
Roman satirist: 2 
PHILIPS, EMO (Phil Soltanec) (b. 1956), U.S. comedian: 117 
PLINY THE ELDER (A.D. 23-79), Roman scholar: 25 
POPE, ALEXANDER (1688—1744), English poet: 49, 96 
PROUST, MARCEL (1871—1922), French novelist: 53 
QUARLES, BENJAMIN (1904-1996), U.S. historian, editor, professor, 
writer: 66 
RAND, AYN (1905-1982), Russian-born U.S. writer: 102,169 
RENAN, ERNEST (1823-1892), French historian and critic: 44 
RICHARDS, ANN (1933-2006), U.S. politician: 108 
ROBERTS, STEPHEN HENRY (1901—1971), Australian historian and 
writer: 10 
RODDENBERRY, GENE (1921—1991), U.S. television producer: 33 
RUSHDIE, SALMAN (b. 1947), Indian- born English writer: 63 
RUSSELL, BERTRAND (1872-1970), English philosopher and 
mathematician: 30,31,49,131-33 
Index 
187 

SADE, MARQUIS DE (Donatien-Alphonse-François de Sade) 
(1740—1814), French writer and libertine: 4, 9 
SAGAN, CARL (1934-1996), U.S. astronomer and writer: 30, 45, 47, 97, 
169 
SAINT PAUL (originally SAUL OF TARSUS) (ca. 10-ca. A.D. 67), early 
Christian leader and theologian: 17 
SALACROU, ARMAND (1899-1989), French playwright and screen-
writer: 39 
SANDBURG, CARL (1878—1967), U.S. poet and writer: 170 
SANGER, MARGARET (1883-1966), U.S. reformer and birth control 
activist: 124 
SANTAYANA, GEORGE (1863-1952), Spanish-born U.S. philosopher and 
critic: 134-35 
SCHOPENHAUER ARTHUR (1788-1860), German philosopher: 18, 32, 
92,97 
SCHUMAKER, JOHN F. (b. 1949), U.S. psychologist: 32 
SENECA THE YOUNGER (ca. 4 B.C.-A.D. 65), Roman philosopher and 
poet: 74 
SHAKESPEARE, WILLIAM (1564-1616), English playwright and poet: 14, 
69, 74, 97 
SHAW, GEORGE BERNARD (1856—1950), Irish-born English playwright 
and critic: 6,10,13, 28, 59, 74,105,112,170 
SHELLEY, PERCY BYSSHE (1792-1822), English poet: 55, 95 
SHORT, ROBERT L. (b. ca. 1937), U.S. writer and ordained minister: 12 
SIMPSON, HOMER, cartoon character from The Simpsons: 53, 59,112, 117 
SINATRA, FRANK (1915—1998), U.S. singer and actor: 31 
SINGER, ISAAC BASHEVIS (1904—1991), Polish-born U.S. writer: 53 
SONTAG, SUSAN (1933-2004), U.S. writer: 122 
STANTON, ELIZABETH CADY (1815—1902), U.S. women's rights 
activist: 82, 99,119,123,160 
188 
Index 

STEIN, GERTRUDE (1874-1946), U.S. writer: 124,170 
STEINEM, GLORIA (b. 1934), U.S. women's rights activist and 
editor: 123 
STENDHAL (Marie-Henri Beyle) (1783-1842), French writer: 153 
STRAWSON, GALEN (b. 1952), British philosopher and writer: 40 
SWIFT, JONATHAN (1667-1745), Irish-born English writer and 
clergyman: 80, 162 
TEMPTATIONS, THE, U.S. vocal group: 172 
THOREAU, HENRY DAVID (1817—1862), U.S. writer and naturalist: 39 
TUTU, DESMOND (b. 1931), South African religious leader: 84 
TWAIN, MARK (Samuel Langhorne Clemens) (1835—1910), U.S. 
writer: 65, 72,101,103,125-30 
VAN DER POST, LAURENS (1906-1996), South African writer: 26 
VAN GOGH, VINCENT (1853-1890), Dutch painter: 109 
VIDAL, GORE (b. 1925), U.S. writer: 54,171 
VOLTAIRE (François-Marie Arouet) (1694-1778), French writer and 
philosopher: 66, 73, 93, 102,103, 148-49 
VONNEGUT, KURT, JR. (1922—2007), U.S. writer: 68 
WAGNER, JANE (b. 1935), U.S. playwright and screenwriter: 61 
WARBURTON, WILLIAM (1698—1779), English bishop and writer: 115 
WATSON, JAMES (b. 1928), U.S. biologist: 98 
WATTERSON, BILL (b. 1958), U.S. cartoonist: 116 
WAUGH, EVELYN (1903-1966), English writer: 171 
WEINBERG, STEVEN (b. 1933), U.S. physicist: 42, 90,165 
WELLS, H. G. (1866-1946), English writer: 83 
WHITEHEAD, ALFRED NORTH (1861-1947), English mathematician and 
philosopher: 113 
WHITEHORN, KATHARINE (b. 1928), English journalist: 114 
WHITMAN, WALT (1819—1892), U.S. poet: 90,108 
Index 
189 


CREDITS AND PERMISSIONS 
Grateful acknowledgment is made for permission to reprint the following quotes: 
NOAM CHOMSKY: 
Page 21: "Three-quarters of the American population..." Noam Chomsky from 
"Keeping the Rabble in Line," copyright © 1994 by Noam Chomsky and 
David Barsamian. All rights reserved. Reproduced by special permission. 
CHRISTOPHER HITCHENS: 
Page 7: "Since it is obviously inconceivable .. .";p. 29: "Gullibility and credulity 
are considered .. ."; p. 82: "Atheism, and the related conviction . .." from 
Christopher Hitchens, "The Lord and the Intellectuals," copyright © 1982 
by Harpers Magazine. All rights reserved. Excerpted from the July issue by 
special permission. 
BERTRAND RUSSELL: 
Page 31: "What is wanted is not the will. . ." From Sceptical Essays, by Bertrand 
Russell, copyright © 1960, George Allen & Unwin Ltd. Reproduced by 
permission of Taylor & Francis Books UK and The Bertrand Russell Peace 
Foundation. 
Page 49: "Not to be absolutely certain . . ." From The Collected Papers of Bertrand 
Russell: Last Philosophical Testament 1943-68, Russell, Bertrand, copyright 
191 

© 1997- Routledge, p. 91. Reproduced by permission of Taylor & Francis 
Books UK and The Bertrand Russell Peace Foundation. 
Page 131: "No man treats a motorcar . . ." and "One is often told . . ."; p. 133: "I 
believe that when I die I shall rot . . ." Reprinted with the permission of 
Simon & Schuster Adult Publishing Group, Taylor & Francis Books UK and 
The Bertrand Russell Peace Foundation from Why I Am Not a Christian by 
Bertrand Russell. Copyright© 1957,1985 by George Allen & Unwin Ltd. 
Page 132: "If I were granted omnipotence . . ." Reprinted by permission of 
Oxford University Press from Religion and Science by Bertrand Russell 
(1970), p. 222. 
Page 133:"The fundamental cause of the trouble . . ." From Mortals and Others: 
Bertrand Russell's American Essays, 1931—1935, Vol. 2, Harry Ruja, ed., 
copyright © 1998, Routledge. Reproduced by permission of Taylor & 
Francis Books UK and The Bertrand Russell Peace Foundation. 
Page 132: "So far as I can remember . . ." From Education and the Social 
Order, Russell, Bertrand, copyright © 1967, George Allen & Unwin Ltd. 
Reproduced by permission of Taylor & Francis Books UK and The Bertrand 
Russell Peace Foundation. 
Page 132: "I am suggesting that, in all our beliefs . . ." From The Collected Papers 
of Bertrand Russell: Last Philosophical Testament 1943—68, Russell, Bertrand, 
copyright © 1997, Routledge, p. 222. Reproduced by permission of Taylor 
& Francis Books UK and The Bertrand Russell Peace Foundation. 
Page 133: "To teach how to live without certainty . . ." Reprinted with the 
permission of Simon & Schuster Adult Publishing Group, Taylor & Francis 
Books UK and The Bertrand Russell Peace Foundation from A History of 
Western Philosophy by Bertrand Russell. Copyright © 1945 by Bertrand 
Russell, copyright renewed 1973 by Edith Russell. 
Page 133: "And if there were a God . . ." From The Basic Writings of Bertrand Russell 
1903—1959, c. 2001, Russell, Bertrand, Denonn, Lester E., Egner, Robert 
Edward, Routledge (UK), copyright ©2001, p. 581. Reproduced by permission 
of Taylor & Francis Books UK and The Bertrand Russell Peace Foundation. 
CARL SAGAN: 
Page 45: "In science it often happens . . ." Carl Sagan, 1987 keynote address, 
CSICOP (Committee for the Scientific Investigation of Claims of the 
Paranormal). Used by special permission. 
192 
Credits and Permissions 

Page 47: "Some people think of God as an outsized, light-skinned male . . ."; 
p. 97: "For me, it is far better to grasp the Universe . . ."; p. 169: "The 
world is so exquisite . . ." Copyright © 1997 Carl Sagan. Reprinted with 
permission from Democritus Properties, LLC 
THE TEMPTATIONS: 
Page 172: Lyrics to "You Make Your Own Heaven and Hell Right Here," Words 
and Music by Norman J. Whitfield and Barrett Strong © 1970 (Renewed 
1998) JOBETE MUSIC CO., INC. All Rights Controlled and Administered 
by EMI BLACKWOOD MUSIC INC. on behalf of STONE AGATE MUSIC (A 
Division of JOBETE MUSIC CO., INC.) All Rights Reserved. International 
Copyright Secured. Used by Permission. 
Credits and Permissions 
193 

About the Author 
Joan Konner is a longtime award-winning journal-
ist in television and print. Her most recent televi-
sion production was The Mystery of Love, a two-hour 
documentary special broadcast on public television in 
December 2006. She served for nine years as Dean of 
the Columbia Graduate School of Journalism, where 
she introduced and taught the course "Covering 
Ideas." She is now Professor Emerita and Dean Emer-
ita of the school. 

