
The Electric Meme
A new theory about how we think 
Robert Aunger
2002
                                               New York: 
                                               Free Press.

                   Contents
Introduction
1. In the Middle of a Muddle
 2. A Special Kind of Inheritance
3. Adding Rooms to Darwin's House
4. The Replicator Zoo
5. The Data on Information
6. Stalking the Wild Meme
7. Memes as a State of Mind
8. Escape from Planet Brain
9. The Techno-Tango
10. Rethinking Replication
11. The Revolution of Memes
Notes
Bibliography
Acknowledgements

INTRODUCTION
When I was doing anthropological fieldwork in central Africa, I
encountered people who believe that witches can attack you in your sleep
and eat your brain, turning you into a witch like them, with upside-down
ideas like walking abroad at night, living homeless in the forest, and
having sex with animals.
In many cultures around the globe, similar
stories are told: People can be haunted by supernatural agents that do them
damage or make them into something new and strange. I hasten to add
that these people are not “weird” in any other way; the individuals I knew
were smart, caring, thoughtful. I grew very fond of them. And certainly
they knew how to survive in their environment much better than I could.
When they, intended to kill an animal on the hunt, they understood the
rules of physics well enough to fire arrows so that the animals died and
they got to eat.
And we were able to converse about many everyday
things, despite my lack of belief in witchcraft, suggesting that many of our
thoughts traveled common pathways.
We shared the bond of being
definitely and resonantly human.
Do these central African people feel any kind of-cognitive dissonance
between their metaphysical and physical worlds?
Between the cultural
beliefs they learn from others and what they experience through their own
contact and experience with the world? Maybe these “crazy” witchcraft
beliefs are some kind of parasite on their minds, able to perpetuate
themselves somehow, serving their own needs. They certainly don’t seem
to make the life of anyone seven holds such beliefs any better, since belief
in witchcraft can make social relationships, even with your closest kith and
kin, rather tense. You’re always wondering whether some cross word or
unintended slight will make someone angry enough to visit you in the
night as an impossible animal that sinks its teeth into your skull.
 1

—— 2 · THE ELECTRIC MEME ——
Of course, you don’t have to believe in witchcraft to get a vague sense
that competing streams of thought are simultaneously burrowing their way
through your head.
Perhaps this feeling arises because some of our
thoughts really are “‘alien” to us. Maybe what psychologists blandly call
“cognitive dissonance” derives from the fact that at least some of our
thoughts have their source outside us and come together somewhat
unhappily inside our heads.
Psychotic delusions in which a person
consciously hears unfamiliar voices echoing through his mind might then
begin when these alien thoughts become too numerous and too rancorous.
It’s not a wholly new idea; recall that stock cartoon image of an angel
whispering, “Don’t do it!” into some character’s ear while a devil is
shouting, “Aw, go ahead!” into the other.
So perhaps we are literally possessed by thoughts imported from those
around us. To use a more medical analogy, maybe ideas are acquired as a
kind of mental “infection” through social contact. We know that we can
acquire terrible diseases in this way, from germs sneezed at us by someone
else. What if we need to fear that something caught culturally from our
compatriots can be dangerously infectious as well?
We might become
contaminated with treacherous brain pathogens just by talking with one
another!
In effect, through conversation, ideas might be able to move
from brain to brain, replicating themselves inside our heads.
Why do we think the things we think? Do we have thoughts, or do
they have us? This startling idea—that thoughts can think themselves—is
the brainstorm behind a new theory called memetics. This theory is based
on an important insight relevant to social species like humans. It begins
by recognizing that many of our thoughts are not generated from within
our own brains but are acquired as ideas from others.
What memetics
argues is that, once inside us, these thoughts then go to work for
themselves, pursuing goals that may be in conflict with our best interests.
These ideas have their own interests by virtue of having qualities that
make them like biological viruses.
Social scientists have long remarked that the pool of beliefs and values
held in common by the members of social groups—their culture, in short—
appears to evolve over time.
New varieties of belief—mutants—pop up
with fair regularity and then are selected by individuals based on a wide
range of criteria, such as their psychological appeal.
This resemblance
between cultural and biological processes led the eminent zoologist

—— Introduction · 3 ——
Richard Dawkins (now the Charles Simonyi Professor of the Public
Understanding of Science at Oxford University) to suggest that cultural
evolution might be described using the same principles as biological
evolution. More particularly, he identified a unit of information that plays
a role analogous to that of genes, the biological replicator. He coined the
term “meme” as the name for these cultural particles, which he presumed
could replicate themselves as people exchanged information. The upshot
of this view is that memes are ideas that collect people like trophies,
infecting their brains as “mind viruses.” Maybe what we think hasn’t so
much to do with our own free will as with the ongoing activity of
something like “thought genes” operating inside our heads.
Many have found the idea of mimes attractively logical and have run
with it. However, much of this speculation has been irresponsible, since
the existence of memes remains to be established. Nevertheless if it could
be shown that social intercourse regularly involves the replication of
information, such a discovery would have important implications for the
nature of human psychology and society. A concerted attempt to sort out
what memes must be like is therefore warranted.
In this book, I take
seriously the notion that such cultural replicators exist.
By identifying
what memes must be like and where they can be found, I hope to hasten an
end to the continuing rounds of conjecture about memes. If the possibility
of memes is confirmed, an era of “‘hard” findings in the new science of
memetics could then be initiated.
To help attain this goal, The Electric Meme begins with a chapter
clarifying the core idea of memetics: that memes are replicators.
Any
evolutionary process, including the cultural kind, needs only to exhibit
features that correlate from one generation to the next.
This quality is
what biologists call heredity. Replication is a more precise claim about
how evolution works—it suggests that a special kind of agent causes the
recurrence
of
cultural
features:
a
replicator.
Some
evolutionary
approaches—competitors
to
memetics,
such
as
sociobiology
and
evolutionary
psychology—invoke
only
genetic
heredity
in
their
explanation of culture.
I disagree.
Socially transmitted information is
central to the nature of culture. But when it is transmitted, is it replicated?
That’s the crucial question.
To answer it, we have to find some new
sources of information that anchor our thoughts and keep our speculations
from dying away with us.

—— 4 · THE ELECTRIC MEME ——
What might be the proper grounds for a science of memes? How can
we, in fact, determine whether replication occurs when we inherit cultural
traits?
First of all, we require a clear idea of how we can generalize
Darwinian theory to cover the case of cultural evolution. In particular, we
need a better idea of what we mean by replication in the first place. In this
book, my first job is to firm up just what we mean by cultural evolution
and to determine how it happens.
For assistance in this task, it is
reasonable to look to the other replicators we know something about—
prions and computer viruses—for insight into how a cultural replicator
might work. It turns out they work quite differently from genes, which
considerably expands the possibilities for memes.
Replicators transmit information. But information has often been seen
as a magical, protean kind of thing, capable of taking on any form a meme
requires—in effect, enabling memes to flit through your mind and out into
the world, and then to live long-term in books or monumental architecture,
before zooming back into your brain. I suggest this jet-setting lifestyle is
not one any form of information can sustain.
We must stalk the wild
meme and determine in exactly what kind of place it might be found.
After considering alternative proposals, I conclude memes will be found
only in the brain.
With such investigations completed, we move forward to a triumvirate
of chapters at the heart of this book.
These chapters tell a story that
follows the evolution of memes since their beginning, possibly some
hundreds of millions of years ago.
Memes must have “started small,”
beginning their careers by replicating exclusively within individual brains.
Following those early days, memes learned a trick that enabled them to
move from one organism to another. Somewhat controversially, I argue
they didn’t do this by themselves hopping between brains. Instead they
used signals like spoken phrases as agents to help them spread.
These
signals,
once
they
penetrated
the
new
host
brain,
initiated
the
reconstruction of the relevant meme from materials located there.
Through this indirect process, memes effectively hurdled the gap of space
between brains.
More recently, memes learned to use artifacts such as
books, CDs, billboards, and T-shirts as storehouses for their messages.
This provided them with advantages in terms of longevity and the fidelity
with which they could be transmitted as they journeyed from brain to
brain.

—— Introduction · 5 ——
This is a book that sets out a new way of thinking about how we think
and communicate.
Obviously, if we are zombies controlled by memes
rather than free agents capable of independent thought, this fact has
considerable bearing on our conception of ourselves, on what we say and
do, and on the nature of the societies we construct. We need to find out
about memes to answer these fundamental questions.
Although it is
unlikely to be the final word on the subject, this book aims to bring us a
few steps closer to determining whether mind viruses are secretly and
silently replicating inside our heads at this very minute, unknown to us—
at least until now.

Chapter One
IN THEMIDDLE
OF A MUDDLE
In 1953, a young girl of the Fore tribe, participating in funerary rites, consumed pieces
of her deceased grandmother’s brain. The elderly woman had died from an illness that
progressively caused an uncontrollable quaking of the limbs, loss of coordination,
paralysis, and dementia. Four years later, just as a brash young American doctor
reached their village in the Eastern Highlands of Papua New Guinea, the girl began to
exhibit symptoms of the trembling disease herself. A year later she was dead too. Most
of the women in her village were soon suffering from what they called kuru, the
shaking. But then the young virologist, Carleton Gajdusek, established a connection
between participating in funerals and becoming the subject of a funeral yourself. The
cultural practice of eating brains soon stopped when the news of this link spread, and
kuru’s devastating consequences on Fore society gradually dwindled away.
In 1838, a young Charles Darwin, fresh from his trip circling the globe aboard the
Beagle, hungrily devoured the ideas of a dead man: Reading a book by Thomas
Malthus about the competition among individuals for scarce resources sent a shiver of
delight up his spine. A connection was made in Darwin’s mind to his own problem of
explaining how the composition of populations changed systematically over time. When
another link was made to the idea of inheritance, the theory of evolution by natural
selection among alternative traits was born. Darwin soon began scribbling away on
his own book The Origin of Species.
                                                            7

—— 8 · THE ELECTRIC MEME ——
In 1992, on March 6, a young boy in Cincinnati woke up and turned on his home
computer. But suddenly a shiver of fear gripped him as he noticed the usual boot-up
procedure wasn’t executing. He quickly determined that most of the information on his
hard disk had been mysteriously scrambled. Code composed by a hacker perhaps half
a world away had overwritten sectors of the boy’s hard drive with data taken at random
from the computer’s memory. He would later read in the local newspaper that the so-
called Michelangelo virus (because March 6, its trigger date, was the famous painter’s
birthday) had probably been accidentally shipped with some software he had recently
purchased and uploaded onto his PC.
These apparently unrelated vignettes, recounting events from varied times
and places, all involve the transmission of information—in biological,
cultural, or electronic form.
Kuru, for example, is caused by a pathogen
containing biological information, which spreads from person to person
through infection.
Information also spread in the second case.
As
Darwin’s eyes passed over a piece of paper covered with patterned ink, his
mind acquired Malthus’s idea of ecological competition for survival. And
the Michelangelo virus, a packet of digital information, was conveyed
electronically to the Cincinnati boy’s computer through a potentially long
chain of physical links, involving a variety of storage media.
But there is more to the stories than this. These events also involve the
replication of information.
In each case, the original copy of the
biological, cultural, or electronic message remained with its source after
transmission: kuru in the dead person’s body, Malthus’s idea on the pages
of An Essay on the Principle of Population, and the Michelangelo virus in
the hacker’s computer (suitably anesthetized, no doubt). Thus these events
seem to involve the duplication of a message in some other location
besides its source. Such events are acts of communication.
But do they involve—or perhaps are they even caused by—replicating
information?
There’s a big difference between
something being
duplicated through its own efforts rather than as the consequence of some
other agency’s activity. Why does this distinction matter so much? If a
unit of information is rep1icating, it can be called a replicator.
And if
communication involves replicators, and not just replication, then such
events share a special kind of dynamic, aptly called the replicator
dynamic. This dynamic underlies all evolutionary processes and can be

—— In the Middle of a Muddle · 9 ——
described mathematically as a generalized catalytic reaction. Basically the
replicator formula considers the particular means by which some object is
able to produce a copy of itself.
Typically this requires the help of-a
catalyst—a commodity that speeds up the production process without
itself being consumed by it. In particular, the formula is concerned with
the details of how many copies of the replicator can be made per unit of
time. The speed of this process then depends on such things as whether
the replicator is itself the catalyst or leaves that role to some other
participant in the reaction. Such energy-absorbing events are momentary
slices out of a longer history of duplications that are linked together to
form an evolutionary lineage. Such lineages define a chain in which the
same information gets passed from place to place and thereby persists
through time. On the other hand, mere duplication may be an isolated,
independent event, and so not part of such an evolutionary history.
Whether a replicator is involved when a given bit of information is
duplicated therefore makes a big difference indeed.
So are replicators required to explain communication events like
reading a book or catching a disease, biological or otherwise? Diseases,
most biologists agree, are indeed caused by a replicator. The question is
which one?
In 1976, the doctor who ventured into New Guinea, Carleton Gajdusek,
was awarded the Nobel Prize for medicine. Gajdusek had argued that the
definitive feature of kuru—a gradual buildup of lesions and peculiar
plaques in the brain—is produced by a growing colony of parasitic
replicators.
What was unusual about kuru from his point of view as a
virologist was the length of time between the postulated date of infection
and the first appearance of symptoms. His explanation, which won him
the most prestigious award in science, was the suggestion of a new
strategic, long-term dormancy, in an existing type of replicator, a virus.
However, the western medical community has not found a virus correlated
with the appearance of the illustrative pattern of cortical plaques, despite
more than 20 years of active research.
In 1997, Stanley Prusiner, another doctor, was also awarded the Nobel
Prize for medicine, this time for a second explanation of kuru and related
degenerative neurological diseases such as scrapie, bovine spongiform
encephalopathy (BSE), and Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease (CJD). He believes
a novel class of biological replicator causes these similar diseases:

—— 10 · THE ELECTRIC MEME ——
prions (short for “proteinaceous infectious particles”).
This is a more
radical explanation than Gajdusek’s because it violates the biological
dogma that all pathological agents must include, and be fabricated by,
nucleic acids (DNA or RNA). Instead these proteins are produced directly
by other proteins (although they probably require the help of an unknown
catalyst called “Protein X”). However, the existence of prions has not yet
been conclusively proven either. Because they invoke alternative causes,
either Gajdusek or Prusiner must be wrong—famously wrong.
What difference does it make whether a virus or a prion causes kuru?
Both explanations seem to fit the basic facts.
There is a link between
consuming brain tissue and the later development of symptoms diagnostic
of the disease. The causal pathway to disease is clear. But, in fact, a lot
rides on the answer to this question. This is because prions don’t achieve
their evolutionary’ goals in the same way as viruses. For one thing, prions
don’t depend on getting translated back into DNA each generation: They
don’t pass through a genetic bottleneck in order to reproduce themselves.
This allows them considerable independence and means they can be
particularly malicious to the products of genes, like people. (All known
prion diseases are fatal.)
Their independence from DNA also allows
prions to transfer rather easily to new kinds of hosts for example, from
cows to people. A harmless form of the prion protein is present in a very
wide range of species. But a new species can become infected if enough
of these protein molecules get into it, as when cows were fed ground-up
sheep tissues (a farming practice in parts of Europe). The result: Sheep’s
scrapie was transformed into “mad cow” disease. (That is what we can get
CJD, the human form of prion disease, from eating beef.) Further, if you
look at population statistics for the course of these diseases, you begin to
find differences in the values of parameters with epidemiological
importance: the likelihood of infection from an exposure, the time delay
expected between infection and the onset of affliction, etc. And how can it
be cured? Anti-viral agents wouldn’t have any effect on a disease caused
by prions because prions aren’t viruses. The moral here is that even when
you involve a replicator, you must make sure to get the right replicator to
successfully explain a disease.
Let’s move on to the second case of information replication described
above, that of Darwin’s infection by a “mind virus.” Analogous options
exist for explaining this event. Let’s begin with the first, more conservative

—— In the Middle of a Muddle · 11 ——
choice.
This is the “Gajdusekian” assumption that an existing class of
replicator, genes, is responsible for the phenomenon in question.
It
suggests that Darwin simply responded to Malthus’s desire to persuade
others of some novel ideas he had written down before he died.
The
assumption is that genes are simply using a novel strategy to make the
organisms they produce more clever and hence better able to cope with
whatever difficulties they might come across.
This strategy is social
communication, or the acquisition of information from other organisms, in
this case mediated through the printed page.
On the other hand, perhaps Malthus’s idea succeeded in lodging itself
in Darwin’s mind because the notion of ecological competition for
survival itself had a variety of appealing features that made Darwin’s
brain—or any other—highly susceptible to it. That is, maybe ideas are
replicators that have evolved abilities to get themselves planted in new
host-minds and thereby gain a foothold for future replication.
This
second
type
of explanation is
more
radical
(and hence
“Prusinerian”) because it postulates the existence of a novel class of
replicator. In this case we’re not talking about genes, or prions, but rather
what Oxford biologist Richard Dawkins called “memes.”
Memes are
generally thought to be replicators residing in people’s brains that are able
to reproduce themselves during transmission between individuals. Thus
memes in Malthus’s head were somehow recoded as spots of ink that
survived their originator’s demise on the pages of a book, there to be
visually picked up and copied into Darwin’s active, living brain.
Once
inside, they became linked to other ideas already present in Darwin’s mind
to form a unique complex: the theory of evolution.
(Exactly the same
insight flashed into another brain—that of Alfred Russel Wallace—after a
reading of Malthus some years later.) The success of this meme complex,
from the point of view of the ideas themselves, has been truly
extraordinary.
Malthus’s original idea, now recast in this larger
intellectual framework, has survived through a number of generations of
host individuals and become ever more prevalent with the passage of time
even to the point where it has been called a universal theory. Malthus’s
idea about competition was itself successful in a new kind of competition
for survival: a battle among a new kind of replicator for places in a
population of brains.
What about the third episode, concerning the boy in Cincinnati?

—— 12 · THE ELECTRIC MEME ——
From the “genes-only” point of view, a malicious hacker in a dark corner
of the world is able to interact indirectly with a large number of other
computer users through the instrument of a program.
Often, unstinting
accomplices further the hacker’s criminal goals by sending the damaging
software along its way to other nodes in the network, where further havoc
follows.
But the sorry consequences of the hacker’s action can be
conveniently summarized by the malevolent intent of this one individual.
From the novel replicator perspective, once the hacker’s brainchild has
been let loose on the world, it develops a life of its own, infiltrating distant
hard disks through its inborn abilities to manipulate networked computer
systems.
It creates a long chain of interactions in this way, and many
replications of the program ensue.
But many of the pathways the
computer virus follows will be unintended by the hacker, causing
unforeseen consequences at various destinations.
If these become
sufficiently serious to other users of the network—if the virus is “too
successful” at replicating itself—its liberation into Webworld may even
result in the hacker being tracked down and prosecuted. This is probably
not what the hacker had in mind when she initially released it into this
population of interlinked intelligences. It is rather a consequence of the
virus’s qualities as a replicator.
We have now seen that each of these vignettes can be explained from
two different perspectives. The traditional view of communication—even
when mediated through artifacts such as books or computers—is that the
organization of such a social interaction, as well as the information content
of what is exchanged, are determined by the wills of communicating
parties (like Malthus and Darwin).
This standard approach can readily
admit that information is duplicated during social transmission, as long as
people are the exclusive agents behind the process.
Information was
duplicated, yes. But because it was itself a replicator? No! Responsibility
for duplicating information lies squarely and solely in the hands (or
mouths or brains) of the communicators.
It is only when information replicates that an additional causal force
becomes involved in the explanation of communication. This is the very
essence of the meme hypothesis. The memetic suggestion is that there is
an information-bearing replicator underlying communication that goes
unnoticed by the traditional approach: a hidden homunculus acting as a
second kind of agent, a puppeteer pulling invisible strings that direct

—— In the Middle of a Muddle · 13 ——
aspects of the communication process. This puppeteer is the information
packet itself, evolved to manipulate its carriers for its own ends.
Only one of these theories of information contagion can be correct:
Either memes exist or they don’t. Therefore the central question in this
book is simply this: What causal forces underlie the communication of
information?
Which of these two ways of “reading” communicative
events is correct?
Does responsibility sit squarely with gene-based
organisms, or do non-genetic replicators, with their own evolutionary
interests, also play a role? Just as in the case of kuru finding an effective
explanation of social communication depends on picking the right
replicator.
Quite a lot depends on this—no less than our whole conception of
ourselves. Who’s talking when I speak: the memes or me? Are my very
thoughts something I was able to decide on, or are their just parasites
attempting to get out of me and thus infect others? It’s the importance of
the prospect that memetics throws up—people turned into zombies, with
only the illusion of control over their own behavior—that should amply
repay a serious investigation into the claim that memes exist.
GENES AND GERMS
Venture capitalist Steve Jurvetson coined the phrase “viral marketing” in
1997 to describe the strategy, first implemented by Hotmail, of tagging the
end of every w-mail message with a promotion for its new service. This
self-replicating advertisement helped the company itself become “hot.”
Hotmail experienced an epidemic rate of growth—12 million new users in
only 18 months. Since then, every dot-com-and-Harry business flocking
to the Internet has attempted to ride the wave of viral marketing by making
use of similar gambits, like putting advertising banners on the “free”
web pages they offer customers. Demonstration downloads of software
and reciprocal linking agreements with Web pages advertising related
products are other strategies to boost one’s customer base. The idea is to
create a “buzz effect.” Instead of marketing an idea or product to largely
unknown
and
amorphous
mass
audiences
through
expensive
ad
campaigns, clever companies focus on key potential customers—early
adopters—and
let
them
market
the
product
to
everybody
else.
Information, it is felt, can be infectious. It can get spread through word-
of-mouth (or its updated equivalent in this digital age, word-of-

—— 14 · THE ELECTRIC MEME ——
mouse) from customer to customer, rather than always being funneled
through the business or the products it controls, such as advertising. The
byword is: Just focus on those capable of setting the trend, the socially
promiscuous and those with the power to influence others. These are folks
itching to “tell a friend,” to make use of the power of social networks.
Recently several popular books have attempted to take advantage of
this idea, by attempting to sell us the idea of viral marketing. What are the
trade secrets these books give away? How can we achieve this enviably
cheap and effective promotion of ourselves or our ideas?
Malcolm Gladwell, in The Tipping Point, argues that effective word-
of-mouth is something created by three rare and special psychological
types, whom he calls Connectors, Mavens, and Salesmen. These are the
people we must use to spread our message. Connectors are the gregarious
gossipers who know everyone else and so speed information on its way
through the population. But Connectors don’t just know lots of people;
they know lots of people in different walks of life. They provide links
between social networks, or bridges to what would otherwise be isolated
groups of people. Their activity greatly reduces the likelihood that an idea
will circulate only in some media backwater; instead it will reach far and
wide.
Connectors also know those crucial people in each of these
networks who will then be able to get the idea disseminated through their
own groups. Gladwell calls this second type of people Mavens (from the
Yiddish word for those who accumulate knowledge).
They are helpful
people with expert knowledge of those who are important in some area,
and so they can introduce the idea to that strategic “someone” who can be
vital to the further success of the idea or product in that area. Mavens are
people who see trends in their earliest phases.
The third important
category of individuals who add “oomph” to the speed of spread is
Salesmen: intuitive “people-people” who sweep you up with their passion
and commitment.
They convince you of the value of the new idea or
product, converting mere contact into effective transmission.
They add
what Gladwell calls “stickiness” to an idea. An idea can be presented to
someone, but unless they become convinced of its value—are truly
infected by it—they won’t then spread it on its way. Stickiness gives a
message impact; it “sticks” to your memory-bank, so you can’t get it out
of your head. Salesmen are persuasive people who can take a basic vision

—— In the Middle of a Muddle · 15 ——
and translate it into digestible form for the masses.
This can require
complex transformations to make ideas or products more appealing. Of
course, increasing a product’s “stick” is the basic role of advertising, so
Salesmen are active, real-life advertisements.
If you can get these kinds of folk to look seriously at your idea or
product, the epidemic nature of social networks will ensure your message
sweeps through society, doing your work for you. In this away, a small
group of these specialists can leverage widespread popular interest in what
you have to sell.
Of course, those seeking to take advantage of the fact that new
products and services can infiltrate the consuming public through
interpersonal communication networks must live or die by the often
mysterious dynamics of epidemic spread. Essentially, the buzz has to be
good or you’ll get burned. What a company wants to establish is a brand-
name, Although gossip can make or break a reputation, it has to be backed
up by solid business practices because networks are themselves out of a
company’s control: Good service and excellent product quality are a must
for those daring to tap the power of viral marketing.
At bottom, viral marketing is simply the application of a more general
idea to business practice. This idea is—to be only somewhat cute—the
idea of infectious ideas.
Since Richard Dawkins named such ideas
“memes,” this appellation has itself proven highly infectious, so that
infectious ideas are often called “memes” nowadays. The Oxford English
Dictionary defines a meme as: “An element of a culture that may be
considered to be passed on by non-genetic means, especially imitation.”
This definition reflects a specialized biological expression derived from a
Greek word meaning “that which is imitated.” Dawkins provided some
initial examples: “tunes, ideas, catch-phrases, clothes fashions, ways of
making pots or building arches.”
Dawkins was neither the first nor the last theorist to speculate that there
might be something akin to a gene operating behind social communication.
However, his coinage—a neologism that combines hints of “memory,”
“mimetic,” and “gene” in one pithy package—has proved popular. And the
analogy to genes embodied in the term is not only memorable but also
ideologically appealing. As one commentator put it, “On the one hand, it
holds out the tantalizing prospect of an elegant, universal theory of cultural
evolution;
on
the
other,
it
evades
genetic
determinism

—— 16 · THE ELECTRIC MEME ——
by offering a parallel cultural process with interests of its own.” Memes
are a second form of replicator that, although as “selfish” as any replicator,
are at least somewhat independent of the interests of our genes. Memes
are generally thought to be replicators residing in people’s brains that are
able to reproduce themselves during transmission between individuals.
Memes arise as a consequence of social learning, as in the vignettes
recounted at the beginning of this chapter. As memes are supposed to be
acquired through imitation, Dawkins had to take imitation “in a broad
sense” to encompass the possibility that memes could be acquired from
reading books or watching television, rather than through direct, face-to-
face interaction with other people. Since culture is widely believed (these
days) to be socially learned knowledge, memes appear to be an account of
how inheritance of this corpus of knowledge occurs.
In effect, memes
become an explanation of cultural evolution.
Adherents
of
memes
encompass
philosophers,
psychologists,
sociologists, computer scientists, and, more generally, interested passers-
by from all walks of life.
Most memeticists are not biologists or
anthropologists by training, and so neither evolutionary nor cultural theory
is their professional expertise.
This has given memetics a distinctively
“populist” flavor. It is the “people’s choice” for an explanation of culture.
There is even a counterrevolutionary feel to it, against the Ivory Tower
nature of the other, academic approaches to explaining culture. However,
this also means that meme aficionados may have little awareness of
alternative evolutionary approaches to culture. Another downside of the
vibrancy of memetics is a certain lack of rigor, so that the general level of
discourse in memetics is somewhat low by “hard science” standards—a
fact that has been recognized by some of the more prominent exponents of
the approach.
There are a few hints of formal theory, but no general
system for analyzing the evolution of memes has been adopted as
legitimate by the majority of memeticists.
This populist stance among memeticists has been rewarded with
antipathy from academics, who often greet the meme idea as a church
congregation would the arrival of an apostate.
Outside academia,
however, memes—these snippets of information learned from the cultural
surround—are all the rage.
Like viral marketing, they have been the
subject of several recent popular books.
And the viral marketeers even
acknowledge, in their humbler moments, that their ideas originate in

—— In the Middle of a Muddle · 17 ——
these books on memes. Gladwell “borrowed” his ideas from Aaron Lynch
and Richard Brodie, prominent meme enthusiasts with earlier books on the
popular market.
By the time these ideas reached Seth Godin, the most
youthful and brazen of the marketeers, Gladwell’s trilogy of Connectors,
Mavens, and Salesmen had been reduced to possessing a single common
trait: They are adept at “sneezing” ideas. The complex process of social
transmission is reduced in Godin’s apocalyptically titled book Unleashing
the Ideavirus to the activity of merely loquacious and gregarious people
who influence product reputations.
Similarly Gladwell’s “stickiness
factor” is reduced (somewhat ironically) to “smoothness”: the ease with
which new infections can be effected.
In each case, the subtlety of
Gladwell’s presentation, taken more directly from the academic literature
on social networks and idea contagion, becomes diluted. So already we
have a chain of infection appearing in this corner of memetic theory from
memeticists to Gladwell to Godin. Basically the same ideas get marketed
as a “new and improved” version with each iteration of the borrowing
process.
But unlike the promotional advertisements, the informational
goods inside the books have in fact become increasingly weakened and
noisy. Rather like the message in the a game of Chinese whispers, by the
third time the ideas have been reproduced, the rather elaborate analyses in
the memetics books have been reduced to a small number of concepts, and
these wind up being somewhat vulgarly expressed.
This is itself an
example of the kind of process that memetics purports to explain: The
dissemination of cultural knowledge—in this case from author to author to
author, and thence into the general public in various forms—depends on
which version of the book-borne infection readers “catch.”
The literature on memes uses two analogies to come to grips with the
nature of memes. The more popular interpretation of memetics—as the
titles of the books on memes (Virus of the Mind, Thought Contagion)
and our discussion thus far both suggest—sees memes as microbes. In
effect, the authors of the popular books on memetics adopt an
epidemiological approach to the study of communication events, like the
ones described earlier. Memes are the equivalent of a cold virus that, by
causing sufferers to sneeze (à la Godin), succeeds in infecting everyone
in the vicinity. So memetics is the cultural analogue to the study of how
disease-causing pathogens diffuse through populations.
The striking

—— 18 · THE ELECTRIC MEME ——
metaphor of memes as “mind viruses” (again originally due to Richard
Dawkins) takes memes as particles of culture that parasitize human hosts,
causing them to behave in ways conducive to getting copies of their
information into the heads of other people.
Memes, like viruses, are
parasites because they make use of another organism’s physical, chemical,
and mental processes for their own transmission.
Furthermore, both
memes and viruses undergo vigorous competition for survival.
Viruses
must overcome the immune system and induce the host to transmit new
virus particles to uninfected hosts; memes must overcome those memes
previously existing in a host’s mind and then induce her to transmit the
meme to new potential hosts. Both of these processes have a great deal in
common. In short, we don’t have ideas; ideas have us! We are hosts to
parasites feeding on our brains that cause us to behave in ways beneficial
to them, not us.
As a result of using this epidemiological analogue, memeticists
concentrate on how memes get transmitted from person to person.
For
example, they might tell a story about how a meme for suicidal imagery
(as the analogue of a lethal microbe) spreads through a cultural group,
perhaps becoming less virulent as the first wave of more susceptible hosts
are killed off. The meme then achieves some kind of equilibrium presence
in the population once all of those who can be, have been infected by it.
(Some might say that, thanks to the widespread sales of books on memes,
this stage has already been reached for the meme idea itself, which has
become endemic among the literate population. Indeed these authors are
making major reputations, and minor fortunes, for themselves as
“sneezers” of the meme-meme.)
While it may be a fine basis for the art of advertising, a number of real
weaknesses debilitate the epidemiological analogue as the foundation for a
science of memes. Mostly, it allows you to be intellectually lazy. Since
epidemiology looks at the level of a population, you don’t need to be
concerned with the mechanics of how the pathogen actually gets from here
to there. Can Vector X—say, a person—really transmit the pathogen from
point A to point B in the time frame allowed? Do they move on foot, by
train, or by plane? Do they have to climb high mountains or suffer cold
temperatures? The epidemiologist cares only about the rate of spread,
not the means of spread. Most epidemiological models also don’t allow
for changes in the nature of the pathogen, being concerned merely

—— In the Middle of a Muddle · 19 ——
with describing variation in its distribution over time, so mutation can be
completely ignored.
The moral: Epidemiology need not even be
evolutionary. But culture (the population of ideas and beliefs that become
shared in a group as a result of communication among group members) is
nothing if not evolutionary.
Relying on the epidemiological analogies has thus left the notion of the
meme itself quite sketchy, and there has been little incentive for people to
be precise. Meme have been variously suggested to exist as
— an idea in someone’s head
— a repeatable piece of behavior like a spoken word, or
— embodied in the form of artifacts, like wheels
Reasonable scenarios for the duplication of any of these can be suggested,
and the means by which they can be passed from person to person can be
argued as well. You can simply assume that memes are one or more of
these categories of “thing” and go forward from there. But this does not
make for a very convincing story. Can a meme really be both a mental
representation and a physical object? Or, if it can only be one of these
kinds of things, why not the other? This vagueness about the physical
nature of memes can lead to empirical confusion as well. People argue
that memes are ideas and then count up postings to an Internet chat group
to test the relative success of memes at spreading themselves. But a meme
in the mind and its manifestation in computers are not necessarily the same
thing.
Given these problems with representing memes accurately, the second
major approach has been to suggest that memes are like genes.
This
viewpoint makes a fundamental point: Memes are cultural replicators. All
of the interesting arguments made by memeticists—that there is some
form of agency in these bits of information (a “memes-eye view”), and
that evolution occurs for the good of memes rather than genes—endow
memes with their own evolutionary interests. What is a meme, after all, if
it isn’t a replicator like a gene? Just another name for a message bandied
about by people in their social games.
In essence, this brand of memetics argues that cultural evolution cannot
be explained without reference to a new replicator. Genes, with their well-
known rules of transmission, cannot account for the ways in which
information is passed around in human social groups, with their use of

—— 20 · THE ELECTRIC MEME ——
language and books.
Even the minion of genes—brains—can’t account
for the rapid increase in knowledge in modern western societies.
Memetics argues that some other force is also at work—that there is a
replicator underlying social communication.
Does Dawkins himself define a meme as a replicator? Although it’s
not perfectly clear from his writings on the topic, it appears that he does.
At least in one place, he compares memes to DNA, the quintessential
replicator that
makes copies of itself, making use of the cellular apparatus of replicases, etc. . . .
[This] corresponds to the meme’s use of the apparatus of inter-individual
communication and imitation to make copies of itself. If individuals live in a social
climate in which imitation is common, this corresponds to a cellular climate rich in
enzymes for copying DNA.
Daniel Dennett, Professor of Philosophy at Tufts University and
Dawkins’s close intellectual heir on such points, confirms that memes are
replicators, saying that memes are “elements [that] have the capacity to
create copies or replicas of themselves.” He even uses the active voice.
Susan Blackmore, Reader in Psychology at the University of the West of
England and the admitted disciple of both of these figures, also says,
“Imitation is a kind of replication, or copying, and that is what makes a
meme a replicator” (because for her, memes are “units of imitation”). So
it seems that the most prominent contemporary memeticists do identify
memes as replicators.
Just how the two replicators—genes and memes—differ, however,
remains somewhat obscure. Little work has been done in memetics using
the gene analogy.
In fact, there has been no extensive intellectual
campaign to deduce the special qualities of memes as cultural repudiators.
No mention has been made of specific mechanisms by which memes
replicate, are selected, vary, or get transmitted. Instead it has simply been
argued that memes are passed among people through imitation, while
evolving in the process.
Genes are, of course, the quintessential replicator.
If memes are
replicators, they must share many essential features with genes. But genes
were first on the evolutionary scene and so are special; any replicators coming
along afterward must live in Gene World and are (probably) going to be

—— In the Middle of a Muddle · 21 ——
dependent on it. Further, genes are ancient, having had time to become
complex, whereas subsequent replicators are much newer and hence
probably simpler. So memes, even though they are also replicators, need
not be the same as genes in every respect. Dawkins himself has suggested
that the meme-gene analogy “can be taken too far if we are not careful.”
Fundamentally, since memes are parasites on the genetic process, they
have no need to produce their own organisms to serve as hosts.
Thus there are those who advocate the contagion-like or viral metaphor
and those who prefer the gene metaphor, with each group claiming the
other is retarding progress in memetics.
Basically, a war is underway
between the “meme-as-germ” and “meme-as-gene” factions. Neither side
can yet proclaim victory because there is no clear evidence being
presented that favors one side over the other.
There’s the obligatory
Journal of Memetics, which allows us to check on the state of play among
the professionals.
In deed all of the claptrap surrounding a growing
academic industry is in place. But something new will have to be done if
memetics is going to advance and become a viable alternative to standard
theories of cultural change.
No one knows what a meme is. Certainly the existence of one has yet
to be demonstrated.
That no one has sounded an alarm about this is
astounding considering the controversy that had greeted the similar, but
less radical, suggestion that prions explain kuru and related diseases. It
simply has not been generally recognized that, at least from the
perspective of evolutionary biology, claiming that cultural replicators
inhabit brains (along with prions!) should be controversial. Meanwhile,
many people blithely debate possible features of memes, ignoring the fact
that their existence first needs to be proven.
Susan Blackmore, for
example, argues The Meme Machine that we can explain phenomena as
diverse as the expansion of the human brain and tipping in restaurants as
the direct result of memes working in our daily lives, while offering no
evidence for how these hypothetical entities accomplish these things.
The ease with which the notion of memes has been accepted in many
quarters might be thought to arise from differences in the standards of
proof in the social as opposed to the biological or physical sciences—that
is to say, such standards are lower in social sciences and higher in
biological sciences—except that a prominent evolutionary biologist coined
the word “meme.” Moreover, much of the interest in the meme hypothesis

—— 22 · THE ELECTRIC MEME ——
has also remained among those relatively far from social scientific
discourse, such as philosophers of biology and computer scientists.
Maybe memes are just concepts useful in philosophical debates. What real
use can we expect to gain from understanding them?
MEMES IN THEMUDDLE
The meme-based approach faces an immediate challenge: There doesn’t
appear to be any particular virtue in invoking memes to explain the cases
of information transmission described at the beginning of this chapter.
The social sciences have gotten along just fine for more than 100 years
without invoking memes, and in 25 years of consideration, no major
conceptual or empirical advances in memetics have appeared.
This
implies that memetics is not a very progressive program of research.
There must be some underlying problem with the present conception of
memes that accounts for this scientific stagnation and for their apparent
lack of appeal to conventional social scientists. Surely, if memes exist,
they leave traces in the world that could be found if only we knew where
to look. It’s possible that if we had a better image of memes we would
begin to find them.
A more philosophical argument against memes is that it is just too
complicated an explanation of how we think and communicate.
The
memetic perspective suggests that two lines of heritable information—
genes plus memes—are required to explain information transmission in
cultured species. This memetic line of argument—which is “Prusinerian”
because it invokes a new causal force, the meme—violates the principle of
parsimony, or Occam’s Razor.
This principle suggests that preferred
explanations should invoke fewer causal factors to account for some
domain, or involve a given number of factors but elucidate a wider range
of phenomena than alternative accounts.
A conservative “Gajdusekian”
option would account for the same phenomenon, culture, by relying on a
single line of inheritance: gene-built minds. Just as a new variant on an
existing theme was first put forward to explain kuru, adding a dimension
of complexity to explain communication and culture by positing a new
class of replicator is only to be preferred if all the available alternatives
fail.
The original evolutionary process to have arisen on Earth, that of
biolife, is based on a replicator: genes. So the natural tendency has been

—— In the Middle of a Muddle · 23 ——
to use genes as an intuition-pump for thinking about any kind of
evolutionary process. The genetic case has been taken, at least implicitly,
to define the necessary qualities of any evolutionary process, regardless of
its physical substrate. But just because biological evolution happens to be
based on a replicator does not mean all evolutionary processes have to be.
In fact, it is possible that cultural evolution can be explained simply as the
consequence of human beings going about the business of their genes,
with big brains and all the other paraphernalia of culture, including
artifacts, as means to get that all-important competitive edge over their
fellows.
Cultural information need not represent an end in itself; it is
produced, by people, solely as an instrument to manipulate others for
genetic ends. People and other clever creatures, in this view, have just
evolved the ability to send and receive messages as a strategy for
improving their biological fitness.
People—and even people’s own
products for copying information, such as fax machines—may only be
acting at the ultimate beck and call of genes. In fact, once genes are on the
scene, evolutionary processes in cultural information become secondary
and derivative. The ultimate responsibility for recent evolutionary jumps,
such as the appearance of human culture, may remain with genes that
simply become more and more remote from the scene as additional layers
of organization get laid on top of them—proteins, organisms, behavior,
and now culture. Genes can, in effect, single-handedly set the whole chain
of events off and then sit back to reap the rewards, The new kinds of
evolutionary process in gene products like proteins and brains could not
arise were genes not in place, there, underneath it all.
But they are.
Although the spread of cultural beliefs appears to be a life-like process, the
liveliness may all come from the humans’ behavior, not the memes.
Cultural evolution certainly depends on genetic evolution, even if it is not,
at least efficiently, reducible to it.
So with genes already present in the world, what need is there for an
additional complication to the explanatory picture like memes?
The
answer, some would argue, is none whatsoever.
Once you unpack the
claims about memes, the role memes are meant to fill disappears.
In sum, the meme hypothesis finds itself in a considerable bind. This
bind is centered on the issue of whether the recurrence of cultural traits
depends on forms of inheritance that are, or are not, reliant on replicators
independent of genes.

Chapter Two
ASPECIALKIND
OFINHERITANCE
The theory of cultural evolution [is] to my mind the most inane,
sterile, and pernicious theory in the whole theory of science.
–Berthold Laufer
Evolutionism is the central, inclusive, organizing outlook of
anthropology, comparable in its theoretical power to evolutionism
in biology.
–Marshall Sahlins
During the course of human evolution, there has been a general increase in
both the complexity and the diversity of cultural forms.
While Homo
erectus produced only rather uniform-looking stone tools, today we have a
proliferation of cultural things, ranging from music genres (everything
from classical to bebop, metal, grunge, and so on) to seemingly infinite
brands of toothpaste and the plethora of sites on the Internet. How can this
cultural diversification be explained?
Some kind of evolution was responsible for this process. Memes are
often invoked nowadays to explain such cultural evolution.
The basic
problem is that no one is sure whether the replication of information
required
by
a
memetic
explanation
actually
underlies
cultural
reproduction. The claim of geneticists that cultural phenomena depend on
replication casts the validity of a meme-based approach to culture into
doubt.
It is possible that culture evolves, with similarity between generations
in cultural traits, but without information transmission at the social level—
24

—— A Special Kind of Inheritance · 25 ——
that is, directly from individual to individual.
This may seem, at first
sight, a peculiar stance for someone with an admitted sympathy to
evolutionary accounts of culture. But it is a perfectly legitimate position.
This is because evolution, as a general principle, can occur without
replication (although biological evolution does involve the replication of
genes). . Why this is so needs to be understood clearly, since it means
memetics is not necessarily correct about the nature of cultural evolution.
In general, evolution need only exhibit a certain number of properties.
Briefly, these properties are
— Heredity: Entities of kind A usually give rise to another A, of kind B
to more Bs, etc.
— Variation: Heredity is not exact—A sometimes gives rise to B, and
— Fitness: Variation must be associated with differences in the
probability of survival to reproduction, on which selection may act.
From this perspective, evolution requires a population in which there is
variation among entities, differential reproduction among entities on the
basis of their traits, and heredity of the traits associated with that
differential reproduction.
Heredity, as the eminent evolutionary thinker John Maynard Smith
defines it above, is the capacitor of like to beget like. In biological terms,
the mechanism generating heredity generally involves nucleic acid
molecules—genes.
In such a case heredity is due to descent with
modification in a lineage of replicators.
But the existence of these
underlying entities that pass on their structure largely intact—replicators,
in short—is not strictly necessary.
So heredity doesn’t require replication. It simply measures a purely
statistical correlation between the characteristics of parents and their
offspring. Say Judy Smith has hairstyle A, while Amy Jones prefers
hairstyle B.
Then we find that the two girls exhibit the same
hairstyle as each of their moms.
This obviously has nothing to do
with a different “hairstyle” gene being replicated in the two families.
Still, the necessary resemblance can be found: One hairstyle A in the
Smith family has given rise to another A hairstyle in that family,
while Mrs. Jones, the B mom, has produced another B.
This
correlation can result from the operation of any mechanism, in
principle.
It may arise because both parents and offspring sample
possible
hairstyles
from
their
cultural
environment
and
by

—— 26 · THE ELECTRIC MEME ——
happenstance select the same way of wearing their hair. Or it could be
that each mom has imposed her preferred style on her daughter. It doesn’t
matter how the correlation is achieved, so long as it exists. The important
point for us is that the information need not be inherited through the
genetic channel—not through DNA replication.
If parents and their
offspring are more similar to each other than randomly selected pairs of
individuals in the population, then evolution by natural selection can
occur: Those people with the favored kinds of traits will tend to increase
as a relative proportion of the population over time.
Heredity is about phenotypes, the physical manifestation of a trait.
More particularly, it is the degree to which the phenotypic traits in the
parents’ generation predict those of their offspring. This gives heredity the
virtue of being about readily observable things, which is convenient.
Replication, on the other hand, is about replicators, which are typically
so small you can’t see them, except with specialized equipment like
microscopes.
If heredity is underpinned by replication, then the
phenotypic traits being measured in a population are parts of the
organisms produced by those replicators, their manifestation or expression
in an observable trait.
Duplication, for example, is a feature of replication, but not necessarily
of evolution.
With heredity, you can just have sequential replacement
instead. Imagine that a DNA molecule, in the effort to produce a copy of
itself, was degraded in the process but left another DNA molecule behind
in its stead. There is no point at which two DNA molecules exist and so
no duplication has occurred, but information has been passed from a DNA
“‘parent” to its “offspring.” Heredity even allows cases in which there is
no temporal overlap in the material.
This would be as if the DNA
molecule produced a protein that degraded and then was responsible for
conducting a process resulting in the construction of a new DNA
molecule: a dance of death and reconfiguration.
Replication is a special kind of heredity, one in which additional
features apply. The requirement of heredity in traits affecting biological
success is weaker than the requirement that replicators exist, and heredity
is all that is needed for evolution.
In ideal circumstances, populations can theoretically grow exponentially.
But it is almost always the case that, in reality, resources are limited. For

—— A Special Kind of Inheritance · 27 ——
this reason, population sizes tend to eventually stop growing. This was
the main point of the theory formulated all Thomas Malthus in his famous
Essay on the Principle of Population. What Darwin added to Malthus’s
demographic story was a recognition that individuals within populations
vary; they have unique characteristics.
He also supposed that an
individual’s characteristics can be passed on to its offspring—the
inheritance principle.
But change in environmental circumstances can
occur, and sometimes this change results in offspring having slightly
different characteristics from their parents. This is the variation principle.
For us, the point of variation is that heredity is not always precise.
That is, A must be able to generate A, and if some variant of A arises, the
new variant form must be able to generate copies of itself. This second
point is crucial: The mutated, or variant, copy must retain—at least some
of the time—its ability to inspire copies of itself being made.
This is
variation with a difference, a difference important to evolution because if
this ability were lost, heritability would be lost.
An implication of this ability to vary is that replication, as one
mechanism of heredity, sometimes doesn’t work; an exact copy of the
original is not the result of the replication process.
But this occasional
failure is almost more interesting than the normal outcome: Replication
can produce something slightly different than expected, but which
nevertheless has the ability to copy itself.
So there is a sense of
disjuncture: The old form is now dead. But there is also continuity: The
new form will now go on to replicate itself over and over.
This
combination of old and new represents a branch-point in a lineage. You
can think of this branching in two ways: Either the old lineage is dead and
a new one has begun, or there has been a change of state in the lineage,
which now goes under a new name, in effect.
Otherwise the chain of
replication ends, and with it the possibility of accumulating useful
functionality, or what biologists call adaptations.
Some of the variants that arise will give the individuals with those traits a
competitive advantage over their neighbors—that is, greater success in
acquiring resources and reproducing. In biological terms, such individuals
have higher reproductive success; they are likely to have more offspring in
their subsequent family trees than these neighbors. If these favorable traits
can
be
inherited
by
later
generations
and
continue
to
be

—— 28 · THE ELECTRIC MEME ——
favored by selection pressures because the relevant environmental
conditions remain the same, then evolution occurs: The traits of these
relatively successful families increase in frequency and will eventually
come to dominate the population as a whole.
If we add the further point that these selected traits are the expression
of particular replicators, which thereby are favored by the evolutionary
process, then we can say that such replicators are relatively “fit.” Fitness
denotes a replicator’s ability to spread through a population. (The term
“fitness” in this book concerns a replicator’s success in out-reproducing
competitors for places in succeeding generations.
It is not about
physiological well-being.
Fitness is typically measured in somewhat
rough-and-ready fashion as the number of offspring that an individual has,
assuming that next-generation success is a good proxy for longer-term
success.)
This quality is a function of environmental conditions: The
phenotypic traits that lead to success in the race for future representation in
the population in one place and time will not necessarily be “good” for an
organism somewhere else, or even the next time around if the situation has
changed. There is no universal standard of value in biology; what “works”
in evolution is always contingent on local conditions, and replicators may
come and go.
According to this perspective, any entities in nature exhibiting the triad
of fitness, variation, and heredity may evolve.
They are evolutionary
individuals. In principle, any level of biological organization can exhibit
these three properties; thus any collection of units that can be grouped into
a population has the potential to evolve by natural selection. So entities
from any level of the biological hierarchy—genes, cells, or organisms—
might play the role of an individual in a population. Even populations of
organisms
might
serve
as
individuals
in
comparison
to
a
“metapopulation”—that
is,
a
population
composed
of
multiple
populations. An example of such a metapopulation exists in the form of
ant colonies linked together via underground tunnels and the exchange of
members.
WHAT IS CULTURE?
The major question for those seeking to understand culture from an
evolutionary point of view is therefore this: Does culture replicate, or does

—— A Special Kind of Inheritance · 29 ——
cultural evolution just exhibit heredity? In other words, what we need to
know is whether each generation resembles its predecessor because they
are linked through the replication of cultural entities with the capacity to
beget something like themselves through social transmission.
And if
cultural similarity is a social phenomenon, is it one involving the
replication of particulate units of information between individuals, as
memetics presupposes? Or is the march of history a process that is not
itself caused by social forces, but which nevertheless results in a
correlation of beliefs and values with what was seen before? Perhaps the
acknowledged resemblances between cultural incarnations over time is
due instead to genes acting through a phenomenon it reliably produces at
the social level—for example, by constructing brains with universal
features that consistently reproduce the same behavior.
Because this question is so central to the whole enterprise of this book,
let me explain again the alternative possibilities.
Cultural traits may
consistently appear in each generation without being recreated each time
by a replication process working at the cultural level—that is, without the
relevant information being transmitted from one individual to another in a
social group. The features called “cultural” may reliably reappear together
without being causally related.
After all, many kinds of phenomena
coincide with high statistical regularity—for example, a barometer reading
“rain” and environmental conditions in which water falls from the sky.
However, the barometer does not cause rain, nor does rain directly cause
the barometer to read “rain.”
Instead both are caused by a drop in
atmospheric pressure.
The same might be true of a “cultural” phenomenon like the
resemblance of young people’s food preferences to those of their parents.
Perhaps children learn what to eat by observing their parents’ behavior and
mimicking it. Such a scenario suggests that tastes for particular foods are
memes being duplicated through social learning.
But alternatively the
correlation in consumption habits between generations could be due to a
universal, inborn Set of taste buds that bias the learning of each person as
they acquire a knowledge of what foods taste good through individual trial
and error.
Such an explanation does not invoke a social channel of
information transfer between individuals but rather a genetic one, which
presumably underlies the predisposition to find certain kinds of foods
tasty.
We can’t really hope to make progress on answering the heredity

—— 30 · THE ELECTRIC MEME ——
question without first determining that the phenomenon we are trying to
explain with memes—culture—in fact evolves in a way consistent with a
replication process. So what is culture anyway?
This turns out to be rather difficult to determine because the notion of
culture has been notoriously difficult to define, even though it is arguably
one of the central concepts in modern social science.
Indeed the entire
discipline of anthropology is based on the idea of culture.
Efforts by
anthropologists to define culture began over a hundred years ago and have
shown certain trends.
It used to be fashionable to throw everything—
including the kitchen sink—into the definition.
For example, the first
academic anthropologist, Edward Tylor, allowed that artifacts (such as
kitchen sinks), kinship and marriage systems, and religious beliefs and
rituals were all parts of culture. But this omnibus definition piles ideas,
material objects, and behavioral practices into the same category. This is
bad practice because it becomes difficult to distinguish what exactly is not
part of culture.
Nowadays, thanks to the widespread success of the so-called
“cognitive revolution” of the 1960s, there is considerable agreement that
culture consists solely of things “in the head”—that is, of beliefs, values,
ideas. Attention has focused particularly on those “mentifacts” that have
been communicated and hence become common in a group.
However,
once one attempts to move beyond this starting point in defining culture,
the degree of consensus falls off precipitously. Nevertheless we can say
that, in the academy these days, culture is predominantly seen as a
cohesive and coherent set of mental representations that is reproduced
relatively intact through the enculturation of subsequent generations.
A
somewhat more operational form of this definition sees the “culture of the
moment” as a collection of ideas, beliefs, and values that can be abstracted
from individuals and considered as a pool of information at the population
level.
Each snapshot of a culture is a simple function of what was
circulating the last time anyone looked. Tracing the history of a particular
trait (or a set of linked traits) through these snapshots then defines a
cultural tradition or lineage.
The cognitive notion of culture, then, is quite pervasive in contemporary
social science. It has the definite advantage of making it clear that culture is
the result of social learning, of being what we know thanks to transmissions
from
others.
But
there
is
an
obvious
tension
present

—— A Special Kind of Inheritance · 31 ——
in this definition. On the one hand, the attempt to keep culture separate
from genetics is pointed. The emphasis on enculturation is clearly meant
to distinguish cultural inheritance from genetic inheritance—that is,
“nurture” from “nature.”
What makes humans, the cultural species,
unique from this perspective is extreme altriciality: Human babies are born
full of plasticity and potential rather than having a recognizable nature or a
fixed set of behavioral routines that are then repeated throughout life. The
long period of childhood and adolescence seen in humans allows a
prolonged cultural apprenticeship to parents and others. What we do in
that long period is to imbibe norms and other situated knowledge through
social learning, which we are particularly adapted to do by our
evolutionary psychology. Thanks to this period of dependence, we are a
cultural species.
At the same time, there is an evident desire implicit in the definition to
take note of the resemblance of cultural and genetic transmission. This
occurs in the reference to the iterative quality of cultural reproduction,
which fits directly into the general framework of evolutionary theory.
This tension is captured in the simple phrase “cultural evolution.”
Unfortunately the general impression that culture evolves doesn’t
amount to real understanding. Our knowledge of culture is not so precise
as to pinpoint a particular mechanism producing change in cultural traits.
A number of candidates for a theory of cultural evolution have been put
forward to fill this vacuum.
Memetics is definitely not the only voice
crying out for attention on this front.
We need to run through these theoretical alternatives to see if we can
eliminate any of them on other grounds besides adherence to the
Darwinian program.
The challenge faced by memetics, as one of the
applicants for the job of explaining cultural evolution, will come into
much better focus once we have distinguished these alternatives.
SOCIOBIOLOGY
The first “modern” evolutionary theory of society and culture to arise
was sociobiology. Considerable fanfare attended its major declaration in
1975, with the very public appearance of E.O. Wilson’s authoritative
book, whose title, Sociobiology, gave the discipline its name.
Wilson
devoted the last chapter of his book to human behavior, to show that the

—— 32 · THE ELECTRIC MEME ——
scope of his theory could encompass the cultural animal the same as any
other.
Wilson’s lead was quickly followed, with many studies of
sociobiological theory having now been applied to the case of humans.
The basic argument underlying such studies is that human behavior can
be understood in terms of genetically acquired learning biases and rational
calculation. Behavior, as a kind of phenotype (whether cultural or not), is
a way to make responses more flexible.
And the learning of new
behaviours is a form of phenotypic plasticity, no more.
The decision-
making of an organism can therefore be expected to be adaptive, except
for the odd, randomized mistake. The only principle one need invoke to
explain the behavior of any organism, including Homo sapiens, is fitness
maximization.
Culture as an individual trait is unimportant. The more
radical human sociobiologists don’t even consider culture to be a word in
their vocabulary: “I, personally, find ‘culture’ unnecessary,” says one.
How then does the human sociobiologist explain the fact that people in
Peoria don’t act like people in Pongo-Pongo? Isn’t that due to culture?
Not according to sociobiologists.
Behavior differs because there is
variation in the kinds of stimuli that folks in these disparate regions
receive. Why is there variation in environmental stimuli? Because people
live in different kinds of places. So folks in Peoria, where it’s cold, wear
warmer clothing and have a word for snow, while people in Pongo-Pongo
wear next to nothing and have never heard of a frightfully cold substance
that lies about on the ground.
Sociobiologists claim that so-called “cultural” variation is the result of
an interaction between genes and environment.
The way in which a
genetic trait manifests itself is not heritable; instead it is the product of a
specific interaction. Uproot a Chinese man and fly him to Los Angeles.
His kids, thanks to a change in diet and lifestyle, may have a higher risk of
cancer than their father. Alternatively, the kids may imbibe the jogging
culture in southern California and thus reduce their chances of this late-
onset illness.
The correlation between parent and offspring phenotypes
will then be low, but only because the proclivity toward cancer, while
inherited, reacts to local conditions.
Removing the grandchild back to
China would see a return of the original phenotype (again with a low
correlation between generations).
The phenotypic response is not
genetically encoded itself, but the ability to respond correctly to different
circumstances must be heritable and evolve by natural selection. Genetic

—— A Special Kind of Inheritance · 33 ——
and environmental factors alone are sufficient to explain the variation we
see in the behavior around us.
At best, human sociobiologists admit that the social transmission of
information occurs, but there suggest it can be ignored because it doesn’t
produce any novel evolutionary dynamics.
Thus, the “grandfather” of
human sociobiology, the eminent zoologist Richard Alexander, says:
To whatever extent the use of culture by individuals is learned . . . regularity of
learning situations or environmental consistency is the link between genetic
instructions and cultural instruction which makes the latter not a replicator at all,
but, in historical terms the vehicle of the genetic replicators.
Why do sociobiologists think there is no independent cultural
replicator? Their argument is that there used to be a world without culture,
prior to the evolution of the genus Homo, from which we derive. Culture
must have arisen through a biological process because the ancestors of
modern humans, like the rest of the animal kingdom, didn’t have it.
Acquiring information and passing it along is just a biological capacity.
There is no reason to think, then, that having culture is different from
exhibiting any other evolved trait, and evolutionary biology is sufficient to
explain such traits in other animals. So culture and social learning can be
reduced to the normal activity of natural selection on genes. Culture is
simply another strategy to enhance the fitness of the behaving organism
through learning. The net result of adopting a sociobiological position is
that humans are placed squarely in the same conceptual box as other
animals: No special dispensations are allowed.
People are just like
polecats, and evolutionary biology is all you need to explain them.
Sociobiologists, in effect, assume that any behavior which evolved as a
response to particular circumstances is governed by evolved psychological
or physiological mechanisms that produce the relevant conditional strategy
even for situations like playing the violin or making a soufflé.
They
suggest that inside anybody’s head there must be a rule of the general form
“In context X, do A; in context Y switch to B.” This rule is placed in the
mind by natural selection favoring generations of those animals that have
historically responded appropriately to both contexts X and Y.
People
tend
to
do
the
right
thing,
given
their
circumstances,

—— 34 · THE ELECTRIC MEME ——
because they were designed to make the right choice by everyday, run-of-
the-mill evolutionary processes.
What about that other cause of behavior: our exercise of “free will”
through decision-making? To the extent that human sociobiologists think
at all about the mind, it is conceived as a general-purpose, all-weather, all-
the-time information processor. It can rapidly learn about local conditions
and respond adaptively to them. The brain is expert at inducing the locally
optimal rule for behavior. The mind is not seen as the locus of adaptation;
rather the behavior is, for it is behavior that is selected, and the gene for
the behavior that is favored or not.
Basically the brain is an invisible
intermediary and can be ignored because it does its job perfectly,
translating the needs of the organism into the optimally correct behavioral
response. The presumption is simply that whatever is required, selection
will have produced it.
A considerable number of studies show that various human behaviors
do tend to maximize some measure of fitness, as exacted by the tenets of
sociobiology. Typically the empirical test is whether some characteristic
correlates well with the number of offspring an individual has, which is
taken as a good approximation of fitness. Richer people tend to have more
children, and better hunters attract more mates. Sociobiological research
has tended to concentrate on subsistence and resource exchange, on
parental investment strategies such as birth-spacing and gender differences
in parenting, and on reproductive strategies such as polygamy versus
monogamy. These are, of course, the kinds of behavior most closely tied
to biological fitness—the number of matings achieved, the number of
babies produced and so might be considered to evolve under more
stringent constraints than craft traditions or religious beliefs. Tests have
also typically occurred in foraging societies, where the problems of
survival might be considered to keep culture on a rather tight leash. When
sociobiologists turn their attention to “developed” Western countries, they
tend to be faced with conundrums like richer people having fewer children,
which reverses the pattern seen in “anthropological” populations. Their
lack of a true theory of culture means sociobiologists simply can’t address
the availability and use of contraceptives, for instance, and must begin to
mumble under their breath.
As we will see, “modern” societies put
considerable strain on other evolutionary social theories as well.

—— A Special Kind of Inheritance · 35 ——
EVOLUTIONARY PSYCHOLOGY
Evolutionary psychology, a more recent but highly successful approach to
explaining human behavior, adds a few wrinkles to the sociobiological
picture.
As the application of evolutionary theory to the domain of
psychology, it is only natural that this school would argue you need not
just biology, but psychology too, to explain human behavior.
From the perspective of evolutionary psychologists, their “home”
discipline, psychology, was in trouble in the 1980s: No general theory of
how the mind works was on the horizon. This made psychologists feel
their discipline wasn’t really scientific. After all, physics and biology had
their overarching paradigms. Evolutionary psychologists see themselves
as coming to the rescue of psychology by supplying such a paradigm.
Their solution: make psychology consistent with the other sciences by
founding it on evolution.
Evolution is, after all, the only scientifically
valid theory that can explain complexity arising from simplicity, and the
brain is the most complex object in the known universe.
To understand the evolutionary psychologists’ position, it’s worth
setting out briefly the intellectual context from which evolutionary
psychology arose.
In the first half of the twentieth century, the default
assumption in psychology was a largely implicit model of the brain as a
“general information processor.”
The brain was seen as the organic
equivalent of a computer and, like a computer, a machine capable of
learning anything and everything with equal facility. The only problem
was that this view turned out to equate poorly with some of the results
coming out of behavior labs. It turns out the supposedly equipotent brain
cannot learn some things, while other tasks come to it relatively easily.
John Garcia performed the classic experiment along this line in the
early 1960s. He was trying to induce taste aversions in rats by various
means.
His lab animals readily learned to associate illness (created by
radiation with X rays) with the consumption of particular foods, but
buzzers or lights presented prior to giving the foods never meant “Watch
out for this one!” to them, no matter how many times the experiments
were run. On the other hand, if Garcia electrically shocked the poor rats
after presenting them with a meal accompanied by lights and sounds, the
rats learned to associate the shocks with the disco effects, but not the

—— 36 · THE ELECTRIC MEME ——
foods.
Further, these learned aversions were quickly induced, and they
persisted, even if long intervals lapsed between trials.
This led to the
concept of “prepared fears”—fears the mind has been made ready for by
the species’ evolutionary history.
Blinking lights and buzzers simply
don’t happen in the rat’s natural environment, so rat brains can’t learn to
associate them with something “natural” like nausea, even when they
regularly recur in a lab environment. If such things weren’t part of the
creature’s evolutionary history, they couldn’t be relevant and hence aren’t
learnable. The results of such experiments could not be explained simply
in terms of stimulus-response or conditioned memory; rather “intervening
variables” (psychobabble for a mind) had to be invoked.
Such research eventually broke the back of behaviorism, until then the
dominant school of thought in psychology.
(An indication of this
dominance is the fact that Garcia couldn’t get his paper published for
years.)
Behaviorism asserted that there was no need to invoke internal
structure in the mind to explain behavior: Brains are simply trained by
experience, and all behavior is a learned response to environmental
conditions. After the death of behaviorism, psychology needed to take the
biology of organisms into account—and more particularly, to recognize
the evolutionary constraints under which brains worked.
Simultaneously during the 1960s, the “cognitive revolution” occurred.
This movement sought to import concepts like algorithm, representation,
search, and solution-space from computer science into psychology.
In
light of this history, evolutionary psychology can be seen as a concerted
effort to join two strains of thought current in the psychology of some
years earlier: the information processing view at the foundation of
cognitive science (which now dominates thinking in psychology) and the
incipient movement to recognize biological constraints on thinking (which
got shunted aside after some initial gains in the mid-twentieth century).
So to evolutionary psychologists, the brain computes; it just doesn’t
compute everything, nor with equal alacrity. At the same time, the brain
is, at bottom, an evolved organ for processing information.
Where a
sociobiologist sees the organism as a general-purpose learner capable of
performing any behavior necessary to maximize biological fitness, an
evolutionary psychologist sees a more restricted “adaptation-executer,”
limited in what it can learn by the innate structures in its brain.
In effect, evolutionary psychology dips the sociobiologist’s perspective

—— A Special Kind of Inheritance · 37 ——
on its head: It’s not behavior, but the decision-making prior to behavior
that matters more to the course of evolution. Evolutionary psychologists
emphasize that the incidentals of a particular situation—the conditions that
produce a behavioral response—cannot be the focus of selective forces.
Such circumstances never materialize in quite the same form again. But
the brain, which reliably reappears each generation, can serve as a
repeated target of selection.
So the attributes of the mind that are
responsible for producing successful behaviors can be rewarded.
Over
time, it is the brain that is expected to exhibit adaptations, not behavior.
We must look for evidence of the (past) workings of natural selection,
then, not in patterns of behavior, but in the brain.
A basic tenet of evolutionary psychology is that the human brain
consists of a set of evolved psychological mechanisms designed by natural
selection to solve adaptive problems that our ancestors faced recurrently
during our species’ evolutionary history.
This point is Garcia’s legacy.
Since almost all of this historic for humans was spent as hunter-gatherers
during the Plio-Pleistocene—an epoch spanning several million years and
ending only 10,000 years ago—the evolved structure of the human mind is
basically adapted to the way of life of prehistorical hunter-gatherers. An
important task for evolutionary psychologists is therefore to reconstruct
the ancestral environment in which human beings evolved by finding the
consistent selective pressures that influenced the evolution of our unique
mental adaptations.
For humans, this niche is small, isolated groups of
kin, organized into nuclear families; a savannah habitat in which women
gather and men hunt and sometimes raid other groups for additional
women and territory; and the universal, monogamous marriage of young
women to somewhat older men.
At least that’s what contemporary
foraging societies suggest it must have been like.
But perhaps instead
mother-offspring groups formed around valuable ecological resources,
while bands of males roved together through overlapping home ranges, as
seen in chimpanzee societies today. The problem is that it is difficult to
know what the relevant features of Plio-Pleistocene living arrangements
were because social groups don’t fossilize.
In any case, our Plio-Pleistocene ancestors would have faced an
enormous number of adaptive problems from basic survival skills, such as
acquiring appropriate foods and avoiding predators, to gaining reproductive
opportunities through the choice of appropriate mates, to protecting

—— 38 · THE ELECTRIC MEME ——
reproductive investments by proper parenting, to living with others.
Because these problem areas are diverse, it is unlikely that a successful
solution to one kind of problem could be transferred wholesale to another
domain.
Rather each type of problem would have selected for the
evolution of its own dedicated problem-solving mechanism.
This makes the mind “modularized.” Hundreds or even thousands of
mental modules may have evolved to solve the myriad adaptive problems
our ancestors must have faced.
These modular reasoning or learning
circuits are considered to have complex structures, so different neural
circuits are specialized for solving particular adaptive problems.
These
evolved psychological mechanisms are designed to accept only certain
kinds of input—say, stimuli looking like animals. These inputs are then
processed using specialized algorithms. In the case of animals, figuring
out the category in which to place the animal might run through a
branching decision structure mirroring the nested hierarchy into which
scientists have organized the “tree” of life-forms. The individual would
then check off say, “long,” “no legs,” and “head-with-hood-shape.” The
conclusion might be, say, “It’s a cobra!”
Finally these modules are
supplied with substantial innate knowledge about their proprietary domain,
so that prior experience is not necessary to output a response that has
historically proven adaptive for the organism in such situations.
This
means you can be a competent problem-solver soon after emerging from
the birth canal. This “rapid-response facility” comes in handy when you
need to quickly solve a puzzle, as when your processor concludes that a
cobra is present in the visual field and says, “Run!”
Many of these modules would have evolved to become what Steven
Pinker, the prominent linguist at MIT and chief band-leader for
evolutionary psychology, calls a mental “instinct.” Such modules develop
reliably in all normal human beings without effort or formal instruction,
and they can be applied without conscious awareness of their underlying
logic.
The processing of information by such instincts is effortless,
automatic, reliable, and fast precisely because we have all this complicated
machinery dedicated to the task.
These instincts are distinct from
whatever more general abilities we may have for processing information.
For example, recognizing the face of someone you know well seems
to be the easiest thing in the world. However, this accomplishment is
achieved thanks to a multistage sequence of unconscious mental events

—— A Special Kind of Inheritance · 39 ——
that occupy nearly one-third of the entire cortex.
Seeing appears easy
only because all the highly efficient machinery is hidden from view—that
is, from consciousness—because this makes it work even better. Having
to “think” about seeing would not be adaptive because it would add time
to that flight reflex after seeing a cobra.
It might also give you the
opportunity to wrongly second-guess what the world was trying to tell you
and therefore allow you to make a silly behavioral response—like trying to
make friends with the snake. Specialized kinds of reasoning suggestive of
isolated mental mechanisms at work have been demonstrated for
interpreting the behavior of objects (physical causality), living things
(objects moving on their own), animals (mobile living things), human
kinds (races), the beliefs and motivations of others (“theory of mind”), and
the detection of cheaters in social contracts. In sum, the mind is a “Swiss
Army knife” with many specific modules providing that quintessential
human characteristic, behavioral flexibility.
Since natural selection takes a long time to design complex adaptations
such as sophisticated cognitive mechanisms, the construction of mental
modules must be a very slow process of cumulative selection, typically
requiring hundreds of thousands of years. Any spontaneous mutations are
likely to harm the well-oiled functioning of the brain. Thus their genetic
basis must be universal and species-typical. This implies that everyone is
endowed
with
the
same
general
mental
structure
and
that
any
psychological differences between people must be primarily induced by
the idiosyncratic conditions in which an individual may have lived. Since
selection typically makes complex adaptations universal in a species,
evolved human psychology consists in a single, universal pan-human
design, which is the root of our unique human nature.
Thus evolutionary psychologists argue that just as evolution by natural
selection has created morphological adaptations that are universal among
humans—walking on two legs, opposable thumbs, a range of tooth types
to
handle
our
omnivorous
diet—so too
has
it
created
universal
psychological adaptations, ways of thinking that will typically sort out the
best answer for genes in a recurring kind of situation.
The goal of
evolutionary psychology, then, is to discover and describe the functioning
of our psychological adaptations, which are the proximate mechanisms
that cause our behavior. By providing an explanation of how the species-
typical mechanisms of the human mind function, evolutionary psychology

—— 40 · THE ELECTRIC MEME ——
will provide the discipline with its own set of universal laws, comparable
to those in the other high-status sciences.
This notion of psychological universals—a main tenet of evolutionary
psychology—allows psychologists to ignore variation in performance,
including that associated with cultural diversity.
At the same time, the
idea of “the psychic unity of humankind” appears easily refuted by
cultural
diversity
and
individual
differences.
But
evolutionary
psychologists do not claim that all human beings will behave in similar
fashion all the time everywhere or that all humans share the same manifest
attitudes and preferences.
Rather they claim that all humans share
common psychological mechanisms that generate different behaviors and
preferences in response to the unique developmental and historical
circumstances in which people find themselves.
So the variation we
observe between individuals and across cultures—from Peoria to Pongo-
Pongo—is not the result of different psychological adaptations, but a
universal set of rules the same “Darwinian algorithms”—found in bodies
at different stages of life and genders, responding in a contingent fashion
to novel inputs.
Recent technological improvements have produced significant changes
in the social and biological context of modern societies from those
characteristic of our ancestors.
An obvious example is medical
contraception.
The availability of the Pill and its “sister” technologies
allow women to artificially limit their fertility and so violate the biological
primary directive to go forth and multiply.
However, due to the
complexity of gene coding, we should expect inertia in the ability of the
brain
to
respond
to
such
changing
circumstances.
Evolutionary
psychologists suggest, then, that maladaptive behaviour, like using the
Pill, is caused by ancestral responses to modern conditions. We are all
trapped in “Stone Age” minds time-transported into modern conditions.
The result is a mismatch between the kinds of inputs the mind expects and
the actual inputs the techno-environment gives it, and hence maladaptive
behavioral responses.
It should be clear by now that what separates evolutionary psychology
from its colleague, sociobiology is the claim that not just structure, but
mental content too—the knowledge needed to function in society—can be
implanted by a history of natural selection into an infant’s mind: We are
born with much of what we need to know to function as competent
members of cultural groups. We just need the time, and occasion, to show
it.

—— A Special Kind of Inheritance · 41 ——
PUNCHING THE BUTTONS ON THE JUKEBOX OF LIFE
What social scientists call culture is just an illusion to sociobiologists. It is
like the shimmering you see at a distance on a hot road through the desert.
When you get closer to inspect the situation, the mirage disappears, and all
you are left with is the hard asphalt under your feet. Sociobiologists see
culture as just evolved behavioral responses, dressed up to look fancy by
social scientists.
Evolutionary psychologists, too, largely dismiss the importance of
culture—or at least what “the man in the street” calls culture: transmitted
information.
They distinguish between what they call “evoked” and
“epidemiological” culture.
Epidemiological culture is what textbook
definitions of culture refer to; it is the product of learning from others—
information spread through a population like a virus. Evoked culture, on
the other hand, is innate information that resides in human heads and is
expressed contingently, in different environments.
For evolutionary
psychologists, what appears to be acquired through the exchange of
information is mostly knowledge evoked by environmental stimuli from a
commonly inherited storehouse of wisdom. This storehouse can be found
in the head of each individual and is a gift of the genes, acquired by
picking only the best products off the shelf as hominids have made their
way through the shopping mall of prehistory.
Some of the most prominent evolutionary psychologists go further,
arguing that basically all of the knowledge you need has already been
placed
in
memory
by
evolution.
In
effect,
these
evolutionary
psychologists not only reject the importance of social transmission but also
belittle the importance of learning and experience more generally. They
argue that gene-based structures in the brain, with which individuals are
born, and which therefore precede individual experience, constitute a filter
by which all experience is evaluated, even in the womb.
At its most
extreme, the idea is that babies are born with most of the information they
need to get by as adults, except perhaps for the vocabulary they need to
plug into their language module.
Humans don’t learn things from the
environment but instead simply recall them from memory.
An image popular among evolutionary psychologists compares evoked
culture to a jukebox. The mental “records” of every musical style are in
every jukebox, but jukeboxes in Rio play samba while those in

—— 42 · THE ELECTRIC MEME ——
Havana play salsa and those in London play pop. This is because what
jukeboxes play is a function of which buttons are pushed by the people
hanging around the machine; it’s just that the buttons pushed in Rio are
different from the ones pushed in London.
Thus evolutionary psychologists believe that the importance of
information transmission is greatly exaggerated by most social scientists.
Is this a reasonable position for anyone to take in explaining culture? It
seems we have to answer the more fundamental question of whether
culture is transmitted before we can move on to the question we have set
ourselves: Does culture replicate?
The question before us, then, is whether evolutionary psychologists are
right in their belief that the evolution of cultural traits can be accounted for
by
heredity
without
replication.
For
them,
both
variation
and
commonalities in culture are explained by recourse to the same causal
machinery: the action of genes in producing big-brained creatures.
Cultural similarities arise not through the diffusion of good memes across
the vast distances that separate similar cultures; rather they are evoked in
response to shared environmental conditions. It is convergent evolution
based on shared experience, rather than the transportation of memes from
one locale to another. This is a denial of direct information transfer from
brain to brain.
Instead the causal arrows point back to genes and their
ability to produce clever organisms: us.
On the other hand, cultural
variation—although it results in different traits being expressed—is
produced by the same causal mechanism: responses to the environment.
In this case, it is just that ecological factors differ, and so therefore do
responses.
This does seem to be a powerful view of the human mind, which may
account for the growing popularity of evolutionary psychology and the
spate of recent books on the topic. But does it jibe with the facts? What
about the evidence?
There are, in fact, considerable problems with
ignoring the role of information transmission from individual to individual
in social life when you get down to cases.
First, the position taken by evolutionary psychologists requires a very
big jukebox to hold all the “records” that might be requested anywhere in
the world. But the brain is indeed big—big enough, say the evolutionary
psychologists, to hold everything you need.
However, even a rough
calculation would seem to rule out a strong version of the evoked culture
argument that everything is pre-stored in the brain.

—— A Special Kind of Inheritance · 43 ——
The human genome consists of about 1.5 billion nucleotide pairs, or
about 150 megabytes of information. Of this, we share about 97.5 percent
with chimpanzees, leaving 2.5 percent of our genome to code for the
innate differences between our closest living relative and ourselves.
Chimpanzees have some culture but much less than humans, so any
recently evolved culture that is innately stored would have to be packed
into this 2.5 percent of the genetic material. This equals about 3.75 x 107
base pairs. At 1 bit of information per base pair and 8 bits per byte, this
translates into about 4 megabytes of information available for the storage
of evoked culture in the human brain. But this is much less space than the
database of cultural information any competent individual must command
to function appropriately in any contemporary human society—much less
any society, in which humans have ever lived (remember, evolutionary
psychologists believe all the possible human lifestyles are stored in the
brain, not just the one popular in the society you happen to grow up in,
because you could be born anywhere).
To flesh out this argument, let’s assume that the assembled corpus of
descriptive work in ethnography is a good pleasure of the total amount of
cultural information the human species is capable of learning. There are
written records of this information—the results of more than a century of
work by professional cultural anthropologists as recorded in their
ethnographies, or anthropological studies of the ways of life in different
cultural groups.
The Human Relations Area Files (HRAF) is the main
repository for this stenographic information. The primary computer-based
database at HRAF consists of 1 million pages of information, with text
entries on .365 cultures coded for many features of life in each of these
groups. Just how much information does this represent? It takes around 5
bits to represent each letter, and if words average around 5 characters each,
we get 3 bytes per word. With about 700 words per page, this comes to a
grand total of around 2,000 megabytes of information in the HRAF
database.
These are summaries of the relevant ethnographies, and not
every society that has been studied by anthropologists appears in this
database. In effect, this is a considerable underestimate of the true amount
of information humans might have to carry around in their heads.
Of
course, not every culture varies on every dimension from every other one;
considerable similarity between cultures is also present in the database,
which means that not every variable for every culture needs to

—— 44 · THE ELECTRIC MEME ——
be stored separately.
Nevertheless the amount of information in this
database is three orders of magnitude greater than we have judged a single
human being has space to devote to this knowledge. It may be that genes
somehow compress the information that will actually be stored in the
brain, so there will always be some slop in this argument.
Yet it does
suggest that the evolutionary psychologists are overly hopeful in their
estimates of how much culture can be evoked by circumstances. In fact,
only a rather modest fraction of what we know can be present inside us at
birth. This conclusion seems commonsensical enough. After all, where
are the mental slots in the developing brain for recently coined slang,
Game Boys, or body piercing?
There are other reasons to think the jukebox model just won’t work.
The crucial claim of the jukebox model is that environmental variation
determines the pattern of cultural behaviors: Individuals are simply
reacting to the stimuli thrown at them by the ecological circumstances in
which they live. A number of studies have now been undertaken on the
vexed
question
of
whether
environmental
variation
explains
the
differences in human behavior between cultural groups, as presumed by
both sociobiology and evolutionary psychology.
We can even use
evolutionary psychologists’ own studies to test this proposition, because a
number of the best empirical projects in evolutionary psychology have
been cross-cultural and so seem good candidates.
These studies have
concentrated on the features that each gender looks for in a potential mate,
such as what shapes men prefer in the bodies of their women (in particular,
the ratio between the circumference of their waist and hips) and whether
one gender prefers faces in which the two sides are more or less
symmetrical. Each of these analyses finds a consistent, expected pattern
of variation within groups.
But often the between-group variation is at
least as significant as the trend studied by these researchers. This variation
remains unexplained because evolutionary psychologists concentrate on
universal patterns.
This tendency to ignore the problem of unexplained variation is shown
clearly by one of the best examples of a cross-cultural study in evolutionary
psychology, that conducted on homicide by the prominent evolutionary
psychologists Margo Wilson and Martin Daly.
This couple has worked
intensively for years to show that the pattern of who kills whom in a variety
of
countries
can
be
explained—as
a
kind
of
extreme
response

—— A Special Kind of Inheritance · 45 ——
to interpersonal conflict—by the principles of evolutionary psychology. In
particular, people should tend not to kill those individuals who might have
copies of their genes. For example, they show that children living with
stepparents (with whom they are not genetically related) are at a much
higher risk of being killed than genetic offspring. This is in accord with
expectation, since biological evolution should have favored those parental
psyches that do not squander care on non-relatives.
P It has also become clear through Daly and Wilson’s work that the
cross-cultural variation in homicide rates is truly staggering. Rates in the
United States, for example, are vastly higher than those in neighboring
Canada
(the
researchers’
home
country).
Environmental
and
socioeconomic variables—even many cultural variables such as language,
fashions, and media—overlap greatly in these two countries. So what’s
causing the big difference? Laws permitting gun ownership in the United
States don’t “legislate” their frequent use, and most killings are not
accidental. The variation in homicidal behavior between the two North
American countries requires another kind of explanation.
The United
States, it has often been said, is truly a “gun culture,” where organizations
like the National Rifle Association can acquire large memberships and
influence law-making. Wilson and Daly don’t acknowledge this kind of
explanation, but then their research goals lie in other quarters.
Nevertheless this example and many others strongly suggest that
culture is not just a straightforward response to stimuli presented by the
environment, as evolutionary psychologists suggest.
If this proposition
were true, the research program called “cultural ecology,” which was
founded on the idea of ecological determinism, would have been much
more successful than it proved to be. Human groups living side by side
exhibit marked differences in beliefs and practices, despite facing common
ecological problems.
Cultural variation is, in fact, both significant and independent of
environmental variation. And this is true not just of humans. The existence
of both ape and cetacean (dolphin and whale) cultures have been deduced by
a number of field biologists, based on patterns of behavioral variation in
time and space that cannot be explained by environmental or genetic factors
in these animal populations.
It therefore appears that evolutionary
psychology cannot explain such variation as the result of different buttons

—— 46 · THE ELECTRIC MEME ——
on the universal jukebox being pushed by ecological variables, even in its
own best studies. Instead cultural variation must be at least partly due to
historical inertia or purely random factors such as “national character,”
neither of which is reducible to ecological responses. So, as was the case
for sociobiology, evolutionary psychology falls short when it comes to
explaining intercultural variation, much less intracultural variation.
From this argument we can conclude that cultural heredity is, in fact,
due to the transmission of information between individuals in populations.
This suggests that cultural replication is still an option. It is thus apparent
that we need a legitimate theory of how cultural evolution occurs through
the social transmission of information. Our search for a good model of
cultural change must continue.
TRANSMISSION HAPPENS
Sociobiologists and evolutionary psychologists have one final riposte to
the contention that information transfer must be included in any reasonable
picture of human evolution.
They don’t deny that information is
exchanged between people.
Humans are a highly social species.
We
spend a lot of our time interacting with one another.
Transmission
happens, of course. But these schools argue that culture is mere veneer,
accounting only for relatively trivial traits such as styles of dress or taste in
music—things that have essentially no impact on biological evolution.
For this reason, evolutionists studying humans can ignore transmission and
its effects.
On the other hand, cultural anthropologists contend that humanity
cannot be understood except as a species embroiled in a unique way of life
totally dependent on the exchange of social information.
Culture, they
say, is something that surrounds us like the air we breathe, determining the
ways in which we interpret our every experience. We are born knowing
nothing important; all is imparted to us by the social group in which we
find ourselves. We must imbibe from this group the special habits, rituals,
and traditions that make us fully human, as members of these special
communities. What we pay attention to from among the welter of sensory
inputs is determined by what is marked as important by our social group.
We cannot even see the world around us except through the lens of
culture. And without the group, we die.

—— A Special Kind of Inheritance · 47 ——
Even from an evolutionary perspective, the question arises: Why
should we spend so much time in apparently fruitless activities like
gossiping if they aren’t significant? For example, doesn’t gossip function
to maintain social reputations that are important for getting or keeping a
mate, a business partner, or a new social role in the group—any of which
can have a significant impact on one’s biological reproduction?
And
aren’t “superficial” cultural traits like the kind of clothes you wear
markers of membership in some social clique, which determines access to
resources available only to the members of such cliques?
Perhaps no
feature of cultural life is trivial in a species with significant social
structuring.
So transmission happens, but does it matter?
Which of these views
about the importance of transmission is correct? There are strong grounds
for believing that cultural transmission is not just an occasional oddity but
an important component of everyday learning.
When some practice, technology, or idea is novel, it nearly always
spreads through a population in the same way. If you graph the proportion
of the population exhibiting the new trait in terms of time, this proportion
always begins at every low frequency (because it is an innovation, after
all). The rate at which people adopt the trait starts to increase slowly, then
faster, until a point of relative satiation is observed, after which time the
number of new adopters dwindles, causing the adoption curve to bend
over. At some point, no new cases occur (perhaps because everyone is
already doing it), and the population curve flattens out or even goes back
down a bit (because sometimes a number of people go back to the “old
way” of doing things). This “S-shaped” cumulative adoption curve is a
very robust finding from several thousand studies on the diffusion of
innovations.
The types of traits following this pattern can be quite
different and include the adoption of hybrid corn among Iowa farmers,
bottle-feeding
practices
among impoverished
Third
Worlders, new
governance practices among Fortune 500 companies, chemical fertilizers
among small-scale farmers, novel approaches to mathematics training (the
“new math”) in secondary schools, and the practice of not smoking among
Americans.
Recent formal models of the psychology underlying this diffusion
process have proven an important point: Reproducing the S-shaped pattern
requires that people not base their adoption of novel traits strictly on

—— 48 · THE ELECTRIC MEME ——
trial-and-error experience of their own.
Direct learning by individuals
from the environment, based on cost-benefit analysis, does not generally
produce the characteristic S-shaped curves that dominate the empirical
literature. Just observing one’s neighbor engaging in the relevant cultural
practice and copying it if it makes sense (a purely rational form of
adoption) cannot explain how new traits spread over time through a
population. Instead an S-shaped curve is created only if individuals prefer
to copy their neighbors (“keep up with the Joneses”). Only if people are
not just making judgments for themselves about the trait will the adoption
process have a social dynamic—speeding up once enough adopters are
around to serve as models for others. Only then will changes in behavior
or belief have the correct temporal dynamics.
This means individuals
must adopt the trait regardless of its payoff to them—in effect, there must
be a psychological bias toward the adoption of that trait. Typically this
bias could favor traits exhibited by prestigious individuals or by the
majority of those observed from the individual’s social group (a process
called “conformist transmission”). But such a bias must be in place, and
be used by many people, for this period of very rapid adoption to take
place. The fact that novelties are a ubiquitous component of any culture—
just think of the constant turnover of fads and technology-inspired
behaviors and ideas—suggests that cultural transmission is an important
influence on how people in a group come to share their beliefs and values.
The implication of these models is that the social transmission of
information is important indeed and should not be cast aside as a trivial
footnote to evolution. It is to the description of approaches that begin with
this admission that we now turn.
CULTURAL SELECTIONISM
The acknowledgment that transmission is important does not immediately
identify just one school of thought, because a variety of theoretical
perspectives exists for dealing with transmission processes.
Leading
contenders for the job of explaining transmission include mathematical
communication theory, as developed at the Bell telephone labs by Claude
Shannon and his colleagues, and cybernetics, the brainchild of Norbert
Wiener and others. Both of these theories are about the process of getting

—— A Special Kind of Inheritance · 49 ——
information from one place to another. However, in the course of being
transmitted, cultural information is typically also reproduced rather than
merely being passed along: Brains cannot transmit a belief without
learning it first; a copy is thus left behind. The transmission of cultural
beliefs therefore not only involves the manifestation of information in
physical form (for example, as sound waves in speech) but also requires
the duplication of the information packet itself. In this respect, it is akin to
biological reproduction.
A well-developed conceptual framework for this task is ready-made:
epidemiology, the biological study of how pathogens disperse through
populations.
The question is how to extend this paradigm to the
explanation of culture. From an epidemiological perspective, the central
question for cultural evolution is why certain kinds of traits, among all of
those that individual creativity tosses up, spread rapidly to others,
becoming endemic in a population (and hence becoming “cultural”), while
others remain idiosyncratic, characteristic only of scattered individuals.
The focus then is determining what qualities cultural beliefs must exhibit
to succeed in reappearing across generations, and what factors determine
that tiny fraction of ideas or beliefs that come to dominate, through the
networks of social communication. “Informational epidemiology” is thus
meant to explain the distribution of beliefs in a population as the
cumulative result of a history of diffusion events.
What we have here, in effect, is the cultural trait seen as a virus, an
analogy already seen in the memetics literature.
As I’ve argued, this
analogy is weaker than one that treats cultural evolution as analogous to
genetic evolution. The problem with this alternative is that we don’t know
whether a replicator-based approach to culture is appropriate ether.
There is a happy compromise position, however.
A group of
contemporary theorists seeks to formalize an evolutionary perspective on
culture through the adaptation of population genetic models to the
peculiarities of cultural transmission.
Although a generally accepted
rubric for this group has not reached wide agreement, a good description is
“cultural selectionism.” This is appropriate because cultural selectionists
require only that cultural evolution rely on what John Maynard Smith has
called
“units
of
selection”—entities
such
as
organisms
with
the
characteristics of multiplication and heredity. This is their main sticking

—— 50 · THE ELECTRIC MEME ——
point with memetics (discussed next), which argues there is a cultural
replicator. Replicators are an example of what Maynard Smith would call
a “unit of evolution”; they differ from units of selection in being capable
of variability as well.
A moniker emphasizing selection also distinguishes this modern school
of evolutionists from earlier applications of evolutionary theory to social
phenomena, which tended to see the long history of life on Earth as a
forced march up the ladder of improvement reaching toward Heaven,
through higher and higher manifestations of God’s Great Design.
This
was a form of manifest destiny applied to the biological realm, which
ignored the possibility of reversals in complexity (if not of fortunes)
within evolutionary lineages, such as the loss of eyes when organisms
move to an underground lifestyle.
As a result, the earlier thinkers who
applied Darwinian ideas to the sphere of human social life (such as the
Victorian sociologist and philosopher Herbert Spencer) were inclined to
think of all evolutionary change in terms of progress, a trend that
culminated in the much-derided Social Darwinism of the 1920s. Selection
is not a process that heads toward any predetermined goal over the long
term but rather reflects local conditions at each moment.
Cultural selectionists define culture as information capable of affecting
individuals’ phenotypes that they acquire from others by teaching or
imitation. This definition obviously emphasizes transmission, as I have
argued it should, and through a particular mechanism of heredity: Social
learning.
At the population level, culture can be considered a pool of
information that becomes modified as people learn new things. If culture
must be learned, and learned anew each generation, then cultural
knowledge must obviously be transmitted to people after they are born.
Presumably transmission is never perfect, so variation between the cultural
repertoires acquired by individuals of a given generation can arise. And
since only a part of a group’s cultural knowledge can be housed in any
given mind (our mental “jukeboxes” are too small to hold everything,
remember), culture is necessarily distributed across individuals.
This
variation in knowledge is the basis on which various kinds of selection
processes, ranging from the physical to the psychological, can operate.
Since culture exhibits, by this definition, the three characteristics required
for evolution through selection—variation, heredity, and selection—cultural
evolution
can
be
analyzed
using
Darwinian
methods.
This

—— A Special Kind of Inheritance · 51 ——
makes culture a part of biology for cultural selectionists. Culture is the
quintessential human adaptation, which a major part of the human brain
has evolved to express.
What distinguishes cultural reductionism from
sociobiology and evolutionary psychology, then, is its emphasis on
traditions of information learned through social transmission, supported by
social learning abilities that have evolved to support such traditions. The
basic claim is that to explain variation in the behaviors and beliefs of
humans, you need to add culture to the standard equation of genes plus
environment.
The formal approach associated with this school (based, as noted, on
population genetics) is generally called “gene-culture coevolutionary
modeling.” These models emphasize the novelties that must be introduced
in the standard genetic machinery to account for the unique features of
cultural as opposed to genetic inheritance. Examples of these new modes
of transmission include multiple parentage (you can learn aspects of some
cultural trait from a variety of people), transmission within peer groups
(rather than inter-generationally), and psychological tendencies to acquire
particular values of a given cultural trait (rather than the 50/50 chance of
getting either the mother’s or the father’s type, as in the case of genes).
Thus we might have a model in which an offspring has varying
probabilities of adopting Protestantism from his mother, Catholicism from
his father, or a New Age religion from the culture at large. The models’
job is to keep track of how the relative frequencies of alternative values of
the “religion” trait change over time in a group. Cultural selectionists also
make much of the fact that the standard distinction in genetics between
genotypes (as replicators) and phenotypes (the qualities of organisms) has
a cultural equivalent: Ideas are the replicator (“blueprint”) of culture, and
behavior its expression, or phenotype.
Mental planning, as the
intermediate step between an idea and its manifestation, can also be treated
as something like its biological analogue: the development of an organism
from its genetic sources. And just as in genetic inheritance, variation is
introduced through errors in the transmission of information, leading to the
diversification of cultural forms.
Cultural selectionists emphasize “population thinking”—the idea, first
articulated by the eminent biologist Ernst Mayr of Harvard University, that
the Darwinian “revolution” was more about the transmission of a pool of
information
through
time
than
about
particular
mechanisms

—— 52 · THE ELECTRIC MEME ——
for that transmission, such as natural selection. In the reductionist view,
evolutionary theory “is [simply] an accounting system for keeping track of
information as it is propagated forward through time by whatever means,
carried by whatever vehicles carry it, interacting with the world and each
other in whatever ways.”
This is a very general formulation of the
evolutionary process, designed to make it applicable to culture, whatever
mechanism turns out to cause change in cultural traits over time.
The
focus on population thinking serves, in effect, as the selectionists’ mode of
generalization. This degree of abstraction is taken as a virtue, because it
allows a multitude of models to be used in the face of ignorance about
what’s really happening inside the explanatory black box.
Cultural
selectionists want to be agnostic about the process underlying cultural
evolution.
What can be treated as a population in the case of culture? One good
answer is the set of ideas in people’s heads that are acquired from others.
So cultural selectionists hold to the standard interpretation of culture as
being something essentially cognitive in nature.
Culture is just the
population-level consequence of the evolved psychological ability to
imitate.
As with evolutionary psychology, selectionists see individual
cognitive abilities as the locus of selection.
Selective forces in cultural
evolution are psychological biases, which lead to a preference for
Protestantism rather than Catholicism, for example. So cultural selection
is a process analogous to natural selection, but it works on variation in
cultural traits rather than biological ones. What selectionists emphasize
(in contrast to evolutionary psychology) is that in both cases the type of
trait favored by the selective force will increase in frequency in the
population. It’s just that the location of the selective force happens to be
different: with culture, it’s in the head as well as in the environment. So
cultural selection is a Darwinian process by which particular traits
increase or decrease in frequency due to their differential probability of
being adopted by individuals. In contrast, natural selection is specific to
the differential survival or fertility of individuals expressing different
types of traits.
Of course, natural selection can also work on cultural variation. If a
socially learned idea causes you to jump off a cliff, then the idea will die
right along with you—and never get learned by anyone else.
That’s an
example of natural selection on a host due to a behavior caused by a cultural
trait.
One consequence is that the cultural trait has also compromised

—— A Special Kind of Inheritance · 53 ——
its own likelihood of further transmission, so this is also an example of
natural selection acting on the reproduction of a cultural trait. This can
happen because the trait causes its host to engage in some behavior that
reduces the host’s longevity (as in our example), or because it reduces the
likelihood that its host will pass that trait on to others—for example, a
belief in the virtue of celibacy can leave someone with no offspring to be
impressed by that virtue. The fate of cultural variants therefore depends
both on mental biases (which influence whether they get adopted in the
first place) and natural selection on people as “hosts” of that cultural
variation. It’s a question of a trait getting past psychological filters, and of
particular host organisms surviving to spread that trait further.
In an effort to keep things simple, the typical practice among gene-
culture coevolutionary modelers is to focus on the dynamics of cultural
traits alone, unless it’s important to track the relationships between these
traits and genes.
If cultural inheritance is completely independent of
genetic inheritance, then cultural evolution can be modeled separately, as a
process happening by itself.
These models then trace changes in the
frequency of cultural traits in a population through cycles of social
interaction (leading to the possible exchange of cultural information) and
differential social transmission of the trait (cultural selection).
On the other hand, there are situations in which an individual’s
propensity to adopt a particular cultural trait depends on his or her genetic
makeup. In this case, there is an interaction that can be included in the
model as a parameter which determines the probability that an individual
will acquire a particular trait according to which genes they have.
This kind of interaction between genetic and cultural inheritance is more
likely to occur at longer temporal scales. A good example is the evolution of
lactose intolerance. Some people cannot properly digest dairy products because
they lack an enzyme (lactase) for processing the complex sugar lactose. By
describing individuals in terms of the presence or absence of the lactase-
producing gene and a culturally acquired tendency to drink milk or not, we can
model how milk consumption coevolved with the gene allowing individuals to
absorb lactose. The analysis of this model suggests that the genetic variant for
absorbing this sugar can reach a high frequently only if the children of milk
drinkers themselves drink milk. There is even a broad range of conditions under
which the lactase-producing gene cannot spread, despite conferring a

—— 54 · THE ELECTRIC MEME ——
significant biological advantage on individuals, in the absence of this
cultural preference. So this example demonstrates that genetic change can
strongly depend on cultural preferences. It isn’t just a one-way road from
genes to culture!
A mechanism for producing much quicker change in cultural traits than
interaction with genes is, of course, learning.
Learning is a means by
which information about local conditions can be acquired through sense
organs, allowing organisms to adjust their behavior on a temporal scale
faster than is possible through the induction of changes in “hardwired”
routines through genetic mutations between generations.
In particular,
social learning—acquiring information from the other individuals in your
environment—has two major advantages as a mechanism for the
acquisition of information. First, you can avoid the costs of going out and
engaging in potentially dangerous trial-and-error learning for yourself, like
figuring out the best way to kill a large animal for supper. Instead you can
just ask somebody or, better yet, watch them try it first. Second, you can
selectively adopt information from only those people with little interest in
deceiving you (such as your parents, with whom your genetic interests
overlap significantly). This helps to avoid engaging in behaviors that run
counter to your better interests and ensures that what you learn is “good”
data about the way the world works.
(Just as in genetics there is the
danger that mutations or lethal recessive genes will emerge to cause
crippling or fatal diseases, so too the danger of copying other people’s
cultural information is that it may be out of date or inappropriate to one’s
own circumstances.)
Even evolutionary psychologists, despite their general disdain for
transmission, acknowledge the benefits of social learning. Steven Pinker,
for instance, sees culture as
a means of exchanging knowledge.
It multiplies the benefit of knowledge, which
can not only be used but exchanged for others resources, and lowers its cost,
because knowledge can be acquired from the hard-won wisdom, strokes of genius,
and trial and error of others rather than only from risky exploration and
experimentation.
Learning socially, once the ability has evolved, may represent a more
efficient means of acquiring important information about the local

—— A Special Kind of Inheritance · 55 ——
environment than through direct interaction with that environment.
Selectionist models have indicated that this is especially true if aspects of
the environment important for survival and reproduction change very
rapidly, or if individuals tend to migrate to ecological niches different
from those in which their parents lived. In these conditions, the degree of
reliance on personal experience through individual learning from the
environment should be high.
On the other hand, if the resemblance
between parental and offspring environments is good, due either to low
mobility or to little change in the ecological context of life, then
individuals can safely rely on the information acquired by others as being
relevant and appropriate. Doing a bit of social learning should be favored
because it will still produce the right kinds of responses without the cost of
trial and error.
So cultural evolution is embedded in, and constrained by, genetically
evolved psychological propensities.
At the same time, these biases can
produce variability in cultural traits that is not directly tied to ecological
differences. Universal psychological biases working on slight differences
in initial trait values can lead groups to quite disparate cultural equilibria
over time, thanks to dynamics internal to the cultural realm. For example,
selectionist models show that cultural “badges,” such as distinct dialects,
styles of dress, and forms of religious practice, can erect barriers to the
free flow of ideas in separate environments, like, say, Germany and
France.
These traits can be completely inconsequential from a genetic
viewpoint (that is, have no direct effect on reproduction or survival) but
nevertheless evolve as ways of identifying membership in different
cultural groups.
Ethnic groups thus form the cultural analogues of
reproductively isolated species. The main difference is that the barriers to
transmission are more permeable and the rate of cultural evolution much
higher than in the case of genes.
As suggested above, evolutionary
psychology has a difficult time explaining stylistic differences between
groups in things like aesthetic productions (like the American Hollywood
versus Indian Bollywood styles of motion picture-making) based solely on
universal psychological propensities and their survival value, even when
ecological conditions vary.
Cultural selectionism holds that the differences between genetic and
cultural
transmission
introduce
important
changes
in
evolutionary
dynamics. In particular, it can produce different kinds of outcomes from

—— 56 · THE ELECTRIC MEME ——
those a purely genetic system would deliver, because information acquired
socially constitutes a second, non-genetic system of inheritance.
Selectionists point out, for instance, that cultural information can be
transmitted in ways impossible for genes: Parents can pass their genes on
to their offspring, but cultural ideas can flow in the opposite direction as
well—from offspring to parents, for example. Certainly kids make their
parents aware of new fads by pestering them to buy the associated
paraphernalia—for example, toys tied to the latest movies.
Further,
individually learned skills or ideas can subsequently be transmitted to
others, making culture a system for the inheritance of acquired variation.
Evolutionary dynamics become more complicated with culture, thanks
to new transmission-based evolutionary “forces” based on social learning
abilities.
And differences in the spread and diffusion of cultural
information account for the novel dynamic properties of cultural evolution,
such as the fact that it can produce much more rapid change than genetic
evolution, or keep maladaptive cultural practices around even in the face
of natural selection against the individuals who engage in such practices.
This
is
true
even
though
the
capacity
for
culture,
including
psychological abilities for social learning, may itself have been the product
of natural selection acting on genes in an earlier time. In perhaps the most
famous book on cultural selectionism, Culture and the Evolutionary
Process, Robert Boyd and Peter Richerson, both biologists at the
University of California, showed that a reliance on social learning, and all
that entails, can arise through standard evolutionary processes, with this
psychological ability then transforming the world through new dynamics
of information transfer.
This purely biological theory for the origin of
cultural inheritance through the action of natural selection effectively
defeats an important claim of sociobiology: All human activity cannot be
reduced to biological fitness maximization by natural selection acting
directly on genes.
So genetically non-adaptive cultural evolution is possible and is more
likely when the differences between genetic and cultural inheritance are
most marked. Indeed one of the earliest findings to emerge from cultural
selectionist analyses was that a variety of mechanisms exist through which
traits with high cultural fitness can increase in frequency despite being
maladaptive from a genetic perspective.
This is not something that

—— A Special Kind of Inheritance · 57 ——
adaptationist positions like sociobiology and evolutionary psychology
would predict.
So the selectionist framework embraces the full range of possibilities
for the evolution of cultural traits: Cultural traits may influence the fitness
of genes (as in the lactase example above), or genes may determine what
direction cultural traits will move in (as when a sect dies out because its
rule of celibacy makes it unable to attract recruits), or genes and cultural
traits may each go their own way quite independently (when a cultural trait
has no biological consequences, it can drift through minds and populations
at whim). There is no overarching answer to the question of who benefits
more, genes or culture; rather the answer must be sought for each case
independently.
The cultural selectionists’ strongest claim is that cultural evolution doesn’t
necessarily depend on replicators.
For them, entities with fidelity,
longevity, and fecundity (the ability to multiply)—the triad of features that
good replicators exhibit—do not necessarily populate the cultural world.
Cultural selectionism admits there is a second inheritance system
operating in human society, that of culture. At the same time, however,
proponents of this view argue that culture need not reflect the activity of a
replicator operating at the social level to produce this cultural heritability.
How can cultural evolution be called a “dual inheritance” system (by Boyd
and Richerson in their book Culture and the Evolutionary Process) when
it doesn’t have dual replicators? This is possible for exactly the reason we
identified earlier: Evolution depends on inheritance but not replication.
Cultural selectionists argue that all we require for the cumulative evolution
of complexity in culture is a system for maintaining heritable variation—
that is, for a correlation between generations in phenotypic values. They
point out that the failure of memetics to come up with a reasonable theory
of meme replication has been taken to herald the death of cultural
evolutionary theory.
But this need not be the case, for a Darwinian
approach to culture can survive the death of the meme. It can live on in
the form of other mechanisms of inheritance.
What might these mechanisms look like? For one thing, in the cultural
reductionist view, cultural inheritance need not depend on “atoms” of
information like memes being faithfully duplicated in each generation

—— 58 · THE ELECTRIC MEME ——
of offspring.
Further, selectionists argue there need be no cultural
communication chains tied together by replication events.
Instead the
same traits may continually reappear through other causal routes. Some
kind
of
gene-environment
interaction—like
the
evolutionary
psychologists’ evoked culture—may be responsible. Alternatively, many
organisms modify their environments in significant ways (the classic
beaver dam example springs to mind). These modifications, sometimes in
the form of artifacts, can serve as educators for future generations. These
artifacts persist in the environment, so people in the next generation can
learn directly from them.
Information can thus be inherited by each individual in the form of
structures in their own brain or through artifacts left behind by their
ancestors. In either case, there is no direct mind-to-mind link, no cultural
replication.
But that’s okay with the cultural selectionists because the
conditions of their population genetics models are still satisfied: There is a
cross-generational correlation in cultural traits, even if the correlation is
not due to the operation of a replicator at the cultural level. These are still
cases in which culture evolves, because evolution is not dependent on the
existence of a replicator working at the individual level, diffusing itself
through the population.
All the replication producing intergenerational
correlations may be happening through genes, or even thanks to the
inheritance of aspects of the environment. Memes may not play a role at
all.
WHO’S IN CHARGE?
Major schools of thought deny that culture replicates. Some even reject
the apparently commonsensical impression that most cultural knowledge is
socially transmitted.
But denying the importance of transmission is
illogical because cultural variation does not mirror ecological or
environmental variation. Instead culture appears to have a dynamic of its
own, due to histories of information transmission independent of the
genetic channel.
Cultural selectionism, which recognizes this central fact, thus has
considerable strengths and seems a viable explanation of our target
phenomenon: culture. It certainly seems to avoid the pitfalls we identified
with sociobiology and evolutionary psychology.
But there is a second

—— A Special Kind of Inheritance · 59 ——
school of evolutionary thought that also emphasizes the transmission of
information: memetics. This leaves us with two candidates still standing
for the office of Culture Explainer.
Both memetics and cultural
selectionism
admit
that
transmitted
information
is
central
to
the
phenomenon we call culture.
Where these two groups differ is on the
mechanism by which culture is reproduced.
Selectionism requires only
heredity, while memetics requires replication.
This makes memetics a
special brand of cultural reductionism.
This contretemps between cultural selectionism and memetics makes it
clear that earlier views on memetics have been framed inappropriately.
And asking the right question is the first and perhaps most important step
to making progress in our understanding. But if we look at the question
that each of the major defenders of memes finds to be the most
fundamental, we find they do not identify the issue that appears crucial
from our review of the situation.
A major proponent of memetics these days is Susan Blackmore. The
central issue in her book The Meme Machine is stated as follows: “Imagine
a world full of brains, and far more memes than can possibly find homes.
Which memes are more likely to find a safe home and get passed on
again?” This question not only presumes the existence of memes but also
is concerned solely with selection among them. In essence, her question is
which memes benefit from the biases people might have about learning
them? Because Blackmore takes so much about memes for granted, she
feels it is legitimate to move on to this secondary topic. Here we will take
nothing for granted and start from ground zero.
Dan Dennett, author of Darwin’s Dangerous Idea, is perhaps the best-
known contemporary defender of memes. When he talks about memes, he
perennially asks the question “cui bono?”” (Latin for “who benefits?”),
implying that memes rather than genes can be the winner when it comes to
contests involving cultural traits.
This question is taken from Richard
Dawkins, who originally asked it in the context of parasitism.
Dennett
even adopts the same example to illustrate the basic principle: the story of
the ant and the “brainworm” fluke. The parasitic fluke (a small worm)
needs to get into a sheep to reproduce and uses the ant as an intermediary
host.
It infects the ant’s brain, induces the ant to climb a grass stalk
(which it otherwise wouldn’t do), where the ant, and hence the fluke, are
more likely to be gobbled up by a passing sheep. Such a behavior is quite

—— 60 · THE ELECTRIC MEME ——
stupid from the perspective of the ant, because natural selection is unlikely
to favor ant genes that regularly leave ants dead. So who can be benefiting
from this behavior, if not the ant?
The answer rapidly comes back: a
parasite that short-circuits the ant’s brain to make it do counterproductive
things.
So far, so good. Parasites are biological entities like their hosts. Many
of the same genes are in both hosts and parasites, so the battle is one
between genes. Even if these genes happen to be located in organisms of
different species, they are still part of a single system of replicating.
The problem is that Dennett takes his “who benefits?” question and
applies it to a contest between different types of replicator—memes versus
genes. But this is not the same situation as the ant and the fluke, where
only genes are involved. What genes can contend among themselves is
not necessarily the same as what genes and memes can fight over. Copies
of the same gene in different bodies typically do not compete over control
of one of those bodies.
And if genes are in organisms from distinct
species, they don’t even compete for the same set of environmental
resources, because species tend to inhabit different ecological niches. For
example, despite their considerable overall similarity, each of the many
different species of finch on the Galápagos Islands has a different diet,
thanks to adaptations in the shape of their beaks.
Some types of
competition are thus excluded to genes. But a meme and a gene can clash
over just about anything, including the direction of a particular behavior,
even in the very same organism, because they are not part of the same
replicator system.
Memes and genes may also have varying stakes in their various
rivalries.
For example, memes depend on behaviors such as social
communication to get themselves transmitted. So passing on a particular
bit of gossip may mean life or death to a meme.
On the other hand,
gossiping is a fleeting moment of idle behavior having little consequence
to the genes inside the gossiper.
Genes simply want to keep their
rumormonger alive and well, and the latest slander about Mary’s infidelity
isn’t going to influence their individual’s health and well-being very
much. This means that memes will invest more of their energy than genes
to ensure they win the “to gossip or not to gossip” fight.
This doesn’t imply that the meme will always succeed, however.
Winning a military battle may matter more to the Abbedabbies than the

—— A Special Kind of Inheritance · 61 ——
Zoobedoobies, but if the Abbedabbies are stuck with sticks while the
Zoobedoobies have guns, then “mattering” doesn’t matter much: The
Zoobedoobies will win, even if winning is only of marginal importance to
them. Similarly, the effective power of these dueling replicators (memes
and genes) depends on their relative strength, their “technologies” of
control over the behavior of the organism that hosts them. The brain must
decide what the organism is to do next: Should it be the gossiping option
that memes hope the brain will find appealing, or the foraging for food
alternative that the genes would prefer? On the other hand, both memes
and genes might benefit from that single behavior, or both might suffer
from it.
Which replicator proves more persuasive at the moment of
decision is not the same as Dennett’s question of “who benefits?”
The
outcome of a conflict alone cannot tell you whom the adaptation has
evolved for. This means that, once we switch to a question of coevolution
between different replicators, Dennett’s question doesn’t pick out the
crucial factor for determining what course evolution is following.
Dennett’s perspective also implies that maladaptation must be due to
the activity of a parasitic meme. What’s a maladaptation? It’s a design
feature or behavior of an organism that makes no sense from the point of
view of that organism’s genes.
Cases of maladaptation are certainly a
major fund of information about relationships between parasites and hosts,
as in the case of the ant and the fluke recounted above. Dennett’s question
implies that you need only to look for memes when someone is doing
something maladaptive, because it must mean a parasitic replicator with
different interests is at work.
But Dennett’s perspective is too narrow
here.
Why? First, some parasites don’t inflict penalties on their hosts.
The bacteria in our gut are also parasites, but their relationship with us is
one of mutual benefit, or symbiosis: We get to eat foods we couldn’t
otherwise digest, while the bacteria get a nice home and a constant food
supply.
If biological parasites don’t necessarily manifest themselves
through maladaptations, cultural parasites such as memetic ideas certainly
need not. A meme may be in the driver’s seat but nevertheless produce an
outcome that favors the host. In fact, favorable outcomes should happen
whenever the meme’s interest coincides with that of the person it uses as
an instrument. We may find that memes often foster the standard goals of
genes, like the maintenance and reproduction of the host organism.

—— 62 · THE ELECTRIC MEME ——
Second, some maladaptive behaviors will prove to be the result of
conflict between the genes within an organism or between a gene’s
expectations and the creature’s current conditions. These would constitute
maladaptations in which memes play no role.
For example, pregnant
women may reject a variety of foods because they are novel or exotic,
even though their caloric requirements have ballooned (along with their
bellies), due to an evolved fear of ingesting unfamiliar substances. So the
interests of genes and memes are likely to converge in some respects but
diverge in others.
The presence of maladaptive behaviours will not be
simply related to the activity of memes.
The more appropriate question to ask, one which will be central to this
book, is cui impello? Who drives the cultural evolutionary process or sets
it in motion? In other words, Who’s in control? It’s not who benefits but
whose interest is being expressed that needs to be asked when you’re
attempting to explain what happens in a coevolutionary system, as when
the dynamics of genes and memes interact in ways that determine what
happens to either of them. It is a question of causes, not consequences, of
who is responsible, not who is rewarded.
How might such a difference in perspective manifest itself? If genes
are in control, then the duplication of cultural information takes place
passively, at the behest of gene-produced brains.
If the memetic
perspective is correct, then at least some bits of cultural information have
the ability to influence the probability of their own duplication. If memes
are causes, then they can bias the course and tempo of evolution. If they
are the mere products of someone else’s activity, they cannot.
Control
makes all the difference. It also makes the field of memetics essentially
about power: the relative power of replicators dueling for control over the
determination of our thoughts and behavior.
The crucial issue that
distinguishes cultural selectionism from memetics is how cultural
reproduction is achieved, and whether this involves the special kind of
thing called a replicator. The French poet Paul Valéry claims that “poetry
can be recognized by its ability to get us to reproduce it in its own form: it
stimulates us to reconstruct it identically.”
Is culture like poetry in
requiring replication? Whether information evolved from being passively
reproduced to actively replicating during social communication thereby
becomes the deciding issue for whether memetics should be the favored
evolutionary approach to culture.

—— A Special Kind of Inheritance · 63 ——
At this point, we have come full circle, to the question we raised at the
beginning: Does replication occur in the context of communication? Now
we can reframe the question as follows: Is it to be heredity or replication in
cultural evolution?
Is Prusiner correct about the need to invoke a new
kind of replicator to explain the case?
Shall we vote for cultural
selectionism or memetics? These are all questions that dance around each
other, as somewhat different ways of looking at the same basic issue: How
are we to account for communicative events that spread cultural
information though social groups? Are genes enough or do we add memes
to the mix: Cui impello?
The identification of new replicators like memes would fundamentally
change how we view the world.
Whole new arenas of evolutionary
dynamics open up if a novel replicator is at work. And consider what it
would mean for our view of communication: Are we in control of what we
say and do, or are we victims of brain parasites? Who, or what, benefits
from our own thoughts?
The implications of the meme question for
human agency and free will are profound indeed.
RESCUING MEMES
How then can we make any further progress on our quest to find memes?
First, memetics will prove to be the best explanation for culture if it leads
to novel predictions that are proven to be correct. The very specific claim
that cultural similarity is due to replication is a hypothesis from which
novel, testable predictions can be made. As yet, however, memeticists can
point to very few, if any, established or confirmed results unique to their
explanatory approach.
But this situation could change if the model of
meme replication I provide later proves scientifically fruitful.
Second, memetics would be the best explanation of culture if it could
be shown to account for a wider variety of phenomena than other theories
of culture, even though that explanation involved a somewhat larger
number of principles. This would render moot the parsimony argument—
the criticism that memetics is just too complicated to be right. The view of
memes I develop in this book has this quality because it also has
implications for psychology and communication.
Third, memetics would be the best explanation of culture if cultural

—— 64 · THE ELECTRIC MEME ——
entities having the characteristics of replicators could be shown to exist.
Such
a
demonstration
would
dominate
any
other
consideration.
Unfortunately this knock-’em-dead argument seems the least likely
prospect at present, simply because we don’t currently have a testable
model of what a meme might be.
Still, we can ask whether things like memes are really plausible. Could
there be something acting independently of genes that can influence the
likelihood
they
will
be
duplicated,
operating
through
social
communication? If we find such a possibility is not very likely, then we
have effectively answered our question in the negative: Memes probably
don’t exist. In fact, as we will see, finding a model of communication that
is compatible with a replication event is not easy. However, it is possible,
and proves to have a number of important repercussions of its own,
although it requires some new thinking about how communication occurs.
Memes can be rescued from the Airy-Fairy-Land in which they now
exist. Indeed I argue that they have a very particular kind of real-world
existence. This conception of memes also happens to be at variance with
previous views, as it probably has to be to open up new avenues for
exploration. I can’t prove my claims here, since they are empirical ones
that will require support from actual investigation.
But, as the Chinese
say, the longest journey begins with but a single step.
The task at hand is to clarify what a meme might be and how it works.
If we can determine how memes must perform the crucial evolutionary
tasks of replicating, mutating, and being selected, we will have struck
gold.
Then we can really begin to harness the power of memes and
perhaps take back control over our own thought processes.

Chapter Three
ADDINGROOMS TO
DARWIN’SHOUSE
All life evolves by the differential survival of replicating entities.
–Richard Dawkins
On his return to his native England from a round-the-world trip aboard the
Beagle, Charles Darwin settled at Down House, not far from London.
There, he lived for forty years as a Victorian country gentleman, writing
the works that would make him famous. As the site for such important
events, the house is a national treasure, and has been recently restored by
English Heritage to something like the condition Darwin left it in. In this
house, his wife, the former Emma Wedgwood, bore Darwin ten children.
This made daily life somewhat cramped, but no significant extension was
made to the family estate.
Since Darwin’s death, however, quite another kind of fate has befallen
his intellectual property.
Theoretical carpenters have been tacking on
rooms left and right to Darwin’s scholarly mansion. Whole new wings
have been added to the main “biology” hall, as evolutionary approaches to
chemistry, economics, and computer science have become popular. An
entire “upstairs” has also sprung up in the form of Darwinian humanities.
Even cosmologists have found inspiration in Darwinian thinking, although
making cosmology evolutionary has meant not just expanding the
Darwinian architecture to the entire universe, but postulating the existence
of multiple universes, competing with one another for survival on
a
cosmic scale.
65

—— 66 · THE ELECTRIC MEME ——
What I have in mind here entails a much more modest aim: to add a
“culture room” to the house that Darwin built.
But if we’re going to
explain cultural change as a process analogous to biological evolution,
complete with replicators, we had better be sure that Darwinian principles
apply to more than just genes. At the same time, as I intend to show in
this chapter, Darwinism is too widely invoked nowadays.
Before I
elucidate the grounds on which Darwinism can properly be broadened to
include phenomena like memes, a bit of history is warranted to help us
understand just where Darwinism stands right now.
EXPANDING THE LIVING ROOM
By the 1870s, Gregor Mendel, the curious monk from Moravia, had
conclusively shown through crossbreeding how the pea plants in his
garden
(and
by
extension
any
other
organism)
inherit
certain
characteristics. A single genetic mutation could make a visible change in
the resulting organism: Smooth-skinned peas became wrinkled, green peas
yellow.
But in the first decades of the twentieth century, the statistical
work of Francis Galton, the gentleman scientist and explorer (and
Darwin’s nephew), indicated that tiny variations in a trait such as height
could also be produced through genetic inheritance.
In such cases,
mutations
produced
only
incremental
changes
in
an
individual’s
observable
qualities—in
their
phenotype—not
the
rather
manifest
categorical changes in character that Mendel’s work suggested. Mendelism
had to be reconciled with so-called quantitative or Galtonian inheritance
before evolutionary theory could be applied to both classes of phenotypic
traits—to both the colors of peas and the height of humans. This unification
was achieved in the 1930s when it was realized that there could be multiple
genes underlying the manifestation of a given trait, each of which make an
additional contribution. So two height-inducing genes might make you two
inches taller, three such genes three inches taller.
In this fashion,
microevolutionary changes in phenotypes could be produced, resulting in
the continuous distribution of height seen in a population. This continuous
“blending” of inherited attributes was produced by variation in genes, each
of which was nevertheless particulate, just as Mendel had imagined. This
insight, due to Ronald Fisher, a biologist at Cambridge, and developed into
the
formalized
models
of
population
genetics
by
J.B.S.
Haldane

—— Adding Rooms to Darwin’s House · 67 ——
and Sewall Wright, has been called the Neo-Darwinian Synthesis. This
revitalized Darwinism, now generalized to include both qualitative and
quantitative characters, has formed the cornerstone of contemporary
evolutionary theory for the last half century and has stood firmly against
many assaults over that time, from both inside and outside the academy.
Other, more recent, attacks on Darwinism have led to less important
generalizations of the theory.
For example, in 1972, two eminent
paleontologists, Niles Eldredge and Stephen Jay Gould, came up with the
idea that the pace of evolution exhibited a large-scale pattern they called
“punctuated equilibrium.”
Inspired by the fossil record, which showed
long periods of stagnation in what species looked like, they suggested that
the formation of new species usually took place rapidly, and then genetic
evolution would settle down again for a restful period until some new
challenge spurred another burst of change. This view was widely touted,
especially by creationists intent on showing that famous Harvard-based
evolutionary biologists didn’t believe in Darwinism anymore.
But, of
course, Gould was quick to quash this mistaken impression by affirming
his allegiance to Darwin. Darwin’s own emphasis on gradual phenotypic
change in the evolutionary record was largely a historical peccadillo, a
response to his own historical circumstances. Darwin needed to distance
himself from the predominant ecclesiastical opinion of his day that the
universe was created in six days and so emphasized that evolution took a
long time to occur. But gradualism is not a fundamental characteristic of
the evolutionary process, so the suggestion that sometimes evolution may
proceed in jerks does not affect the utility of Darwin’s basic ideas.
More recently, Stuart Kaufmann, a fecund thinker with primary
allegiance to complexity theory, has championed the notion that natural
selection is not the only cause of adaptive design.
Perhaps equally
important, in his mind, is the order or structure that consistently appears
each generation through the operation of physical and chemical constraints
on what can develop. As a result, many aspects of an organism’s form don’t
have to be coded for by genes but can arise through more fundamental
principles that apply to the construction of any physical object, not just
living things.
In particular, the rows of seeds spiraling up the sides of
pinecones, to left and right, will always come in adjacent numbers from
what mathematicians call the Fibonnacci series. In this series, each term

—— 68 · THE ELECTRIC MEME ——
is the sum of the previous two in the sequence (that is, 1, 1, 2, 3, 5, 8, 13,
21, and so on). So a pinecone may have 8 rows spiraling left and 13 going
right. It is believed that this pattern is generated by microscopic events at
the tips of the growing tissues that eventually form these seeds. Many of
the beauties visible in the complex forms of organisms may, in fact, arise
as the coincidental consequence of many bits and pieces using simple rules
for interaction. Such order essentially comes “for free” from a biological
perspective. Kaufmann saw this kind of unprescribed emergence of global
structure through the self-organization of parts as contrary to Darwinian
principles at first. However, he later came to see his work as falling within
the Darwinian fold as well.
Even if natural selection is not solely
responsible for the form organisms take at the end of development, it is
still the primary determinant of the direction lineages of organisms trace
over time. Since these chains of descent are the true object of evolutionary
change, natural selection can still be called the most important biological
agent, just as Darwin expected.
These episodes were not fundamental attacks on Darwinism because
they didn’t threaten the key claims of his theory.
Darwin himself
recognized what was crucial to its survival and eventual establishment. He
emphasized that “if it could be proved that any part of the structure of any
one species had been formed for the exclusive good of another species, it
would annihilate my theory, for such could not have been produced
through natural selection.” So Darwin was well aware of the problem of
altruism—one organism coming to the aid of another at some cost to itself
and described it as that “one special difficulty, which at first appeared to
me insuperable, and actually fatal to the whole theory.”
Darwin was
referring in particular to the social insects, which exhibit an extreme form
of altruism.
Already in Darwin’s day it was common knowledge that
hymenopteran colonies (honeybees, wasps, bumblebees, and ants) usually
consist of one reproducing queen and a multitude of sterile workers.
This means that most of the members of the group forgo completely the
genetic imperative to reproduce; instead these sterile individuals
cooperatively help the fertile animals to raise the group’s offspring. This
sort of altruistic social behavior is also characterized by another trait: At
least two generations overlap in life stages capable of contributing to
colony labor, so that the offspring can assist their parents during part of
their
life
cycle.
Explaining
the
abandonment
of
reproduction

—— Adding Rooms to Darwin’s House · 69 ——
by worker castes in some social insects was a crucial dilemma to which
Darwin devoted an entire chapter in his Origin of Species.
It was not until the 1960s, however, that evolutionary theory could
properly explain a significant part of all the cooperation occurring in
nature.
A revolutionary insight by William D. Hamilton (the recently
lamented Royal Society Research Professor of Zoology at Oxford) was so
important that it spawned an entire field of research in biology about social
life—sociobiology (discussed in Chapter 2). Sociobiology represents, in
effect, a major generalization of Darwinism in terms of expanding its
scope to encompass a whole new range of phenomena.
Why did
Hamilton’s theory have such an impact on modern evolutionary biology?
Hamilton showed that altruism, the conundrum dreaded by Darwin,
could be explained, and quite simply, if we would just shift our point of
view down from the level of organisms to that of the genes. By so doing,
we could recognize that related animals are likely to share many genes.
Not only that, but if the gene copies could evolve ways to help each other
out, they might benefit in the only terms of relevance to evolution, that of
gaining representation in the next generation.
Although one copy of a
gene responsible for some altruistic act might suffer if the organism
sheltering it dies as a consequence, offsetting reproductive benefits might
be conferred on other copies of the gene in the organisms toward which
the act is directed. The result could still be a net increase in the number of
such genes surviving into the future.
In retrospect, of course, Hamilton’s insight seems obvious enough: He
simply recognized that genes exist in multiple copies within populations
and should evolve to exploit the possibility of collaborating whenever
circumstances permit.
Hamilton simply looked past the skin (or
exoskeleton) of the individual organism to see that natural selection would
favour strategies of mutual assistance between related genes, regardless of
where these brethren were located.
So even though almost of the ants in some colonies are not themselves
reproductive but provide defensive services to the group, this makes
evolutionary sense. This is because the soldiers are more related to their
siblings than they would be to their own offspring (if they had them). The
gene that makes soldiers into soldiers rather than reproductives can survive
because groups with this social structure will out-reproduce their

—— 70 · THE ELECTRIC MEME ——
competitors. “Hamilton’s rule,” which summarized his insight formally,
suggests that an individual that profits from the altruistic act must share a
higher proportion of genes with the benefactor than the cost-benefit ratio
this act imposes on them. If this inequality holds, then the genes behind
such altruism can evolve.
Of course, to make this all work, several tricks must accompany the
desire to assist related genes: The genes must be able to recognize each
other reliably (which can be difficult because they are typically packed
deep inside these sacks of substance called organisms) and simultaneously
spawn the appropriate behavioral response when the recognition bell goes
off. This can be a lot for one gene to manage, so it may be necessary for
cooperative gene-complexes to evolve before cooperative behavior will be
seen in a species.
But Hamilton’s insight—the “gene’s-eye view” of
nature—led to the eventual formation of Darwinism that now prevails.
A DARWINIAN UNIVERSE?
The successful application of this newly generalized Darwinism to social
problems spawned a massive outbreak of interest in evolutionary thought.
In the last 25 years or so, Darwinian theory has been applied to a dazzling
array of problems. Testimony to the apparent utility of this theory comes
from the recent burgeoning of fields such as evolutionary ecology,
evolutionary economics, evolutionary psychology, evolutionary linguistics
and
literary
theory,
evolutionary
epistemology,
evolutionary
computational science, evolutionary medicine and psychiatry—even
evolutionary chemistry and evolutionary cosmology.
What unites these approaches, despite being concerned with such
varied topics? What justifies calling all of these theories Darwinian? In
fact, Darwinian theory—both in its original formulation by Darwin
himself and in its twentieth-century “synthetic” guise—is limited to
several respects and hence not really fit to serve as the foundation for such
varied use. Why is this?
First, because Darwin’s theory, as the title of his original work
suggests, is a theory of evolution by means of natural selection. Natural
selection is recognized as the driving force behind directional change in
evolution, the process central to the production of adaptations.
But it

—— Adding Rooms to Darwin’s House · 71 ——
doesn’t adequately cover changes in the frequencies of genes by other
means, such as randomizing factors like genetic drift.
However, this
deficit has been remedied in large part by the Neo-Darwinian Synthesis in
the 1930s, which formalized the relationship between the various kinds of
influences on genetic change, both random and directional.
So this
criticism no longer troubles evolutionists.
Second, Darwin’s is a theory about the evolution of organisms.
However, his work doesn’t tell us how to identify an organism.
Organisms may appear obvious, but that is only because the common bias
has been to treat the higher vertebrates and especially mammals as the
paradigm organisms, despite their rarity and atypicality in the kingdom of
living
things.
Mammals
like
us
are
well-organized,
complex
conglomerations of cells contained in a sack of skin; death causes the
disintegration of this composite. But much more common in the kingdom
of living things are “lower” animals like clonal organisms, plants, bacteria,
and viruses.
Organisms have very different ways of going about
evolutionary
processes
such
as
reproducing,
finding
the
material
necessities for continued existence, and so on.
Evolution has even
produced “in-between” kinds of creatures like colonial protists, cells that
sometimes aggregate other times disassemble and go about their business
individually.
Darwin
presented
exemplary
cases
of
organismal
evolutionary analysis in The Origin of Species, but he left vague the
intended, let alone actual, scope of the theory.
It remains uncertain
whether neo-Darwinian theory—even as developed during the twentieth
century to include population genetics and the conceptual apparatus of the
evolutionary synthesis—fully applies to all branches of the tree of life.
Third, Darwin’s theory is not only about organisms but suggests that
selection operates only at the organismal level.
However, biology
nowadays concerns many levels of organization—from molecules to cells,
organisms, populations, species, and even ecological communities.
As
noted, the recent revolution in evolutionary thought, centered around
sociobiology, can be seen as a switch to the view that the gene, not the
organism, is the fundamental level of organization and selection.
But
many evolutionists suspect that selection may occur at more than one level
of organization simultaneously.
Thus, while we see that applications of “Darwinian” thought
abound, it remains questionable whether these applications are really

—— 72 · THE ELECTRIC MEME ——
Darwinian at all.
How can a theory devised to deal with organisms be
legitimately extended to the immune system, the competitive strategies of
corporations, or the life history of stars, as recent developments in the
Darwinian “movement” have alleged?
This question is central to
enlarging the scope of evolutionary theory to the problem of human
culture and communication—and ultimately of how we think.
For a
general evolutionary science of culture and psychology, it is crucial that
we establish a solid foundation for the jump from biological replicators to
something as controversial as memes.
REPLICATORS, INTERACTORS, AND LINEAGES
How might evolutionary theory be legitimately generalized from the case
of biology to culture?
The “gene’s-eye view” of evolution described
earlier isn’t a good enough foundation for understanding cultural evolution
because it is still limited to one level—the genes.
So a straightforward
application to culture is legitimate only if cultural change is reducible to
evolution in genes, in which case the social sciences become superfluous.
This hardly seems likely.
One way of making evolutionary theory more comprehensive, which
Richard Dawkins has dubbed Universal Darwinism, comes from a
recognition that there are two functions that agents of the evolutionary
process can play. The Universal Darwinist strategy looks at the roles that
genotypes and phenotypes (the observable expressions of genotypes) play
in the evolutionary process. It then subtracts the features of these agents
that appear peculiar to genes and organisms.
Such features tend to be
associated with the particular material from which genes and organisms
are constructed and the particular mechanisms by which DNA replicates or
by which sexual or asexual organisms reproduce.
From this now more
abstract perspective, the evolutionary process is regarded as having two
components, replication and selective interaction, and these are denied for
any entities performing those functions. Dawkins’s strategy, in effect, is
to abstract from the matter and structure of the concrete mechanisms of
genes and organisms to yield a theory specified solely in terms of
functions.
Richard Dawkins has given the name “replicator” to any type of
information with the characteristics required to form the foundation of

—— Adding Rooms to Darwin’s House · 73 ——
an evolving system.
He suggests that examples include not only
Mendelian genes but also the computer programs called viruses, and
memes. Replicators are thus the basic units of evolutionary processes, and
their basic function is to pass on their structure largely intact through
copying.
With this identification of replicators, Dawkins essentially argues that
Darwinian evolution can occur anywhere—in genes, in culture, on Mars,
and all at the same time—as long as replicators are at work in each
evolutionary process.
For Dawkins (as the quote at the head of this
chapter suggests), evolution is all about replication. In effect, he asserts
that Darwinism can be well and truly generalized—indeed universalized—
by identifying replication as the central phenomenon underlying any
evolutionary process. It is based on this argument that Dawkins originally
introduced the notion of a meme, as a hypothetical example of a different
replicator associated with culture that could evolve just like a gene. It is
through the concept of replication that Dawkins believes evolutionary
theory can be properly extended to cover cultural evolution.
Despite the central role of the replicator concept in evolutionary
biology, insufficient attention has been devoted to defining just what
replication is.
Dawkins himself is not explicit on this point, and
philosophers of biology have yet to reach a consensus.
If seems that
replication is just what replicators do.
In case of any uncertainty, the
tendency is just to point to DNA as an example of how it is done.
Anything else worthy of the name replicator must be “like” DNA.
This isn’t good enough, of course, if one’s goal is to come up with
more broadly applicable criteria that can be rigorously applied to candidate
replicators.
We will have to do considerable work in the rest of this
chapter to lay out exactly how replication works, so we can then apply this
knowledge to the novel case of memes.
Let me get a start on this problem by defining four minimal conditions
for replication. Generally conceived, replication is a relationship between
a copy and some source exhibiting the following characteristics:
— Causation: The source must be causally involved in the production of
the copy
— Similarity: The copy must be like its source in relevant respects
— Information transfer: The process that generates the copy must

—— 74 · THE ELECTRIC MEME ——
— obtain the information that makes the copy similar to its source from
that same source, and
— Duplication: During the process, one entity must give rise to two (or
more)
The first condition says that the original replicator must participate in
the process that results in the appearance of its copy, a second replicator.
This concept of replication is neutral about how much control a replicator
has over the replication process. A replicator must be responsible, given
the context, for making the process happen in some sense.
But the
replicator need not be entirely responsible.
Many other factors can be
involved, and conditions may have to be “just right.”
The second condition is simply that the copy and the original must be
of the same class of entities, so that they can rightfully be called similar to
one another. The reference to “relevant respects” generally means with
respect to those qualities that allow the replicator to maintain its generative
ability and those aspects that produce the similarity of the copy to its
source. At the same time, this clause allows for the possibility, indeed the
necessity, of occasional mutations in what gets copied. Such variations
are the fuel on which the evolutionary process works.
This leads to the third condition, which is necessary in order to exclude
from our definition of replication the possibility that copies of a source
appear over and over but as the result of activity by something besides a
replicator.
In a way, the “information transfer” requirement is that
everything necessary for replication is present at the point where
replication in taking place.
Replication must not refer to, or rely upon,
information brought in from outside.
The process has to be “local,” or
encapsulated in an informational sense.
No instructions can fly in to
rescue the situation, like a hand of God descending from the heavens.
Most important, it is this transfer of information from one generation of
replicators to the next that defines the relationship of descent between
them. The encapsulation of a replication event as a node in a chain of
similar events also establishes the existence of an evolutionary lineage.
Duplication, the fourth condition, is also an intrinsic part of what we
mean by replication.
The word “replication” has a sense in which
something must be repeated. Replicators multiply. They can do this only
if their number increases. So duplication results in a changing number of

—— Adding Rooms to Darwin’s House · 75 ——
the relevant kind of entity being counted.
The source and copy are
individuals that form part of a population of alternative forms, so that by
being duplicated, the relative frequency of the type they both represent in
that population changes.
Such changes in relative frequency are the
substance of evolutionary change.
The duplication criterion also has the salutary effect of taking the
replicator notion out of the realm of the abstract. The first three conditions
merely identify replicators by their primary function: copying themselves.
Duplication, on the other hand, forces investigators to find two physical
entities and determine how they got there.
The process by which the quintessential replicator, DNA, accomplishes
the feat of producing copies of itself obviously fulfills all four of these
criteria in spades, as can be seen from even the simplest description. Gene
products read off from DNA spur the molecule to unfold, allowing
replication to begin.
Just before cell division, enzymes unzip the two
strands of the molecule, exposing the bases to the cell’s internal soup of
raw materials. Another enzyme, also produced by DNA and known as a
DNA polymerase, then marches along each of the two strands, triggering
each base to pair up with a complementary base from the soup. This is
how DNA causes itself to be duplicated.
Through this step-by-step
process, the polymerase copies the genetic information and creates two
new, double-stranded DNA molecules.
Since both molecules have the
same structure and sequence as the original, the similarity condition is
fulfilled.
Since the chemical bits of DNA that can bond together are
specific pairs—with every cytosine bound only to a complementary
guanine, and every adenine only to a thymine—the sequence of bases
attached to the newly exposed strand depends on which ones are present
on the other side of the chain.
This is information being passed—
inherited—from the source strand to the copy being made. And finally, at
the end of the process, there are two molecules where before there was
only one: duplication.
What other kinds of phenomena fall into this category?
Some
examples will help us to firm up the four conditions for replication, which
remain somewhat abstract at the moment.
You might think, for instance, that the first-class British postage stamp,
with its picture of the Queen on the front side, qualifies as a replication of
the
Queen
herself
according
to
our
criteria:
Elizabeth
Windsor

—— 76 · THE ELECTRIC MEME ——
caused the stamp to have that particular face on it by being a queen rather
than a commoner (information transfer); there is a resemblance between
the face on the stamp and that of the person (similarity): and the Queen
perhaps signed a decree to the effect that such a stamp should be
manufactured (causation). And there is duplication as well: The stamp and
Queen exist side by side; the Queen’s visage is not harmed by the taking
of the photo that led to the stamp’s creation.
But this isn’t really an example of something we would want to call
replication because stamps don’t go on to make other stamps. There’s no
evolutionary lineage here. So what’s wrong with our analysis of Queen
“replication” so far?
Perhaps the conditions are too general, only
necessary but not sufficient to distinguish true instances of what we are
after?
At minimum, we need to firm up what we mean by similarity.
Resemblance isn’t enough. A three-dimensional object such as the Queen
and a two-dimensional object such as a picture of her are not really the
same in the sense that we mean.
Similarity requires a closer physical
relationship.
An important implication of this perspective is that
replication is not founded on a notion of similarity, but of causal linkages:
The notion of linkage, of lineage, becomes of paramount importance.
In addition, the notion of cause is too broadly interpreted in this
example as well: The Queen, even if she did sign an edict, didn’t really
cause the stamp to be made in the sense we are using the term, in that she
didn’t manufacture it herself in any meaningful sense. She didn’t turn the
handle of the printing press, for example. No lineage of replication events
follows from the decree because a causal process involving paper and ink
and machines produces each stamp. So the notion of proximate cause gets
closer to what true replication involves. The face information doesn’t go
from one stamp to the other, nor does it go directly from the Queen’s face
to the stamp either. So on all of these counts, the Queen does not replicate
every time the Royal Mail emblazons her face on a sheet of paper.
Let’s investigate another technological example involving a piece of
paper, this time sitting on an office worker’s desk. On the paper is a graph
of third-quarter sales figures. Say the department head calls for a meeting
about sales. The paper must be copied but is in no sense able to do all the
work of copying itself. Rather the worker must bring the piece of paper to
the copier and place it inside the machine.
The paper itself does

—— Adding Rooms to Darwin’s House · 77 ——
have some limited power to make this happen by virtue of what it has
printed on it: The graph is much more likely to get photocopied in this
situation than a poem by a third-grader. Then, given the existence of the
surrounding machinery—and the obliging human touch of punching the
button—the piece of paper is copied.
Is the piece of paper a replicator, then? It seems to fulfill all of the
criteria. The printing on the paper serves as a template of information—
the relevant information—for what should appear in the duplicate
(causation).
The copy, if the copier is any good, should also be very
similar to the original (similarity). What is impressed upon the blank sheet
should be the information derived from the original (our inheritance
relationship fulfilled).
And at the end of the process, both original and
copy are there for inspection, side by side (duplication).
The printed
information can also be further reproduced, becoming a lineage, as
required of an evolutionary replication process. Any mutations, such as a
smudge on the glass, will be faithfully reproduced in subsequent copies.
So evolution in the message can occur.
For example, if the smudge
appears in a spot that leads to misinterpretation of a word, it may reduce
the likelihood of further reproduction—a form of selection.
It’s true that we still have to take the notion of causation a bit loosely:
The paper, for example, isn’t the proximate cause—the person punching
the copier button is that. This is why some say that replication should be
limited to “direct” causation, as we noted in the example of the stamp
above. Still, the paper is relatively inert, a good store of information; the
copier is a protected environment for replication; there is good similarity
of content and substrate between the source and copy. Dawkins himself
considers this case and concludes that the piece of paper—or more
precisely, the information printed on it—is a replicator. So replicators can
be artifactual in nature, not just biological.
Perhaps the most important quality a replicator has, from an
evolutionary point of view, is its “power”—a quality originally identified,
again, by Richard Dawkins.
He argued that replicators, besides merely
copying themselves, also exert some additional positive influence on the
probability of their own replication. Those replicators with greater power
will be favored over those that have less of a positive effect on this
probability. More copies of these replicators get made compared to those
without such power and thus bias the statistics of reproduction in their

—— 78 · THE ELECTRIC MEME ——
favor. Power is what determines who benefits—or which replicator wins
the battle to control the events over which different replicators, like genes
and nieces, might be competing.
There are many ways in which replicators can ensure that they not only
survive but prosper in the next generation. Viruses produce structures that
fool other organisms into treating the viral genes as their own and make
them copy them willy-nilly; genes in multicellular bodies produce
structures that increase the probability the organism will reproduce and
thus likely pass on copies of these genes; and organisms can engage in
behaviors that increase the probability that a sibling will reproduce and so
pass on copies of the gene sequences that both organisms inherited their
parents. Indeed the ingenious ways in which replicators ensure they get
copied again and again is one of the best signs of natural selection at work.
Dawkins also identified a second class of agent important to thinking
about a universal evolutionary process.
He originally called them
“vehicles” but most people nowadays prefer to call them “interactors.” An
interactor is another technical but powerful concept in contemporary
evolutionary biology.
Interactors are paired with replicators, both
conceptually and causally, because replicators produce interactors.
For
example, genes (replicators) produce organisms (interactors). A person,
like any other organism, is the temporary storehouse for an aggregate of
genes that will come together only once. That’s what makes a person an
individual. So interactors, unlike replicators, don’t repeat themselves; they
don’t form lineages. Interactors such as organisms multiply the collective
capabilities of genes (such as providing the ability to get around in the
environment) and obey the genes’ will—a will that primarily consists of
getting reproduced as often as possible.
These qualities make it
worthwhile for genes to collaborate in the construction of interactors.
Interactors, by virtue of interacting with the environment, can either
foster or cause the demise of the replicators that are housed inside them.
Interactors are what get selected, by virtue of what they do—and what they
do replicators had a hand in producing. Interactors can be distinguished
from replicators (of any sort) by their inability to pass on their structure
directly.
People can’t
sprout clones of themselves from out of

—— Adding Rooms to Darwin’s House · 79 ——
their foreheads like Zeus, for instance. The structure of organisms is only
indirectly
transmitted
to
future
generations
through
their
role
in
perpetuating the genes that caused their construction in the first place.
Replicators are directly involved in replicating themselves but interact
with their environments only indirectly, through the interactors they
construct.
Of these two basic evolutionary concepts, the idea of a replicator is
more fundamental, because interactors arte not necessarily components of
reproduction. At the beginning of life on Earth, for example, replicators
were very basic and had to interact with the environment on their own
behalf. In effect, they played both major evolutionary roles, of replicator
and interactor. It’s likely that specialized structures for interaction finally
hadn’t been invented yet. But since the job of replicators is to hold on
tight to a message and that of interactors is to interact and perhaps be
changed by that interaction, the two jobs are in conflict.
It’s therefore
going to be to a replicator’s advantage to evolve the ability to produce
specialized interactors. Then the replicator can remain relatively inert and
protected, while its minion, the interactor, undertakes the dirty, dangerous
job of getting around in the world while staying in one piece.
So, as
material entities, replicators are also the driving force behind the
evolutionary process, generally conceived.
It is important to remember that evolution is a process, not just a
collection of things like replicators and interactors. From this perspective,
perhaps the most important evolutionary concept is lineage, an identity
that persists indefinitely through time—either in the same or an altered
state (because mutations can occur)—as a result of a replication sequence.
A chain of replication events constitutes a lineage. These events are
causally and physically linked by the replications relationship in each
instance.
Replication leads to chains of similar events in which those
participating in replication do all the work themselves, rather than being
caused by processes operating at other levels of organization. In a lineage,
each instance is related by the fact that a replicator of the same type
produced it. The events can thus be linked together as representatives of
the same thing.
This relationship between instances or extents is what
biologists call descent.
Lineages cannot simply reflect the persistence of something that
happened long before. The recurring features defining the lineage must be
reproduced from scratch each time their reappear. So, for example, the

—— 80 · THE ELECTRIC MEME ——
younger generation cannot wear clothes similar to those of their parents
simply because the clothes themselves have been passed down. Rather, to
constitute a case of cultural replication and another link in a true lineage,
similar pieces of apparel have to be manufactured and chosen as a cultural
“statement” by the young.
Another example makes this point about informational inheritance
clear.
Consider a number of tape recorders, placed in a line at some
distance from one another.
Each recorder has been set up so that
“hearing” a particular tune play will cause it to play the same tune, pre-
recorded on its tape.
Someone punches the play button of the first
machine. The sound it makes is sufficiently loud so that the next one in
line can “hear” it and is stimulated to reproduce the tune. This, of course,
causes the next one in line to play the same sequence of sounds as well,
and so on.
Without knowledge that these machines include stored
information in the form of pre-recorded music, we might be led to the
conclusion that this tune has replicated itself through a chain of replication
events involving the different machines. But, in fact, information is not
inherited from machine to machine: what makes the tune “survive” down
the line is a set of conditions that held true before the first recorder ever
disturbed the air. These conditions persist throughout the experiment, and
nothing is created except a set of signals produced by whatever program
has been attached to the recorders to make them sensitive to this stimulus.
Lineages are continuous, unbroken sequences linking replicators past
to replicators of the future. Your family tree is underpinned by a number
of gene lineages, for instance. Lineages are the true substantive focus of
evolution because it is lineages that allow the cumulative effects of
selection to produce adaptations over time.
Notice that a lineage is
restricted to the case of replication.
Interactors like organisms do not
constitute elements of lineages; even though they may be the bearers of
adaptations, those adaptations did not evolve to benefit organisms but
rather the replicators that make them. It is consistent pressure on similar
interactors that allows small modifications to accumulate in the suite of
replicators responsible for those modifications. Each new interactor is not
only viable, but a superior type for that environment. By making use of
the material generated by previous generations of selection, increasingly
complex interactors can be produced through the accumulation of
adaptations.

—— Adding Rooms to Darwin’s House · 81 ——
Universal Darwinism thus suggests there are online two major agents
for evolutionary theory to consider.
These actors, replicators and
interactors, are identified by their functions, regardless of whether we are
talking about the evolution of molecules or universes. These agents dance
back and forth between replicator and interactor forms through generations
to produce lineages, which are the record of their activity over time.
Richard Dawkins argues that “evolution is the external and visible
manifestation of the differential survival of alternative replicators.” But,
in fact, as we saw in Chapter 2, you can have evolution without
replicators.
Heredity alone is sufficient to generate an evolutionary
process.
The last several sections of this chapter have thus far been
devoted to replication as the foundation of an evolutionary, process.
However, the scope of evolution is broader than envisioned by Dawkins,
whose amendment of Darwin does not produce a truly universal
Darwinism, as he hoped. Everything Dawkins claimed is still valid; it’s
just that the reach of the Dawkinsian program is more limited than its
author believes.
Dawkins’s Universal Darwinism is not the only scheme that has been
developed for generalizing evolutionary theory beyond the classic
Darwinism of natural selection among well-defined organisms. Richard
Lewontin of Harvard, another of the most distinguished and productive of
contemporary evolutionary biologists, suggested a second strategy for
generalization early in his career.
In a nutshell, his idea is simpler to
replace the broad “organism” wherever it appears in Darwin’s Origin of
Species with the word “individual.” If Darwin’s book still makes sense,
then the theory is not specific to organisms but can refer to anything that
can properly be called an individual. In effect, although Darwin stated his
principles in terms of organisms, they can be interpreted more generally
than the theory’s originator intended. By rereading Darwin in this way,
Lewontin formalized his insight in terms of three principles, which he
claimed are necessary and sufficient conditions for evolution to occur.
This led him to the criteria we presented earlier—heredity, variation, and
fitness—as those that successfully, identify any kind of individual capable
of evolving.
Lewontin’s strategy for generalizing Darwinism can be characterized
as “levels abstraction” because it identifies different levels of organization

—— 82 · THE ELECTRIC MEME ——
at which individuals—the locus of selection—can be identified.
Only
those properties of organisms essential to their role in evolution are used to
define the entities (“individuals”) that satisfy that role. It is interesting to
note that individuals defined at levels above the organism, such as species,
will not have many of the qualities of organisms, which are specific to that
physical scale. This is because organisms are more tightly organized—
and the fates of the genes present in them more interdependent—than is
the case for groups, whose membership can fluctuate. Genes simply don’t
sweep in and out of an organism like organisms can from a group. As a
result, adaptations have evolved that reflect the long-term selection
pressure on cooperating groups of genes.
Lewontin’s three principles crosscut Dawkins’s Universal Darwinism:
Where Lewontin generalizes over levels, Dawkins generalizes over roles.
Still, the two methods of abstracting Darwinism are compatible. You can
think of Lewontin’s conditions for individuality as the qualities that
Dawkins’s interactors—the individual “units” of selection—must have to
count as the foundation of an evolutionary process. However, these two
perspectives remain incompatible because Dawkins’s view is restricted to
replication, while Lewontin’s is based only on the principle of heredity.
They are therefore different perspectives one can take on the generalized
evolutionary process, with Lewontin’s being “more universal” than
Dawkins’s.
Lewontin’s theory is certainly the most general one yet developed, and
one that can be fruitfully applied to culture.
As we have seen, cultural
selectionists suggest we should take Lewontin’s line on culture, that
cultural evolution need only exhibit heredity.
Others—memeticists,
essentially—claim the Dawkinsian approach to Darwinism is required
(because memes are replicators).
What distinguishes memetics from other evolutionary approaches to
culture is its bold central claim: Memetics argues that cultural evolution is
the result of a replicator called the meme.
As discussed earlier, the
prominent contemporary memeticists Dawkins, Dennett, and Blackmore
identify the issue of replication as central to memetics, which they should
do to be consistently different from cultural selectionists.
So we can
legitimately say that the difference between memetics and the other
schools of evolutionary thought on culture boils down to the distinction
between replication and inheritance. Inheritance alone is not, in fact, the

—— Adding Rooms to Darwin’s House · 83 ——
issue
dividing memetics
from
alternative
explanations of
cultural
evolution, including cultural selectionism. The specific claim of memetics
is that an entity, called the meme, exists that fulfils all the criteria of a
cultural
replicator:
causation,
similarity,
information
transfer,
and
duplication. This is, in fact, the only claim that is unique to memetics—
the claim that defines it and separates it from its rivals.
We are therefore back to our problems of identifying how such a
replicator would work.
Luckily there is yet more we can learn about
replication—and hence about the nature of memes as replicators—by
looking at another area of research on this crucial phenomenon.
THE REPLICATION REACTION
Defining the general category of “replicator,” as Dawkins’s Universal
Darwinism has done, permits the creation of a formal theory of replicators.
This theory is another important source of information about the nature of
replication that can influence our search for memes. memes will have to
satisfy the constraints of any such general theory to be considered
legitimate members of the replicator “club.”
Constructing a general theory of replication has been the project of
what can be called the Vienna School of evolutionary theorists—primarily
people surrounding the Nobel laureate Manfred Eigen, a physical chemist
at the University of Vienna.
Replicator Theory was developed by this
group largely to model the origin of life and hence the emergence of the
first replicators from a dead universe.
It isn’t surprising that the
minimum—and
therefore
most
general—requirements
for
defining
replicators should come from a research program addressing the problem
of how to recognize the first primitive signs of self-reproduction.
However, as the developers of Replicator Theory themselves emphasize,
the “chemistry” of replicator “reactions” in the theory is really quite
stylized. Replicator Theory has been applied to all kinds of phenomena
with equal alacrity and ease. Indeed it has already been adapted to deal
with the cohabitation of symbol strings in a kind of artificial chemistry.
Replicator Theory is, in fact, the most general theory of the evolutionary
process we have: It can account for predator-prey interactions and purely
symbolic intercourse.
Its application to super-molecular replicators like
memes should therefore be assured.

—— 84 · THE ELECTRIC MEME ——
Replicator theory begins by noting that when replication occurs, two
bits of organized matter appear where before there was only one—an
example of the duplication principle in action.
This is an event that
typically must be accompanied by the input of energy, either because the
original bit of matter is not consumed by the reaction and remains intact or
simply because a second novel bit of structure gets added to the mix. To
accomplish duplication in either of these ways, we need to add some
energy to the system to get things going.
So replication is almost by
definition a negentropic event. That is, it involves a local reduction in the
amount of disorder in physical matter. After all, something new—another
replicator, which almost certainly entails some additional complexity of
structure—is being created.
Often, however, replicators won’t have the ability to reproduce and
simultaneously manage the allocation of energy during the reaction. This
is especially true if they are rather simple. What this means is that the
replication event will often require the assistance of a catalyst. Catalysts
are a special class of molecules with the ability to speed up a chemical
reaction without themselves being consumed or modified by it.
Further, if all of these events are to come off efficiently and repeatedly
in reasonable time, they will also require resources and replicators to be
locally concentrated—that is, the participants in the reaction must be
together in some kind of container to protect them from environmental
distractions and noise.
For example, DNA has secluded itself inside a
double envelope of nucleus and cell protoplasm, both of which enclose
these highly stable molecules behind walls that shield the replication
reaction from interference.
DNA even recruits assistants such as
messenger RNA and various proteins into this safeguarded domain at the
crucial moments to midwife its birthing labors.
Generally speaking, a replication reaction begins when an enzyme and
its substrate (the specific chemical with which it interacts) come into
contact.
They may bond together to form a temporarily more complex
whole before dissociating again to produce the end products, which are
typically different combinations of atoms than went into the process. This
reaction generally proceeds at a constant rate, converting new bits of raw
materials into reaction products.
As the substrate is used up, these
products may accumulate locally.
In some cases, this buildup of by-
products (chaste) or end products (the desired ones) will begin to cause

—— Adding Rooms to Darwin’s House · 85 ——
the reaction to reverse itself or at least to slow, down, perhaps due to a
paucity of freely circulating components that haven’t already been bound
into new replicators.
Many such reactions are also sensitive to various
local
conditions,
such
as
the
acidity
and
temperature
of
the
microenvironment.
Small structural differences in chemicals can cause gross differences in
levels or kinds of activity. So several classes of catalytic events resulting
in replication can be distinguished on organizational grounds.
Each of
these types of reaction has been identified in nature.
The first and simplest form is autocatalysis.
This happens when a
replicator serves as its own catalyst.
In this kind of reaction, one
replicator, thanks to the availability of an energy supply, can convert some
raw materials into a second copy of itself, perhaps together with some by-
products, as waste. So the simplest form of the replicator equation can be
expressed as follows:
1 replicator + materials + energy
2 replicators + waste
Such a reaction can realistically be called self-replication because it is
the closest approximation to a case of “going it alone.” This is typically a
single-step operation, and its dynamics can be described by what is called
a “first-order replicator equation.” The kinetic equation associated with
this dynamic—which specifies the actual levels of energy and real timing
of the event—describes a Malthusian growth process.
If Malthusian or
exponential growth, births are a linear function of density (or the existing
number of similar replicators). Each existing replicator gives birth to just
one other one each time the process is iterated. Thus the total number of
replicators grows at a constant rate over time.
In effect, the per-capita
birth rate for new replicators remains constant, as long as all the necessary
materials are kept nearby in quantity.
This regime can be called “survival of the fittest,” because when two
replicators are at work in the same microenvironment, the one with the
faster growth rate will come to dominate the slower-growing replicator,
even in a system with freely available resources. In effect, the slowpoke is
selected against by time itself. It simpler gets out-duplicated. The pattern
of evolution in such a case is simple. Everything depends on the initial
proportion of each replicator in the population and its rate of reproduction

—— 86 · THE ELECTRIC MEME ——
relative to its competitors. We can think of this as a race between two
replicators: one that is slow and steady, like the turtle in the child’s fairy
tale, and another that is fast but tires rapidly, like the hare.
Unless the
turtle has a great advantage in terms of a lead at the starting block, it will
lose the race to the faster-reproducing rabbit.
Replicators that use templates as the means to duplication tend to
follow this pattern of growth. This is, of course, the method used by DNA
to achieve replication: Each strand of the double helix serves as a kind of
template for the other.
Having split lengthwise, the complementary
strands of DNA unwind from their three-dimensional form into two more
accessible straight lines. At this point, the message of DNA on one side
can be read off by ribosomes to produce its complement, which is then
tacked on to form a new stretch of DNA.
Another
example
is
the
operation
of
ribosomes
themselves.
Ribosomes are a peculiar type of RNA that manufacture the proteins used
in all living things.
A ribosome can string together amino acids in a
precise linear sequence, following instructions provided by the messenger
form of RNA. It grasps a specific amino acid, brings it together with the
growing polypeptide, and thus causes a catalytic reaction that results in the
amino acid being added to the end of the polypeptide.
These examples are very familiar to any biology student, and survival
of the fittest is, of course, the idea in the back of everyone’s mind when
they think of evolution. Indeed survival of the fittest has been linked to
natural selection ever since Darwin himself adopted the catchphrase
(which originated with Herbert Spencer) in a late edition of his Origin of
Species. But there are other kinds of replication processes that lead to very
different kinds of dynamics. Darwinism is not limited, as Darwin himself
thought, to an optimizing process, the best possible outcome.
The
alternative evolutionary regimes are much less familiar because they have
been derived more recently. But they turn out to be just as important in
understanding the world around us.
The first of these other types of evolutionary dynamic is based on a
second, more complicated type of replication reaction. It occurs when
an independent catalyst is required to achieve the replication. Here, a
replicator must combine with the catalyst, an energy supply, and source
materials to produce the replicator copy and some waste products. This

—— Adding Rooms to Darwin’s House · 87 ——
reaction process may also involve intermediate states in which the catalyst
is first bound to one or more of the other participant in the reaction, which
creates a complex but temporary reaction product that separates again to
reveal the final form of the duplicated replicator. This general situation is
covered analytically by the second-order replicated equation.
In this case, the more replicators there are, the faster their population
grows. Replication can now occur even faster than in the earlier case of
autocatalytic replication, because the number of births at any given
moment is less dependent on the number of replicators that has already
been produced.
What becomes more crucial is the availability of the
catalyst. If this is in abundant supply, then the births of new replicators
can increase in nonlinear fashion over time. The increase in births can be
hyperbolic
or
super-exponential—effectively
much
faster
than
the
Malthusian growth of the previous dynamical regime.
(Mathematically
this is represented as an exponent on the replicator’s growth rate of greater
than one.)
When the rate of growth is this fast, the population of replicators
rapidly satiates the environment. So in a competition, the replicator with
the highest initial concentration, when multiplied by its growth rate, wins
the race.
Thus initial conditions have a large impact on the final
composition of the population.
In effect, this kind of growth gives an
evolutionary advantage to those first on the scene.
Once a solution is
found, it becomes difficult for any later arrival to invade the population
and dominate it, regardless of how good it is. So in our active race, no
matter how much of a head start the turtle replicator has, it’s unlikely to
beat the hare, regardless of how lazy and unworthy the hare is.
This
regime is therefore called “survival of the first.” It is a winner-take-all
situation in which, given a particular path to follow, the first to finish the
course effectively finishes it for everyone else as well. If the hare makes it
first to the finish line, it keeps the winner’s award forever, whether or not
the turtle has characteristics that make it more fit for living in that
environment. Survival of the first is not necessarily survival of the best.
Examples of this evolutionary regime, in which being common is an
advantage, are protein-catalyzed replication and sexual reproduction.
With sexual reproduction, the complication is that two organisms at
minimum are required to produce a new one.
The male and female

—— 88 · THE ELECTRIC MEME ——
are again complements, but now both must “come together” before
replication can occur (unlike DNA, where one complement already exists
and produces the other).
The reason species that evolve the ability to
reproduce sexually are at an advantage when common is because it then
becomes easier to locate an appropriate partner. There are simply more
partners around to meet, and individuals are not restricted, due to lack of
choice,
to
potentially
unsuccessful
matings
with
partners
having
incompatibilities or defects.
Such a dynamic also characterizes hypercycles, a quite different kind
of replicator that may have preceded template-based replicating like RNA
and DNA in the historic of life on Earth, hypercycles are a mutualistic
group of molecules that catalyze one another in a ring-like fashion, such
that A produces B, which produces C, which produces D, which produces
A again. It is the group as a whole that constitutes a replicator in this case.
Replication is expected to be relatively slow in a hypercycle because it
requires that every member of the circle be present in sufficient quantity to
complete the causal sequence (there are no shortcuts). But the cycle that
works the fastest can outcompete any others—especially if the competitor
cycles utilize any of the same molecules, because the speedier cycle will
get to those crucial molecules faster.
There are simply more of them
already around, so one of the partners of that cycle is more likely to bump
into the next guy in the chain than a member of a rare cycle. When it is
common, a hypercycle has the ecological advantage of being everywhere.
On the other hand, larger hypercycles (those with more members—say,
running through F rather than D before making the circle back to A—are
at a disadvantage because it becomes more probable that one of the
member molecules will mutate. As a result, that member will no longer
produce the next molecule in the causal ring, meaning that the cycle is no
longer completed and the replication of that cycle ceases. If any of the
constituent reactions has a high energetic cost or involves relatively rare
components to assist in the production of the next member, then these too
are disadvantages to that cycle.
The opposite of superfast or hyperbolic growth is parabolic or sub-
exponential growth.
This kind of rate characterizes yet a third
evolutionary regime. Here the higher the concentration of the replicator
population, the slower the rate of overall growth: Self-limitation becomes

—— Adding Rooms to Darwin’s House · 89 ——
stronger over time until no further replication takes place, and the
replicator’s population size levels out. This regime can occur when birth
is inhibited by the fact that each replication takes two replicators out of
play. Examples of this include oligonucleotide analogues and many of the
synthetic replicator proteins produced artificially in laboratories.
In
oligonucleotides, the source replicator is a template for the production of a
copy from raw materials, but once the copy is produced, it remains bound
to the source molecule, such that the two now function as one. Further,
some of the substrate needed to make more replicators has been used up
without an effective increase in the number of replicators roaming about
looking for new victims. So each instance of replication further limits the
ability to do it again.
This third regime can be called the “survival of everybody” because
multiple types of replicators, with different rates of growth, can coexist at
the end of the race. In effect, both the hare and the turtle wind up at the
finish line at the same time, because the closer the hare gets, the more tired
it becomes, while the turtle, moving slower, is not so incapacitated and
edges ahead until it too faces the same constraints. There is a cost to being
common in this regime, such that any new variant replicator that comes
along is free to try its hand at surviving in the soup.
This is just the
opposite of “survival of the first,” where there is a cost to currently being
the rare type in the population.
With the survival of everybody, rare
replicator types can increase in frequency, regardless of their abilities.
Such a regime may be due to standard ecological interactions, such as
the tendency of predators to focus on those prey species (or parasites on
hosts) that are relatively more abundant, leaving the rarer species with the
advantage of evolving less controlled by that pressure. Replication may
also simply exhaust the necessary resources on which replication is based,
with the replicators being unable to substitute somewhat different but more
freely available resources.
A more social reason for this kind of
evolutionary dynamic is that females may prefer rare types of males,
which leads to an equilibrium in which different kinds of males can
persist.
Thus, depending on how the present density of a replicator influences
its rate of growth over the next interval, different evolutionary regimes can
come to pass.
(The table below provides an
overview
of the

—— 90 · THE ELECTRIC MEME ——
differences between evolutionary regimes.) If, on average, each replicator
produces another one like itself each time around, then survival of the
fittest will result, because there is no intrinsic advantage with time: The
replicators are competing on equal terms.
The race then becomes a
question of survival, and those replicators—or, more appropriately, the
interactors they produce—with the best fit to environmental conditions
will win.
However, if a replicator achieves a less good record of
reproduction, survival of everyone is possible.
This is because as any
candidate gets slightly ahead, it loses steam, giving the others a chance.
So it will often be neck and neck at the finish line, with only relatively
random events giving the nod to any one competitor. On the other hand, if
a replicator can produce more than one copy of itself each time the starting
gun goes off then the fastest one will win the race by dint of sheer
numbers.
The two less familiar kinds of evolutionary process in which rates of
growth are either greater or less than one are different in that the best
“runner” doesn’t necessarily win the race. With these alternatives, there is
no optimization of biological fitness, and adaptations need not accumulate
over the long term. The heritable features of an interactor are no longer
the primary determinants of success in the evolutionary race; instead an
element of temporal chance enters the picture. So replicator types with
superior abilities do not necessarily increase in frequency over time. The
ideal outcome arises only when replicator birth rates are Malthusian. But
this is just as expected, since it was a reading of Malthus that inspired
Darwin’s conception of survival of the fittest in the first place.
REPLICATION REGIMES
SELECTION
REGIME
REPLICATION
TYPE
MECHANISM
GROWTH RATE
CHARACTERISTICS
survival of
the fittest
first-order
replication
(autocatalysis
template
(ribosome)
Malthusian
(exponential)
success depends on
own characteristics
only
survival of
everybody
first-order
replication
(autocatalysis)
complement-
matching
(DNA)
parabolic
(sub-
exponential)
selection is not
based
on own qualities
survival of
the first
second-order
replication
(catalysis)
sexual
reproduction
hyperbolic
(super-
exponential
invasion is difficult
regardless of
individual
capabilities

—— Adding Rooms to Darwin’s House · 91 ——
So here’s the bottom line from Replicator theory: Replicators use
different sorts of mechanisms to make copies of themselves. The type of
mechanism they use determines the speed at which those copies can be
made.
These growth rates in turn determine very different classes of
evolutionary dynamics.
Thus replication proceeds at a pace dependent on the concentration of
existing replicators of the same type or the availability of other resources,
and on whether the replicator or an assistant serves as the catalyst to the
reaction. These different mechanisms of replication produce distinct rates
of increase over time.
Each replication regime is consistent with basic
Darwinian principles, but the path evolution follows—and who wins the
race—turns out to depend on the distinctive means by which a particular
replicator accomplishes the vital task of replication. Different replicators,
because they are physical things, will accomplish their evolutionary goals
through different mechanisms.
And this means that the outcomes will
vary because the dynamics of selection depend on the rate at which a
population grows, which in turn critically influences the kind of
equilibrium one can expect at the end.
Different kinds of evolutionary regimes are possible even with the
first-order replicator dynamic, because growth rates can range from
parabolic (or sub-exponential) to exponential. So one class of replicators,
the self-catalyzers, can themselves produce qualitatively different kinds of
evolutionary dynamics. What varies within this class is the kinetics of the
replication reaction, or the steps through which each replicator must go to
produce a copy. In effect, which molecules can be found bound together
varies at each point in the reaction. It is these intermediate combinations
of elements that are key to the kind of growth rates that can be achieved.
An appreciation of mechanisms is therefore absolutely crucial to
understand evolution at a given level of organization. Abstract models are
simply not enough.
As noted earlier, the first three criteria of replication—causation,
similarity, and information transfer—would leave it a purely functional
notion, while the duplication criterion tended to make the definition more
mechanistic in nature.
This trend toward greater physical specificity is
furthered by the need to identify a replication reaction for each kind of
replicator.
Where, how, and under what conditions does replication
occur?
Answering such questions goes a long way toward eliminating

—— 92 · THE ELECTRIC MEME ——
the confusions, which abound in the philosophical literature, about what
can be classified as a replicator (suggestions have ranged widely, from
photocopies to bird nests to the life cycles of organisms to species).
Replication reactions ground the replication process in a time, place, and
sequence of events that result in the duplication of some physical structure.
The replication reaction concept also makes it clear that, despite the
often-repeated phrase “self-replication”—and the idea that replicators are
omnipotent agents able to achieve their goals at will, without help—no
replicator really ever “goes it alone.”
How could it when it must by
definition produce two out of one?
At minimum, it will require raw
materials out of which to construct the copy. DNA requires an incredibly
elaborate group of co-participants to reproduce itself and must also find
itself in a very special location: the nucleus of a living cell. Take DNA out
of this context—place it in a test tube, for example—and the molecules
just sit there in gooey clumps, uselessly tangled up like submicroscopic
wads of genetic spaghetti.
So replication appears to be a highly complex, specialized kind of
event that typically takes place within a close confine.
A replication
reaction is the cauldron within which replication can take place. To find
the traces of a replicator (such as a meme), then, we need to look out for a
chain of specific events—a chain of replication reactions.
References to theory, however, do not exhaust the evidence from which
we can draw to make claims about the nature of memes. There are also
other replicators—either recently discovered or recently invented—that
provide a much broader perspective on what a replicator can be like than
the standard example, genes, provides.
Therefore the next chapter
explores what we can learn from the ways in which these other replicators
work. While this exercise has its own intrinsic interest, it will also prove
crucial to limiting the kinds of approaches we can take when building our
model of meme replication.

Chapter Four
THEREPLICATORZOO
We can see why there should be so striking a parallelism in the
distribution of organic beings throughout space, and in their
geological succession throughout time; for in both cases the beings
have been connected by the bond of ordinary generation, and the
means of modification have been the same.
–Charles Darwin
Nowadays it’s not just genes anymore. Replicators abound. Indeed it is
now widely argued that DNA was probably not the first replicator to arise
on planet Earth, being rather too sophisticated in its repair abilities and
copying fidelity to have sprung up from nothing.
Many kinds of
replicators now exist or have existed, on many substrates. For insight into
the general prospect of replication as a phenomenon, we need not rely just
on theory, which we’ve just discussed, but can learn from the existing
examples of replicators.
All these mates-to-memes should provide
considerable heuristic inspiration for anyone attempting to delineate the
characteristics of a cultural replicator.
This intellectual wellspring has
gone largely untapped by memeticists, but we can use it now to help us
determine what a meme’s qualities must be. I therefore propose that we
look closely at two well-documented cases of alternatives to genes: prions,
a biological replicator independent of genes, and the replicators based
inside artifacts called computer viruses.
93

—— 94 · THE ELECTRIC MEME ——
SPONGYGRAY MATTER
In 1957, a few years after he co-discovered the double helix, Francis Crick
proposed a very famous hypothesis. It states that “once ‘information’ has
passed into protein it cannot get out again. In more detail, the transfer of
information from nucleic acid to nucleic acid, or from nucleic acid to
protein may be possible, but transfer from protein to protein, or from
protein to nucleic acid is impossible.” Later, after it had proven to form
the foundation of molecular biology, Crick called this hypothesis the
“central dogma” of biology.
Crick’s dogma defined the difference
between
two
kinds
of
biological
specificity,
or
the
transfer
of
informational
constraints—that
of
each
DNA
sequence
for
its
complementary strand, and that between DNA—and protein in terms of
information flow.
But in the final years of the last millennium, Crick’s central dogma
fell. The reason? Direct protein-to-protein information transfer was found
to be possible in prions, the infamous class of proteins we met in the first
chapter of this book.
They are a new class of replicators with many
features distinct from DNA- or RNA-based replicators, thanks largely to
the fact that they have a different substrate than genes or viruses. How are
they capable of replicating themselves without relying on DNA? With the
aid of a catalyst, prions cause another molecule of the same class to adopt
an infectious shape like their own simply through contact. Thus prions are
an important and only recently discovered mechanism for the inheritance
of information through means other than genes.
This is an exceptionally profound development for biology.
As the
first instance of a very different mode of replication from genes, but within
the biological realm, prions have generated considerable excitement. In
fact, they have had the scientific community in an uproar for years because
they cause infectious diseases strictly through the transmission of protein
particles. The discovery merited a Nobel Prize for Stanley Prusiner, who,
against a backdrop of resistance and disbelief among most of his
colleagues, doggedly pursued the possibility of a rogue biological entity
replicating without the assistance of genes.
The prion story has only recently been worked out, and some details of
how replication in proteins happens are still not understood.
But how
proteins are formed turns out to be crucial to the story.
Proteins are made of building blocks known as amino acids that are

—— The Replicator Zoo · 95 ——
arranged like beads on a string.
After the cell’s machinery has put it
together, one amino acid at a time, these linear chains fold up on
themselves into unique three-dimensional structures—typically the shape
that makes it most stable. This optimal arrangement is called the protein’s
“native state.”
Given suitable conditions, most small proteins will
spontaneously, adopt their native states.
Since form and function are
tightly coupled in proteins, this shape allows them to carry out intricate
biological functions. For instance, the protein’s shape might be a knob
that fits into the cranny on some section of DNA, meaning it can bind
there and thereafter inhibit that gene’s expression.
Since it is difficult to observe the folding process accurately (it
happens very rapidly and at a small scale), it would be nice to be able to
infer a protein’s shape from its amino acid sequence. But no one has yet
been able to predict how a two-dimensional sequence will contort itself
into a three-dimensional object.
Protein folding is governed by the
formation of electrochemical bonds between different parts of the growing
molecular chain. Biochemists know in principle how these rules work, but
they can’t yet deduce how they are applied in any particular case, because
the number of options is too vast. A protein just 100 amino acids long
could theoretically adopt around 1090 different shapes—a truly vast
number.
The problem thus appears, from most perspectives, to be
devilishly hard. The computer company IBM announced in 1999 that it
would
spend
$100
million
to
build
the
world’s
most
powerful
supercomputer—one
500
times
faster
than
any available
today—
specifically to deal with the protein-folding problem.
Even with this
petaflop machine (one capable of executing 1 million billion operations
per second), it will take nearly a year to simulate the folding process of an
average protein.
But proteins are able to regularly fold inside your body almost
instantaneously, which suggests something is amiss: Is the human
organism really computing so much information so fast, or have the folks
at IBM and elsewhere incorrectly specified the problem?
Some recent
results suggest that protein-folding may be simpler than it looks. It can’t
be the case that proteins are doing the same calculations as an IBM
supercomputer in fractions of a second.
They must be relying upon
natural constraints to help perform the job of acquiring a shape.
Considerable success in modeling the folding of proteins has recently
been achieved by ignoring what the IBM computational effort will focus

—— 96 · THE ELECTRIC MEME ——
on: the complex details by which each atom interacts with each other atom
to construct the protein molecule. Instead the newer approaches focus on
the coarse-grained features of relationships between the amino acid
sequence in DNA and known rules by which molecules generally structure
themselves.
In fact, fundamental physical laws underlie the protein-
folding process.
These laws significantly constrain what can happen,
which eases the modeling problem.
It turns out that molecular chains, as they grow, explore a far smaller
range of different shapes than is theoretically available to them.
In
particular, the topology of a protein—the three-dimensional shape it winds
up in—appears to determine major features of how it folds. Thus both
protein structures and protein-folding mechanisms can be predicted, to
some extent, using models based on simplified representations of the
polypeptide chain at least for small proteins. This means modelers can
take a relatively large-scale view of the folding process, rather than
worrying about the details of how this or that atom links up with others in
its neighborhood. So new methods based on the end-state of the process—
the protein’s overall shape—have shown great promise in predicting
protein-folding mechanisms.
Sometimes, however, the process goes awry, and the protein doesn’t
wind up with the shape it was supposed to have.
In some cases, this
misfolding turns the protein into a prion. This may not be a problem for
the prion, but for an organism housing such proteins it can be disastrous.
Perhaps the most interesting example of a protein-folding disorder is the
class of diseases called “transmissible spongiform encephalopathies”
(TSEs). The three primary TSEs are scrapie in sheep and goats, bovine
spongiform encephalopathy (BSE) or “mad cow” disease in cattle, and
Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease (CID) in humans. Testimony to the significance
of prions comes from the current public-health crisis concerning BSE and
CJD, which are closely related diseases.
TSEs have a long incubation
period in which victims show no symptoms, followed by a relatively short
clinical phase, ending typically in death. They are all characterized by the
accumulation of a specific form of prion protein in the central nervous
system.
The body is constantly producing the proteins associated with TSEs like
CJD.
Normally the protein folds properly, is chemically active (remains
soluble by a variety of agents), and is disposed of without problem

—— The Replicator Zoo · 97 ——
by the body: natural cleansing powers.
But prions can adopt a second
configuration that is inactive.
In this shape, it becomes resistant to
solution by enzymes and therefore aggregates in body tissues.
That a
protein can have both active and inactive states is not unusual. What is
surprising about prions is that once a single protein molecule in a cell
takes on this inactive state, it can influence other nearby molecules of the
same type to adopt a similar state.
Suppose, for example, that a small
amount of the protein misfolds so as to become a CJD-related prion. If
this prion bumps into a normally folded protein, it causes a refolding
process in that protein so that it ends up as another infectious prion,
despite its perfectly normal amino acid sequence.
Significantly, this
influence can continue even after the cell undergoes division and new
protein molecules are made.
So long as the body keeps producing the
normal protein, each CJD prion can keep on creating more and more of its
brethren out of these new recruits. The result is insoluble masses of prions
(called plaques) that continually grow larger and larger, showing up as
pockets in the network of neurons in the brain.
In effect, the prion is
replicating itself even though it includes no nucleic acid of its own.
Prion replication shows all the standard features of an evolutionary
process. A single type of normal prion protein, inserted into the brains of
living laboratory mice, for example, can be converted by the mouse into
two different forms, depending on the type of abnormal human prion that
initiates the conversion process. These “strains” of prions consist of the
same protein misfolded in different ways. Even though all the different
strains of a particular prion contain a common genetic sequence, each
protein strain has a distinct shape, and each strain of prion can impose its
own brand of misfolding on its normal cousin by simple contact.
It
thereby transmits the disease with the unique characteristics of that strain
to other protein molecules. Like a disease, the specific manifestations of
the molecule in the individual are determined, then, not by the abnormal
gene or the sequence of amino acids in the protein, but purely by the
abnormal shape taken on by the protein. It is this shape that is infectious.
And the different strains of these prion diseases “breed true” as they are
transmitted from one host to another.
Odd as it may seem, inheritance
without DNA is possible in the weird world of prions. A single nervous
system can even harbor multiple prion strains with specific and
independent consequences.

—— 98 · THE ELECTRIC MEME ——
These strain differences are also associated with slight differences in
the protein deposits that cause the disease. Scientists have recently used
these strain differences to show that a few British people truly have “mad
cow” disease, the form seen in cattle, rather than the usual human form of
Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease.
What is now called “new variant CJD” is a
consequence of the transmission of BSE prions from cattle to humans;
people are now dying of “mad cow” disease under a new name. So the
ability of prions to cross host species boundaries is clear and appears to be
easier than for DNA- or RNA-based viruses. Even when individuals don’t
exhibit the symptoms of a prion disease, they can nevertheless be
“carriers” of that prion and then transmit it to others of their own, or a
different, species. The “species barrier” that limits infection of one host
species by prions from another type of host now appears to be highly
porous.
Are prions likely to be widely found in biology?
Leading prion
researchers think so. Although nucleic acids will likely remain the main
agent of biological heredity, it is possible that since we now know how to
look for them, we may begin to find prions all over the place as
explanations for diseases previously attributed to other evolutionary
agents, like viruses.
Certainly the prion protein corresponds to a gene naturally found in the
genome of all vertebrates (as well as yeast), which is expressed in most
tissues of their bodies. And more and more types of prions are constantly
being found; entirely different classes of proteins can be prions.
The truly ancient origin of many of these proteins suggests they have
positive functions.
However, the prions in older families of organisms
(like yeast) are not as dangerous to their hosts as those in later-arriving
species like mammals. The infectious proteins in yeast are prions in the
sense that they have the ability to change configuration, but they do not
cause disease or kill their hosts, nor even significantly disrupt normal
biological functions. What they do is introduce new functions, which can
nevertheless be quite significant. One yeast prion, for example, Sup35,
can cause new sections of the yeast genome to be transcribed, leading to
the expression of genes that would otherwise remain silent. Certainly if
prions are found to be ubiquitous, they could only proliferate because most
of them have some kind of value to the organism that has been selected
for.

—— The Replicator Zoo · 99 ——
SURVIVAL OF THE PRIONS
The principles of replication discussed in Chapter 3, if they are general,
should be applicable to these new replicators. We can begin by examining
how the replication reaction works in prions.
It’s not yet entirely clear, but experts believe that during prion
replication, an as yet unidentified factor, called protein X, first binds to a
normal protein molecule. Protein X is believed to act as what biochemists
call a molecular chaperone—essentially a catalyst that increases the rate of
conversion of reaction materials into the final product by moving the
normal protein to the place where the replication reaction itself can take
place. Once in place, this complex (composed of the protein together with
the catalytic chaperone) then binds to a third molecule: a nearby prion.
Then, by an unknown process, the normal molecule is transformed into a
second molecule of prionic form. Finally the original prion and protein X
come unhooked, leaving the new prion to float free, ready to infect other
“innocent” molecules. The step that limits the rate at which the abnormal
forms can be produced in the body has little to do with the availability of
source prions; it has more to do with the first stage in replication, when the
normal protein binds to the chaperone, protein X.
The need to get other players, specifically the chaperone molecule,
involved during the conversion of protein molecules provides evidence
that the replication process has (at least) two steps and involves an
intermediate complex composed of multiple players.
Further, “normal”
prion protein molecules are converted into “infectives” at different rates
depending on the type of chaperone used.
Prion “birth” rates are
determined, then, by the kind of chaperone protein available and by how
fast it works.
The net rate at which prion-filled plaques accumulate, and hence the
time-to-symptoms for a particular strain of prionic disease, is a function
not just of the prion’s birth rate but also its death rate, because it turns out
that prions are not completely resistant to dissolution by enzymes, The
body can work to clear these blobs of protein from the brain. It’s just that
some strains of prion are more resistant to dissolution than others. So it is
the birth rate (a function of chaperone type) minus the death rate
(susceptibility to dissolution) that explains the overall speed with which
prions accumulate in the host.

—— 100 · THE ELECTRIC MEME ——
With this knowledge of the replication reaction, we can begin to think
about the kind of evolutionary dynamics this sort of reaction suggests. It
appears that prions can produce a copy of themselves if only one other one
is in the vicinity.
If one becomes two, then the number of prions will
increase at a linear rate.
Replicator Theory tells us this means these
replicative will experience a selection regime in which only the fittest
survive, just as in the case of genes. This means that types of prions that
are slow to replicate (or quick to degenerate) can be outcompeted by new
variants and can be replaced over time in the population of hosts. It pays
in this case to pick the right chaperone to bring to the replication dance.
What else have we learned about prions as replicators that might be
useful to us in our definition of a meme? Prions are a type of protein with
a three-dimensional configuration that allows it to replicate through the
conversion of an existing physical substrate into a different form. Like
viruses, prions are parasitic replicators because the substrate they depend
on is the end result of gene expression.
In this case, DNA makes the
protein molecules for the prions to infect.
But the ability of prions to
replicate is independent of genes, thanks to the specifics of their
replication mechanism.
Prions, furthermore, do not appear to combine into larger structures;
they don’t react with larger functional conglomerations of material,
although huge masses of insoluble prion protein can accumulate through
sheer repetition of the replication reaction.
Thus replication through
conformational change is the only trick prions have learned.
They are
limited replicators; any prion can adopt only a few different shapes or
strains. However, prions are modular: Prion molecules contain particular
sections, or domains, that can be attached to other proteins that transform
them into prions. These domains are modular in the sense that they are
add-on: and are transferable between widely varying types of protein from
evolutionarily distant species. For example, a novel prion was created by
recombinant methods in which the crucial sections of a yeast prion were
fused onto a protein from a rat. Further, this new rat prion (in a type of
protein not previously infective) could be reinserted into the yeast and
retain its infectivity. This modularity suggests that, as species evolved,
other
proteins
might
have
picked
up
these
prion
domains
and

—— The Replicator Zoo · 101 ——
also become elements of epigenetic inheritance. If they did, this kind of
protein inheritance pattern could have had an important effect on the
process of species evolution.
As suggested above, prions exhibit some truly peculiar characteristics
compared to genes. For example, they are reversible. Because prions can
change a protein’s shape and function without affecting the genes that
code for it, the protein can switch back and forth between its normal and
infectious forms—either spontaneously, with the help of molecular
chaperones, or through simple biochemical manipulations by people in
laboratories.
Prions enable an organism to respond to environmental
changes and to pass these changes on to its progeny.
This ability to
respond to the here and now endows their inheritance with a certain
Lamarckian flavor,
Prions can also arise in many ways.
The initial folding error that
initiates a chain of replication reactions may be induced by a mutation in
the gene sequence coding for that protein.
This represents a kind of
genetic predilection to become a prion. Alternatively the misfolding may
just occur spontaneously, as a result of some purely local incongruity at
the time the folding of a molecule occurs; perhaps the presence of a rogue
molecule somehow influences the outcome.
Shape can also be
phenotypically inherited through the contact of two molecules within a
host, as described above.
Finally, as a variant of the contact scenario,
there are cases of interpersonal transmission in which a prion molecule can
migrate from one host to another if the tissue in which it resides is
consumed by another host, and there continue its business. (This is what
happens when people eat infected beef.) These are four different routes to
the production of new prions, only one of which (spontaneous mutation) is
found in nuclear genes (viruses can also perform inter-host transmission).
Since they can arise in these new ways, prions will exhibit profoundly
different ways of spreading through populations than genes are capable of.
Prions are real eye-openers for those who come to memes thinking only of
the example of genes as replicators. Because prions work quite differently
from genes, the possibilities for a cultural replication mechanism are
expanded considerably by taking this comparative viewpoint. As we will
see, the next class of replicator we will investigate computer viruses shares
a number of the prions’ unusual qualities.

—— 102 · THE ELECTRIC MEME ——
ATTACK OF THEBINARIES
The electric things have their lives, too. Paltry as those lives are. –
Philip K. Dick
First law of computer security: don’t buy a computer. Second law: if
you ever buy a computer, don’t turn it on.
– Virus writer “Dark
Avenger”
Computers are confusing things.
We recognize them as machines, but
they also appear to be intelligent. It has been shown that we tend to treat
eyes blinking and mouths moving on television and computer screens as
fellow flesh and blood.
At a visceral level, humans don’t know the
difference between the real thing and a simulation. We can even put the
calculating hardware inside a metal-and-plastic body that moves around,
which makes a computerized robot even more confusing. We also treat
computers as agents because they are becoming more and more integral to
modern human society, doing many things we used to do for ourselves,
like make cars, answer the phone, balance our bank accounts, and post our
communications. As a result, we talk to them on the phone and get lonely
when they don’t talk back.
Given this near-humanity, can computers take the next step, become
even more powerful? Can the ultimate power—the ability to replicate—
reside inside the brains of these creatures, just as it does (perhaps) inside
ours?
Computer programmers often claim that relatively simple algorithms
are capable of replication.
Here’s one version of this idea, a program
rewritten in a high-level language that prints out a copy of its own
instruction set in quasi-English on paper:
main(){char q=34,n=10,*a=”main(){char
q=34,n=10,*a=%c%s%c;printf(a,q,a,q,n);}%c”;printf(a,q,a,q,n)
’}
But this tiny, one-line program, written in the popular language C, is
not a replicator, at least not as defined here. The problem, of course, is
that the source program consists of magnetic states on a rotating disk (the
computer’s hard disk), while the “copy” is ink on paper.
But a set of
logical states in computer memory and a bunch of ink marks on paper are
not the same thing.
Neither can the program produce a copy of the
original memory states in another computer (at least, not without
reprogramming).

—— The Replicator Zoo · 103 ——
This confusion about replication is probably due to a surfeit of
“symbolic” thinking.
Computer scientists tend to slip conceptually
between programs written by the end user and the states of memory
managed all those programs, considering then: as synonymous. They are
not.
Combining talk of abstract information with the tendency to
anthropomorphize intelligent machines can be deadly to clear thinking.
When we talk of computers, it’s perhaps better to avoid the whole world of
symbols and simply talk of code—some bit of structure that can be
translated into another kind of structure. So bid goodbye to bits and bytes;
let’s speak instead of binary states in electrical circuits.
My denial of the claims of eminent computer scientists about
replication in computer programs is not meant to be taken in blanket
terms.
Replication in computers can and does occur on a daily, basis.
Further, it can occur both within and between computers.
We call the
programs that accomplish this feat “computer viruses” (or what I will call
comp-viruses, for short). But before we proceed any further, let’s attempt
to be clear about what we’re talking about. What is a comp-virus?
Frederick
Cohen,
currently,
a
researcher
at
Sandia
National
Laboratories and an independent computer system security consultant, is
the acknowledged intellectual “guru” of the comp-virus community. He
single-handedly made the study of comp-viruses academically respectable.
Cohen defines a comp-virus as a sequence of symbols in machine memory
that, when interpreted by the machine, causes another sequence to appear
somewhere else in memory.
Cohen’s shorthand definition: A computer
virus is “a program that can ‘infect’ other programs by modifying them to
include a, possibly evolved, version of itself.” A comp-virus, then, is a
program that reproduces its own code by attaching itself to other
executable files in such a way that the virus code is executed when the
infected file is called up.
What makes a comp-virus interesting, according to Cohen, is “its
ability to attach itself to other programs and cause them to become viruses
as well.”
All viruses work by linking themselves to the existing
programming on a host machine in some fashion. For example, “shell”
viruses completely enclose the original file or executable program, making
the original code an internal subroutine of what is, in effect, a whole new
program.
“Intrusive” viruses overwrite some or all of the original host
programming, perhaps to replace a subroutine or insert a new interrupt

—— 104 · THE ELECTRIC MEME ——
sequence that they can make use of for replication. Most comp-viruses,
however, are “add-ons,” because they are easier to write. They merely
insert additional lines of programming somewhere into a sequence of code
already in memory, making the original program grow larger. In any case,
when one of these host files is activated, the viral code executes and links
copies of itself to even more hosts.
Viruses are thus programs just like any other on your PC. They consist
of instructions that your computer executes. What makes viruses special is
that when they execute, their primary purpose is to place their self-
replicating code in other programs, so that when those other programs are
executed, even more programs wind up being infected faith the replicating
code. The infected program becomes, in effect, the replicator’s interactor
or vehicle for further replication.
Since this is a replication process
dependent on host resources, it is parasitic in nature.
The virus is also
detrimental in the sense that it co-opts its host’s resources and can order up
aberrant behavior ranging from the posting of an innocuous message to the
screen (thus announcing its presence) to wiping out hard drives and
clogging
networked
computer
systems
with
superfluous
data
and
messages.
This last kind of activity, although distinctive, is not a
necessary component of a comp-virus, however.
Interest in comp-viruses has been almost exclusively practical: how to
stop the next comp-virus epidemic from bringing down the world’s
computer network.
But what can comp-viruses tell us about how
replication can be achieved in yet another kind of physical substrate? The
similarities between comp-viruses and memes, it will turn out, are
significant—especially in the way their replication reactions work and the
sequence of stages through which each of these replicators has evolved.
Getting the most out of this case study requires beginning with a look at
how comp-viruses reproduce.
A DAY IN THE LIFE OF A COMP-VIRUS
Every viable computer virus must have at least two basic parts, or
subroutines.
As these sections of code are executed, these subroutines
translate into stages in the virus’s life-cycle. First, the virus must contain a
search routine, which locates new, uninfected hosts that are worthwhile
targets for replication. This routine will determine how fast the virus can

—— The Replicator Zoo · 105 ——
reproduce, which is a function of how broad the search criteria are. If the
virus can infect multiple kinds of media and a wide number of file types,
then it will find fresh victims faster. But, as with all programs, a trade-off
between size and functionality pops up here. The more sophisticated the
search routine is, the more coding it will require. So although an efficient
search routine may help a virus to spread faster, it will make the virus
bigger, and so easier to detect.
Second, every computer virus must contain a routine to copy itself into
the area that the search routine locates. This is the part of the life cycle
during which the replication reaction must take place. The copy routine
will only be sophisticated enough to do its job without getting caught.
Again, the smaller it is, the better. How small it can be will depend on
how complex a virus it must copy. For example, a virus that infects only
COM files (part of the PC operating system) can get by with a much
smaller copy routine than a virus that infects EXE (or software program)
files. This is because the EXE file structure is much more complex, so the
virus needs to do more to attach itself to an EXE tile.
When the virus executes, it usually intends to infect other programs.
What can vary is when it will infect them.
Some viruses infect other
programs each time they are executed; other viruses infect only when a
certain triggering condition occurs. This trigger could be a date or time, a
sequence of keystrokes by the computer user, the presence or absence of a
suite of files on hard disk, certain file attributes, a counter within the virus,
or some random event. If the comp-virus is resident in computer memory,
it can silently lurk there waiting for someone to access a diskette, copy a
file, or execute a program before it infects anything. This trigger can be a
rare event, so you can never be sure that a virus isn’t already present on
your computer. Sophisticated comp-viruses are very selective about when
they infect programs because this is vital to the virus’s survival. If the
virus infects too often, it is more likely to be discovered before it can
spread very far.
In addition to the two basic stages—which enable the virus to locate
suitable hosts and attach itself to them, respectively—many computer
viruses have other routines appended to their “genomes.” First, it is usually
helpful to incorporate some additional features into the virus to avoid
detection, either by the computer user or by commercial virus-detection
software.
For example, a virus can overwrite some part of system

—— 106 · THE ELECTRIC MEME ——
software and essentially co-opt the system (this is called using “stealth”).
It then becomes immune from inspection because it is now part of the
computer’s operating system—in effect, it becomes the virus inspector and
so can ignore itself.
As a second kind of supplementary section, a comp-virus may include
program code that, when executed, stops normal computer operation,
causes the destruction of data in computer memory, or plays practical
jokes on the user, such as flashing silly messages on the screen.
Such
routines may give the virus a certain “character,” but they are not essential
to its basic biological functions. In fact, such routines—which add what
we can call an “attack” phase to the viral life cycle—are usually
detrimental to the virus’s goal of survival and self-reproduction, because
they make the fact of the virus’s existence known to the user.
As might be expected, this secondary functionality is often omitted
altogether. The more appropriate image for comp-viruses is therefore one
of “search and copy” rather than “search and destroy.” It is only due to the
fact that those individuals doing the programming have malicious
motivations that these often puerile sideshows get added on to a comp-
virus’s code. How else can we explain a virus that causes a quote from the
television show The Simpsons to pop up on the screen whenever the time
of day matches the date (such as 4:10 on April 10, for example), which the
Melissa virus did?
Computer viruses, just like their biological cousins, are not inherently
destructive. The essential feature of a computer program that causes it to
be classified as a virus is not its ability to destroy data, but its ability to
gain control of a computer and make a fully functional copy of itself.
Being destructive slows down a comp-virus’s replication rate and injects
new selection pressures into the evolution equation, neither of which are
desirable from the virus’s own point of view. For similar reasons, a bio-
virus typically evolves fewer destructive capabilities—that is, betonies less
virulent—over time because harming hosts is detrimental to the survival of
the virus.
The usually malevolent effects of these viruses can either be designed
or arise inadvertently. Often the damage to a computer is not intended, but
because many virus writers are not first-rate programmers, destruction
arises from the fact that the virus contains poor-quality code. One of the
most common viruses in the early days—the Stoned virus, which

—— The Replicator Zoo · 107 ——
flashed the message “Your PC is now stoned” was not intentionally
harmful.
Unfortunately the virus’s author did not anticipate anything
beyond 360K floppy disks, with the result that the virus will try to hide its
own code in an area on larger diskettes that causes corruption of the entire
disk. Comp-virus designers still often don’t seem to mean to cause the
harm they do. Even the worst comp-virus thus far—the Love Bug virus—
was apparently released mistakenly.
The attack phase of a comp-virus life cycle is optional because an
independent sequence of code is responsible for it.
This is entirely
different from the case of DNA or prions, where all such effects are a
necessary consequence of the replicator’s physical structure. The protein
coded for by a gene is the only possible result of the nucleotide sequence
at that point in the DNA molecule. Similarly, a prion’s disease-producing
ability is entirely due to its strain, which is in turn an automatic reflection
of its conformation, or shape. As the physical nature of these replicators
changes, so too do their effects on individual hosts.
The physical footprint of comp-viruses also influences the computers
they infect. The section of their code for the replication function gives
them a certain length, trigger, and location in memory. This means the
virus takes up a certain amount of real estate that other programs cannot
occupy and requires a certain amount of resources to maintain and produce
copies of itself.
These can be considered the automatic, or primary,
consequences of its presence.
What is new with comp-viruses—what makes them verbs different
from the biological replicators we have examined—is the ability of
programmers to tack on extra bits to the end of the creature, the code
producing the intentionally damaging effects, which can be called their
“secondary phenotype.”
Having phenotypic effects isn’t novel for a
replicator, but the fact that they have to be separately coded for is; in this
case, the “function” doesn’t automatically follow from the “form” of the
virus, as is true of biological replicators. There is a real physical division
within the replicator between the sections devoted to these different
functions: You can cut off the “tail” of a comp-virus—the extra bit that
says, “Your computer is stoned”—and thereby remove its ability to inflict
damage on a computer, without harming its ability to replicate itself. This
division between primary and secondary phenotypic effects is only
possible because comp-viruses are super-molecular in scale.

—— 108 · THE ELECTRIC MEME ——
So how does this division of code and activity in comp-viruses work in
practice? The particulars of a life cycle can vary from virus to virus, but
for our purposes we can just consider how the most basic infectors are
spread. This typical comp-virus life cycle begins with a single infected
computer.
The virus in that computer searches for a new host file by
looking for files—either elsewhere in the same storage unit or on other
computers—without the trademark fragment of code known as a virus’s
signature. A signature is a marker of identity that a comp-virus appends to
an infected file to say, “I’m already here, don’t bother!” because
continuous reinfection of the same file can lead to a significant depletion
of memory (in the form of very large files with multiple copies of the virus
tacked onto it) and the possibility of compromised functionality—both of
which increase the probability a virus will be detected by the user.
However, once an uncontacted executable file is found, the virus is free
to attach itself, turning it into an infected file. When the user attempts to
execute this file, it first performs the vital biological function: It infects
another file.
Then it executes the normal instructions of that file as if
nothing had happened. With the exception of a slight delay (for executing
the viral search and copy routines), the infected file appears to still be the
normal one—that is, until the triggering condition causes damage
somewhere. This is because the last thing the infected file does is to check
the secondary viral functions: Is it time to inflict damage? If so, and only
then, the comp-virus does whatever injury it has been programmed to do.
CLASSIFYING VIRUSES
Not all comp-viruses get through this generic life cycle in exactly the
same way.
The mechanisms they use to accomplish their search and
copy functions can vary. We therefore need to be clear about what kinds
of comp-viruses there are.
Although many topologies of computer
viruses exist, few of these classifications are theoretically sound. Some
identify viruses according to the type of file they can infect: boot sectors, the
operating system, software programs, or macro files. Other classifications
are based on how the virus operates; yet others distinguish whether the virus
remains resident in memory or is merely a transient presence there.
Classifications can even be based on what kind of defenses the virus uses to

—— The Replicator Zoo · 109 ——
avoid detection.
Often these different traits are conjoined in the same
listing, confounding categories.
Some principle must be introduced to
eliminate the chaos.
Replicator Theory provides a clear rationale for
developing a classification of comp-viruses, but we still need to do a little
investigation to determine just how the application of these principles will
work out in practice, given current computer technology.
The architecture for nearly all present-day computers was first devised
more than 50 years ago bad the brilliant Hungarian mathematician John
von Neumann, a codeveloper of the most popular formal theory in the
social sciences today (game theory), as well as a founding father of
modern computational science.
His basic idea was to make computers
more powerful by dividing the information-processing task from the
memory task.
In this way, “programs”—a set of built-in rules for
processing information—could be distinguished from “data,” which was
specific to particular jobs.
This division is manifest in contemporary
computers in their very hardware.
The central processing unit (CPU ),
usually found on a large, flat circuit card (called the motherboard), is there
to manipulate data that has been acquired from various devices, either for
storing data or communicating with the outside world, to which it is
connected via a hodgepodge of wires, cables, cards, and jumpers.
The
CPU uses a solid-state network of wires and transistors that function by
transferring millions of electrical pulses per second through a complex
maze of circuits. Other microprocessors take software instructions from
long-term data storage sources, such as read-only memory (ROM) or a
hard drive, and place them in the computer’s main memory, or random-
access memory (RAM), where they await access to its CPU.
Data may be stored in a computer either permanently or temporarily.
(Cognitive science later instituted this same division when it distinguished
between short-term and long-term memory.)
RAM is the area in a
computer where data is held temporarily while an application or the
operating system is using it.
In RAM, signals are established by an
electronic charge communicated to RAM by some other part of the
computer. In contrast, in ROM, the memory chip has built-in, permanent
electrical states. ROM can retain data after the computer has been turned
off, while RAM cannot. When RAM loses power, the memory states that
represent data there are lost.

—— 110 · THE ELECTRIC MEME ——
Maintaining the accuracy of memory depends on control over any changes
in the electrical values of computer registers. Such changes must occur
only in response to a legitimate command from some other part of the
system, which reach that register in the form of an electronic signal. For
example, holding down the Shift key and then pressing the m key on the
computer keyboard sends a signal to the computer’s processor that is
translated internally from “M” into the binary equivalent of the number 77
(the ASCII code for “M”), which happens to be 01001101. In those terms,
the
letter
is
usable
as
pulses
of
electricity
racing
through
a
microprocessor’s various parts.
That’s why a computer needs to be
plugged in (or have a source of battery power) to work. The various parts
of the computer thus communicate information to one another in the form
of signals: One circuit activates another, changing its state.
This is
accomplished through the exchange of electrons.
So computation in
machines—these days, at least—is all about electrons moving from place
to place, changing the charge of some substrate.
In general, then, computers register information as the absence or
presence of an electric charge. Since there are only two options—on or
off, positive or negative—the computer can only distinguish two different
numbers: 1 and 0. Sending electronic pulses through circuits that either
pass through a transistor to indicate “yes,” or “1,” or are impeded to
indicate “no,” or “0,” creates this binary code. In any of the computer’s
memory devices, one electrical state thus represents a single bit of data—
that is, a single binary decision-unit. However, computer programmers,
being human, often prefer to write down their ideas in a form closer to
human than computer thought and so use software that allows them to
produce a series of language-like instructions called “source code.”
Another piece of software called a compiler turns the source code into
object code, a language intermediate between the programmer’s language
and the computer’s.
Then yet another piece of software, a translator,
turns the object code into machine code, the binary language computers
understand, A comp-virus can thus be written in the machine’s binary
code or in a higher-level language with a large “vocabulary” of
commands, such as Pascal or C or Lisp, but to achieve the necessarily
exacting control over function that parasites require, most comp-virus
writers code directly in machine code.
In any case, the virus always
resides in the computer, stored in memory, as states of electrical or

—— The Replicator Zoo · 111 ——
magnetic charge in physical registers.
This is important to remember
when it comes to thinking about how information can be replicated inside
computers.
The only reasonable classification of replicators from the perspective of
Replicator Theory is according to substrate and replication reaction type.
As just described, comp-viruses replicate by modifying computer memory.
Since only RAM and disk-based memory can be changed by the
computer’s own activity (ROM is permanently set by the computer’s
manufacturer), these are the two kinds of locations where computer
viruses can reside. If we refer back to our first criterion of distinguishing
replicators by their substrate, this means we can distinguish, at the most
fundamental level, between two basic kinds of comp-viruses: RAM-based
and disk-based viruses. I will call these, respectively, “short-term” versus
“long-term” comp-viruses, because any RAM-based virus must die when
RAM is inactivated, and that happens every time a computer is turned off.
Because replication reactions tend to be so specific, we should expect that
a particular comp-virus would replicate in one or the other substrate, but
not both.
However, long-term memory can be stored either as optical
polarizations or as magnetic charges on the surface of a disk of some sort.
So comp-viruses have, in effect, three potential substrates: electronic
short-term memory (RAM), and magnetic or optical long-term memory.
This identifies, then—within the second major category of disk viruses—a
distinction
between
magnetic
and
optical
long-term
comp-viruses.
However, these two kinds of media work in roughly analogous ways, so
this distinction is not very important. Other substrates may be developed
as new technologies for storing information come on-line in the future.
However, I expect the basic principles of replication we have developed
will hold for them as well.
There is yet a third level in our classification scheme below the basic
and secondary substrate distinctions: the type of copy mechanism a comp-
virus uses to replicate. The copy stage of a virus’s life history defines the
replicator reaction and so is another consideration, after substrate, in a
proper hierarchy of replicator types.
All comp-virus life cycles begin on a long-term memory device with a
program being read off by the operating system. But all computer programs,

—— 112 · THE ELECTRIC MEME ——
including viruses, must utilize a computer’s RAM to store data or
instructions as they wait for the CPU. So the basic cycle is one that moves
from long-term to short-term memory and back again. The differences in
viral life cycles come in how the search and copy routines are
implemented.
As we will see, comp-viruses have gone through three
major developments over time. Each represents a new complication to this
basic viral life cycle of transfer between disk-based storage and RAM.
The simplest type of viruses, and the first to arrive, were confined to
RAM in a single computer.
This early age, which I will call Phase I,
began in the 1960s with programs called Darwin and Core War and their
descendants. In the simplest life cycle, the program on long-term memory
is used as a source for instructions submitted to RAM. These instructions
create a “virtual” operating environment within RAM that allows
instructions to be copied inside that environment. These are the simplest
comp-viruses, since they don’t need to carry a lot of baggage for
conducting complex search or copy routines. Their cycles are somewhat
unusual in that it is a one-way trip from disk to RAM, where they replicate
and then die. There may be information about what happened inside RAM
written back to the disk after a run of the virtual program, but this does not
typically modify the source program itself, being rather a kind of log file.
It is important to distinguish between the software program itself, the
virtual operating system that results from the execution of that program,
and the small, executable programs that are written by the virtual operating
system into RAM. The software programs themselves, residing on hard
disk (in magnetic memory), are not simple, since they have the job of
creating the virtual environment and interacting with the computer’s own
operating system. To duplicate a piece of software, you must execute a
file copy procedure, which is accomplished by the computer’s operating
system at the push of a button. The program itself doesn’t instigate this
copying; the computer user does. So the program itself does not replicate.
In such cases, it’s only the little programs, residing in RAM and created
indirectly by the software, that qualify as comp-viruses.
The second type of comp-virus arrived in the early 1980s and
introduced somewhat greater complexity into the viral life cycle. These
viruses used residence in RAM as a springboard for the infection of new

—— The Replicator Zoo · 113 ——
computer hosts. They spread by first infecting long-term memory devices
(like floppy disks) inserted into the host machine. These “alien” disks,
serving as intermediary hosts, would then be physically inserted into
another potential host, a second computer, where the virus could go into
action again by transferring to that machine’s RAM. The object was to
replicate the source program itself, residing on a long-term memory device
such as a hard disk, rather than a RAM-based instruction, as was the case
in Phase I.
In the third phase of development, beginning in the late 1980s, true
network viruses appeared, almost as soon as significant numbers of
computers became directly linked to one another through electrical
connections. In Phase III viruses, the search is broadened to include any
other computer that a signal can reach through the network. Further, the
duplicate is now only linked to the source comp-virus through this signal,
which has effectively mediated the replication process. In some cases, the
replication reaction itself will be split between computers.
The
reproduction cycle now moves from one disk and its RAM to another
computer’s long-term storage through its RAM. This involves yet other
complications than were necessary for Phase II—in particular, the use of
specialized signals for transmitting information over an electronic
network. I will call this kind of inter-computer replicator a network comp-
virus. This is a bit of code that gets into a machine in the form of an
electronic message dispatched by another computer, rather than through
direct physical contact. It requires a host machine capable of producing
signals that transmit viral information directly through a channel to a
second definitive host.
In order to outline this history in more detail, we need to first discuss
what has happened within the “brain” of a single machine and then talk
about the evolution of information transfer in networked artificial
intelligences.
EVOLUTION INSIDE A COMPUTER
Replication within computers can take simple forms, even simpler than the
example provided at the beginning of this chapter. In fact, such replication
is the goal of a major research initiative, begun about twenty years ago,
which has been christened Artificial Life (or ALife, for short).

—— 114 · THE ELECTRIC MEME ——
It isn’t standard nomenclature to call programs from this burgeoning
field of comp-viruses, because they don’t fit the standard image.
First,
they don’t replicate between computers, but rather within them. Second,
they don’t engage in destructive activity, being devoted entirely to
replication within the RAM environment. But I have already argued that
destructiveness is not an intrinsic characteristic of a comp-virus. Third,
they also don’t append themselves to preexisting files. Instead their hosts
are preexisting memory registers. Even so, they are programs that are able
to duplicate themselves elsewhere in memory and so fulfill my basic
definition of a comp-virus.
Recognition that ALife programs deal in comp-viruses also has the
benefit of removing the blinder—which comes from concentrating only on
network comp-viruses—of believing that there is no such thing as a
“good” comp-virus. After all, bio-viruses are used nowadays as delivery
vehicles for genes in gene therapy or for other molecules that serve
medical purposes, so why shouldn’t comp-viruses be used to “cure” sick
computers of some of their ills? Already, comp-viruses are used by the
ALife community to investigate scientific questions, and the potential of
this approach for science and technology is exciting.
Real benefits are
being achieved through the novel use of this kind of replicator.
TIERRA, originally programmed by Thomas Ray (a wildlife biologist
turned hacker) in 1990, is now seen as a classic experiment in ALife.
TIERRA is a real place; it just happens to exist inside computers. It’s an
environment, an “alternative Earth” (tierra is Spanish for “earth”)
composed of a completely featureless terrain—space in RAM—that
basks in the flow of electricity.
Comp-viruses roam though this
environment as strings of machine code that compete with each other
for two resources: computer cycles (“energy”) and memory space
(“territory”).
Further, every now and again, as a viral program is
copied between memory cells, one of its infobits is randomly flipped
by the operating system as a way to mimic the genetic mutations
caused
by
cosmic
radiation
and
errors
of
replication
in
real
organisms.
The result of this reproduction is a slightly different
program that might exhibit useful new functions or contain deficits
that make it unable to further replicate. Old viruses and mutants that
crash are eliminated in each iteration of the program by a death

—— The Replicator Zoo · 115 ——
algorithm (called The Reaper), as either decrepit or unfit, to keep
population numbers down.
TIERRA comes complete with its own operating system, which
functions only within the conscripted area of RAM set aside for the
program. This programs (resident elsewhere in RAM) determines how the
creatures interact with each other, introduces the mutation events into their
reproduction routine, allocates resources, keeps records of events, and
provides graphical feedback to the “outside world” of the computer user.
This TIERRAN operating system is part of the viruses’ artificial
biosphere, the laws of which are to be exploited in any way possible.
Ray’s comp-viruses are self-replicating in the sense that they can
directly
call
instructions
from
the
computer’s
central
information
processor, rather than requiring any keystrokes from the computer user.
Replication is essentially the ability of a program to copy itself elsewhere
in memory. The virtual operating system executes the instructions it finds
in memory in sequence according to address. This means the execution
pointer moves along the genome of each virus in the population, doing
what the instructions found there tell it to do at each point. Thus Ray calls
each virus a “virtual CPU.”
Because the set of 32 instructions in the
TIERRAN language is quite robust, variations introduced into a viral
sequence can remain meaningful.
The virus is also a replicator-cum-
interactor, because its structure (or code) instigates the replication process,
while also serving as the agent competing with other comp-viruses for
space in the TIERRAN ecology. The virus, like its biological counterpart,
has no other “body.” It is directly selected by virtue of its functions; no
layer of protection sits between the code and The Reaper.
In his now-legendary first experiment with TIERRA, Ray seeded his
virtual environment with a single example of what he believed to be the
simplest comp-virus possible.
This was a piece of code he designed
simply to copy itself elsewhere in memory; this copy could then become
active and do the same. Its “genome” was 80 bytes long. He thought at
the time that it would likely take years of additional programming before a
process resembling real evolution would emerge.
But, as he later
recounted, “I never had to write another creature.”
For the first few thousand generations, it’s true, nothing much happened.
But then a number of 81s—mutant viruses with an extra byte of program
code—showed up.
A little later, a 79 appeared.
Because the 79

—— 116 · THE ELECTRIC MEME ——
had one less byte of code than its “parents,” it took less time to reproduce
and hence was able to outcompete the 80s and 81s because it had shorter
generations (the length of time between replications).
It began to take
over the TIERRA ecosystem.
Next something quite unexpected happened.
A 45 emerged.
A 79
seemed reasonable, but how could a 45-byte-long virus reproduce using
only just over half the instructions of the original 80?
When Ray
examined 45’s code, he found the logical answer: 45 was a parasite.
Instead of reproducing itself, it hunted for the reproductive code of an 80,
then called on that code to help it out. This was analogous to the way a
biological virus functions.
“Real” viruses reproduce by inserting their
DNA into a host cell and then using the cell’s reproductive apparatus to
build copies of themselves.
This new digital replicator was a type of
parasite that had evolved the ability to borrow parts of the necessary code
for replication from the more complex replicators in its environment. But
as the “lean, mean” 45s grew in numbers, they began to crowd out the host
80s on which their own reproduction depended, and so they began to die
off as well.
This decline in the numbers of parasites led in turn to an
increase in the population of host 80 codes, causing an oscillatory cycle in
the numbers of the two types of replicators. TIERRA had now become a
real ecosystem with multiple types of digital viruses competing for
resources but maintaining a presence in the RAM soup.
This pattern
mimicked the cycles of growth and decline between hosts and parasites
observed outside computers.
What is more, the comp-hosts began to
evolve characteristics that would make them resistant to the comp-
parasites, and the comp-parasites then found ways of circumventing these
new comp-host defense systems.
An ever-escalating evolutionary arms
race was in progress, the very phenomenon that is believed to have
provided the springboard for the increasing adaptive complexity of living
organisms over evolutionary time.
But this was not the end of the story. The 79s were immune to attack
by the 45 parasite, but eventually a new 51 parasite appeared that could
use 79s to reproduce. Even later carne another surprise: the arrival of a
program only 22 bytes long.
What was more, it was completely self-
contained—not a parasite. TIERRA had evolved a functioning program
using less code than any human programmer was likely to imagine.
Further tinkering with the initial conditions of a run of TIERRA

—— The Replicator Zoo · 117 ——
produced additional examples of processes analogous to those in
biological creatures. Ray found he could select for longer replicators as
well as shorter ones or evolve forms of cooperation among highly related
replicators, cheating, and even sexual reproduction.
For example,
sometimes two comp-viruses attempting to reproduce would choose the
same location for their offspring. Each of the competing viruses might
then overwrite different bits of this same section of memory. The result
would be a hybrid, with part of its code originating from one “parent” and
part from the other.
Ray’s TIERRA thus provided a powerful demonstration that evolution
worked in a binary environment just as it did in nature. Although he had
designed both the environment and its first inhabitant, no new code was
written at any stage in the runs exhibiting the evolution of parasites.
Reproduction, death, natural selection, and mutation seemed to be enough
to cause parasites to appear from nowhere. Ray didn’t need to—and had
not—built them into the system.
Reading Ray’s report convinced John Maynard Smith (one of the most
eminent of contemporary evolutionary thinkers) to announce (in one of the
world’s most prominent scientific journals) that “artificial evolution” in
computers was possible.
However, due to the hazards of over-
anthropomorphizing computer intelligence that I noted earlier, we need to
be very careful about how we interpret the events recounted above. The
question is: Are these viruses real replicators?
After all, it might be
“virtual” replication only, because TIERRA is running in a “virtual
machine,”
Replication might be simulated rather than physical because
the von Neumann architecture, which dominates contemporary computing,
separates processing functions (by the CPU) from memory storage (on
disk). We need to know where the processes relevant to replication are
happening to know if they conform to our expectations from Replicator
Theory. Real binary sequence duplications—copies of memory states—
appear in the RAM of Ray’s computer when he runs TIERRA. But did
they get there through a process of true replication?
This question can be answered by determining whether these viruses
exhibit the four characteristics, discussed in Chapter 3, that identify true
replicators: causation, similarity, information transfer, and duplication.

—— 118 · THE ELECTRIC MEME ——
Let’s use a program from Core War—perhaps the quintessential ALife
program and one of the first computer programs designed to replicate
information inside a single computer—as an example.
This classic Core War program, called Imp, is simplicity itself.
If
replication holds in this minimal case, the more complex TIERRA viruses
should perforce pass the replicator test as well.
Imp consists of a single instruction: “MOV $0 $1,” or move from
reference address 0 to address 1. This instruction, when executed by the
operating system, causes the move instruction to be copied to the next
location in memory (addresses are relative to the current instruction).
Then, on the next clock cycle, the system pointer will move ahead one
position and execute the instruction found there, which is, of course, the
move instruction, which tells the program to move forward again. In this
way Imp marches through memory until something stops it.
If Imp
overwrites a location in memory and an enemy program tries to execute
that instruction, the enemy will be turned into an Imp.
With Imp, the
search routine is totally automated or removed; it is immediately copied
into the next slot without the need for additional instruction. Copy is the
attack stage of Imp’s life cycle as well.
However, this stage is not
destructive, being instead competitive in nature. So Imp bundles all three
stages of the life cycle—search, copy, and attack—into one move.
Now let’s run through the replication criteria to see if Imp satisfies
them. Imp’s “move” instruction being read by the virtual operating system
at one address causes the system to write data to the next address in
memory.
This satisfies the causation criterion.
Both of these two
addresses now have the same instruction in them (MOV), making them
identical. Further, the operating system installs the MOV command in the
second register by referring back to what was in the previous address, so
information has been transferred from the source to the copy. Once the
transfer is complete, there are two MOV instructions where before there
was only one: duplication. This satisfaction of all four criteria means that
Imp, despite being incredibly simple (only one instruction long), manages
to be a replicator.
Since the TIERRA viruses operate in an analogous
manner, they too constitute digital replicating within RAM.
It seems on the face of it somewhat preposterous to call virtual bits of
code replicators.
After all, the viruses in these ALife programs are not
active agents themselves, being just sets of electrical charges in computer

—— The Replicator Zoo · 119 ——
memory.
How can they cause duplication to happen?
During an
execution of TIERRA (or Core War), a “virtual” environment is set up by
the operating system in a portion of RAM designated by the software
program.
In this environment, virus code is “planted” onto memory
registers by the operating system, which Hips their bits in accord with
instructions found in other registers. The key to replication in these digital
ecologies is that the information in the viral “genome” is data (a set of
binary numbers) but simultaneously serves as a set of instructions
intelligible to the operating system. When read off, these numbers cause
the operating system to take particular actions on that data or to perform
manipulations on other locations in memory.
Through this causal
feedback between the replicator and the operating system, the conditions
for initiating a replication reaction are satisfied. This duality of function,
as information store and interpretable instruction, is crucial to the nature of
replication generally.
So Maynard Smith’s apparent jubilation over a new form of evolution
was well founded.
This is real evolution. It even involves replication.
Artificial life programs are bona fide evolutionary environments. That’s
why they follow evolutionary principles and exhibit standard evolutionary
patterns over time.
For example, it is only through such a feedback
process between the memory and information processor that replication
can be differential. The shorter viruses in TIERRA were able to reproduce
more rapidly than the longer ones and so gained an advantage in time.
This is the very stuff of evolution: There was selection for shorter
genomes in TIERRA.
TIERRA too is a quarantined world, cut off from the rest of the
computer—and the world at large—by a wall of self-referential code.
The interplay between a localized operating system and “data” (the
viruses) is what keeps TIERRA isolated.
Is the need for such
isolation real?
Ray certainly believed so and indicates that he was
told it was vital to install a virtual operating theater for his creation
by major figures in the ALife world. The fear is that these infectious
replicators might get out into the “wild” of the Internet if the
computer
running
the
program
was
physically
linked
to
the
network.
But since TIERRA viruses can’t replicate except in the
context of the TIERRA operating system, in fact they are safe; their
“genomic” code is nonsense outside this “virtual” world, just as
DNA is useless outside the nucleus of a cell.
Similarly, the

—— 120 · THE ELECTRIC MEME ——
computer simulations that operate well within the confines of the holodeck
on Star Trek are unable to step out of the room where the conditions for
their existence are maintained (a fact played upon in several episodes of
the television program). Like any other replicator system, they depend on
finding themselves in just the right niche to survive and replicate. Imp, the
Code War program that passed the replicator test, is considerably simpler
than the one-line “self-replicating” printout program reproduced at the
beginning of this chapter because it lives in a special world and can rely on
being coddled by it.
Outside that protected environment, of course, it
becomes just another bit of code.
Many features of biological systems have now been duplicated in silico
by a variety of descendants of TIERRA.
It is evident from these
simulations that digital analogues to DNA- or RNA-based viruses exist:
These are indeed viral agents that exhibit a wide variety of phenomena that
parallel those of their biological cousins.
This parallel suggests that
evolutionary processes really are “universal” in replicators of whatever
stripe and color.
FROM FLOPPY TO HARD
As these developments in Artificial Life were unfolding, parallel evolution
was beginning in a related domain: the ability of code to replicate between
computers. By being able to construct a proxy—a different form of the
virus “living” in a computer’s equivalent of short-term memory, ready to
go on the attack—viruses were able to escape the confines of their original
host and spread on: into the world.
Computer-borne pathogens are considered to be in circulation, or “in
the wild,” once they’ve been found on two or more workaday computers.
This first happened in 1981 in an incident involving Apple II computers,
although it wasn’t spoken of as a viral attack at the time. Since then, the
number of comp-viruses in the Apples has continuously escalated with
time, doubling every year or two.
The number roaming through
computers in 1990, for example, was a few hundred.
By 1994, about
5,000 viruses were circulating. With the turn of the millennium, the total
topped 50,000. At this rate, there will be nearly 500,000 comp-viruses in
the wild by the year 2010.
Fred Cohen had mooted the idea that the replication of programs across

—— The Replicator Zoo · 121 ——
a network of linked computers represented a threat to their security and
stability in 1984. In that year, he published an important paper including
both the results of several experiments and the theoretical foundation for
later work on inter-computer viruses. In 1983, Cohen had written one of
the first such viruses and then performed the first experiments in network
security by releasing it onto a local suite of connected computers. The
virus traveled farther and faster than anyone had expected in this limited
environment. Another early experiment at the university, of Texas at El
Paso showed that in a standard IBM PC network, a virus could spread to
60 computers in 30 seconds.
Although these controlled experiments indicated how quickly viruses
might be expected to spread, real-world infection rates could not be
determined accurately until attacks took place on computer networks
outside laboratories. The real world obliged shortly after Cohen turned in
his dissertation on comp-viruses.
In 1986, two brothers, Amjad and Basit Alvi, working at Brain
Computer Services in Lahore, Pakistan, noted the fact that the boot sector
of a floppy diskette contained executable code. This code was the first
area of memory activated when a 1980s-era computer was turned on
because it contained a small program that instructs the computer how to
load the operating system and activate the screen, disks, and keyboard.
The brothers realized that they could replace this code with their own
program, guaranteeing that a virus hidden there would gain control over
the computer’s activity as soon as the computer was turned on or rebooted
and prior to the execution of any anti-viral software. The virus would then
be free to lie in wait in computer memory and copy itself onto each floppy
diskette that is accessed in any drive.
The user would then carry this
newly infected disk off to other computers, where it could then transfer
itself onto another floppy’s boot sector and repeat the process again. In
this way, the program could spread itself widely. Indeed the brainchild of
these brothers proved to be one of the most successful viruses of all time,
becoming known as the Brain virus.
After boot-sector viruses came the more versatile file viruses.
A file
virus attaches itself to an executable file (such as those that contain
software) and is activated when a computer user runs an infected application
or opens a document created by the infected program. These viruses, which
can
be
either
RAM-resident
or
not,
activate
behind
the
scenes

—— 122 · THE ELECTRIC MEME ——
without the user’s knowledge, performing their intended operations before
permitting the actual program to run. Such viruses, spreading from disk to
disk, started to appear in larger numbers in the late 1980s, causing
thousands of computer systems to become unusable for periods of time
and hundreds of thousands of users of several international networks to
experience denial of services.
The early history of comp-viruses was largely a kind of pendulum
swing between file viruses and boot-sector viruses.
File viruses were
“popular” in the late 1980s simply because there are more ways to infect
files than boot sectors.
However, by the mid-l990s boot-sector viruses
again accounted for around 90 percent of all virus incidents because file
viruses tended to disappear as the use of Windows as an operating system
increased (Windows is fragile in the presence of file viruses). Although
boot- and file-virus infections were common in the early 1990s, sightings
of such viruses have waned since operating systems started including
built-in safeguards against their spread. So major shifts in the kinds of
viruses circulating in the wild can be due to revisions in or replacements of
operating system software.
In this case, the increased use of OS/2 and
Windows operating systems caused viruses written for the older DOS to
basically disappear by 1995—but not because the newer operating systems
were designed to resist viruses. Quite the contrary, viruses have been even
more successful in this new environment because new kinds of viruses
could be written for and spread by these operating systems. Rather the
inability of DOS viruses to survive in the revised environment was due to
their reliance on program features missing in the newer operating systems.
But, generally speaking, virus incidents were widely considered
urban myths (like rumors of alligators in the sewers of New York) at
this time because they were often touted by the media and anti-viral
software vendors but failed to materialize except on a very few
computers.
Even for successful viruses, the rise in prevalence was
typically quite slow, often taking months or even years to become
relatively common around the world.
The equilibrium level of
prevalence
was
also
quite
low.
Well-prepared
organizations
experienced about four virus incidents per year for every 1,000 PCs
they had, and this rate of incidence did not change substantially
through the early 1990s. This relatively slow rate of spread was due to
the fact that infection by these kinds of viruses required the

—— The Replicator Zoo · 123 ——
physical transfer of disks between computers.
But this restriction was
about to be eliminated.
LEARNING TO NETWORK
The exponential increase in computer use over recent decades not only has
resulted in the growth of information distribution and a shift in the way
people communicate but also has provided an environment in which a new
form of replicator has arisen and evolved: the network comp-virus. The
crucial development was the standardization around a single protocol for
the communication of information over such networks.
Then came the
development of hypertext: a way of easily accessing the information stored
on linked computers through specialized software (called browsers), which
allowed even everyday users to navigate the network from computer to
computer in search of information.
The widespread adoption of the
Internet and the World Wide Web as a means for the communication of
information naturally followed.
The Internet and the Web are actually an amazing collaboration of
thousands of networks around the world that can share information using a
single protocol called TCP/IP. The key to downloading and sharing data
across the Internet is a format that may be read and deciphered by any
computer on the network, no matter what operating system it’s running. A
sophisticated wiring and switching system also helps route data from one
computer to the next.
As networking caught on, the population of computers through which a
virus could spread increased dramatically. By the mid-1990s, “local area
networks”
(relatively
small
sets
of
computers
connected
within
organizations) became “wide area networks” (like the Internet, stretching
around the world). This enabled some viruses to be successful on a scale
not seen before.
The linking of computers, together with the nearly
universal use of the same software programs (presently we live in
Microsoft-World), led to dramatic increases in the population of hosts
comp-viruses could potentially reach.
The kinds of uses to which
computers were put (and so types of software) also widened, with people
using w-mail, personal massaging, Web radio and television broadcasts,
and other forms of information-exchange via networks.
This provided
comp-viruses with a wider range of opportunities as well. The result is

—— 124 · THE ELECTRIC MEME ——
that these days, viruses can sweep around the world in hours or even
minutes, thanks to electronic transfer via the Internet. Thus the chance of
your computer being infected by some kind of virus has risen from about 1
in 10,000 per annum in 1990, to 1 in 1,000 by 1995, to 1 in 10 as this is
being written.
The first denizens of these new populations of potential hosts were file
viruses, which tended to spread primarily as “hitchhikers” on documents
attached to email messages.
But in 1995, Microsoft introduced
WordBasic, a text-based programming language for writing macro
commands that vastly simplified the writing of viruses.
Macros are
essentially small programs that add specialized functions to the operation
of large software programs.
For example, on May 3, 2000, the infamous Love Bug virus appeared.
It spread (as an attachment to an email entitled “I love you”) from its
origin in Manila, the Philippines, through the rest of the world within
hours, striking 55 million computers, infecting about 3 million of them
(you had to open the attached document to be infected), and causing
billions of dollars in damage worldwide.
The Love Bug outdid the
Melissa virus, the previous record-holder in terms of replication, by many
orders of magnitude. It managed this degree of success by sending itself
to everyone in each infected user’s e-mail address book.
So by the millennium, only five years since the beginning of the
previous era, there had been another reversal in fortunes, with file viruses
being back on top of the frequency charts.
Seventy-five percent of all
viruses in the wild at the end of the century were macro file viruses. The
flip in prevalence away from boot-sector viruses was due not to a change
in operating systems this time, but rather to the global networking of
computers. This tended to increase the spread of file viruses because disk-
based transmission became less effective in a world where information
could be exchanged electronically with the click of a mouse.
Also important was the development of WordBasic, the easy-to-code
language for writing macro viruses.
Previously the stereotypical virus
writer had been a pimply faced, asocial teenage boy who could write
machine code, seeking vicarious pleasure through the fame of his progeny.
Today the virus writer profile is much broader, including just about
anyone, male or female, of any age. WordBasic represented a ready-made
virus-writing kit accessible to anyone because all you had to do was

—— The Replicator Zoo · 125 ——
put together a couple of commands, embed these in an a-mail attachment,
and send it off. Point-and-click tools for producing complex comp-viruses
have also been made readily available on the Net by virus writers. As a
result, virtual communities of virus writers have sprung up that are willing
to share code through chat groups, and virus-writing tutorials have
appeared on-line that ease in the creation of this new type of virus.
One manifestation of this “progress” was Nimda—“admin” (a
shortened form of “system administrator” spelled backward—a worm that
started spreading in mid-September 2001 and quickly infected PCs and
servers across the Internet.
It was the first worm to use four different
methods to infect PCs, making it the Swiss Army knife of comp-viruses.
First, it spread by sending e-mail messages with infected attachments;
second, it could scan for and infect vulnerable Web servers; third, it copied
itself to shared disk drives on business networks; and fourth, it appended
Javascript code to even pages that downloaded the worm to surfers’ PCs
when they viewed the modified page. This multipronged attack made it
quite successful.
What’s next?
We already have viruses that preferentially infect
popular personal data assistants, a new form of hardware that is often
plugged into personal computers and shares operating system instructions
with them. Further, communication protocols have now been established
for mobile phones, and their use has increased dramatically around the
world, so we can expect these to soon become victims of viruses tailored
to their needs. The comp-virus story is just beginning.
ACCOUNTING FOR HISTORY
To better understand the history of comp-viruses, we need to think about
computers in a new way.
A computer is like an organism in many
respects. The CPU and its attendants (RAM, ROM, hard disks) are the
computer’s brain, the many wires its circulatory system, the keyboard its
sensory system, and its screen the face it presents to the world. Computers
even have a primitive metabolism: the ability to suck energy from the cord
plugged into the wall and, with this energy, to manipulate their own
internal components. This makes them more like an organism than most
artifacts.
Unlike its biological counterparts, however, a computer can

—— 126 · THE ELECTRIC MEME ——
evolve new organs, or a more complex internal structure, with time. These
are the new kinds of files it can accommodate. These new kinds of files
then get targeted, often as soon as those new kinds of host “tissue” arise,
by viruses. Coevolution thus occurs between an expanding number of host
organs—new niches to fill—and the parasites to fill them.
Another difference from biological organisms is that computers can
simply swap organs. Different versions of the same organ exist: For the
word-processing function, a computer might use Microsoft Word or one of
its competitors.
Comp-viruses are typically organ-specific parasites, so
those viruses that can attach themselves to the most prevalent organs
spread best.
On the other hand, comp-viruses that live in unsupported
software are likely to die out.
Since each virus specializes in particular computer organs, there can be
a microbiology of parasitic programs within a single host computer, each
resident in a different section of its “body.”
These viruses can even
interact or come into conflict with one another, just as biological viruses
do. The virulence of each virus is then affected by this interaction among
them. One virus trying to cause damage to some host tissue may tread on
the territory of another comp-virus, which blocks or accentuates this
damage. Comp-viruses must therefore learn to coevolve in a situation of
software conflict. For example, the DenZuk virus will overwrite the Brain
virus if it finds a Brain already resident on a computer it is attacking.
Like biological parasites, comp-viruses are tied to a particular host
species.
In the case of computers, species are denied by operating
systems, which are entirely different kinds of organisms for comp-viruses
to live in. Thus a PC virus typically can’t replicate in Apple Macintoshes
because it can’t depend on the same programming “calls” working in the
microenvironment it lives in. Other participants in the replication reaction
simply aren’t present. Historically most viruses have been linked to the
numerically dominant species, IBM PCs, and the dominant maker of
software for that platform, Microsoft.
Continuing with this ecological analysis, a network of PCs can be
seen as a social group of computers, because they’re in communication
with one another, sharing a common language and set of “customs” for
the exchange of information. This group may have a number of parasitic
viruses feeding off of its members, and each virus can be considered to
have a certain prevalence in this population. The Internet then becomes

—— The Replicator Zoo · 127 ——
an ecosystem of these strange, silicon-based organisms, composed of
multiple computer species that have found a common language through
which they can exchange information.
This common communication
protocol doesn’t necessarily enable comp-viruses to switch host species,
however, as their replication still depends on a replication reaction that
expects local resources to be just right.
With these ecological relationships established, we can now analyze
how comp-viruses have evolved over the course of their brief history.
Certainly, their history suggests intensive selection of comp-viruses by the
ecological conditions just outlined.
Comp-viruses also exhibit one of the other main components of
evolution: mutation, and lots of it. However, this all takes place when they
are being programmed by people.
Computer transmission through
networks is almost flawless, so computers hardly ever introduce variation
into data themselves. Comp-viruses therefore can’t rely on random flips
of bits to lead to new wrinkles in their offspring, as TIERRA did. Further,
almost any variation introduced through flaws in transmission is likely to
cause the resulting program to become inoperative. So how does variation
arise? Effectively all mutations are intentional, in the sense that humans
must take a copy of the virus “off-line” from the course of its spread
through a network, reprogram it, and then send it out into the wild again
with a new form.
This makes evolution in comp-viruses very limited.
They are quite fragile replicators dependent on highly sophisticated
assistance for any real evolution.
On the other hand, comp-viruses engage in simple manipulations of
their environment to make it more amenable to their continued presence
and replication.
They alter memory states, switch program pointers to
hide themselves, or mark their domain to keep other programs of the same
type from intruding into their territory.
So comp-viruses are able to
engage in a wide variety of responses to environmental conditions. They
just can’t evolve by introducing variations into their code—at least for
themselves.
This makes the network comp-viruses quite different from the RAM-
resident ALife viruses we looked at earlier, whose forte seemed to be the
development of truly, novel abilities to respond to changes in ecological
circumstances (like the sudden appearance of a predator). This might be
expected,
because
ALife
viruses
are
tiny
programs
living
in
a

—— 128 · THE ELECTRIC MEME ——
protected environment, whereas network viruses are much larger programs
living in an environment bent on their destruction. Network viruses have
to be much more clever than their ALife counterparts to survive.
And
their environment keeps changing in ways that few biological viruses have
to deal with: There are complete changeovers in operating conditions and
host species types every few years.
Only “assisted” evolution (through
human design) would seem able to keep up with such drastic fluctuations
in selection pressures.
SURVIVAL OF THE COMP-VIRUSES
We have thus seen that comp-viruses face difficult selection pressures in
the wild. From the perspective of Replicator Theory, I now want to ask
whether it is likely that only the fittest comp-viruses survive (as was the
case with our other comparative case of a replicator, prions). For this to
hold true, the replication reaction for comp-viruses must exhibit a one-for-
one dynamic.
Is it true that the replication reaction for comp-viruses
exhibits a one source-one copy pattern, as expected by Malthusian
growth?
Well, what about the macro virus Melissa, which lands on your
computer, only to turn around and fire itself off to the first 50 names it
ands on your e-mail list? Isn’t that a much higher rate of reproduction at
work—50 copies at one go? In fact, it is not.
Fifty copies of Melissa
don’t reside on the source computer, each one being bred off to a different
destination. Instead the computer’s operating system is having to do a lot
of work; it repeats 50 times the “now send this” command, each time to a
different location.
That is 50 events, constituting in each case the
beginnings of a replication reaction. And it to only a series of signals that
Melissa
produces.
Each
e-mail
simply includes
instructions
the
destination computer needs to create a copy of the Melissa file on its own
disk.
Before any copy of the virus is actually made, the destination
computer must be an IBM PC with the right e-mail software package on it.
And users must execute the file they receive with their e-mail.
This
doesn’t always happen either. These filters on success can significantly
reduce the effective distribution of the comp-virus.
But the most salient point is that, from the point of view of the host
computer, a 1-to-50 rule is not at work: In fact, hidden underneath, the

—— The Replicator Zoo · 129 ——
operating system is engaging in many independent activities, each one of
which qualifies as a reproductive act. The point can be seen more clearly
in the ALife case, which doesn’t involve signaling in the same way. Only
one memory cell is being operated on at any given moment; there is no
parallel processing in von Neumann computers. So the operating system
plods from one register to the next, seeing what it is supposed to do with
the information there. Comp-viruses are “made” one at a time, both within
and between computers.
So the answer to our question is clearly yes: Each comp-virus could
inspire the production of a copy of itself.
A linear rate of growth thus
appears to characterize the behavior of comp-viruses.
This trait makes
comp-viruses like DNA and prions, and is consistent with an active
selection process in a rapidly changing environment of new kinds of
computers and software. Only adaptive comp-viruses should survive, as
suggested by their history, in which the dominant forms are rapidly
replaced.
Can we now characterize the nature of comp-virus replication
reactions more clearly?
Where do they occur?
The first place to
look is RAM, since all instructions go through there. Still, no virus
is likely to find everything it needs already present in RAM at the
time it wishes to replicate. Many of the calls required by a virus in
RAM reside on the hard disk, where the software programs that assist
in
replication
are
stored,
or
in
ROM,
where
many
basic
computational functions permanently reside. So code stored either in
ROM or on the hard disk (as well as RAM itself, of course) can assist
viral replication. But when these calls are made, the instructions are
“loaded into” RAM, where they become actively present. It is as if
RNA had migrated from the cytoplasm of a cell into the cell nucleus
to help with DNA duplication.
We can therefore think of RAM as
being the enclosed domain within which the replication reaction
happens, where all the relevant parties come to circulate in an
electronic soup, waiting for their cues.
Variation will arise in just
how dependent a given virus is on making calls to ROM or a disk, so
dependence on “external” resources will always be a matter of
degree.
Even in cases of disk-to-disk replication, RAM is still the
place
where the intermediate steps
occur, although the actual
duplication of information takes place only on the disk, as a

—— 130 · THE ELECTRIC MEME ——
result of signals sent by the information processors down the cable
attaching the disk to the motherboard, where ran resides.
How do these considerations play themselves out during the history
recounted above? In Phase I, infection was controlled, localized to the
RAM disk within individual computers, and short-term.
Replication
reactions, thanks to the involvement of virtual operating systems, were
almost entirely restricted to RAM, approaching the ideal of true isolation.
In Phase II, replication still took place within the confines of one
computer. Typically the spread of a virus was dependent on instructions
that remained resident in RAM.
Once activated, such RAM-resident
programs used operating system commands to remain active in memory.
This gave them the chance to infect the many other bits of information that
go in and out of RAM during normal computer operation. And sometimes
this information would be copied to “hard” media inserted into the
machine, such as floppy disks. Then Phase II viruses could spread through
what has been called “sneaker net”—human vectors padding in their tennis
shoes, handing these physical media (floppy disks) from person to person.
In effect, the virus copy was physically carried in some long-term storage
medium to the next host.
Because of this contact between computers,
“epidemics” were not restricted to just one computer. But this method of
transmission worked slowly and laboriously, since human vectors don’t
move as quickly or as far as the electronic ones that came later.
This modus operandi involved a reversal in roles from that characteristic of the
players in Phase I, where the program in RAM was the replicator. The ALife
program itself, sitting on the hard disk, was relevant only to the extent that it
produced the virtual operating system that catalyzed the RAM-based replication of
data structures.
Now, with Phase II, the program in long-term memory has
become the replicator, and any manifestation in RAM is the catalyst for the
duplication of long-term memory structures. In Phase II, the data structures to be
duplicated exist on hard disks, which are accessible by the general operating
system on the boot disk.
This is what Thomas Ray and other ALifers were
worried bout: Use of the computer’s “real” (as opposed to “virtual”) operating
system as a catalyst would lead to the potential destruction of real data in long-term
memory.
(Of
course,
what
the
ALifers
most
fear
is
just
what

—— The Replicator Zoo · 131 ——
network comp-virus writers desperately want: their progeny replicating out
in the world.)
Phase II involved normal copying from RAM to disk using local
operating system commands. No communications protocol was required.
Infections are now long-term, but with a relatively slow rate of spread.
With boot-sector viruses like Brain, two copies of the same virus exist
simultaneously on the same machine: one copy in the boot sector of the
boot disk, another copy in a sector of a floppy disk inserted into another
drive, together with the operating instructions in RAM derived from the
viral program, which functions as a catalyst for replication (assisted by the
operating system).
Phase III, in contrast, is defined by the electronic replication of
network comp-viruses.
These viruses have a vastly increased rate of
spread, leading to real viral epidemics that have crippled sections of the
Web for short periods. Thus, as time has gone on, the different kinds of
vectors underlying the epidemiology of computer viruses have had a major
impact on the speed with which viruses can disperse, and hence on the
“reality” of viral epidemics. The rate at which sneaker net can connect
computers is vastly slower than that of electronic transmission. This has
meant a considerable reduction both in the time it takes for an epidemic to
occur and in the size of the potential population of susceptible computers.
Electronic transmission is largely responsible for comp-viruses becoming
a real threat to the security and functioning of the Net.
The new reality of epidemics has in turn led to the need for anti-viral
software distributed to the users of computers tied into the Web. But this
has itself prompted the development of techniques among virus writers to
increase the likelihood their viruses can avoid detection. So an arms race
of offensive and counteroffensive, each time with more sophisticated
weapons, has begun between viruses and anti-viral software. This race,
which began during Phase II, continues today.
What makes Phase III possible is a change in the nature of the physical
links between computers: As they get wired together, the flow of electrons
is smoothly extended from inside one machine to exchanges between
them. Signals can now escape the narrow confines of their source host
to wander the network. But the involvement of two physically separated
sets of electronic memory (in the RAM of two different computers)
means
that
the
RAM
in
the
source
computer
is
responsible

—— 132 · THE ELECTRIC MEME ——
only for producing signals, while the receiving computer’s RAM must
complete the replication reaction based only on information provided by
those signals. In effect, the signal-assisted replication of Phase II (which
brought all the information together in RAM) becomes signal-mediated
replication in Phase III.
Taken together, these considerations mean that we can have RAM-
RAM or disk-disk methods of replication, but not RAM-disk replication.
Some viruses replicate within RAM, others within a single disk, others
between disks. But in each case, the same replicator does not replicate in
both electronic and magnetic media: The surmise (derived from Replicator
Theory) that replication is typically specific to one set of circumstances is
upheld. A1l these routes lead to Rome, or the Holy Grail of replication,
but the roads differ in the kinds of terrain they pass through to get there.
It is important to recognize that the signal sent through a channel
between computers is not a comp-virus itself.
The signals traveling
between computers are different than the sequence of information that
initiates the process and that gets copied onto the destination computer.
Networked computers must translate the information in the virus into a
form amenable for transmission through a particular kind of channel to
another computer (which may be running a different operating system).
So a coding procedure falls between the instruction to send a message and
the message actually being sent.
In the case of the Internet, the
communication protocol involves adding on bits to the signal to make it
capable of reaching its destination in a form interpretable by the
destination computer.
In particular, when one computer is told to send
data across the Internet, the data is broken into sections called packets.
Special identifiers are added to each packet to help it reach its destination.
It’s like placing each packet inside an envelope with the destination
address printed on the outside. The difference is that many packets are
typically required to deliver a message, and each packet flies to its
destination by a potentially different route, The packets thus need to be
decoded and reassembled all the receiving computer to reconstitute the
message sent by the source computer. This should make it clear that these
signals are not themselves a virus-in-transit.
Of course, replication reactions taking place within the confines of a
single device may use signals to communicate with the operating system

—— The Replicator Zoo · 133 ——
or long-term memory, but they won’t have to switch coding schemes. At
the same time, the instructions sent to the operating system that result in
writing a sequence of magnetic states to memory are not the same
sequence as the comp-virus either. It’s always the case that messages are
not the same as “meanings” in computer communication (nor its human
equivalent). This is a fundamental point of profound importance in the
hunt for the memes.
CONVERT THY NEIGHBOR
We can conclude that Replicator Theory applies to comp-viruses as well
as prions. Genes and prions are molecular, but comp-viruses are super-
molecular, being composed of states in multiple molecules (actually
sequences of electrically charged molecules).
But these differences in
scale don’t seem to matter. The principles we identified with replicators
earlier—of sticking to one substrate and of information transfer (or
constraint transference)—both hold true at each scale.
This is not that
surprising, since we already noted that Replicator Theory has been applied
to a variety of problems in evolutionary theory besides the description of
DNA duplication. Since Replicator Theory applies to all the replicators
we know about, I will assume it can be usefully applied to memes as well.
The ways in which comp-viruses replicate parallel in many ways those
of their biological counterparts. The basic process is essentially equivalent
in feel to what I called conversion, as in prions. Comp-viruses work by
converting existing memory states to states that can produce copies of
themselves.
This is just what prions do.
Such a method relies on the
existence of the right conditions.
Luckily for virus writers, nearly
everyone uses the same software for email, word processing, and other
basic tasks, so the number of potential hosts runs into the millions.
Comp-viruses are also like prions in using a co-opting strategy: They
convert an existing physical substrate.
All comp-viruses share a
fundamental strategy: to flip the electrical state of some unit of memory
from one kind of charge to another.
This means the use of the word
“virus” is entirely appropriate: They are dependent replicators.
On the other hand, comp-viruses are very robust replicators and so
don’t exhibit the same limitations as prions in this respect. Fred Cohen
proved that viruses could evolve into any result that a universal computing

—— 134 · THE ELECTRIC MEME ——
machine could compute, thus introducing a severe problem in detection
and correction. In effect, the fact that computer languages are like real
languages means that programs can express—or compute—anything. The
problem is that they typically have to be designed by human hands to do
those things.
So the fact that they are potentially robust does not
necessarily lead to their full-throated evolutionary potential being realized.
They are limited by human imagination, which in many cases is less
creative than the natural selection process.
However, it is important to note here that the comp-virus case brings
up one important qualification of the argument I have emphasized thus far,
that replicators always remain tied to only one physical substrate.
The
qualification is that information transfer can be mediated.
That is, the
transfer of information from one place to another, within the context of a
replication event, can be conducted by an accomplice, rather than by the
replicator itself. Signals generated by replicators can serve this functional
role of message mediator. This is a new feature of comp-viruses not seen
in genes or prions.
Further, this mediation tends to loosen the bonds to individual
substrates. Comp-viruses, as we have seen, can jump from magnetic to
optical substrates of memory, with the chance of flipping back and forth
between magnetic and optical forms in the future as well. Admittedly,
both
long-term
memory
substrates
work
with
electrical
charges.
Nevertheless it is the first indicator we have of any flexibility on this point.
The question is whether it is the super-molecular nature of comp-viral
replication, its mediation by signals, or the digital nature of computer code
that allows this degree of slop in the lineage. This is an important question
from an evolutionary point of view.
Of course, Phase I and II comp-viruses don’t exhibit this feature, so it
appears not to be strictly due to digital coding. Since these early forms are
also super-molecular viruses, this cannot be the whole story either. What
is new to Phase III viral life cycles is signal mediation, so it appears this is
what is crucial. It is the easy, reliable code-decode protocols that can be
arranged for binary data transfers introduced by such transmission that
make it possible to begin life on one substrate and end it on another.
The essential point about this is that the messenger need not be of the
same substrate as the replicator.
The source and copy replicators still

—— The Replicator Zoo · 135 ——
need to be made of the same material; it’s only the signal in between that
introduces a degree of play in the system. This point will be important
when we come to discussing how memes propagate themselves.
If we now look at both of the replicators we have investigated, we can
see a similarity between them.
Both prions and comp-viruses act like
religious fundamentalists. It’s as if they lie in wait for you at airports or
come directly to your door and try to convert you into something like
themselves. Their mission is to spread their version of what’s valuable:
They want to share their state of being with you. In short, they seek to
convert you. Persuasion is their modus operandi. They can’t make whole
new people from scratch, being quite willing to rely on other replicators
for that. But once you’re around, they go to work on you, trying to refold
you into something more congenial, which they can trust to go off and do
the same job on yet other innocents.
In effect, comp-viruses are
manipulative memories, and prions proselytizing proteins.
As we shall
see, memes use these same methods of persuasion in their attempts to
dominate their world.

Chapter Five
THEDATA ONINFORMATION
Where is the wisdom we have lost in knowledge?
Where is the knowledge we have lost in information?
–T.S. Eliot
Memetics is very far from the “mimetic” judgment Plato passed on
materiality–that is consists of poor imitations of “True Forms.”
Memetics is the antithesis of metaphysics, insisting that matter
matters.
–B.C. Crandall.
We have learned a lot about the nature of replication with our excursion
through Replicator Theory and Universal Darwinism, as well as from our
foray into “Comparative Replicatorology” in the last chapter. But some
edges of the replicator notion still remain fuzzy.
In particular, one criterion for replication is that information be
transferred from the parent replicator to its offspring. But is information
something “hard” or “soft,” physical or abstract?
The nature of
information is a much-vexed issue in the philosophy of science, and it will
require an entire chapter to deal with. I can’t boast of finding The Final
Solution to the Information Problem, the one true point of view that all
philosophers henceforth must accept.
After all, they’ve been arguing
about information since the ancient Greeks.
But now enough real
headway can be made on this issue to firm up our ideas about the nature of
replication.
In fact, we will be able to derive a couple of corollaries
  136 

—— The Data on Information · 137 ——
to replication in the process. This clarification will then prove to have
useful spin-offs when it comes to catching a meme.
INFORMATION IS PHYSICAL
There is a widespread sense abroad—in both academia and the world at
large—that information is an abstraction.
But I argued in a previous
chapter that information can be transferred from one replicator to another.
So how exactly can you inherit an abstraction? Steven Pinker says that
“information can be shared at negligible cost: if I give you a fish, I no
longer possess the fish, but if I give you information on how to fish, I still
possess
the
information
myself.”
Pinker
is
suggesting
that
the
“inheritance” or passing along of information is rather special because it
comes with no price tag. How is this possible? Because information is
not a thing of this world. It is immaterial—after all, anything you can give
away and still have must be something magical and ineffable, right?
Pinker’s “free gift paradox”—that you can pass information to
someone else without losing possession of it yourself—springs from a
common tenet of cognitive science: the equating of ideas with information.
This allows Pinker to say that “mental states are invisible and weightless. .
. . The content of a belief lives in a different realm from the facts of the
world.” If this is the case, then beliefs can’t exist in the brain, which is
composed of a messy network of cells no one knows what to do with. We
must therefore separate the mind from the brain, introducing a dualism that
has been prominent in intellectual circles ever since René Descartes, the
French philosopher, introduced the distinction between mind and brain in
the seventeenth century.
In this view, an idea, and perforce any other form of information,
doesn’t have mass or charge or length.
Likewise, matter doesn’t have
bytes. You can’t measure so much gold in so many bytes. Matter doesn’t
have redundancy, or fidelity, or any of the other descriptors we apply to
information, which make it possible for information to be a replicator.
This dearth of shared descriptors means matter and information have to be
discussed separately, in their own terms. This leads directly to the claim
that replicators like genes—or memes—and interactors like organisms
belong to not only separate conceptual worlds but different realms of
existence as well.
This kind of dualism had its forebear even

—— 138 · THE ELECTRIC MEME ——
earlier than Descartes, in the philosophy of Plato. For Plato, ideas existed
in an abstract heaven, which he called the realm of Forms. Although this
realm was independent of everyday physical reality, it could be accessed
by the mind through deductive thought. Platonism implies that replicators
reside in the domain of Forms (where information resides), while
interactors live in the domain of material things, with us and our minds.
The replicator, then, isn’t a material object. The physical gene—that
is, the string of atoms comprising the DNA molecule—is not what
evolution conserves and passes on. Only the information embodied in the
nucleotide sequence gets from one generation to another; the atoms
actually bearing the message get swapped over each time transmission
occurs. A gene is just a kind of “cybernetic abstraction,” a message that is
transmitted in a kind of magical way from generation to generation.
An informational replicator, then, may exist on different substrates,
using different codes. This is what makes the replicator notion abstract. It
defines a replicator
simply by its
function.
Such an idealistic
interpretation may have some analytical interest, but it can’t be used to
understand evolutionary lineages, which are distinct historical entities
limited to one time and place.
Nevertheless, this “info-mystical” viewpoint is common, both among
our better thinkers and in the popular imagination. George Johnson, the
distinguished science writer, for example, recently claimed that
these [computers]—the most complex things produced by the human mind—can be
made indefinitely small because of a crucial distinction. While ordinary machines
work by manipulating stuff computers manipulate information, symbols which are
essentially weightless. A bit of information, a one or a zero, can be indicated by a
pencil mark in a checkbox, by a microscopic spot on a magnetic disk, or by the
briefest pulse of electricity or scintilla of light. The special nature of information
confers another advantage.
The power of computation can be leveraged and
leveraged again.
Design a computer and then use it to help you design a better
computer, ad infinitum.
The rise of computers has had a lot to do with the popularity of ideas
like these.
The constant process of transferring information from one
physical medium to another and then being able to recover that same
information in the original medium brings home the supposed separability

—— The Data on Information · 139 ——
of information and matter. In biology, when you’re talking about things
like
genes
and
genotypes
and
gene
pools,
you’re
talking
about
information, not physical objective reality.
They’re patterns.
Even if
computation is tied to a physical substrate, there’s a difference between
computation and information.
Computation is just a way to juggle
numbers with machines.
But we can see now that Johnson’s argument—this time taken from
computer science rather than biology or psychology—is fundamentally
mistaken. The exact opposite of what Johnson says is happening. As our
computer chips become ever smaller, they are beginning to brush up
against constraints set them by fundamental physical laws—even quantum
confusion about just what state they are meant to remember. So as we
head toward quantum-scale information processing and begin to compute
with individual molecules or photons, it will quickly become evident just
how “entangled” the fundamental units of information are with their
physical substrates.
It’s true that information doesn’t have a number of physical properties
like mass or charge or length. For instance, you can’t know how heavy an
idea is because when ideas change, the brain substrate still weighs the
same—it’s just that the bits of material have been rearranged.
In this
respect, ideas are a bit like consciousness, or the soul.
When the soul
(supposedly) departs the body at death, no change in the body’s weight
can be observed.
But ideas are not immaterial. Information doesn’t exist independently
of the material through which it is made manifest. Even our thoughts and
ideas are in the structure of gray matter and the form of electrical
fluctuations in our brains. Changing ideas can require the expenditure of
energy needed to rearrange the bits of matter. Information is a measure
associated with a quality of matter.
It may not be matter itself, but
information is still a physical quantity.
The message of this chapter is simple: It is a fundamental fact that
“information is physical.” This phrase has become the mantra of a group
of scientists called information physicists. It was first adopted by one of
their most august members, the late Rolf Landauer, of IBM’s Thomas J.
Watson Research Center. The mantra doesn’t mean that information is a
separate kind of entity whose bits get totted up alongside the number of
molecules and joules when accounting for all the material in the universe.

—— 140 · THE ELECTRIC MEME ——
Nevertheless the presence of information can change the course of events,
and it is in this sense that information is physical.
Any complete
description of the universe must include information.
Physical reality
must be considered to include not just matter and energy, but information
too. As Norbert Weiner, one of the founders of cybernetics in the 1940s,
put it: “Information is information, not matter or energy. No materialism
which does not admit this can survive at the present day.”
Why does
information matter?
Because the structure of the universe—that is, of
matter and energy—is a function of the distribution and quantity of
information. If matter and energy are randomly distributed through space,
there is no structure to the universe; if there is useful information in the
universe, then there are pockets of organized matter or energy within it,
capable of doing work, such as being converted from one to the other.
Information is a quality or property of bundles of matter or energy.
Information has not always been an important concept in physics. In
earlier centuries, theoretical attention was focused on apparently more
fundamental concepts like mass, momentum, and energy—on the task of
finding the universal properties of nature that could be described using
simple, elegant equations. Nevertheless information has come to the fore
in recent years. In fact, it is now believed that information may be the
most basic concept in physics—potentially even more important than
matter or energy as an organizing principle.
Just as Theodosius
Dobzhanzky famously said, “Nothing makes sense in biology, except in
the light of evolution,” so too one might argue now that nothing in physics
makes sense except in the light of information—in particular, the
generalized information theory that is now emerging.
Indeed the two
domains of physics and biology appear to be intimately related, since it is
possible to describe evolution itself as a process of computation.
Rolf Landauer’s work, beginning in the early 1960s, makes clear why
physicists are interested in information.
Before then, it was widely
believed that processing a single bit of information—each 1 or 0 of binary
code—inevitably consumed some energy, which placed a fundamental
constraint on computer power. But Landauer showed, to the surprise of
many people, that this was not true.
As computer technology becomes
ever more efficient, each calculation can be perforated with less energy
expenditure, because it occurs on smaller and smaller scales. But there is

—— The Data on Information · 141 ——
still a cost. At some point, the bits must be flushed from the computer’s
memory so that the machine can be reset for another computation. You go
through a history of calculations to get a result that contains less
information than the process itself. To take a simple example: 2 + 2 = 4.
But once you’ve gotten to.4, you can’t recover how you got there: was it 2
+ 2, or 213 – 209? The sequence of steps that got you to the end of the
calculation is forgotten. What Landauer demonstrated was that it is only
at that point—when information is erased—that computation dissipates a
small amount of energy as heat.
This result, now called Landauer’s
Principle, has been described as the “thermodynamic cost of forgetting.”
So energy consumption in not an intrinsic quality of computing; it is
erasing data that consumes energy.
It seemed to be a physical necessity that all computers must perform
this erasure of information and thus incur the energetic cost. But Landauer
also postulated that this inefficiency in contemporary computers resulted
more from a coincidence of design than from any physical laws:
Computers were built with irreversible logic because it was easier to
design a circuit that trashed unwanted data than it was to design a closed
system that should reuse it.
Landauer’s colleague at IBM, Charles
Bennett, soon convinced himself that a reversible computer could be
designed that would circumvent Landauer’s principle. Computation need
not be a process in which information is discarded. When such a computer
completed its task, one would essentially run it backward, returning it to
its initial state without tossing away any information. Such a computer
could operate with unprecedented efficiency, because it would not use any
energy.
The work of these physicists at IBM eventually led to the
development of reversible computing—a system that recycles leftover bits
and their energies instead of dissipating them as heat.
Reversible
computing has remained mostly theoretical thus far but may yet
revolutionize the way computations are done.
At any rate, the
fundamental idea that computation can occur, at least in principle, without
an expenditure of energy—or a loss of information—is now well
established.
Information’s physical nature becomes particularly obvious when it starts
obeying counterintuitive lass’s, such as those of quantum mechanics. For

—— 142 · THE ELECTRIC MEME ——
example, in a phenomenon called “quantum teleportation,” objects or
information can be transported from any point A to any point B
(theoretically across a galaxy) without traversing the intermediate space. I
don’t use the word teleportation casually here; I mean to invoke the
fantastical machines called “transporters” in the television series Star Trek,
which can immediately make a person or object disappear from one place
and reconstitute a perfect replica in some other place, regardless of
distance.
Exactly how this piece of legerdemain is supposed to be
accomplished is not explained in the television program, but the general
idea is that the original object (such as Captain Kirk’s body) is first
scanned, extracting all the information from it. Then this information is
transmitted to some receiving location and used to construct the replica of
Kirk’s body from atoms of the same kinds, arranged in exactly the same
pattern as the original.
Captain Kirk disappears with a spacey kind of
sound effect from inside the spaceship Enterprise and reappears a moment
later on some planet’s surface. The news is that a way to achieve this bit
of science fiction in real life was recently suggested by IBM’s Charles
Bennett, and has even been demonstrated by transporting a quantum state
of light from one side of a lab table to the other without it traversing any
physical medium in between (believe it or not!).
Quantum mechanics is non-local, meaning that distant objects may
become “entangled” together physically. In this peculiar quantum state,
particles of matter may have effects on one another even though they are
not close together—what Einstein called “spooky action at a distance.”
The entanglement of two particles is achieved by first bringing them into
contact and then separating them.
These two particles thus become
twinned in a way idiosyncratic to the world of quantum mechanics. They
share information that has no independent existence in either particle
alone, such as the fact that they are in states that are opposite to one
another. Once this pair of particles is entangled, they can constitute the
communication “channel” through which a message can be passed, despite
being taken any chosen remove from one another. This is because altering
one particle of this entangled pair causes the other to be affected in a
highly correlated way without any material link between the two.
The first step in quantum communication (which involves the
teleportation of information) is to give one of this pair of particles to “Alice”
(the physicists’ traditional name for the message sender) and the other to

—— The Data on Information · 143 ——
“Bob” (the guy who receives the message). Bob may be very far away
from Alice “as the crow flies.”
For communication of the message to
happen, the obvious difficulty is getting the particle to Bob without
disrupting its state. So once Alice and Bob have received their entangled
particles, Alice brings another particle—the one whose state she wants to
teleport to Bob as a “message”—into the vicinity of her entangled particle.
At this point, Alice scans the message particle together with her member
of the entangled pair of particles. This yields some information about the
state of the two together but disrupts both their states. This is because
Alice here comes up against the constraints of Heisenberg’s Uncertainty
Principle.
At very small scales, the act of observing a system—for
example, by shining a light on some molecules in a tiny container—can
inject enough energy into that system to disturb its state. So the very act
of attempting to measure something introduces into the equation a
fundamental and unavoidable uncertainty about the state of what was to be
measured.
In effect, you can never measure both the position and
momentum of a tiny particle at the same time with infinite precision
because observation itself disrupts what you’re looking at.
This means
that, in quantum communication, the measurement of a particle does not
reveal to Alice anything about the separate particles, but only about the
two of them with respect to each other.
But even this kind of
measurement destroys the state she teleports.
To reconstruct Alice’s message requires two bits of information: First,
are the states of both the message particle and the entangled particle
presently the same (yielding a binary, yes/no answer); and second
(regardless of the previous answer), what is that state (another binary
up/down answer)?
Quantum teleportation permits the instantaneous
transmission of one of these answers via the original entangled pair of
particles, while a “classical,” less-than-light-speed connection such as a
telephone line must be responsible for communicating the other answer.
Since both answers are required before either is useful, the duplication of
the original state at Bob’s location takes time to produce.
Still, the answer to one of the questions is already at Bob’s place, in the
state of his entangled particle.
Because Alice measured the particle to
teleport and the particle entangled with Bob’s together in the same special
space, they too will become correlated in the peculiar quantum mechanical
way—that is, entangled with each other.
Although measurement

—— 144 · THE ELECTRIC MEME ——
destroys the original state of the message particle, Alice sends her
measurement results to Bob by calling him. After hanging up the phone,
Bob may have to twiddle his entangled particle to make its state agree with
the one at Alice’s location and thus retrieve the original, pre-measurement
state of the message particle.
Bob uses the information Alice sent him
through
a
classical
communication
channel
to
determine
which
transformation of his particle is required.
Once this is done, he has
resurrected at a distance the original quantum state of the message particle
(which was unknown to either Alice or Bob) and so duplicated the
message.
Quantum teleportation is thus a process in which the complete
information in an unknown quantum state is decomposed into classical
information and quantum information (the latter called an Einstein-
Podolsky-Rosen Correlation).
These are sent through two separate
channels and later reassembled at a new, potentially very distant location
to produce an exact replica of the original quantum state that was
destroyed through the message-sending process.
Because you can
determine the state of a classical physical system without disturbing it,
there is no problem making a copy of information at macro scales. But at
the quantum scale, this destruction is a necessary feature of the process,
due to the Heisenberg Uncertainty Principle. Alice’s determination of one
property of the particle (such as its rate of spin) to a certain precision
reduces the precision with which she can know about a complementary
property of the particle (such as its direction of spin).
Therefore Alice
cannot retrieve all of the information that is stored in a particle. That’s
why it’s impossible to copy quantum information perfectly.
While you
can move quantum information around, you can’t copy it—you can’t
xerox a particle. Nevertheless, the message has been transferred; Bob has
consumed the signal. It is therefore an instance of communication.
Note that the communication channel has no length in this case,
even if it joins widely separated points in space. This is quite different
from electrons proceeding down a telephone wire—the phenomenon
Claude Shannon was thinking of when he developed the mathematical
theory of communication.
In a telephone wire, the electrons must
interact with the atoms between points A and B, potentially leading to
disruption of their state and hence the message.
But with quantum
communication, there is no interaction with the world, and hence no

—— The Data on Information · 145 ——
possibility of disrupting the message.
Quantum communication thus
makes it clear that Shannon’s theory of information is not universal. It
applies only to cases where the transmission goes through space.
So,
theoretically at least, you can have perfect communication, without
information loss, using quantum methods: Bob can be absolutely sure of
obtaining the quantum part of the message exactly as intended by Alice,
regardless of how far apart they are.
But true teleportation is not in prospect because reconstituting a
duplicate from local materials would require some way of getting round
the physical barrier of instantaneously transmitting all the relevant
information about an object, which has been proven impossible.
Still,
“beaming down” to a planet’s surface some seconds after being in a
circling spaceship—a staple plot device in the Star Trek series—is
possible. Realization of this truly amazing prospect awaits an engineering
solution
to
the
considerable
problem
of
constructing
a
state
of
entanglement that can encompass simultaneously the very large numbers
of atoms making up objects like Captain Kirk.
The fundamental lesson of this counterintuitive phenomenon—the
point I want to draw from it—is that you can think of transmitting
information in just the same way as transporting bodies. That is, you can
send a message or move Captain Kirk from one place to another using the
same equipment. In both cases, it is just a question of rearranging atoms
into the desired configuration. How much more physical can information
get?
At any rate, it should now be obvious that the dominant conception of
information in science is a down-to-earth, rock-bottom physical one.
Information may take a variety of forms, but it always manifests itself in
some physical structure. This justifies the cry of the information physicist:
“No information without physical representation!”
THE NATURE OFBIOLOGICAL INFORMATION
Information may be physical, but what does this mean for biology?
Remember, our interest in information comes only in the context of figuring
out what the implications are for replication and evolution. Physicists treat
any kind of structure as information. But biological information isn’t just
about structure.
In evolutionary theory, more subtle discriminations are
required.
For
example,
in
DNA
we
have
to
distinguish
the

—— 146 · THE ELECTRIC MEME ——
special structure exhibited by the sequence of linked nucleotides from the
physical structure of the double helix itself. The positioning of atoms in
that special staircase arrangement has many qualities that make DNA a
superb choice for storing information, such as redundancy (each strand is
complementary to the other), closure (it wraps up on itself like a cocoon
into something called chromatin, protecting the messages within), built-in
error-correction (the right base has to match up or the double helix goes
out of kilter), and so on. Double-stranded DNA probably evolved from a
single-stranded, RNA-like precursor for this reason.
It is a superior
molecule for information storage.
The problem is that all of these features of DNA molecules count as
structure but not as biological information. DNA molecules are adapted to
replicate.
The features of DNA molecules that allow them to replicate
were selected for, beginning with their precursors at the origin of life. But
the global aspects of the molecule’s structure just mentioned aren’t what
get involved in its major biological function: the transmission of
information across time. That role goes to the ordering of the base pairs
themselves. The genetic “message” is made up of these units, strung one
after the other along the helical back-bone. That’s why, for example, the
bonds that connect the two bases that make up each of the rungs of the
DNA ladder are easier to sever than those that connect successive
nucleotides together. This makes it is easier to chop up the helix into bits
than to cause it to split down the middle (although it makes this latter
move when replicating).
This means you can insert a new bit into the
middle of a genetic “word” but not so easily tear an existing word in half.
Unfortunately, in spite of the massive amount of work done by a
variety of scholars to explain the notion of information, none of the
suggestions made thus far is adequate to distinguish information as it
functions in evolution from other sorts of structure.
The physical
information contained in the arrangement of atoms in a double spiral
staircase in your living room is no different in kind from that exhibited in
the linear sequence of base pairs that actually produce the proteins that
evolution works on. Structures are not physically separable from concrete
systems: They may be distinguished only analytically.
We also can’t just say that it’s the sequence of base pairs that gets passed
on. It isn’t a particular sequence that transfers when DNA replicates; instead
the
complement
of
each
base
does
(that
is,
for
every
cytosine

—— The Data on Information · 147 ——
that comes along, a thymine gets linked to its opposite strand, and for
every adenine, a guanine is affixed to the other side). That is, the original
ATGC does not equal its transcript, GCAT; they may match one another,
but they are opposites.
While the transcript may later be used to
reconstruct the original sequence because they are complementary, they
are still not the same sequence.
Information thus can’t be equated with structure or order, pure and
simple. Biological information is not equivalent to physical information;
it is some kind of subset.
Only the aspects of structure that matter to
evolution actually, count to a biologist.
The question, then, is how to
distinguish the special sort of structure exhibited by sequences of base
pairs in molecules of DNA from the physical structure of the double helix
itself—that is, from the layout of atoms in space.
Perhaps we can find
inspiration from an earlier generation of thinking about genes. What did
genes “do” before they transmitted information?
Inheritance was not always considered a problem of information
transmission. In fact, until around 1950, molecular biologists described
genetic mechanisms without ever using the term “information.”
The
prevailing view in the early part of the twentieth century, championed
particularly
by
Linus
Pauling,
was
that
genes
transferred
(not
“transmitted”) chemical specificity through time. By the 1930s, work in
biology had determined that interactions between molecules in living
organisms are highly specific—that is, a given molecule would typically
react with only one reagent.
In effect, enzymes act only on particular
substrates.
This was encapsulated in the catchphrase of the title: “one
gene-one enzyme.”
As more was learned, this organizing principle
became codified in the idea that the behavior of large organic molecules
was determined by their conformation, or three-dimensional shape.
Pauling, the great pioneer in determining the structure of large molecules
like proteins, was particularly, fond of the image of biological interactions
taking lace as a kind of precise fit between a “lock “ and “key” as the
surfaces
of
these
molecules
came
into
contact
and
intermediary
aggregations were formed, then broken apart.
This lock-and-key arrangement is typified by a general phenomenon
called “molecular recognition,” which results from an exact fit between
the surfaces of two molecules.
The random bumping together of large
macromolecules in solution is the first step toward molecular recognition.

—— 148 · THE ELECTRIC MEME ——
When the surfaces of two molecules match well, enough weak bonds can
form between their surfaces to temporarily withstand the thermal motions
that tend to break them apart. These chemical bonds lend relatively high
stability to their relationship.
It is these physical requirements for
matching
that
naturally
account
for
the
specificity
of
biological
recognition on the molecular level. For example, enzymes can typically
only catalyze very specific kinds of chemical reactions due to their ability
to latch physically onto just one or a few types of molecules.
Pauling thought this kind of process would extend to gene-based
inheritance as well. And it does. For example, a particular protein can
attach itself to a stretch of DNA by “recognizing” this specific sequence
because its physical shape is extensively complementary to special surface
features of the double helix in that region.
In most cases, the protein
makes a large number of contacts with the DNA.
Although each
individual contact is weak, the numerous contacts that are typically formed
at the protein-DNA interface add up to ensure that the interaction is both
highly specific and very strong. Once in place, the protein can prohibit
that gene from being “expressed” (or read off by RNA) for the
manufacture of another protein that is the gene’s “natural” product. By the
1960s, the idea that “structure determines function” had become the
dominant principle in molecular biology.
The
“problem”
of
biological
information,
then,
is
this:
The
information0transfer criterion that is an essential feature of replication
isn’t just an abstract similarity relationship between source and copy. The
relationship is already covered by the similarity condition, another of the
formal criteria for replication. Informational inheritance involves a real
transfer. But of what? Abstractions reside in a metaphysical domain like
Plato’s Forms, never moving. They don’t have to move because they are
immaterial; we simply refer to them when we need to. So what moves
when replication happens?
The answer to our problem—why biological, as opposed to physical,
information has a more precise nature—becomes obvious, I suggest, if we
return to the old idea that information is tied to the specific structure of
matter.
What I want to suggest is that certain kinds of matter have a
special ability that makes them biological.

—— The Data on Information · 149 ——
Certain classes of proteins can adopt, and then retain, two or more
stable atomic configurations. They are called allosteric; in other words,
they are flexible. Different allosteric proteins can interact, much as keys
fit into locks, with the result that information is transferred from one
molecule to the other. How does this occur? The source molecule makes
the atoms of the receiver molecule deploy themselves in a spatial pattern
analogous to its own.
In essence, there is a change in the receiving
molecule’s shape, in the orientation of the atoms that make it up. It flips
into the configuration of the other molecule (or at least something closer to
it, if it can adopt multiple states).
There is no “communication at a
distance” at the molecular scale of organization. This requires very close
interaction, where the relatively weak powers of electromagnetic attraction
can work to align the two molecules properly, making them ready for the
configurational change to occur.
Provided with a sufficient store of
energy, such molecules can transfer information serially: One molecule
passes information to a neighbor, which in turn passes that information to
another neighbor, and so on, in a chain.
Biological information thus
moves and flows; it can be communicated.
The flow of information
generates an ordered sequence of conformational changes, propagating
through the chemical mixture.
This capability, I suggest, defines biological, as opposed to physical,
information. Biological information is capable of transferring constraints
or specificities of structure.
It arises when one bit of matter can help
another bit to become like itself. Linus Pauling thought large molecules in
general were able to do this. Biological information in structure that can,
through lock-and-key manipulations, change the conformation of other
matter into its own shape. Only those kinds of matter that can be flexible,
like allosteric proteins, are going to be flexible in this fashion, and hence
biological. Certainly the split-and-reassemble quality of DNA replication
has this special trait.
In an evolutionary, context, it is this aspect of structure that counts as
information. Other aspects of structure don’t matter in biology—only the
component of structure that has been passed to an object by another one is
important. Of course, you can’t “see” which aspect of structure this is: All
structure still looks like atoms arranged in space.
You can only know
which aspects of the current configuration have been “acquired” through
transmission by observing the history of that bit of matter.

—— 150 · THE ELECTRIC MEME ——
So here’s how the new view sees information transfer. Information is
communicated between molecules when the lock and key are differently
shaped: The lock fits into the key, and both are changed in the process.
The message is the change in shape, not the new shape itself. But the new
shape is what matters in the next go-round, because that is what the new
interactant sees. The key—now in the form of a lock, for the roles are
reversible—runs off with a new conformation, so that a new kind of key is
required to fit it the next time around. There is no constance of players in
such chains, no lineage of similar forms, but rather a constant back and
forth between locks and keys as they flex from one shape to another.
Information replication is a special case of this communication
process.
It occurs when the transfer of structural constraints from one
molecule to another results in the duplication of the original configuration:
The lock fits into the key; the key turns into a lock, but the original lock
doesn’t change conformation, so the two locks now coincide. Of course,
this kind of complementarity between lock and key is how DNA works.
This is essentially how prions work too: Some unfolding and refolding
goes on in both of the molecules involved, but both also wind up in a
similar state to one another.
In the physicalist tradition of Pauling, information is determined by both
a structure and a substrate. It is not disembodied, but always a function
of some ordering of physical matter.
By contrast, in Shannon’s
mathematical theory of communication, information transmission is
modeled as a reduction in uncertainty about a message’s content.
Reducing uncertainty sounds a lot like restricting possibilities, which is
one way of interpreting the transfer of specificity. But Shannon’s theory
is neutral about physicality. It was specifically designed to be “general,”
to apply regardless of how the message is embodied.
In particular, it
makes no reference to the meaning or content of the message.
From
Shannon’s standpoint, a nonsensical message and a meaningful
message can be equivalent.
So the message “man” and “mna” are
equally good in the sense that they contain three valid letters; it’s just
that only one of these makes up a recognizable word. But clearly, in
a biological context, a message should have a meaning, or function.
This is accounted for by a structuralist approach.
“Mna” doesn’t
have
the
same
physical
structure
as
“man”—and
only
one

—— The Data on Information · 151 ——
of these two sequences of letters “unlocks” the mental imagery associated
with the male of the species.
The more abstract (“informational”) and
more physical (“structural”) approaches to information thus differ in how
they can be interpreted.
There is no need to speak of information in the abstract; it is structure
as well as order. The anthropologist Gregory Bateson famously defined
information as the “difference that makes a difference.” That difference is
the constraints information introduces—in our case, to the outcome of
replication. Replicators are entities that can transfer structural constraints
on what is possible from one location and time to another. This is what
Pauling had in mind with his notion of “molecular specificity.” But more
particularly, replicators physically limit the kinds of reactions that can
occur to those which result in duplication.
What makes replication
replication, in this view, is the fact that the constraint set is highly specific:
The similarity between the duplicate and the original is very good.
In
replication, rather a lot of information is transferred, and consequently the
constraints on what is produced are tight. This suggests that replication is
but one end of a spectrum of reactions—the end where the outcome is
relatively guaranteed, and in which the produced configuration is largely
determined by inputs from a single source: the original replicator. Various
mechanisms are used to ensure that this similarity between source and
copy recurs over and over, buffered as much as possible
from
environmental disturbances.
THE STICKY REPLICATOR PRINCIPLE
Transfers of information are tied to particular material substrates, due to
the transfer mechanism’s reliance on physical “background conditions.”
This is why genetic base pairs depend on molecular helpers like various
kinds of RNA to work their biological magic. From this basis, it follows
that replication will typically be specific to one kind of physical substrate.
If you try to copy DNA using different assistants or materials, you don’t
get the right kind of material to make new organisms at the end of the line.
The restriction of a given replication reaction to one suite of conditions
and materials is also implicit in the basic replicator equation from
Replicator Theory.
To exhibit the same kinetics in interactions with

—— 152 · THE ELECTRIC MEME ——
other molecules, the source and copy replicators must presumably share
many physical characteristics, such as being made of the same substance.
So a crucial upshot of our investigations into the nature of replicators is
the suggestion that replicators pick one kind of material to live on, and
then stick to it. This can be elevated to the Sticky Replicator Principle, for
those who like fancy phrases to remember.
Just to recap this section, a replication process, which involves true
information transfer, is likely to be tied to a particular physical substrate.
An important consequence of the Sticky Replicator Principle is that
abstract conceptions of information simply won’t wash when thinking
about replication issues. This means that any theory involving replication
must specify some physical, rather than merely functional, claim about the
mechanism that a replicator uses to achieve replication. This is because
replicators are not only picky about what kinds of things they will stick to,
but also about what kinds of contexts they are willing to be found in.
Since traditional memetics doesn’t make such a claims, it is inadequate as
a theory.
THE SAME INFLUENCE RULE
We can now couple the Sticky Replicator Principle with the knowledge
gained earlier from our examination of the replication reaction and
equation to go back and say something else about the similarity condition
for replicators. Taken together, these two constraints imply that the source
and copy in a replication relationship are not just similar in some vague
sense, but similar in terms of their material substrate.
This conclusion flies in the face of standard memetic theory, of course,
which suggests that substrate specificity is not implied by the fact that
memes are replicators.
The common belief that a memetic lineage can
consist of a meme passing from brain to computer to book and back to
brain without compromising the notion of replication has been cast into
considerable doubt by our investigation.
Where did this idea come from anyway?
This traditional view of
replication suggests that if two things can do the same job, then they are
the same kind of thing. More technically, we can call this idea “functional
equivalence.” For example, it is possible that brains and computers can
serve as equivalent storehouses for memes because both can produce the

—— The Data on Information · 153 ——
same behaviors. This kind of view has been legitimized by reference to
the famous Turing Test, dreamed up by the brilliant British mathematician
Alan Turing, in the first half of the twentieth century. Turing suggested
that a way to determine if a computer can think (like a human) is if you
can’t tell its answers to a series of questions from those of a person—that
is, if you can have an intelligent discussion with the machine. Obviously
the “programs” at work in the human and the computer will bear little
resemblance to one another. Nevertheless they produce the same kinds of
outputs. So we can call them functionally equivalent agents, at least for
the job of answering questions. Functional equivalence is thus the idea
that the mechanisms “inside” don’t matter, as long as a process can exhibit
stable input-output relationships: Ask a given question, expect a particular
answer from both the computer and the functionally equivalent human
being. Different mechanisms for generating the output, then, are for all
intents and purposes the same.
When this principle is applied to replication, it makes memetics
substrate-neutral. In essence, what kind of “machine” grinds through the
replication process isn’t supposed to matter. So the same meme can exist
in brains or on paper, no problem.
Functional equivalence does have its good qualities.
It is consistent
with heredity: It obviously provides a good correlation between parental
“inputs” and offspring “outputs.” And this, as I have asserted, is all that
evolution requires.
But it means that those who adopt the functionalist
stance in memetics—and the list includes most of the major players, such
as Dennett, Blackmore, and Dawkins—cannot hold the memetic line
against encroachments from the Gadjusekian “let’s make do with genes”
view of cultural evolution.
This is because functional equivalence can
achieve heredity without replication—without memes.
Functional equivalence is also the source of another problem identified
earlier: substrate neutrality, which is tied to the explanatory futility of
memetics thus far. Functional equivalence means memes are not tied to
any one kind of code.
Source and copy can be on different substrates
because function is potentially transferable between contexts. The Little
Red Riding Hood story is essentially the same, whether told in pictures or
a song or written words, because you can still get the “moral” from it in
any case. But functional equivalence is not, so to speak, what I have in
mind.

—— 154 · THE ELECTRIC MEME ——
Functional equivalence is fine as a principle for computational science.
We already know that machines using different substrates—silicon chips,
DNA, or quantum states—can perform computations. They can also rely
on different mechanisms, such as operating systems and software
programs, and nevertheless accomplish the same thing. But replication is
a more precise notion than computation, so functional equivalence is too
loose a criterion for evolutionary purposes. We want to exclude this kind
of equivalence, which leads us to call genes on paper and genes in cells the
same thing, because lineages involving brains and those involving
computers are not the same—their evolutionary dynamics are bound to
differ.
Replicators are not Turing machines, capable of generating any
kind of solution. In fact, the whole idea of replication is just the opposite:
to make sure only one kind of product comes out at the end.
Replicators, then, to be defined as similar, cannot just do the same kind
of job. They have to do the same kind of job in the same kind of context.
If replication is always specific to one substrate, then information transfer
can take place only within certain restricted kinds of circumstances. This
condition suggests that true replication involves what I will call “structural
equivalence” between the source and the copy.
The notion of structural equivalence is taken from social network
theory.
This theory attempts to describe, in a general way, how the
structure of the network—the particular links that exist between people—
hamper or facilitate the flow of goods or information through that group of
individuals. The relationships in one network may be defined by kinship;
in another, by positions within a company.
This idea obviously resonates with the technique of viral marketing
mentioned at the beginning of this book, which is based on role-playing in
networks.
For example, there may be an old lady in the Bronx who is
treasurer of her local Senior Bingo Players Association and so passes
money on to the society’s president. Similarly, an old lady in Brooklyn
does the same thing, thanks to being the treasurer of the Bingo Players in
this other New York City borough. The two old ladies are similar to each
other, but not the same person, and neither are the two Bingo Player
presidents. Nevertheless the same consequences result from the relationship
between treasurer and president in these two cases.
Both old ladies are
“wired up” in the same way to similar “downstream” players in their

—— The Data on Information · 155 ——
respective bingo associations. They are what I have called “structurally
equivalent”; they have the same kind of influence on the overall situation,
even though they occupy different places in the overall network.
Whereas functional equivalence can be summarized as requiring “same
input/same output,” structural equivalence necessitates “same input/same
influence.”
The same suite of effects must ripple through the larger
context in which the evolutionary agent (such as a replicator) finds itself
(like our example of a social network).
This cleans that what must be
similar is not just the intermediate, proximate output from the agent’s own
action, but also the downstream consequences, due to the agent’s similar
connections into a larger context.
So the similarity criterion we have
discussed as crucial in replication implies that source and copy must have
the same causal influences on the world at large.
This insight—
recognition of the need for structural, not just functional, equivalence in
replicators—can be enshrined as the Same Influence Rule. It essentially
argues that function follows (physical) form.
This rule must be applied to the set of replicators defining a lineage; it
is comparative quality (like the qualities of our two Bingo Players, above).
It is a quality that replicators in a lineage share, not just the source and its
immediate descendant, produced by a particular replication reaction. In
effect, if the whole sequence of replicators identified by a chain of
replication reactions is considered together as members of a group, they
must not only share a single substrate to be similar, but also play similar
evolutionary roles. All these copies of a replicator will use the same set of
skills and tactics to get ahead in a game in which all of them face similar
selective forces.
This will allow selection pressures on this group of
replicators to be consistent over time and for the adaptations associated
with this lineage to acculturate. And the accumulation of adaptations is
the sine qua non of evolution.
AT DETOUR’S END
If we now stand back for a moment to look at what we have learned
through this foray into how various sources of information can be put to
work on culture, we can see that we have gained considerable insight into
how memes will have to work if they are to be true replicators. The notion
of a replicator is itself a fundamental generalization of the Darwinian

—— 156 · THE ELECTRIC MEME ——
idea of a biological unit of inheritance. Crucial features of any replication
event—causation, similarity, information transfer, and duplication—have
been identified.
Replicator Theory taught us that entirely different
evolutionary regimes are possible.
This theory complements nicely our
earlier suppositions about the central phenomenon of replication. In fact,
all of the criteria we originally specified for replication are explicit in the
replicator equation and replication reaction concept. Information transfer
is present in the notion of the replicator serving as its own catalyst.
Causation is also obviously present if the replicator catalyzes itself.
Duplication, as noted above, is the place where Replicator Theory begins,
and similarity of instigator and product is the obvious goal of the whole
process. The description of inheritance as transferred specificity inspired
by Linus Pauling, is obviously also an image congenial to Replicator
Theory as developed by Manfred Eigen and his compatriots.
So the
replication reaction is a very good representation of the phenomenon we
are so vitally interested in here.
We have also learned that any replicator must be a physical thing. This
runs contrary to a lot of contemporary thinking. Memes, after all, appear
not to have a single, archival kind of medium.
Consider Miguel
Cervantes’s book Don Quixote: a stack of paper with ink marks on the
pages. But you could transfer the book to CD or a tape and turn it into
sound waves for blind people. No matter what medium it’s in, it’s always
the same book, the same information. So it seems that it is information
content that defines a replicator, not its material embodiment.
Genes are not—nowadays at least—any different from memes in this
respect: They too have a variety of media in which they can be “archived.”
A gene can be lifted out of its home inside the nucleus of a cell and its
code deciphered by modern gene-sequencing machines.
The code can
then be written down and stored in a library or in computer memory.
Later, potentially many years after its original extraction, the gene can
then be reconstituted in a cell, and the cell can in turn be injected into a
living organism to go back to work normally.
All this through the
wonders of genetic engineering.
Does this mean that genes are like
memes, that they don’t have a single medium?
Are they protean
replicators, capable of taking on a variety of different forms to suit the
occasion, like the eponymous figure from Greek mythology who had that
ability?

—— The Data on Information · 157 ——
In fact, neither memes nor genes can exist in all those media. If this
proposition were right—if replicators were merely abstract—this should
be a disastrous state of affairs.
It would lead us straight back into the
morass of moribund memes, memes that are everywhere and yet nowhere
because they can be anything and nothing: memes in your head, memes in
your movements, memes in your toaster. In short, replicators that aren’t
tied down to any particular thing. Memes or genes, then, like information
itself, should have to exist in some Platonic never-never land. At bottom,
this kind of abstraction just can’t handle the fact that the evolutionary
process is not finally one of information transmission.
The idea that replicators can migrate from one form to another without
consequence simply isn’t true.
Just look at how crucial evolutionary
parameters have changed as genetic engineering technologies have
improved. Technicians have been able to write down gene sequences for
quite a while, but it used to be the case that you did it by hand, after
making a judgment about how far the gene had traveled down a special
gel. Then, on transferring the data to a computer, lots of errors crept in
because you were pecking at a keyboard with 26 letters on it where only
four (A, C, G, and T) were required. Today the transcription machinery
has improved significantly, as specialized computer software has been
developed to take information directly from an equally automatic gene
sequencer and plug it into a computerized database. Many fewer errors
crop up as a result—mutation is constrained by technology.
Prior to the invention of sequencing technologies, genes were stuck
inside organisms and couldn’t get out.
Gene lineages followed their
normal course, mutating occasionally, to produce the standard bushy
family tree of life.
But now genes can be inserted into just about
anything and made to persist in that new genome, whether it belongs to
the species of organism that donated it or not.
So the “horizontal”
transfer
of
genes
between
species
is
becoming
much
more
characteristic of gene lineages, thanks to technological developments,
even in the higher animals, where it was relatively absent as a
“natural”
phenomenon.
(Viruses
have
long
performed
the
introductions of “alien” genetic material into the genomes of complex
animals from time to time.)
The storage of genetic information in
“artificial” media will have a tremendous impact on the dynamics of
evolution in the “real” world.
That is what genetic engineering

—— 158 · THE ELECTRIC MEME ——
is all about: changing the way things normally work when left in nature’s
hands.
So you can, in the abstract, represent a gene in many different
ways these days.
But how you do so influences the bioevolutionary
dynamics that result from that choice. The point is that several aspects of
a gene’s life are dependent on how it can manifest itself in the material
world.
I conclude that information is not metaphysical; it’s merely physical.
This conclusion should, I hope, prove to be the death knell for the protean
replicator, the shape-changer always popping up around every corner,
often where we least expect it.
Further, the principles we have just derived—the Sticky Replicator
Principle and the Same Influence Rule—are important deductions about
replicators that will color all later argument in this book and help narrow
our search for memes significantly. We have gained all these insights only
by examining the general theory of replication—something that has not
previously been done by memeticists, but that provides us with the
possibility of making real progress toward a science of memetics.
With these many and lengthy preliminaries now behind us—and
keeping our new, hard-won wisdom about the nature of replication in
mind—we are now ready to begin our quest for memes in earnest. The
question we now need to answer is: Where are memes hiding?

Chapter Six
STALKING THEWILDMEME
If the event of the journey
Prove as successful to the queen,—O, be’t
so!—
As it hath been to us rare, pleasant, speedy,
The time is worth the use on’t.
–William Shakespeare
Originally memes were defined as shared elements of culture learned
through imitation from others, with culture being defined rather broadly to
include ideas, behaviors, and physical objects. It was thought that memes
might be present in any of these various forms.
In this context, Susan
Blackmore invites us to consider a bowl of soup. Does the wet stuff itself
count as a meme? Or the instructions about how to make soup stored in a
person’s brain? Or the kitchen-bound behavior of making the soup? Or
perhaps the written-down recipe?
Blackmore has recently argued that
“memes are not magical entities or free-floating Platonic ideals but
information lodged in specific human memories, actions and artifacts.” So
for Blackmore, memes are in all three kinds of things I have identified: the
brain, behavior, and the products of behavior. Dennett too suggests that
memes are both in the head and out in the world, as part of a complex life
cycle.
Imitation, taken in the “broad sense,” is consistent with memes
being in any of these kinds of things.
The primary problem with this state of affairs is that it doesn’t tell
you where to look for a meme, or how to tell when you’ve actually
159

—— 160 · THE ELECTRIC MEME ——
located one. Just look at what we still don’t know about memes: where
are memes to be found? Are memes in behavior, in brains, in artifacts, or
some combination of the three? Or perhaps something in the brain might
be a “memotype,” with some behavior as its memetic phenotype. Or the
opposite.
(All of these positions have adherents.) How many different
ways can you get infected with one? From how many different “cultural
parents” might you acquire memes? How long can a meme live? How do
memetic alternatives compete with each other?
What do they compete
for? How many variant memes might there be? What different kinds of
forces select among alternative memes?
What forces cause them to
mutate? How fast do they mutate? Are memes translated from one form
to another?
If so, how?
All of these questions are open.
At present,
memeticists can’t even act like the drunk searching for his keys under the
lamppost because the light is better there.
We don’t know where the
lamppost is or where the light is coming from.
In the last chapter, I concluded that to truly identify a replicator we
have to specify how its replication reaction works. Now we have to get
our hands dirty and determine the physical mechanics of memetic
replication.
Why be concerned with the mechanistic details? No one in memetics
has previously done this; no one has even felt it was necessarily.
The
consensus seems to be that we can ignore implementation issues
altogether. Memeticists continually note that a lot was accomplished by
Darwin prior to the identification of genes. They often remark that the
study of cultural variation is presently at the same state of development as
the study of biological variation was in Darwin’s time: It seems reasonable
to suppose that an evolutionary process underlies cultural elaboration, but
the mechanisms of inheritance—the cultural analogue of Mendelian
rules—remain unknown. But, the argument goes, this is okay because we
can still use basic Darwinian thinking about selection, variation, and
heredity to get us some way toward a memetic science.
Well, quite a bit was accomplished in genetics before 1953, when
Watson and Crick accurately modeled the genetic structure, including
Mendel’s ingenious experiments with peas, which suggested there were two
copies of each gene in an organism. But since Watson and Crick broke the
genetic code, the entire field of molecular biology has developed.
In
essence,
heredity,
a
biological
phenomenon,
was
shown
to
have

—— Stalking the Wild Meme · 161 ——
a chemical basis, and the laws of chemistry were demonstrated to apply to
the fundamental problem of biology. This kind of reduction has proven to
be extremely powerful in the case of biology and has led directly to an
explosion of knowledge about the actual workings of genes, from their
physiological activities to their different kinds of roles.
We can also take the example of other bio-replicators to heart. Thanks
to the identification of infectious agents such as prions, which lack
genomes altogether, and subviral genomic particles like viroids and
virusoids, many diseases previously believed to be genetic in origin are
now being characterized as transmissible.
Some people also think that
cancer—another large category of illnesses—is just a lineage of rogue
cells setting out on their own reproductive course independent of the host
body, much to the chagrin of the cell lines that are “behaving.” This list
may only get longer as we find that viruses are behind many diseases of
strange etiology. Viruses are being found to have more strategies up their
sleeve than previously thought, like long incubation times.
Kuru and
“mad cow” disease were only, the beginning. Prions are now being touted
as the agents responsible for a variety of diseases previously thought to be
innate, like Alzheimer’s and Parkinson’s disease.
These developments
have come from a growing recognition that parasites have evolved many
different and quite complex life cycles that do not conform to the standard
etiological pathway of direct exposure and quick development of
symptoms,
the
easiest
causal
relationship
to
establish
purely
by
coincidence and correlation. Diseases we have long ascribed to genetic or
environmental factors—including some forms of heart disease, cancer, and
mental illness—may in many cases actually be found to be infectious.
Some think even obesity is caused by viruses!
And this process of
reclassification of diseases can only be expected to continue as our
understanding of the evolution of bioparasites increases.
So the move to look for a physical correlate of the replicator concept in
culture is a natural progression. The history of genetics and epidemiology
provide clear parallels. Any hope is that a similar theoretical reduction
will occur in memetics: that some aspects of memetics can be reduced to
the principles of a highly progressive science and so give memetics the
chance of becoming full of portent for the future. Once we recognize what
memes are, we can begin to trace their pathways through society. Just as
in
the
case
of diseases,
so too,
I
predict,
will
our
apparently

—— 162 · THE ELECTRIC MEME ——
innate knowledge be found to have been transmitted to us through
epigenetic means, either recently or in the past.
Memes will acquire
greater significance as we turn away from the standard dichotomy of
nature or nurture. It’s therefore likely that tremendous advances await us
if only we can “get physical” about memes.
Once we nail down the
replication mechanism, then all kinds of new hypotheses about memes will
suggest themselves and whole new fields of empirical endeavor will open
up.
There’s another reason this argument in favor of continued ignorance
about mechanisms simply won’t work. The analogue to Darwin’s time is
faulty. Things are not the same now as then. It’s rather like arguing that
currently “underdeveloped” countries should go through the same process
of development as occurred in the West the first time around, when the
world was younger. In fact, such countries cannot rewind history back to
the time of the Industrial Revolution, even if they wanted to.
This is
because they are the poor relations, with little power, in a world now
dominated by global financial markets, nuclear weapons, international
media conglomerates, and mobile labor forces.
The weight of the First
World is on their shoulders, but unlike Atlas, they don’t have the gigantic
powers to keep it aloft, to pretend as if it didn’t exist and freely exercise
their own will.
The developing countries also cannot tap into the
manpower pool on which the original revolution depended because they
are that reservoir of labor.
In much the same way, memes live in a world of genes. Memes began,
at least, as the genes’ poorer cousins, with relatively underdeveloped
abilities for replication and control over their tendency to mutate. So, in
some sense, a straightforward analogy to genes is bound to fail, simply
because genes got there first.
This changes the evolutionary context
utterly and completely for any replicators that follow. Generally speaking,
memes are necessarily dealt the weaker hand by history.
Memes can’t
simply replay the videotape of evolutionary history again to get a different
ending to the plot, with genes parasitized to do their bidding instead,
because there is only a tiny chance memes would get the scenario they
desire at the end. Evolution never works out in just the same way twice
because each sequence of descent with modification is a long history of
coincidences.

—— Stalking the Wild Meme · 163 ——
A major error of previous stories about memes has been to forget this
general context. As soon as the exciting prospect of a cultural replicator
was recognized, theorizing generally went about as if memes existed in
splendid isolation, rather than being “Third World” replicators. Memetics
has forgotten that memes are parasites, dependent on hosts for a living,
and that they necessarily play second fiddle to genes. So memes must deal
with the fact that they live in a world full of genes. And just as champions
of memes argue that a “genes-only” view is wrong, so too is a “memes-
only” perspective insufficient. It’s a genes-plus-memes world we all live
in.
Each replicator must coevolve with the other and handle those
activities of the other that impinge on its own goals and well-being.
There is a yet a third reason the “but Darwin did okay” argument
doesn’t hold water. As I’ve stated before, it’s possible that memes aren’t
necessary at all. Genes might be sufficient to explain cultural inheritance.
It might, in the end, be a “genes-only” world after all. In effect, the only
way we’re going to be able to tell whether cultural selectionists are right
about the nature of cultural evolution is to actually put our hands on a
meme. We simply must determine where memes live and identify how
they satisfy the criteria for being replicators for memetics to survive.
The challenge, then, is to provide some empirical support for the meme
hypothesis.
Memes cannot be left as intangible, ineffable, unknown
“stuff” that is somehow created, transferred, transformed, and preserved to
account for changes in cultural traits. We need to find out: What’s the
matter with memes?
THE QUEST BEGINS
Taking the need for a physical model of memetic replication seriously
means we need to establish in which kind of substrate memes can be found.
Although Dawkins’s original catalogue of memes suggested he believed
they could be found in beliefs, behavior, or bottle-tops, he later refined his
definition of memes, primarily to restrict them to one substrate—the
mental—clue to what he perceived as confusion about the memetic
“genotype” versus “phenotype.”
He believed, as do most Western
intellectuals, that beliefs causally precede behavior, so due to their priority,
ideas are more important than their products.
Since replicators are also
causally prior to, and more important than, interactors in evolutionary

—— 164 · THE ELECTRIC MEME ——
terms, we should therefore identify memes as ideas. “A meme should be
regarded as a unit of information residing in a brain,” he declared.
But both Dawkins and Dennett continue to assert that memes can exist
in artifacts.
For example, even after his switch to brain-based memes,
Dawkins again declared that memes can “propagate themselves from brain
to brain, from brain to book, from book to brain, from brain to computer,
[and] from computer to computer.” Dennett says, “A wagon with spoked
wheels carries not only grain or freight from place to place; it carries the
brilliant idea of a wagon with spoked wheels from mind to mind.” Since
Dawkins explicitly argues that a vehicle “houses a collection of
replicators” and “works as a unit for the preservation and propagation of
those replicators,” memes must exist inside artifacts like Dennett’s
wagons, using them like Trojan horses to infiltrate the defenses of
innocent minds. Brains, behavior, and artifacts are equally good homes
for memes. They exist as information, regardless of where or how this
information is stored, which makes memes “substrate-neutral,” Dennett
says.
We can use the Sticky Replicator Principle, which holds that memes
can exist only on one physical substrate, to rid ourselves of this tendency
to what is more properly called “substrate profligacy.”
But is it ideas,
actions, or artifacts that memes are hiding in? I’ll let the cat out of the bag
by saying that memes will be found only in brains.
However, it’s
important to note that Dawkins did not have principled reasons to think
ideas are more likely to be replicators than behaviors; he did not couch his
argument in terms of Universal Darwinism. His reasoning for preferring
the mental identification was philosophical, rather than biological, in
nature.
A justification based on functional criteria for preferring a
restriction of memes to ideas remains to be produced, and I will produce it.
So we can’t simply take Dawkins as the authority defining the new
scientific field of mentalistic memetics. Rather we must provide a more
substantial defense of our choice of a substrate for memes.
Let me begin the process of elimination by asserting that in light of our
definition of replication, artifacts don’t have the requisite qualities of
causation, similarity, information transfer, and duplication. For proof of
this statement, let’s take the quintessential example of artifact production,
the automobile assembly line.
Cars are made inside factories—an enclosed, protective environment,
full of raw materials and machines for converting those materials

—— Stalking the Wild Meme · 165 ——
into the desired final form. This is all well and good, and in accord with
Replicator Theory.
But cars aren’t born; they are assembled, these days mostly by robots.
That is, they do not develop from a chunk of raw material but are
constructed by having various bits added onto them.
And, in fact, the
materials are not so “raw” in this case—many of the bits used are
preprocessed, ready for attaching to the developing chassis.
So
construction is not entirely encapsulated in the local site but involves
many prior activities, such as the making of spark plugs (a product of
some other factory), which get plugged into the engine block at the
assembly plant.
Of course, it can also be said that proteins are cobbled together in a
similar kind of sequential process.
In particular, ribosomes, which
construct DNA in the cytoplasm of cells, are themselves made through a
complex process as part of the growth of a cell (which begins when
instructions are read from previous bits of DNA). So it isn’t the “assembly
line” nature of the process that distinguishes replication from production.
Replicators can be assembled, rather than grown.
What is the difference, then? The crucial point is where the directives
controlling the robotic movements come from.
In the car factory, the
assembly robots don’t have the information “on board.” Their movements
respond to instructions from a computer program somewhere.
In this
program, there are no instructions that say, “If the previous car was
painted blue, then paint this one blue” or, “If there was a hatch-back on the
previous car, when add one to this car as well.” Rather, the instructions
that direct the movements of the robotic arms may be stored in a database,
perhaps even more remote from the factory floor than the computer itself,
reflecting orders for new cars from customers around the country. Even
before robots took over the factory floor, the automobile workers would
work from written instructions that told them what bit to weld onto the
next car. What happened with the previous car on the line had no bearing
on how they behaved with respect to the next hulking mass of metal
headed their way.
So multiple cars come out the factory door (fulfilling the duplication
criterion of replication), and these cars may look enough like one another
to be called similar (they all have the same brand of name plate slapped on
them, at least). But one car does not play any role in generating the next;
computer programs direct the machines that perform that job.
So it

—— 166 · THE ELECTRIC MEME ——
seems that artifacts fail our replicator test because two of the fundamental
qualities of replication are missing. First, one car plays little or no causal
role in making the next. (At most, the fact that one car can be ticked off as
completed means that the pointer on the computer program moves to the
next line down the order list, where the specifications for the next car can
be found.) Second, there is no information transfer from car to car, even
indirectly. No quality-control machine reads out the condition of one car,
and then feeds those criteria to the machines controlling the construction
of the next—duplicating an accidental dent in the hood down the line, for
instance. Instead the specifications are preset and come from a location
remote from the assembly site. In short, automobiles are produced, not
reproduced.
The reader may recall that I earlier allowed that artifacts can be
replicators. Indeed there are whole classes of them, ranging from Xeroxed
patterns of ink on paper to computer viruses. So why am I now saying that
memes can’t be considered artifacts that replicate?
Because the whole
point of invoking memes is to explain culture. We commonly attribute the
special features of how particular groups of people act and think to their
culture. But the specialized, highly technological categories of artifactual
replicators we’ve discussed cannot explain the phenomenon of culture,
which is both much bigger and older than these types of artifacts. Xerox
machines and computers very recently arrived on the scene, while culture
is at least as old as the so-called “cultural revolution” of 40,000 years ago,
during the Upper Paleolithic, when people first began leaving permanent
records of their cultural activities in the form of cave paintings, sculptured
rock, and decorated bone fragments.
Even today the existence of
computers themselves or jet planes or, more prosaically, plastic lawn
furniture can hardly be explained as the concerted activity of replicating
artifacts. Not all kinds of artifacts can be replicators. Of course, not all
proteins are replicators like prions, either, nor are all computer registers
occupied by viruses.
Further, it’s not likely that any protein could be
converted into a prion, nor that any artifact could be turned into a
replicator. The idea of replicating cars is even a bit frightening.
But any register in computer memory could potentially be converted
to a viral state. This is one way of seeing the difference between limited

—— Stalking the Wild Meme · 167 ——
and unlimited replication, of course: While prions are limited replicators,
comp-viruses are not.
And what we are looking for is an unlimited
replicator capable of accounting for the complex phenomenon of human
culture. So we need to find a physical substrate that is robust enough to
play a causal role in all of culture’s myriad manifestations, not just a few
exotic ones. Our search for a cultural replicator must continue.
EINSTEIN’S TEA PARTY
This elimination of artifacts from consideration still leaves two major
traditions of thinking about the nature of memes as contenders for the
crown of True Replicator. These are also the traditions that are presently
competing for numerical dominance in memetic circles: behaviorism and
mentalist. Each is essentially the inverse of the other. Behaviorism sees
the cultural replicator as a behavior.
Think of a chimpanzee mom
demonstrating her nut-cracking skills in exaggerated, slow-motion style, as
a way, of teaching the same task to her young son, who is watching
intently. For behaviorists, the signal transmitted to the immature chimp by
this behavior is the replicator.
This signal must first live in the
macroenvironment
of
the
physical
world,
and
then
in
the
rnicroenvironment of the young chimp’s mind, before generating a new
replicator in the form of another demonstration of the skill by the young
skill-learner. Memetic mentalism, on the other hand, argues the reverse:
The knowledge underlying the mom’s skill-production and other cultural
behaviors are the replicators, while the generated behaviors are the
interactors of culture. Both positions have some intuitive appeal and have
attracted adherents.
A little vignette involving a very obvious kind of behavior—speech—
is perhaps the simplest way of examining the possible nature of behavioral
replication:
Two men meet in the street.
“Hello,” the first man says.
“Hello,” the second
replies.
The first man’s friendly “hello” goes into the second man’s brain as waves
of compressed air tickling his cochlea; another “hello” comes out the
second man’s mouth moments later. What happens to the spoken phrase
in between seems to be replication. Let’s go through the criteria we’ve
identified to check whether this impression is justified.

—— 168 · THE ELECTRIC MEME ——
First, it seems pretty clear that the similarity condition is satisfied: One
“hello” equals another. (Think of looking at the sonograms—records of
the amplitudes and frequency of the sound waves—for the two spoken
phrases; they will look alike.)
What about causation?
Presumably the second man wouldn’t have
said anything unless the first man spurred him to do so by issuing his
greeting. So the generation of the first signal seems to have initiated a
process that resulted in a second “hello” being produced. This looks like
causation all right.
Had the first man said, “Guten Tag,” the reply might have been quite
different: “Say what?” for instance, or, “Sorry, no sprechen the Deutsch!”
This indicates that the choice of language used in the greeting had an
impact on the nature of the replay as well.
This is an instance of
information transfer in action: the information transferred being that the
first man is an English-speaker wanting to be friendly, which influenced
the nature of the speech made by the second man. Wishing to reciprocate
the good intention, he too produced a copy-cat “hello” instead of a
different English phrase or something in another language.
What about the final condition, duplication?
Do we go from one
“hello” to two “hello”s with this exchange? Well, my ability to describe
the interaction as an “exchange” already suggests the answer is no. There
are two ways of looking at what has happened in our little scenario. The
first is that the “hello” signal dies when it reaches the second man’s ears.
In that case, nowhere did the second “hello” come from? The second man
must have generated it separately using some internal system independent
of the stimulus from the first man. One signal is produced and dies; then
another signal is produced somewhere else at a later moment in time.
There is a break in the existence of the behavioral pattern. This doesn’t
suggest continuity, much less duplication.
Alternatively, the signal can be thought to transform itself into another
kind of signal, in a new code suitable for living inside the brain.
In
particular, the spoken phrase must progress from air-wave code to brain
code and then back again as the second “hello” is emitted into the air. Just
as parasites like the nasty Trypanosomea brucei (a fluke that causes
sleeping sickness) can take on wildly different morphologies as they wend
their way from pigs to humans to snails to pigs and so on, a signal can go
from compressed waves of air to a set of action potentials in the

—— Stalking the Wild Meme · 169 ——
brain and back again.
But in this case, the exchange of greetings
represents the complex life cycle of a single signal, passing through
multiple brains. No replication takes place; it is just different phases of the
one signal’s life. Even if we grant continuity to the interchange, then, it is
not clear that anything was duplicated—one thing, a signal, might just
persist through changes in form.
So the “hello” can be considered either to undergo a single complex
life cycle or a sequence of independent productions.
In either case, it
seems the duplication condition of true replication is not fulfilled by
behavior: There is no point in time at which two copies of the signal
coexist. Just as the two instances of “hello” do not get printed on top of
one another in the narrative representation on the page of this book,
neither do the actual conversational “hellos” overlap in time.
Because
behavior doesn’t duplicate, it fails our test for replication.
What this example shows is that you need to open up the black box of
the brain and look inside to see whether what is happening in there is
proper replication, transformation, or something else again. The advocates
of memes-as-behaviors
might
disagree
with
the
necessity
of the
duplication criterion, but for each type of replicator, temporal overlap
between the source and copy is a characteristic feature of the process.
Going from one to two occurs in every known example of replication (just
remember the cases we looked at earlier: prions and comp-viruses).
There is another argument that memes can’t be in behavior. It begins
with another tale. I call it “Einstein’s Tea Party.”
In 1904, Albert Einstein could frequently be found muttering “E=mc2” as he
tramped around his apartment in Bern, Switzerland. After a few days of this, his
parrot, Jolly, began squawking “E=mc2,” copying the German physicist’s tone and
inflection exactly. Although Einstein loved the bird’s companionship, he found this
mimicry often upset his train of through. He determined to give Jolly a companion,
hoping the parrot would pay more attention to a new lady-friend than the scientific
discoveries of his human benefactor. So the next day, after finishing at the patent
office, he purchased a second parrot, which he called Polly
By this time, Einstein had stopped muttering, “E=mc2.” But the amorous Jolly
hadn’t. Polly soon learned to imitate Jolly’s vocalization perfectly. Einstein hadn’t
counted on that and was quite annoyed, since now Polly was also interrupting his
meditations.

—— 170 · THE ELECTRIC MEME ——
Max Planck visited Einstein’s apartment for tea a week later.
Einstein was
reluctant to discuss his recent work in front of another physicist until it was
published.
However, as Einstein’s maid, Gertrude, came into the room with tea,
Planck heard the new parrot saying something. He instantly recognized it as the
solution to a problem he had been trying to solve for years.
“Yes,” Planck
exclaimed, “E=mc2!”
Gertrude, just then serving the guest, wondered why he was so excited about
the parrot’s nonsensical chatter as to nearly upset the tea service.
Find the meme in the story. Is it in the behavior (the spoken phrase) or
in the idea (the mental representation)? As we will see, this simple story
illuminates many of the issues separating the behaviorist and mentalist
camps. I will argue that it provides another basis on which the mentalist
opinion can be preferred.
Our basic goal in analyzing this story is to explain how the great
German physicist, Max Planck, came to learn Einstein’s novel idea,
because that may involve a meme being transmitted. What are the basic
data to help us decide the case?
Well, notice that a bit of behavior—
speaking a particular phrase—appears to go from Einstein (a human) to
Jolly (a bird) to Polly (a second bird) and finally to Planck (a second
human).
Of course, the bit of speech (“E=mc2”) is very similar in the
humans and the parrots: sonograms of the vocalizations, which I take to be
good
empirical
measures
of
the
behavioral
“meme,”
would
be
demonstrably similar in frequency and amplitude throughout the sequence.
In particular, Planck’s sonogram would be very similar to Einstein’s (since
Einstein and Planck would both be speaking native German), although less
similar than in the Einstein and Jolly comparison. This is because even
though Einstein and Jolly are different species, parrots can imitate the
incidentals of human vocalization better than most humans, and Jolly
learned the phrase directly from Einstein.
On the surface, at least, it is surely impressive that the same sound-
stream is reproduced a number of times, in two different species.
This
reasoning suggests we should focus our attention on the behavior.
In
particular, it seems a robust replicator indeed that can skip over species
boundaries in its ability to and hosts.
Add to this the fact that the
transmission chain was from a human to a bird and back again, with perfect
repetition of the meme by the last link in the chain, a human who had

—— Stalking the Wild Meme · 171 ——
never heard the meme before, and we have quite impressive fidelity of
transmission.
So should we therefore say that it is the behavior, rather
than the idea, that is the meme, because, arguably, there appears to be a
line of information transfer for the spoken phrase between the original
mumblings of Einstein and the excited moment of recognition by Planck at
the end of the story?
Before we record a victory for the behaviorists, what about the idea
behind the phrase “E=mc2” and all its connotations? Can they be said to
have passed through two birds’ minds on their way to Planck’s? It seems
unlikely that there can be very similar mental representations in species
with different kinds of brains.
No common mental structure should be
able to make it all the way from one physicist’s brain to the other’s.
This reasoning would indicate that we should take behavior as what is
replicated during social transmission, through imitation. Complex ideas
are too individualized to be instances of a replicator lineage. The behavior
is much more likely to jump the species barrier intact than mental
representations, surely? So the incident at Einsteins’s tea party favors the
behaviorist approach to memes, unlike our earlier story of the chance
meeting in the street.
But the emphasis on comparing mental to behavioral “similarity” is
misplaced. What matters more in determining where the replicator lies is
evolutionary dynamics, as indicated by the discussion of the replication
reaction in an earlier chapter.
Focus for a moment on Gertrude, Einstein’s maid.
Gertrude, on
hearing Polly or Jolly, did not “understand” what the parrot was saying.
This is true even though Gertrude speaks German, because the maid’s
scientific and mathematical education had not led her to the position where
the sequence of vowels and consonants in the phrase “E=mc2” could be
applied to any context meaningful to her. Perhaps Gertrude didn’t know
that “c” is a mathematical symbol for the speed of light, for example. The
problems would be greater, of course, if Gertrude had been, say,
Portuguese instead. Then there would have been decoding difficulties as
well as interpretational ones. On the other hand, if Polly the parrot only
spoke Parrotese, the problems would be the same: how to translate the
bird’s language into one the human could understand. If the bird had said,
“Energy equals mass times the speed of light squared!” the same meme
would
no
doubt
have
been
formed
in
Planck’s
mind,
but
it

—— 172 · THE ELECTRIC MEME ——
might not have helped poor Gertrude, without the ability to do anything
with even this version of the math.
Let’s stretch this story a little further. Let’s say that Gertrude was able
to remember the phrase “E=mc2” exactly. When her husband asked about
her day’s activities at home later that night, she could then tell him that
Planck was excited about the parrot saying, “E=mc2.”
Thus Gertrude
could carry the mental memory, with few of its implications or meaning
available to her, and even become a link in a transmission chain to her
husband with high fidelity.
From a mentalist perspectives, Gertrude is
much like Polly: an innocent: bystander to meaning, but a good transmitter
of the necessary message anyway.
But it is more likely that Gertrude would not remember the sequence of
sounds correctly (unless she had heard it repeatedly from the parrots while
moving around the apartment cleaning) because she lacked a good
understanding of the phrase’s meaning. She might tell her husband that
Planck had said “E=cm2,” for example. Her husband, if equally untrained
in mathematics, might then further butcher the phrase when recounting the
story of Einstein’s surprised visitor to his cronies in the pub the next
evening. Transmission fidelity would obviously be extremely poor in such
a case.
Meanwhile, the parrot lineage would exhibit no such variation, despite
an equal lack of appreciation for mathematical niceties on the part of the
birds, who were more likely to remember the phrase as a single chunk of
information rather than a sequence of consonants and vowels, thanks to
their more limited brains. The point is that the fidelity of replication in a
purely human lineage (Einstein to Planck to you, the reader) is a function
not just of the ability to imitate local behavior but also of the ability to
correct errors.
Had Polly the parrot slightly mangled the all-important
phrase, Planck might have “heard” the right one anyway, had he been
primed, perhaps by some earlier discussion over aperitifs with Einstein, to
be thinking about physics at the time.
This is not what should have happened if the listener had been Dolly,
another parrot. Evolution of the representation in any parrot lineage would
be minimal. Variations are unlikely to be introduced through transmission
of the phrase from Jolly to Polly to Dolly to Zolly and so on, even though
the words are meaningless to the parrots, because the birds are highly
adept
vocal
mimics.
But
should
some mutation
in the
phrase

—— Stalking the Wild Meme · 173 ——
arise in a lineage made up purely of birds, that changed phrase would be
successfully passed from parrot to parrot thereafter ad infinitum, with little
further modification.
However, it would do so with never a chance to
recover the “right” version, because parrots have poor comprehension of
the theory of special relativity.
So the novel dynamics of bird lineages should be very different from
those in human ones. In particular, a bird lineage will exhibit high fidelity
with low mutation rates, but no error correction.
Human transmission
chains, on the other hand, will exhibit higher mutation rates (due to their
innocence of mathematics), but reverse mutations back to the “correct”
phrase will pop up, thanks to the ability of some people, at least, to recover
meaning, due to their knowledge of mathematics or physics. This is one
lesson we learn from Professor Einstein.
I have still further ammunition against the behaviorists: Transmission
modes will be very different in the human and bird lineages.
When
Einstein publishes his result, thousands of people Einstein has never met
will start talking about it among themselves.
By now, millions more
people in faraway lands have heard or seen the phrase in some context—as
an advertising jingle, or on a T-shirt—which has caused the formula to
enter their memory. In contrast, parrots in these times and places will not
be picking up the latest issue of the Physical Review or observing bumper-
stickers to catch up with Einstein’s work.
These are not transmission
methods available to parrots. So humans can maintain a communication
chain even when the acquisition of the message is from a machine. Parrot,
book, e-mail, whatever—it doesn’t matter to people. This is certainly not
the case for any parrot lineage.
They don’t read or use computers; it
matters a lot to them whether someone is speaking or reading the phrase
silently to themselves. So again we have very different kinds of dynamics
in the replication chains, due to the kinds of channels for information
transmission available to humans as opposed to parrots.
In conclusion, these two stories—the meeting in the street and Einstein’s
tea party—have shown that behavior does not exhibit features that are
indicative of replication. First, behaviors, like signals, are not duplicated.
Second, tracing the path of a behavior does not identify distinct evolutionary
lineages. The same spoken phrase went through a progression of people and
birds in Einstein’s apartment, but this conflated two different kinds of
evolutionary dynamics.
Inheritance does not work the same way in

—— 174 · THE ELECTRIC MEME ——
lineages involving different host species. I think these stories effectively
kill the possibility that memes exist in behaviors.
The behaviorist “mistake,” which it is all too easy to make, is to
concentrate on the obvious, on what is observable.
And what is
observable, typically, is some relatively brief-exchange of information
during a social interaction, as in our example of men in the street above.
But the fundamental question of evolution is how long-term dynamics play
out, and the fate of replicator lineages. These processes are not so readily
observable, but the explanation of such patterns is the basis of any
evolutionary science, including memetics.
Certainly the chain of very
similar “E=mc2”s in our second story is startling, and it would seem that
explaining that should be the central focus of memetics. But it is not. The
big picture is what happens to repetitions of the spoken phrase when the
chain becomes longer, when it is iterated to 20 or 100 duplications, and
perhaps just in a series of birds or people.
There are some remaining qualms I should deal with before we settle
definitively on the position that memes must be something in the brain.
Most importantly, the issue of what constitutes mental similarity remains.
More particularly, the question is what kinds of copying events in the
mind classify as proper replications of mental content. Behaviorists might
insist that the measure of mental similarity must include all the intricacies
of implication and inference that a person can draw from the signal “E
=mc2.” This would mean links to everything the individual knows about
Einstein, for instance—his great shock of tousled white hair and mustache,
his eminent position at the Institute for Advanced Study in Princeton, his
reluctance to acknowledge quantum mechanics, his protests about the
Manhattan Project—and other famous phrases besides the formula, such as
“Only two things are infinite, the universe and human stupidity, and I’m
not sure about the former.” Some people might not know that “E=mc2”
should be associated with Einstein’s name, erroneously thinking that Max
Planck was responsible for its original formulation.
Should all these
ramifications be counted in the tabulation of mental similarity?
They should not.
In complex brains, the connotations of any idea
may ramify indefinitely. But the complicated network of associations to
“E=mc2” will necessarily be individual. They cannot be part of a single,

—— Stalking the Wild Meme · 175 ——
replicating meme.
In fact, the phrase “E=mc2” may itself be several
memes, cobbled together, that become associated only in particular
contexts, as when someone thinks about Einstein for some reason (“Isn’t
he the bloke that came up with ‘E=mc2’?”).
But this is a natural
restriction.
Only small bits of information are likely to be repeatedly
replicable through multiple generations.
What happens to those bits in
terms of mental structures, as they come together during use by host
individuals, is a different question.
The behaviorist has one final refuge: the empirical impossibility of a
mentalist memetics. It would be ironic indeed if we identify a physical
model for memes but it turns out to be one that can never be tested!
Behaviorists have argued that any memetics that begins in the brain is
doomed to failure because memes are then defined as intrinsically
unobservable entities: Who can see what happens inside brains? But this
confutes the subjective with objective aspects of mental events.
To
observe the activity of living brains, we don’t have to miniaturize
ourselves into a small spaceship that gets injected into the cerebral fluid of
some hapless victim, as in the 1970s science-fiction film Fantastic
Voyage. Instead we can nowadays rely on various sensors and imaging
devices, such as EEG recorders or brain scanners. In the age of brain-
imaging technologies like MRI and PET, we can “see” memes in action,
although brain imaging studies don’t yet give us pictures of the memes
themselves.
It should be remembered that genes were once unobservable as well,
but this didn’t stop them from being biological replicators. Genes have
moved from being a hypothetical entity to an observed, experimental
phenomenon since they were physicalized by Watson and Crick, who
identified the mythical units of inheritance as a particular molecule inside
the nucleus of each cell in the body. Basically the moral of this story is
never say never to a clever scientist. This is, in fact, one of the “Laws of
Technology” of Arthur C. Clarke, the science-fiction writer and inventor:
“When a scientist says something is possible, he is almost certainly right.
When he states that something is impossible, he is very probably wrong.”
So the apparent advantage of focusing on behavior, if indeed it exists, is
only likely to remain an advantage temporarily. Convenience isn’t reason
enough to change our minds about such a fundamental issue as where to
find a new kind of replicator.

—— 176 · THE ELECTRIC MEME ——
A HOME FOR MEMES?
With behavior now out of the picture, and given our earlier elimination of
artifacts, the only remaining candidate as the substrate for memes is ideas.
Our conclusion by exclusion, then, is that the brain must be where memes
reside, if they exist anywhere. But before we try to identify a mechanism
by which ideas might be replicated, which means delving into the
somewhat mysterious, highly intricate territory that is the human brain, I
first want to convince you that the brain is actually a likely place to find
replicators.
My goal is to show you that the brain is a highly isolated,
protective environment in which replicators could evolve.
In fact, the brain is just the kind of place Replicator Theory should
suggest as the birthplace of a replicator.
It is full of ambient energy
waiting to be harnessed and provides lots of scaffolding for a replication
reaction in the form of a network of cells with support structures on which
to hang components, all in standardized configurations, and so on. Just as
DNA is protected inside a double envelope of outer cell and nuclear walls,
so too is the brain encased inside a system of doubled protection, this time
made of bone, tissue, and chemicals. The hard braincase is an important
first line of defense against environmental insults. It ensures that physical
trauma won’t deform the brain and so impede its work. The bony skull
also protects it from radiation, which would introduce noise into the
signal-transmission process. Inside the skull is cerebrospinal fluid, which
fills the spaces between these closely packed cells, providing buoyancy
and mechanical support for the brain, while helping stabilize the flow and
chemical composition around the central nervous system and flushing
away the metabolic products of neurons and glial cells.
The brain, as a signal processor, must also be protected from sources of
noise and signals coming from the rest of the body that might be harmful.
This includes what genes might try to “say” to the brain: virsues are
potential messengers knocking at the door with bad news. For this job, the
brain has instituted the blood-brain barrier (BBB), which functions just
like the software and hardware-based “fire walls” that companies anxious
to preserve company secrets install around their intranets. The BBB is
present in all vertebrate brains, so it is an ancient adaptation for this
purpose, nearly as old as the cortex itself. It is also laid down within the
first
trimester
of
human
fetal
life,
which
implies
it
is
an

—— Stalking the Wild Meme · 177 ——
important early step of self-defense. Perhaps nowhere else in the body are
cells attached as firmly and closely as they are in the multi-mile-long
network of capillaries in the brain, forming a barrier of tight intercellular
junctions.
Why do these capillaries form such an impenetrable barrier?
This
anatomical arrangement shields delicate brain tissue from toxins in the
bloodstream
and
from
biochemical
fluctuations
that
could
be
overwhelming if the brain had to continually respond to them.
By
restricting the passage of molecules between the bloodstream and the
brain, this microvascular system ensures the proper maintenance of the
neuronal microenvironment.
This defense works against most viruses,
which are stopped by the BBB (although HIV, the virus that causes AIDS,
manages to sneak through—how is still unknown).
So the BBB is a
second line of defense against illegal information and disruption of the
computational functioning of the brain.
The brain is secure, stable real estate—a good place for a cultural
replicator to set up shop.

Chapter Seven
MEMES AS A STATE
OFMIND
If my opinions are the result of chemical processes going on in my
brain, they are determined by the laws of chemistry, not logic.
–J.B.S. Haldane
Memes must have initially replicated within individual brains because
that’s the simplest context for a replication reaction.
How did brains
evolve to allow such an event? Perhaps surprisingly, it is possible to see
quite clearly how and why a novel replicator such as a meme could evolve
inside nervous systems.
More importantly, it is now possible to define
how a replication reaction would work inside a brain. There are even clear
reasons for thinking such a reaction arose during the history of life on
Earth, as we will see.
GETTING MORE NERVOUS WITH TIME
In the beginning, there were no replicators. Sometime after the Big Bang,
starstuff congealed. Planets formed. But there was emptiness upon the
face of the deep. A certain quiet prevailed.
Then the first primitive entity that could copy itself arose, its identity
obscured by the mists of time.
Although “born naked,” these early
replicators quickly learned to sheath themselves in a coat of protoplasm
for protection from the elements.
This was the humble beginning, the
birth of life.
178

—— Memes as a State of Mind · 179 ——
Next came single-celled organisms, the first specialized interactors.
They
possessed
facilities
both
to
receive
information
from
their
environment and to take action on behalf of the genes stored inside.
Primitive bacteria, for example, could orient themselves toward particular
chemicals; advanced protozoa could even habituate to stimuli or become
sensitized to them.
However, some 680 million years ago, living creatures arose that were
composed of multiple, cooperating cells. Biological processes originally
collected into a single cell could now be divided among them.
Information-processing abilities, in particular, became the specialization of
particular types of cell within these more complex organisms.
Such
organisms harbored receptor cells that responded to particular chemicals in
the environment, while other cells stimulated their primitive motor
apparatus and so began doing things like vibrating. Some of these cells
began to release hormones into the body that diffused through intracellular
spaces and, later, blood vessels until they reached other cells able to read
the message. Such primitive nervous systems consisted of “hardwired,”
two-step links from sensory to motor cells, transmitting messages from
place to place within the organism.
This was the birth of intercellular
communication.
As time passed, even more specialized cells—neurons—evolved that
were able to produce electrical spikes rather than chemical signals. This
allowed messages to be delivered from point to point, even across large
bodies.
Then these neurons began to aggregate in one portion of the
organism to improve their ability to coordinate behaviors.
In effect, a
“central” nervous system developed: Neurons and sensory receptors were
localized at the “head” of the organism, with sensory and motor neurons
relegated to peripheral status, organized as nerve cords running along the
length of the boded.
Ancestral annelids and other invertebrates then
slipped a neuron into the circuit between receptor and motor cells. These
“inter-neurons” created a three-layer network, freeing its members so that
they were able to specialize.
Certain neurons began firing only when
specific kinds of inputs were fed to them by other neurons; each time
around there would become more likely to fire in response to that same
class of stimulus. They were, in effect, “tuning in” to certain features of
the external environment. This was the birth of memory.

—— 180 · THE ELECTRIC MEME ——
Other neurons could make use of the information stored in their
colleagues when attempting to make their own classifications as well.
This led to the formation of clusters of neurons collaborating to make finer
and finer discriminations about the world around them.
Increased
numbers of neurons led to the need for some internal organization as well.
These administrative tasks came to be fulfilled by yet other specialized
neurons. This was the birth of (real) brains. The rest is prehistory.
This brief fable about the emergence of the brain ends before we come to
the birth of memes.
Let me move our timeframe forward even more,
paying greater attention to detail as we go along.
Several major events can be discerned in the history of brain evolution.
First, nervous systems become increasingly centralized, evolving from a
loose network of nerve cells (as in the jellyfish) to a localized brain. This
was a trend toward encephalization—that is, a concentration of neurons
and sense organs at one end of the organism, which allows greater
coordination and control by the decision-making center.
With the rise of vertebrates and the development of a spinal cord (in
animals such as fish, amphibians, and reptiles), we also get a division of
the brain itself into a series of three major swellings: the hindbrain,
midbrain, and forebrain.
In certain animal lineages, the brain becomes
both much larger and still more complex. Eventually a gradual increase in
the relative size of the brain conspired to the body is also seen.
With the rise of mammals during the Mesozoic era, the continuing
evolution of the brain becomes marked by changes in the ratio of midbrain
and forebrain structures, and in the expansion of the forebrain itself. The
mammalian brain keeps the major division into three sections but also
adds two new structures: the neocerebellum (“new little brain”), looking
much like a fungal growth at the base of the brain, and the neocortex
(“new cortex”), which grows out of the front of the forebrain . In most
mammals, these new additions are not particularly large relative to the
primordial brain stem. But when we come to primates, they become much
larger, and in the human they are so large that the original brain stem is
almost completely hidden by this convoluted mass of gray matter.
With our arrival at human brains, we find about a hundred billion

—— Memes as a State of Mind · 181 ——
neurons have gathered together to form a truly complex communicative
network. Since a typical neuron in the cerebral cortex receives input from
a few thousand fellow neurons, this makes for about 100 trillion
connections in the 1.5 kilograms of gray matter inside your head. (If you
started counting synapses at the rate of one per second right now, you’d be
finished in about .32 million years.) Each cubic millimeter of your cortical
tissue—a volume about the size of an average fleck rubbed off the end of a
pencil eraser, and roughly the same consistency—includes 100,000
neurons, 500 million dendrites, and close to 1 billion synapses wired
together with 4 kilometers (about a 2 1/2 miles) of axonal cabling. This is
all supported in a mass of cells called glia, which together constitute
neuropil, or gray matter.
Neurons are structurally and electrically polarized. One end of the cell
receives chemical or electrical signals from sensory cells or other cortical
neurons that destabilize its polarity (or electrical conductance).
The
opposite end of the cell transmits signals to other neurons or to muscle or
gland cells. This receptive end is called a dendrite (from the Greek word
meaning “tree-like”) because it usually has numerous branches. Dendrites
can be likened to a bushy antenna system that receives signals from other
neurons. When a dendrite is stimulated in a certain way, the polarity of its
cell body exceeds some threshold value, causing a specialized section of
the neuron (called an axon) to generate a millisecond-long pulse.
This
action potential or spike sends a signal out along the axon to a synaptic
terminal at the opposite end of the neuron, where it may be picked up by
the dendrites of other neurons.
For one neuron to influence another, the two must be connected. This
is accomplished by junctions called synapses, which abut the dendrites of
other neurons. Each neuron has up to 10,000 synapses impinging on it
from about 1,000 other neurons. This means that, on average, each neuron
touches another neuron in about 10 places. This is a large number of ways
in which one neuron can influence another and is sufficiently complex in
itself to ensure that interesting evolutionary dynamics could take place
even at this small, inter-neuronal scale.
Synapses work by transmitting a chemical signal (neurotransmitter) or
electrical signal (current-carrying ions) across the narrow gap between its
cell and the next. These messages activate receptors on the membrane of
the target cell, which change its polarity, and thus make it possible for

—— 182 · THE ELECTRIC MEME ——
the message to be sent further through the network of interconnected cells
that make up the brain.
Each neuron in this network is itself a small computer, capable of
sophisticated non-linear operations, such as the multiplication, division, or
amplification of signal strengths, or establishing a threshold for its own
activity. If we put this knowledge together with our recent awareness of
the role of other agents in information processing—such as support
structures like glia or gases like nitrous oxide permeating the inter-
neuronal space—it becomes clear that a neuron’s decision to fire is
influenced by a broad range of factors and is a truly complex decision-
making process.
Just imagine what happens when you link millions of these into a
communicating network! It obviously gives a big-brained organism
tremendous computing power. But from an evolutionary point of view,
the question is why an animal would need such power, especially given
that it comes at a significant cost, that of maintaining such a large, energy-
sucking organ in the east place.
Why bigger and bigger brains have
evolved remains a puzzle, especially as each neuron seems so complex. It
is also an important question for us, for only in big brains do memes
become possible.
THE PLASTIC BRAIN
Bigger brains must have evolved because they made the lives of the
animals with bigger brains better.
Primitive nervous systems that have
been around snore than a half-billion years are still fairly typical of the
vast majority of such systems in the animal kingdom.
These are
essentially reactive systems: A sensor sees a condition, such as heat or
light, and passes that information directly to a fixed decision-making
process that converts this real-time information directly into a command to
respond in some fashion.
For example, organisms that rely on light for
power can sense in which direction the most light can be found and then
move toward it. Animals with these rather simple nervous systems exhibit
what the scientists who study animal behavior call “fixed action patterns.”
Variety in these behaviors arises only through changes in the genetic code
underlying
brain
development.
If
a
situation
presents
itself

—— Memes as a State of Mind · 183 ——
that is unexpected by the gene-based algorithm, the animal acts
inappropriately, and without remedy, time after time.
Complex responses can be genetic too.
More complex behavioral
sequences, with multiple decision points, can be coded as relatively simple
rule systems into an animal’s genome. A famous example in the animal
behavior textbooks comes from bumblebees.
In their hives, they can
engage in the precise, multi-step removal of wax caps on the cells of dead
pupae, even though they have no cortex at all to speak of.
What distinguishes learning from such programming is the ability to
change responses because of new experiences.
Human twins, for
example, do not necessarily react in the same way to the same situation,
despite their genetic identity.
Take an extreme example: the case of
Chang and Eng, the nineteenth-century Siamese twins who were joined at
the chest.
They had virtually identical genotypes, right down to the
nucleic acids. And two people simply can’t be raised in a more similar
environment—there was no spatial separation between them, and no birth-
order effects in the way their parents treated them.
Their experiences
throughout their entire lives were as similar as could be, given that they
were different individuals, because wherever one went, by necessity the
other did also. They even married sisters (with whom each fathered about
10 children).
Yet Chang was the dominant one, more intellectual and
volatile, while Eng remained submissive and sober. They even sometimes
voted for opposite parties in American elections (the pair settled in
Virginia as adults). Their example is wonderful evidence that genes don’t
control everything in big-brained creatures.
Something made Chang
different from Eng, and that thing was his brain.
So any big brain is unique. It even differs from itself over relatively
short periods of time, because the state of its network is constantly in flux.
Thus the outcome of growing bigger brains, with their increased numbers
and layers of neurons, is greater plasticity of response.
This plasticity
produces true behavior, or selective movements and activities in answer to
specific stimuli.
Flexibility of response within the life span of the
individual organism (rather than on a generational timescale) becomes
possible with more complex nervous systems.
A more contingent
response, dependent on a larger number of cues from the environmental
circumstance,
can
be
created.
The
number
of
surprises
such

—— 184 · THE ELECTRIC MEME ——
animals encounter over their lifetimes may nor decrease, but the number of
behavioral wrong-footings presumably does.
With the human brain’s 1 trillion connections we get truly staggering
possibilities for flexible responses. Could all this be coded into our genes?
Or is there room for another replicator in there?
The human genome has between 40,000 and 60,000 genes, with a
considerable fraction of these not coding for anything.
This makes a
difference several orders of magnitude in size between the number of
genes and the number of synapses.
Simple division suggests that each
gene must therefore control at least 1 million of the brain’s decision-
making units—more, really, since fewer than half our genes code for
features of the brain. This simple analysis makes it clear that each neuron
cannot be directed to its final resting place, and all its connections dictated,
by a specific genetic program. In effect, there is no gene specifying the
state of the 45th synapse down the axon of the 2,649th neuron on the left,
just past that third crease of the temporal sulcus. The numerical disparity
between genes and synapses proves that genes cannot directly specify the
exact topology of our neural networks.
It is possible, however—by setting the rules by which neurons find
their places and roles—for genes to indirectly determine the final form of
the brain. Many models have shown us that very complex objects can be
created by a small number of heterogeneous objects interacting with one
another.
Evidence from brains themselves also show this ability.
Transplantation experiments indicate that neuronal connectivity is largely
determined by very general rules rather than any characteristics specific to
individual neurons. Neurons transplanted into the fetal brain of another
species wind up perfectly well connected, Thus, “when a pig neuron grows
up in a rat brain environment, it integrates with other neurons according to
rat rules.” This is because the genetic program for neuronal development
is able to compensate for whatever body it happens to find itself in and
allows the neuron to wire itself up to that network appropriately.
So the simple arithmetic above is not enough to tell us that our
behavior
isn’t
genetically
“determined.”
General
principles
of
construction—the contingent expression of genes—could be at work, and
the many possible interactions between genetic rules could do nicely to
create the complex structures we have inside our heads.

—— Memes as a State of Mind · 185 ——
Still, it is well known that genes don’t act as blueprints. Organisms are
not preformed in any way; there is no homunculus (or miniaturized
person) inside egg or sperm cells that simply grows larger as cells are
added to the developing body. Rather genes are like recipes. The recipe
doesn’t have to be as big as the cake it helps you to make—a whole cake
shop can be tilled with the products of a very slim recipe book. Similarly,
a few genes can have major effects on the final shape and function of a
body.
Just look at the way the brain grows.
A special class of genes,
called Hox genes, are now known to control very general processes during
development, such as the basic divisions in the body plans of vertebrates,
including segmentation of the brain.
So one gene can have massively
ramified effects on a developing structure.
But if every last interconnection is not spelled out in the chromosomes,
then how do neurons get wired up properly during development? If genes
are not the sole source of information shaping the brain, what else is at
work?
Presumably an organism’s experience also shapes its mental
contents. This certainly seems to be the case.
We now know that there are at least five distinct phases during the life
span of primates during which the number of synapses significantly
changes. Three of these phases take place before an individual has even
left the womb. The fourth occurs during the first couple of years of life
and leads to truly remarkable changes in the number of synapses.
In
humans, the infant brain sprouts neurons and synaptic connections at a
phenomenal rate through the first year of life, so that a toddler actually has
almost twice the number of neurons as an adult. But this proliferation is
rapidly followed by significant pruning of neurons and their connections to
sculpt the brain’s processing pathways. Throughout our early childhood
we lose about 20 billion synaptic connections each day. Poorly placed or
unneeded cells and connections die off as the brain tunes itself to the
sensory world and the body in which it finds itself.
The last, recently
discovered phase of change in synaptic architecture takes place during
adolescence and is characterized by a slower decline in the density of
synaptic connections in the brain. Neuronal networks are thus trained by,
and come to incorporate information from, the environment.
This has
been encapsulated as the “use it or lose it” hypothesis of brain
development.
Social upbringing—our culture, if you will—is thus
important in framing the way our minds work.

—— 186 · THE ELECTRIC MEME ——
In sum, the genome suggests the general structure of the central
nervous system (the number of cells of various types, their relative
placement, and so on), while nervous system activity and sensory
stimulation provide the means by which the system is fine-tuned and made
operational. And since new stimuli are constantly flooding sensory inputs,
this means the brain is always in flux: Its contents are extremely volatile.
This conclusion is consistent with a theoretical reason to believe genes
must have relinquished at least some control over the operation of big
brains. There is a fundamental limit to the complexity of form that can be
achieved by natural selection. Increases in the complexity of phenotypes
is subject to constraints, as first recognized by Manfred Eigen. What he
called an “error threshold” follows directly from Replicator Theory.
Think of the likelihood of mutation as being constant for each gene in an
animal’s genome. Then begin to increase the total number of genes. At
some point it becomes inevitable that the disruptive forces of mutation,
acting on each gene, will dominate the directional force applied to the
genome by natural selection: The mutations can be creating centrifugal
force in a variety of directions, while selection pulls only one way.
Combinations of genes required to produce the organism’s adaptive
features simply cannot be kept together in the face of assaults on each
gene by mutation. As the pressures put upon natural selection increase,
new mutations will no longer be efficiently filtered out and can begin to
sneak into the larger genome. Then one or another component of the gene
clusters within that genome will tend to be replaced by some variant that
can’t play its proper role. At this threshold in the size of the genome, no
further accumulation of useful variants, and the adaptations they produce,
will be possible.
In effect, the maximum number of beneficial genes
selection can preserve as a team will have been reached.
For any
additional accumulation of complexity, a new evolutionary force must
arise (or the mutation rate, which we have assumed to be constant, must be
reduced somehow). The evolution of larger nervous systems can therefore
be seen as a means of increasing the complexity of body shapes and
functions once increases to the complexity of the genome have reached
their limit.
The organism must then begin to store information in the
convoluted tissues of the cortex rather than in the double helix in the
center of each of its cells.

—— Memes as a State of Mind · 187 ——
Anyway, it doesn’t make much sense for genes to exert total control
over our thinking. The whole point of growing a big brain, after all, is to
introduce some flexibility into responses. In essence, the idea is for the
brain to accumulate information not instructed by the genes, but selected
from the environment.
Learning is favored over genes in a range of
circumstances. Increased brain size should be selected for in lineages of
organisms when it is advantageous to acquire information that is difficult
to code in the language of genes, such as remembering a migratory route
or recognizing each member of one’s social group as an individual.
There is another consequence of growing a big brain that is worth
mentioning. With increased volume, the number of neurons “inside” the
cranial sphere increases faster than the number of ones on the surface,
those connected to the outside world (assuming sensory receptors are also
limited to the surface of the body). It seems almost inevitable, then, that a
big brain will turn inward on itself.
Still, the behaviorist credo that animals are devices for translating
sensory input into appropriate responses dies hard. In fact, “the notion that
behavior is always a reaction to a stimulus is so ingrained that the name
applied by psychologists to an element of behavior is ‘response’.”
But
contrary to this commonsensical notion that the brain is constantly trying
to respond to sensory stimuli, much of the information a big brain is
working on at any moment has been called up from memory, rather than
having just come in as the latest update about environmental conditions.
One reason that so much of the activity of big brains is internally
generated is that the downside of considerable plasticity is the need for
increased memory management. In big brains, neurons are busy trying to
keep the “books” straight, or to supervise what is happening elsewhere in
the cortex.
The brain must try to keep what has already been learned
stored somewhere as new impressions come on-line, with the potential to
disrupt previously established links and associations. Big brains are thus
largely talking to themselves, modulating what they think about things that
happened long ago or that might happen in the future. This process even
continues during sleep, when memory continues to be consolidated and
events of the day are rehearsed to extract meaningful connections from
experience.

—— 188 · THE ELECTRIC MEME ——
As a result of this continual reassessment of the current situation, the
human brain gains an extended temporal horizon about which it can
“think.”
This makes possible our sense of the past.
Despite its ever-
changing nature, the brain includes an internal model of the world, which
it compares with new experiences. It also has a model of itself. That is,
the brain has a point of view. It represents its own place, both in the body
and in the world at large, and uses this model to continuously test whether
signals coming in from the environment can be ignored or must be
incorporated into its worldview.
Thus, the brain never stops sucking information out of its sensors to
update what it has in its database. Each new input reverberates throughout
the brain, altering it at many levels. The brain also decides how to respond
to external stimuli based on its own activity at the moment. The reaction
to exactly the same impulse can be different each time the impulse arrives
because a response has to do with attention, context, and the behavioral
relevance of the stimulus.
Every millisecond, the brain sees things
differently.
In a sense, then, the brain becomes its own environment, to a
significant degree, as its size increases.
It becomes a world unto itself,
largely responding to stimuli that it has generated, not received.
This
makes the brain a “solipsistic” organ—an entity living in its own house of
mirrors, truly convinced of only one thing: its own existence.
As a
structure, the brain is like a maze in which most of the routes circle back to
the starting point, rather than leading out.
This feature makes the big brain a natural medium in which replicators
might bubble into existence, because self-referentiality is but one stop
away from self-replication. To point to yourself, for example, you must
form a physical circle with your arm.
Referring to oneself can thus be
represented as a loop, like a snake coiled up with its head biting its tail.
Replication too is a recursive process that iteratively returns to the same
place it has visited before, hoping to begin again. It’s just a temporal loop,
rather than a physical one. The fact that a major proportion of the links in
the brain feed back to areas that feed forward to them is therefore highly
suggestive. The self-referential nature of the brain gives us every reason
to expect that the replication of information is possible in such a place.
The only remaining question is whether the replicator that benefits from
all this looping of information is genes or a parasite on biological

—— Memes as a State of Mind · 189 ——
evolution arising in this new microenvironment: memes. The answer to
this question, it turns out, depends on how fast you want to store new
information—that is, on just how plastic the brain is.
THE MILLISECOND MEME
DNA is at work in the brain, and not just during the period when the brain
is developing in the womb. When does the genetic programming of brain
states become potentially memetic in nature? To answer this question, we
can take the prion case as a source of insight: Prions are replicators
because they can convert protein shapes (and hence functions) without the
gene responsible for the protein being changed in any way.
This is
independent change, worthy of entitlement as a new replication process.
Similarly, that other class of parasitic replicators we looked at earlier,
computer viruses, are defined by their ability to duplicate memory states
without recourse to computer operators, using only the operating system
and software pre-existing on the computer (or network) to achieve this
goal. True replication, after all, must exhibit a direct informational link
from one replicator to the next. This is what is required by the information
transfer condition for replication. So what we are looking for in the brain
is a new causal pathway for information transmission. Memes, by analogy
to these other replicators, can therefore be said to arise when changes in
brain states are effected without recourse to DNA.
Luckily we don’t have to look far for evidence that memes might play
a role in brain functioning.
Everything we know about learning
mechanisms suggests that short-term changes in neuronal states are not
accompanied by the expression of genes. In fact, the concept of “short-
term” memory is defined by the lack of protein synthesis, which is the
normal consequence of gene expression. The primary difference between
short-term and long-term memory is therefore the direct involvement of
genes. Since this condition is so important for our definition of memes,
elaborating on just how these two mechanisms of memory work is
worthwhile.
Memories are thought to be stored in the brain as changes in synaptic
connections between interconnected neurons.
Change in such networks
can arise in three ways.
First, new neurons can be recruited from
generative areas of the brain to participate in memory storage (as added

—— 190 · THE ELECTRIC MEME ——
nodes in the network). We have recently learned that this process, which
changes the physical wiring diagram of the brain, can occur in the neo-
cortex even in adulthood.
Second, new synaptic connections between
existing neurons may be formed, which also modifies the topology of the
network (as new links, but without new nodes).
These connections
between neurons are largely determined by the early experience of the
individual, with particular links either being strengthened or withering
away as a result of feedback from the environment. And third, there can
be changes in the strength of existing synaptic connections linking
neurons, with no new links or nodes involved. This strength of connection
between two neurons can be expressed as an increased or decreased
likelihood of one neuron firing as a result of being fired at by the other.
Thus a variety of mechanisms for storing information are available in
the complex brain. The first two methods are physiological, requiring the
growth of either entirely new cells or parts of cells. They are therefore
restricted to relatively long-term changes in memory. On the other hand,
the third mechanism—the ability of neurons to alter the strength of their
synaptic
connections
with
activity
and
experience—is
a
complex
phenomenon involving a variety of physical and chemical factors. This
plasticity in synapses is thought to play a critical role in memory storage.
Existing connections can be strengthened, or weakened, within a time-
frame that staggers the imagination: in milliseconds (thousandths of a
second). Since it is only through such plasticity that short-term memory
independent of new protein synthesis can be identified at all, we focus on
this mechanism here.
First, however, it is important to show how this mechanism, synaptic
plasticity, contributes to long-term memory storage as well, because this
will set the terms within which memes can be defined.
A number of
studies, involving animals as varied as the fruit fly (Drosophila), nematode
worm (Aplysia), and mouse, have demonstrated the importance of a
particular protein, called CREB for short, which is involved in the process
of consolidating “long-lasting” changes in synaptic plasticity (those that
occur over a period of seconds to hours). This body of data supports the
hypothesis that gene transcription is critical to long-term, learning-induced
changes in neuronal networks.
The transcription of specific DNA
sequences in the cell, induced by CREB, initiates a cascade of activity in
which other genes are also read off.
This ultimately results in

—— Memes as a State of Mind · 191 ——
the production of proteins that are responsible for the structural changes
underlying long-term changes in the responsiveness of neurons.
Further, regulation of gene expression by CREB can be localized to
individual synapses, which are chemically “marked” by the local
translation of a kind of RNA located at specific dendrites.
This RNA,
called “messenger” RNA (the same molecule that transports the genetic
“signal” from nuclear DNA to the site of protein synthesis), is shipped out
to these extreme locations in the neuron. There, it is translated to produce
proteins under the control of local synapses.
These proteins then hang
around, regulating the sensitivity of that dendrite to incoming stimuli.
Decentralized protein production, under the finely tuned control of
synapses acting as local managers, thus contributes to the critical task of
storing memories.
The flexibility of neuronal responses to incoming
stimuli is increased significantly thanks to the highly sensitive repertoires
of proteins circulating around individual dendrites.
Essentially the cell is making use of messenger RNA’s ability to
produce proteins as a way to store information in these stable molecules.
It’s true that there is no change in the neuron’s gene sequence, and none of
this activity feeds directly back to the organism’s gametes, to the cells that
will be responsible for determining the genetic constitution of the next
generation of brainy organisms.
So this use of messenger RNA and
protein may appear immaterial from the point of view of biological
evolution, since the regulation of a neuron’s propensity to fire occurs
without immediate instruction from nuclear DNA. But there is an indirect
link: The particular kind of messenger RNA sent out to a dendrite is
determined by the transcription of a specific gene. For this reason, there
will be selection on those aspects of the genetic system present in neurons
for their ability to respond to the outside world appropriately, and for the
ability of those proteins to stabilize memory. In this sense, there will be
biological evolution in these memory-production mechanisms, and thence
on the genes that produce them. In effect, these longer-term changes in
brain states are just flexible genetic phenotypes, which could still preclude
a role for memes.
To steer clear of this possibility, we need to identify a domain in
which there is no gene expression at all. Such a domain does exist. No
known mechanism of gene activity is reactive at the temporal and spatial
scale necessarily to explain short-term changes in synaptic plasticity—

—— 192 · THE ELECTRIC MEME ——
That is, in the strength of connections between neurons in complex brains.
To do so, the product of gene expression, a protein, would have to be
produced and go to work in milliseconds, and at individual synapses.
Regardless of what we learn about how brains work in the future, it is
unlikely that gene expression will ever invade the territory framed by this
temporal and spatial scale.
This is change in neuronal states without
recourse to DNA (even indirectly)—which satisfies our condition for
independence.
Therefore some activity in the brain is not directed by genes.
The
basic physiology of neurons and their connections are essentially fixed at
the timescale of a second or so. But the state of a node can be changed
within this timeframe.
This doesn’t mean that replication of neuronal
states occurs, but it does imply there is room for another replicator to be
responsible for brain activity within the confined domain we have
identified.
However, this alternative replicator must work very fast
indeed, and in a highly localized situation—in the context of a few
neurons at most, working in concert.
Let me be clear about this crucial point. Even if they are quite distinct
kinds of response—one electrical, the other structural—short-term and
long-term memory are linked. Any short-term neuronal response probably
triggers some cascade of long-term memory consolidation, which suggests
that the brain’s short- and long-term responses are integrated. Short-term
changes trap the trace of memory, which the long-term mechanism then
fixes into place. Short-term memory may not depend on genes during the
instant of trapping, but it does depend on genes to produce its mechanisms.
And then gene transcription is needed to consolidate its gains. So long-
term memory’s formation is dependent on short-term changes in neuronal
plasticity.
Nevertheless the mechanisms for these two kinds of memory are
independent. If the mechanisms are distinct, then so too are the results.
We can legitimately disentangle two kinds of information in the brain,
each being the product of processes with different dynamics and causal
structures. The distinction is not only analytic—it’s not just a distinction
born of my mind but not in my brain.
It’s a real, physical difference,
because the mechanisms are physical things.
Here’s the decisive point: Short-term mechanisms for changing neuronal
states will be under natural selection because they reappear in each
generation of brains.
But the products of those mechanisms—memetic

—— Memes as a State of Mind · 193 ——
information, potentially—is not subject to the same selection effects as it
scoots around the brain. Similarly, prions are produced using mechanisms
put into place originally by genetic processes for the folding of proteins,
but contain information acquired independently of genetic assignment
(through inter-molecular contact) that then flits between molecules. The
key factor isn’t what generates the mechanism in the first place but what
happens to the information generated by that mechanism. A lineage of
memetic information can be created independently of gene-produced
mechanisms for storing memories, even short-term ones.
In effect, what we have located is the possibility of a “millisecond
meme,” with the involvement of such a replicator, the state of a neuronal
node would be determined by the sequence of events experienced by the
host organism and endogenous memetic evolution. This state would thus
be (to a greater or lesser degree) independent of genes in that its current
configuration has been produced by a history of stimulation by previous
meme products, as well as other stimuli. It would be in this domain that,
as the eminent neuroscientist Jean-Pierre Changeux suggests, “the
Darwinism of synapses replaces the Darwinism of genes.”
THE NEUROMEME DEFINED
We now have a temporal and spatial framework within which to continue
our search for memes. But what about getting even more physical? Can
we define a substrate and replication mechanism for memes?
Most definitions of memes are abstract, couched in terms of
information or the mental representation that results from imitation. But
replicators exist as specific substrates, as physical complexes. So too must
memes be, if they are replicators.
This isn’t to say that physical models of memes don’t already exist. In
fact, a number of memeticists have suggested that memes should be
associated with the physical network of neurons—the map that links each
neuron, through synapses, to others. Dawkins, for example, argued that “if
the brain stores information as a pattern of synaptic connections, a meme
should in principle be visible under a microscope as a definite pattern of
synaptic structure.”
But it is clear, I hope, from the preceding discussion, that this argument
cannot be true.
It commits the same error as an earlier generation

—— 194 · THE ELECTRIC MEME ——
of neuroscientists, such as Karl Lashley and Wilder Penfield, fell prey to
when they attempted to locate the traces of memory (which they called an
“engram”) in the brain. They were victimized by an overactive concern
with tissue. Memories simply aren’t warehoused in the miniature bodies
of specific neurons, to be elicited by an electrical prod to the exposed gray
matter or excised by surgically removing an area of the cortex. You can’t
separate some molecules from the brain and expect to hold a memory in
your hand.
No bit of information has meaning except through its
relationships to other bits of information. Our model of memes must be
consistent with what we presently know about the distributed and
contextual nature of memory and learning in the brain. I therefore argue,
contrary to Dawkins and others, that a meme must be an aspect of the
neuronal network.
Memes must also be memories—although here I will not using the
word in its everyday sense, as something that can be consciously recalled
about a specific event in an individual’s life history. Instead let me use the
word more generally to refer to any information that persists over time in
the brain, even if it is the stored value of some variable internally
generated by a solipsistic brain. Memes, then, are just a class of memories
that can copy themselves.
What is the context in which such copying might occur? What neurons
do is communicate with one another—pass information from one to the
other in chains of exchange.
That is their job.
So the replication of
memes must occur in the context of communication between neurons.
However, it’s also the case that for Darwinian evolution to occur in the
brain, something must change along the way.
But this change can’t
involve new tissues being formed and added to the network—that can’t
occur at the millisecond timescale we require. What is reproduced through
millisecond generations, however, is states of neurons: Molecules like
neurotransmitters, the electrical potential-producing elements in a neuron,
can agglomerate or dissipate very rapidly indeed.
This means the
electrochemical states of neurons can be reconstructed on this timescale
and
so can
serve
as
the
foundation
for
what
might
be
called
neuromemetics.
These ideas demand further discussion.
But given our current
ignorance about how the brain stores and manages information, it isn’t
worth trying to be too specific about the physical scale at which replication

—— Memes as a State of Mind · 195 ——
occurs. I will simply use the word “node” to indicate where replication
happens. A node is, in effect, some portion of a neuronal network. I will
also take the most elementary case—limiting myself to only two nodes—
and treat communication between these two nodes in a rather schematic
way to keep my discussion simple. My reasons for being vague about all
this are derived from our current ignorance about the details of neural
functioning. Let me next outline the kinds of ways in which two nodes
can interact in an attempt to identify if any of these possibilities qualifies
as replication.
The most frequent kind of event between nodes is probably one in
which a source node, 1, is in some state, A, prior to firing. As a result of
being stimulated and emitting a spike, node 1’s state changes to B. The
spike then stimulates a second node, 2, converting it from state Y to state
Z. Since the state of node 1 at the end of this process (B) is not the same
as node A’s state at the end (Z), no state has been duplicated and hence
there is no possibility that replication has occurred. I will call this simply
a case of neuronal communication. Some information has passed “hands,”
but that’s all.
A second possibility is that node 1, prior to firing, is in state A, and
that after being stimulated by 1’s action potential, node 2 winds up in the
same state A.
However, let’s say the exertion of producing the spike
converts node 1 to another state, B.
So the state in question (A) has
effectively moved from node 1 to node 2. For this reason, I will call this
form of communication state-switching. Again, there is no duplication of
states and hence no replication of state A.
A third possible kind of interaction between nodes can, I think,
reasonably be called the true replication of neuronal states through a
process of communication. This occurs when node 1 begins in state A,
fires a spike at node 2, converting it to state A, and then itself returns to
state A after firing.
How does this satisfy our four conditions for
replication, defined in Chapter 3? Node 1 has caused node 2 to acquire
the same state as itself by stimulating it, and this state is similar to its own.
Causation and similarity are thus fulfilled by this example. The two states
are also related by descent, because at least part of the information that made
node 2 take on state A was derived from the signal coming from node 1.
And the state has been duplicated as well: The two nodes both exhibit this
state simultaneously. Thus this process exhibits all four of the necessary

—— 196 · THE ELECTRIC MEME ——
characteristics that identify true replication.
State A is now what
philosophers call a “dispositional state,” or what dynamical systems
theorists call an “attractor.” What these terms mean is that the node has an
ability to return “home” after being jostled away from it.
These are
“prodigal son” nodes.
Yet another possibility is when two downstream nodes, 2 and 3, are
both stimulated by node 1, and wind up in the same state, A, as node 1
began in. But in the process, node 1’s state gets altered to B. Here, we go
from one copy of state A to two copes in the next timeframe, but the
location of the original copy has moved from node 1 to node 2, say. Is this
still replication, good and true?
Since we care about changes m the
number of states, not where they are, I would argue that this qualifies as a
case of memetic replication as well. The table below provides a summary
of the various communication types I have just discussed.
TYPES OF NEURONAL INTERACTION
TYPE OF INTERACTION
STATE CHANGES RENDERED
REPLICATION CRITERIA
Neuronal
communication
Spike leaves source node in new
state B, while changing receiving
node to new state Z.
No duplication of states
Neuronal state-switching
Spike changes source node from
state A to B but leaves receiving
node in new state A.
Movement, not
duplication
Neuronal state
replication
Spike leaves source and receiving
nodes in state A; alternatively,
spike
changes source node from state A
but leaves two receiving nodes in
new state A.
Causation, similarity,
inheritance, and
duplication fulfilled
What this analysis implies is that if some nodes in the neuronal
network automatically return to their original state after firing, and at the
same time (thanks to their connections with other nodes) simultaneously
cause another node to settle in the same state, then that node has caused
itself to be copied. Alternatively the node may simultaneously cause two
related cells to adopt its original state. In either case, the “Midas touch” of
such nodes has the defining quality of a replicator, making these new
nodes “golden” from an evolutionary point of view. I therefore argue that
the states of these nodes are memes. Like other replicators, memes are
physical things. They are, in fact electrical things—propensities to fire—

—— Memes as a State of Mind · 197 ——
tied to the special kind of cells called neurons (but are not the neurons
themselves).
Here, then, is my definition of a neuromeme:
A configuration in one node of a neuronal network that is able to
induce the replication of its state in other nodes.
Let me explain what several of the terms in this definition mean. A
“node” can be, at minimum, a single neuron or even a single synapse.
However, a node may also be an ensemble of neurons in some cases: a set
of linked cells that settles on the same state while causing another set to do
likewise. Some clusters of strongly interconnected neurons may acquire a
configuration in which they tend to return to the same state after
excitation: that is, their collective state is an attractor.
Such ensembles
replicate themselves in situ. Alternatively a meme can move to another
physical group if that group adopts (perhaps for the first time) the same
potential to fire as the source ensemble after excitation.
Our definition therefore means that memetics—for the moment, at
least—is agnostic about how the brain codes information and should
therefore remain mute about issues of physical scale.
A neuromeme is
basically
just
a
brain-based,
super-molecular
structure
capable
of
replication.
The analogous nature of the mechanism through which
memes replicate and those used by prions and comp-viruses is clear. In all
cases, it is the state of a preexisting substrate that is changed by the
replication process. This neuroscientific perspective on memes also makes
it clear that replication is not the primary function of information
processing in the brain. Not every synapse or cell in the brain is going to
be in a memetic state at any given moment.
What
then,
do
I
mean
by
a
node’s
“configuration”?
A
configuration is defined by those factors that determine a node’s
propensity to fire. These factors, although presently somewhat mysterious in
nature, would be things like the quantity and type of neurotransmitters and
other proteins present in the node, or the glia and nitrous oxide surrounding the
node, which contribute to its propensity to fire. What is clear is that, taken
together, these must be the factors that determine and predict the primary
product of memetic activity—a spike that can assist in the conversion of other
nodes
into
similar
memes,
either
in
the
same
or
another

—— 198 · THE ELECTRIC MEME ——
brain. Depending on the scale of the node concerned, this could involve a
matrix of values, with each cell of the matrix measuring the values of
particular contributors (such as acetylcholine, a neurotransmitter) that
determine the propensity of a particular synapse or neuron to fire. Let me
emphasize that a node’s configuration is not defined as a probability.
Rather it is measured in terms of the physical complement of proteins and
other molecules that modulate a node’s responsiveness to stimuli.
A node’s propensity to fire is also likely to be stimulus-specific, or to
arise only in response to particular kinds of originating events. Signals are
impoverished in content (only hinting at what needs to be said or done), so
local conditions must be just right for replication to occur.
Given that
memetic information must be converted from signal, back to meme, and
thence to signal again, complex regularities in information processing at
each stage of the information’s progression through brains will likely have
to evolve to support replication.
A very precise relationship between
memes and the signals they produce is surely required for a lineage of
similar neuronal states to arise.
Further, because each neuron comes under the influence of many other
neurons, it is likely to take many states as a result. Only specific kinds of
inputs are apt to cause a neuron to adopt the particular infectious state of a
given memetic lineage. Again, this gives us a physical reason to suspect
that only certain kinds of stimuli will have the necessary causal
relationship with neuronal states to result in replication.
I see this definition of a meme in terms of a state rather than a material
substrate as the key conceptual move in neuromemetics.
This move is
crucial to achieving a legitimate perspective on brain-based cultural
replicators. The implications are many. First, this switch in perspective
preserves the basic distinction between replicators as informational
templates and interactors as dynamic entities in the world.
Genes, for
example, aren’t molecules; the molecules were there since early in the
evolution of the universe and can be explained by chemistry. At the same
time, genes aren’t put together from nothing but take material already
organized to a degree by other forces and add a twist: It is the new state of
matter that, in appropriate circumstances, can replicate. What matters is
the sequence of amino acids along the double helix of DNA. Similarly, in
prions, another class of biological replicator, it is the conformational state
of
the
infectious
particle
that
is
important
in
determining

—— Memes as a State of Mind · 199 ——
which “strain” of prion is passed on through contact.
Its own three-
dimensional shape determines how a local, non-infectious protein is
converted into a new prion. In the same way, my distinction is between
what a cultural replicator is (a state of matter) and what it does (like copy
itself and have other effects in the world).
The second major consequence of the move from substrates to states is
that memes are not bound to particular cells. The molecules in a neuron
that define its electrochemical state, as a readiness-to-fire, come and go; it
is the readiness-to-fire that endures. Memes are still physical; it’s just that
their substrate is energetic—“electric,” if you will—rather than material.
If a meme does not depend on the identity of individual neurons, it also
doesn’t depend on the unique connectivity of some neuron to other
neurons, nor its positional relationship to the cortex as a whole.
This
means the qualities of a meme don’t depend on the unique features of the
wiring diagram of an individual brain, which reflects the sequence of local
environments it experienced during its development and learning activity.
Thus the memetic state can be replicated, move from area to area, and
presumably stimulate other nodes in the network to join it in the infectious
state.
The ability to replicate is, of course, the crucial feature of a
replicator.
But this freedom from materiality means that replicator
information can travel, across nodes, into the environment.
This
transmissibility is crucial to the continued replication of a meme in
different locations, and hence the persistence of memetic lineages.
The division of state or condition from physical material also implies
that memes are separable.
Although the brain is composed of a single
neuronal network, such that any individual neuron can be connected to any
other through a small number of links, this is not the case for the memes that
“ride on the backs” of those neurons. Only a specific node is involved in
any meme’s manifestation. The fact that one meme’s substrate is physically
linked to another’s does not mean the two memes are joined together.
Rather they remain functionally distinct. This is evident in the fact that
one meme can fire without the other doing so.
With ensembles of
neurons being tuned to several different types of stimuli (what
neuroscientists call “overlapping coding”), multiple memes can even be
layered in a single node, being manifest as firing patterns separable
through time.
So several memes can be latent in the same node,

—— 200 · THE ELECTRIC MEME ——
each lying in wait for the proper stimulus to come along and express it.
This divisibility makes memes the “corpuscles of culture.”
Finally, in my earlier discussion of replication in computer viruses, I
argued that the information in a replicator must serve two functions: as a
store of information and as an interpretable instruction, in order to be able
to initiate the replication process when that information is “read off” by
some external agent. How is this accomplished by the kind of replicator I
have suggested in the brain? The neuronal state stores information about
kinds of things “out there” (because it only responds to certain suites of
stimuli), as well as about the recent history of the organism (or the brain
itself). This makes it “about” something out in the world or something the
brain cares about. At the same time, that state is capable, when induced by
the input of energy (much as when an operating system “reads” a
computer address), of firing a signal that instigates the process through
which another similar meme is created elsewhere. In this way, a neuronal
state can both be read or “interpreted” by a catalyst and implicitly be an
interpretation or representation of other things.
LA MEME CHOSE
What makes two nodal states the “same” and therefore duplicates of one
another? Being the same in evolutionary terms means being “identical by
descent.” This technical phrase implies that two replicators share some
physical features and have the same “parents.”
So for two genes to be
identical by descent, they must be copies that arose through replication
from the same ancestral gene sequence. The copies of a particular gene in
two siblings are identical by descent if they have been inherited from the
same person, such as their paternal grandmother.
By analogy for two
memes to be identical by descent, two nodes must have the same parental
nodes and be similar in quality. What kind of quality is relevant?
Remember that our similarity criterion for memes requires only that
they pass information through the neuronal network in the same way—
this was the import of our Same Influence Rule, outlined earlier. This
does not mean the nodes must be absolutely identical in terms of their
physical layout but rather that, when stimulated, they perform in ways
that have similar consequences to the larger network. This means, for
neurons, that they must communicate roughly the same message to other

—— Memes as a State of Mind · 201 ——
nodes that themselves play equivalent roles in the network.
The
considerable redundancy in the brain gives memes ample opportunity to
engage in parallel activities, despite their different locations.
Further, at the small scale at which memes are defined, there should be
comparable connectivity matrices in different brains for small groups of
neurons among the billions of connections made in each.
Indeed there
could be quite a few copies within a brain, allowing for movement of the
memetic state to different locations or replication within a host to produce
a (small) population of similar memes simultaneously. The combination
of these two factors—the use of the Same Influence Rule to define
similarity, and the fact that neuromemes are defined on a quite small
scale—should guarantee that memetic states can be reproduced with some
fidelity in different parts of the same brain (as well as between brains, as
we shall see).
But what about the fact that two nodes releasing the same pattern of
spikes at different places in the network seem to be saying something quite
different by virtue of the fact that each drives the dynamics of the brain
from a divergent angle? In this case, one state-A neuron in the primary
visual cortex and a second state-A cell in some other region of cortex
would not have an equivalent influence on brain activity.
Doesn’t this
negate the possibility of replication within a brain—according to the
criteria we have set up—because no two neurons will have exactly the
same effect on the larger network of which each is a part?
This is where it becomes important to remember the crucial distinction
between local, or “value-added,” processing and global meaning, which
reflects the cumulative decision-making by an information-processing
stream.
The node in the visual cortex from our example may be
participating in exactly the same way in one decision-making circuit as the
node somewhere else is doing in its own, independent circuit.
In each
case, the meme is telling its neighbor down the line something that has the
same meaning for that neighbor in its context. The subject of conversation
may be quite different between the two cortical domains, but that is
irrelevant to our concerns. What each meme is doing is adding the same
kind of value to its local information-processing stream; what the brain
will later make of these decisions when bringing these parallel processes
together is a separate matter.
There’s also another way two nodes can be equivalent. Neuroscientists

—— 202 · THE ELECTRIC MEME ——
have told us that most of the thousands of input lines to the average brain
cell are actually parts of feedback loops returning via neighboring neurons.
Barely a tenth of a neuron’s connections come from sense organs or levels
lower in the information-processing hierarchy. In effect, every neuron is
plugged into a multitude of mutual relationships with other neurons.
If
much of brain communication is a kind of back-and-forth message-passing
to synchronize spike streams, then memes may mostly be talking to one
another, with each keeping the other stimulated and in the right state.
Neither is doing much except having the same kind of influence on the
other. This makes them equivalent in the sense required for them to be
considered replicas of each other.
Not only that, but in some cases the signal sent out by one neuron may
not come directly back to it but instead may travel through some
intermediary, forming a more complicated circuit. In effect, memes may
replicate by forming what Manfred Eigen calls hypercycles. A memetic
hypercycle would be a set of neurons in which each member catalyzes the
production of the appropriate memetic state in the next member by firing a
spike at it. This process of jolting the next guy into action goes round until
it comes back to the first neuron, which gets returned to its original state,
completing the causal circle. The whole neuronal circuit then constitutes a
single replicator.
If the circuit is small enough, it might be able to
duplicate itself in another circuit by sending a spike to the neuron that
originates the round of mutual stimulation in that memetic hypercycle.
Such cyclic replicators are known to exist in sets of biomolecules and may
have been the first replicators on Earth. But this story remains speculative
with respect to memes because no one is currently looking for such
circuits in the brain.
STATIONARYMEMES
I suggested above that memes can replicate in the brain through two
different routes. The first method requires the source node to return to its
original infectious state for duplication to occur, since only one
downstream node also adopts the same state. I will call this the Stationary
Meme Model.
In the second method, the Mobile Meme Model of
replication, the source node loses its original state but simultaneously
induces two downstream nodes to become infectious.
I now want

—— Memes as a State of Mind · 203 ——
to elaborate on how each of these models might work, beginning with the
stationary one.
The first way in which a meme could remain in place is through a
process operating within the cell to ensure it maintains the right state
despite disturbances.
This would most likely be some kind of electro-
chemical process that kicks in automatically after the cell fires.
Another way in which the source node could be returned to its original
state is through feedback from outside the cell. This could occur through
either a short loop or a long loop. Both kinds of loop rely on the spike
train produced by the memetic state eventually producing another signal
that returns to stimulate the node which initiated the loop, returning it to its
original infectious state. The short loop is distinguished from the long one
by staying within the brain, taking advantage of reciprocal connections—
which form a large proportion of all connections throughout the brain—
between different areas of cortex.
Signals sent out into the macroenvironment can also be picked up by
the host organism again. For example, what went out through the mouth
can come back in through the ear, to reincite the stimulation of the source
node, producing a replication event in the same brain that produced the
signal in the first place. Hearing one’s own voice saying something may
cause the responsible neuronal node to revert to the state that produced the
meme in the first place. (The novelist E.M. Forster once quipped: “How
do I know what 1 think until I hear what I say?”) Similarly, the individual
who types a word onto paper or a computer screen is the first to see and
interpret what the message says. These are examples of the long loop in
action.
The host becomes both the sender and receiver of messages.
Indeed it has been argued that this microenvironmental feedback loop is
the reason we humans alone have consciousness: It makes us appear to
ourselves as agents in the world (both “inside” and “outside” our heads
simultaneously), as well as providing temporally delayed input. In effect,
the returned signal presents the brain with a chance to reflect on the
behavioral option it chose.
Interaction between short-term and long-term memory mechanisms is another
way that nodes can be brought back into an infectious state after firing. This is
because even long-term memory is constantly subjected to updating. Until

—— 204 · THE ELECTRIC MEME ——
recently it was thought that newly learned material is transformed into
stable, solid chunks of long-term memory through a one-time process of
protein generation known as consolidation. This is no longer believed to
be the case.
Instead long-term memories become chemically unstable
every time they are retrieved. In this fragile state, long-term memories can
be easily altered or disrupted. Furthermore, after they have been retrieved
and
are
being
sent
back
down
for
storage,
memories
must
be
reconsolidated through the synthesis of new proteins.
This reintegrates
them with the new situation in the area where they came from, updating
their consistency with any other information that may have come in during
the interim.
This reconsolidation occurs within the local neural system
that reforms the memory.
Presumably reconsolidation occurs with sufficient precision and
regularity that recall can take place without significant damage to the
information contained in long-term memory. However, the process is not
perfect. This is evident in the so-called false memory problem, discovered
through a laboratory procedure in which information about a recent
experience, made up by researchers, is fed to experimental subjects. When
subjects are later questioned about the event, they tend to incorporate the
false information into their account. So even relatively stable memories
must be continuously reinforced—at least after each recall of the
information they contain—to ensure that the information is not degraded
or simply lost in the process of being used for decision-making. In effect,
consistency over time is what happens when updates keep returning the
memory to the same state it previously had.
Consolidation can therefore either take a node out of a memetic state or
reinforce it. The Stationary and Mobile Meme Models thus differ in how
the relationship between short-term and long-term information storage
works out at each node.
In the mobile meme case, the two kinds of
memory work at odds with one another: long-term mechanisms change the
infectious state introduced in some node by a short-term mechanism,
rendering it un-memetic.
In the Stationary Meme Model, on the other
hand, short-term and long-term mechanisms are mutually reinforcing,
allowing memes to remain on the spot. If the infectious state persists even
through multiple episodes of reconsolidation, we can label it meta-stable.
The need for reconsolidation has the important consequence that
memes are not restricted to short-term memory but can infiltrate long-

—— Memes as a State of Mind · 205 ——
term memory as well, since they can modify a memory while it is in use
(after recall but prior to reconsolidation) via a fast-acting mechanism.
When the reconsolidation mechanism kicks in, this memetic state then gets
“frozen” in place (at least for as long as “long-term” means in the brain,
which may only be a few hours). Thus the link between memes and long-
term memories—if not in terms of the traditional conception as stable
crystals of information safely stored away—is rescued. Infectious states
can be fixed in place by protein synthesis! This obviously has important
implications for the longevity of individual memes and hence for the
ability of memes to create lineages.
MEMES IN MOTION
The second model of memetic replication involves the movement of the
original meme from one location to another. How can this be achieved?
In only thousandths of a second, a cortical neuron’s “receptive field”—the
kinds of stimuli to which it responds—can shift. One moment, a neuron
may be responsible for firing when a spot on the tip of your index finger
feels pain; the next moment, it might be a spot near the first knuckle of
that finger that is “represented” by that neuron. Scientists have for some
time believed that the responsibility of an area of cortex could shift over a
much longer period—say, to compensate for injury to an area of the
cortex. But this level of dynamic behavior, only recently discovered and
existing even at the level of individual neurons, is quite surprising because
it implies that even our self-representations (at least in terms of
topographic “maps” of our body that are present in our brains) are highly
fluid. What this suggests more generally is that mental representations are
constantly moving around in the brain.
Clearly there is a lot of change going on in the brain all the time. Just
as clearly, however, there is some consistency of memory, and some
sharedness to cultural knowledge.
How can we reconcile the apparent
chaos in the brain with the consistency and stability of social memory,
with the effectiveness of socialization into the lifeways of a cultural
group? After all, you remember your name from day to day, do you not?
How is this possible if there is only a welter of ever-changing hubbub in
your head?
In effect, the brain is faced with two largely combative goals: to learn
and to remember. How can it effectively achieve both simultaneously—

—— 206 · THE ELECTRIC MEME ——
and using the same equipment, since both memory and learning are
accomplished by neurons, and nothing but neurons? We don’t currently
know the answer to this question in full. But an important way in which
the brain attempts to limit potential damage to hard-won prior knowledge
is by segregating the memory and learning functions spatially.
The
hippocampus (a small area in the middle of the cortex) apparently serves
as a gatekeeper that selectively grants new impressions entry into the long-
term storage areas.
So tried-and-true knowledge is kept apart to some
degree from more dynamic areas, while new, untested data are subjected
to a variety of examinations before being admitted into the exclusive long-
term memory club.
At the same time, of course, some bits of information are constantly
being batted about by neurons, getting passed from hand to hand. These
neurons must remain highly adaptable if they are able to hold a wide range
of types of information and switch from one moment to the next.
If a
meme can be virtually anywhere, then the neocortex (the largely neo-
cortical areas devoted to internal message-passing) really is just that: a
vast landscape of highly similar neurons, ready to be manipulated as you
please, charged with responsibility for just about anything.
A neuron’s
connectivity, strengths of connection, relationships with support structures
like glia, and involvement with neurotransmitters and other chemical
partners—all must be able to change at the drop of a hat. Neurons in the
isocortex must remain pluripotent. It’s true that certain functions tend to
regularly wind up in the same general areas from person to person, but
these tend to be the primary sensory and motor areas. (The primary visual
cortex is in the very back of the head, for instance.) For the rest, there is
significant variation—even between hemispheres—in where a particular
function winds up in a person, especially for the “higher” functions like
planning and executive control that are characteristic of the isocortex.
Memes thus need not be tied to any particular location. But it isn’t
unexpected that memes should be mobile.
Computer viruses can also
move around quite freely.
A comp-virus can be physically split into
sections residing in multiple locations, only virtually linked into a whole
by other bits of information called pointers. (This is why disk-optimizing
software can defragment tiles by moving them all to one location on the
physical disk to speed up their retrieval by the operating systems). Prions,

—— Memes as a State of Mind · 207 ——
our other example of a novel replicator, are also individual molecules that
are free to move about their environment, the brain.
If memes are mobile, like these other replicators, then they must be
adept at solving the problem of transmission. An analogy will be useful.
Think of the brain as a soup. In fact, it should be an alphabet soup,
with memes serving as the letters, floating on the surface of a sea of
chemicals. Each kind of meme would then be a different letter. There
might be an A here and another over there, while a clump of Bs might be
off somewhere else (local connectivity between neurons would probably
ensure some geographical clustering of memetic lineages).
The letters
would bob like corks on this sea, moving back and forth, or drifting with
the tide of change in the information-processing seascape. But the letters
can also move about in a jerky fashion or can be thought to rapidly sink
below the surface of the soup, only to reappear somewhere else a
millisecond later. This is because it is, in fact, an electrical soup, and the
letters are just lighted portions of a massive, densely linked network of
wires just under the surface—something like a gigantic underwater neon
sign. As with a neon sign, it is the flashing script that matters: The state of
illumination of the sign’s various sections are the memes, which can be
duplicated and move about over the network of wires.
This makes it easy to see how variation and evolution can occur in a
population of memes.
It will naturally be most easy for the lighted
message “A” to be conveyed by a section of the wiring diagram that
actually bears that shape—an area of wiring that resembles two long legs
attached in the middle by a belt. This would be an area of the sign with a
predisposition to “A-ness.” However, as with an old, dysfunctional neon
sign, sometimes a physical B shape will also broadcast the message “A,”
because the bottom length of wire in that node has short-circuited. A letter
B could also display as a “C” if its right-most section of wire went out.
However, it would be more of a stretch for an A diagram to display as a
“C,” suggesting that there are closer familial ties between memes A and B
than between memes A and C. The A to C “mutation” would therefore
be rather rare in the meme population. It may also be easier to go from
one letter to another than the reverse. For example, it should be easier
for a physical B to show as an “A” than vice versa. Thus, as various bits
of the wire diagram go on the fritz, the letters displayed at a particular
location of the grid can change, as can the total number of A or B

—— 208 · THE ELECTRIC MEME ——
letters in the electrical soup. This is the essence of evolution. The ability
of the multitude of wires to transmit electrons determines what kind of
illuminated state they can adopt.
This analogy also suggests that each
letter is composed of subunits, only some of which need to flash
simultaneously to make the proper signal. Memes might therefore consist
of an ensemble of components, so that a replicator node will be somewhat
complex.
This is quite a different picture of the brain than we got from the
Stationary Meme Model. Nevertheless both of these models may be true
at the same time, although for different memes. But is one model of meme
replication more likely to hold true?
Are there, after all, islands of
stability in the sea of moving brain waves: rocks that never move, holding
fast to a moment from the past, ignoring all the stimuli beating up onto
their shores, and remaining untouched by subsequent events, as expected
by the Stationary Model? It now seems very unlikely that memory could
cope without moving, for it would mean that some memory is—just as in
computers—“addressable,” with a constant physical location.
The Stationary Meme Model also requires one node to be able to
regain its composure after firing, which is an added duty for a node to
discharge. In this sense, the Stationary Meme Model is more complex,
requiring greater sophistication in the performance of individual neurons.
Although neurons are no doubt highly competent computational devices,
overburdening them with tasks runs counter to the wisdom of parsimony.
Another factor to consider is the fact that the brain is a so-called “small
world” network.
This is a particular kind of structure that appears to
generally characterize complex “real-world” networks of any kind, from
chemical-reaction networks to food webs, electric power grids, networks of
friends, citation links between scientists, and groups of computers. Small-world
networks arise when you randomly replace some fraction of the links between
nodes with random pathways. Local “neighborhoods” tend to be preserved after
such a move, but at the same time it becomes possible to connect any two nodes
in the network through just a few links. In effect, most power stations—or
people or computers connected to the Internet—are connected together by short
chains of intermediary nodes. Any person in the world today, for example, is
estimated
to
be
only
about
six
acquaintances
away
from

—— Memes as a State of Mind · 209 ——
anyone else (the so-called phenomenon of “six degrees of separation”),
while on the World Wide Web even, one page is on average only about 16
to 20 clicks away from any other.
Connectivity in small-world networks is not perfectly regular: The
physically neighboring neuron need not be the closest in terms of the
length of the pathway that has to be followed to get there.
(This is an
important way in which the brain is unlike the artificial neural networks
simulated on computers, which are fully connected—every possible link is
made between nodes.) Rather, much like Internet friendships, your closest
e-mail pals may be across the world, while the person in the house or
apartment next to you remains an unknown quantity. Thus, in the brain,
every once in a while, a single axon stretches from one side of the brain to
the other, linking two otherwise quite disparate neighborhoods. This has
the effect of keeping the average number of links between any two
neurons in the brain reasonably low.
Models of dynamical systems with “small world” structures display an
enhanced ability to propagate signals, increased computational power, and
an ability to synchronize their outputs (which may explain why the
synchronizing of spikes plays such an important role in the brain).
In
particular, infectious diseases spread more easily in small-world networks
than in completely regular or completely random networks. This implies
that memes should more readily survive and propagate inside brains than
in alternative kinds of networks. Memes have found a kind of home, the
brain, which makes movement more feasible. (On the downside, it also
means that it will be necessary to observe the whole brain to know
whether a replication event has occurred, because a meme that was in one
corner of the brain at one moment could leap to the other side the next
through one of these long-distance connections.)
For all of these reasons, I expect the Mobile Meme Model will prove
much more relevant empirically than the stationary one.
It is more in
keeping with the truly dynamic mental organ we have come to know
through recent neuroscientific advances.
THINKING IN “MEME-TIME”
Every time you turn around these days, a new discovery in neuroscience
indicates a fresh kind of dynamic change that happens inside our heads.

—— 210 · THE ELECTRIC MEME ——
In fact, the pictures of brains coming from the new imaging techniques are
still “blurry” because the brain changes faster than pictures can effectively
be taken of them.
How can replication possibly occur in the face of this tempest in a
cranium?
Memes are supposed to have the power to hold themselves
together in the face of adversity—after all “fidelity, fecundity, and
longevity” is the replicator motto, right?
This intense mutability of
memory appears to be a knockdown argument against the possibility of
brain-based memes.
It’s a question whether any association between a
certain retrievable bit of information and a particular piece of the brain
lasts for longer than a few milliseconds.
What could possibly be
duplicated or serve as a safe location for the storage of information over
time?
How can we call any little piece in this stormy sea an island of
stability?
Everyone intimately experiences the fact that ideas can mutate: Your
beliefs change with time, just as common sense would suggest.
The
malleable self, something we all must deal with, is underpinned by the
development of life stories we tell ourselves to give us the sense of
permanence that seeing the same face in the mirror day after day seems to
require.
Our life narrative is simply an attempt to keep some kind of
continuity in what is in fact a maelstrom inside our heads beneath our
consciousness.
But the emphasis on the stability of memes within individuals—on the
need to have locked-in memories—is based on the assumption that meme
evolution occurs only between individuals. If meme evolution can occur
within a host, then this perceived need for mental stability is wholly
misplaced.
Neuromemes evolve within that encompassed sphere—and
very rapidly.
The picture presented by neuroscientists of a brain
constantly in flux is not antithetical to neuromemetics (although it is to
conventional memetics, because of its exclusive tie to social transmission).
Just as the HIV virus can rapidly evolve through mutation and
diversification within a single host, developing an entire ecology of mutant
forms side by side, so too can there be variant forms of a neuromeme,
simultaneously present in one brain, that have branched off into divergent
lineages.
Any one of these variants can come to dominate the meme
population in that brain, thanks to a variety of selection mechanisms. And
any one of these forms can be the meme that makes the jump to a new
host, starting the whole process of evolutionary elaboration all over again.

—— Memes as a State of Mind · 211 ——
Meme “flexibility” within the lifetime of its host is thus not a
conundrum, but an expectation of neuromemetics. Once we stop thinking
about evolution from the point of view of the host and switch to the
perspective of the memetic parasite, dynamicism becomes an advantage:
Memes can change while their hosts stand still in evolutionary terms. This
has always been one of the primary reasons for the persistence of
parasites. They can hit moving targets because they are able to change
direction even faster than the target can.
So we had just better get used to the somewhat counterintuitive
timeframe that characterizes this new kind of replicator, with its
generations that pass in an eye blink. If we are going to talk about the
evolution of cultural replicators in the brain, we have to learn to think in
“meme-time.” Bacteria can reproduce every 20 minutes or so, but memes
put the fecundity of these biological champions to shame: The rapidity of
their profligacy is on the order of a thousand times faster,
REASONS FOR REPLICATING
Even if all of the foregoing is fine and good, the ideas expressed thus far
remain hypothetical.
What reasons do we have to even suspect that
replication might be happening inside our brains?
On the face of it, it
seems inefficient for the brain to duplicate information. Surely evolution
would select against such wasteful practices with precious resources?
In fact, there is every reason to think that multiple copies of the same
information is just what evolution would produce in brains. It might be
both convenient and necessary to introduce replication machinery into the
normal operations, for several reasons.
First, why should bits of the brain’s knowledge be spread across many
cells when, as we now know, each neuron, by itself, is a pretty fancy
computer and thus capable of representing a fairly complex idea or image?
The answer is simple: because neurons die. There must be redundancy in
a system in which any component may tragically fail without warning, and
without the possibility of back-up. Redundancy is fault tolerance at work.
Redundancy is also important in genetic evolution. Many genes are
present in multiple copies in the same genome—sometimes hundreds of
them.
Some of these copies incorporate small changes in the DNA

—— 212 · THE ELECTRIC MEME ——
sequence. These appear to be kept in storage by organisms, ready in case
their potentially different products become needed to deal with shifts in
environmental conditions.
Redundancy even exists in the genetic code
itself, in the form of “silent” codon changes. There is a probably even
greater redundancy in the neural code, in the way the brain stores
information.
Someone current with the latest findings in neuroscience might want to
rebut: “But we have recently learned that even adult brain cells can be
replaced. Stem cells are constantly being recruited even by cortical areas,
and wired up to take the place of dead neurons.” This would indeed seem
to give the old notion of the so-called grandmother cell—a single,
“dedicated” neuron that fires only when the face of your grandmother
comes into view—a new lease on life: If the neuron storing your
grandmother’s image fails for any reason, just replace it.
But, in fact, rebirth isn’t good enough to fix the problem of information
storage, because the information accumulated in the old cell has already
been lost. If what that cell knew hadn’t been duplicated elsewhere, and
made retrievable, that information cannot be replaced. Sure, a new neuron
could be slipped into the old neuron’s spot in the network, but what would
it have to say to its neighbors?
It wouldn’t know what the old neuron
knew without being exposed to the same sequence of experiences.
It
could, so to speak, fill the “shoes” but not the “office” of the old neuron.
The expertise the old neuron had developed over its lifetime would have
died with it.
And since every neuron is potentially a member of many
different teams, each of these teams would have buried some of its skills
with the funeral of its player.
In fact, just the opposite of the grandmother cell hypothesis is
suggested by the “new” model neuron: The more complex a single neuron
can be, the more important it becomes to make sure that its store of
knowledge is copied elsewhere in the system. This knowledge can’t be
hoarded in pristine condition somewhere off-line, because the brain is a
whole: Any part can be reached by any other and so is subject to constant
manipulation. For true backups, neurons had to await the development of
artifacts—storage mechanisms outside the body that are the brain’s real
“hard disks.”
So it’s possible that memes arose in the first place from the need for
brains to keep copies around in case trauma or other trouble damaged

—— Memes as a State of Mind · 213 ——
the imprint of some crucial bit of information. From this basic back-up
process came abilities to copy information, parasitized by memes for their
own purposes. The duplication of information within a brain may have
arisen as a by-product of the growing tendency to introduce redundancy
into the coding process as brains grew bigger. This pressure did not arise
from memes themselves, as Susan Blackmore suggests, but from internal
requirements for efficient memory representation. Our hypothesis for the
origin of intra-brain memory replication, then, is that distributed
representation and the multistage incorporation of memory led to
replication in some cases.
Second, it’s also the case that the same bit of information moves
around within the brain over time. Recent evidence—thanks to the ability
to Simultaneously monitor multiple neurons in behaving animals over
relatively long periods—suggests that as new behaviors become more
habitual with repetition, the area of the brain most actively involved during
such activity moves from the neocortex to more “primitive” sections of the
brain. This “practice effect” is mirrored by movement of the information
underlying a skill from one area of the brain to another as its performance
goes from being the focus of attention to a preconscious, unthinking habit.
Similarly, a meme may migrate through the brain as it goes from being a
sensory stimulus to a short-term and then a long-term memory.
The
information may be communicated without duplication within a brain but
may also in some cases involve replication, if a copy of the memory
inadvertently is left behind.
There are thus a number of reasons to expect that the duplication of
information, if not replication per se, is a common occurrence, especially
in big brains. The step from duplication to replication may be significant
but is not insurmountable, as the mechanisms I outlined for neuronal
replication above build on duplication.
HOWMEMES QUALIFY AS REPLICATORS
Now that I have identified a mechanism for meme replication, we can take
a stab at determining just what kind of a replicator a meme must be. As
we learned from Replicator Theory, the nature of the replication reaction
determines what kind of evolutionary dynamics will follow. Will only the
fittest memes survive over time, or will the first memes to arise

—— 214 · THE ELECTRIC MEME ——
come to dominate the population? On the other hand, perhaps every kind
of meme will have a chance in evolutionary tournaments?
In fact, what we want to find is that memes can evolve toward greater
complexity. Only in this way can they account for a significant portion of
culture, which itself is becoming more complex, seemingly at an
increasing pace. This means memes must exhibit linear, or Malthusian,
growth, because only then will the fittest memes survive—those that can
combine to produce more and more complex adaptations. We also know
from comparisons with other replicators that the kind of replication
reaction leading to Malthusian growth and the optimization of memetic
features over time must not bind memes up in the process (as in the
survival of everybody scenario) nor involve multiple replicators to
produce each new one (as with survival of the first). Instead we must find
one replicator producing one copy with each iteration of the process. So is
this what the memetic replication reaction looks like?
Meme replication requires a sequence of steps. Incoming stimuli serve
as the super-molecular equivalent of catalysts for reactions during which
non-infectious neuronal nodes are transformed into infectious ones
through a change in their “conformations.” If we think of this process in
Replicator Theory terms, we can say, first, that a signal enters the
“containment” area (the cellular matrix of a neuronal node), setting an
electrical reaction in motion. The signal works as a chaperone or catalyst
to transfer memetic information from the source node to the replication
assistants (such as neurotransmitters) or simply to catalyze meme
functionality from local materials.
When the “reaction” is finished, the
meme-node is left in an electrochemical state that is infectious. In effect,
then, the original stimulus sets off a “chain reaction” through the
downstream node that culminates in that node adopting a new connectivity
pattern and state of latent activation. Sometime later, a new stimulus is
then produced that is capable of transmitting the infection to yet other
nodes.
It is this characteristic of the new output that makes the node
suddenly memetic.
This mechanism, as described, requires one preexisting meme. Only
one replicator must be present to produce another one, and then it becomes
free to pursue other avenues of replication. The conclusion is thus that
meme replication is one source to one copy. I therefore think we have
every reason to believe that memes will function just like any of the other
replicators we have studied, at least in terms of their growth pattern.

—— Memes as a State of Mind · 215 ——
They must run the gauntlet of selection, with only the fittest surviving—
those memes that absorb new adaptive qualities over time.
Memes also display a number of other parallels with prions and
computer viruses, the other replicators we have investigated. First, they
can replicate via conversion, rather than construction, of the neuronal
substrate.
Just as prion replication depends on a preexisting, gene-
produced, normally folded protein molecule, and comp-virus replication
depends on preexisting artifactual memory, meme replication depends on
preexisting, gene-produced brain structures.
Second, memes can be
reversed, or become non-infectious again, because the same neuronal node
can be a replicator one minute and not the next, or with respect to one kind
of input but not another, depending on its state.
Third, memes can
replicate through the mediation of super-molecular instigators: a signal-
stimulus. So memes share a number of peculiarities with the replicators to
which they are most profitably compared.
And, as suggested by
Replicator Theory’s stringent mechanism requirements, memes exist on a
single substrate (neurons), just like every other known replicator.
An important question to ask is whether memes are unlimited
replicators—ones able to remain infectious even when mutations strike
factors influencing their state. Such a trait is important because it means
memes could take on a range of states without losing the ability to
maintain their evolutionary lineage.
This quality would seem to be
necessary if memes are to be capable of explaining the complexity of
human culture. Can neuronal nodes take on many states and still remain
infectious? The answer to this question is much less clear than previous
ones, because we still don’t know enough about the brain to say for sure.
Perhaps, then, we should return to our comparative stance for clues, since
this strategy has proven so productive in previous chapters.
We know that other unlimited replicators tend to be modular, at least
based on the existing examples: Genes and comp-viruses are both modular
and unlimited, while prions are neither. The correlation between these two
characteristics is therefore good, based on our known examples of
replicators, and for this reason probably extends to memes. Are memes
modular? We did have the hint earlier on, when discussing the image of a
memetic population as an electric alphabet soup, that memes might need to
be made up of components, although this certainly remains a vague
suggestion at this stage.

—— 216 · THE ELECTRIC MEME ——
Why then should memes be unlimited replicators while prions, for
example, are not? Prions are limited to one size and only a few physical
conformations.
Memes are not, thanks to their super-molecular scale.
They are like computer viruses in this respect (since locations in computer
memory consist of charged sections of a tape or disk). The conformations
that molecular replicators like genes and prions can adopt are severely
constrained by atomic forces.
But replicators composed of multiple
molecules don’t appear to be subject to the same physical constraints.
Their function may still be strictly tied to their form, but a new dimension
of variation in form is available because the individual molecules can now
orient themselves to each other in multiple ways as well. ‘We can thus
expect that memes will be able to adopt a wide range of states.
Presumably a number of these will remain infectious, so that memes can
be considered relatively unlimited replicators.
In the end, perhaps the most important question of all is who’s in
control (our cui impello question). Can we expect memes to be relatively
powerful replicators, capable of taking on genes for the determination of
host behavior? If not, then even if memes exist in something like the form
I have suggested, they have no impact on the world and will forever
remain ineffectual, invisible entities, hidden behind a genetic screen.
Essentially this is a question about how robust memes are, because
their competitors, genes, are quite robust.
All you need to account for
some complex phenomenon is a robust replicator. Genes aren’t exactly
big, but they are responsible for the production of very complex things:
organisms. If memes have many ways of interacting among themselves,
the possibilities for combination expand considerably, and the range of
things that memes can account for increases.
In this way, even simple
things like memes can account for something as complex as culture.
Robust replicators must be able to take on many more states than
they currently do, leaving room for future evolution.
To determine
whether memes are robust therefore requires finding the ratio between
the number of actual states a population of memes exhibits and the
number of possible states they could adopt. This ratio is actually likely
to decrease as brains get bigger because with more copies of memes around,
a larger variety of states will be realized by at least one meme in that larger
population.
So the only way for memes to get more robust over

—— Memes as a State of Mind · 217 ——
time is to aggregate, to make the state of a meme dependent on the
compound state of multiple neurons.
The ability to do this, of course,
depends significantly on the size of the neuronal network. Certainly the
representational capacity of cortex rises exponentially with the number of
neurons. Thus the number of possible multineuron nodes is several orders
of magnitude higher than the number of states required to define a single
node. This is how robust replicators are defined. So the bigger the brain,
the more robust the memes in it—if they learn to organize at a higher
level, making a node involve more neuronal territory.
Such a reorganization could help explain the difference between
human and non-human cultures.
Early memes perhaps were not
particularly robust replicators because they lacked significant plasticity,
being restricted to a smaller scale. With relatively few neurons involved
and relatively few steps before their message was passed to motor neurons,
there was little room for development. But as time went by, they found
themselves in increasingly complex brains and were able to stretch out a
bit themselves as well.
So, as with any evolving entity, it is probably the case that the power
of memes has increased with time, in tandem with the expansion of brains.
Truly effective power has perhaps only come relatively recently in the
course
of evolutionary
history,
as
suggested
by the
considerable
differences between human culture and the cultures of other species.
Nevertheless it is quite clear that the complexity of human culture is itself
increasing as time goes on. This kind of constantly increasing power is
just what one would expect of a maturing replicator, and one whose power
seems to be increasing much faster than that of genes.
Thus the mechanisms I have identified, and the kind of replication
reaction we have inferred for it, are consistent with what we expect of an
unlimited, robust replicator. The memes suggested by this analysis will be
powerful adaptive agents, sufficient to explain cultural evolution.
SELECTION ON SIGNALS FOR MEMES
It is tempting to draw a parallel between the evolution of ideas and that of
the biosphere. . . . Ideas have retained some of the properties of
organisms. Like them, they tend to perpetuate their structure and to
breed; they too can fuse,

—— 218 · THE ELECTRIC MEME ——
recombine, segregate their content; indeed they too can evolve, and in this
evolution selection must surely play an important role. . . . This selection
must necessarily operate at two levels: that of the mind itself and that of
performance.
The performance value of an idea depends upon the change it brings to
the behavior of the person or the group that adopts it. . . . The
“spreading power”—the infectivity, as it were—of ideas, is much more
difficult to analyze. Let us say that it depends upon preexisting structures
in the mind, among them ideas already implanted by culture, but also
undoubtedly upon certain innate structures which we are hard put to
identify.
– Jacques Monod
An important component of any evolutionary explanation is the
identification of what things can be selected and what kinds of pressures
can be put on those things. If signals evolve, as I have just suggested, then
they must suffer selection. If memes are replicators, then they too must
undergo a similar fate.
So no theory of memetics would be complete
without a discussion of selection on the products of memes and, through
that culling process, for memes themselves (a distinction that should
become more clear as we go along).
When a student asked Linus Pauling how he got a good idea, the
double Nobel Prize winner answered: “You have a lot of ideas and you
throw away the bad ones.” Francis Crick, co-discoverer of the molecular
structure of DNA, said that “theorists in biology should realize that it is . .
. unlikely that they will produce a good theory at their first attempt. It is
amateurs who have one big bright beautiful idea that they can never
abandon. Professionals know that they have to produce theory after theory
before they are likely to hit the jackpot.”
These eminent scientists are
describing the process of conscious decision-making as a choice among
alternative ideas—a form of selection. Similar accounts by scientists and
artists about the creative process are legion.
No doubt
a
matching
selective
process
occurs
in the
purely
unconscious sphere: Lots of nascent ideas get quashed before ever
reaching consciousness.
Behavioral plans, after all, are rather complex
creations that must have undergone some preliminary assessment before
further mental investment was made in them.
Are there memetic
puppeteers operating behind the curtain of consciousness, like the
“wizard” Dorothy found hiding behind a screen in the Land of Oz?

—— Memes as a State of Mind · 219 ——
We can elaborate somewhat on how an unconscious process of
selection among alternative ideas might operate.
The brain signals
responding to a single event can be mirrored at many different places
(probably in the same region of the brain).
It’s as if the brain enlists
neurons from many precincts to “vote” on each of its actions. Thus spike
trains representing all of the different interpretations of a stimulus compete
for the job of directing the organism’s behavioral response to that
stimulus. The mutual connectivity that appears so endemic in the brain—
node 1 being wired up to node 2 and vice versa—may be a way in which
signals from multiple information-processing streams are synchronized, to
coordinate behavioral responses based on a convergence of the “best
thinking” the brain has done. Synchronization could line up the alternative
interpretations of a situation for better assessment of their relative merits,
producing a “fair” competition in the sense that each of the spiking
“racers” sets off when the same starting gun fires. This way of reining in
spike trains also suppresses cheaters, who could otherwise sneak through
the tournament without actually recruiting new members for their team
based on merit: Head-to-head competition prohibits the raiding of
competing teams.
This is important because the goal of the race is to
achieve the largest pool of support and thus a better chance of attracting
attention. The possibility that gets voted the winner in such competitions
actually gets acted upon and may also bubble up into consciousness as
well. Attention is thus a kind of top-down selection system among racing
spike trains.
Presumably these competitions are biased in favor of the response that
will produce the behavior most conducive to the continued survival and
reproduction of the organism. The resolution of the race also results in the
suppression of the neuronal representations voted to be less likely
interpretations of events or less relevant behavioral plans.
This
suppression is achieved through synaptic plasticity, which reduces the
incorrect neuronal states’ degree of connectedness to the rest of the
network and thus their ability to conscript support the next time around.
At the population level, this suppression is visible as a decay of
synchronous firing among neuronal ensembles, which appears to be a
reflection of the brain changing its train of thought.
In sum, a spike can be selected for its ability to maintain a message
from one synapse to the next, for its ability to find the right kind of target

—— 220 · THE ELECTRIC MEME ——
cell in which to deposit its message, and for its ability to convert that cell
to the proper infectious state. On the other hand, a state (a meme) can be
selected for its ability to maintain its state (memory retention), for
producing a spike train that wins in the kinds of decision-making
competitions I have just described (because the spikes then gain a chance
of finding a new host through social transmission), and for being
responsible (indirectly) for behavioral responses beneficial to the host
organism (because the meme should then not only be reconsolidated, but
its ties to other nodes should be strengthened, increasing its chances of
winning the next go-round). It may also need to return to its original state
after stimulation (to complete the replication process required by the
Stationary Meme Model).
So there are indeed many kinds of selection
mechanisms at work in the brain, operating on our thoughts at many points
in the decision-making process.
Advances in neuroscience will likely soon provide us with a glimpse
into the mechanisms that produce mental changes.
What these insights
may prove is that our non-random, “designed” solutions to problems are
the result of a multistage mental tournament in which there is selection
among blindly created variants for the strongest option, given the
environment of thought at the time. In effect, decision-making is a process
of Darwinian selection in the brain. It just all happens very fast. We put
up alternative scenarios for action, let them battle it out for their fit to
circumstances, and the candidate surviving at the end wins our vote in
terms of determining what we actually do. Ideas, from this perspective,
are tentative tendrils of thought, creeping forward through the neuronal
network, only to be chopped off at their greenest tips by the sharp clippers
of some selecting agent. Those memes that participated in the production
of the winning entries into these decision-making tournaments can
therefore expect to be favored by selection. They are the alternatives that
go on to reproduce again—that is, they will tend to persist to the next
generation
of
decision-making.
Meanwhile
others
will
gradually
disappear from the scene. In this way, the selection on signals leads to
selection for further propagation of the memetic replicators responsible for
these favored phenotypes. This “mental Darwinism,” if true, would bring
psychology fully in line with the “hard” sciences and provide a solid
foundation for a science describing social groups in terms of such
Darwinian agents as well.

—— Memes as a State of Mind · 221 ——
THE MEANING OF MEMES
What can memes be said to represent in the brain, then?
What does a
meme mean?
From a neuromemetic point of view, memes don’t represent anything!
Memes don’t mean, they just are. Memes are states of being. In this, they
are just like genes, whose expression depends on the developmental
context you place them in. Genes make proteins to “express” themselves,
and the consequences of gene expression can vary depending on where the
gene is located.
(A gene’s neighbors in the genome can control the
circumstances under which it gets transcribed and hence affect its impact
on events.)
Similarly, memes produce spikes that express their
“intention.” It is the spikes that represent things. When neuroscientists
are interested in brain “code,” they start measuring firing patterns, not the
states of the underlying neurons. Neuroscientists are almost exclusively
concerned with what spikes mean. Neuromemetics, on the other hand, is
interested in biophysical models of how spikes are generated in the first
place. What happens before a spike is produced is often more interesting
to a memeticist than how fast or often a neuron releases a spike, or where
the spike goes afterward.
Mental representation is a function of a firing pattern, then, not the
structure of the neuronal network.
So you can’t equate meaning with
memes.
Meaning is always context-dependent, and so unrepeatable.
There can be no replication of representations. What can be replicated are
physical structures.
As we are searching for a naturalistic theory of
physical replicators, we must use a structural definition of memes. Just
such a definition was provided earlier.
As we have been emphasizing, then, memes are just physical things;
meaning comes in the contingencies of their expression. However, a state
can be expressed as a likelihood to respond or fire, so states and spikes (or
memes and their products) are related. In this sense, one can say that a
meme implicitly represents something, because it has the capability of
producing a spike with that quality.
What a spike represents depends on where it is found in the brain.
Remember that memes probably move around a lot, so where they figure
in an information-processing stream will vary, depending on who is
upstream and downstream of them—that is, depending on the neurons

—— 222 · THE ELECTRIC MEME ——
that surround them in the chain of command. In particular, the cognitive
complexity of what spikes represent depends on where they fall in the
sequence of communications between neurons.
Between a sensory
stimulus and motor output, there can be numerous links from neuron to
neuron.
Large-brained creatures like people especially engage in an
unconscious, multistep process when responding to situations.
Neurons
pass messages from one to another until some resolution about what to do
emerges.
It’s like a game of 20 questions.
For a given neuron,
neuroscientists call the range of stimuli to which a neuron responds by
bring its “receptive field.” At first, very primitive distinctions are made, to
preclude oceans of further possibilities by narrowing things down as
quickly as possible. For visual inputs, it might be a question of whether
the stimulus is light or dark. Then finer and finer discriminations are laid
on the initial, generic hypothesis by subsequent decisions. The hypothesis
is channeled to downstream neurons, which are tuned to are only in
response to particular combinations of features (as established by prior
firings). Is the stimulus animal, plant, or mineral? Each higher level of
processing encodes a more composite aspect of the visual stimulus and
thus requires inputs to satisfy several conditions before firing will take
place. So some neurons come on-line only when the original stimulus has
already satisfied all of the criteria defining a very complex category.
Neurons at the end of the chain respond only when a particularly complex
representational object—like a human face—is present in the perceptual
environment. What a node’s output means is thus a function of where it
falls in this chain of activation.
In each case, neurons are simply responding to synaptic inputs from
their neighbors. A first-order sensory neuron responds to a particular rod
or cone in the eye, while the proximal stimulus of the second-order neuron
is the first-order neuron rather than the original environmental input.
What is explicitly represented at each stage is only that information
encoded locally, considered independently of what has gone before. But
each node also contributes some “added value” to the sequence of
discriminations, with the cumulative consequence that an exquisitely fine-
tuned response to a complex environmental context is made possible. The
resulting behavior of the organism is thus extremely flexible, thanks to the
nearly infinite pathways through the neuronal network produced by the
possibilities
for
combination
inherent
in
this
sequential
process.

—— Memes as a State of Mind · 223 ——
Nevertheless, by compressing this sequence to a single step, or
decontextualizing the response by not considering “prior” information, we
can argue that the later, higher-order nodes implicitly represent the entire
set of discriminations that together define a complex object. Thanks to the
sequential nature of cortical processing, the complexity of what a node
implicitly represents can change dramatically.
This hierarchical picture of how the brain operates has implications for
memetics.
Dawkins (and everyone since) has thought of memes as
concepts—that is, as complex, semantic entities like the notion of a meme
itself. But from a neuromemetic perspective, memes (or, more precisely,
their products) are not defined only at the conceptual level. Presumably,
replicating nodes in neuronal networks can exist at any stage of the
sequential process just described.
If so, thanks to this hierarchical
processing, the spike trains produced by memes can exhibit a range of
implicit representational levels. So what kind of thing can a spike train
represent? I would suggest something as small as a sound or as large as a
religious tradition (such as Roman Catholicism).
A spike can encode
simple or complex things despite no change in the complexity of the node
involved, depending on when the meme comes into an information-
processing stream.
If memes can represent only primitive distinctions about the world,
then it becomes necessary to add a number of them together to make up a
proper concept. Mental representations would then be composed of many
memes.
Current psychological theories about the nature of concepts
suggest that concepts are heterogeneous complexes made up of more
primitive cognitive bits and pieces.
Concepts, in modern psychological
parlance, are themselves theories (so this theory of concepts is called
“theory theory” of course).
Neuromemetics is therefore consistent with
the latest perspectives on how concepts are represented in minds.
However, no two high-level representations are likely to be exactly alike,
and they will probably vary considerably from individual to individual, if
they are put together from many pieces.
In fact, conceptual clusters, as
composites of memes and other information, are bound to be individualized,
since they are constructed during the course of a developmental process—
the complex production of a behavioral response to a stimulus.
Each
response is produced to suit a specific occasion. But such complex mental
representations, pulled together in working memory as part of a decision-

—— 224 · THE ELECTRIC MEME ——
making
process,
are not
the
units
of culture.
The claim
that
representations can exist at the conceptual level and above does not touch
on the qualities of neuromemes as replicators, since they can be much
simpler in nature.
However, the lack of “connection” between a meme and its
representation implies there may be no simple relationship between the
state of a neuromeme, the type of signal it produces, and the sort of
behavior that results from that. So no easy set of rules can tell you how to
convert from the state of a neuromeme, which you know, to some
observable behavior, which you want to predict—or vice versa. Mendel
uncovered a simple way to translate from the color of peas to hypothetical
genes, but the equivalent may not exist in the case of behavior.
So,
unfortunately, identifying how neuromemes might replicate does not
necessarily provide us with the equivalent of a genotype/phenotype
mapping for culture.
We currently don’t have many clues about what
parameters in spike trains are relevant, nor how those variables might
relate to traits in the underlying memes. Do we count the average number
of spikes per second within a minute after stimulation? Do we wait for a
longer period of salience? Or count the intervals between spikes within a
train?
Or
the
temporal
correlations
with
the
spikes
produced
simultaneously by other nodes?
There are suggestions that all of these
may matter and may be part of the coding system used by the brain for
making decisions about behavior. We just don’t know at present.
A further conceptual difficulty looms. One implication of the “moving
meme” hypothesis is that a particular spike train may mean “double-
handled pot” on this occasion, but “aspect of hair-line on forehead” the
next time around, and “sense of grief over a dead pet” the next. How can
all these memes be members of a single lineage? If what their products
represent can vary so much, how can there be a consistent relationship
between a meme and its spike train? Since it’s only the spike train that
makes it to the site where the next meme will be created, how does the
same meme get created each time around?
Steady and true input-output relations are crucial to sustaining a
lineage. Such different representations would seem to preclude any such
relationship developing between memes and their spikes. And we know
that even individual neurons are constantly responding to different sets of
stimuli from one minute to the next.

—— Memes as a State of Mind · 225 ——
But it’s actually the meaning that varies in each case, nor necessarily
anything else. Just because the meaning of the signal producing a meme
varies doesn’t imply that the same physical state isn’t created in the node
each time around.
The signal can be physically the same as well each
time; it just has a different meaning because it is taking place in a different
context. And the circumstances eliciting the memetic signal during each
iteration may share something in common that isn’t obvious to a conscious
mind working at the conceptual level.
All of this is somewhat
counterintuitive, but we constantly need to think about these processes
from the point of view of the neurons involved and how they work.
Try this analogy: Just as biological twins can begin life with the same
genetic complement but grow up to become quite different, so too can two
memes begin their lives as identical by descent, but then, through
experience, diverge in some qualities, such as what they represent. This
does not, however, make them less “identical” in evolutionary terms.
They still share the same parents and state; it’s just that what happens
downlink when they fire off a spike may differ in some respects. It’s as if
twin brothers go into separate lines of work. They still look alike and call
the same place “home” (the house where their parents live). So too will
two sibling memes retain a physical similarity in terms of their neuronal
states and keep some link (perhaps only historical) to their memetic
parents, regardless of what they are up to nowadays.
THE FIRST AND LASTMEME
What does neuromemetics imply about when memes might have first
begun replicating inside brains? At minimum, surplus neurons capable of
storing
information
from
the
environment—that
is,
programmable
neurons—were required.
These only become possible with the rise of
bigger brains. Nevertheless this significantly increases the length of the
period during which memes could have been around, because standard
memetic approaches emphasize that memes arise only when organisms
have acquired an ability to imitate. This effectively restricts memes to a
small number of species and predicts a very recent origin for the first
meme. With neuromemetics, memes could have dawned relatively early
in the growth of the cortex—certainly by the time vertebrates appeared.
So memes probably began life within the brain of a relatively simple-

—— 226 · THE ELECTRIC MEME ——
minded organism—an animal with just enough brains for a meme to roll
around in (although the 32 hard-wired neurons of the sea slug, for
example, may not have been enough).
Memes, in this view, are simply physical tokens in the brain that have
acquired some evolutionary agency or control over their probability of
reproduction.
Something about their physical nature led them to get
involved in a situation resulting in their information being duplicated.
Prions are similar in this respect: Before the first prion showed its face,
there were lots of proteins in circulation.
It’s just that, at some point,
proteins
with
certain
configurations
arose
that,
in
the
proper
circumstances, wound up being duplicated without referring back to DNA.
Memes too are Johnny-come-latelies, walking into an already complex
state of affairs, able to take advantage of mechanisms that arose in the first
place for other reasons having much more to do with providing advantages
to genes. Memes are an example of a replicator co-opting a mechanism
for its own purposes—in this case, learning mechanisms.
What was likely accomplished during this first phase of memetic
evolution—that restricted to individual brains? Well, evolution is always
a contest to get as many progeny as possible into the next round of
reproductive competition.
One way to accomplish this is by increasing
one’s rate of replication relative to opponents.
This requires that the
resources devoted to nonessential activities be minimized and that the
reproductive cycle itself not take very long.
The first of these
requirements implies very little investment in building an interactor; the
second needs a small-sized replicator that can be copied fast. Indeed, what
is usually found in a race for replication is that parasites evolve which
make use of the functionality of the full-fledged replicators to achieve
their own single-minded goal of making baby parasites more and more
efficiently. In these competitive environments, we find that increasingly
simple replicators evolve: parasites on parasites on parasites (called
“parasitoids”). This is, for example, the lesson from the ALife program
TIERRA, recounted earlier: The ecological conditions in TIERRA favored
the evolution of small replicator size and low resource use; it was a strictly
competitive environment. Many later experiments in Artificial Life have
confirmed this general principle. However, other simulations have been
set up to show just the opposite: that more and more complex replicators
can also evolve in computer memory. If transmission depends on doing

—— Memes as a State of Mind · 227 ——
some kind of useful work beside just reproducing yourself, we generally
find that replicator complexity is favored.
Another important lesson from ALife, then, is that selection in the
brain—if it favored increased complexity, as suggested by the growth of
the brain and its products—must have been for functions other than the
brute rate of meme replication. For complexity to evolve, there has to be a
specific force promoting an increased investment in non-reproductive
functions or, alternatively, a competitive environment that demanded
complexity to achieve reproductive competence (people have long
generation times because they aren’t sexually mature until their reach the
teenage years). What other functions besides reproduction might a meme
have evolved to perform?
The brain is designed by natural selection to produce behavior—
adaptive activity in the organism. That is what the brain does: intervene
between genetic instructions and environmental stimuli to produce an
adaptive response. So it seems natural to suppose that competition among
memes must be to produce behavior, to be selected for the good effects
they produce in the host. That is how the symbiosis between genes and
memes arises: Both seek to promote “good” behavior in the organism they
find themselves in. What selective force would have induced memes to
invest in a more complex interactor and a lengthier developmental process
to become competent in those functions—in effect, to take a hit on
reproductive rate by lengthening generation time compared to competitor
memes?
I think the answer is that the need to cooperate leads to complexity in
this case. It’s the fact that memes are necessarily social that sets them apart
from essentially independent replicators like genes or prions. Memes are
“born with connections”: Their substrates are physically tied to one
another as parts of a single, massive neuronal network.
This has
important implications for their evolution and, in particular, their
relationship to their “hosts.”
Only by attracting attention, and hence
directing the behavior of their host organisms, can memes induce hosts
to translate spike trains into social signals, which provide them with an
escape route into the macroenvironment. There the signals can find their
way into another brain and help replicate the relevant memes, which thus
survive into future generations. In effect, memes, to be communicated,
must be able to recruit confederates.
Because memes generally

—— 228 · THE ELECTRIC MEME ——
must collaborate with other neurons to get attention, their essential stance
toward their community must be one of cooperation. In Network World,
you want to have your connections strengthened, to become indispensable,
a party to all computational events. The ability to slot into a wide variety
of neuronal complexes, to be a good neural citizen, is a favored quality.
NICE PARASITES
This conclusion has a major implication for the nature of neuromemes. As
a result of this need to cooperate, memes tend to be not virulent but rather
symbiotic parasites that do better if they do no harm. In fact, gregarious,
tolerant memes are likely to be most successful.
Thus those who talk
about “selfish” memes implicitly assume that memes are isolated,
independent
replicators—probably
because
no
physical
model
has
previously been imposed on the concept. In fact, the symbiosis between
memes and organisms is real: The memetic surround in which people live,
the cultural world, is to a meme as water is to a fish: invisible, but
nurturing, a necessity for life itself. This implies that the environment of
meme evolution is different from the standard one, where energetic
efficiently is the primary criterion for selection.
P The popular image of memes as virulent “mind viruses,” with which
geneticists are so smitten, is therefore not only repellant but wrong. To
think we are antagonistic to our own brain—or that there are foreign
bodies taking up residence inside us that are malevolent—is preposterous.
The notion of host-destroying memes must be mistaken. Just look at the
tremendous general adaptiveness of culture, the consequent success of the
human species in conquering the planet, and the increasing complexity of
cultural evolution.
Indeed, the extraordinary ecological success of our
species has been due largely to coevolution with memes. They’re what
have permitted us to have all kinds of fun other species don’t have—such
as recreational sex (thanks to the Pill) and virtual reality.
Memes themselves have similarly profited through their relationship
with us, having become more capable replicators with time—for example,
by learning to jump between hosts.
Further, memes constitute (at least
aspects of) the self, to which we obviously have an intimate, not
antagonistic, relationship.

—— Memes as a State of Mind · 229 ——
Thus while memes are parasites, this doesn’t necessarily imply they are
virulent (although some may be).
“Parasitic” doesn’t necessarily mean
something is there, feeding off you.
Considered as an ecological
relationship, parasitism merely means dependent, not hostile.
Actually
parasites can have a symbiotic relationship with their hosts that is mutually
beneficial to both parties; it’s only that the parasite can’t live without the
protection and sustenance that the host provides.
Technically both
cleaner-fish and leeches are called parasites; it’s just that one provides the
service of picking nits off your flesh while the other sucks your blood.
Certain memes may be harmful to their hosts.
But the virtue of
memetics is that these conditions can be specified.
This is because
memetics provides a theory of meme-host conflict, leading to predictions
about when potential maladaptation in the host should arise.
By
comparison, competing theories of cultural evolution such as evolutionary
psychology are weak on this point. Evolutionary psychology argues only
that it is more likely for traits in evolutionarily unusual contexts, such as
modern societies, to be maladaptive.
But such a blanket statement is
unlikely to be true for everything from rockets to contemporary forms of
the novel.
Meme theory is alone in predicting just when cultural traits
should be harmful.
Memetics argues that, as parasites, beliefs will be
virulent to the extent that they can replicate independently of their effects
on hosts. For example, when relatively simple ideas travel well—like the
notion of a ghost, or a person who continues to haunt the world after death
(assuming that such ideas are harmful)—these non-gregarious beliefs can
nevertheless attract attention and thereby get into the environment for
further replication.
Also, memes that can’t get out of their hosts are more likely to be
virulent: they haven’t passed the test of being adopted by numerous brains,
of getting through a range of input filters. They may have arisen as a “bad
mutation” through spontaneous development or bad wiring from ontogeny.
Idiosyncratic beliefs, in this view, are more likely to be maladaptive to
their hosts. Maladaptation is not due simply to ancient instincts gone awry
in modern circumstances, as evolutionary psychologists suggest.
So memes are not go-it-alone replicators that compete with each
other to minimize resource use and generation length as a means to
increasing their relative rate of reproduction. In memetic evolution, it is

—— 230 · THE ELECTRIC MEME ——
often more complex memes that win evolutionary competitions, not
simpler, hyper-parasitic memes. Memes would thus have certainly more
room to roam around in as brains for bigger and may have put some
pressure on brains to increase in size, as their symbiosis with brains
became more ingrained over time.
W
WH
HYY DDO
O W
WEE H
HAAVVEE BBIIG
G BBRRAAIINNSS AANNYYW
WAAYY??
Still, there seem to be many good reasons for having big brains besides
giving extra freedom to memes.
So I can’t finish this discussion of
replication in brains without returning to the question we began with,
which remains unanswered: Why do we have big brains in the first place?
Here’s a hypothetical scenario.
It may have all begun when the dependence of certain higher
organisms on specialized foods produced selection pressure for even more
neurons to remember where and how to obtain those foods. Additional
selection pressure could also be put on organisms that found themselves
doing better if they stuck together with others of their kind, perhaps
because being on the inside of a big herd reduced the risk of being picked
off by a predator, or because cooperative hunting proved more efficient.
This necessitated, however,
even
more memory—for
example, to
remember whether other members of the group had proven trustworthy in
past cooperative ventures.
These external pressures supplied reasons for growing bigger brains.
But how did the brain respond? The evolution of the human brain can be
understood from the “inside” as a process in which new kinds of control
over information flow were added over time. In effect, as the centralized
decision-making structure of the brain became larger, it also became
increasingly hierarchical. It appears that newer additions to the primate
brain (such as the expanded forebrain) took over control from earlier
elaborations (such as the cerebellum), in effect becoming their new
masters.
But all the apes share roughly the same general hierarchical
organization. What has changed in humans is that the prefrontal cortex
has expanded. This places the area of greatest plasticity at the top of the
decision-making hierarchy, which thus allows the rest of our brain’s
organization to be controlled in a much more flexible fashion.

—— Memes as a State of Mind · 231 ——
The change from ape to Homo was therefore about the tweaking of
structure rather than the addition of completely novel information-
processing modules.
But this tweak led to important new cognitive
abilities.
Humans appear to have repertoires of responses that are, in
effect, free from the immediacy of the present environment. This ability
allows us to remember and to plan, and to do so in inventive and unique
ways.
Accordingly, the ability to look ahead, engage in conscious
thought, and use language all depend on our augmented neocortical
structures, centered in the prefrontal areas.
The main reason for our
extravagant degree of mental plasticity thus seems to be to permit these
exotic psychological abilities.
These abilities, in turn, allow human
culture to have a maximal effect both on the shaping of our social life and,
through feedback, on the instigator of social behavior, our brains. Human
brains are thus forged from a mix of genetic and cultural evolution. The
implications of these dual pathways for information transfer are dealt with
in the next chapter.

Chapter Eight
ESCAPE FROM
PLANETBRAIN
The only way of directly communicating an idea is by means of an
icon; and every indirect method of communicating an idea must
depend for its establishment upon the use of an icon.
–Charles Sanders Peirce
Selection favors those able to use signals to manage the behavior of
others in their own interests.
–Donald Owings and Eugene Morton
James Boswell famously asked Samuel Johnson, an exuberant fixture of
the literary scene in eighteenth-century London, how he could refute the
sophistry that the external world is but an illusion.
The inimitable Dr.
Johnson said, “I refute it thus” and kicked a rock with his foot. However,
not even rocks present themselves candidly to the brain for inspection.
Even the most direct experience, such as pain, is only perceived. What is
“experienced” is some signal coming into the brain from a particular sense
organ—in Dr. Johnson’s case, from his toes. Many philosophers therefore
claim we are necessarily solipsistic, living psychologically in
an
ineluctable world of one, isolated from reality by an insurmountable
uncertainty about the nature of what is “outside.” What if “I” am only
dreaming all this? Or what if “I” am only a virtual program running on
some massive computer?
232

—— Escape from Planet Brain · 233 ——
Leaving aside such philosophical conundrums, we still face a major
question from an evolutionary point of view. The main goal of memetics
heretofore has been to explain how mental “secrets” can get from one
human mind to another intact. The logical Mr. Spock had the ability to do
a “mind meld” whenever the plot of an episode of television’s Star Trek
required some bit of information to be extracted from an alien species. He
would simply place his hands on the creature’s forehead (or its functional
equivalent), concentrate hard, and out the required enigma would pop.
Being from the planet Vulcan, he could engage in this form of direct mind-
to-mind contact. But we humans lack this convenient facility. The poet
John Donne famously claimed that “no man is an island” but in fact,
psychologically speaking, each person is like a planet drifting through
space, never being directly impacted by contact with other psychological
bodies. So how do memes bridge the distance—the gap of air—between
brains, each locked in a prison of its own making?
If one brain is a
mystery wrapped in an enigma, how could any two such things ever hope
to communicate with one another? How do memes ever manage to escape
their home and infect new hosts?
MIND THE GAP
Memeticists have typically answered this question by saying that memes
leap from brain to brain by inducing their hosts to engage in behaviors that
transmit signals to other hosts. Given the proclivity of memeticists to “think
epidemiologically,” this is a natural answer to make: Memes, like other
parasites, must have a life cycle that includes a phase during which memes
are transmitted from host to host. In effect, an infected host must engage in
the production of what the nineteenth-century American semiotician Charles
Sanders Peirce called an “icon.” The icon is the thing that goes between.
The meme simply coats itself in a vector—some kind of information-
carrying icon, such as a spoken message, an observed motor behavior,
a bit of text, an image, or a slab of stone. When a potential host comes
into contact with that vector (that is, reads the text or hears the
message), the meme leaps out of this vehicle (gets decoded), becoming
active again, and infects the person, who becomes a new host. Then
the infection phase inside the new host brain starts up.
Even later,

—— 234 · THE ELECTRIC MEME ——
the meme may get encoded again into a suitable vector (not necessarily of
the same medium it was originally decoded from), and the whole cycle
begins over again. So what I will call the “jumping meme” hypothesis is
that memes themselves traverse the gap between brains, in some form.
This supposition is, of course, based on the analogy between a meme
and a virus. But there is a major difference between memes, as I have
discussed them, and biological parasites. When DNA or RNA viruses are
socially transmitted, the very same molecules move themselves, bodily,
from one host to the next. But for a meme to “jump” from one host to the
next, brain code must be converted to signal code and back again to make
the same trip that DNA can make on its own.
This presents some
problems, as we will see.
SIGNALS AS INTERACTORS
The basic supposition behind the image of jumping memes is that these
cultural replicators act like their biological counterparts by riding around
inside an interactor (the “vector,” in epidemiological terms). Is this a good
image to have of memes? Can memes really jump the gap between brains
by leaping inside an interactor for the trip across the gap between hosts?
This “interactor question” is something that has perplexed memeticists
since day one—at least those memeticists who take the gene analogy
seriously.
Memeticists generally feel it’s very important to identify
something as the memetic parallel to the genotype/phenotype distinction in
biology. A variety of candidates have been put forward. One might say,
for example, that a recipe is the memetic replicator and the cake the
memetic phenotype, or that the performance of a song is the phenotype of
the remembered idea of the song. In effect, either an object or a behavior
is being taken as the cultural equivalent of an organism—as the cultural
interactor—in such analogies. But none of these suggestions has achieved
consensus in the somewhat fractious memetic community.
Prions, on the other hand, don’t produce separate interactors, but that
is because they are limited replicators. Anything accounting for culture
must be an unlimited replicator, and unlimited replicators, it seems
reasonable to believe (based on the other examples, genes and computer
viruses), must be what biologists call “heterocatalytic.”
The sequence

—— Escape from Planet Brain · 235 ——
information of a gene often gets read off without the code itself being
replicated; instead a protein will be produced by the machinery set in
motion by the genes.
Similarly, a computer virus—an artifactual
replicator that is basically unlimited in the number of forms it can take—
can produce two kinds of signals: those that result in replication of the
virus, and those that result in the activation of other programs, causing
damage to computer memory or producing silly on-screen displays. These
are examples of the basic distinction between phenotypic behavior and
replicative behavior.
The question, then, is: Do memes engage in this
same division of labor? Can the same neuronal state produce a spike train
with different results, depending on its stimulus and downstream
interactions—either making a new replicator or making something else?
Memes are essentially memories. But memories need to be recalled,
not just replicated. Recall (with reconsolidation) should be one kind of
outcome when memetic neurons are stimulated. From the perspective of
memetic replication, this is “off line” activity, the kind of dead-end
information that is emblematic of phenotypic production. In this case, the
meme contributes to the construction of some complex of information in
working memory for the organism to act upon, without the meme itself
being duplicated. So it seems memes engage in phenotypic activity too.
They have multiple products: not just new memes, but also messages
helpful to normal mental operations. This makes memes heterocatalytic.
If spike trains are the “behavioral” products of memes, which are
replicators, then they should be considered memetic interactors. And in
many ways, signals seem to fill the bill, to act like proper interactors. Just
as interactors can’t pass on their structure directly, spikes don’t make
spikes; rather, spikes are generated by upstream neurons. Further, signals
are degraded by noise (mutate) in the transmission channel (their relevant
environment) and fade away without boosting (get selected)—all of which
prove that they interact with the environment, as good interactors should.
Also, by “finding” the right downstream neuron, spikes cause the next
generation of memes to be born, thus determining the fate of the
replicators responsible for them. Further, spike trains have evolved greater
reliability (for example, by encasing axons in protective sheaths to
improve signal induction) and developed new skills (such as inter-brain
transmission), and so seem to be evolving new adaptations. (Interactors
are the proper locus of adaptation.)
In
addition, there is no reason to

—— 236 · THE ELECTRIC MEME ——
expect successive spike trains to be similar, thanks to varying reactive
fields and rapid changes in sensitivity of neurons, so spikes don’t form
lineages. And just as some proteins are enzymes (molecular catalysts), so
too are these memetic interactors catalysts, of an electrochemical sort. All
of these seem to be persuasive analogues in the brain to the ways in which
other interactors work.
But the analogue is deceptive.
Several problems—potentially major
ones—arise from thinking of social transmission in this way, of seeing
signals as meme vehicles.
First, signals are only loosely coordinated and are easily disturbed or
divided into bits. As a result, they are very susceptible to corruption: They
flit about the brain or macroenvironment, bumping off everything in their
path, and potentially leave a bit of themselves behind at every point. This
is no way for a good interactor to behave, allowing everything a chance to
distort its message.
A further problem: If memes must be in both brains and signals, then
memetic information must exist on multiple substrates, such as neurons
and sound waves.
But I’ve argued at length in earlier chapters that
replication is substrate-specific.
“Jumping” memes thus immediately
violate our dictum—derived from Replicator Theory and our comparative
look at other replicators—that memes exist in only a single form. I have
also argued that it is the substrate neutrality of standard memetic theory
that has hampered the development of memetics as a science.
This is
simply not an avenue we want to go down, in my view. Memes can’t be
translated from brain stuff to signal stuff and back again.
Even if memes could be reliable, translated from brain code to signal
code, there is typically a loss of information associated with translation
between coding systems.
What is well captured by one system doesn’t
necessarily “translate” to the next.
Just think of the problems
professionals have translating Shakespeare into French, much less Swahili.
The problem is not restricted to concepts expressed in language either:
Many non-Western cultures don’t recognize the post-Renaissance concept
of romantic love, for instance. At any rate, each transformation between
coding systems leads to some of the information in the message being lost.
How can memetics, in good conscience, contradict a fundamental result of
information theory—that degradation follows transformation?
I don’t
think it can.

—— Escape from Planet Brain · 237 ——
This corruption problem doesn’t arise with prions because they are
both replicator and interactor bundled into one.
If there is no
transformation—no heterocatalytic loop in the life cycle—then this
difficulty is avoided altogether: The replicator just makes its way around
the world on its own.
But memes must necessarily be transformed to
escape from brains and make their way through the general environment
and
thence
back
into
brains
because
neither
neurons
nor
their
electrochemical products leave their host’s body.
Another way of thinking about the transgression problem is to say that
signals are really just viruses—memes minimally enclosed in some
defensive coating, trying to jump the gap to the next host. The meme’s
cycle from brain to behavior and back to brain is then connecting like the
complex life cycle of some insects, where they begin life as a larva, then
progress through a pupal stage, thence to an immature form, and finally
maturity, with the creature taking on a different appearance in each stage.
But signals aren’t complex enough to be meme vehicles. They can’t
carry physical memes around—that is, they can’t hold brain cells inside
them. Signals are just air-pressure fluctuations or series of photons, not
bubbles floating through the air with neurons inside.
This means that
signals may carry sufficient information to cause a new host to produce a
copy of the meme, but cannot contain the whole blueprint nor the
materials with which to do the work by themselves. Not only that, but
memes are defined by the ability to replicate, and signals can’t replicate—
or at least that’s what I argued in Chapter 6.
Further,
this
perspective
means
that
memes
must
violate
the
presumption—true enough of genes—that the replicator must be carried
along inside the interactor. So if we are to go this way with the notion of
interactor, it has to be generalized from its current conception—the
Dawkinsian image of a lumbering robot housing the replicator inside—to
admit this possibility.
I conclude from these difficulties that signals simply can’t be vehicles,
much as Dawkins would like them to be.
Thus (with apologies to
Marshall McLuhan), the meme is not the message.
Memes just can’t
jump.
Still, it is crucial that memes make the leap between hosts somehow—
otherwise, we have no shared knowledge, no culture. This process must
also involve the social transmission of information through signals, or we
are left with the possibility that culture is, in fact, genetic—transmitted not

—— 238 · THE ELECTRIC MEME ——
from individual to individual during their lifetimes, but at birth, hidden
away somewhere in the sperm and egg, so with our change of focus in this
chapter to social transmission, we have immediately fallen into a
conundrum: Memes can’t jump the gap from person to person, but the
social transmission of information is the necessary foundation of any
reasonable theory of memetics.
SIGNALS AS PHENOTYPES
The only option left for us, it would appear, is to consider signals as
memetic phenotypes, or expressions of memetic activity in the world.
Genes produce phenotypes, of course, like the color of your eyes or a
propensity to obesity. So it’s natural to think that memes must have an
equivalent way of manifesting themselves, of showing their faces to the
world in such a way that selective forces can then prefer or condemn them.
But we have established that a signal is the only thing that progresses
from one brain to another. So according to this view, what reaches the
new host is only phenotypic information, potentially modified during its
journeys from brain to brain. Each time a meme leaves one host brain, the
next host brain should have to reconstruct the replicator from an observed
behavior or a spoken phrase.
If you call the bit in the middle—the
information in the social channel—a phenotype, then the fact that it does
interact with the world, and is changed by it, and then gets taken in by the
next host, makes cultural evolution Lamarckian: What is inherited down
the line is acquired variation.
In effect, variation introduced into the
transmission
process
through
experience
and
interaction
with
the
environment becomes the source for subsequent replication reactions.
Lamarckianism is, of course, not the way genetic evolution works. In
the late nineteenth century, August Weismann showed that acquired
changes to the body of an organism during its lifetime did not affect the
germ line: The gametes, or sex cells (egg and sperm), remain isolated from
any such effects.
Weismann’s discovery once and for all undercut the
theory of “soft inheritance”—the idea that an organism could pass on its
experience to its progeny.
Information acquired during the life of the
organism cannot be “reprogrammed” into the hereditary material.

—— Escape from Planet Brain · 239 ——
We also don’t want cultural inheritance to be a Lamarckian process
because
Lamarckian evolution has well-known problems, such as
implying that the variation on which selection works eventually bleeds out
of the system, leaving evolution bereft of an ability to change any further.
How then could memetics account for a rapidly and continually changing
thing like culture? An interpretation of signals as phenotypes seems to be
precluded by the Lamarckian problem.
But
what
about
Richard
Dawkins’s
notion
of
an
“extended”
phenotype? Is this a way to deal with the problem of signals? Dawkins’s
point is that there is no good reason to suppose that phenotypes must stop
at the skin and that there are many aspects of life which we can account
for straightforwardly only if we suppose that they do not. For example, an
organism can have effects on its inanimate environment, like making
artifacts—shells, burrows, and whatnot—that are subject to genetic
variation.
There seems to be no principled reason not to regard the
relevant genes as being “for” those artifacts, just as other genes are “for”
bodily traits. If variation in the artifacts affects the reproductive success of
the organisms that produce them, then those genes will be exposed to
natural selection in the ordinary way. Similarly, signals don’t appear to be
full-fledged interactors; they don’t have genes inside of them but
nevertheless influence the biological success of the behaving organism.
They are just a way the host is manipulated by a replicator that results in
that replicator experiencing an improved ability to replicate.
In this view, memes engage in a common trick among parasites: get the
host to help with your transmission by changing the environment in some
way that fosters your reproduction. The proximate, or first-order, memetic
phenotype would be the neural spike.
The “extended” phenotype of a
meme, then, should be the result of the spike, such as host behavior (as the
spike stimulates motor neurons and gets converted into muscle movement)
that goes about its business outside the host body.
But, again, this isn’t really a solution. The problems with calling a signal
the memetic equivalent of an extended phenotype is that phenotypes, even
“extended” ones, are reproductive dead-ends. Dawkins’s favorite example
of an extended phenotype is a beaver dam. But the dam only blocks up
water and provides shelter, it doesn’t make new genes. Beavers do that in
the
ordinarily
way:
by
mating
with
other
beavers.
In

—— 240 · THE ELECTRIC MEME ——
effect, beaver dams don’t make new beaver genes; beavers do. There is
essentially no way for information acquired by phenotypes through
interaction with the environment to re-enter the information stream that is
used to constitute the next generation. But this is just what we are asking
memetic signals to do. This makes for a fundamental disanalogy, then,
between the biological and cultural uses of the phenotype concept. The
informational and causal arrows in the phenotypic perspective point only
one way, and it isn’t back to replicators. Weismann, not Lamarck, should
be our guide in understanding how memes work.
Here’s our problem in a nutshell: Signals can’t be vehicles (or
interactors) because they are too simple. The interactor notion also can’t
be extended to encompass signals—it would be like suggesting there are
vehicles driving around without passengers inside to direct them.
But
neither can signals serve as the phenotypic expressions of memes, even
“extended” ones, and still produce evolutionary lineages. Phenotypes are
by definition reproductive dead-ends, but signals bear the burden of
carrying reproduction forward into new hosts because memes themselves
can’t leave brains.
Have we reached an impasse, then?
Have we defined away any
possibility of a social memetics? This would truly be a dire conclusion,
since our whole purpose in identifying memes is to explain culture.
SIGNALS AS “INSTIGATORS”
However, we don’t have to abandon all hope of explaining how memes
can jump the gap between brains. What we need is an entirely new and
different conception of how social transmission works.
In my view,
signals are not interactors; nor are they phenotypes. Instead they are
what I will call “instigators.” The arrival of a signal in a brain brings
an influx of energy and information, sparking the crucial change in
local conditions that causes a replication reaction to begin. This is an
analogy neither to the meme-as-virus nor the meme-as-gene, but a return to
the replication reactions of Replicator Theory, outlined in Chapter 3. This
new perspective sees signals as “molecules” that can cause specific reactions,
given the right preconditions. This role is consistent with the basic nature of
signals as bundles of patterned energy. As packets of information, they ensure
an
inheritance
relation
by
making
sure
the
replication

—— Escape from Planet Brain · 241 ——
reaction they instigate produces the same kind of meme as made them in
the first place. The physical substrate carrying the wave pattern can also
serve additional roles: The signal may do the job of a catalyst, speeding up
the sequence of events, or act like a matchmaker by bringing the relevant
parties
to
the
replication
reaction
together
(and
thus
facilitating
proceedings).
But these are secondary to the primary role of getting a
particular kind of reaction going in the just place.
What we are looking for from this switch in perspective is a
mechanism that actually conserves information over time—that’s what
replication is all about. If we lose information, we lose everything. This
conservation is accomplished by noting that memes never leave their
happy situation in the brain. Rather they send forth a signal that searches
for a place to create a brother meme elsewhere, while the originating
meme sits there doing nothing further at all to help out.
What is new in this perspective is that signals are seen as rabble-
rousers. They are projected like arrows into the environment, with which
they must interact (hence the confusion that they are themselves
interactors).
Signals then migrate through the macroenvironment to a
novel host (gaining contact through some sensory organ) and are translated
back into neural impulses. Once within the brain, they are passed through
neural connections to a location where they give birth to a new meme by
stimulating a node in the new network, leaving it in a memetic state. This
may happen a number of times as the signal moves through its
microenvironment, the new host’s cortex.
This implies that there is no direct meme-to-meme contact during
memetic replication; memes don’t go flying through the air to meet up
with their brethren in other brains but stay inside their original host.
Memes don’t move: Signal-instigators do. This means the idea of a meme
may be a meme, but the spoken word “meme” is not itself a meme; it is a
signal. A meme can only be a state of matter coded in “brain language.”
This isn’t just a different way of seeing the same phenomenon of social
communication. It may appear that there isn’t any change in what actually
happens “on the ground”—it is, after all, still the case that information goes
from one brain to the next through an intermediate stage in which it adopts a
different form. But the change in point of view does have real implications.
Calling signals instigators rather than interactors or phenotypes is crucial
because
it
saves
us
from
the
ghost
of
Jean-Baptiste
Lamarck.

—— 242 · THE ELECTRIC MEME ——
If signals aren’t interactors, then cultural evolution doesn’t involve the
inheritance of an interactor’s derived features—Lamarck’s folly.
If signals are instigators, then replication also doesn’t need to involve
construction, just conversion. This is the crucial insight we have derived
from our investigation of the other parasitic replicators, prions and comp-
viruses. All the signal need do once it enters the new host is to make the
conditions there favorable for a particular kind of conversion to take place.
Conversion of an existing substrate is not the same thing as making a new
stretch of DNA out of amino acids.
Instead, for a meme, replication
simply involves flipping a neuron from one state (which pre-exists the
replication reaction) to another.
This is not too much for a signal to
accomplish, even if it is impoverished as a representation of the entire
meme. It is still the signal that is selected through its travails in the gap
between hosts, and it may even be considered to exhibit adaptations (such
as linguistic features).
But the meme isn’t inside the signal (which
preserves the interactor notion’s integrity as well).
Conversion also avoids the problems of the replicator necessarily being
degraded because it is reconstructed from a phenotype.
Signals are not
phenotypes; they are not a replicator’s way of interfacing with the world.
Their minimal and specialized role instead is to contain the information
most likely to lead to the replication of a particular strain of memes. They
must move through a communication channel and then instigate a reactive
process at their destination. However, producing an infectious state in the
receiving brain is not enough; it has to be the same state as produced the
signal in the just place to constitute the next link in a memetic lineage.
Only a tiny bit of the signal’s information may be used in the
duplication process, and this may not be the memetic codes themselves.
Instead replication reactions may rely on signals providing an apparently
extraneous bit of information that triggers the replication process.
The
mere presence of the signal may be sufficient for the necessary memetic
information to be re-derived on the spot.
The result is still meme
replication in the new host, but the signal need not transfer memetic
information from the source to receiving brains.
To ensure there is an
inheritance relationship between the source and receiver hosts, it is only
necessary that the signal contain information that guarantees that the
correct nodal state is the outcome of the reaction process.

—— Escape from Planet Brain · 243 ——
This means that the relationship between a meme and the signals it
produces could be arbitrary—one of the criteria often used to define a
symbolic relationship.
This is handy if, as many would assert,
communication systems like human language are symbolic in nature.
Social memetics is therefore consistent with communication theory on this
point.
However, on the downside, an observer who is trying to reconstruct a
meme inside a brain from its more readily observable social signal is
barking up the wrong tree.
Since conversion is not the same as
production, the signal is not necessarily “like” the meme in content. Such
an observer would be assuming that the relationship between signal and
meme is more direct than it really is.
The signal need only inspire a
conversion in some existing neuronal node, persuading it to adopt a
different configuration, rather than making it from scratch.
It is not
transmitting the meme’s essence from one place to another. So signals are
not necessarily linked in a thematic sense to the memes that produce them.
The information brought into the equation by an instigator thus may
not actually be incorporated into the final product, the new meme. This
implies that whatever variation was introduced into the instigator’s
message by its travels does not become part of the offspring replicator.
The inheritance process is thereby ensured to be Darwinian rather than
Lamarckian: No acquired variation is fed back into the memetic lineage.
In informational terms, memes and their signals can be completely
independent.
Despite the lack of contact between a parental and offspring meme,
seeing signals as instigators makes memetic replication direct again, at
least in the sense that memes are not coded to make up the signal that flies
between organisms. Memes themselves don’t have to be translated from a
mentalist code (replicator sequence) to a behavioral code (phenotypic
performance) and back again during social transmission.
Instead the
product of a meme, a spike, is translated into a social signal. This means
it’s the instigators, not the replicators, that undergo translation.
This
implies, in turn, that it’s the system that converts signals from an internal
code to an external one for transporting the message through the
environment that must resist the tendency to degrade, not memes.
We
therefore don’t have to claim that information theory doesn’t apply to
memes; it does.
It’s just that memes are not undergoing the translation

—— 244 · THE ELECTRIC MEME ——
processes that lead to low-fidelity replication.
Memetic lineages can
persist over the long term because any degradation of signals is incidental
to their replication.
ECOLOGICAL SELECTION ON SIGNALS
It should be fairly obvious that this is a natural extension of the ideas
presented in the previous chapter about how memes get around inside
brains.
Social signaling is just an elaboration of the strategy memes
learned in an earlier phase of their evolution.
Neuronal signals are
transduced even in inter-neuronal communication: They go from an
electrical pulse within the cell to coding in chemical neurotransmitters
between cells (on a very fast timescale). This cycle is simply elaborated
slightly when signals are transduced for transmission outside the body,
into a form (such as photon streams) that can progress through the air.
Transmission, unlike transduction, does not involve a change in code or a
barrier to movement.
This is a very straightforward modification of the existing system. The
only difference is that now it’s motor neurons that are being stimulated at
the end of the cortical information-processing stream, rather than another
kind of neuron. “Talking to muscles” is in fact the most natural thing in
the world for an animal brain to do. It is, after all, the primordial function
of the brain to produce behavior. As a result, motor programs are centered
in older parts of the cortex.
And communication with one’s fellow
organisms through behavior is also ancient. Indeed, many animals, from
lowly ants on up, can produce behavioral signals of some kind, such as
laying trails of pheromones along the ground for others to follow. It’s just
that genes control the production of these primitive signals. It’s only with
the evolution of big-brained creatures that genes relinquish control over
signaling. So memes are merely piggybacking on a primitive function of
non-memetic neurons, parasitizing an existing facility of the brain.
This suggests that it isn’t just social signals that are best thought of as
instigators but spike trains as well. They too are merely taking a minimal
message from one place to another, where locally available resources are put
to work to cause replication. No memetic information need be encapsulated
in cortical signals either. It’s just that the “gap problem” has brought their
nature into particularly stark relief. In fact, the same problem—of leaping
the
gap
between
neurons—must
be
solved
by
neuromemes

—— Escape from Planet Brain · 245 ——
as well. The scale is considerably smaller, and the gap not so hostile to
being leaped perhaps, but the problem remains nevertheless.
As soon as there was room for memes in brains in the first place, there
must have been a tendency for meme-derived spike trains to wind up
stimulating motor neurons. And any meme that led to good behavioral
outcomes would have been useful to the brain and so become a favored
guest. The only novelty here is that the meme itself actually gets spread to
other hosts as a consequence.
This would give the memetic lineage a
whole new lease on life: The memes could survive their original host and
engage in a whole new round of evolution under a new set of constraints.
Any such tendency of memes to stimulate motor neurons should therefore
have been powerfully reinforced.
Selection on signals in the social sphere is an extension of that
occurring on signals inside brains.
“Ecological” selection on the “free-
living” forms of signals—those traveling through the macroenvironment—
must pass the same tests as signals moving between neurons, such as the
ability to find a previously uninfected host.
A factor important to its
success in the social sphere that was missing in the purely neuronal
situation, however, is the signaling system’s need to maintain the
“meaning” of the message through translation from a neuronal to social
signal.
There are sometimes reasons why certain classes of memes aren’t well
adapted to making the jump through the social environment, over and
above their need to run the psychological gauntlet spikes undergo.
Selection in the macroenvironment will often guarantee that actual
infection rates of new hosts are considerable below their theoretical
potential.
Factors such as the distance to the next uninfected host (a
reverse function of the density of hosts, as well as the degree to which the
same meme has already infiltrated a population) and various kinds of
agents that can disrupt signals (such as ambient noise, in the case of an
auditory signal) will filter out those signals not up to the task of
negotiating the wide open world outside the organism. So both physical
and mental obstacles to transmission face social signals.
A selection process also goes on in social groups. Ideas compete among
themselves for the right to occupy the mental niche that is devoted to the
description or explanation of some phenomenon. This battle can be fought

—— 246 · THE ELECTRIC MEME ——
not just within brains but also between them, because every person will
have a need to describe or explain that same phenomenon.
Sometimes
prospective candidates for this task are rapidly shunted aside by “right-
thinking” people and may even get labeled as crackpot, which is usually
sufficient to kill them off altogether. On the other hand, a “buzz” factor
can lead an idea that has already achieved some popularity to become the
completely dominant choice in a group through a kind of positive
feedback effect: As people imitate each other, it becomes more and more
likely that the person each adopter imitates will have the favored trait.
This has been documented in scientific circles: lf an academic paper has
been cited a certain number of times, it becomes even more likely to be
cited again.
Thus alternative ideas, each seeking to control one form of behavior,
are culled by analogous processes happening at a wide range of scales—
from the individual neuron (operating within milliseconds) to social
groups of hosts (over decades). A number of these selection processes can
operate simultaneously on the same ideas.
For example, educational
training in universities constitutes a (largely unconscious) mental selection
process in the minds of students (who must consider the intellectual value
of what they are taught for themselves), as well as an attempt by faculty to
recruit new members for their clique (which promotes their version of
thinking within some domain). The adoption of an idea by a student can
be a victory for a meme, a signaling (or teaching) mechanism, and a social
group, all at the same time.
THE RICHNESS OF THE RESPONSE
Researchers who specialize in the study of human language still have a
major gripe against the memetic perspective on social communication. It
all began with Noam Chomsky, the living author who has been more cited
by his fellow academics than any other (while at the same time being a
vocal critic of American foreign policy). He spurred a revolution back in
the 1950s that is still continuing.
His central point was the so-called
“poverty of the stimulus” dictum—that what gets transmitted in signals is
insufficient in content to account for what people can make of them. We
recognize this ourselves when we commonly say that a single gesture or
word “speaks volumes.”

—— Escape from Planet Brain · 247 ——
Think of the word “hello,” spoken by the two men meeting in the street
in our earlier story.
“Hello” is a simple utterance that can mean many
things, from “I’m happy to see you again, lover” to “I’m just making a
show of being civil, even though I detest you as a person, because you’re
not worth violating social norms for.”
Not all of this information is
actually present in the single word of greeting, of course. The whole field
of sociolinguistics has arisen to explain how people can draw such wide-
ranging implications from the social context of everyday conversation.
What is actually present in the message is but a mere fraction of what can
be inferred from that message by its recipient. To correctly interpret the
sender’s intention, the receiver must be able to fill in the gaps in the
message and thus reconstruct what the sender intended to say. Essentially
the “message” from communication theory is that messages don’t equal
meaning; they are intrinsically something less.
In fact, Chomsky’s principle is true of communication in any context
you care to mention: in communication between genes, viruses, cells,
computer viruses, or memes.
There isn’t a single example of a
communication process in which all the necessary information is
transmitted from sender to receiver; messages are always depauperate and
insufficient to explain how the receiver reacts. The receiver (whether a
computer, a cell, or a mind) must always engage in some kind of
interpretive or reconstructive process, based on the message as well as
other contextual factors, to determine what the source of the message
“meant” by the act of sending the message in the first place.
But how can we be sure that we reach the right conclusion based on such
slim evidence? How can an information lineage persist when each receiving
individual fills in large chunks of the material from his own idiosyncratic
store of memories and knowledge? Memetic content might be unlikely to
survive intact over numerous iterations of idiosyncratic reconstruction by
different minds. In effect, this inferential model of communication could
imply a relatively high rate of mutation—perhaps too high to sustain
evolutionary
lineages
of
memes.
If
scant
messages,
brief
and
informationally insubstantial, are heavily reconstructed by receivers to
infer the sender’s intent—and based on that, the meaning of the
message—then the result of transmission typically might not be
duplication of the original version but some new interpretation.
This
may even happen every time someone in the chain passes on a message.

—— 248 · THE ELECTRIC MEME ——
Replication might be only at the tail end of a statistical distribution of
possibilities; in many cases the meaning reconstructed by the receiver
could be different from that intended by the sender.
How does real communication take place then?
Evolutionary
psychology provides one answer to the conundrum of how we can ever
have replication as a consequence of information transgression: I’ll call it
the possibility of a “rich” response.
The idea is that we should expect
evolution to supply us with just what Chomsky says we need: the ability to
reliably infer what’s missing in messages.
Evolutionary psychology
suggests there are heavy-duty regularizing structures in human brains.
These structures ensure that inferences take a certain form, given a
particular kind of stimulus. In effect, there can be heavy channeling of
mental reconstruction by receiving parties to a communication.
It isn’t
just randomized cutting and pasting of infobits going on in there.
Since they are evolved, presumable all people share these mental
structures—what evolutionary psychologists prefer to call “modules.”
This would seem to provide everyone with the same mental code-decode
mechanism that should guarantee that, despite the poverty of the stimulus,
the “correct” inference is nevertheless routinely drawn from a signal. The
representation that winds up being constructed in the mind of the receiver
will be very much the same as that which produced the signal in the first
place, because the same manipulations are being undone at the receiving
end as were done in the sender’s mind to originally construct the signal. If
the decoding is very close to the reverse of the coding, then we wind up
with a replicate of the message in the receiving brain. The poverty of the
stimulus can be compensated for by richness in the response.
The memes that actually persist are thus those that “fit” with our
evolved psychology; those that try to cross boundaries or “slip
between” these modules will not survive to replicate again.
But this
does not discredit the general notion of replication; in fact, it provides
a mechanism for predicting just which kinds of memes will survive:
those in harmony with preexisting modules for processing their kind of
content.
One would even expect that, if brains and memes are becoming
symbionts, there will be natural selection for information-processing
mechanisms in the brain that ensure the survival of memetic content—even if
it has to be inferred rather than simply decoded—and that specific adaptations

—— Escape from Planet Brain · 249 ——
exist (in the form of modules) as responses to this problem.
Perhaps
mechanisms for the repair of mistakes during inferencing could arise in
this way, as they have for DNA replication.
One still might say that channeling inference—no matter how
narrowly—only delays the inevitable: The memetic message must still
become corrupt eventually.
If some information is inevitably lost with
each iteration of communication, then the fidelity of replication rapidly
deteriorates, and the message soon gets lost in a welter of noise.
Determining just how long memetic lineages can persist will be an
empirical question. No lineage can regenerate itself forever. Eventually
some mutation will creep in that leads to an end to succession.
The
accumulation of adaptations by a lineage maintained over a long period is
always a fine balance between mutability and fidelity, between the
possibility of a better version and safeguarding the one that has proven to
be the best so far.
This narrow path is treaded very well by DNA
replication and perhaps by neuromemes as well.
In the end, it is the combination of two factors that can produce
consistent replication in memes.
First, signals are instigators, which
means they need play only a small (but crucial) part in the meme-making
business.
Second, memes work through the conversion of an existing
substrate rather than the full-fledged production of new structures. Memes
don’t construct something complex from scratch; they merely reconfigure
it.
Coupling instigation with conversion means that the replication
reaction has relatively little work to do and that signals may be quite
tangential to this process.
So whatever may happen to signals in their
travels, replication reactions should remain capable of regularly and
repeatedly producing similar memes, leading to a long-term lineage being
formed.
There’s also a sense in which the unholy question of mutability is
misdirected.
Even if memes mutate each and every time transmission
occurs, it’s still possible for the ultimate goal of any evolutionary process
to
emerge:
proper
evolutionary
lineages
that
exhibit
cumulative
adaptation. How?
One way is if the errors introduced during transmission are not biased
in any way. People then are not effective at making replicas of the memes
they try to copy, but they do have replication as their goal—they just
happen to make mistakes. The central tendency of the resulting memes (as
statisticians
would say)
will
still
float
around
the value
of the

—— 250 · THE ELECTRIC MEME ——
original meme. Since this normative meme remains the dominant form in
the population of learners, more people wind up using the original meme
as the template for their own learning than any other value. So there is no
net movement in the population of memetic forms.
What is perhaps even more surprising is that the force of evolution can
still be sufficient to ensure the emergence of adaptive design when
mutation is directed by some psychological bias. Such a bias can cause
memetic norms to tend toward some new value because the copying
mistakes people make are on average in the direction of this psychological
attractor. Now the mean of copying errors is no longer zero. But this is
still not a problem if the bias heads everyone toward the same goal—say,
some functional optimum for that kind of meme. Then all the errors lead
the population average toward that optimum. It’s just a case of directed
evolution moving the population consistently toward a new value, even if
memetic replication is invariably imperfect. The only difference from the
previous case is that the frequencies of alternative values in the population
of memes shift along a path leading to the new norm.
In both of these scenarios, precise replication almost never occurs, but
the long-term consequence is the same as in the case of high-fidelity
replication among genes: cumulative adaptation over time.
It’s only a
fixation on the way genes work that obscures the possibility of other ways
to maintain the inheritance of information in the face of significant
mutation.
Finally, if there is such heavy-duty reconstruction at the receiving end
of a transmission, what happens to information transfer?
One of the
conditions for replication is that the copy must be similar to the source
because information deriving from that source has been incorporated into
the copy. But if reconstruction is due to modular influencing mechanisms,
and these are genetically inherited, then cultural transmission isn’t the
cause of similarity in beliefs and values between people.
Rather each
person individually relearns that knowledge thanks to naturally evolved
modules for inferring things. The cultural link in social communication
seems to be broken by this “on-board” mental construction.
But no one has ever argued that replication is achieved without
assistance—by any replicator. As long as the process of inferring content
depends on information inherited from other brains—from source copies of
the meme—the transmission process is an evolutionary one and qualifies as
an instance of replication.
This is just what signals do as instigator

—— Escape from Planet Brain · 251 ——
of replication reactions: pass information along from the source. So the
fact that cultural knowledge is inferred, based on the content of signals,
does not exclude it from the category of replication events.
NEVER MIND THE GAP
The ability of some host organisms to communicate with each other
through social signaling presented memes with a way to solve the “gap
problem.”
However, you only have to remember that language is a
signaling system to realize that communication systems vary enormously
in their sophistication: The grunts of macaques are not nearly as elaborate
as
human
speech.
So
considerable
evolution
has
occurred
in
communication systems based on social signaling.
This progression is
bound to have implications for memes.
So how did social communication evolve? For species that lived in
groups, it’s possible that nervous systems had to develop the ability to
learn from observing the behavior of their fellows.
However, social
observation can be a route through which information is transferred
independently of genes. If this information is then passed along to others,
a
chain
of inheritance
in non-genetic
information
is established.
Transmission would likely introduce noise into the chain, so we could also
have descent with modification in the message. In effect, this means that
genes may have permitted the development of another mode of evolution
in cognitive species, bringing us quite far from genetic determinism in big-
brained creatures.
The crucial step for memetics would occur when a copy of the message
stays behind somewhere in the chain when another copy moves on to the
next link. So instead of merely passing the message along, and then going
dumb again, a node makes a copy as an interim step in its message-passing
routine, perhaps to achieve some delay in the subsequent transmission, as
an instance of momentary storage.
This opens up the possibility of
multiple copies (or near copies) simultaneously being disseminated
through a neuronal population, in various, potentially criss-crossing,
lineages.
If so, then genes have loosed a monster! When degrees of freedom
arise in more complex networks of neurons, memes can begin to evolve.
But as the number of neuronal interconnections increases, so too does the

—— 252 · THE ELECTRIC MEME ——
scope for action and movement by memes. The degree to which genetic;
control was lost—or the possibility of non-genetic inheritance increased—
is greatest in species with larger nervous systems, a greater dependency on
social life, and better abilities to learn from others. (Of course, humans
excel in all of these areas) Memes, according to this scenario, arose as
parasites on chains of communication in such species.
Once memes evolved, what happened next to signals?
Over time,
evolution often produces higher degrees of complexity and greater
cohesion in the objects of selection, which signals would be, as the
products of this new, replicator. The question is how do highly ephemeral,
dynamic entities like signals become more complex?
We know that
signals can serve as good instigators: A computer virus can be perfectly
copied through many generations, thanks to a protected transmission
channel and the strict error-correction mechanisms used in contemporary
computer communication protocols. Presumably the same thing happened
as signals became involved in the replication of memes.
But there appears to be nowhere to go in terms of increasing the
complexity of individual signals. Even language—perhaps the ultimate in
communicative complexity—is not so much an advance in signaling as an
advance in coding and decoding.
If you look at sonograms of spoken
phrases—the pictures of a phrase’s wave forms in terms of amplitude and
frequency—they look like nothing so much as a bunch of never-ending
squiggles (mimicking the printouts from EEGs, which monitor brain
waves, not coincidentally). Grunts and grammatical productions both use
the same sound resources, and human language may even involve fewer
different sounds than some animal sound systems. Speech is still just air
molecules being pushed about, after all.
Even if individual signals are not the focus of cumulative selection,
one way for signals to become more complex is to aggregate into
temporally united sequences. Individual signals may not become more
elaborate, but sets of them could. Selection pressures would then be put
on messages composed of many cooperating signals, leading to
increased cohesion in the messages so produced.
Each signal then
becomes like a cell, bunched into coordinated multicellular “organisms.”
Certainly it appears that this is one characteristic of human language: the ability
to tie signal units together into strings called sentences. Grammar, of course, is
the ultimate result: Each of the units in a sentence can begin to play a specialized

—— Escape from Planet Brain · 253 ——
role (as noun, verb, adjective, and so on), greatly amplifying the range of
sentiments that can be expressed in a message.
Language is thus an
obvious case of selection for communicative complexity, achieved in the
face of little room for increased sophistication in signals themselves.
While some evolutionary advances are seen in signal streams, other
advances appear in signal generators and interpreters. Both ends of the
communication link have been compelled by natural selection to come up
with better solutions. For example, signal receivers have had to cope with
increasingly complex messages, coming in at the same speed as when the
messages were ungrammatical.
This has led to the need for quick
comprehension, and particularly the ability to parse the continuous stream
of sound inputs into meaningful units, like words. On the other hand, the
generators of signals would also have needed to produce more interesting
messages to parse. This required better cognitive abilities for buffering
output as sentences were being put together at the originating end of the
communication link, and the storing of partially interpreted messages at
the other, awaiting the full sense to be expressed and received. Much of
the fancy machinery supporting language is therefore in the neural
mechanisms for generating and receiving spikes.
This is fully consistent with the neuromemetic perspective because it
suggests that where most of the “action” has occurred during the evolution
of communicative systems is in the head, where the replication of memes
happens.
The mechanisms that evolved for generating and interpreting
complex
messages
should
also
support
the
reliable
and
accurate
conversion of neuronal states, even if those states turn out to be infectious.
And the merest inducement—such as the single word of greeting,
“hello”—can set off the replication process, even when the source of that
inducement is far away, in another brain.
Still, if each brain is an independent universe (memes being at first unable
to jump the social gap), then how did an infestation of memes manage to
spring up each time a big-enough brain was born?
Could each new
species of meme be able to evolve adaptations and complexities if the
products of this evolution must die as soon as their host did?
It’s entirely possible.
Why?
First, literally billions of generations of
memetic evolution—of “meme time”—can take place within the lifespan of a

—— 254 · THE ELECTRIC MEME ——
big animal—in 20 years, say.
This is a period not to be sneezed at if
you’re a replicator. It is, after all, the equivalent of a hundred thousand
years for a bacterial colony in terms of generation time. Second, evolution
just happens whenever the circumstances permit; it doesn’t look into the
future, starting up only if there are long-term prospects for survival. If a
pool of water dries up or a computer hard disk becomes disconnected from
a network, so be it; the biological or artifactual replicators just die off.
Further, the basic conditions for memetic evolution were always the same,
thanks to the common, evolved architecture of the brains available. Each
of these newborn “universes” was, in effect, ready-made for memes. If
memes were able to arise once under such conditions, they probably
managed the trick quite regularly.
A meme’s chances for immortality
were more limited in the era before social transmission, but evolutionary
processes nevertheless would have occurred, over and over and over.
Of course, any communication between selective environments could
have led to migrants finding their way to new contexts and provided for
the longer-term survival of their evolutionary lineages. It was only late in
memetic evolution that memes succeeded in reliable hopping from one
island of evolutionary history to another through social communication.
So the brain was not selected for size simply to support memes.
We
shouldn’t overemphasize the importance of these brain parasites.
The
brain has too many important jobs to do, as indicated by the huge
proportion of human genes dedicated to coding for brain function and
morphology.
Rather memes piggybacked on a big-enough brain to get
themselves going.
And once they got a handle on living inside this
protected environment, they become bolder about risking life outside the
brain.
In the early days, though, memes didn’t even know that other islands
of evolution existed outside the cortex they lived in. For them, replication
meant survival to another generation.
Quite simply, the meme, if it
replicated, could live on in its offspring—the same motivation any of us
have. The replicator’s basic desire is to endure, to have another chance at
the evolutionary lottery, and this desire would have been satisfied through
replication inside one cortex.
If memes are basically mental entities, then the primary host of
memes is not an organism but an organ, the cortex. The fate of memes is

—— Escape from Planet Brain · 255 ——
thus effectively linked to the genes that code for this organ, whichever
organism the cortex happens to be in. Thus there has been a long history
of interaction between these genes (which are highly conserved, at least in
the mammalian line, with a consistent developmental sequence) and
memes, beginning with the rise of vertebrates.
Memes can thus be
considered to constitute a single “species” of replicator, with a specific
definitive host, the cortex.
One consequence of this longer history is that, during their long co-
dependence with brains, memes have had the time to engage in significant
feathering of their nests, by doing some reconstruction of the mind.
If
genes and culture have coevolved for a long while, then many of the
seemingly “innate” traits of contemporary humans are the result of cultural
pressures on genes: natural selection for genes that favor the more efficient
expression of those cultural abilities. For example, considerable resources
in the human brain are devoted to the processing of linguistic inputs,
which can be used by memes to help guarantee their good replication.
Thus big brains have evolved greater dependency on memes over time.
However, meanwhile memes have sought greater independence from
brains, developing more elaborate life cycles, interacting with a wider
variety of things in the general environment, like artifacts (see the next
chapter).
Our current human “nature” becomes, in effect, a cultural
artifact. Our most cherished personality traits may be ones that support
our symbiosis with memes. This includes brain adaptations for language
production and comprehension, for example. So we have truly entered the
cultural niche as a species and can no longer live outside it. The benefits
are obvious but also entail some perils since the door to a life without
culture has been closed behind us.
RETHINKING COMMUNICATION
The idea that social communication involves the replication of
information—a proposition central to social memetics as I have
presented it here—forces us to reconceptualize what communication
is all about.
Communication is commonly defined as the transmission of
information. However, as general as this sounds, it still isn’t general enough.
It leaves out quantum communication, for instance, which need not involve a
channel
or
transmission—at
least
not
as
normally
conceived—

—— 256 · THE ELECTRIC MEME ——
because information doesn’t move through space but rather just reappears
at the destination (see Chapter 5). I therefore suggest that communication,
generally speaking, is a process in which messages (typically translated
into signals) are produced and then consumed.
This process can occur
over a wide range of scales—from atoms to organisms. The sender of a
signal need not be the same as the producer, and the receiver can be
different from the consumer. On the other hand, the same agent, as in the
example of communication with oneself, can undertake all of these roles.
Several features of this definition of communication are worthy of
attention. First, it doesn’t refer to replicators. That’s because the message
being transmitted need not be duplicated—indeed, a message cannot be
duplicated in quantum communication, as discussed earlier.
Another possibly surprising aspect of the definition is that it doesn’t
mention intentionality. In human communication, due to the complicated
social cognition of our species, message production and consumption
include a lot of work to infer the intention of the sender to recover the
proper message (for example, getting past any potential irony or sarcasm
implicit in the context, which reverses the message’s meaning). But this is
not a general feature of communication, which can take place without any
cognition at all, as when entangled atomic particles exchange information.
While
communication
requires
time
to
complete
(consumption
necessarily follows production), the process need not be completed
rapidly; it may be mediated by artifacts, which can “hold” delivery of the
message in abeyance for an indeterminate period.
This makes some
communication events “quasi-interactions”: The sender and the receiver
are displaced from one another in both space and time, as when a
journalist’s report is read only some days after she wrote it. In such cases,
the consumed signal need not be the same energy packet as the one that
helped produce the artifact in the first place, so the signal producer must
trust that at some point the communication process will complete itself,
making the effort of producing the signal or artifact worthwhile.
Memetics will never be a truly general explanation of the communication
process because it’s only concerned with explaining communication among
creatures with brains. For example, only two of the three kinds of events with
which
we
began
this
book
can
possibly
be
touched

—— Escape from Planet Brain · 257 ——
upon by a memetic explanation—the social and artifactual cases (Darwin’s
reading of Malthus and the spread of a computer-virus, respectively), but
not the biological one (of kuru). Just what the effect of memetics will be
on our thinking about the nature of communication can be made clear only
by detailing how it’s different from current accounts.
Three general approaches to describing communication are in vogue,
each specific to one type of communicative agent. The first approach is
devoted to communication among agents without intelligence, such as
machines, and so is called Mechanical here.
It’s based on the
mathematical model of communication, as epitomized in the work of
Claude Shannon and William Weaver during the 1940s.
Although this
model is not directly relevant to memetics because of its restriction to
communicators without brains, Shannon and Weaver’s work has proven to
be the foundation on which all subsequent theories of communication have
been built, so we must deal with it here.
The Mechanical model was originally devised to design telephone-
Switching networks with certain optimal properties, such as the most
efficient use of bandwidth (for the communication channel’s informational
capacity) with the highest possible fidelity of transgression. In this classic
model of communication, a source selects a message that is then coded by
a sender for transmission over a channel to a receiver, which then hands
the message to some destination.
We obviously need to unpack this model a bit.
The sender (which
need not be the same as the source) translates the message into a signal
(which can travel), so it’s a signal, not the message, that is sent through a
communication channel.
The receiver, in turn, decodes the signal back
into a message for some destination, as when a telephone converts a
spoken phrase back into sound for the person listening in. The receiver
must share the sender’s code book and functions as a kind of inverse
transmitter. Differences between the sent and received messages are due
to corruption by noise or the interference of other signals in the channel
during transmission. These differences are unwanted and distorting, since
they add or subtract from the signal and thereby create uncertainty about
what the message says.
The primary result of the mathematical approach to communication was
to provide a definition of information that didn’t depend on its physical
substrate.
Mechanical theory was concerned only with the problem

—— 258 · THE ELECTRIC MEME ——
of
efficiently
transmitting
messages
through
channels, not
with
deciphering what the messages might mean. Shannon and Weaver were
specific about not wanting to get involved in considerations such as the
sender’s or receiver’s mind-set, and excluded the problem of interpreting
the meaning of a message from the communication process as they
narrowly defined it.
The idea was simply that the message reduced
uncertainty about a situation relevant to the receiver.
What could be done about noise in the channel?
Shannon and
Weaver’s solution was to situate an observer outside the communication
channel. Between the information source and the transmitter, the original
message branches off toward an observation device, which surveys what is
sent and received, notes the discrepancies, and transmits corrected data to
the receiver.
This is a cumbersome solution that few real-world
communication systems exploit. Rather than adding a whole new bunch
of machinery to the communicative apparatus, more popular ways of
battling noise include introducing redundancy into the coding of the
message or simply sending the same message many times through the
channel, which the receiver can then compare.
The Mechanical approach thus sees communication largely as a
process of finding the optimal coding system to compensate for the noise
problem.
Some ways of encoding a message into a signal will simply
survive the journeys through the channel better than others, depending on
the qualities of that channel. The job of the sender is to find that way.
Communication is social in the limited sense that it is a form of interaction
between the sender and receiver, but a Mechanical communicator is not
oriented toward an understanding of the machine with which it is paired in
the communicative event. All an encoder has to do is produce a signal; all
a decoder has to do is to attend to that signal. Thus there is no reason to
credit either the sender or the receiver with any form of subjectivity, let
alone inter-subjectivity.
Neither communicator need be endowed with
mental states and capacities. Perhaps it isn’t surprising that an emphasis
on the utility of different coding schemes should arise when the sender and
receiver’s psychology is defined out of the paradigm!
By contrast, human communication presupposes and exploits an awareness
of self and others. Consequently theories of human communication reflect the
very different cognitive abilities of humans as compared to machines.
An
approach designed to explain the peculiarities of human communication

—— Escape from Planet Brain · 259 ——
therefore suggests that communication involves not just the production
and decoding of signals, but the inferring of intentions by both senders and
receivers, based on aspects of the situation in which both find themselves.
I will therefore call this approach Inferential. This theory is limited to
intentional agents, with the quintessential example of a communicative
event being human conversation.
The scope of this theory is therefore
more restricted than the Mechanical one, and less naturalistic.
The Inferential approach has its academic roots in the work of the
influential philosopher of linguistics H.P. Grice.
He argued that
communicative events had to be recognized as such before they could be
successful. In effect, the potential sender and receiver of a message have
to negotiate a proper context for communication before exchanging
messages, so that each party is paying attention to the other and expecting
the exchange proper to begin.
Even after the cooperative intent to
communicate has been made manifest by the participants, Grice believed
that human (verbal) communication can proceed effectively only if certain
maxims are obeyed.
These maxims include saying only what is
informative, relevant, and true, as efficiently and clearly as possible.
Gricean theory thus assumes that an implicit, gentlemanly agreement rules
the exchange of information, and that participants share the goal to
successfully complete the communicative event—that is, both desire to
share a meaning.
Instead of the Mechanical concern with messages being linearly
transferred from sender to receiver, Inferentialists see communication as
the mutual negotiation of meaning.
Inferentialism thus challenges the
tendency of reductive Mechanists to equate meaning with messages (the
content of signals). On the contrary, the Inferentialists assert, signals do
not “convey” meanings from sender to receiver but rather constitute a
stimulus from which the parties to the interaction must actively construct
meanings, In essence, the central insight of the Inferential school—that
meaning is “negotiated”—adds a step to the Mechanical model of
communication, From the perspective of a Mechanist, we can says that the
receiver must not only decode a signal but also infer the sender’s meaning
by analyzing a message after it has been decoded. At the other end of the
communication event, the source must have some idea about what sort of
manipulations the receiver is likely to make of potential messages

—— 260 · THE ELECTRIC MEME ——
to ensure that the correct message is sent and the meaning they intend to
communicate “gets through.”
Both the Mechanical and Inferential approaches have several failings.
First, they don’t explain why communication occurs or who should be able
to engage in this type of activity. Studies of communication from these
standard approaches are generally concerned with the narrower question of
how information can be transmitted and particularly how messages are
received.
An explanation for the distribution and elaboration of
communicative abilities among species remains missing.
There is also little theory of message content in evidence.
Shannon
explicitly argued that the goal of his mathematical approach was to
divorce itself from the specifics of content, form, or channel; rather he
sought
to
derive
a
generic
concept
of
information
through
his
investigations (a goal he achieved). An Inferentialist, on the other hand,
seeks to typologize communicative events, particularly the kinds of events
involving
the
exchange
of
spoken
phrases.
‘Unfortunately,
an
Inferentialist believes that most of what is inferred from messages is not
transmitted—it consists of implications derived by the receiver from the
communicative situation.
The social complexity and specificity of
communicative
events
therefore
makes
any
general
account
of
communication impossible in the Inferentialist view.
Further, the computational mechanisms by which a source selects from
among all possible messages the one to be sent out into the world remain
largely unspecified. Presumably not all formulations of a signal package
are equally good at getting the message across. Mechanists suggest that
agents maximize the efficiency by which a quantity of information is
transferred. Inferentialists, on the other hand, suggest that conformity with
the maxim of relevance—what will help each party to best understand the
other’s motivation in a given situation—is what communicators are after.
While they may specify how best to send the chosen message, neither of
these maxims has much to say about the need to choose among competing
messages in the first place. A major part of the communicative process—
how to find the best message to send, which will ensure that one’s
intention is properly inferred by the receiver—is left out of the
explanation.
Finally, it’s strange for Inferentialist theory to assume cooperation
between message senders and receivers. It hardly seems likely that the

—— Escape from Planet Brain · 261 ——
interests and intentions of complex agents like organisms will always be
in complete harmony. Indeed overlapping interests should be considered
an unusual case since genetic endowments and socioenvironmental
situations are rarely the same for different organisms. On the other hand,
for the Mechanical model to become a complete description of human
communication, it must show how the sender and receiver can come to
have not only a common language but also common sets of premises about
how to communicate messages.
The communicating parties must then
apply these identical inference rules to the message in parallel ways, such
that communication results in the successful transmission (and hence
reproduction)
of the message.
The
Mechanical
approach
seems
incomplete as a model of human communication; the Inferential approach
seems to fill the gaps.
The consequence of adopting an Inferential
approach, however, is to separate the study of communication from the
rest of science and make it something of an art form: the subjective study
of human intentions.
A third approach to understanding communication avoids these
difficulties. Because it’s devoted to describing the evolution of signaling
behaviors, I call it Evolutionary.
Animals are the agents whose
communication this theory is supposed to explain. The theory holds that
communication is a specialized behavior involving the broadcast of
information.
Thus selection acts over generations to change the
repertoire of displays of which a species is capable, thanks to its
genetic endowments.
Say an animal leaks some chemical into the
environment that other animals can detect and that provides them
with information about some aspect of the emitter’s condition.
If
this information is beneficial to the perceiver—for example, in
social competition—then greater sensitivity to the reception of that
cue will evolve.
If the receiver’s response to this information is
also in the sender’s interest, the ability to emit that cue will also
improve.
So
communication
evolves
when
a
coincidental
association between the production of some cue and relevant
information
about
the
emitter’s
condition
or
some
other
environmental situation is correctly perceived by another animal.
This depends on the fortunate happenstance that the animal can
already sense this aspect of its environment—has evolved receptors
to “taste” the chemical signal, for instance.
Both the behavioral
context in which the cue is produced by the “sender” and the
context in which the cue is interpreted by the “receiver” are then

—— 262 · THE ELECTRIC MEME ——
ritualized to minimize any ambiguity, in the situation, which should
increase the efficiency with which each partner can fulfill their role in the
communicative exchange.
The Evolutionary approach represents a very different view of
communication than we have discussed before. It’s a question of dialogue
versus dissemination. Single events of information exchange, exemplified
by dialogue between a sender-receiver pair, are the standard focus of both
the Mechanical and the Inferential theories. Dissemination, on the other
hand, suggests a profligate sender that tosses signals out into the
environment, hoping to find one or more receivers, much as a sycamore
tree throws millions of its seeds into the air or salmon broadcast their milt
into the water.
But if we are to link communication to culture, it must come through a
recognition that communication events are repeatable—that the same
information can be disseminated not just once but multiple times, and so
spread through a population. The Mechanical and Inferential approaches
have ignored this fact by concentrating exclusively on the communicating
dyad and on the individual communication event. What unites these first
two approaches is the assumption that the sender-receiver pair, linked by
an abstract channel, is all that need be considered in a theory of
communication. The result is that the history of theory in both of these
traditions has tended to consist largely of increasingly sophisticated
models of sender and receiver psychology as earlier models have proved
too simple to account for some aspect of real communicative events.
If we expand the temporal and spatial horizon to encompass a population
and acknowledge that a communication event can be repeated, with the
message being passed from person to person, it becomes clear that we must
attend to communication chains. Further, the repeated communication of
a message is likely to result in descent with modification in the constituent
information.
The dyadic communication event—with a sender-receiver
pair—is still the unit of analysis for population-level phenomena; it’s just
that repeated events determine the course of information transmission
through social groups. From this new perspective on communication, both
biological and cultural evolution can be seen as a story of message-
passing, whether through DNA or cultural messages. It’s a story about
stories—in
particular,
how
individual
lives
and
social
traditions

—— Escape from Planet Brain · 263 ——
interact over time.
This evolution of messages will be missed if we
concentrate only on the brain (psychology) or the dyad (communicative
acts), instead of society.
Recognizing the possibility of disseminating messages over a longer
temporal horizon means that evolution in the mental abilities of senders
and receivers can also occur through normal biological processes. New
adaptations for coding or decoding messages can evolve in later
generations of communicators, as can mechanisms for inferring the intent
of one’s partner to the communicative event.
If one looks at
communication chains, distortions in message content can then arise not
just as a consequence of randomized noise in the channel, but because
psychological features held in common among receivers introduce
systematic biases in those signals and in how incoming messages are
interpreted. Communication can even become an arms race between the
ability among senders to deceive receivers and the ability among receivers
to see through this deception. Then the transformations, distortions, and
losses of information typical of social transmission are to be explained not
just as side effects of “jumping the gap” between brains but as the normal
consequence of “dueling” communication itself.
What calls out for
explanation from an evolutionary perspective is the fact that extended
chains of communication can succeed in distributing throughout a
population those ideas that are readily identified as a culture.
The Evolutionary approach avoids several of the problems associated
with the Mechanical and Inferential approaches. First, it doesn’t assume
the sender and receiver intend to cooperate when they begin to exchange
information.
When the biological interests of sender and receiver
significantly overlap, then selection on signaling abilities will generally
favor increasing efficiency, as assumed by the Inferentialist’s favorite
philosopher, Grice. However, when interests diverge—that is, when the
fitness benefits to be derived from the exchange of information are not
equal between sender and receiver or do not depend on the same
outcome—then an arms race can be expected between senders’ ability to
produce false, irrelevant, or ambiguous messages, and receivers’ skills in
detecting the sender’s motivation for sending the signal in the first place.
Signaling theory also has a hypothesis about the conditions under which
animals should form communicative intentions: Animals should seek to
communicate when manipulating
others through signaling promotes

—— 264 · THE ELECTRIC MEME ——
their own biological fitness (and that of their relatives) more than any
alternative behavior they might engage in. The ability to identify a cause
for communicative events is an advance for the evolutionary approach
over the alternative models discussed earlier.
However, as for message content, the Evolutionary approach suggests
only that signaling systems may arise as a means of exploiting a pre-
existing sensory bias that organisms have already developed by chance.
Constraints on signal design can then be related to the environmental
context in which cues or signals are emitted and received (for example, a
dense jungle habitat dampens sound), as well as the physiological
capabilities of the animals involved (such as body size constraints on the
volume of sound that can be produced).
But this is more a theory of
constraints on transmission than a theory of message content.
So the
Evolutionary approach remains somewhat deficient on this front.
The Evolutionary approach also lacks a mechanism for selecting
among possible messages to send, although presumably selection is
optimized to benefit the biological fitness of the communicator. Note also
that attention is focused in the Evolutionary approach on the individual
organism, with models tending to take the perspective of either signaler or
receiver in isolation. Thus the function of communication for the signaler
is to influence the probability that the receiver will behave in a fashion
beneficial to the sender. The receiver’s function, on the other hand, is to
acquire information that improves the likelihood of choosing an optimal
response to the sender. The result, however, is that sender-oriented theory
comes
to
somewhat
different
conclusions
about
the
nature
of
communication than receiver-oriented models.
As a consequence, an
overarching perspective on communication is lacking. These remaining
faults suggest there is still room for improvement.
Memetics
suggests
yet
another
theory
as
an
alternative
for
communication studies, which I call Coevolutionary.
It increases the
emphasis on the hitherto ignored aspects of the communication event by
noting that communication involves not merely a sender and a receiver but
also a channel and a message. Adaptation in senders and receivers still
holds, as in the Evolutionary approach, but can also evolve in parasites on
the communication process—the messages themselves, which interact in
important ways with the channels through which they travel.
The
Coevolutionary approach emphasizes that a consequence of successful

—— Escape from Planet Brain · 265 ——
communication can be replication of the information conveyed. Further,
the evolution of human communication from simpler forms in other
animals involves not just increasing cognitive sophistication, but also the
creation of novel communication channels (such as mass media) and the
consequent elaboration of the messages passing through those channels. A
major
consequence
of
the
coevolutionary
approach
is
thus
that
communication is explicitly linked to large-scale social phenomena such
as cultural change through a physical consequence of communication by
dyads: the replication of information.
The Coevolutionary approach therefore must be seen as an addition to
the primarily biological vision of the communicative act as a social
interaction between gene-based organisms.
This is because a parasitic
system has evolved on top of that designed by the natural selection of
genes in the host organisms. These organisms still use signals for their
own purposes, such as social competition with conspecifics. So genetic
interests can differ between individual organisms and there can be
conflicts in which signals serve as weapons, as in the Evolutionary
approach. But the Coevolutionary approach suggests there is an additional
dynamic to the one between the receiver and sender: Both senders and
receivers must cope with the rise of a new, increasingly robust replicator,
the meme, that parasitizes one of their organs, the brain. In effect, there is
a hidden homunculus or “ghost in the machine” behind communicative
events. Communicated information can itself an evolutionary agent.
The major claim of the Coevolutionary approach is therefore that
communication simultaneously involves the sender and receiver in two
different relationships: first, as conspecifics with potentially divergent
genetic and social interest, but also as potential hosts to a more or less
robust, parasitic replicator with its own evolutionary interests.
The
Coevolutionary theory thus suggests an additional relationship between
sender and receiver than that of cooperators or competitors: they also share
an infection.
Further, these agents may be brought into contact and
exchange information due to the interests of this parasite, not necessarily
their own (genetic) interests.
Nevertheless there are considerable areas of overlap between the
Evolutionary approach to communication and the Coevolutionary one (as
the closeness of their names suggests). This is because both acknowledge
the potential of conflicting interests between senders and receivers.

—— 266 · THE ELECTRIC MEME ——
As a result, the psychology expected by both theories is the same in that
respect.
However, a Coevolutionist would also indicate that there is a
potential conflict of interest between the receiver and the message. The
ability to deal with messages has proven beneficial for brains in general;
the relationship is thus often symbiotic. But it’s in this additional level of
potential conflict that distinctions between the expectations of the
Evolutionary and Coevolutionary approaches can be found.
In modeling the communication event itself, the primary difference
between the Evolutionary and Coevolutionary approaches is in the
conception of signals. In the Coevolutionary approach, signals are defined
as “free-living,” extended phenotypic products of memes, rather than as
manipulations of the environment by organisms.
Communication can
therefore no longer be considered as a process in which people play mental
badminton with shuttlecocks of information.
Rather communication
becomes one stage in a meme’s life cycle, during which it produces
signals that travel through a harsh environment in search of another mind
in which the meme can take up residence and reproduce. It isn’t signals
that
are
considered
to
be
the
second
evolutionary
agent
in
a
communicative act. The parasite is, in fact, closer to “home,” inside the
brain itself.
The central question for the Coevolutionary approach, then, is whether
signals are instigators of memetic replication or modifications of the
environment by organisms that have no evolutionary import of their own.
If it’s true that memes replicate through the use of signals, then it can also
be assumed that some aspects of sender and receiver psychology will
reflect adaptations to this fact.
In this respect, the psychological
expectations of Evolutionary and Coevolutionary theories will differ,
despite their common assumptions about the possibility of conflict
between communicators.
The Coevolutionary theory can also fill the lacunae left by the
Evolutionary approach to communication. First, it provides the rudiments
of a theory of message content, thanks to its greater attention to and
reconceptualization of the role of signals. Signals are instigators of meme
replication, which implies that they should be selected, both within the
brain and in the macroenvironment, for the traits that allow them to fulfill
this role. Signals will therefore be pressured to convey information vital
to meme replication between hosts.
This implies that signals can be
expected to exhibit design features that allow them not just to survive

—— Escape from Planet Brain · 267 ——
travel through the macroenvironment intact, but also to carry those bits of
information that cannot be supplied from local resources in the receiving
brain.
Just what these bits may be is not clear at present, due to our
ignorance about brain mechanisms for information processing.
But as
neuroscience improves, we should begin to make empirical claims about
what kinds of messages will be needed to stimulate replication reactions in
the brain.
The Coevolutionary approach to communication also provides hints of
a mechanism for the selection of messages. While the replication reaction
occurs in the receiving brain, message selection occurs in the sender brain.
So adaptations should also appear in the message-sending brain for this
purpose.
The message that conveys meaning most reliably, with the
lowest probability of being misinterpreted, should be the one that the
decision-making process prefers, perhaps due to its “fit” with a processing
module devoted to the processing of such content in the receiving brain.
Again, the inner workings of a message-selection mechanism are in need
of further development.
Nevertheless these ideas represent an advance
over the alternative approaches.
Because they largely ignore the
evolutionary role of channels and signals, the other three approaches we
have examined lack such implications for these aspects of communication.
In conclusion, models of coevolution between hosts and parasites have
already provided us with insight into a variety of outstanding problems in
evolutionary theory. Examples include the theory that sex evolved so that
hosts could take advantage of the recombination of genetic elements that
sexual reproduction provides, and that variation is maintained within
species to deal with more rapidly evolving parasites.
Coevolution has
been shown to produce more optimal outcomes or to more rapidly achieve
a given level of fitness not only in biology but also in computer science.
Indeed computer scientists are increasingly using evolutionary principles
to solve the problem of software design because the increasingly complex
functional requirements of modern software surpass the human ability to
design solutions using logical principles. Considering parasites as engines
of evolutionary change has thus been illuminating for a number of
disciplines.
Considering cultural traits as parasites—as replicating
memes—may provide insight into the communication process as well.

—— 268 · THE ELECTRIC MEME ——
IMITATION SCHMIMITATION
A further benefit of the approach to communication adopted in this book is
that there is no need to mention imitation in the account of memetic
replication, even though imitation is in the definition of the word “meme”
in the authoritative Oxford English Dictionary.
Why is this a benefit?
Because the concept of imitation is problematic.
Imitation is generally
held to be a special type of social learning responsible for the difference
between humans and other creatures.
But nobody really knows how
imitation happens.
Cultural
selectionists
and
prominent
memeticists
(Dawkins,
Blackmore, and Dennett included) admit that the psychology of imitation
may remain a bit murky but argue that imitation is a peculiar
psychological ability that has peculiar social consequences: When a
population of imitators start imitating one another, the emergent result is
culture.
The appropriate question is therefore why not emphasize
imitation as the defining characteristic of our species when there appears
to be a correlation between this ability and the exhibition of complex
culture?
It’s a very natural coupling: Culture is present in very few
species; those few species have big brains; and imitation seems to require
big brains.
Since both imitation and culture achieve their pinnacle in
humans, why not assume that each must somehow be linked to the other,
especially since the development of the ability to imitate seems to be an
important and early developmental goal in our species? Babies are expert
imitators, after all.
presumably we devote considerable psychological
resources to this ability to imitate one another. So the link between this
unique learning mechanism and culture seems inexorable.
This would indeed be fine, if it wasn’t possible that imitation
doesn’t really exist, except as a dubious distinction in the minds of
social psychologists.
The general rubric of “social learning” is an
amorphous grab-bag category of theoretically distinct cognitive capacities,
of which imitation is meant to be one. But psychologists themselves can’t
agree on a standard way of telling these skills apart, mostly because they
haven’t identified mechanisms for how they’re supposed to work. Generally
speaking, social learning is facilitated by an animal paying attention to some
aspect of the situation surrounding another member of its species—for
example, where it is sitting or the thing it is interacting with, say a

—— Escape from Planet Brain · 269 ——
plant. What’s meant to make imitation different from other types of social
learning is that rather than paying attention to the place or thing a novice
sees some other animal involved with, it now focuses on the movements of
the demonstrator—how it is engaged in eating that plant, perhaps. And
with imitation, the novice acquires the rules for generating a new class of
behavior—how to eat that kind of plant—rather than learning how to
mimic the demonstrator’s precise motions in manipulating the plant.
A
true imitator, then, is supposed to be able to learn how to perform some
new behavior simply by seeing it done—at minimum, by seeing it only
once.
After this, the organism can reproduce that behavior even when
circumstances are not exactly the same as those in which it originally
observed the demonstrator engaging in the behavior. There is too much
slop, or room for error, in the other kinds of social learning, which involve
significant individualized mental processing. It is for this reason that both
memetics
and
cultural
selectionists
have
been
based,
since
their
beginnings, on the psychological mechanisms of imitation: It’s supposed
to be the necessary underpinning of truly cultural learning—that is,
learning that reflects the ability to quickly learn a repertoire of new skills
from demonstrations of those skills by others.
This appears to cultural selectionists to be good enough as a foundation
on which to build an epidemiological theory. After all, you don’t have to
have a complex appreciation of the ins and outs of each individual’s tastes,
desires, and knowledge to model the spread of ideas through a population.
The problem is that this definition of imitation still doesn’t really tell
you who should be able to do it. It doesn’t mention how such mimicry of
behavior might be achieved.
The definition only makes reference to
behavior, not the mental abilities needed to produce that behavior.
This vagueness has allowed two different schools of thought to spring
up on the question of how much dedicated psychological machinery is
required to implement this ability.
We can call these schools the
Mentalists and the Behaviorists. Mentalists say only those species with
what is nowadays called a “theory of mind” can imitate. Theory of mind
is a hypothetical mental ability that enables an animal to “read” the
intention behind another animal’s behavior. It allows the first animal to
mentally simulate the perspective of another animal and so figure out what
it is up to. Having a picture in its head of what the other animal is thinking

—— 270 · THE ELECTRIC MEME ——
should enable the first individual to infer how to engage in that behavior
itself—imitation, in effect.
Behaviorists, on the other hand, don’t care whether their candidate for
imitative ability has fancy mental representational skills or not. All they
require is that it displays the rapid, unreinforced learning of novel
behavior. It’s perhaps preferable to them that the animal can do this for
several types of behavior, because this suggests a general proclivity to
imitate.
Otherwise it might simply be a trick of the genes, an inbred
program for some particular complex behavior.
After all, animals with
rather simple neural systems, or indeed no brains at all, can do wonderful
things like build huge cities (just look at termites and ants). This is the
primary reason that Mentalists restrict imitation to species with brains big
enough to be credited with complex internal representations—typically
apes, humans, and perhaps dolphins—while Behaviorists argue that less
well-endowed species, such as rats, birds, and fish (or even some
invertebrates such as the octopus!) can also be admitted to the club, as
long as their can “do what they see.”
So the question is: Does imitation require a lot of brainpower—which
would mean that only a few select species are capable of it—or can
humble animals with no cortex also imitate?
The cultural selectionist is likely to be unconcerned by this question of
who exactly is “allowed” to imitate. This may be an empirical question,
but it doesn’t affect the selectionist’s models, after all. These models can
still churn out predictions about population dynamics from different
regimes of cultural transmission, whatever creature turns out to be
acquiring information through imitation.
So cultural selectionists can
pursue their program of research unperturbed by these empirical niceties.
But, in fact, this business of cognitive prerequisites is vitally
important to the general question cultural selectionists are interested in:
cultural evolution. This is because one particularly glaring consequence of
imposing a big brain limit on imitators is that birds then get excluded.
Learning birdsong becomes mere mimicry—the matching of a vocal
behavior to particular sensory inputs: Hear a song; reproduce it.
This
means singing behavior is not sensitive to the situation and involves no
understanding of the message-sender’s motivation in transmitting the call
in the first place—in short, it isn’t full-fledged imitation.
However,

—— Escape from Planet Brain · 271 ——
this introduces a definitional problem. Birds may be exempted from the
“imitation club” but their songs have been well documented to exhibit all
the
characteristics
of
cultural
evolution, like mutation,
drift, and
directional selection.
The birdsong case therefore implies that cultural
evolution can occur without the ability to imitate, contrary to what both
memetics and cultural selectionism have so long assumed.
Complex
population-level effects, such as fully cultural traditions, can arise despite
limited cognitive abilities among members of that population.
Cultural selectionists can always retort that they don’t mind if birds
have culture, even if this places them with the Behaviorists in saying that
“lower” animals can imitate too.
Imitation would still remain the
mechanism of cultural learning.
This move should allow cultural
selectionists and prominent memeticists to continue to found their theories
of cultural evolution on imitation.
And all of them do so for the same
reason: because it’s the only form of social learning likely to produce the
reliable inheritance of information.
Richard Dawkins has certainly
continued to identify imitation as the sole means by which memes can
replicate.
However, it isn’t clear how imitation is going to obey the requirement of
producing an evolutionary lineage, of achieving fidelity in chains of
transmission.
Culturally acquired ideas are often lost or transformed in
memory after an individual acquires them. Just think of the children’s game
of Chinese whispers, in which each child tries to tell the kid on his left what
the kid on his right just whispered into his ear. What went into the front of the
chain as “Sally slept at her friend’s house last night” comes out the end as
“Sammy wept when his aunt groused at him.” Chains of imitated information
can produce consistent cultural traditions only if imitation is buttressed by
additional psychological processes that insulate or reinforce the acquired ideas.
If imitation is to be the mechanism by which ideas are preserved across space
and time, then it must provide psychological services that insulate socially
transmitted information from being modified by individualized learning
along the way. Otherwise the information won’t be replicated but rather
continually modified.
Imitation finally may not be able to ensure
sufficient fidelity in the transmission of information to effect cultural
replication.
We just don’t know because the basic question of how
imitation occurs remains only vaguely understood. Strangely, for such a
central question in the social and psychological sciences, relatively little

—— 272 · THE ELECTRIC MEME ——
empirical work exists on this topic to guide us through the variety of
possible interpretations.
Some might argue that the recent finding of “mirror” neurons solves
the problem of delineating a mechanism for imitation.
Neurons in a
monkey’s prefrontal lobe have been found to respond not only when the
animal is poised to grasp a piece of food, but also when the human
experimenter in the monkey’s field of vision is about to grasp the same
piece of food. Mirror neurons seem to provide a straightforward mapping
between one’s own actions and the observed actions of others. The same
regions of the brain that send commands to our muscles when we act also
seem able to recognize the same action when it’s performed by others.
This implies that perceptual and motor abilities are intimately connected
and that imitation may be as simple as “monkey-see, monkey-do.” This
would represent a drastic reduction in the psychological underpinnings
necessarily to produce imitative behavior.
So it could solve our
mechanism problem: It provides an explicit neuroscientific underpinning
for the ability to imitate.
It also favors the Behaviorists, which is
necessary if we are to admit songbirds into the imitation club.
However, mirror neurons don’t really solve the mechanism problem.
The result in monkeys has been seriously overinterpreted. Mirror neurons
are likely to be found in any system that contains feedback loops within
the cortex.
So they may be all over the brain.
For example, the same
neurons fire when someone is viewing an image of the Mona Lisa and
later recalling that experience. Now it’s perception and imagination that
involve the same neurons, firing at nearly the same rates; no behavior is
involved at all.
The neurons involved in this match are also spread all
over the cortex. So this doesn’t prove anything except that mirror neurons
are part of the vast collection of neurons responsible for either action or
observation. If imitation were really so simple as the mirror neuron story
suggests, many more animals would pass the behavioral tests for imitation,
which they don’t.
So learning novel things isn’t just a matter of linking
perception to behavior.
This relationship necessarily holds for any
animal. The mere fact that the same areas of the brain light up when
two kinds of tasks are performed does not limit information processing
to a simple loop between them; many variables probably still intervene
between perception and action in the case of imitation, whether such a
neurological system can be the seed for the human capacity to imagine

—— Escape from Planet Brain · 273 ——
someone else’s state of mind thus remains an open question. Those who
are presently looking to mirror neurons for a viable theory of imitation will
have to look elsewhere.
There’s another problem with the evolution of imitative ability that
also suggests we may not be thinking about this whole problem of social
learning in the right way.
To efficiently imitate others, an organism
probably must invest in extra neural tissue, which is costly in terms of the
energy required to keep it going. But the first individual who happens to
get stuck with a mutation coding for the expensive network supporting this
psychological ability will find herself in a population with no complex
cultural traditions on which to draw. Carrying around a big brain in such a
situation is simply a hindrance: The individual is handicapped by having
to find extra food to feed the extra brain-stuff. Such a mutation provides
neither the individual nor the social group with any benefit. So there’s this
Catch-22 in the evolution of the complex cognitive machinery underlying
the imitative ability: It isn’t any good unless everyone has it, but it won’t
evolve unless it’s reasonable for the first person to develop it. Imitation
has few advantages when rare, even though it can be very beneficial to a
group when common.
This constitutes a considerable barrier to the
evolution of imitation, since any gene-based ability is likely to start as a
single mutation and hence will be very rare at the beginning.
How then did humans manage to hurtle this start-up cost and actually
begin to evolve this trait? Lots of “just so” stories could be told, but the
bottom line is that no one really knows at present.
So we have purely
theoretical reasons to think that there might be something wrong with
seeing imitation as the basis for something as fundamental as cultural
evolution.
One still might retort that even if there are major problems with
imitation, no viable alternatives exist. If we want to explain what might be
special about human culture, it would appear that we’re stuck with
imitation,
which
remains
the
best
candidate
for
a
psychological
mechanism of quick, reliable social learning.
But we need not be led inexorably to a reliance on imitation.
By
emphasizing imitation as the mechanism for transmission, you are almost
forced to think that cultural evolution begins—and ends—with social
learning; that the only important thing in the life history of a meme

—— 274 · THE ELECTRIC MEME ——
is transmission between brains. However, experiments in Artificial Life
such as TIERRA tell us that a lot of evolution can go on inside a single
intelligence. So too must early memetic evolution have been a story of
populations of memes within a brain.
A considerable proportion of
memetic history thus went by before the first meme learned to escape its
birth-host. This means that memes have been evolving for a long period
of time, and not merely for social communication. This underscores the
irrelevance of social learning to memetics.
Any kind of self promoting
behavior leading to the replication of memes within a brain would have
done to get the ball rolling. It is true that social replication places other
kinds of constraints on memes, and these will influence the kinds of
memes that evolve once social communication has become their primary
mode of replication.
But in their early period, the flavor of memetic
evolution can be expected to have been quite different.
By acknowledging this history, the kinds of psychological explanations
you can draw from to explain memetic evolution opens up. For example,
many genes survive in the genome because they are good at: manipulating
the system, not thanks to the vital proteins they produce. Take so-called
“junk” DNA—meaning DNA that is parasitic on the genetic system,
interested only in making more copies of itself, even within the genome of
one individual. Just as not all genes produce proteins, not all memes need
to induce behavior.
They could be “junk” memes, lying in wait for a
useful job to do but meanwhile being parasitic on the memetic system. At
least as long as there is selection for fast reproduction, some rogue memes
will feel the pressure to parasitize memetic reproductive system by going
it alone. (There is no sense of guilt in the ranks of replicators.) There
might even be a kind of division of labor among memes. Some memes,
like some genes, probably engage primarily in the regulation of other
memes’ activity—“busybody memes,” in effect, interfering in the affairs
of others.
All of this gets missed with the emphasis on imitation. A review of the
early history of neuromemes may even be able to explain how memes
solved the Catch-22 conundrum noted above: how social transmission
became common while being costly at the same time. It seems doubtful
that the highly inefficient and haphazard process of early social
communication would lead to the replication of a meme in another brain—
at least at first. Thus early selection pressures for signal production would

—— Escape from Planet Brain · 275 ——
have been weak, perhaps insufficient to result in a major transformation of
the
memetic
system
or
to
have
bootstrapped
modes
of
social
communication into existence in the first place. Rather it is more natural
to argue that an efficient replicator system was already in place within the
brain, having evolved over a long period. In effect, memes at first did not
live or die by their ability to send social signals. Nevertheless any success
at jumping the gap between hosts would have been regarded and so fed
back into the mechanisms for memetic replication. In this way, memes
could have persisted without signal-based life cycles for a long period,
quietly evolving a variety of social skills, during which time random
successes at social communication became more regularized.
With neuromemetics, the whole imbroglio surrounding imitation can
be avoided.
It would be hard to build a structure as sophisticated as a
science of cultural evolution on the shaky foundations of contemporary
social learning theory. Luckily it’s not the foundation on which this book
is based. The “electric meme” is grounded in a more fundamental science
than social psychology: It draws its inspiration from neuroscience.

Chapter Nine
THETECHNO-TANGO
Technical civilization, and the human minds that support it, are the
first feeble stirrings of a radically new form of existence, one as
different from life as life is from simple chemistry.
–Hans Moravec
As computers become increasingly intelligent, and as genetic engineering
and bioengineering begin to produce true cyborgs (people whose bodies
have been augmented with artificial components), our general ignorance of
what drives improvements in technology is rapidly becoming more dire.
Strident forecasts by reputable figures in science and public life suggest
that human beings could become second-class citizens in a twenty-first-
century society dominated by intelligent machines.
To address such
possibilities, it’s vital that a readily understandable framework be
established for dealing with the evolution of technology.
One reason for the lack of a ready-made stand on this issue is that
traditional evolutionary theory doesn’t concern itself with artifacts. But
evolutionary theory should have to account for the existence of things like
computers, which are merely fancy artifacts. Why? Because computers
and other artifacts show evidence of complex design and inherited
features; successive generations of computers—or tennis shoes or even,
clothespins—appear to form lineages. This strongly suggests that artifacts
are subjected to an evolutionary process.
After all, there is only one
276

—— The Techno-Tango · 277 ——
currently accepted explanation for the rise of complexity: natural selection,
as limited by intrinsic physical constraints on organization. So do artifacts
evolve?
I suggest they do.
But it’s important to recognize that they
evolve through interaction with mental “artifacts”—in particular, ideas,
which can be memes. Coevolution between memes and artifacts is at the
root of cultural change.
My claim, then, is that memes alone are not
enough. The incredible dynamicism of cultural modification in modern
Western societies, driven largely by technology, can only be the result of
“parallel power”: two lines of inheritance working together, feeding off
each other in a positive fashion. Providing a framework for understanding
how memes relate to artifacts is the goal of this chapter.
How can we think of artifacts?
Not all artifacts fit into a single
category recognized by evolutionary theory.
There isn’t a truly general
way to speak about these “made things.”
They can be extended
phenotypes, interactors, templates for signals, hosts for replicators,
parasitic replicators, or true replicators, depending on which artifact you
refer to. Some artifacts can potentially be many of these distinct things at
the same time. Each of these perspectives is only a partial view of what an
artifact can be.
Artifacts are thus a heterogeneous group sharing only the quality of
being produced from environmental materials through the activity of
organisms. And even this relationship between the organic and material
worlds is being severed as factories become automated and machines
begin to make machines.
With computer viruses, the divorce between
human activity and artifact production becomes even more complete, as
the virus can make copies of itself with only the most incidental
involvement of any biological agent (usually a seemingly innocent mouse
click).
Further, new kinds of artifact are invented as time goes by, with more
complex ones coming later in the sequence.
The types of artifact that
arrive later have internalized the ability to change themselves in more
fundamental and powerful ways. In effect, new, more dynamic categories
of artifact are continually being added to the existing roster; each adds a
new evolutionary dynamic to the overall picture of modern life.
I
therefore conclude that artifacts are evolving greater evolvability, which
accounts for their ability to occupy multiple evolutionary categories.
Accounting for the development of this evolutionary process—and the role
of memes in that process—is our task here.

—— 278 · THE ELECTRIC MEME ——
ARTIFACTS AS PHENOTYPE
The first artifacts were phenotypes. You have an idea for a better hammer,
and the “expression” of that idea is the made thing, the new hammer. In
effect, we can say that artifacts originate in the human mind as mental
objects and afterward are turned by people into physical objects. The idea
that was born in its inventor’s mind is thus like the artifactual equivalent
of a genotype, while its phenotype (or physical manifestation) is the actual
object.
More precisely, we might say the idea (a new meme?) is the
genotype and the activity of the individual in making the artifact is the
phenotype, while the secondary consequence—the extended phenotype, if
you will—is the artifact itself.
For example, the idea of a stone tool
manifests itself directly as the knapping or making of a flint, with the end
result being the Acheulean hand ax characteristic of an early human
species, Homo erectus.
Artifacts like hand axes are inanimate objects because they are “pure”
phenotypes.
They
exist
as
independent
physical
objects
in
the
environment, as the embodiment of an idea. They thus become divorced
from the vital force behind their creation: the idea that made them possible
in the first place. They are also dead-ends in an evolutionary sense: They
cannot make copies of themselves. This makes such artifacts lifeless and
inert in character.
These abiotic substrates are created (in some cases) by cultural
parasites, Lucerne.
Hand axes produced by subsequent generations of
Homo erectus may be quite similar, just with changes in form or style,
which gives them the appearance of being created through a process of
descent with modification—and makes the sequence appear to constitute
an evolutionary lineage. But, in fact, artifacts are extended phenotype of
memes, created through an intermediary agent, the host organism.
However, artifacts are the focus of selection pressures. They are the
things that can acquire and exhibit adaptations, thus becoming more
complex with time. But what evolves is the idea behind the artifact. The
artifact can, in some instances, be “upgraded” to the new model or
archetype for that class of artifact. But in these early stages, when artifacts
are simple, you simply make a new one from scratch to reflect the better
idea you just came up with. This year’s hunting bow is not, for example, a
recycled and retooled bow from last year; it has instead been made

—— The Techno-Tango · 279 ——
“fresh” from raw materials. So there is a characteristic production cycle
for new artifacts in this early phase of human evolution: idea, product, use,
selection; then new idea, new product, new round of selection.
All the
novelty arises first in the idea.
The physical objects themselves—the
artifacts—do not evolve because there is no direct line of inheritance from
one artifact to the next.
Hammers don’t make hammers; people with
hammer-making knowledge do.
Since making artifacts involves transforming “natural” bits of stuff in
the environment into something new, people are, in effect, reforming
aspects of the world in which they then have to live. Any such factor with
which a species must deal to survive and reproduce constitutes part of
what ecologists call that species’ “niche.”
The making of artifacts can
therefore be called “niche construction” or “ecological engineering.” Such
reworking of one’s surroundings has been going on for a long time. Even
lowly ants, termites, and bees reconstruct their niche by making massive
homes for themselves out of mud.
Worms also chew up their
surroundings, making it a more congenial place not only for them but also
for a wide variety of microbes and plants. We therefore shouldn’t think of
niche construction as something that requires brains, although if you have
brains, the number of ways in which you can modify your environment
increases considerably. And humans are obviously the niche constructors
nonpareil, since we are the species that has transformed the face of nearly
the entire planet through generations of cumulative, ever more powerful
activity.
Once you’ve engaged in this kind of activity, the environment has new
kinds of objects in it with which you can interact, to your benefit or harm.
Niche construction creates a new evolutionary loop in which the
transformed environment begins to put new selective pressures on the
organisms that made those modifications. Every new technology introduces
new capabilities as well as new hazards. For example, wagons or cars not
only can make people more mobile but also can run over innocent bystanders
and kill those riding inside them as well.
In any case, the existence of
mechanical vehicles may promote any genes that help in the production of
such artifacts, such as the genes that increase the skill with which new
(and safer) vehicle designs can be made. Littering the landscape with
such knickknacks, adding artifacts to what nature has already provided,
can thus significantly influence the way in which natural selection

—— 280 · THE ELECTRIC MEME ——
goes to work on a population.
This is especially the case if these
modifications persist, as artifacts often do, while the organisms that make
them come and go. Much of what we call the “built environment”—roads,
cathedrals, sewer systems—has been sitting there, as part of the landscape,
for generations.
In effect, such artifacts are inherited by subsequent
generations as an aspect of the ecological world they face.
However, this seems to be only part of the picture, because artifacts,
which include things like paintings and fashionable clothes, are generally
felt to be part of our cultural environment.
Shouldn’t there be some
consideration of the fact that creating such artifacts feeds back not only
onto our genetic makeup but onto our cultural lives as well?
Niche
construction can have an impact on the speed and direction of biological
evolution because artifacts are physical objects “out there” in the
environment, just like mountains or trees.
Making hammers can be a
“natural” consequence of genetic programs for that kind of behavior. But
skills for modifying the environment can also be transmitted through
populations in an epidemiological fashion—that is, through social
learning.
What can now be called culturally learned niche construction, as you
might expect, introduces new dynamics into the relationship between
clever organisms and their environment. Learning how to make artifacts
from others can introduce quite different dynamics into a population
than would be observed had the same routine for making artifacts been
inherited from parental genes. This is because it takes a long time for
biological evolution to select among naturally occurring mutations those
few that would enhance our ability to modify the environment in some
particular way.
But once we developed a rather general biological
mechanism for learning new things socially, the universe of possibilities
opened up, because an individual could then acquire many new abilities
for making things within a single life span.
Our abilities to clothe,
house,
and
medicate
ourselves
have
enabled
us
to
respond
to
environmental challenges not so much through genetic mutation and change
in our body’s shape, but rather by reducing or eliminating those aspects of
our environment that we find unpleasant, thanks to these newfound
abilities—abilities coming not from a shared genetic proclivity, but from
knowledge held in common by cultural groups. In effect, we have been
liberated from the strictures of our bodies by our ability to remake the

—— The Techno-Tango · 281 ——
world in our own image.
Humans are thus not helpless victims of
circumstance or mere objects
of selection, but rather the potent
constructors of highly modified, culturally inherited worlds.
ARTIFACTS AS INTERACTORS
If artifacts are part of culture, and specialized knowledge or know-how is
necessary to make artifacts, then perhaps the ideas going into the making
of artifacts are memes. When a woman knits a scarf with a certain pattern,
does the pattern reflect a meme (or meme complex) in the mother’s mind?
Can we use an evolutionary perspective to illuminate the relationship
between memes and artifacts?
The hammer doesn’t augment human musculature and achieve a
widening of the human niche just by lying there on the ground. It must
actually be put to work building a chair or a skyscraper. Artifacts are thus
linked to memes by the fact that cultural tools, to have real force, must be
wielded appropriately. This requires specialized knowledge, acquired by
individuals through practice using those artifacts.
It’s people with
expertise that make artifacts an important component of culture. This is
made obvious by the science fiction scenario in which some social group
crash-lands on a new planet, blessed with a wealth of technological gismos
beyond their wildest imaginings, only to perish because they can’t figure
out how to make anything work, not being the originators of that
technology. Know-how has to match with artifact.
So people must interact with technology.
Does this make artifacts
what evolutionists call interactors? Answering this question will require a
bit of analysis.
Take the example of a vehicle, like a wagon. A wagon is a machine
made up of some wheels, axles, and a platform, combined to carry loads
efficiently.
If function follows form, perhaps as a person constructs a
wagon, his idea of a wheeled wagon is bodily transferred to that artifact, in
its shape. The wagon thus becomes a good Dawkinsian vehicle, carrying
the wagon idea “inside,” as the artifact moves about or otherwise interacts
with the environment.
The wagon, with its every movement, sheds
wagon-memes like manna in all directions, just waiting to be picked up by
passers-by,
because
the
idea
of
a
wagon
is
embodied
in
its

—— 282 · THE ELECTRIC MEME ——
outline, in its basic design. The analogy between artifacts and biological
organisms, both of which carry replicators around inside them, should be
clear as the motivation for this argument.
How, then, does a wagon-meme create the next generation of wagon-
memes? A wagon may incidentally communicate the idea of a wagon, but
can it directly transmit to the perceiver the recipe for duplicating the
wagon? A person who sees a wagon going by won’t necessarily learn how
to build one as a result of that experience.
Neither can the wagon
physically replicate itself.
Since wagons don’t fabricate wagons, the
meme must first get out of this “vehicle” and back into a mind, so that this
active, organic agent can create the next wagon. But the meme’s problem
is easily solved. A wagon can also communicate the idea of motion and
the possibility of transportation through its form to anyone who sees it
going down the road. That is, the very act of perceiving the wagon alone
causes the meme to leap off the wagon and into the perceiving mind. The
recipient acquires a memetic copy of the inventor’s original idea of
efficient transportation of heavy objects via rolling wheels by virtue of
absorbing this visual signal. In effect, perception can separate idea from
instantiation, or extract the essence of “wagonness,” by engaging in a kind
of reconstruction of the wagon. The act of looking at something is thus
not a case of a stimulus coming from the world into the eye. Instead it is
as if the eyes send magical darts at the wagon, which cause the wagon idea
to be chipped away from its material context and then sucked back into the
perceiver’s eyes. The meme then proceeds into the brain, to lodge itself
there as a fully functioning duplicate of the idea in the mind of the
wagon’s inventor. One replication of the wagon-meme is complete.
In this example, memes can be found in signals, minds, and artifacts—
a good example of their much-vaunted ability to jump from substrate to
substrate, and the value of defining memes abstractly. The wagon idea, as
a meme, physically moves from someone’s mind out into the world by
inspiring the constructive activity of the host individual. Once there, it
latches onto an artifact (the wagon) that has been made; then it moves into
someone else’s mind after a ride on a signal when the wagon is perceived.
From its base in the perceiver’s mind, it can cause more meme-embodying
artifacts to be made.
High-fidelity replication is assured by such a
procedure
because
the
meme
itself—its
whole
information

—— The Techno-Tango · 283 ——
packet—makes the entire convoluted journey from one mind to the next
through this roundabout journey via artifacts and signals.
But this explanation is wrong.
There are several problems with it.
First, perception is, in fact, the passive reception of a signal by an
organism; eyes do not zap X rays or anything else at objects. Any view
that requires “active” eyes, ears, or noses is unscientific.
Second, this
viewpoint introduces a major asymmetry between the way in which
memes get into artifacts and the way they get back out of them again.
Memes are created at the same moment as the artifact itself, as a kind of
side effect of that production process, in the form or function of the
artifact. But memes are then extracted from their physical home without
harm to the artifact—or indeed any kind of involvement of the artifact at
all—through a kind of magical process. A signal making its way through
the air (or some other channel) has to bounce off the artifact, acquiring
meme-hood in the instant of contact, and then continue on its journey, thus
transformed until it is perceived.
However, no physical change in the
nature of the signal has occurred, so how are we to account for its change
in status from mere signal to meme? I don’t think there is any coherent
way to see how signals work as long as you think of artifacts as standard
interactors with replicators inside.
Also note that in biology, genotypes are inert stores of information
(DNA molecules, wrapped up tight inside cell nuclei), while organisms,
the interactors, are dynamic agents active in the world.
In the case of
artifacts, we get the reverse: creative, dynamic genotypes (ideas) and
static, uninvolved interactors (artifacts) that move only if some external
force is applied to them. Isn’t there something wrong with this picture?
It’s
clear
from
this
analysis
of
wagon-memes
that
artifactual
“interactors” are not like their biological counterparts in several key
respects. The replicators (if any) responsible for their construction are not
inside the artifacts themselves. Instead the ideas that make new kinds of
artifacts possible are located at some remove, in someone’s brain. So the
memes are not actually housed by the artifact itself, as DNA is held in the
nucleus of each cell. Artifacts also have no ability to repair themselves, and
so are more liable to degrade without outside assistance than organisms.
Further, the mechanism for converting their energy supply into useful form
may not be inside them either, like the step-up or step-down transformers at
power
stations
that
adjust
the
voltage
for
electrical
equipment

—— 284 · THE ELECTRIC MEME ——
inside households.
In sum, artifacts are not independent reproductive
systems. Artifacts are only part of a larger system required for making
copies of themselves: the activity of a knowledgeable individual or, in a
more modern context, a factory working from blueprints and raw
materials, must also be added to the mix. Artifacts are not self contained
reproductive systems because the replicators and catalysts that produce
them are “off-board” or “outsourced.”
Artifacts are zombies; if they
move, it’s because they’re under remote control. For all these reasons, we
would have to broaden the notion of an interactor significantly to include
artifacts. We can’t really use Dawkins’s original idea, that interactors are
“vehicles” for replicators, to describe this class of made things.
Can we legitimately expand the interactor notion to cover artifacts,
then? I think the answer is a definite “sometimes.” Simple artifacts like
hammers are tools, which are useful ornaments for expanding the niche of
their users.
For example, stick tools make otherwise inaccessible food
items (such as underground termites) available to chimps. But tools have
influence on the environment only through use of an organism’s muscle
power. Tools are just the “extended” traits of those organisms to which
they become attached: A stick wielded for defense or for poking at the
ground is (literally) an extension of one’s arm. For this reason, I suggest
that relatively simple artifacts like tools cannot profitably be seen as
interactors; they are extended phenotypes. For the same reason, I argued
in the previous chapter that signals can’t be interactors: They’re just too
simple.
But some artifacts are truly complex. More complex artifacts became
possible after big-brained creatures figured out how to combine tools as
means to a more powerful end: machines.
Machines have internal
structure: multiple, heterogeneous parts amalgamated to serve functions
that none of the parts, taken individually, might have succeeded in
addressing.
Nothing in the animal world is equivalent to a pulley, for
example, much less a computer. Some animal-built artifacts can process
information—termitaria (the towers of clay that termite colonies build) can
regulate the air temperature inside themselves, for instance.
But
computers are capable of much more, thanks to their modifiable innards.
Their insides can take on new states under the command of instructions
from elsewhere inside the machine.
This is possible only because they
have complex internal constitutions, unlike any animal-produced tool.
An important revolution in artifact production came when machines

—— The Techno-Tango · 285 ——
were linked with power sources independent of human musculature, such
as steam engines and electric generators.
This invention provided such
artifacts with the mechanical equivalent of a metabolism: the ability to
change internally through the incorporation of energy.
Steam made
possible factories with greater powers to shape metal and other raw
materials. It also allowed artifacts to move on their own: Steam enabled
people to step aboard trains for trips to distant destinations.
Powered
machines are therefore like cells in having not only considerable internal
differentiation but also the ability to use (if not exactly acquire) their own
source of power. This independence enabled powered artifacts to interact
with their environments in new ways; they were no longer just slaves to
organisms.
Complex artifacts are therefore good interactors. Given that computers
can become hosts to parasitic replicators like viruses, they must work
something like organisms, which are similarly susceptible. So perhaps we
can legitimately call these “metabolic artifacts”—the ones with their own
power sources—interactors.
Indeed it’s hard to know what else to call
them, even though they can’t reproduce independently, like biological
organisms.
The development of machines occurred only in the past few hundred
years and in association with a single species—humans. It must therefore
be the case that, at some point in history, some classes of artifact became
sufficiently sophisticated that they moved into a new evolutionary
category. Since this was a historical development—computers followed
long after hammers—an evolutionary process must be responsible.
Although
these
more
sophisticated
artifacts
remained
(extended)
phenotypes, because they were still the result of human activity, they
could also now be called interactors. But since we can’t apply the same
evolutionary title to all of them, artifacts must be a grab-bag category:
Pick an artifact, and sometimes it will play one evolutionary role,
sometimes another.
ARTIFACTS AS SIGNAL TEMPLATES
So far, we have concluded that some consolidated artifacts, like wagons and
rockets, can be interactors. Some artifacts move around under their own
power; they can even be “smart,” like computers. But what role do memes

—— 286 · THE ELECTRIC MEME ——
play in this gradual evolution in artifacts? If these are physical rather than
biological interactors, then where are the memes? In particular, what is
“inside” complex artifacts, making them “go,” if it isn’t memes? What
allows them to be part of an evolutionary lineage? How can we rightfully
say that information passes through artifacts on its way from one mind to
another if memes themselves aren’t present the whole time?
In fact, nothing need be inside an artifact. Instead interactor-artifacts
can be thought of as templates for signals.
Before investigating how
artifacts act as templates, what they are templates for must be clarified,
Signals are patterned streams of particles flowing through a channel.
Examples of signals include spoken words, a light beam (stream of
photons), or a digital message (.a stream of electrons). They can be called
“natural” if an organism produces them (as in the sounds of speech) or
“technological” if a machine does (as in our example of a photon stream).
Artifacts, on the other hand, can be templates for generating signals. Such
artifacts consist of a substrate with information inscribed as structures in it
or on it (as color, shapes, or patterns on a background). Examples here
include tattoos, the famous paintings on the cave walls in Lascaux, France,
books, magnetic tape, and DVDs. Artifacts are things that can choke the
transmission channel by sitting there inertly, waiting to serve as the
template for a signal.
In contact with an artifact, a signal can start to reflect a new pattern,
which changes its amplitude and frequency, for example, to “reflect” the
fact that it is now carrying information about the nature of the artifact it
bumped into. For example, even though Shakespeare has been dead for
nearly 400 years, his speeches are still present in current-day brains,
having been stored in widely available books. Thus ideas can make their
way from one mind to another through the mediation of artifacts, carried
along their way, both before and after contact with the artifact, by signals.
This process of communication through artifacts can, but need not,
result in the replication of some idea, making it a meme. In most cases,
perhaps, the signals that project from an artifact don’t lead to the
replication of any meme associated with that artifact. As I argued above,
seeing a wagon doesn’t necessarily lead the perceiver to recreate the
wagon inventor’s idea in his own mind. People often see things without
fully examining and understanding them; they are concerned only with
using the artifact to achieve some other goal, such as getting somewhere.

—— The Techno-Tango · 287 ——
Nevertheless it seems undeniable that at some point in time, the social
transmission of memes moved from being mediated by signals to also
being mediated by artifacts. But just as signals aren’t memes, neither are
artifacts. Both are instigators for replication, not replicators themselves.
Signals, remember, are mere scraps of information, which must be
augmented to constitute an idea. There is still much work for the brain to
do once the signal has hen received, just as cognitive scientists and
linguists have argued.
In some cases, then, the progress of information into artifacts and back
again through signals was good enough to result in information being
replicated between two different brains. This evolutionary development—
messages hopping a ride on artifacts in their progression from host to
host—is a “natural” outgrowth of an existing capability among memes.
As organisms learned to modify their environments in specific ways,
messages came to get buried, or embodied, in artifacts, waiting for later
release when struck by a signal-bearing medium.
Eventually memes
learned to exploit this in-place mechanism for their own selfish ends.
This is what makes physical artifacts different from their biological
counterparts: the role of signals in the replication of memes. Memes can’t
exist in both brains and artifacts, any more than they can exist in both
brains and signals.
Either case violates the single-substrate rule.
But
when artifacts are seen as signal templates we no longer face the multiple-
substrate problem. Memes stay in brains, where they belong. Artifacts
join signals as intermediaries to replication, achieved somewhat indirectly
through their agency.
This may seem counterintuitive.
Think of the Rosetta Stone, for
example. How is it possible that memes aren’t stored in the surface of that
piece of rock? The writing on it unlocked a whole dead civilization, that
of the ancient Egyptians. It therefore seems to speak to people with the
voices of those long dead, millennia later. For dead Egyptian minds to be
able to communicate with us, memes must have been stored in that slab of
stone, you might think.
But, in fact, rocks don’t talk. Their virtue—and the reason someone
took the time to carve similar patterns on that particular stone three times
over—is that rocks form a relatively inert and durable substrate for signal
templates.
There’s no meaning—no memes—on them.
The Rosetta
Stone,
despite
redirecting
photon
streams
into
the
environment

—— 288 · THE ELECTRIC MEME ——
for thousands of years, was
“mute” until the Frenchman Jean-Francois
Champollion took seriously the idea that the same text might be written
there in different languages—as a kind of translator’s table—and worked
out the meaning of the Egyptian hieroglyphs from the Greek words.
If memes are not lying dormant in the stone, if they reside only in
brains, then how do dead memes miraculously appear again in the brains
of people generations later? The link is necessarily indirect, through the
artifact, which achieves this miracle of transmission from the dead. This
transmission involves a number of steps: The stone functions as a long-
term storage device for the written templates that, when “read off,”
produce a catalytic signal, which then helps in the re-creation of the meme
in a brain. But such a pathway can be as efficient as direct transmission of
the catalyst from a source brain, if conditions are right. Remember that, in
my book, brains are preconditioned to construct memes, given a chance.
So there doesn’t have to be much of a stimulus, and the stimulus can just
as easily be a signal derived from a rock as one projected by a mouth.
How does the artifact production process work now?
Using the host
organism as an instrument, neuromemes can produce both signals and
artifacts. For example, a meme can cause someone to say something or to
type a word into computer memory. However, as in this example, it will
generally be the case that a meme must decide whether to spur its host
organism to produce an artifact or a signal. Different motor programs will
typically be involved in the production of one or the other.
To say
something, the mouth must be moved; typing requires fingers to peck
away at a keyboard.
So memes have an either/or choice: Either produce a brain spike that
escapes into the macroenvironment as a social signal (in the form of
photon or phoneme streams), or produce a physical template—an
artifact—that can catalyze signals at some later time.
It’s basically a
choice between current or later transmission (and perforce, a decision
between replication today or tomorrow).
The direct production of a social signal is easier. Essentially the move
is from one dynamic coding system to another—from spike to speech—

—— The Techno-Tango · 289 ——
whereas the production of an artifact requires the coordination of a
complex sequence of host activity, like hacking away at the surface of a
stone.
The
direct,
signal-mediated
route
therefore
arose
earlier
historically.
Adding another step in the transmission process—the
“layover” on a stone—also introduces greater uncertainty into the memetic
life cycle. In particular, replication is delayed compared to the relatively
quicker, guaranteed result of a signal. This need to find a way to secure a
return on the investment in a stone template also caused this mode of
replication to arise only after brain-to-brain signal mediation.
However, artifacts potentially represent an improvement over signals
in one respect: Many signals never reach a new host and thus constitute a
reproductive dead-end for the memes that produced it.
Producing the
Rosetta Stone, on the other hand, could potentially harvest a much better
return on investment because it sticks around, giving many later signals
the opportunity to establish a whole new life for the responsible memes.
The all-important evolutionary goal of continuing the memetic lineage
may be achieved more readily by the artifact constantly generating signals
that reach another brain than host-generated signals would.
So artifacts are much more likely to produce multiple copies of the
meme than a signal. This may compensate in some circumstances for the
meme’s reduced degree of control over the fate of the signal eventually
produced from the Rosetta Stone, hundreds of years later. Thus there may
be a net selective advantage to artifact production in some circumstances.
Robinson Crusoe on his desert island should definitely forgo yelling for
help and instead put a message in a bottle, for example.
COMMUNICATIVE ARTIFACTS
My claim is thus that more complex artifacts can work as physical
interactors through their ability to serve as templates for signals that
transmit memetic information between minds.
We can draw further
lessons from this new view of artifacts. In particular, we can distinguish
two major classes of artifactual interactors.
The primary purpose of a wagon is not to communicate the wagon-
meme to those who happen to observe it going by. Its basic function is to
supplement human muscle power by moving loads about efficiently.

—— 290 · THE ELECTRIC MEME ——
That is what the lineage of wagon designs gets better at doing over time.
Indeed, as wagons get more complex, the mechanism that makes them
move may get buried inside other machinery, so that the ability to perceive
how they work becomes more difficult.
The spread of the meme for
“rolling transport” may therefore be hindered, rather than furthered, by
technological developments in wheeled vehicles.
The main purpose of books like this one, on the other hand, is to
transmit the writer’s message.
Books exhibit a number of adaptive
features designed to facilitate this end: the stark contrast of black type on a
white background for easier reading, a clear typeface, a durable
substrate—all of which are placed inside a protective cover.
As the
printed template produces visual signals that someone can interpret, some
memes may be replicated in the process. And as improvements in printing
have taken place, it has become easier for the messages in books to be
disseminated.
Developments in the form of books appear to reflect a
selective bias toward the more efficient communication of any embodied
messages held within their covers.
So successful wagon designs are not those that communicate
“wagonness” most readily, but those that “communicate” loads more
efficiently from here to there. Nevertheless any artifact that functions as
an interactor allows signals to reflect off it, which can lead to memes being
reproduced; the artifact becomes a memetic interactor in such cases. As
this class of interactor-artifacts developed over time, however, some of
them came to be explicitly designed to serve as signal templates and hence
serve better as disseminators of memes.
Various classes of artifacts
nowadays—like this book—are therefore made to transmit information or
to hold messages. Artifacts whose primary function is to serve as a signal
template can be called communicative artifacts.
After eons of directing hosts to produce signals, memes therefore
devised a new strategy for reproduction in new brains. In the first instance
of such activity, a meme produced a signal that caused muscular or other
activity by the host organism.
This activity, in turn, resulted in the
production
of
an
artifact,
probably
through
the
relatively
minor
modification of existing environmental materials (as in the case of early hominids
bashing at stones to create primitive tools).
These tools are the extended
phenotypes of those memes, as suggested before. But these artifacts also included
two-dimensional templates on their surface, embodied in the form of

—— The Techno-Tango · 291 ——
the artifact itself, from which signals can be “struck off” a symmetrical
stone with a sharp edge, unusual in nature, communicates its function by
its very shape, telling all who see it: “Use me to make cuts in things!” A
signal thus produced, “reflecting” information from that template, can then
make its way through the environment, eventually to become a stimulus to
a new brain. On making contact with some sensory organ such as an eye
or ear, the social signal gets translated back into a neuronal spike train.
This train then searches for a location suitable for a replication reaction
inside that brain, which acquires the idea that stones can be modified to
suit human purposes.
Once the ability to produce artifacts evolved, elaborations of this basic
strategy for the social replication of memes naturally arose. The next type
of artifact ensuing from this development encoded messages as a patterned
structure on the artifact’s surface, using the physical substrate as a
“background.” Examples of this novel type of artifact include paint on
rocks, ink on paper, and magnetic charges on celluloid tape. This is an
outgrowth to be expected only after the first, simpler route to meme
replication had been well established.
A subsequent step in the evolution of interactions between memes and
communicative artifacts results in an even less direct process of memetic
reproduction.
Now the neuromeme produces a signal that induces host
behavior which produces an artifact (a machine) that in turn produces a
memetic artifact with a signal template.
Examples include the printing
press, which produces books that can produce photons (visual signals), and
the tape recorder, a machine that can encode tapes which play musical
sounds (aural signals).
This additional complexity in artifacts is worth
noting because, from the perspective of the neuromemes, the nature of the
memetic copies eventually produced is more uncertain as more steps
intervene. So this lengthier process of replication should arise later—as it
did, historically speaking. But it’s just an elaboration of the original move
from signals to artifacts in the first place in the sense that it required a
“decision” by memes about which route to use to achieve reproduction.
The advantage of this strategic move away from host muscle power in
favor of more powerful machines, and therefore the reason such
production processes probably evolved, is that machines can produce
many more copies of the communicative artifacts than would otherwise be
possible. Just compare the number of popular novels printed for business-

—— 292 · THE ELECTRIC MEME ——
people on trains or planes to the number of medieval incunabula
handwritten by monks slaving away in their monastic cells (which can
now only be found locked away in museums).
The increase in artifact
population size (millions of copies in the case of pulp-fiction titles, for
example) in turn significantly increases the pool of potential hosts for a
given set of memes. The trade-off, from a meme’s perspective, is between
the greater uncertainty and roundabout replication arising from machine-
based artifact production versus the greater potential number of copies that
could be produced through this route. The balance must have eventually
tipped in favor of using machines to make templates to make signals.
Artifacts that have some control over the production of signals, rather
than being passive, inert templates for signals, come next in the
evolutionary sequence. Electronic artifacts (tape players, television sets,
virtual reality machines) generate signals themselves rather than relying on
ambient radiation to be reflected off one of their surfaces. There is thus a
“generation gap” between books and television. The advent of electronic
artifacts also introduces greater control over signal content, destinations,
and distribution, and simultaneously reduces the uncertainty associated
with the original production of such media. The potential population of
hosts also increases dramatically again.
Each of these is obviously of
benefit to the memes interacting with such artifacts.
Just think of the
number of people in the world who know the theme songs from popular
television shows, compared to the number that have learned the tunes from
an original, locally produced play.
The relationship between a template and a substrate becomes even more
elaborate when the substrate wraps in on itself to create an entire
microenvironnnent for signal templates.
This makes the artifact a snug
home for the templates, to some degree independent of the larger
environment with which the artifact itself must cope. The obvious example
here is a computer, which houses sophisticated templates for the dispensing
of signals: memory banks in the form of two- or three-dimensional arrays of
signal templates. Further, we are no longer restricted to static templates;
these are active ones: These registers can be readily modified, so that
messages can be updated. This is a major step forward—making computer
memory more flexible, like human memory—with obvious results.
Moreover, a computer’s templates are not restricted to storing just one piece
of information; many millions of bits of information can coexist

—— The Techno-Tango · 293 ——
inside a single machine. This is a throng of templates that memes (and
other types of information) can use.
In this way, artifact-based signal templates have evolved, step by step,
from being coded in the shape of an artifact (such as a stone tool) to a
pattern on its surface (ink on paper) to a structure internal to the artifact
itself (a computer program).
This sequence requires an increasingly
convoluted production process to make the template. In the first step, both
the substrate and the template are produced in the same action (since they
are the same thing in a hammer: its external form); later a substrate
suitable for more sophisticated templates must be prepared before the code
is added.
For example, clay tablets must be molded before symbolic
shapes (cuneiform) can be pressed into their surface.
Even later, with
more highly evolved types of artifact, a complex artifice like a computer
housing must be created prior to the addition of the template inside.
Also there is an increasingly intimate connection between the host and
the template over time. The template moves from being an ectoparasite—
that is, a parasite clinging to the outside of a host (like the shape of a
hammer)—to an endoparasite, one living inside the protective womb of
the host’s body (like computer memory). From the perspective of both the
artifact and the template, then, the observed progression is a natural
coevolutionary sequence for a parasite and host: one of increasing
dependency on each other.
This trend suggests that the relationship between artifacts and memes
is one of symbiosis—both of the involved species use their association to
regulate interactions with the environment. As the degree of dependence
between them increases—that is, as the relationship “tightens”—either the
usefulness of each partner to the other tends to increase or one becomes
progressively more exploitative of the other.
What advantages accrue to memes by progressing through this
sequence? Ectoparasitic templates on artifacts are essentially naked and
remain exposed to the environment, which means they can be readily
degraded. The messages they can produce are also very limited as a result:
Only transcription of the template structure into signals takes place,
typically through reflection off that surface (as when photons are defected from
the shape of a hammer). The form of the artifact can become increasingly
complex (progressing, for example, from a two-dimensional surface to one with
some
relief
or
from
a
black-and-white
to
a
color
palette).
But

—— 294 · THE ELECTRIC MEME ——
there is still only a longer string of signals to be read off the surface of the
artifact; there is no increase in the sophistication of the signals.
By moving inside the artifact, the template gains not only shelter from
environmental forces that would weaken and weather it, but also an
opportunity to feed off the artifact’s resources, if any, for the creation of
more complex structures of its own kind.
For example, with the
introduction
of computers,
the
template
gets
both
a
comfortable
microenvironment in which to live and the possibility of developing into a
new code, thanks to the provision of a substantial and concentrated energy
source and room to grow, with sophisticated, looping execution structures
for the development of computer programs.
Further, as computers are
networked, signals can be transmitted between hosts, resulting even in the
replication of programs (template states) along the way, as in the case of
computer viruses.
Thus, although artifacts are physical substrates, not organic ones, they
still behave in many ways as if they were proper biotic hosts for parasites.
Since artifacts are not biological things, however, the same kind of
relationship cannot be expected to hold in all respects. An organism-as-
host-environment is special because it can adapt to the presence of the
bioparasite. The continued presence of the parasite is therefore dictated
not only by its own morphological and physiological characteristics, but
by its ability to defend itself against the host’s response to its presence.
Host and parasite thus become a coevolutionary system.
But a physical host cannot respond adaptively when a parasite decides
to manipulate it; the host has no ability to learn new responses; it is not
behaviorally plastic (although it may be made of plastic). The relationship
between an artifact and replicator is always one engaged “at a distance,”
through the mediation of a template. Although the two may still coevolve,
this leaves memes with only indirect, and relatively feeble, control over
their artifactual “hosts.”
ARTIFACTS AS REPLICATORS
The foregoing does not end the litany of evolutionary roles that artifacts
can adopt. An earlier chapter provided a long discussion about computer
viruses.
They are able to duplicate themselves in electronic forms of

—— The Techno-Tango · 295 ——
memory, and thus constitute an instance of an artifactual replicator, even if
they are restricted to manipulating an existing substrate.
In effect, this
makes them parasitic replicators. However, an even more novel kind of
artifact looms on the horizon.
Nanites—nano-scaled machines that can
presently self-assemble into almost-visible objects and that may perhaps
soon be able to self-replicate—are envisaged by nanotechnologists as
mechanical replicators that do not rely on hosts.
Given the right
conditions, they will be able to make use of some form of energy to
reproduce themselves from raw materials, independent of any human
activity.
Therefore such nanites should not be parasitic, they would be
true artifactual replicators. Naturally any such replicator would begin its
career as a relatively primitive form but then could evolve greater
complexity without human interference.
With truly replicating artifacts, we clearly would find ourselves an a
new situation, because memes would remain physically independent of
such artifacts (back in the brains of those who invented the new
replicator), although the replicating artifact and replicating neuronal node
could
clearly
interact
with
one
another—as
when
the
inventive
nanotechnologist, under the influence of meme-for-nanites, sets up the
conditions necessary for the first nanite to be created.
From that point
forward, however, we could have dueling replicators: memes competing
with the nanites themselves for control over the course of nanite evolution,
because it’s possible that the interests of physical replicators and
biological or cultural ones would not be the same.
For example, most
nanites today are made of carbon and might seek to use a major source of
concentrated carbon—biological organisms—as fodder for their own
“bodies.”
If some artifacts do cross this final Rubicon, becoming fully
independent evolutionary agents, they will have run the gamut of
evolutionary roles, from simple phenotype to full-fledged replicators. This
would reverse the message from the previous chapter on social memetics.
There I argued that signals are “none of the above”—at least neither
replicator nor interactor (they are phenotypes, of course). But artifacts, on
the contrary, can be “all of the above”—from simple phenotypes to full-
fledged replicators. We can only await future developments to tell where
the evolution of artifacts will go from here.

—— 296 · THE ELECTRIC MEME ——
THE MACHINING OF CULTURE
So how do memes fit overall into this picture of artifact evolution?
I
believe the relationship between memes and artifacts has itself evolved as
the nature of artifacts has changed.
Artifacts like hand axes and wagons are simple because their function
follows directly from their form. In this, they are like prions. Therefore
any memes associated with such artifacts will be limited replicators,
because their ability to vary and still perform their function must be
severely constrained. Wagons with square wheels don’t roll and so can’t
transport anything.
Such wagons don’t last long, and neither would a
meme “wagon with square wheels.” Simple artifacts also embody only
one idea.
In the case of the wagon wheel, we may also have just one
meme—the idea that “round objects roll”—embodied in the form of this
class of “made round things.”
This meme is replicated when someone
innocent of this idea acquires it through observing the wagon go by.
More complex machines, on the other hand, are capable of performing
multiple functions and therefore of being involved in the transmission of
multiple memes simultaneously. We could say that the axle connecting
the wagon’s wheels is an important independent technological innovation
and must have required a new meme to have evolved. Putting the platform
on top of two sets of wheels connected by axles was a further development
of the basic idea of rolling transportation.
A wagon may thus be
associated with several memes, each embodied in a separate portion of this
relatively primitive machine.
Thus artifacts can evolve multiple functions by developing component
parts, each of which performs an independent job. They can also become
multifunctional by dividing into a background and template, with the template
evolving the function of producing multiple signals that convey separate
meanings. A major break arises with this physical division because form no
longer automatically indicates function in template artifacts.
Merely
observing an artifact’s use no longer communicates the idea behind its
creation. When you see a hand ax hacking at something, it’s fairly easy to
infer that the ax is designed for chopping things up.
But if you see
someone reading a book, you won’t be able to figure out why the
reader is laughing or crying unless you can get a glimpse of the page
yourself.
This is because the template contains information that

—— The Techno-Tango · 297 ——
must be interpreted to have meaning. Black-and-white patches on a piece
of paper must be translated from their two-dimensional state to make a
three-dimensional impression, a true picture in the mind. Once we leave
wagons and such behind, we get to communicative artifacts in which the
material object itself becomes in a sense secondary; it remains important
only to the extent that it serves as a good support for the template. For this
reason, it doesn’t much matter if words are written on stone, paper, or a
computer screen.
The development of more sophisticated artifacts like nanites does not
mean that simple phenotypic artifacts are made obsolete or fade into
obscurity. Instead they continue to have their purposes, if highly specific
ones. But in the course of modification, an artifact may cross the “border”
from one evolutionary category to another—for example, from phenotype
to replicator.
This kind of major leap in evolutionary “status” is not
unheard of in the biological world: Prions are replicating proteins, simple
molecules that acquire the ability to replicate via a physical modification
of their shape.
This single act transforms them straight from genetic
phenotypes to independent replicators.
Prions don’t become interactors
first, nor hosts to parasitic replicators; prionic proteins become replicators
themselves in one fell swoop. Similarly, particular kinds of carbon, like
the soccer-ball-shaped Carbon-60 molecule (called a “buckyball” after the
inventor of geodesic structures, Buckminster Fuller), can be induced to
assemble themselves into aggregates with regularized shapes such as
tubes.
Aggregates of C60 can then form micromachines, like tiny
transistors or molecular rotor wheels, or different-shaped C60 aggregates
can be combined to produce macroscopic (visible) structures. Such self-
assembly is a major step on the way to replication, so C60 is potentially on
the road to becoming not just another “inert” molecule but a replicator.
A DARWINIAN DUET
Since both memes and artifacts obviously evolve, and also interact, it is
fair to sate that memes coevolve with artifacts. This is certainly the case
with communicative artifacts, because the idea that made the artifact-as-
substrate—for example, the idea of a book (as a two-dimensional surface
for
encoded
symbols)—is
different
and
unconnected
in
an

—— 298 · THE ELECTRIC MEME ——
evolutionary sense from the memes associated with the template—that is,
from the content of a book (as a particular sequence of symbols). It may
also be true that the earlier generation of simple artifacts coevolved with
memes.
But the idea that gives one wheel some peculiar feature (say,
multicolored spokes) may not be memetic at all, even though the basic
idea of a wheel-as-round-thing is a meme. Thus aspects of an artifact may
be produced through the replication of a meme, while other aspects of the
very same artifact may be non-memetic in nature.
This creates a
coevolutionary relationship between artifacts and memes of a different
sort. In such a case, memes and other ideas combine in the creation of a
compound artifact, with the memes being responsible for only certain
aspects of its design.
One way in which coevolution between memes and artifacts can occur
is through the avenue of use. With practice at hammering, a clever person
might find that his particular hammer is poor at some aspect of the job it
has been designed to do. Perhaps the hammer’s head keeps falling off as it
bangs on things. In a few cases, the user may think of a better way to keep
the hammerhead on the shaft tightly. This may just involve the hammerer
changing his behavior in interaction with the tool, such as using shorter
strokes from the elbow rather than swinging the hammer from over the
shoulder.
Or it may require a design modification to the tool itself:
Perhaps the user devises a new means of affixing the head to the shaft.
This design innovation may take place through trial and error or through a
mental simulation of that trial-and-error process (“What if I wrapped some
cord around this bit here or notched the end of the shaft here?”). Either
way, the process of design modification—or artifact mutation—can be
thought of as being Darwinian in the sense of involving selection among
random mutations.
In fact, technological innovation can be described as a Darwinian
process of descent with modification operating in parallel between ideas
and their implementation—that is, in both the technical knowledge base of
artifact-making or artifact-using and in the artifacts themselves.
The
inherent dynamism of technology can then be seen as due to the interaction
of these coevolving processes.
Inventors feed off existing artifacts as
somehow
faulty
models,
experiment
with
many
options
for
their
modification, and then create improved ones, which are descendants in a

—— The Techno-Tango · 299 ——
lineage of similar artifacts. These new exemplars of what an artifact can
be in turn stimulate novel thoughts about how the next generation of
improvements can be wrought on this raw material, creating the next
generation of ideas related to such artifacts.
It is this back-and-forth
between thoughts and their manifestations in the world that makes
technology particularly dynamic.
More formally, here’s how I propose technological change occurs.
New artifact types are created through invention, or random mutations in
form. This starts a new evolutionary lineage. Innovations, on the other
hand, are modifications of these inventions through the recombination of
parts. Add a tool to a tool, and you get a machine. Combine a machine
with another machine, and you get a more complex machine. Such single-
step recombinations between artifact lineages (“combinatorial chemistry”)
can rapidly produce complexity.
Over time, an artifact lineage can
therefore show evidence of cumulative selection (variation with descent)
and manifest an adaptive design with greater and greater power to
transform the environment.
Simultaneously there is a process of mental evolution in know-how
that can also be described as Darwinian. The production of new artifacts
is first simulated in the mind, perhaps through an unconscious process, in
which various amendments to the artifact are “tried out” for their
competitive advantages before the first thingamabob is ever physically
attached to a thingamajig. This process of mental trial and error may recur
at the level of research and development within a firm, in which potential
emendations to a product are selectively tried out by a team, perhaps
through
“brainstorming,”
rather
than
being
simulated
within
one
individual’s mind. Yet a third level of selection among artifactual forms
can occur in the marketplace, as when one brand of toothpaste is chosen
over another by a consumer. In any case, innovation can be described as a
Darwinian process of iterative modification, not a directed “intentional
design.”
This means that to explain cultural change we must deal with the
evolution of both technology and cultural knowledge. It’s the interaction
of these two Darwinian processes—of descent with modification in the
body of knowledge available to a society relevant to the production of
some artifact, as well as the embodied modifications in the artifact

—— 300 · THE ELECTRIC MEME ——
itself—that
must
be
modeled
for
a
complete
understanding
of
technological evolution. And only a united Darwinism, using a single set
of principles for both memes and artifacts, can place such disparate
phenomena into a common analytical framework.
WHO’S IN CONTROL NOW?
I have established that there is a parallel between evolution in memes and
evolution in artifacts: They are two Darwinian processes working in
tandem to achieve the phenomenal rates of cultural change we see in the
world around us.
How, then, do these two processes actually interact?
Both memes and artifacts have an independent evolutionary dynamic
associated with them.
But if they are mutually involved in cultural
change, then there must be coevolutionary dynamics between them as
well, caused by their relationships with each other.
This complex
relationship can really be pursued in detail only by modeling the process.
The formalism devised by cultural selectionism (derived from population
genetics) is admirably capable of dealing with this modeling problem,
after suitable modification.
But, as noted above, the nature of the
interaction between a meme and an artifact also differs depending on what
kind of artifact is being considered—is it a simple phenotype, an
interactor, or a replicator? So an entire class of models will have to be
developed to deal with the varying kinds of relationships that memes and
artifacts can have together. This simply hasn’t been done yet.
Why are we left hanging here, at this somewhat unsatisfactory point?
Why has there been little theoretical attention to developments in
technology from memeticists? One reason is that the relationship between
memes and their hosts—including (by extension) artifacts—is symbiotic:
What is good for one is generally good for the other.
Thus there are
relatively few areas in which interests conflict: What benefits hosts in their
battle to stay alive and prosper has also proven to aid the career of memes
as mental parasites.
And over a substantial range of phenomena to be
explained, there has been considerable overlap between the expectations of
standard social science and the memetic kind of host-parasite approach.
Still there are bound to be situations in which conflict arises between
memes and artifacts, especially when (and if) they become full-fledged

—— The Techno-Tango · 301 ——
replicators themselves. Who’s in control of technological evolution? For
much of their history, both memes and artifacts have been relatively
impoverished replicators, with little ability to affect the behavior of the
other. This again implies that there are few domains in which their unique
interests can express themselves or make themselves felt in the world.
At the same time, the story of culture turns out to hinge much more
significance on artifacts than on memes. Memes began life as replicators
and have achieved certain advances, especially through their interactions
with signals and artifacts. But over the same course of time, artifacts have
rapidly progressed from simple phenotypes to replicators, thanks to their
involvement with ideas. This rapid evolutionary succession makes it even
more imperative that we understand precisely how fast-changing artifacts
evolve.
The lack of attention paid to artifacts has meant that there has been a
tendency to make too much of memes, to think that they play too great a
role in human culture. It’s a natural mistake. If memes are like genes,
which drive biological evolution, then surely memes must play the same
central role in cultural evolution. They must be the agents that make us
fully human, unique in all the world. It has therefore been necessary here
to cut memes down to size by showing that even if they are a leading
player in the tale, the drama turns out to be a love story. And the actor
playing opposite memes in this romance turns out to be artifacts. Memes
must dance a tango with technology to make the curtain come down after
the third act.
This “demotion” of memes to shared billing should cure
meme enthusiasts from making ridiculous claims about the ability of
memes to cause everything seen during human evolution, from big brains
to language to consciousness.
In fact, there is more to culture—and
human psychology—than the replication of memes.
This extra bit is
artifacts, and all that goes with them.
Certainly it will be fascinating to live in a world with replicating
proteins, replicating organic and mechanical memories, and replicating
miniature machines.
But to understand how replicating artifacts might
come into being, we need to figure out how novel ideas become novel
objects—and how these inventions then become the foundation for a
successful line of innovations—if we are to dodge the more frightening
scenarios being put forward about the new millennium (like man-eating
nanites).
The concepts put forward here are only a first step in this
direction.

—— 302 · THE ELECTRIC MEME ——
RETHINKING CULTURE
What even these tentative steps make clear, however, is that the viewpoint
developed here has major implications for our notion of culture.
As I
observed earlier, culture is most commonly seen these days as the
information in individuals’ heads that they have acquired from others. I
want to take issue here with this formulation. The definition is too narrow.
Let me first note, however, that this cognitivist definition of culture has
many virtues: It’s clear, simple, and comprehensible. You know what to
count in order to take stock of culture: ideas in people’s heads. It also
automatically identifies a mechanism—social learning—as crucial to the
dissemination and replication of culture. One problem, at the empirical
level, is that it may be difficult to tally up the frequency of ideas in some
group of people. It’s easier to do that with readily observable phenomena
like behavior or artifacts, but cognitivists define the object of analysis as
something inside the mind.
This difficulty is why some memeticists
suggest we make the observably duplicated elements of culture, like
behavioral patterns, the replicators—in effect, reversing the perspective we
have adopted here.
The connection between culture and cognition is also powerfully,
supported by the circumstance that human beings—the planet’s sole
possessors of full-blown culture—are those creatures with brain sizes that
seem disproportionately large for their body size.
Surely these two
singularities are linked, the reasoning seems to go. The dominant theory
of human brain evolution—the “Machiavellian intelligence hypothesis”—
suggests that it’s the complexities of social life that have caused the
ballooning of our brains, which then allowed cultural accretions to creep
in. Calling the need for impressive social cognitive abilities the cause of
big brain evolution seems to work: Human groups are considerably larger
than those of other primates, so remembering more names and faces may
have spurred the growth of cortex in our species. And other creatures with
big brains—such as apes, elephants, and dolphins—also seem to have
flexible, complex social lives.
Within the currently dominant cognitivist camp, culture is generally
defined as either widely shared traits—a view held by most cultural
anthropologists—or as socially learned traits, a conviction common
among cultural selectionists. These definitions are not identical. For

—— The Techno-Tango · 303 ——
example, some socially learned beliefs can be minority values and so still
would be called cultural by cultural selectionists, but not by those who
emphasize sharedness.
There are also problems with the “widely shared” criterion. First, what
is rare today can be universal tomorrow, thanks to the social diffusion of
information.
At what degree of commonality does information become
cultural? Second, some beliefs may be shared as a result of similar but
independent experiences, rather than through the social transmission of the
idea. So for the cultural consensualists, the cultural and the communicated
do not overlap completely. But this breaks the link between culture and
society, which most social scientists would want to keep.
I therefore argue that the criterion of social learning is more crucial
than the actual commonality of beliefs in defining what is cultural. The
implicit objective of recognizing culture is surely to distinguish it from
biological
inheritance,
including
the
information
that
evolutionary
psychology suggests has been placed in the mind by natural selection in
the form of specialized abilities for information processing. So it’s best to
acknowledge this explicitly by including the acquisition mechanism in the
definition of culture. The true criterion of what is cultural underlying the
cognitive revolution is how such information is acquired: through social
learning, rather than genetic or mental inheritance. Culture is something
individuals acquire during their life spans through social living.
But if you “follow the information” as it loops between heads, often
through various artifactual incarnations, it becomes clear that you can’t
divorce cognition from technology.
You can’t really separate the
production of communicative artifacts on the factory floor from their role
in the dissemination of information.
It’s the state of the art in
communication technology that determines what artifacts can do as
manipulators and purveyors of information.
What is used today as a
“mute” piece of inert technology can be fit into a communicative artifact
tomorrow, thanks to the ease with which inorganic materials can be
recombined. So recognizing that the cultural knowledge in people’s heads
has origins in interactions with artifacts necessitates adding technology as
a dimension of the culture concept.
But perhaps we can divide “social” learning into two categories:
information learned directly from people, and that acquired from artifacts.

—— 304 · THE ELECTRIC MEME ——
This should keep the original mode of social learning as cultural, while
relegating the other to “technological learning.” However, such a division
is unlikely to work because much of the information in artifacts has been
put there by people with the express purpose of communicating it to
others.
Artifacts are just intermediaries.
The routes through which
information circulates simply involve too many interchanges between
people and artifacts, at least in modern societies, to keep the distinction
between direct and indirect transmission clear.
Recognition of this mediation has been delayed, I think, by the fact that
the discipline traditionally designated as official guardian of the culture
concept—anthropology—has
been
preoccupied
until
recently
with
traditional societies.
In these groups, technology is highly limited,
especially
with
respect
to
communication,
which
remains
almost
exclusively face to face.
But this ancient social context is rapidly
disappearing. For the culture concept to remain relevant, it must adapt or
die.
Luckily there are alternative evolutionary approaches that do not see
culture in strictly mentalist terms.
These alternatives are actually more
consistent with the general objective to explain what is in people’s heads.
In fact, change in the pool of non-genetic information in a population is
better described, especially in modern societies, by paying attention to the
sources of that information. And to the fact that much of this information
is stored, in various kinds of artifacts, in the environment.
Somewhat ironically, recognition of the fact that culture is partly
environmental reasserts the uniqueness of the human species. As it has
become clear that animals can do most of what we used to think was
specific to humans—like make tools or use symbolic communication—
the so-called “cultural adaptation” that separated humanity from the
rest of creation has tended to dwindle in significance.
Chimpanzees
are now well known for having a variety of cultural traditions, or patterns
of behavior passed from generation to generation via social learning. They
even have group-specific techniques for using artifacts. For example, two
chimpanzee populations living in similar forest environments in nearby
African countries exhibit distinct styles of the same behavior. Tai Forest
chimpanzees from the Ivory Coast dip a stick into a termite nest and then
lick the termites off with their tongue. In contrast, Gombe chimpanzees

—— The Techno-Tango · 305 ——
in Tanzania use a more efficient technique: They use their free hand to
strip termites off the stick-probe and then shove the mass of insects into
their mouths.
What is less well known is the fact that such behavioral traditions also
exist in “lower animals” like the humble guppy, in whom arbitrary and
maladaptive social customs for finding food can be maintained through
social learning. The rudiments of culture thus exist in a range of species,
but the number of traditions in any one of them is few and their speed of
change slow compared to the human case. How can this variation in the
“strength” of culture between species be explained? In particular, what is
unique about human culture?
The argument now—and one that will stand the test of time—is that
what distinguishes humans is cumulative culture. Human culture includes
traditions that build on their earlier accomplishments to reach more
sophisticated culminations, either in thought or in material form. Thus the
key to human cultural evolution is that a new “ratchet” effect arose, in
which cultural advances were built upon progressively in a way not seen in
the social traditions of other animals. Human cognition would thenceforth
become increasingly complex and differentiated, eventually achieving
modern levels of sophistication without the need for further biological
change.
Of course, calling this process “ratcheting” merely gives a name to
what we already surmised was important.
What we really need is a
mechanism to drive the ratchet round and round. What really separates
human culture from the culture of other intelligent creatures?
A prominent point of view suggests that cumulative culture is possible
only if people can learn lots of new things before they die, not just the few
new tricks to which monkeys and apes are restricted.
This limitation
consigns monkey culture to the continual reinvention of simple novelties
(like the famous invention of potato-washing by a Japanese macaque) and
ape culture to a relatively small number of cultural traditions. Fully robust
culture is presumably restricted to species with well-developed abilities to
imitate others in the social group.
Otherwise individuals spend their
lifetimes reacquiring the cultural basics of their parents, and no
accumulation is possible. General intelligence and a rich social life are not
enough.
According to this argument, the crucial human adaptation is the

—— 306 · THE ELECTRIC MEME ——
ability to understand others as intentional agents like oneself.
This
psychological change enables people, and only people, to truly imitate
others: to copy not just what someone else does but what they intended to
do (even if they don’t, because of some fumbling, actually achieve their
goal in practice). This facility is the only means to transmit information
socially with any reliability, because it permits learners to ignore errors in
performance by teachers.
An implication of this line of argument is that the difference between
cultural learning (which only humans do) and social learning is imitation.
The problem here is that the experts are still divided about whether we
should credit apes with the ability to imitate.
What chimpanzees, for
example, appear to learn from observing tool use in others is that certain
kinds of effects on the environment can be produced; they don’t learn how
to manipulate the tool itself from seeing their fellows in action. In other
words, apes can’t “ape” one another. They learn from others through what
is called “social priming”: Their attention and exploratory trial-and-error
learning is directed in part by what they see others do. Apes can learn
what things in the environment to pay attention to, and what constitutes a
resource or a danger, by observing their compatriots. But the observing
animal is left to draw his or her own inferences about how to make use of
that knowledge and, in particular, must learn to make use of resources like
tools through personal experience. Apes thus cannot reproduce the action
patterns or learn strategies or goals by observing others. Hence insight—
the discovery of a new way to extract nuts, fish for termites, or reach
inaccessible food—cannot be directly transmitted to other members of the
group.
According to this view, each generation is condemned to
recreating the cultural techniques and knowledge of its parents because of
its own psychological inadequacies.
This small difference in psychology between humans and apes is then
supposed to blossom into big differences at the social level, especially
over time.
The result of our ability to share knowledge through true
imitation, iterated over time, is the ratcheting of the pool of cultural
knowledge toward greater complexity.
This is a highly plausible account of what separates us from the rest of
creation. But the real cause of cumulative culture may be the ability to
share knowledge across generations through the manufacture of artifacts.

—— The Techno-Tango · 307 ——
In my view, culture can acquire complexity through a material history.
Culture thus has a body as well as a mind; it’s just that the body of culture
is made of materials like metal and plastic rather than flesh and blood.
Our intelligence is both molded and augmented by our environment, and
our environment in turn has been modified by the intelligence of our
parents. We are educated in part by our own artifacts. The result is that
we live in, and have become increasingly dependent on, our constructed
environment. Taken together, genes plus memes and artifacts create a life-
form of increased complexity, similar to symbiotic relationships in the
biological realm such as lichen (the combination of a fungus with algae).
Human culture is a phenomenon that emerges from the interactions
between humans, memes, and their constructions.
Taking cognition out of the brain/body and putting it in the
environment has a number of advantages: You don’t have to carry it
around with you; it becomes a public good that everyone can use without
using it up; it can endure after your death and so assist your descendants;
and it enables you to engage in complex behaviors that would otherwise
exceed
your
brain’s
“bandwidth”
(temporal
information-processing
capacity). Certainly the team of one computer plus one human can solve
problems that neither in isolation could attempt.
Further, by making
knowledge public, you can begin to engage in the social management of
information.
Some “intelligence” can be distributed through the
organization of the social group itself and so can compensate for some
lack of processing ability at the level of individuals. That is, certain kinds
of social structures are better able than others to actually process
information. These organizations can themselves produce more optimal
solutions to group problems (such as the distribution of food) and then get
these solutions into the right hands.
Culture, in this view, is not just the information each generation
acquires through direct teaching and sophisticated social learning. There
is a built environment to account for, with its own causal role to play. For
the truly exorbitant increase in cultural sophistication characteristic of the
modern age, the development of extra-brain storage capacities seems to be
required.
Making artifacts also depends on having precise manipulators:
something like hands, for making things. Dolphins don’t have technology,
despite their big brains, because they don’t have fingers. Presumably it

—— 308 · THE ELECTRIC MEME ——
takes some intelligence to produce information worthy of being off-loaded
into artifacts, but it also requires the ability to do so effectively.
So
dolphins, despite all the cognitive prerequisites, have no technology to
speak of, for lack of dexterous appendages.
What do apes lack then to achieve cumulative culture?
They have
hands with opposable thumbs and big brains just like us, yet they exhibit
only a few relatively modest cultural traditions to show for it. Further, if
we have memes, then surely so do apes (and dolphins): Their brains are
big enough. So the activities of this kind of replicator can’t be the crucial
factor distinguishing the other big-brained creatures from humans.
What is missing, quite obviously, from the forested surroundings of
apes is a cache of complex artifacts.
This deficit may have a
psychological cause, such as an inability to indicate one another’s
behavior or to engage in the multistep planning associated with the
construction of complex artifacts.
Alternatively apes may simply never
have lived in circumstances competitive enough (with other species) or
severe enough (in terms of survival) to have made invention a necessity.
For whatever reason, the real correlation we can observe in the world
today is not between big brains and cumulative culture (because apes and
dolphins have one but not the other), but rather between sophisticated
artifacts and cumulative culture.
This combination is found only in
humans.
So “big culture” is not necessarily a function of big brains per se but
rather of the ability to produce complex artifacts. This is not to deny that
cumulative cultural traditions depend on a reasonable account of
intelligence as a precondition. They do. Artifacts are, after all, physical
objects made through effort and concentration.
They need complex
planning to produce. But cognition alone is not enough. At some point,
there simply isn’t any more one animal can learn within its finite life span,
even from other clever animals. Some of the accumulated wisdom of the
species has to be shunted into the environment for it to endure. It’s the
fact that the artifacts are there and can be made use of that influences
subsequent cultural developments.
Humans thus engage in a distinctive way of life: We live in a “culture
niche.” This term acknowledges that the ability to share knowledge for
coordinating human social activities is important.
But plain, old-
fashioned social learning may be enough to accomplish this sharing.
Cumulative culture need not depend on sophisticated, poorly understood

—— The Techno-Tango · 309 ——
skills such as imitation. What I mean to emphasize with the term “culture
niche” is that our way of life is also defined by material adaptations: our
physically
constructed
environment
as
a
storehouse
of
cultural
information.
Culture must therefore be considered information circulating in a
population through social communication, which may be mediated. Since
mediation can involve not just signals but artifacts—information stuck in
the communication channel—not all culture need be in peoples’ heads.
Some will reside in the environment, in these artifacts. The mediation of
communication introduces a new complexity to the transmission of
cultural information and hence to cultural dynamics, which now depend on
innovations in the means of storing information in the environment—that
is, on the evolution of artifacts.
This makes the culture concept more
messy than a purely cognitive appraisal. But that’s the price we have to
pay to “follow the information,” which is the main job of an evolutionary
account, because that is where the dynamics are determined.
And to
repeat what has become, in effect, a mantra in this book: If the dynamics
are different, then you have to recognize that the underlying mechanisms
are novel. Indeed, in evolutionary models, cultural dynamics are different
if you admit artifacts into the definition of culture.
Having all those
signal-producing templates lying about makes a difference to how fast and
how far a species can evolve.
In particular, it’s becoming more and more clear that the increasing
complexity of twenty-first-century Western culture cannot be occurring
strictly in response to what individual people are learning from the other
people around them.
Where exactly, for instance, is the information
collected by the much-vaunted Human Genome Project? The billions of
As, Gs, Cs, and Ts are certainly not in anyone’s head—and arguably not in
any collection of people’s heads. Instead it is an extremely large database
stored on centralized computer hardware, connected to the Web. Much of
what we “know” nowadays is like this: information warehoused only in
quite un-fleshy human institutions. To account for the rate and direction
of change in the cultural knowledge of “modern” societies, we must look
at these technological information repositories and how people interact
with them.
The standard cognitivist conception therefore ignores an important
part of culture—the evolution of artifacts. Artifacts are inherited, which

—— 310 · THE ELECTRIC MEME ——
means they fit in with the general spirit of the cultural selectionists; they
also influence human psychology and so should be important to those with
a mentalist bent, like evolutionary psychologists.
Further, they figured
significantly in the earliest definitions of culture, and so including them
would represent a return to an earlier, perhaps “golden” age of omnibus
definitions, in which everything from harpoon heads to religious symbols
was thrown into the category of culture. We must include in our definition
of culture not only what we learn socially, but also the implicit knowledge
we acquire or simply make use of that derives from artifacts, perhaps
placed there by earlier generations. Such artifacts range from skyscrapers
to cars to “personal organizers” to the piece of string you tie on your finger
to remind yourself to buy some milk on the way home.
These bits of
“crystallized intelligence” influence cultural activity because they serve as
tools for thought and behavior. So culture is not just what you learn from
others; it’s not just the pooled information in a networked group of heads.
Much of what we rely on, what makes us modern humans, is “out there”—
in the environment, in the seemingly menial stuff we use every day to get
things done.
This perspective suggests that human culture really is something
remarkable. After all, we produce more sophisticated artifacts than any
other species, by a long shot. We will almost certainly underestimate the
power of culture and mistake our own place in the world, if we do not take
into account the reality of our highly reconstructed environments—the
cultural niche—into which we have put much of our “intelligence.” And
some of the “intelligence” required to maintain and reproduce these
complex artifacts may be selfish memes at work in the world.

Chapter Ten
RETHINKING REPLICATION
Repetition is the only form of permanence that Nature can achieve.
–George Santayana
We have had to expend a lot of effort to reach the point where real
empirical work can begin on memes. In particular, I have been anxious to
establish just how replication could occur in the context of social
communication—and in a way consistent with what we know about the
process of replication in general.
Particularly important was the
discussion of other known replicators, keeping in mind the principles of
Replicator Theory. Comparative investigations have often proven fruitful
and proved so here.
This investigation allowed us to infer new
propositions about the general nature of replication.
First, any mechanism achieving such a precise, rather magical result is
likely to be restricted to one kind of physical substrate. This is because
many precise conditions are involved in the replication of material things,
and all replicators—memes included—are material things.
Second, defining similarity was shown to be crucial to determining
which replicators can be classed together. For this purpose, we inferred that
a Same Influence Rule is what is relevant to evolution. This condition is
satisfied if two replicators have the same job with the same overall
consequences in some larger context. A class of replicators can thus be
identified that are in potential competition, thanks to sharing a similar
physical form and role. They use the same strategy for combating selection.
311

—— 312 · THE ELECTRIC MEME ——
Even though they may vary in certain respects physically, these aspects are
irrelevant to their likelihood of success, so these replicators can be tagged
with the same label.
Genes are defined, in effect, by having the same
influence on their surroundings. They don’t have to be exactly the same
physical sequence of bases. For example, there can be changes in the third
base defining an amino acid without affecting the protein produced by that
molecule.
This is all that is relevant in many regimes of selection,
including “survival of the fittest.” In prions too, sections of their structure
are irrelevant to their ability to infect other molecules. And certainly the
“same” comp-virus can have different physical realizations in different
computers, depending on the specifics of the local memory “ecology.”
For example, they need not be in the same location on the hard disk of two
different computers but still are called upon by the operating system under
the relevant circumstances and are copied into other locations just fine. A
comp-virus program need not even be stored in the same series of
physically contiguous locations in memory. Just as a gene might include
an intron, or non-coding region, so too can a comp-virus, like any
program, be stored in fragmented form, as long as the pointers to the
fragments all work properly. The intervening memory locations are not
part of the functional program but are nevertheless there in physical terms,
just like the intron in the case of DNA. Similarly we can expect there will
be irrelevancies in the physical instantiation of a meme. Some aspects of
the neuronal network will have no impact on their functioning as members
of the information-processing cooperative. So for all of these replicators,
there are physical aspects that must be the same, and others that do not
matter for performance of the crucial evolutionary roles they must play as
replicators. This is all the Same Influence Rule requires.
A third major insight into replication comes from recognizing that there
are a number of obvious commonalities in the ways the non-genetic
replicators we looked at work.
This is, I suggest, because they are all
members of what I believe is a newly identified class of replicators, which I
call super-parasitic. The super-parasitic class of replicators includes (but
may not be limited to) prions, computer viruses, and memes.
These
replicators share one feature with “normal” parasitic replicators like viruses:
They cannot replicate on their own. Instead they rely on machinery evolved
to benefit other replicators (like DNA) to duplicate them.
This

—— Rethinking Replication · 313 ——
principle can be iterated. For example, in the biological world we have
viroids, which are parasites on parasites (bioviruses). They are even more
primitive bits of matter that co-opt the mechanisms developed by the virus
which they depend on to help them replicate.
But super-parasitic replicators not only need such machinery; they also
depend on another evolutionary agent to make their substrates for them in
the first place. They are like hermit crabs: They turn the empty shells left
behind by another species into their own survival machine and main
abode. Super-parasitic replicators essentially adopt substrates that are the
prior work of other replicators. What is more, an interactor for the other
replicator is turned into a replicative substrate by these super-parasites.
For example, prions turn an ordinary protein into an infectious agent for
their own reproduction.
From the perspective of Replicator Theory, these replicators engage in
a kind of third-order replication process, which determines how fast their
populations can grow. First, the growth rate of a super-parasitic replicator
(like a meme) is a function of the rate at which the replicators responsible
for its substrate (in this case, genes) are produced. Second, memes must
also wait for these newly made genes to produce organisms, which the
super-parasitic memes then draft for their own purposes. On top of these
two constraints comes the replicator’s own ability to convert this interactor
(in particular, the brain tissue of these organisms) into a replicator like
itself. This too can occur with greater or lesser speed, depending on what
kind of replicator it is. So any increase in the population of a replicator
like memes comes only at the end of a long chain of preconditions; it’s a
highly derivative process.
All of the replicators in this class of super-parasites are also similar in
another way: They all use the conversion of an existing substrate to an
infectious conformation as their primary mechanism for replicating
themselves.
This follows naturally from their dependence on the
substrates of others: without the ability to build their own homes, they are
reduced to renting or buying an existing property and then converting it to
suit their needs (often with the guarantee that they can convert it back to
its original state once they decide to sell or move on). This grants them
greater flexibility in the ways in which they can arise, since a bit of matter
can be rearranged into the proper conformation through a number of routes
but can often only be made in the first place by one method.
Some

—— 314 · THE ELECTRIC MEME ——
of these routes are quite different from the single method characteristic of
DNA replication. The “routes to replication” through conversion include:
–
Mutation (or spontaneous conversion)
–
Transmission of signals through protected channels to new hosts,
which catalyze conversion, or
–
“Natural” bias (a structural tendency to adopt the relevant
conformation)
Comp-viruses illustrate these causally distinct avenues of replication.
First, mutation can occur through file corruption, perhaps due to a power
surge in the computer.
The second route, transmission, can happen
through instruction messages being sent to other nodes in a computer
network, which results in switched register values in the new host
computer’s memory bank. Third, a comp-virus can be acquired if a user
happens to copy a host program already infected by the viral code, which
can happen when an infected software program gets downloaded over the
Net or gets shipped out on “hard” media from a factory. In this case, some
sectors of the user’s computer memory will automatically get “tuned into”
states that define a comp-virus by previous computer activity (such as file
copying). This constitutes an example of conversion through natural bias.
Since memes are out primary focus, let me also explain how analogous
processes result in memetic replication as well. First, a meme could arise
through natural bias if the “natural” state of a node in a host’s neuronal
network supports a particular infection state. For example, during a brain’s
development, some bit of memory may acquire a certain configuration that
ensures it will return to that particular state, even after many kinds of
disturbance.
If this state happens to be an infectious one (capable of
generating a spike that converts other nodes), then this node’s natural bias is
toward a memetic state. The tendency to adopt a memetic state could be
due to genetic causes manifesting themselves during the growth and
maturation of the brain, which is consistent with the notion from
evolutionary psychology that there is significant innate structuring of the
brain. Such nodes might represent fundamental cognitive distinctions such
as the conceptual primitives of “over” and “under” or “inside” and
“outside,” which can be applied to a range of cognitive phenomena.

—— Rethinking Replication · 315 ——
Language suggests such primitives exist through its wide application of
these terms to things besides relationships between physical objects—like
“under the gun” and “inside knowledge.”
Second, a neuronal node can be stimulated to adopt a memetic state as
a consequence of processing some external stimulus, received in the form
of an action potential or spike. Only this process requires the involvement
of the hosts’ social environment and an act of information transmission,
such as reading a book or listening to someone talk. This works via the
mechanism of signal instigation outlined in the chapter on social
memetics.
Like the other parasitic replicators, new memes can also arise through
spontaneous mutation as a result of internal mental activity.
The
difference from the case of transmission is that the original stimulus is
now internal to the brain, rather than coming from the social environment
of the host. Via its connections to other neurons, a memetic substrate may
suddenly be stimulated to adopt a new configuration that can replicate
itself.
In effect, incidental activity by related neurons connected to the
node flip it into a new state, to which it’s then likely to return.
Memes (along with the other super-parasitic replicators) can thus arise
in various ways, whereas genes are restricted to one. This takes us some
distance from the traditional view of memes as the necessary product of
social learning, particularly imitation. The upshot is that memes should
exhibit altogether different kinds of evolutionary dynamics than traditional
models of social learning would suggest. In particular, elaborate regimes
of evolutionary change in memes can occur within individual brains, with
a number of implications detailed in earlier chapters.
It’s also true that all of the super-parasitic replicators duplicate
themselves at linear rates: They are “Malthusian replicators” that undergo
selection such that only the fittest variants survive in their host populations
over time, They share this characteristic with genes, and so coevolution
with genes is likely to be a true power struggle. Who’s in control when
there is conflict between super-parasitic replicators and genes is not
obvious but will have to be determined on a case-by-case basis.
The
outcome will often come down to a footrace, with the winner being the
replicator that can replicate faster (assuming they can stay on course—
major differences in mutation rates can spoil the chances of fast-moving
memes, for instance).

—— 316 · THE ELECTRIC MEME ——
This is a fascinating result that has immense implications for a general
understanding of the evolutionary process going on about us, in this
modern world of replicating genes, artifacts, and memes. Outbreaks of
both prion-based diseases and new computer viruses are headline news, so
these super-parasites are not mere curiosities that have no bearing on our
everyday lives. These two replicators are forces to be reckoned with. The
same may be true of memes: Our world view will be substantially altered
if they are proven to be (at least partially) responsible for cultural
evolution.
As with any other form of parasite, these three replicators can largely be
distinguished by their life cycles. They are particularly identified by the
substrate on which they primarily depend, the nature of their relationship
with that definitive host, and the kinds of interactive products they make.
In comparing the super-parasitic replicators in this way, this last quality
becomes particularly interesting, because it’s clear that both of the super-
molecular super-parasites use signals as intermediaries. Memes generate
both inter-neuronal and inter-personal signals.
Like memes, computer
viruses don’t physically move from one host to another through the air or
through electric cables. They use signals sent between memory locations,
typically with the aid of operating system instructions that the virus must
be able to call on for assistance. Thus memes are most similar to comp-
viruses because they are both super-molecular and both use signals as
instigators.
Both memes and computer viruses are also defined in
electrochemical terms, as states of potential change on electronic,
magnetic, or cellular substrates. The primary difference between them is
that memes use a biological substrate provided by genes, instead of an
artifactual one produced by people.
There are also some respectable parallels in the evolution of comp
viruses and memes, as we have analyzed them. Both have gone through
three major phases, in which new complications to their life cycles have
been introduced.
DNA has gone through a long history of additional
complexities as well, in terms of the development of more and more
sophisticated interactors.
But as parasitic replicators, this avenue of
evolutionary elaboration is not available to comp-viruses and memes.
Their development didn’t come in terms of spawning more complex

—— Rethinking Replication · 317 ——
interactors; instead they have gone from relatively simple reproductive
cycles to ones with additional stages appended to them.
(Complex life
cycles are common in bio-viruses as well.) Both of our replicators began
replicating only within single hosts (either machine or organic) but then
developed the ability to distribute themselves among hosts in a second
phage of evolution. This ability started with a rather primitive mechanism
for jumping the gap between hosts. (The mechanisms were different, of
course: Comp-viruses piggybacked on intermediate disk-hosts, while
memes used signals as instigators.) But then this life cycle became further
elaborated into a more sophisticated, flexible mechanism (direct electronic
transfer for comp-viruses, the use of artifact way stations in memes). This
commonality of trajectory suggests it may be a “natural” one for super-
molecular,
super-parasitic
replicators.
Apparently
signal-assisted
replication becomes signal-mediated replication if given a chance.
This analysis also suggests there is a relationship between a replicator
being super-molecular and its ability to use signals for the mediation of
replication.
Why should this be so?
Because with an additional
dimension to play with (the interaction between molecules), the tight
constraints imposed on a replicator of adopting but a single physical
conformation are loosened. This appears to lead to the use of one or more
of these molecules as a signal, this in turn leads to some flexibility in the
kinds of substrates a replicator can adopt (as in the example of comp-
viruses moving between magnetic and optical memory thanks to the
common use of the same binary code for signals).
I have also argued that the notion of a replication reaction, derived
from Replicator Theory, can be applied broadly to all instances of
replication—even to those replicators (like memes) that are super-
molecular in scale. I believe it’s useful to think in these terms because it
reminds us that the replication process is a physical event located in space
and time. The replication reaction is that nexus where information transfer
and duplication take place.
It’s the linking point in the chain of events
defining an evolutionary lineage. Replication at any scale requires an input
of energy and produces something that wasn’t present before: a second
instance of the replicator.
So these events are reactions in the traditional
chemical sense. In the case of signal-mediated replication, everything is still
required to be in the local situation from which the copy springs into existence,
except
that
the
source
is
only
present—by
proxy,
as
it
were—

—— 318 · THE ELECTRIC MEME ——
in the form of the signal. Contact between the source and the copy is what
is lost in such cases. (This is what necessitates the need to divorce the
replicator notion from that of an interactor, although the one is not always
carried around inside the other, as Dawkins thought.) Information transfer
is achieved, despite the inability to “read” that information directly off the
physical source, through the signal carrying this information to the site
where the copy is produced. That is, in fact, what the signal is evolved to
do.
BIOLOGY VERSUS CULTURE
Our collaborative examination of these replicators also provides us with a
clear indicator of just what separates biological from cultural replication,
for these are two different arenas in which evolution can take place. At
first glance, it might appear that the distinguishing feature of biological
replication is physical overlap between the parental and offspring
replicators.
For example, in the defining case of DNA replication, one
strand of each copy’s double helix is donated by the source molecule to its
offspring. In effect, each of the progeny molecules shares a half of the
“mother” double helix.
So the source and copy share some physical
material, inherited from the previous generation of DNA.
On the other
hand, think of a truly cultural type of replication mediated by a copying
machine: The new piece of paper coming out of the machine on the left
contains no part of the original, which is regurgitated off to the right.
There is no material contact between the copied piece of paper and the
original: An intermediate step in the copying process holds the relevant
information electrostatically on the copier’s rotating drum.
So this is a
reproduction process in which there is a physical link between the original
and the copy—the original must be there on the drum or nothing happens,
a blank page comes out—but no material overlap between the original
sheet of paper and the copy.
However, prions, which are arguable biological in nature, also replicate
without material overlap between the source and the copy. After contact,
the source prion goes on its merry way physically unchanged, while the
copy is simply a molecule that has changed its shape, but that existed prior
to the interaction. It isn’t created through a process in which the original
prion sacrificed some part of itself to its “offspring.”
No exchange

—— Rethinking Replication · 319 ——
of atoms has taken place; there is physical contact, but not overlap. The
prion case seems to preclude material overlap as a clear divider between
the biological and cultural realms.
What seems to more effectively distinguish cultural from biological
replication is the use of signals as mediators of the replication process.
This characteristic holds for both comp-viruses and memes, but not
prions (or DNA).
Such a distinction is quite interesting because it
suggests that culture really is intimately related to the process of
communication (as noted above), while biological evolution is not. It’s
true that biological interactors such as cells and organisms have developed
the ability to communicate as a mechanism that facilitates their survival
and reproduction. It’s also true that messenger RNA can be thought of as
carrying information from nuclear DNA to the cytoplasm, where proteins
are synthesized. This could be considered a kind of mediation or message-
passing during biological replication. But RNA is not a signal: It’s a static
molecule, not a wave-like pattern of molecules. So even if we admit this
generous interpretation of mediation, it still isn’t mediation per se that
distinguishes cultural from biological replication, but rather mediation by
signals.
Cultural replication reactions are always instigated by signals
racing in from elsewhere, whether this transmission of information derives
from another computer in the network, photons reflected off the page of a
book, or as a spike sent by another neuron.
Signaling is not a central
feature of the replication process in biology, but it is for culture.
Mediation by signals means that cultural replication always involves
code-switching.
In DNA, replication occurs through complementary
template-matching: There is a one-step relationship between one base and
another on the opposite strand of the molecule. Similarly, making a new
prion is a matter of direct, contact-based information transfer between the
surface of two proteins, making them the same. One code suffices in both
cases: The template being created is either the same as, or the molecular
complement of, the original template. In cultural replication, by contrast,
the inheritance process always requires multiple steps, because it must
solve the problem of the physical “gap” between a replicator and its copy.
With
replication
mediated
by
signals,
information
is
necessarily
transferred from replicator to signal and back again. In social memetics,
these
two
steps,
switching
from
one
substrate
to
another,

—— 320 · THE ELECTRIC MEME ——
suffice. In coevolutionary memetics, there is yet a third step: coding the
artifact-based template as well.
In the coevolutionary case, the
progression of inheritance is therefore from meme to artifact to signal:
three changes in substrate, and hence in information coding.
These switches in coding systems from one medium to another allow
an arbitrarily relationship to crop up between a replicator and its
products—something not seen in the biological world. The information
structures or codes in signals and artifacts are not necessarily “attached” to
particular physical replicators.
For example, comp-viruses can use
multiple computer operating systems and communication protocols to
generate the signal that makes its way from one site of replication to the
next. Similarly, by cooperating with other mental machinery, a meme can
generate any number of artifacts to get the same message across to the
next potential host.
So this arbitrary (some would say “symbolic”)
relationship holds whether the cultural replicator is itself artifactual in
nature or not.
Dependence on signals may also be a more fundamental quality of
cultural replication than the other quality shared by comp-viruses and
memes: being super-molecular.
This is because it is possible, in the
future, that computers will be molecular in scale, as with the prospect of
DNA-based computers, or even smaller, with quantum-scale computers
also on the horizon. Since these computers will still need programming to
do complex calculations, viruses will doubtless still be able to arise on
these new substrates for computation. Replication may also spring up in
artifacts other than computers in the future (like nanites), with no necessity
of being super-molecular in scale. So being super-molecular is probably
not so essential to the nature of cultural replicators as the use of signals to
breach the distance between the source replicator’s abode and the site
where the copy is produced.
THE BIG PICTURE
Can we visualize what a replicator must be like, then, independent of its
particular substrate? I think so. All replicators—genes, prions, memes—
are things that can be represented by ball-and-stick constructions. Indeed
this
is
how
Watson
and
Crick
originally
worked
out
the

—— Rethinking Replication · 321 ——
peculiar shape of DNA, so crucial to its functioning—by fiddling with a
big construction kit of wire and plastic balls. For genes and prions, which
are molecules, the “balls” are associated with atoms, the “sticks” with
electrical bonds.
For memes, which are super-molecular, the balls are
cells (neurons), while the sticks are synaptic connections.
For comp-
viruses, the balls are memory registers; the sticks are pointers from one
register to the next. So all of the replicators we have identified can be
thought of in these terms.
Another way of thinking about ball-and-stick constructions is as
networks.
Networks, after all, are just nodes connected by links.
And
networks can be represented mathematically as matrices, or rectangular
collections of boxes (or cells) filled with numbers that represent the nature
of the connection between the node identified by its row and the node
identified by its column.
An interesting property of matrices is their reducibility—that is, the
number of rows or columns in the matrix can sometimes be eliminated
without losing information. For example, given knowledge of the laws of
chemistry, the three-dimensional shape Of DNA (the double helix) can be
reduced to two dimensions and represented as a matrix with two rows, as
if the twisting helix were stretched out into a straight line (as it is when
DNA is transcribed).
And thanks to the strict complementarity of each
rung of the DNA ladder, you actually only need write down the sequence
along one side of the ladder; the order of the other is completely
determined by its complement.
Thus geneticists commonly represent a
gene sequence by a one-dimensional matrix, or vector. This is the “string”
of letters that you will find representing a gene in any gene bank or library.
Prions and memes, on the other hand, are unlikely to be so readily
reducible to a single dimension, because the rules for converting from a
lower-level representation to a higher one will be too complex to justify
leaving out the intervening information. Nevertheless prions can certainly,
be represented by the values in a matrix with some small number of rows
and columns.
I think memes can too, although this remains to be
empirically ascertained.
I think we can safely conclude from this discussion that we have learned
many things about the nature of that most fundamental of evolutionary

—— 322 · THE ELECTRIC MEME ——
processes, replication, from our attempts to locate another replicator:
memes. This project has led us not only to a better search image for the
ostensible cultural replicator, but also to a better understanding of what is
happening in other evolutionary domains—and even with respect to the
oldest and best-known replicator, DNA.

Chapter Eleven
THE REVOLUTION
OFMEMES
Culture is not inherited through genes, it is acquired by learning
from other human beings. In a sense, human genes have
surrendered their primacy in human evolution to an entirely new,
nonbiological or superorganic agent, culture.
–Theodosius Dobzhansky
Genes began life as strictly functional entities.
As late as 1933, the
eminent geneticist T.H. Morgan could claim that “there is no consensus
opinion amongst geneticists as to what the genes are—whether they are
real or purely fictitious.” To many, genes were only a name for whatever
was responsible for the Mendelian patterns of inheritance people were
observing in biology labs. No one yet knew just where to find genes, nor
how they fulfilled the statistical regularities in the proportions of traits that
appeared in each succeeding generation first identified by Mendel. It was
only in the 1950s that genes became incontrovertibly real, material
entities—the biological analogue of the atoms in physical science. When
Watson and Crick constructed the famous tubular model of the double
helix in a Cambridge laboratory basement, genes “took on” a material
structure. Scientists had identified the molecular substrate that held them
and the mechanism that enabled them to make copies of themselves.
The basic machinery of genes has thus been known for 50 years. The
nature of prions is also coming rapidly into focus, thanks to the urgency
of curing the human diseases they cause.
Various other simple, self-
323

—— 324 · THE ELECTRIC MEME ——
replicating proteins have also been manufactured as special-purpose, toy
replicators by chemists working in laboratories. However, the replicator
underlying the more recent transitions in evolutionary dynamics—those
associated with human cultural inventions such as language and writing—
has not yet been properly identified.
Currently, then, memes exist only as hypothetical functional entities,
with the express purpose of explaining observable similarities in cultural
traits over time. I argue that developments similar to those that occurred
in genetics must now take place for memetics to be established as a
science. We must find out where memes are hiding. The difference from
the situation of the 1930s is that genes have already been identified and
may be responsible for the statistical regularities we see in the field, in the
“cultural” traits human populations exhibit over time. In effect, what we
are calling memetic effects could be due to that other replicator being at
work.
For memes to become real, we have to find out just how they
operate and, if possible, see them in action. It’s time for a new scientific
revolution, for the beginning of a “molecular memetics” to mirror the
revolution in biology that occurred with the identification of physical
genes.
THE EVOLUTION OFMEMES
In this book, I have used information gleaned about the nature of
replication to explain what memes are. I began by suggesting where we
should look for memes, where our “molecular” memetics must start.
Artifacts and behaviors fail the replicator test. Only brain states have the
necessary qualities to replicate: They can cause similar entities to arise
through information transfer, so memes should be in the brain. Does the
brain have the qualities to harbor replicators like memes? Yes. It’s an
isolated, energy-rich environment housed inside the braincase, holding a
soup of cells and chemicals. Memes could even persist in a brain in a vat,
if that vat contained the requisite chemical bath as an energy source.
But what inside the brain could replicate itself? The brain is so
complex that it’s difficult to know where to start the search. Since
the earliest times in Western intellectual history, the brain has largely
been thought of in terms of an analogy to something easier to
comprehend. Many of these analogies happen to reflect changes in
the concept of electricity.
The classical Greek conception of the
brain
was
as
a
pneuma,
a
kind
of
nervous
fluid.
This

—— The Revolution of Memes · 325 ——
became animal electricity with Galvani’s late eighteenth-century studies of
jerking frogs’ legs and more recently morphed into spiking action
potentials. Now, with the rise of molecular studies of the brain, we can
more precisely isolate electrically charged ions passing through gates and
jumping across microscopic gaps like electric sparks. If electricity is a
stream of electrons—small atomic particles moving quickly through a
channel—then perhaps memes are small conceptual elements transmitted
through a particular channel, a linked chain of neurons. The suggestion is
that a meme must somehow be electric too: An electric meme is what we
should look for.
The next step was to identify a temporal and spatial scale within which
a new replicator could gain control over brain activity. This was necessary
because genes are known to be responsible for aspects of long-term
memory. It turns out that memes, if they exist, must work very quickly
indeed within milliseconds.
If they are to replicate despite this very
rapidly changing substrate, then they are also likely to be quite small—just
a node in the network, perhaps one neuron, or a few of them acting in
concert. The only thing that can replicate quickly enough to be a meme is
the state of such a node; changes in the physical substrate, in the network
of connections and nodes itself, take too long to qualify. So a meme must
be the state of a node in the neuronal network.
This state is electric
because it determines the node’s electrochemical propensity to fire an
action potential (or spike) at other neurons in the brain. And this memetic
behavior is itself electric, since spikes are discharges that change a
neuron’s polarity.
The important point is that a state, unlike the physical network itself,
can be duplicated elsewhere in the network.
And the state of a node
becomes independent of genes to the degree that its current qualities have
been produced by a history of stimulation by previous meme products, as
well as other stimuli. Although the basic physiology of neurons and their
connections are determined by genetic evolution, the state of a neuronal
node at any time is determined by the sequence of events experienced by
the host organism and endogenous memetic evolution.
A meme, then, is essentially the state of a node in a neuronal network capable
of generating a copy of itself in either the same or a different neuronal

—— 326 · THE ELECTRIC MEME ——
network, without being destroyed in the process.
Memes have gone
through several stages of evolutionary advance.
Such replicators must
have first evolved within brains. Even before this, however, the states of
neuronal nodes were able to change location within a brain when a
stimulus altered its original conformation, turning it “off”’ in one place
while simultaneously turning it “on” somewhere else. This is “normal,”
non-memetic information-processing in the brain. The brain-as-network
simply flexes and distorts as a given state changes location.
Then the states of nodes began—perhaps by chance at first—to
replicate within a brain.
A signal stimulated one node to fire, causing
another node to acquire the same conformation or electrical potential,
while itself returning to its original state. Then two copies of the state
existed, probably in similar locations.
This state had proven to be
infectious: It could be “caught” by another node in the network. A new
replicator had emerged. One copy of the state might not be functional (a
“junk meme”) in terms of providing spikes beneficial to the host organism,
but nevertheless was there, lying in wait for events to make it useful.
A number of things play important roles in the process through which
this parasite on cortical activity replicates.
First, the definitive host to
neuromemes is physical network of neurons itself. That is, the substrate
on which parasitic memes “feed” is the neuropil—the suite of neurons and
their support structures that participate in, and maintain the potential for,
conducting information between neurons.
Second, the replicator itself, an electric meme, is an electrochemical
potential, existing in a neuron or set of neurons. This state of a node in the
network can be measured in terms of sensitivities to incoming stimuli,
which influence the likelihood the node will fire. The node on which the
meme “sits” constitutes the effective network, the set of linked neurons
likely to fire simultaneously.
Third, the output or product of the node (a temporal set of “spikes”) is
not the meme’s phenotype, strictly speaking, but a curious kind of thing: a
signal. Signals are perturbations of the environment, often focused in a
channel, that propagate information from one place to another.
After neuromemes got the ball rolling, the next step in memetic evolution
was the beginning of social memetics. In this development, memes began

—— The Revolution of Memes · 327 ——
to replicate between brains. An incoming signal still stimulates a memetic
node to fire, as before, causing another node to acquire the infectious
conformation, while itself returning to its original state. But this second
node of neurons now exists in another brain. How? The memetic spike
simply has to stimulate a motor neuron to engage the host organism in a
behavior that produces a social signal, such as a stream of speech, that can
be consumed by a second organism. Sensory receptors in the receiving
organism then convert this signal back into a spike train that can instigate
the local replication of the memetic state in its brain. As a result, there are
two copies of the meme, probably in similar locations in the two different
brains.
Evolution within a memetic lineage, given this development,
became independent of the fate of any one host organism.
In effect, a
meme had jumped the gap from one host to another. This led to new kinds
of incentives for the sharing of information in social species coevolving
with their memetic parasites.
Think of what this new perspective means for our view of social
transmission. Just as computer memory can be turned into an alternative
Earth in Artificial Life programs, so too is the brain a new kind of
spherical “planet” on which an ecology of replicators can evolve, with
their own unique characteristics that reflect the strange mix of selective
forces they face.
New person-planets can be seeded by signals.
This
seeding starts off a new colony of memes in a potentially hostile
environment.
These memes can then evolve into new species of ideas.
Further, there is a constant barrage of message-meteorites bombarding the
surface of the planet (through eyes, ears, touch), each carrying the spores
of new meme-species. So the mental ecology is never able to settle down
into a stable equilibrium but is always being invaded by potential new
members of the memetic community. This produces the expected degree
of dynamicism in the picture of what happens through the social exchange
of information.
The fact that memes are parasites on this brain-planet, and
produced only by a very specific mechanism, saves us from major
error. Some memeticists have said that the brain, and even the sense of
self, is composed entirely of memes.
This evokes an absolutely
visceral response from many people, and rightly so. Just as people are
beginning to crawl out from under the rock of genetic determinism—a
view
promulgated
by
sociobiologists
and
others—prominent
memeticists seem determined to slide people back under it.
But

—— 328 · THE ELECTRIC MEME ——
this time, the rock is to be called “memetic determinism.” You are slave
to your memes—you are your memes, they say. If one replicator isn’t the
cause of our behavior, then it must be another, these memeticists seem to
feel. But this position is both unnecessarily alarmist and almost certainly
untrue. It is a piece of hubris and a major impediment to the memetic
perspective being generally adopted by the lay public because it leaves no
room for human agency. Luckily this position simply isn’t consistent with
the idea that a meme is a highly specialized kind of neuronal state, and not
all forms of intercellular communication within a brain will produce it.
This doesn’t mean that the ancient philosophical notion of “free will”
can survive the coming onslaught of neuroscientific advances, however. It
is still likely that we will have to recognize that the mind is an emergent
property of the brain, and nothing more. It may even be the case that our
conscious awareness of “making a decision” comes only after the real
neuronal work has already been done subconsciously (as suggested by
some important experiments carried out by Benjamin Libet over the past
20 years). What we have in our heads is a complex mixture, caused by an
interaction of a couple of replicators (genes and memes) as well as regular
forms of independent learning. No single agency is in charge of anything
we do.
Signals began as neural communicators, then social ones. Most recently,
however, they have learned to involve artifacts in their travels. Artifacts
are abiotic substrates for signals located in the macroenvironment. They
are a curious collection of objects because, from an evolutionary
perspective, they can be anything from beaver dams to computer memory.
It’s also important to distinguish signals from artifacts.
Artifacts can
interact with signals, as when electrons circulate through a computer or
photons glance off the page of a book.
So artifacts and signals have
independent existences. One is static, the other dynamic. They also have
different roles: Artifacts can store information safely, while signals are
designed for moving information around efficiently. Given this role as a
storehouse, it’s natural that artifacts, and not signals, should in some cases
develop
the
ability
to
replicate.
Signals
are,
after
all,
about
communication, not replication.
So naturally, with their ability to use signals for replication between
brains (developed when social memes evolved), memes came to involve

—— The Revolution of Memes · 329 ——
themselves with artifacts, either by helping construct artifacts or by using
them as templates for the signals they produce.
This instigated a new
coevolutionary process between artifacts and memes.
The evolution of
culture has come to depend more and more significantly over time on the
evolution of artifacts. An earlier discussion of how memes coevolve with
artifacts provides the basics for a working theory of cultural change in
societies that have significantly modified their niches through the
accumulation of technology.
Artifact evolution is itself a Darwinian
process with great speed and power, and human culture can be thought of
as the product of complex interactions between organisms, memes, and
artifacts.
So in neuromemetics, which covers the first phase of meme evolution,
information transfer is satisfied by the production of a signal spanning the
gap between one neuron and the next; replication is based on the
mediation of signals within organisms.
Social memetics (the second
phase) depends on signal-mediated replication between organisms.
In
coevolutionary memetics (the third phase), information transfer becomes
even more indirect.
First, a meme-inspired behavior produces, or
modifies, an artifact, which in turn does the job of producing or modifying
a signal that eventually reaches a new host. It is a case of artifact- and
signal-mediated replication between organisms. Each of these steps, while
representing an evolutionary outgrowth of earlier steps, also manifests
itself as a stage added to the earlier, simpler life cycle of a meme. (Such
growth in the complexity of life cycles is a standard pattern in the
evolution of parasites.)
This conception of memes maintains the focus on the specificity of
replication reactions, which is necessary because cultural replicators are
still physical things that must duplicate themselves through some
particular mechanism.
All the complexities in the evolution and life
history of memes arise in the mediation of inheritance, not in the
replication reaction itself, making the cause-and-effect relationship
between parental and offspring replicators more and more tenuous over
time, and hence more treacherous.
THE REVELATION OFMEMES
One of the primary intellectual benefits of neuromemetics is that it makes a
naturalistic theory of both communication and culture plausible.
The
primary
long-term
benefit
of
the
approach
developed
here,
then,

—— 330 · THE ELECTRIC MEME ——
may be that it directly connects advances in the biological and particularly
neurological sciences to the explanation of social phenomena. As a result,
the ability of such a social science to tie into results from these other
sciences is automatically ensured, since its principles must be continuous
with knowledge about workings at the lower levels of organization
covered by the biological and physical sciences.
In return, the social
sciences can not only make use of, but build upon, these discoveries by
pointing out the recursive nature of causation, in particular, the “top
down” factors that influence goings-on in the brain, as when pheromones
wafting between individuals lead to the activation of mate choice
mechanisms.
The result could be that social science becomes as
progressive as the biological sciences on which it depends.
Neuromemetics thus provides us with a testable mechanism of
replication that is consistent both with other sciences and with the
expectation that culture evolves through the descent of replicators. Many
memeticists will no doubt resist this conceptual move and dislike the
alterations
in
perspective
it
requires,
preferring
the
old-style
“epidemiological” social memetics. However, I think the current lack of
progress in empirical or theoretical memetics belies the charm of
continuing to talk in abstractions. Memeticists like Susan Blackmore say
that only social transmission is included within the compass of proper
memetics, because Richard Dawkins and the Oxford English Dictionary
define the meme in terms of a social learning mechanism: imitation. But
there are theoretical reasons to override the etymologist’s concerns: If
replication within a brain is part of the evolutionary history of the meme,
then it must be included in the project to explain the social phenomena that
Blackmore and others believe memetics is about.
Even if this extends
memetics into the domain normally given over to psychology, such an
assignment of territory is an accident of academic history, and not a proper
theoretical reason for excluding such events from the domain of memetics.
If we take as the central feature of a meme’s definition the fact that it is a
replicator, and evolves, then we must follow that fact wherever it leads,
regardless of disciplinary boundaries or dictionary definitions.
In fact,
quite a different picture of memes arises if we do acknowledge the
psychological part of the meme’s evolutionary historic and trajectory.
Most importantly, it gives memes a more plausible beginning and,
coincidentally, a longer and more interesting history.

—— The Revolution of Memes · 331 ——
The difference between neuroscientific and Dawkinsian memetics is
crucial, and many conceptual changes are entailed by it.
First, my
definition of memes performs the same kind of shift as occurred in the
sociobiology revolution.
Where sociobiology represented a shift in the
focus of selection from the organism to the gene, neuromemetics signals a
similar downward shift in perspective from social to inter-cellular
communication. Memes are now defined at a scale lower than that which
Dawkins and others have suggested: at the inter-cellular level within an
organism, rather than between organisms. It’s true that the life cycle of a
meme sometimes involves the use of signals that work at the inter-
organism scale, but memes per se are not making the journey between
hosts.
A meme will still care, of course, about where its relatives are.
Hamilton’s insight, the foundation for sociobiology, forced us to
acknowledge that a gene should seek out its brothers, regardless of which
body they might be in. Neuromemetics forces on us the same switch in
viewpoint, but in an opposite direction: a recognition that a meme should
care about its relatives, but might have its whole family right there in the
same brain with it!
It’s even possible that replicators can single-handedly achieve a
significant unification of the sciences—that elusive, but much-to-be-
desired goal of philosophers and practitioners of science alike.
How?
Replicators are states of matter and therefore can be described using the
language of physics, at least in principle. But they also catalyze reactions
among bits of matter—this is the replicator dynamic mentioned earlier. At
this point, we have crossed over to the domain of chemistry. However,
resulting from the catalysis is a new packet of information that bears a
resemblance to the packet that created it—that is, replication—with a
mutation or two thrown in perhaps, due to the transmission process. In
effect, the replication process, when iterated, generates a chain of objects
exhibiting a pattern of descent with modification.
Since this is the
criterion defining an evolutionary process, we have now entered the
traditional domain of biology.
Next we face the prospect of explaining
sociocultural phenomena as the outcome of a replicator new to the scene,
the meme.
This is where the social sciences normally come in.
And
psychology is required to understand the replication mechanism used by
this new cultural replicator. So new replicators, new sciences. Since each
science deals with the same kind of generating process, just at different

—— 332 · THE ELECTRIC MEME ——
scales of organization, both method and substance are unified.
Each
replicator builds on the work of previous ones; each new science is
devoted to understanding the products of more fundamental ones.
If replicators play such an important role in the general scheme of
things, it seems important to locate them and to understand how they
perform their useful work. For example, getting the right picture of how
kuru is caused will lead more rapidly to a cure for related diseases having
the same symptoms (a patchwork of holes in gray matter), such as
Alzheimer’s disease. Once you get a grip on a replicator, the dynamics it
produces are much more likely to become yours to control. To help us
gain this control over memes, I’ve presented the best clues I could for
identifying them. In this book, I’ve offered a theory of how the replication
of information may occur at the neurological level and at the social level—
in effect, a model of what memes might look like.
Only concerted empirical investigation can determine if these ideas are
true. Luckily, within the next five to ten years, neuroscience should be in
a position to provide empirical evidence that the kinds of entities described
in this book exist. However, neuroscientists are not explicitly looking for
replicators nowadays; it isn’t a project on their agenda. This is because
very few neuroscientists care about evolutionary issues.
Certainly the
problems of the social sciences seem very far indeed from their lab
benches. The study of neurophysiology is so fast-moving on its own, and
seems to depend so little on the “big questions” of why the brain is good at
processing some kinds of information but not others, that it appears the
evolutionary context of psychological processes can be safely ignored.
Neuroscientists can only be expected to adopt the goal of finding memes if
the theoretical interest of such a discovery is amply demonstrated. But if I
have made the prospective kudos seem valuable enough, a race to find the
first meme will be spawned among the more adventurous members of the
neuroscientific community.
(Remember, the last person to discover a
replicator in the brain, Stanley Prusiner, won a Nobel Prize for his work!)
On the other hand, should it turn out there are no such things as memes,
the consequences of that discovery for our understanding of the world around
us will be equally profound, for it will mean that we observe an evolutionary
process involving the transmission of information—cultural change—that is

—— The Revolution of Memes · 333 ——
not underwritten by replicators.
In this eventuality, we would have to
explain how people come to have similar ideas in their heads without
being “infected” by others. Remember that the entire biological world is
the result of activity by genes, replicators par excellence.
Even the
infections that computers can “catch” evolve because the agents that cause
them, computer viruses, are replicators. Without memes, we would have,
for the first time, a pool of things—ideas and values, in this case—that
exhibit similarity, duplication, and inheritance without a replicator being
involved.
Such a discovery would perhaps be even more magical than
uncovering a new form of replicator, especially as common perception and
thought appear to occur regularly from person to person and generation to
generation. How can we get something like descent through the constant
re-creation of beliefs and values in each person’s head?
Such a
phenomenon would cry out for explanation, should memes be proven
impossible.
No doubt such a discovery would also leave each of us feeling a little
bit more alone than we did before—and alone in a new way. The essential
psychological fact of a world without memes would be that we each live in
a mental box of our own construction, assembled from the bits and pieces
of information we get from others. How does successful communication
take place, then? How is it we can understand each other? Attention will
immediately focus on how the brain can reliably remake the meaning of
messages from signals sent through the air. The power to communicate
will fall to evolved neurological structures for assuring that human brains
correctly interpret these signals.
Institutions to regularize social
interaction, which assure a familiar context for the transmission of signals,
will also become important components of any explanation of cultural
evolution. This is probably why we have ritualized routines for greeting
one another, and for presenting ourselves to others (a separate public
“face” or “person.”) Culture somehow becomes even more wonderful and
amazing, if perhaps more inscrutable, once memes are gone.
Establishing whether memes exist is thus a scientific project of primary
importance. Its outcome will give us a new kind of awareness about the
nature of evolutionary processes, how social groups work, and our own
place in the world. I will accept the conclusion of this project either way:
memes or no memes. That’s the only justifiable attitude for a scientist to
take, in my view.
But regardless of how the meme story turns

—— 334 · THE ELECTRIC MEME ——
out, the study of the most complex evolutionary process we know—
cultural evolution—looms as one of the most significant and exhilarating
undertakings in science today. Understanding ourselves, and the societies
we make, remains one of our greatest challenges. Electric memes may yet
play a crucial part in the eventual solution of these mysteries.

NOTES
PAGE
CHAPTER 1: IN THE MIDDLE OF A MUDDLE
7
Darwin’s reading of Malthus: Richards 1987:98–102.
8
Acts
of
communication:
The
“fundamental
problem
of
communication … [is] reproducing at one point either exactly or
approximately a message selected at another point” (Shannon and
Weaver 1949:31).
8
Replicator dynamic: Schuster and Sigmund 1983.
10
“Protein X”: Prusiner 1995.
11
Coining of word “meme”: Dawkins 1976.
11
Evolution as universal theory: Cziko 1995.
14
Books on viral marketing: Gladwell 2000; Godin 2000; Rosen 2000..
15
Examples of memes: Dawkins 1976:206.
15
“On the one hand, it holds out the tantalizing prospect . . .”: Quoted
from Jeffreys 2000.
16
Memes as explanation of cultural evolution: Some of the major
proponents of memes—particularly Susan Blackmore—carry the ball
considerably further than this, believing that memes also explain the
evolution of big brains, consciousness, altruism in large groups, and
so on.
16
Scientific status of memetics: for example, Dennett 2000.
16
Formal theories in memetics: Lynch 1991; Gabora 1997.
17
Popular. books on memes: Lynch 1996; Brodie 1996.
17
“Mind virus” metaphor: Dawkins 1993.
19
Internet chat group study of “memes”: Pocklington and Best 1997;
Best and Pocklington 1999.
19
Memes as genes: Wilkins 1998.
20
“makes copies of itself . . .”: quoted from Dawkins 1982:109–10.
20
Dennett’s view of meme as replicator: Dennett 1995:343.
20
Memes as “unit of imitation”: Blackmore 1999:43.
21
Carrying the meme-gene analogy “too far”: Dawkins 1986:196.
21
The “meme-as-germ” versus “meme-as-gene” war: Wilkins and
Gatherer (1998) believe the epidemiological analogy is at fault, while
Lynch (1998) thinks steering too close to the example of genes may
be misleading.
335

—— 336 · Notes ——
PAGE
CHAPTER 2: A SPECIAL KIND OF INHERITANCE
24
Laufer 1918.
24
Sahlins 1960:44.
24
Memes
as
explanation for cultural evolution: I will take it
for
granted both that culture exists and that it evolves. Even though both
of these
claims remain
contentious—disputed
even
by some
evolutionary approaches to human behavior such as sociobiology and
evolutionary
psychology—I
don’t have
space to
address
the
arguments of such naysayers here. An excellent book by Boyd and
Richerson (in preparation) accomplishes this job handily in my view,
so I don't need to tread over this much-trodden ground again.
25
Definition of heredity: Maynard Smith 1987.
25
Replication unnecessary for evolutionary process: Godfrey-Smith (in
press).
25
Barometer not a cause of rainfall: Streleny and Griffiths 1999:101–
2.
30
What is culture?: I will restrict myself to evolutionary explanations
as the only kind fit for historical phenomena like culture and will not
deal here with the early history of thought on cultural evolution in the
social sciences, which has been admirably detailed elsewhere. See,
for example, Ingold 1986; Richards 1987.
30
Cognitive
notion
of
culture
is
pervasive:
One
would
think
archaeologists might represent a stronghold against cognitivism.
After all, they necessarily deal with artifacts as their “raw” data.
However, they too have largely bought into the cognitivist paradigm
and often consider their “material culture” as only indirect evidence
of what is truly important: inferring the mental representations of
people long dead.
31
“Modern” evolutionary theories: By restricting my attention to
modern theories, I exclude from this review evolutionary approaches
that are no longer active, such as those developed by earlier
generations of anthropologists like C.H. Morgan, Leslie White, and
Julian Steward.
32
Application of sociobiology to humans: Alexander (1979) is the
acknowledged fountainhead. See also Flinn 1997.
32
“I, personally, find ‘culture’ unnecessary”: quoted from Betzig
1999:17.
33
Genes plus environment can explain human behavior: for example,
Hill and Hurtado 1996:13–14.
33
“To whatever extent the use of culture . . .”: quoted from Alexander
1979:78–79.
34
Compendia of human studies showing fitness maximization: Betzig et
al. 1988; Winterhalder and Smith 1981.
35
Evolutionary psychology: Proponents are now legion. John Tooby,
Leda Cosmides, and Donald Symons (called the Santa Barbara
School because they are all centered at the university there) are the
theoretical avante-garde; their primary theoretical statement is
Barkow et al. 1992. Steven Pinker is the popularist extraordinaire
(see especially his How the Mind Works), with Wright (1994),
Gazzaniga (1994), and others as close seconds. Textbooks are also
available; see, for example, Buss 1998 and Gaulin and McBurney
2000.

—— Notes · 337 ——
35
Psychology necessary to explain behavior:
I hasten to add the
proviso that the phrase “evolutionary psychology” is currently being
used in two different ways by intellectuals. There is a sense in which
it has been widely recognized that psychology can no longer remain
out in the cold, a holdout from the Darwinian revolution. The brain
is an evolved organ and deserves to be treated as such. This is the
general sense of the term and would include, potentially, much of
neuroscience, the study of neuroanatomy from a comparative
perspective, and so on.
But a more specific use is actually more prominent these days,
especially in popular scientific presentations.
This is the one to
which I refer in this book. It is a particular flavor of evolutionary
theorizing centered around the work of a married couple presently at
the University of California, Santa Barbara, Leda Cosmides and John
Tooby, a psychologist and an anthropologist, respectively. To ignore
this distinction would be to mistake a number of corollaries identified
as important by this group as fundamental principles of evolutionary
thought applied to decision-making. They are not. Modularity, the
concept of the “environment of evolutionary adaptation” and psychic
uniformitarianism are all part and parcel of the “Santa Barbara view,”
derived from specific assumptions about how evolution works on
brains.
This group takes its inspiration largely from the cognitive
sciences, and more particularly from Chomsky.
But alternative
sources of theoretical insight are available. So even if this brand of
psychologizing does not last, such a failure should not invalidate the
more general project to understand the brain as a functional part of
evolved organisms, and psychology as the scientific study of that
evolved organ. The discipline of psychology should never return to a
pre-Darwinian era.
35
Evolutionary psychology as “white knight” for psychology in
general: Tooby and Cosmides 1992.
35
Aversions in rats: Garcia and Koelling 1966.
37
Reconstructing ancestral environment as task of evolutionary
psychology: Symons 1987.
38
Modularity claim of evolutionary psychology: Tooby and Cosmides
1995:1189.
38
Modules as mental “instincts”: Pinker 1994.
39
Evolutionary psychology provides laws: Cosmides and Tooby 1987.
40
Darwinian algorithms provide evolved but contingent responses:
Buller 1999.
41
“Jukebox” model: See Tooby and Cosmides 1992,:115–16.
This
analogy was used by Sir Peter Medawar in a 1959 article called “The
Future of Man” <http://www.santafe.edu/~shalizi/Medawar/future-
of-man.html> to make roughly the same point.
43
Brain too
small to
hold
necessary cultural variation:
Peter
Richerson, personal communication.
43
Human
Relations
Area
Files
(HRAF)
repository:
<http://yale.edu/hraf/>
44
Evolutionary psychological studies of mate preferences: See Buss
1998 for a discussion of many of these studies.

—— 338 · Notes ——
44
Homicide study: Daly and Wilson 1988.
45
Cultural ecology: Steward 1955; Vayda and McCay 1975; Netting
1986.
45
Cultural variation within eco-zones: Examples are provided by Boyd
and Richerson (in preparation). See also Guglielmino et al. 1995.
45
Ape and cetacean culture: Whiten et al. 1999; Rendell and
Whitehead (in press).
47
Diffusion of innovation studies: Rogers 1995.
47
Models of the psychology of innovation adoption: Henrich (in press).
49
Cultural selection and epidemiology: Cultural selectionists are
explicit not only about the structural similarities between cultural and
genetic transmission, but also about the relevance of epidemiological
approaches. As Cavalli-Sforza and Feldman (1991:54) acknowledge,
“epidemiology is an important source of inspiration for the study of
cultural transmission” in these models, so the auto perspectives are
tightly linked.
49
Common versus idiosyncratic beliefs and their spread: Sperber 1996.
49
“Cultural selectionism”: this position is expounded primarily by
academic biologists and anthropologists.
The key figures are the
Stanford biologists Luca Cavalli-Sforza and Marcus Feldman, who
originally
developed
the
formal
approach,
the
University
of
California biologists Robert Boyd and Peter Richerson, who
popularized it and extended it, and the Stanford anthropologist
William Durham, who has provided the most compelling case
studies, as well as some theoretical wrinkles.
I will follow the
formulation of Boyd and Richerson most closely.
The most
important works by these authors are Cavalli-Sforza and Feldman
1981; Boyd and Richerson 1985; and Durham 1992.
A related
approach using a different formalism that has not been further
developed, even by its proponents, is Lumsden and Wilson 1981.
For general reviews, see Durham 1992; Feldman and Laland 1996;
and Flinn 1997. A variety of monikers have also been assayed by
various commentators for this somewhat heterogeneous approach.
Durham (1992) prefers “evolutionary culture theory,” Cavalli-Sforza
and Feldman (1981) “gene-culture coevolutionary theory,” and Boyd
and Richerson (1985) “dual inheritance theory.”
All of these are
perhaps more precise descriptors but are too unwieldy.
50
“Unit of evolution”: Maynard Smith 1987.
50
Definition of culture: Boyd and Richerson (in preparation).
51
Importance of “population thinking” in cultural evolutionary
studies: Boyd and Richerson 2000.
52
“. . . an accounting system for keeping track of information . . .”:
quoted from Boyd and Richerson (in preparation).
52
Agnosticism about the processes underlying cultural evolution: Boyd
and Richerson (in preparation).
53
Genetic changes dependent on cultural preferences: Feldman and
Cavalli-Sforza 1979.
54
“a means of exchanging knowledge . . .”: quoted from Pinker
1997:190.
55
Cultural “badges” erect barriers to transmission: Boyd and
Richerson 1987.

—— Notes · 339 ——
56
“Unnatural origins” of culture: Boyd and Richerson 1985.
57
Genes and culture coevolve, with either party determining changes in
the other: Kendal and Laland 2000.
59
“Brainworm” fluke story: Dawkins 1992:218; Dennett 1991.
62
“Poetry can be recognized by its ability . . .”: quoted from Valéry
1989.
PAGE
CHAPTER 3: ADDING ROOMS TO DARWIN’S HOUSE
65
Head quote: Dawkins 1976:192.
68
“if it could be proved . . .”: quoted from Darwin 1909[1859].
68
“one special difficulty . . .”: quoted from Darwin 1909[1859].
70
“Limited” Darwinian theory: Griesemer (in press b).
72
Darwinian
“extrapolations”:
For
Darwinian
immunology,
see
Edelman 1993; for business models , see Koch 2001 and Schwartz
1999; for Darwinian cosmology, see Smolin 1997.
72
Computer viruses and memes as replicators: Dawkins 1993.
73
Replicators as the basic unit of evolutionary processes: Hull 1980.
73
Meme as replicator associated with culture that could evolve the
gene: Dawkins, in his Introduction to Blackmore 1999.
73
Four minimal conditions for replication: These criteria are closely
related to those found in Sperber 2000, with supplementary input
from Godfrey-Smith (in press) and Maynard Smith 1987.
74
Duplication as intrinsic to replication: Duplication is not a condition
of replication in Sperber 2000 or Godfrey-Smith (in press), but Eigen
(1992:161), for example, defines replication as a process that results
in the doubling of molecules.
77
Replication limited to “direct” causation: Hull 1980.
77
Photocopied paper as replicator: Dawkins 1982:109.
77
Replicator “power”: Dawkins 1982.
78
The term “interactor”: Hull l980.
78
Interactor determines fate of replicators: Hull 1980.
79
Evolutionary concept of lineage: Hull 1988:409.
80
Tape recorder sequence example: Sperber 2000.
80
Replicators, not interactors, as elements of lineages: It is a bit
confusing that systematists—those who draw pictures of evolutionary
history in the form of branching tree diagrams—seem to suggest that
things like species are elements of lineages, or nodes along a single
branch, with such drawings. But, in fact, what is being traced with a
line of ancestral and descendant species is typically some gene
variant, or set of variants, that distinguishes that line (not lineage) of
organisms from others in the same evolutionary picture. So trees of
species, if they are properly drawn. are really trees with genes
underneath . See Nei 1986 for further explanation.
81
“evolution is the external and visible manifestation . . .”: quoted
from Dawkins 1982:82.

—— 340 · Notes ——
81
Lewontin’s strategy for generalizing Darwinism: Lewontin 1970.
81
Lewontin’s strategy as “levels abstraction”: Griesemer (in press b).
83
Formal theory of replicators: You can't have a theory of something
with only one member in the class of things being explained, as
would be the case if only genes were being studied.
83
Manfred Eigen’s collaborators: These include Peter Schuster, Peter
F. Stadler, Robert Hecht, Walter Fontana, Robert Happel, and others.
83
Replicator Theory: For an overview, see Hofbauer and Sigmund
1988 or Eigen 1992.
83
An artificial chemistry: Fontana and Buss 1994.
87
“Survival of the first”: Michod 1999.
89
Artificial replicators: Rebek 1994 or Lee et al. 1997.
89
Oligonucelotide replication: Szathmáry and Maynard Smith 1997.
89
Cost of being common: Szathmáry 1991; Michod 1999 calls this
same regimethe “survival of anybody,” but that appellation doesn’t
imply an equilibrium in which many different replicators can coexist.
90
Darwin’s inspiration by Malthus: Richards 1987.
91
“Bottom line” from Replicator Theory: Michod 1999:46.
91
DNA as wads of genetic spaghetti: Deacon 1999.
PAGE
CHAPTER 4: THE REPLICATOR ZOO
93
Head quote: Darwin 1909, Chapter 15.
94
DNA not-first replicator: See, for example, Kaufmann 1993.
94
“once ‘information’ has passed into protein . . .”: quoted from Crick
1958:153; italics in the original. See also Crick 1970.
95
IBM petaflop computer: Service 1999.
96
New methods for understanding protein folding: Baker 2000; Van
Gunsteren et al. 2001.
96
The three primary TSEs: Kuru, the disease found among the Fore
people of New Guinea (discussed in Chapter 1) was probably also a
disease caused by prions.
97
Prions inserted into the brains of living laboratory mice: Telling et
al. 1996.
97
Prion disease strains breed true: Chien and Weissman 2001.
98
Carriers of prions: Hill et al. 2000.
98
We may begin to find prions all over the place: Tuma 2000.
98
Sup35 causes gene transcription: True and Lindquist 2000; Partridge
and Barton 2000.
99
Prion replication is two-step process: Saborio et al. 1999.
99
Body
can
clear
some
prions:
“University
of
California–San
Francisco Researchers Report Test That Detects Prion Diseases,
Illuminates Novel Findings About Infectious Prions,” Science Daily
report, posted 9/30/98.
<http://www.sciencedaily.com/releases/1998/09/980930081855.htm>
100 Prion replication kinetics: Eigen 1996.

—— Notes · 341 ——
100 Prions and species evolution: Li and Lindquist 2000.
102 Quote: Dick 1982:214.
102 Quote: Gordon 1993.
102 People treat computer faces like people: Reeves and Nass 1996.
102 Self-replicating computer programs: Ralph Merkle (“Self replication
and nanotechnology,” <http://www.zyvex.com/nanotech/selfRep.html>)
and Mitchell (in press) are examples; the one I use here comes from
Merkle; Merkle, in turn, took it from “Self-reproducing programs,”
an article in Byte magazine, August 1980, p. 74.
103 Cohen’s definition of a comp-virus: Cohen 1994:1.
103 “a program that can ‘infect’ other programs . . .”: quoted from
Cohen 1994:3.
103 “its ability to attach itself to other programs . . .”: quoted from
Cohen 1984.
103 Types of comp-viruses: Spafford 1992:731–32.
104 Basic parts of comp-virus life cycle: This section draws from Ludwig
1990:16–17.
106 “Attack” phase detrimental to comp-virus: Ludwig 1990:16–17.
109 Von
Neumann
architecture:
Actually
the
same
physical
and
analytical division is present (100 years earlier) in the designs left
behind by Charles Babbage for his Analytical Engine, which had a
“store” for memory and a “mill” for the calculating unit.
But
Babbage's machine was not built until recently.
109 Inside a computer: Excellent background on how computers work
can be obtained from two special issues of Smart Computing
magazine: Vol. 3 Issue 4 (November 1999) and Vol. 4 Issue .3
(August 2000), accessible from
<http://www.smartcomputing.com/editorial/sTOC.asp?guid=gb48e3f
0&type=5&vol=3&iss=4>
112 Types of comp-virus life cycles: Two kinds of logical cases are
ignored here, because they haven't been relevant historically (at least
yet!). The first is the possibility of replication within the same disk in
one computer.
Viruses can conceivably replicate within magnetic
memory, taking up multiple places on a single hard disk.
For
example, this can happen when a (rather stupid) RAM-resident
comp-virus, lacking a signature or signature recognition algorithm,
keeps on reinfecting the same file, or similar files, in long-term
memory.
The second possibility we will not examine further is that of RAM-
to-RAM replication between computers.
In such a case, a RAM-
based replicator produces a signal that goes through the virtual
operating system (OS) to the normal OS of the source computer, then
through a wire to another computer, where it is interpreted by the
normal OS, passed to the virtual OS, and written to RAM in the
receiver computer. This has been put forward as a proposal by some
observers but has not, to my knowledge, been carried out.
(An
example is “Network TIERRA” which builds on the case study
TIERRA discussed at length below.) There doesn't seem to be much
point to either of these types of scenarios, mostly because they don’t
extend the evolutionary dynamics of the viruses in any way, fruitful
or otherwise.

—— 342 · Notes ——
114 There is no such thing as a “good” comp-virus: Bontchev 1994.
114 TIERRA: Ray 1992.
115 Legendary first experiment with TIERRA: This account was adapted
from Kelly 1994:285–89.
115 “I never had to write another creature”: quoted in Levy 1992:221.
117 Maynard Smith convinced: Maynard Smith 1992.
118 Core War: The game was invented in the mid-1980s by A.K.
Dewdney and was popularized by its publication in his “Computer
Recreations” columns in Scientific American magazine. Core War is
a descendant of Darwin, a game written by Victor Vyssotsky, Robert
Morris, Sr. (father of the famous 1988 Internet Worm’s author), and
Doug McIlroy in the early 1960s.
Darwin ran on an IBM 7090
mainframe at Bell Labs in New Kersey. By the late 1980s, Core War
had become a cult pastime among computer programmers. See the
following
sources:
Core
War
FAQ,
<http://www.stormking.com/~koth/corewar-faq.html>; John Perry’s
“Core
Wars
genetics:
The
evolution
of
predation”
<http://www.ecst.csuchico.edu/~koth/evolving_warriors.html>;
and
“Core-wars
for
Dummies:
An
introduction
and
tutorial”
<http://www.koth.org/info/corewars_for_dummies/dummies.html>.
The classic reference remains, however, Dewdney 1984.
119 Ray told to put TIERRA in quarantine: Levy 1992:218.
120 Numbers of wild network comp-viruses: Alan Solomon, “A brief
history of PC viruses,” <http://www.cknow.com/vtutor/>
121 Brain virus: White et al. 1995.
122 Viral epidemiology in the 1990s: White et al. 1995.
124 The chance of your computer being infected: Kim Zetter, “How it
works: Viruses” PCWorld magazine, October 13, 2000,
<http://pcworld.com/features/article/0,aid,34551,00.asp>
124 Love bug virus: Kim Zetter, “Viruses, the next generation” PCWorld
magazine, November 1, 2000,
<http://pcworld.com/features/article/0,aid,34551,00.asp>
124 The virus writer profile is much broader: Kim Zetter, “What makes
Johnny (and Jane) write viruses?” PCWorld magazine, November 15,
2000, <http://pcworld.com/features/article/0,aid,34551,00.asp>
127 Comp-viruses engage in simple manipulation of their environment:
Spafford 1992.
134 Viral programs can express—or compute—anything: Cohen 1986.
135 Replicators seek to “convert” you: Ridley and Baker (1996) apply
the term “conversion” to all forms of prion creation; here I’m
generalizing it to comp-viruses, because they too alter the state of a
preexisting substrate as their mechanisms of replication.
PAGE
CHAPTER 5: THE DATA ON INFORMATION
136 Head quote: T.S. Eliot (1963 [1934]) “Choruses from ‘The Rock.’”
In Collected Poems 1909–1962. New York: Harcourt Brace.
136 Head quote: Crandall 1996.

—— Notes · 343 ——
137 “information can be shared at negligible cost . . .”: quoted from
Pinker 1997:190.
137 “mental states are invisible and weightless . . .”: quoted from Pinker
1997:329.
137 An idea doesn’t have mass or charge or length: paraphrased and
adapted from Williams 1992:10.
138 Only the information embodied in the nucleotide sequence gets from
one generation to another: Deacon 1999.
138 Evolutionary lineages are limited to one time and place: Hull 1982.
138 “these [computers]—the most complex things produced by human
mind …”: quoted from George Johnson, “First cells, then species,
now the Web,” New York Times, December 26, 2000.
139 “Information is physical”: Landauer 1991.
140 Physical reality includes not just matter and energy, but information
too: Jacob 1973:95.
140 “Information is information . . .”: quoted from Weiner 1961:132.
Francis Crick, in his statement of the central dogma of biology, also
suggested that three factors were involved in the translation of DNA
sequences into proteins: “the flow of energy, the flow of matter, and
the flow of information.”
So this important founder of molecular
biology was attuned to the physicalist interpretation of biology. See
Crick 1958.
141 Erasing data consumes energy: Landauer’s perspective suggests that
the commonsensical T.S. Eliot got it exactly wrong in the quotation
at the head of the chapter.
We do not lose knowledge in the
conversion to information. Instead the proper question is: What do
we have to lose, to forget, to get from information to knowledge?
And how can we filter out only the most salient aspects of knowledge
to achieve wisdom?
The relationships with respect to amounts of
stuff are just the reverse of those suggested by the poet.
141 Reversible computing: Bennett and Landauer 1985; Bennett 1995.
142 Quantum teleportation: Bennett et al. 1993. See also:
<http://www.research.ibm.com/quantuminfo/teleportation/>
142 Quantum teleportation demonstrated: Furusawa et al. 1998. See also
Bouwmeester et al. 1997, 1997.
144 You can’t Xerox a particle: Wootters and Zurek 1982. This quantum
limitation is on duplication, no on replication.
The method being
discussed is one that involves some outsider to the system scanning
an object for information so as to engage in a reproduction process.
This is not what happens in replication, where no observation need
take place: It all happens within the circumscribed circumstances.
“Particles” in the form of complex molecules can, of course, replicate
(just think of DNA).
145 “No information without physical representation!”: Landauer 1991.
146 Staircase and DNA have some physical structure/information: Hull
et al. (in press).
146 Biological and physical information inseparable: Mahner and Bunge
1997:339.
148 Proteins “recognize” DNA: Alberts et al. 1994:408.

—— 344 · Notes ——
148 “Structure determines function” as dominant principle: Sarkar 1996.
149 Lock-and-key flow of information: Lowenstein 1999.
151 “difference that makes a difference”: Bateson 1972.
153 Stories remain the same, regardless of substrate: Dennett 1995:353–
54.
154 Structural equivalence: See, for example, Wasserman and Faust
1994. This principle implies that two structurally equivalent memes
might be found in the same processing stream—one early on, another
one later. The on-line meme might then implicitly represent some
gross distinction, while the later one determines whether the stimulus
fits into a complex class (i.e., is tuned to fire “in response” to human
faces). On structural terms, these two memes should be considered
the same; on representational grounds, they are quite different. But
on the basis of this difference in implicit representational quality,
these two memes might have different functional roles in the sense of
determining host behavior (the meme’s phenotype).
This suggests
that structurally equivalent memes can produce different phenotypes.
This is called pleiotropy when genes do it and is not considered a
problem. The gene simply has multi-functionality. So too here.
156 Information content defines a replicator: Williams (1995).
156 “Archival” forms of genes: Richard Dawkins in the Guardian-
Dillons Debate between Richard Dawkins and Steven Pinker on the
question: Is Science Killing The Soul? at the Westminster Central
Hall on February 10, 1999,
<www.edge.org/documents/archive/edge53.html>
PAGE
CHAPTER 6: STALKING THE WILD MEME
159 Head quote: The Winter’s Tale, Act III, Scene 1.
159 Bowl of soup example: Blackmore 1999:63.
159 “memes are not magical entities of free-floating Platonic ideals . .
.”: quoted from Blackmore 2000:61.
159 Memes are both in the head and out in the world: Dennett 1991,
1995.
160 We don’t need Mendelian laws of culture for memetics: Blackmore
1999:56.
161 Obesity caused by viruses: Dhurandhar et al. 2000.
163 Mentalist redefinition of memes: Dawkins 1982:109.
164 “A meme should be regarded as a unit of information . . .”: quoted
from Dawkins 1982:109.
164 “propagate themselves from brain to brain . . .”: quoted from
Dawkins 1986:158.
164 “A wagon with spoked wheels . . .”: quoted from Dennett 1995:348.
164 “[a vehicle] houses a collection of replicators . . .”: quoted from
Dawkins 1982:114.
164 Memes are “substrate-neutral”: Dennett 1995.
165 Proteins are cobbled together: Lowenstein 1999:70.
167 Behavioral versus mental memes: Behavioristic memephiles include
Deacon
(1999),
Gatherer
(1998), and
Benzon
(1996).
The
mentalistic camp, currently dominant, includes Blackmore (1999),
Dawkins (1982), Dennett (1995), Lynch (1996), and a host of others,
among its members.

—— Notes · 345 ——
169 Einstein’s Tea Party: The basic outline for this story comes from a
posting by Raymond Recchia to the memetics mail-list on June 9,
2000,
<http://aldebaran.cpm.aca.mmu.ac.uk/~majordom/memetics/2000/1487.html>
It has been twisted to serve my purpose, and its interpretation is my
own.
173 Conclusion that behaviors aren’t replicators: It is also worth noting
that considering behaviors to be replicators implies that the
replication reaction occurs out in the open air, as with speech. But
this contradicts the implications, from Replicator Theory, that very
specialized conditions are required for the catalysis of copied
molecules, especially at the beginning: high concentrations of the
necessary building blocks, physical proximity, and the proper three-
dimensional alignments between the components. Signals of various
kinds, flitting about in the open environment, will be subject to
conditions too heterogeneous, the materials too diffuse, for a
standardized protocol of replication to evolve effectively. Note too
that the replication of artifacts like comp-viruses of Xeroxed paper
takes place in highly protected, isolated environments, as expected by
Replicator Theory.
175 Mentalism doomed to science of unobservable entities: Gatherer
1998; Benzon 1996.
176 Blood-brain barrier: Junoqueira et al. 1998.
PAGE
CHAPTER 7: MEMES AS A STATE OF MIND
178 Head quote: quoted in Popper 1982:89.
178 The first replicator: Whether in the form of an autocatalytic set
(Kaufmann 1986) or as single molecules like RNA (Joyce 1989,
1992) is a question left open here. I am also adopting a “replicator-
first” rather than “metabolism-first” position on the origin of life, but
only as a matter of narrative convenience.
182 Each neuron as mini-computer: Koch 1998.
184 “when a pig neuron grows up . . .”: quoted from Deacon 1997:200.
185 Hox genes: For example, brain structures involved in higher-level
learning emerge reliably in ontogeny under the influence of genetic
factors such as the homeobox gene Lhx5, which controls the
formation of a cortical structure called the hippocampus. See Zhao et
al. 1999.
185 Last phase of neuron pruning during adolescence: Bourgeois et al.
1999.
186 Error threshold: Eigen 1971.
187 Bigger brains favored when it’s hard to code information in genes:
Bonner 1980.
187 “the notion that behavior is always a reaction . . .”: quoted from
Milner 1999:3.
187 Memory consolidation during sleep: Nádasdy et al. 1999.
188 Temporal variation in brain response to same stimulus: Dennis
Meredith 2000 “Mind over Matter,”
<http://www.dukeresearch.duke.edu/lowres/Mindmatt.html>
188 The brain as a “solipsistic” organ: Freeman 1999.
188 Self-referentiality
as
a
close
relative
of
self-replication:
Hofstadter 1979.
I use the word “self-referential” here to
suggest
the
recursive
nature
of
inter-neural

—— 346 · Notes ——
connectivity.
I’m not arguing that the brain is making reference
through such connections to a self or identity.
190 New nodes in the neuronal network during adulthood: Gould et al.
1999.
190 Synapses being strengthened or withering away as a result of
feedback from the environment: Hebb 1949; Changeux 1985.
190 Synaptic plasticity: See Klintsoca and Greenough 1999 for an
overview.
191 CREB can be localized to individual synapses: Yin 1999.
191 Decentralized protein production and memory: Barinaga 2000.
192 Dependent relationship between short- and long-term memory: John
McCrone, personal communication.
193 “the Darwinism of synapses . . .”: quoted from Changeux 1985:272.
193 Abstract meme definition: Boyd and Richerson 1985:33; Blackmore
1999:66; Durham 1991:188; Dawkins 1982; Wilkins 1998; Hull
2000; Dennett 1995. Blackmore (1999:66) says, “I shall use the term
‘meme’ indiscriminately to refer to memetic information in any of its
many forms, including the ideas, the brain structures that instantiate
those ideas, the behaviours these brain structures produce, and their
versions in books, recipes, maps and written music. As long as that
information can be copied by a process we may broadly call
‘imitation,’ then it counts as a meme.”
193 Memes as physical network of neurons: Dawkins 1993; Delius 1991;
Plotkin 1993.
193 “if the brain stores information . . .”: quoted from Dawkins
1982:109.
196 Neuronal nodes as attractors: On the other hand, some attractor
nodes will probably not be memetic. For example, there are reliable
features of the world that could get translated into an attractor (e.g.,
borer detection) but that do not ever replicate themselves through the
production of signals.
They fire incredibly regularly and always
return to their designated state, but do not replicate. Examples might
include things learned by each individual independently (thus not
requiring social transmission)—things like universal regularities in
the perceptual environment that produce single copies of these things
in every human brain that grows to maturity. This being an attractor
ensemble is not enough to become a meme. You have to return to
state and reproduce at the same time. You also have to have another
meme as a proximate cause, so that you become part of a lineage, a
causal chain.
197 Definition of neuromeme: I should point out that I have a number
of important predecessors in this area.
The first is Manfred
Eigen. In an aside on group selection in the brain, he wrote: “If
there is mutual enhancement of linked neurons (forming, for
example, neuronal groups), any cyclic closure may define a ‘self-
reproductive’
firing
unit.
This
self-reproductive
unit
may
represent a ‘template.,’ but not in the sense that it leads to
multiplication of such circuits (e.g., groups) . . . The phenotype
of synaptic linkage in a cycle may be excitation or firing density
(or coherence of firing).
Competition may be introduced by
limitations of synaptic growth and inhibition.
Finally, mutation

—— Notes · 347 ——
may correspond to modifications (either structural or dynamic)
within such cycles” (Eigen 1994:44–45).
It is not surprising that
Eigen should have expressed ideas so similar to the ones I have
deduced from a similar framework, including his Replicator Theory
(described earlier).
Calvin (1996) discusses information replication as part of the
operation of his “Darwinian” machines within brains but does not use
the word meme nor connect his discussion to the memetic literature
in any way. Calvin is careful to provide a complete account of the
evolution of these information units within brains, with mechanisms
for variation, selection, and inheritance in a detailed neurobiological
model. However, my schematic approach to replication shares little
with Calvin’s sophisticated neuroscientific approach.
Liane Gabora (1997) has also put forward an argument that memes
must be in the brain.
However, Gabora takes her cue from
complexity theory. In her view, memes do not function in isolation
but as parts of a complex conceptual network, or worldview, which
should be the basic level at which cultural evolution is analyzed. For
her, the tendency to view memes as discrete, identifiable units (or
replicators) is problematic.
As parts of the brain, memes are
intimately involved in highly distributed, highly structured and inter-
connected networks. So memes spend most of their time as streams
of through that are continuously renewing, revising, and reassessing
the constituent memes.
It is these more holistic streams of
information that should be our primary focus, in her view.
However, the closest predecessor to meuromemes, as I develop it
here, is the earlier view of Juan Delius.
Delius is a prominent
neurobiologist who, appropriately enough, works on social learning
in songbirds. He is particularly interested in explaining the relatively
stable aspects of culture as long-term memory traces. He proposes
(Delius 1991) that the simultaneous activation of pre- and post-
synaptic neurons (a classical Hebbian mechanism) makes neurons
what he balls “hot,” or more susceptible to firing. His proposal is
that memes are clusters of neurons that become “hot” thanks to
information acquired through social learning, particularly imitation
or instruction. So for Delius behaviors like the production of signals
are how memes express themselves phenotypically, mimicking
Dawkins’s view in this respect. Memes, then, as a form of memory,
are physicochemical changes in the states adopted by clusters of
neurons—a definition very close to me own. He notes that memes
will be encoded as topologically unique patterns of “hotspots,” so a
trait in one brain will have a different geometrical configuration
than that same trait manifests in another brain. Despite this, he
argues they have similar functions in the host.
Delius believes
that many versions of a meme can be generated by a single
individual as a form of mental creativity. He is, in other words,
also a good neuronal selectionist.
He emphasizes the material
nature of memes as physical brain structures, modified by the
mental activity stimulated by experiences of social learning. He

—— 348 · Notes ——
emphasizes the parasitic nature of memetic replication and notes that
memes can be beneficial symbionts or detrimental parasites.
He
discusses
various ways in
which memes can aggregate into
coevolving complexes. All of these propositions should be familiar
to the careful reader of this book.
My view differs from that of Delius primarily in the suggestion that
social replication takes place through a mechanism other than social
learning.
Delius also does not describe memetic coevolution with
artifacts (the topic of a later chapter). Otherwise we have come to
largely convergent positions.
What I provide is an extended
argument for why we must think of memes in that way, to contrast
with Delius’s and Eigen’s more programmatic statements.
198 Genetic information as the novel configuration of matter in the
double helix: Jacob 1973:273.
201 Multiple replicator copies in brain: as suggested in Calvin 1996.
201 No two neurons will have exactly the same effect in the larger
network of
which each is a part: John McCrone, personal
communication.
203 Sensory feedback into brain as source of consciousness: Harth 1994;
Humphrey 1999.
204 Local reconsolidation of memory: Nader et al. 2000.
204 False memory: Loftus 1996.
205 Fluid topographic maps in brain: Faggin et al. 1997.
206 Variation in cortical brain regions: Mountcastle 1998:83.
208 “Small world” networks: Watts and Strogatz 1998.
208 Local “neighborhoods” preserved by link replacement: Amaral et al.
2000.
212 Stem cells wired up in adult cortex: Shors et al. 2001.
213 Movement of memory with practice: Jog et al. 1999.
215 Similarity of “new” replicators: Two of these novel replicators—
prions and memes—are also found in the brain. Not only that, but
prions can kill memes, so there is room for real conflict between
these two replicators!
215 Replicate through signals as intermediaries: Prions don’t share this
particular feature with memes and comp-viruses.
217 The representational capacity of cortex rises exponentially with the
number of neurons: Rolls and Treves 1998:261.
217 Quote: Monod 1970.
218 “You have a lot of ideas . . .”: quoted from Buchanan 1985:95.
218 “theorists in biology should realize . . .”: quoted from Crick
1988:42.
219 Neuronal
synchrony
and
behavioral
response:
Singer
1999;
Steinmetz et al. 2000.
219 The neuronal representations voted to be less likely interpretations of
events are suppressed: Desimone 1998.
219 Decay of synchrony as indicator of change in train of thought:
Rodriguez et al. 1999.
220 Kinds of selection on brain spikes, and hence the memes that
make them: This formulation of specific selection regimes has
another very important quality: It abolishes any complaints
about
memetics
being
tautological.
It’s
an
old
saw

—— Notes · 349 ——
among creationists that evolutionary theory is tautological because it
says that only the fit survive but then measures fitness by the number
survivors; survival figures as both the causes and the effect in the
theory, making it circular.
However, this is a caricature.
The
mechanism
Darwin
put
forward,
natural
selection,
places
independent factors—the things doing the selecting, which can range
from parasites to predators to asteroids—between the adaptations that
favor survival and the actual fate of organisms.
So evolutionary
biology can define fitness independently of what winds up evolving,
which saves the theory from being a tautology and makes it
acceptable science.
But meme theory would still seem to be susceptible to the tautology
complaint.
Isn’t it just that those ideas that happen to survive get
declared winners after the fact in the case of memes? For the meme
concept to escape the same problem, we must define cultural fitness
independently of what happens to be found in the belief pool. If the
first four notes of Beethoven’s Fifth Symphony (“da da da daah”) are
declared a powerful meme only because people can commonly be
heard humming it, we achieved no insight; we have said nothing
about why that particular musical phrase succeeds in dominating
other potentially hummable tunes in people’s minds.
When memeticists say that the popularity of “da da da daah” is
explained by its psychological appeal, then memetic fitness is being
defined by its success in producing replicas of itself.
This is an
example of just what the creationists complain about.
But with
neuromemetics, a meme’s fitness is due to its ability to duplicate
itself physically, which may be independent of its meaning or utility
to those that harbor it. Fitness is not a question of whether a meme
makes good use of the psychological structures in its environment.
It’s a question of how reliably a neuron can return to the same state
or survive attacks that would convert it to a non-infectious state. The
fitness of neuronally defined memes is a function of their kinetics (or
rate or reproduction) against competitors, not just their current
popularity.
Another reason the tautology argument doesn’t stick to this new
version of memetics is that what a meme represents in the mind is
separated from its physical instantiation in the brain.
Signals are
presumably evaluated on the basis of their content, not because of the
meme that might get constructed should the signal be admitted into
the brain.
There is a logical, temporal, and physical separation
between the evaluation of signals by brains and the fate of
neuromemes.
So the tautology complaint just won’t work against
neuromemetics.
220 “Mental Darwinism”: This perspective leads, however, to another
major
complaint
against
memetics:
its
lack
of
emphasis
on
intentionality.
Why get rid of all intentionality in the picture of
human mental life and social interaction when it is such a good way
of explaining how humans work? It is, after all, a viewpoint that has
dominated our thinking about thinking for hundreds, if not thousands,
of years. And you can predict quite well what someone will do by
assuming they want the same things in life you do.
Dropping

—— 350 · Notes ——
this rich store of intuitions therefore seems a bit rash. But we don’t
know that intentionalism is right either. It’s just a black box theory,
based on folk psychology—thinking that other people’s mind work
like our own, with many beliefs and motivations likely to be shared
between us.
Perhaps the language of belief and desire is just an
implant out in your head by natural selection because it was a
convenient gloss on what really happens in the brain!
In fact,
assuming people are motivated to achieve a particular goal and to
choose the course of action most likely to produce the desired
consequence allows you to predict very well what other people will
do. Our brains are designed to like such explanations for our actions
because that’s the language the brain uses to model human
interaction for itself.
But the interpretation of action in terms of
intentions was planted there by a history of selection; that’s why it
seems natural—it is! We think of ourselves as motivated agents with
the free will to decide our fates, and we infer that others are like this
too. But that’s no reason to think that we actually are such agents,
just because we’ve adopted this motivational shorthand as a way to
explain ourselves to ourselves in everyday discourse. That’s not a
scientific explanation, just the first one that comes to hand. That’s
why it’s called a “folk” theory—one that sprang up from intuition
before scientists got hold of the problem.
221 Biophysical models of spikes: See, for example, Koch 1998.
222 Hierarchical processing in the brain: Felleman and Van Essen 1991.
223 Memes can express a range of representations: The neuroscintific
view should thus go some way to assuaging the qualms Ernst Mayr,
the eminent evolutionary biologist of Harvard University, has about
the idea of a meme.
“It seems to me that this word [meme] is
nothing but an unnecessary synonym for the term ‘concept.’” See
Mayr 1997.
223 Theories of concepts: See Margolis and Laurence 1999 for a
contemporary overview of thinking about concepts.
223 Neuromemetics
is
consistent
with
neuroscientific
views
of
information representation in brains: Some neuroscientists object to
any attempt to break the brain into bits, which is what neuromemetics
seems to do (at least analytically), with its talk about isolated states in
brains. They argue that the brain must always be treated as a whole
(see, for example, Freeman 1999). After all, the neuronal network is
one joined-up totality, with every neuron being connected to every
other one through some circuit of synapses. The brain is an organ, of
a piece.
From the perspective of these holists, everything is
connected to everything else, and many current models of brain
activity indicate that most stimuli have an effect on the entire cortical
tangle. Anything interesting must therefore emerge, as a whole, from
the intrinsically complex developmental processes involving all of
these parts. It’s pointless, then. to try and tease this dynamic apart.
Trying to define brain “states” or concepts as an isolated aspect of the
brain is simply not meaningful.
When reacting to a stimulus, the
whole hierarchy of brain processes acts together, moving over the

—— Notes · 351 ——
course of a few hundred milliseconds from a raw state of
representation to one that is focused and imbued with meaning. So
any node’s state evolves in concert with how the rest of the brain is
reacting to a stimulus.
It’s a fairly common objection to claim that some phenomenon is so
complex and intertwined that you can’t break it up into meaningful
units. Many anthropologists say the same thing about culture. They
argue that there are no units in culture, much less scraps of it that can
replicate themselves.
Instead culture is considered a complex
amalgam of practices and institutions, not just ideas.
These
anthropologists believe you can’t chop it into bits and put under the
microscope, that no bit has meaning outside its context. Culture is
rather a vast web of mutual implications, like a maze with no way
out. (Of course, at the same time, they admit that culture is learned,
and presumably learned in bits and pieces as you acquire knowledge
from others through communicative exchanges.)
All neuromemetics asserts is that there are interesting things
happening at the level of circuits within the brain—like the
replication of information.
The existence of these circuits is well
recognized
by the
same neuroscientists
who complain about
chopping up the neural real estate. Neuromemetics admits that the
brain is a network. But think of this network in terms more familiar
to us—as a social network. I used the example in Chapter 5 of two
ladies, both of whom are treasurers of the Bingo-Players Association
in their New York borough and so structurally equivalent in terms of
these two associations. We know that neuronal networks, like social
networks, are “small world” networks, which means both kinds of
network
will
share
many
important
properties—maybe
even
divisibility.
This suggests that we can legitimately look at what a
particular circuit is doing, without having to recognize that
everything in the brain is connected to everything else.
So it is
appropriate to make an analogy between bingo clubs in New York
and your brain!
The implication is that we may not have to take the whole brain into
account at every moment to make sense of what is happening in
there.
Everyone in New York City is also connected in various
ways—they’re all bunched together within the city limits, pay city
taxes, and share city services. But net every nose in New York needs
to be counted whenever the Bingo-Players meet to discuss their
affairs. Similarly, to effectively predict what behavioral response is
impending, we may not need to measure the state of every neuron in
the brain.
Sure, the brain is complex, and, yes, everything is connected to
everything else in such a network, at least in some roundabout way.
But in the end, if we’re going to identify a replication mechanism as
we did in genetics, we have to stick to the particulars of the case.
That’s why we can’t just opt for “global understanding.” We may
need to think globally, but we have to analyze locally.
224 Parameters of “brain code”: Rolls and Treves 1998; Singer 1999;
Mountcastle 1998.

—— 352 · Notes ——
226 In competitive environments, simple replicators evolve, as illustrated
by Artificial Life simulations: When selecting for complexity,
mutually catalytic sets of elements emerge, which then organize
themselves into higher-order mutualistic cooperatives, creating a
self-maintaining ecosystem (Fontana and Buss 1994). The ecological
conditions in Core Wars and TIERRA (described in an earlier
chapter), on the other hand, favored the evolution of small size and
low resource use. See also Lenski and Velicer 2000.
227 Memes unlike other “independent” replicators: This statement is
somewhat unfair to genes, which nowadays have mostly tethered
themselves into interdependent teams along chromosomes, having
evolved numerous ways of establishing higher orders of organization
through cooperation (Haig 1997). Memes, in contrast, have had this
condition thrust upon them from their early history as parasites on
gene-produced brains.
228 “Virulent ‘mind viruses’”: fostered by authorities such as Dawkins
1993; Blackmore 1999’ Brodie 1996; and Lynch 1996.
228 Memes as symbionts with humans: Harms 1996.
229 Parasitism means dependent, not hostile: Dogiel 1964.
229 Memes virulent to the degree they are independent: Dawkins
1982:110.
230 Selection on memory for food items during evolution: Milton 1988.
230 Selection on memory for social skills during evolution: Humphrey
1976.
231 Higher-order mental functions centered in quintessential human
cognitive adaptation, the prefrontal cortex: Cziko 1995.
PAGE
CHAPTER 8: ESCAPE FROM PLANET BRAIN
232 Head quote: quoted in Deacon 1999.
232 Head quote: Owings and Morton 1998:11.
233 “Mind the gap”: I was reminded of this phrase—constantly
replicated by either a tape-recorded or electronically synthesized
human voice loop in the London underground as a warning to those
stepping from the platform into trains—by John Constable.
237 Social signals as vehicles: Dawkins 1982:109–10.
239 Extended phenotype notion: Dawkins 1982.
246 “Hot” paper citation study: Hull 1988.
247 Reconstructive nature of human communication: Sperber 2000;
Sperber and Wilson 1986.
247 No mental replicator chains possible through social communication:
Sperber 1996, Chapter 6.
249 Channeling
of
inference
not
enough
to
save
memes
from
degradation: David Hull, personal communication.
249 Memetic lineages maintained in the face of significantly error-prone
transmission: Gil-White (2001).
251 Genes, facing information overload, left the burden to culture:
Bonner 1988:208.
255 Memes have “feathered their nest” in the brain over time: Dennett
1991:207.

—— Notes · 353 ——
255 Communication
is
commonly
defined
as
the
transmission
of
information: See, for example, Bradbury and Vehrencamp 1998:353.
256 The
need
to
infer
message
sender’s
intent
during
human
communication: Sperber and Wilson 1986.
256 “Quasi-interactions”: Thompson 1994.
257 “Mechanical” communication theory: Shannon and Weaver (1965
[1949]).
259 “Inferential” communication theory: Sperber and Wilson 1986,
1997.
259 Early source of Inferential theory: Grice (1991 [1975]).
260 The “relevance” maxim: Sperber and Wilson 1986.
261 The need to share inference rules for successful communication:
Sperber and Wilson 1986:15.
261 Evolutionary communication theory: See Bradbury and Vehrencamp
1998, Dusenbery 1992, and Hauser 1996 for summaries.
261 Ritualization
for
efficiency
of
communication:
Bradbury
and
Vehrencamp 1998:535.
262 Tendency to increasingly sophisticated models of sender-receiver
psychology: Although many in media studies have attempted to
extend the mathematical branch of communication theory in this
way, it is actually unfair, since the developers of the Mechanical
approach
explicitly
cautioned
that
this
formal
theory
of
communication ignores the source or destination of messages,
leaving these as psychological black boxes (Cherry 1966:41;
Shannon and Weaver 1965[1949]). It is therefore not intended as a
complete theory of human communication (Cherry 1966:52).
In a
famous lament, Shannon himself cautioned that “workers in other
fields should realize that the basic results of the subject are aimed in
a very specific direct, a direction that is not necessarily relevant to
such fields as psychology, economics, and other social sciences”
(IEEE Transactions of Information Theory, December 1955), quoted
in Cherry 1966.
263 When the biological interests of sender and receiver significantly
overlap, signaling becomes more efficient: Johnstone 1997:164.
263 Arms race between sender and receiver: Dawkins and Krebs 1979.
264 Signaling systems may arise as a means of exploiting a preexisting
sensory bias: Johnstone 1997:174; Dusenbery 1992.
264 An overarching perspective on the evolution of communication is
lacking: Johnstone 1997:155.
268 Imitation as a form of social learning: For general references, see
Heyes and Galef 1996; Whiten and Ham 1992.
269 Cultural learning: Tomasello et al. 1993.
269 “Theory of mind” and imitation: See, for example, Whiten 1991.
270 Birdsong learning not true imitation: Tomasello 1996:324.
271 Birdsong exhibits all the characteristics of cultural evolution: A

—— 354 · Notes ——
selection of recent articles from a considerable literature could
include Baker 1996; Ficken and Popp 1995; Grant and Grant 1996;
and Payne 1996.
274 Admitting birdsong to the culture “club”: Blackmore (1999:49–50)
attempts to get around this problem by admitting birdsong as an
example of memetic spread, despite its not being based on true
imitation, but this is an obvious kludge, since no animal between
birds and humans in evolutionary history gets admitted to the “true
imitation club.”
271 Imitation is the only form of social learning appropriate enough as a
foundation of human cultural evolution: Boyd and Richerson
1985:35; Blackmore 1999:47–52. See also Durham 1991:188.
271 Imitation as meme’s mechanism of transmission: Dawkins 1976:206;
Dawkins 1999. However, as Blackmore notes, Dawkins takes this in
a “general” way, since he admits that memes “can propagate
themselves from brain to brain, from brain to book, from book to
brain, from brain to computer,” etc. (Dawkins 1986:158).
271 Imitation doesn’t ensure fidelity in the transmission of information:
Heyes and Plotkin 1989l Heyes 1993.
272 “Mirror” neurons: Gallese et al. 1996; Rizzolatti and Arbib 1998.
272 Same neurons activated when viewing and later recalling the Mona
Lisa: Kreiman et al. 2000.
PAGE
CHAPTER 9: THE TECHNO-TANGO
276 Head quote: Moravec 1998, Chapter 1.
276 Scary techno-futures: See, for example, Moravec 1998.
278 Artifacts move from being mental to physical objects: Barbieri
2001:220.
278 Artifacts as a second-order consequence of ideas: Dawkins (1982)
has called such things “extended phenotypes,” to acknowledge that
the activity of the body put them there in the first place. (This idea
was also discussed in the previous chapter, but with respect to signals
rather than artifacts.)
279 Niche construction theory: Laland et al. 2000.
280 “Cultural” niche construction theory: Laland et al. 2001.
281 A wagon and its memes: Dennett (1991:204) uses the same example
of a wheeled wagon: “A wagon with spoked wheels carriers not only
grain or freight from place to place; it carries the brilliant idea of a
wagon with spoked wheels from mind to mind.”
282 Memes inside artifacts: Dan Dennett, for example, continues to argue
that an abstract, substrate-neutral definition of memes is to be
preferred to any attempt to concretize them. See Dennett (in press).
282 Meme journeying through signals, minds, and artifacts: This
picture satisfies in large part an old desire of Dennett’s: “It is
tempting to suppose that some concept of information could
serve
eventually
to
unify
mind,
matter,
and

—— Notes · 355 ——
meaning in a single theory” (Dennett and Haugeland 1987).
Meaning here becomes the importation of memes into minds from
others, either directly, through straightforward communication, or
indirectly, through artifacts.
285 Complex machines as good interactors: It’s true that tools can also
influence the biological success of the genes responsible for their
production. The story of Cro-Magnon groups defeating Neanderthals
in prehistoric Europe is the most classic case of a more sophisticated
tool kit leading to one populations’ triumph over another.
So,
technically speaking, tools qualify as interactors according to the
original definition of interactors (cited in Chapter 3). But it remains
true that artifacts are evolving into new territories, as will become
clear as we go along.
293 Evolution of symbiotic relationships: Dogiel 1964:21.
294 An organism is a special kind of host because it can adapt to a
parasite: Dogiel 1964:433–34.
295 Nano-scaled robot replicators: Drexler 1981.
297 Self-assembling buckyballs and nanotechnology: Richard E. Smalley,
“Self-assembly of fullerene tubes and balls.” An address presented
before The Robert A. Welch Foundation 39th Conference on
Chemical Research: Nanophase Chemistry, held in Houston, TX,
October 23–24, 1995, <http://cnst.rice.edu/welch95.html>
302 “Observable” memetics: Gatherer 1998.
302 The “Machiavellian intelligence hypothesis”: Byrne and Whiten
1988.
303 Problems with the “widely shared” criterion of culture: Aunger
1999.
304 Chimpanzee cultural traditions: Whiten et al. 1999.
304 Variation if chimpanzee termiting techniques: McGrew 1992.
305 Social customs in guppies: Laland and Williams 1998.
305 “Ratchet effect” in human cultural evolution: Tomasello 2000.
305 A prominent point of view on cumulative culture: The next several
paragraphs summarize the arguments of Tomasello 2000.
305 Intelligence and social life do not produce culture: Boyd and
Richerson 1996:78.
307 “Culture” has a body: This point has been argued by a variety of
recent theories, including niche construction (Odling-Smee 1988),
distributed (Hutchins 1994) and situated cognition (Resnick et al.
1991), and the so- called “Russian school” of Vygotsky acolytes
(Cole 1998).
307 Intelligence within group structures: Hutchins and Hazelhurst 1991.
308 Cumulative culture need not depend on imitation: Blackmore (1999),
Boyd and Richerson (1985), and Tomasello (2000) all insist it does.
309 Dynamics of artifact-based culture: Laland et al. 2001.
310 Culture “out there” in the environment: I’m not alone in breaking
with purely mentalist cognitivism. Roy D’Andrade, in his masterful
intellectual
history
of
the
discipline,
argues
that
cognitive
anthropology is now in a fourth “phase” of development in which
“culture is seen to be particulate, socially distributed, variably
internalized, and variably embodied in external forms [i.e., behaviors
and artifacts]” (D’Andrade 1995:248).

—— 356 · Notes ——
PAGE
CHAPTER 10: RETHINKING REPLICATION
313 Viroids as parasites-on-parasites: Diener 1979, 1996.
313 Super-parasites need help constructing substrate: You might think
that the principle can be extended to genes as well, that genes can be
seen as being parasitic on preexisting molecules produced by general
chemical processes. DNA then converts these building blocks into a
specialized substrate for replication by tying them together into the
double helix.
It’s true that DNA doesn’t make nucleotides from
scratch. But independent nucleotides are not replicators, and I define
super-parasites as being dependent on other replicators. So the buck
stops with DNA.
314 “Routes to replication”: The transmission-through-signals route is
not available for prions.
314 “Natural bias” towards a replicator state: Introducing the category
of naturally biased memes is similar to Atran’s (1998) division of
memes into “core” and “developing” categories, Plotkin’s (2000)
distinction between “deep” and “surface” memes, and Tooby and
Cosmides’s (1992) “evoked” as opposed to “transmitted” culture.
The former category in each case is a cultural unit with little
dependency on social input, and hence recurrent, while the latter is
cross-culturally variable.
314 Semantic primitives like “over” as evidence of cognitive primitives:
Lakoff 1987.
318 Physical overlap as distinction between biological and cultural
replication: Griesemer (in press a).
319 Messenger RNA as a signal: Mazia 1956 (cited in Sarkar 1996).
PAGE
CHAPTER 11: THE REVOLUTION OF MEMES
323 Head quote: Dobzhansky 1962.
323 “there is no consensus opinion amongst geneticists . . .”: quoted in
the Introduction to Fox Keller 2000.
324 Historical
ages
and
their
analogical
thinking
about
brains:
Changeux 1995.
327 Self composed entirely of memes: See, for example, Blackmore 1999;
Gabora 1997.

BIBLIOGRAPHY
Alberts, Bruce, Dennis Bray, Julian Lewis, Martin Raff, Keith Roberts,
and James D. Watson (1994; 3rd ed.) Molecular Biology of the Cell.
New York: Garland Publishers.
Alexander, Richard (1979) Darwinism and Human Affairs. Seattle:
University of Washington Press.
Amaral, L.A.N., A. Scala, M. Barthélémy, and H.E. Stanley (2000)
“Classes of small-world networks,” PNAS USA 97:11149–52.
Atran, Scott (1988) “Folk biology and the anthropology of science:
Cognitive universals and cultural particulars,” Behavioral and Brain
Sciences.
Aunger, Robert (1999) “Against Idealism/Contra consensus,” Current
Anthropology 40:S93–S101.
Aunger, Robert (ed.) (2000) Darwinizing Culture: The Status of Memetics
as a Science. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Bailey, Craig H., Maurizio Giusetto, Yan-You Huang, Robert D. Hawkins,
and Eric R. Kandel (2000) “Is heterosynaptic modulation essential for
stabilizing
Hebbian
plasticity
and
memory?”
Nature
Reviews
Neuroscience 1:11–20.
Baker, David (2000) “A surprising simplicity to protein folding,” Nature
405:39–42.
Baker, M.C. (1996) “Depauperate meme pool of vocal signals in an island
population of singing honeyeaters,” Animal Behaviour 51:853–858.
Barbieri, Marcello (2001) The Organic Codes: The Birth of Semantic
Biology. Ancona: Pequod.
Barinaga, Marcia (2000) “Synapses call the shots,” Science 290:736.
Barkow, Jerome H., Leda Cosmides, and John Tooby (eds.) (1992) The
Adapted Mind: Evolutionary Psychology and the Generation of
Culture. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Bateson, Gregory (1972) Steps to an Ecology of Mind: Collected Essays in
Anthropology, Psychiatry, Evolution, and Epistemology. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press.
Bennett, Charles H. (1995) “Quantum information and computation,”
Physics Today 48(10):24–30.
357

—— 358 · Bibliography ——
Bennett, Charles H., G. Brassard, C. Crepeau, B. Jozsa, A. Peres, and W.
Wootters (1993) “Teleporting an unknown quantum state via dual
classical and Einstein-Podolsky-Rosen channels,” Physical Review
Letters 70:1895–99.
Bennett, Charles H., and Rolf Landauer (1985) “The fundamental physical
limits of computation,” Scientific American 255:38–46.
Benzon, William (1996) “Culture as an evolutionary arena,” Journal of
Social and Evolutionary Systems 19:321–62.
<http://www.newsavanna.com/wlb/CE/Arena/Arenaa00.shtml>
Best, Michael L., and Richard Pocklington (1999) “Meaning as use:
Transmission
fidelity
and
evolution
in
NetNews,”
Journal
of
Theoretical Biology 196:278–84.
Betzig, Laura, Monique Borgerhoff-Mulder, and Paul Turke (eds.) (1988)
Human Reproductive Behaviour: A Darwinian Perspective. New York:
Cambridge University Press.
Blackmore, Susan (2000) “The power of memes,” Scientific American
283:52–61.
Blackmore, Susan (1999) The Meme Machine. Oxford: Oxford University
Press.
Bonner, John Tyler (1988) The Evolution of Complexity by Means of
Natural Selection. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Bonner, John Tyler (1980) The Evolution of Culture in Animals.
Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Bontchev, Vesselin (1994) “Are ‘good’ computer viruses still a bad idea?”
EICAR conference.
<http://www.informatik.uni-hamburg.de/pub/virus/texts/viruses/goodvir.html>
Bourgeois, Jean-Pierre, Patricia S. Goldman-Rakic, and Pasko Rakic
(1999) “Formation , elimination, and stabilization of synapses in the
primate cerebral cortex.” In: The New Cognitive Neurosciences,
Michael S. Gazzaniga (ed.) Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Bouwmeester, D., J.W. Pan, K. Mattle, M. Eibl, H. Weinfurter, and A.
Zeilinger (1998) “Experimental quantum teleportation,” Philosophical
Transactions of the Royal Society of London Series A—Mathematical
Physical and Engineering Sciences 356:1733–37.
Bouwmeester, Dik, Jian-Wei Pan, Klaus Mattle, Manfred Eibl, Harald
Weinfurter, and Anton Zeilinger (1997) “Experimental quantum
teleportation,” Nature 390:575.
Boyd, Robert, and Peter J. Richerson (2000) “Memes: Universal acid or a
better mousetrap?” In: Darwinizing Culture: The Status of Memetics as
a Science, Robert Aunger (ed.). Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Boyd, Robert, and Peter J. Richerson (1996) “Why culture is common, but
cultural evolution is rare,” Proceedings of the British Academy 88:77–
93.
Boyd, Robert, and Peter J. Richerson (1987) “The evolution of ethnic
markers,” Cultural Anthropology 2:65–79.

—— Bibliography · 359 ——
Boyd, Robert, and Peter J. Richerson (1985) Culture and the Evolutionary
Process. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Bradbury, Jack W., and Sandra L. Vehrencamp (1998) Principles of
Animal Communication. Sunderland, MA: Sinauer Associates.
Brodie, Richard (1996) Virus of the Mind: The New Science of the Meme.
Seattle, WA: Integral Press.
Buchanan, Bruce (1985) “Steps toward mechanizing discovery.” In: Logic
of Discovery and Diagnosis on Medicine, Kenneth Schaffner (ed.).
Berkley: University of California Press, pp. 94–114.
Buller, David J. (1999) “Evolutionary psychology.” In: A Field Guide to
the Philosophy of Mind, Marco Nani and Massimo Marraffa (eds.),
Roma Tre, Università degli Studi: Società Italiana di Filosofia
Analitica. <http://www.uniroma3.it/kant/field/ep.htm>
Buss, David M. (1998) Evolutionary Psychology: The New Science of the
Mind. Boston: Allyn and Bacon.
Buss, Leo. (1987) The Evolution of Individuality. Princeton: Princeton
University Press.
Byrne,
Richard,
and
Andrew
Whiten,
eds.
(1988)
Machiavellian
Intelligence: Social Expertise and the Evolution of Intellect in
Monkeys, Apes and Humans. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Calvin, William H. (1996) The Cerebral Code: Thinking a Thought in the
Mosaics of the Mind. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Cavalli-Sforza, Luigi L., and Marcus W. Feldman (1981) Cultural
Transmission and Evolution: A Quantitative Approach. Princeton:
Princeton University Press.
Changeux,
Jean-Pierre
(1985)
Neuronal
Man.
Princeton:
Princeton
University Press.
Cherry, Colin (1996; 2nd ed.) On Human Communication: A Review, a
Survey and a Criticism. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Chien, Peter, and Jonathan S. Weissman (2001) “Conformational diversity
in a yeast prion dictates its seeding specificity,” Nature 410:223–27.
Cohen, Frederick B. (1994; 2nd ed.) A Short Course on Computer Viruses.
New York: Wiley.
Cohen, Frederick B. (1986) “Computer Viruses,” dissertation for the
Department
of
Electrical
Engineering,
University
of
Southern
California.
Cohen,
Frederick
B.
(1984)
“Computer
Viruses:
Theory
and
Experiments.” <http://www.all.net/books/virus/>
Cole, Michael (1998) Cultural Psychology: A Once and Future Discipline.
Cambridge, MA: Belknap Press.
Cosmides, Leda, and John Tooby (1987) “From evolution to behavior:
Evolutionary psychology as the missing link.” In: The Latest on the
Best, John Dupré (ed.). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

—— 360 · Bibliography ——
Crandall, B.C. (1996) Global Algorithms 1.5: The Nanotech Future: A
Digital Conversation with B.C. Crandall.” CTHEORY.
<http://www.ctheory.com/ga1.5-nanotech.html>
Crick, Francis H.C. (1988) What Mad Pursuit: A Personal View of
Scientific Discovery. New York: Basic Books.
Crick, Francis H.C. (1958) “On protein synthesis,” Symposium of the
Society for Experimental Biology 12:138–63.
Cziko, Gary (1995) Without Miracles. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Daly, Martin, and Margo Wilson (1988) Homicide. New York: Aldine de
Gruyter.
D’Andrade, Roy (1995) The Development of Cognitive Anthropology.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Darwin, Charles R. (1909) [1859] The Origin of Species. New York: P.F.
Collier and Sons.
Dawkins, Richard (1999) “Introduction” to Blackmore 1999.
Dawkins, Richard (1993) “Viruses of the mind.” In Dennett and His
Critics: Demystifying Mind, B. Dahlbohm, (ed.). Oxford: Blackwell,
pp. 13–27.
Dawkins, Richard (1986) The Blind Watchmaker. New York: Norton.
Dawkins, Richard (1982) The Extended Phenotype. Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Dawkins,
Richard
(1978)
“Replicator
selection
and
the
extended
phenotype,” Zeitschrift für Tierpsychologie 47:61–76.
Dawkins, Richard (1976) The Selfish Gene. Oxford: Oxford University
Press.
Dawkins, Richard, and John R. Krebs (1979) “Animal signals: Information
or manipulation?” In: Behavioral Ecology, John R. Krebs and N.B.
Davies (eds.). London: Blackwell, pp. 282–309.
Deacon, Terrence (1999) “Memes as signs: The trouble with memes (and
what to do about it),” The Semiotic Review of Books 10(3):1–3.
Deacon, Terrence (1997) The Symbolic Species. New York: Penguin.
Delius, Juan (1991) “The nature of culture.” In: The Tinbergen Legacy,
Marian Stamp Dawkins, Timothy R. Halliday, and Richard Dawkins
(eds.). London: Chapman and Hall, pp. 75–99.
Dennett, Daniel C. (in press) “From typo to thinko: When evolution
graduated to semantic norms.” Ms in preparation for volume from the
Fyssen Foundation Conference on Evolution and Culture.
Dennett, Daniel C. (2000) Foreword to Aunger 2000.
Dennett, Daniel C. (1999) “The evolution of culture.” Charles Simonyi
Lecture, Oxford, delivered February 17, 1999.
Dennett, Daniel C. (1995) Darwin,” Dangerous Idea: Evolution and the
Meanings Of Life. London: Allen Lane.

—— Bibliography · 361 ——
Dennett, Daniel C. (1991) Consciousness Explained. Boston: Little,
Brown.
Dennett, Daniel C., and John Haugeland (1987) “Intentionality.” In: The
Oxford Companion to the Mind, Richard L. Gregory (ed.). Oxford:
Oxford University Press.
Desimone,
Robert
(1998)
“Visual
attention
mediated
by
biased
competition in extrastriate visual cortex,” Philosophical Transactions
of the Royal Society of London Series B—Biological Sciences
353:1245–55.
Dewdney, A.K. (1984) “ln the game called Core War hostile programs
engage in the battle of bits,” Scientific American [reprinted in The
Armchair Universe: An Exploration of Computer Worlds, New York:
W.H. Freeman 1988].
Dhurandhar, N.V., B.A. Israel, J.M. Kolesar, G.F. Mayhew, M.E. Cook,
and R.L. Atkinson (2000) “Increased adiposity in animals due to a
human virus,” International Journal of Obesity 24:989–96.
Dick, Philip K. (1982) Do Androids Dream of Electric Sheep? New York:
Gallantine.
Diener, Theodor O. (1996) “Origin and evolution of viroids and viroid like
satellite RNAs,” Virus Genes 11:119–31.
Diener, Theodor O. (1979) Viroids and Viroid Diseases. New York:
Wiley.
Dobzhansky, Theodosius (1962) Mankind Evolving: The Evolution of the
Human Species. New Haven: Yale University Press.
Dogiel, V.A. (1964) General Parasitology. London: Oliver and Boyd.
Drexler, K. Eric (1981) Submolecular engineering: An approach to the
development of general capabilities for molecular manipulations PNAS
USA. 78:5275–78.
Durham, William H. (1992) “Applications of evolutionary culture theory,”
Annual Reviews in Anthropology 21:331–55.
Durham, William H. (1991) Coevolution: Genes, Culture and Human
Diversity. Stanford: Stanford University Press.
Dusenbury, David B. (1992) Sensory Ecology: How Organisms Acquire
and Respond to Information. New York: W.H. Freeman.
Edelman, Gerald M. (1993) Bright Air, Brilliant Fire: On the Matter of
Mind. New York: Basic Books.
Eigen, Manfred (1996) “Prionics, or the kinetic basis of prion diseases,”
Biophysical Chemistry 63:A1–A18.
Eigen, Manfred (1994) “Selection and the origin of information.” In:
Selectionism and the Brain, Manfred Eigen, Olaf Sporns and G.
Tononi, (eds.). San Diego: Academic Press, pp. 35–52.
Eigen, Manfred (I992) Steps Toward Life: A Perspective on Evolution.
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Eigen Manfred (I971) “Self-organization of matter and the evolution of
biological macromolecules,” Naturwissenschaften 58:465–523.
Eliot, T.S. (1963 [I934]) “Choruses from ‘The Rock.’” In: Collected
Poems 1909–.I962. New York: Harcourt Brace.

—— 362 · Bibliography ——
Faggin, B.M., K.T. Nguyen, and M.A.L. Nicolelis (1997) “Immediate and
simultaneous sensory reorganization at cortical and subcortical levels
of the somatosensory system,” PNAS USA 94:9428–33.
Feldman,
Marcus
W.,
and
Kevin
Laland
(1996)
“Gene-culture
coevolutionary theory,” Trends in Ecology and Evolution 11:453–57.
Feldman, Marcus W., and Luigi L. Cavalli-Sforza (1979) “Aspects of
variance and covariance analysis with cultural inheritance,” Population
Biology I5:276–307.
Felleman, D.J., and David Van Essen (1991) “Distributed hierarchical
processing in the primate cerebral cortex,” Cerebral Cortex 1:1–47.
Ficken, M.S., and J.S. Popp (1995) “Long-term persistence of a culturally
transmitted vocalization of the Black-Capped Chickadee,” Animal
Behaviour 50:683–93.
Flinn, Mark V. (1997) “Culture and the evolution of social learning,”
Evolution and Human Behavior 18:23–67.
Fontana, Walter, and Leo W. Buss (1994) “The arrival of the fittest:
Toward a theory of biological organization,” Bulletin of Mathematical
Biology 56:1–64.
Fox Keller, Evelyn (2000) The Century of the Gene. Cambridge: Harvard
University Press.
Freeman, Walter J. (1999) How Brains Make Up Their Minds. London:
Weidenfeld and Nicolson.
Furusawa, A., J.L. Sorensen, S.L. Braunstein, C.A. Fuchs, H.J. Kimble,
and E.S. Polzik (1998) “Unconditional quantum teleportation,” Science
282:706–9.
Gabora, Liane (1997) “The origin and evolution of culture and creativity”
Journal
of
Memetics–Evolutionary
Models
of
Information
Transmission 1.
<http://www.cpm.mmu.ac.uk/jom-emit/1997/vol1/gabora_l.html>
Gallese, V., L. Fadiga, L. Fogassi, and G. Rizzolatti (1996) “Action
recognition in the premotor cortex,” Brain 119:593–609.
Garcia, John, and R. Koelling (1966) “Relation of cue to consequences in
avoidance learning,” Psychonomic Science 4:123–24.
Gatherer, Derek (1998) “Why the ‘thought contagion’ metaphor is
retarding
the
progress
of
memetics,”
Journal
of
Memetics–
Evolutionary Models of Information Transmission 2.
<http://www.cpm.mmu.ac.uk/jom-emit/1998/vol2/gatherer_d.html>
Gaulin, Steven J.C., and Donald McBurney (2000) Psychology: An
Evolutionary Approach. New York: Prentice Hall.
Gazzaniga, Michael S. (1994) Nature,” Mind: The Biological Roots of
Thinking, Emotions, Sexuality, Language and Intelligence. New York:
Basic Books.
Gil-White, Francisco J. (2001) “L’evolution culturelle a-t-elle des règles?”
La rechérche Hors-Série No. 5(Avri1):92–97.
Gladwell, Malcolm (2000) The Tipping Point: How Little Things Can
Make a Big Difference. New York: Little, Brown.
Godfrey-Smith, Peter (2000) “The replicator in retrospect,” Biology and
Philosophy 15(3):403–23.
Godin, Seth (2000) Unleashing the Ideavirus. New York: Do You Zoom,
Inc.

—— Bibliography · 363 ——
Gordon, Sara (1993) “Inside the mind of Dark Avenger” Virus News
international. <http://mh101.infi.net/~wtnewton/vinfo/darkmind.html>
Gould, Elizabeth, Alison J. Reeves, Michael S.A. Graziano, and Charles
G. Gross (1999) “Neurogenesis in the neocortex of adult primates,”
Science 286:548–52.
Grant, B.R., and P.R. Grant (1996) “Cultural inheritance of song and its
role in the evolution of Darwin,” finches,” Evolution 50:2471–87.
Grice, H.P. (1991 [I975]) Studies in the Way of Words. Cambridge, MA:
Harvard University Press.
Griesemer, James R. (in press a) “Development, culture and the units of
inheritance,” Philosophy of Science (Proceedings) 67:S348–68.
Griesemer, James R. (in press b) “The informational gene and the
substantial body: On the generalization of evolutionary theory by
abstraction.” In: Varieties of Idealization. Pozman Studies in the
Philosophy of the Sciences and the Humanities, Nancy Cartwright and
Martin Jones (eds.). Amsterdam: Editions Rodopi Publishers.
Guglielmino, C.R., C. Viganotti, Barry Hewlett, and Luigi L. Cavalli-
Sforza (1995) “Cultural variation in Africa: Role of mechanisms of
transmission and adaptation,” PNAS USA 92:7585–89.
Haig, David (1997; 4th ed) “The social gene,” In: Behavioural Ecology:
An Evolutionary Approach, John R. Krebs and Nicholas B. Davies
(eds.). Cambridge: Blackwell, pp. 284–306.
Harms, William (1996) “Cultural evolution and the variable phenotype,”
Biology and Philosophy 11:357–75.
Harth, Erich (1994) The Creative Loop: How the Brain Makes a Mind.
New York: Perseus Books.
Hauser, Marc (1996) The Evolution of Communication. Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press.
Hebb,
Donald
0.
(1949)
The
Organization
of
Behavior:
A
Neuropsychological Theory. New York: Wiley.
Henrich, Joseph (in press) “Structural transmission and the diffusion of
innovations:
Adoption
dynamics
indicate
that
biased
cultural
transmission is the predominate force in behavioral change and much
of sociocultural evolution,” American Anthropologist.
Heyes, Celia M. (1993) “Imitation, culture and cognition,” Animal
Behaviour 46:999–1010.
Heyes, Celia M., and Bennett G. Galef (1996) Social Learning in Animals:
The Roots of Culture. San Diego: Academic Press.
Heyes, Celia M., and Henry C. Plotkin (1989) “Replicators and interactors
in cultural evolution.” In: What the Philosophy of Biology Is, Michael
Ruse (ed.). Dordrecht: Reidel, pp. 139–62.
Hill, Andrew F., Susan Joiner, Jackie Linehan, Melanie Desbruslais, Peter
L. Lantos,
and John Collinge (2000) “Species-barrier-independent prion replication
in apparently resistant species,” PNAS USA 97:10248–10253.

—— 364 · Bibliography ——
Hill, Kim, and A. Magdalena Hurtado (1996) Ache Life History: The
Ecology and Demography of a Foraging People. Hawthorne, NY:
Aldine de Gruyter.
Holbauer, J., and Karl Sigmund (1988) The Theory of Evolution and
Dynamical Systems. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Hofstadter, Douglas (1979) Gödel, Escher, Bach. New York: Basic Books.
Hopfield, John J. (I982) “Neural networks and physical systems with
emergent collective computational abilities,” PNAS USA 79:2554–58.
Hull, David L. (2000) “Taking memetics seriously: Memetics will be what
we make it.” In: Darwinizing Culture: The Status of Memetics as a
Science, Robert Aunger (ed.). Oxford: Oxford University Press, pp.
43–68.
Hull, David L. (1988) Science as a Process. Chicago: University of
Chicago Press.
Hull, David L. (1982) “The naked meme.” In: Learning, Development and
Culture, Henry C. Plotkin (ed.). London: Wiley, pp. 273–327.
Hull, David L. (1980) “Individuality and selection,” Annual Review of
Ecology and Systematics 11:311–32.
Hull, David L., R.E. Langman, and S.S. Glenn (in press) “A general
account of selection: Biology, immunology and behaviour,” Behavioral
and Brain Sciences.
Humphrey, Nicholas (1999) A History of the Mind: Evolution and the
Birth of Consciousness. New York: Copernicus Books.
Humphrey, Nicholas (1976) “The social function of intellect.” In:
Growing Points in Ethology, Patrick Bateson and Robert Hinde (eds.).
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Hurst, Laurence D., Anne Atlan, and Bengt O. Bengtsson (1996)
“Epigenetic conflicts,” Quarterly Review of Biology 71:317–64.
Husband, Scott, and Toru Shimizu (1999) “Evolution of the avian visual
system.” In: Avian Visual Cognition, R. Cook (ed.).
<www.pigeon.psy.tufts.edu/avc/husband>
Hutchins, Edwin (1994) Cognition in the Wild. Cambridge, MA: MIT
Press.
Hutchins, Edwin, and Brian Hazelhurst (1991) “Learning in the cultural
process.” In: Artificial Life II, Christopher G. Langton, Charles Taylor,
J. Doyne Farmer, and Steen Rasmussen (eds.). Reading, MA: Addison-
Wesley, pp, 689–706.
Ingold, Tim (2000) “The poverty of selectionism,” Anthropology Today
16(3):1–2.
Ingold, Tim (r986) Evolution and Social Life. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Jacob, Francois (1973) The Logic of Life. New York: Random House.
Jeffreys, Mark (2000) “The meme metaphor,” Perspectives in Biology and
Medicine 43:227–42.
<http://www.press.jhu.edu/journals/perspectives-in-biology-and-
medicine/vo43/43.2jeffreys.html>
Jog, Mandar S., Yasuo Kubota, Christopher I. Connolly, Viveka
Hillegaart,
and
Ann
M.
Graybiel
(1999)
“Building
neural
representations of habitat,” Science 286:1745–49.

—— Bibliography · 365 ——
Johnstone, Rufus (1997; 4th ed.) “The evolution of animal signals.” In:
Behavioural Ecology: An Evolutionary Approach, John R. Krebs and
Nicholas B. Davies (eds.). Cambridge: Blackwell, pp. 155–78.
Joyce, Gerald F. (1992) “Directed molecular evolution,” Scientific
American 267(6):90.
Joyce, Gerald F. (1989) “RNA evolution and the origins of life,” Nature
338:217–24.
Junqueira, Luiz Carlos, Jose Carneiro, Luis Carl Junqueira, and Robert O.
Kelley (1998’ 9th edition) Basic Histology. New York ; McGraw-Hill
Professional Publishing.
Kaufmann, Stuart A. (1993) The Origins of Order: Self-Organisation and
Selection in Evolution. New York: Oxford University Press.
Kaufmann, Stuart A. (1986) “Autocatalytic sets of proteins,” Journal of
Theoretical Biology 119:1–24.
Kay, Lily E. (2000) Who wrote the Book of Life? A History of the Genetic
Code. Stanford: Stanford University Press.
Kelly, Kevin (1994) Out of Control: The New Biology of Machines.
London: Fourth Estate.
Kendal, Jeremy R., and Kevin N. Laland (2000) “Mathematical models for
memetics,” Journal of Memetics–Evolutionary Models of Information
Transmission 4.
<http://www.cpm.mmu.ac.uk/jom-emit/2000/vol4/kendal_jr&laland_kn.html>
Klintsova, Anna Y., and William T. Greenough (1999) “Synaptic
plasticity in cortical systems,” Current Opinion in Neurobiology
9:203–8.
Koch, Christof (1998) Biophysics of Computation: Information Processing
in Single Neurons. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Koch, Richard (200l) The Natural Laws of Business: Applying the
Theories of Darwin, Einstein, and Newton to Achieve Business
Success. New York: Doubleday.
Kreiman, Gabriel, Christof Koch, and Itzhak Fried (2000) “Imagery
neurons in the human brain,” Nature 408:357–61.
Lakoff, George (1987) Women, Fire and Dangerous Things. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press.
Laland, Kevin N., John Odling-Smee, and Marcus W. Feldman (2001)
“Cultural niche construction and human evolution,” Journal of
Evolutionary Biology 14:22–33.
Laland, Kevin N., John Odling-Smee, and Marcus W. Feldman (2000)
“Niche construction, biological evolution and cultural change,”
Behavioural and Brain Sciences 23:131–75.
Laland, Kevin N., .and K. Williams (1998) “Social transmission of
maladaptive
information
in
the
guppy,”
Behavioural
Ecology
9(5):493–99.
Landauer, Rolf (1991) “Information is physical,” Physics Today 44:23–29.
Laufer, Berthold (1918) “Review of R.H. Lowie Culture and Ethnology,”
American Anthropologist 20:90 [quoted by Leslie White in his “Foreword”

—— 366 · Bibliography ——
to Evolution and Culture, Marshall D. Sahlins and Elman Service
(eds.), Ann Arbor, MI: University of Michigan Press (1960)].
Lee, D.H., K. Severin, Y. Yokobayashi, and M. R. Ghadiri (1997)
“Emergence of symbiosis in
peptide self-replication through a
hypercyclic network,” Nature 390:591–94.
Lenski, Richard E., and G.J. Velicer (2000) “Games microbes play,”
Selection 1:89–95.
Levy, Steven (1992) Artificial Life. New York: Vintage.
Lewontin, Richard C. (1970) “The units of selection,” Annual Review of
Ecology and Systematics 1:1–18.
Li, Liming, and Susan Lindquist (2000) “Creating a protein-based element
of inheritance,” Science 287:661–64.
Loftus, Elizabeth F. (1996) Eyewitness Testimony. Cambridge, MA:
Harvard University Press.
Lowenstein, Werner R. (1999) The Touchstone of Life: Molecular
Information, Cell Communication, and the Foundations of Life. New
York: Oxford University Press.
Ludwig, Mark (1990) The Little Black Book of Computer Viruses. Show
Low, Arizona: American Eagle Publications.
Lumsden, Charles J., and Edward O. Wilson (1981) Genes, Mind and
Culture. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Lynch, Aaron (1998) “Units, events and dynamics in memetic evolution,”
Journal
of
Memetics–Evolutionary
Models
of
Information
Transmission 2.
<http://www.cpm.mmu.ac.uk/jom-emit/1998/vol2/lynch_a.html>
Lynch, Aaron (1996) Thought Contagion: How Belief Spreads through
Society. New York: Basic Books.
Lynch, Aaron (1991) “Thought contagion as abstract evolution,” Journal
of Ideas 2:3–10.
Mahner, M., and Mario Bunge (1997) Foundations of Biophilosophy. New
York: Springer-Verlag.
Margolis, Eric, and Stephen Laurence, eds. (1999) Concepts: Core
Readings. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Maynard Smith, John (2000) “The concept of information in biology,”
Philosophy of Science 67:177–94.
Maynard Smith, John (1992) “Byte-sized evolution,” Nature 355:772–73.
Maynard Smith, John, and Eörs Szathmáry (1995) The Major Transitions
in Evolution. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Maynard Smith, John (1987) “How to model evolution.” In: The Latest on
the Best, John Dupré (ed.). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Mayr, Ernst (1997) “The objects of selection,” PNAS USA 94:2091–94.
<http://www.pnas.org/cgi/conten/full/94/6/2091>
Mazia, D. (1956) “Nuclear products and nuclear reproduction.” In:
Enzymes: Units of Biological Structure and Function, O.H. Garbler
(ed.). New York: Academic Press, pp. 261–78.

—— Bibliography · 367 ——
McGrew, William C. (1992) Chimpanzee Material Culture: Implications
for Human Evolution. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Merzenich, M.M., and R.C. de Charms (1996) “Neural Representations,
Experience, and Change.” In: The Mind-Brain Continuum, Rodolfo
Llinás and Patricia Churchland (eds.). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, pp.
61–82.
Michod,
Richard
E.
(1999)
Darwinian
Dynamics:
Evolutionary
Transitions
in
Fitness
and
Individuality.
Princeton:
Princeton
University Press.
Milner, Peter M. (1999) The Autonomous Brain: A Neural Theory of
Attention and Learning. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Milton, Katherine (1988) “Foraging behaviour and the evolution of
primate intellicence.” In: Machiavellian Intelligence: Social Expertise
and the Evolution of Intellect in Monkeys, Apes, and Humans, Richard
Byrne and Andrew Whiten (eds.). Oxford: Oxford University Press,
pp. 285–306.
Mitchell, Melanie (in press) “Life and evolution in computers.” In:
Darwinian Evolution Across the Disciplines, M. McPeek et al. (eds.).
<http://www.santafe.edu/~mm/paper-abstracts.html>
Monod, Jacques (1970) Chance and Necessity [quoted in Douglas R.
Hoftstadter, “On Viral Sentences and Self-Replicating Structures,” in
his book Metamagical Themas: Questing for the Essence of Mind and
Pattern, 1985, New York: Basic Books].
Mountcastle, Vernon B. (1998) Perceptual Neuroscience: The Cerebral
Cortex. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Moravec, Hans P. (1998) Robot: Mere Machine to Transcendent Mind.
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Nádasdy, Z., H. Hirase, A. Czurkó, J. Csicsvari, and G. Buzsáki (1999)
“Replay and time compression of recurring spike sequences in the
hippocampus,” Journal of Neuroscience 19:9497–507.
Nader, Karim, Glenn E. Schafe, and Joseph E. LeDoux (2000) “Fear
memories require protein synthesis in the amygdala for reconsolidation
after retrieval,” Nature 4o6:722–26.
Nei, Masatoshi (1986) Molecular Evolutionary Genetics. New York:
Columbia University Press.
Netting, Robert M. (1986; 2nd ed) Cultural Ecology. Prospect Heights, IL:
Waveland Press.
Odling-Smee, F.J. (1988) “Niche constructing phenotypes.” In: The Role
of Behaviour in Evolution, Henry C. Plotkin (ed.) Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press.
Owings, Donald H., and Eugene S. Morton (1998) Animal Vocal
Communication: A New Approach. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.
Partridge, Linda, and N.H. Barton (2000) “Evolving evolvability,” Nature
407:457–58.
Payne, Robert B. (1996) “Strong traditions in indigo buntings: Origin,
improvisation, dispersal, and extinction in cultural evolution.” In:
Ecology and Evolution of Acoustic Communication in Birds, D.E.
Kroodsma and E.H. Miller (eds.). Ithaca: Cornell University Press, pp.
198–220.

—— 368 · Bibliography ——
Pinker, Steven (1997) How the Mind Works. London; Penguin.
Pinker, Steven (1994) The Language Instinct. London: Penguin.
Pittenger, C., and Eric Kandel (1998) “A genetic switch for long-term
memory,” Comptes Rendus De L’Academie Des Sciences Serie III
(Life Sciences) 321:91–96.
Plotkin, Henry C. (2000) “Culture and psychological mechanism,” In:
Darwinizing Culture: The Status of Memetics as a Science, Robert
Aunger (ed.). Oxford: Oxford University Press, pp. 69–82.
Plotkin, Henry C. (1993) Darwin Machines and the Nature of Knowledge.
London: Penguin.
Pocklington, Richard, and Best, Michael L. (1997) “Cultural evolution and
units of selection in replicating text,” Journal of Theoretical biology,
188:79–87.
Popper,
Karl
R.
(1982)
The
Open
Universe:
An
Argument
for
Indeterminacy. Totowa, NJ: Rowman and Littlefield.
Prusiner, Stanley B. (1995) “The prion diseases,” Scientific American
272:48–57.
Rasmussen, Steen, Carsten Knudsen, Ramus Feldberg, and Morten
Hindsholm (1990) “The Coreworld: Emergence and evolution of
cooperative structures in a computational chemistry,” Physica D
42:111–34.
Ray, Thomas S. (1992) “An approach to the synthesis of life,” In:
Artificial Life II. Christopher G. Langton, Charles Taylor, J. Doyne
Farmer, and Steen Rasmussen (eds.). Redwood City, CA: Addison-
Wesley, pp. 371–408.
Rebek, Julius (1994) “Synthetic self-replicating molecules,” Scientific
American 271:34–40.
Reeves, Byron, and Clifford Nass (1996) The Media Equation: How
People Treat Computers, Television, and New Media Like Real People
and Places. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Rendell, Luke, and Hal Whitehead (2001; in press) “Culture in whales and
dolphins,” Behavioral and Brain Sciences 24(2).
Resnick, Laura B., J.M. Levine, and S.D. Teasley
(eds.) (1991)
Perspectives
on
Socially-shared
Cognition.
Washington,
DC:
American Psychological Association.
Richards, Robert J. (1987) Darwin and the Emergence of Evolutionary
Theories of Mind and Behavior. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Richerson, Peter J., and Robert Boyd (1978) “A dual inheritance model of
the human evolutionary process I: Basic postulates and a simple
model,” Journal of Social and Biological Structures 1:127–54.
Ridley, Rosalind, and Harry F. Baker (1996) Fatal Protein: The Story of
CJD, BSE, and Other Prion Diseases. Oxford: Oxford University
Press.
Rizzolatti, G., and M. Arbib (1998) “Language within our grasp,” Trends
in the Neurosciences 21:188–94.
Rodriguez, E., N. George, J.P. Lachaux, J. Martinerie, B. Renault, and F.J.
Varela (1999) “Perception’s shadow: Long-distance synchronization of
human brain activity,” Nature 397:430–33.

—— Bibliography · 369 ——
Rogers, Everett M. (1995; 3rd ed.) Diffusion of Innovations. New York:
Free Press.
Rolls, Edmund T., and Alessandro Treves (1998) Neural Networks and
Brain Function. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Rosen, Emanuel (2000) The Anatomy of Buzz: How to Create Word-of-
Mouth Marketing. New York: Doubleday.
Saborio, G.P., C. Soto, R.J. Kascsak, E. Levy, R. Kascsak, D.A. Harris,
and B. Frangione (1999) “Cell-lysate conversion of prion protein into
its protease-resistant isoform suggests the participation of a cellular
chaperone,” Biochemical and Biophysical Research Communications
258:470–75.
Sahlins, Marshall D. (1960) “Evolution: Specific and general,” In:
Evolution and Culture, Marshall D. Sahlins and Elman Service (eds.).
Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press, pp. 12–44.
Sarkar, Sahotra (1996) “Biological information: A skeptical look at some
central dogmas of molecular biology.” In: The Philosophy and History
of Molecular Biology: New Perspectives, Sahotra Sarkar (ed.).
Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic Publishers, pp. 187–231.
Schuster, Peter, and Karl Sigmund (1983) “Replicator dynamics,” Journal
of Theoretical Biology 100:533–38.
Schwartz, Evan I. (1999) Digital Darwinism: Seven Breakthrough
Business Strategies for Surviving in the Cutthroat Web Economy. New
York: Broadway Books.
Service, Robert F. (1999) “Big Blue aims to crack protein riddle,” Science
286:2250.
Shannon, Claude E. (1948) “A mathematical theory of information,” Bell
System Technical Journal 27:379–423, 623–56.
Shannon, Claude, and Warren Weaver (1965 [1949]) The Mathematical
Theory of Communication. Chicago: University of Illinois Press.
Shors, Tracey J., George Miesegaes, Anna Beylin, Mingrui Zhao, Tracy
Rydel, and Elizabeth Gould (200l) “Neurogenesis in the adult is
involved in the formation of trace memories,” Nature 410:372–76.
Singer, Wolf (1999) “Timr as coding space?” Current Opinion in
Neurobiology 9:189–94.
Smith, Q.R. (2000) “Transport of glutamate and other amino acids at the
blood-brain barrier,” Journal of Nutrition 130(4S Suppl):1016S–22S.
Smolin, Lee (1997) The Life of the Cosmos. London: Weidenfeld and
Nicolson.
Spafford, Eugene H. (I99a) “Computer viruses: A form of artificial life,”
In: Artificial Life II, Christopher G. Langton, Charles Taylor, J. Doyne
Farmer, and Steen Rasmussen (eds.). Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley,
pp. 727–46.
Sperber, Dan (2000) “An objection to the memetic approach to culture.”
In: Darwinizing Culture: The Status of Memetics as a Science, Robert
Aunger (ed.). Oxford: Oxford University Press, pp. 163–74.
Sperber, Dan (1996) Explaining Culture: A Naturalistic Approach.
Oxford: Blackwell.

—— 370 · Bibliography ——
Sperber, Dan, and Deirdre Wilson (1997) “Remarks on relevance theory
and the social science,” Multilingua 16:145–51.
<http://perso.club-internet.fr/sperber/rel-soc.html>
Sperber, Dan, and Deirdre Wilson (1986 [2nd ed. 1995]) Relevance:
Communication and Cognition. Oxford: Blackwell.
Steinmetz, P.N., A. Roy, P. Fitzgerald, S.S. Hsiao, E, Niebur, and K.O.
Johnson (2000) “Attention modulates synchronized neuronal firing in
primate somatosensory cortex,” Nature404:187–90.
Sterelny, Kim (2001) “Niche construction, developmental systems and the
extended replicator.” In: Cycles of Contingency: Developmental
Systems and Evolution, Susan Oyama, Paul E. Griffiths, and Russell
D. Gray (eds.). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Sterelny, Kim, and Paul E. Griffiths (1999). Sex and Death. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press.
Steward, Julian (1955) Theory of Culture Change. Urbana: University of
Illinois Press.
Symons, Donald (1987) “If we’re all Darwinians, what’s the fuss about?”
In: Sociobiology and psychology: Ideas, issues and applications,
Charles Crawford, Martin Smith, and Dennis Krebs (eds.). Hillsdale,
NJ: Erlbaum, pp. 121–46.
Szathmáry, Eörs (1991) “Simple growth laws and selection consequence,”
Trends in Ecology and Evolution 6:.366–70.
Szathmáry, Eörs, and John Maynard Smith (1997) “From replicators to
reproducers: The first major transitions leading to life,” Journal of
Theoretical Biology 187:555–71.
Telling, Glenn C., Piero Parchi, Stephen J. DeArmond, Pietro Cortelli,
Pasquale Montagna, Ruth Gabizon, James Mastrianni, Elio Lugaresi,
Pierluigi Gambetti, and Stanley B. Prusiner (1996) “Evidence for the
conformation of the pathologic isoform of the prior protein enciphering
and propagating prion diversity,” Science 274:2079–82.
Thompson, John B. (1994) Media and Modernity. London: Polity Press.
Tomasello, Michael (2000) The Cultural Origins of Human Cognition.
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Tomasello, Michael (1996) “Do apes ape?” In Social Learning in Animals:
The Roots of Culture, Celia M. Heyes and Bennett G. Galef (eds.). San
Diego: Academic Press, pp. 319–46.
Tomasello, Michael, A.C. Kruger, and H.H. Ratner (1993) “Cultural
learning,” Behavioral and Brain Sciences 16:495–552.
Tooby, John, and Leda Cosmides (1995) “Mapping the evolved functional
organization of mind and brain.” In: The Cognitive Neurosciences,
Michael Gazzaniga (ed.). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Tooby, John, and Leda Cosmides (1992) “The psychological foundations
of culture,” In: The Adapted Mind: Evolutionary Psychology and the
Generation of Culture. Jerome H. Barkow, Leda Cosmides, and John
Tooby (eds.). Oxford: Oxford University Press, pp. 19–136.

—— Bibliography · 371 ——
True, H.L., and Susan Lindquist (2000) “A yeast prion provides a
mechanism for genetic variation and phenotypic diversity,” Nature
407:477–83.
Tuma, Rabiya S. (2000) “It’s not just DNA anymore: Prion proteins and
hereditary information,” HMS Beagle 81 (June 23).
Valéry, Paul (1989) The Art of Poetry (Collected Works, Vol. 7). Edited
by J. Mathews; translated by Denise Folliot. Princeton: Princeton
University Press.
Van Gunsteren, W.F., R. Bürgi, C. Peter, and X. Daura (2001) “The key to
solving the protein-folding problem lies in an accurate description of
the denatured state,” Angewandte Chemie International Edition
40:352.
Vayda, Andrew P., and Bonnie J. McCay (1975) “New directions in
ecology
and
ecological
anthropology,”
Annual
Review
of
Anthropology 4:293–306.
Wasserman,
Stanley, and
Katherine
Faust (1994)
Social
Network
Analysis:
Methods
and
Applications.
Cambridge:
Cambridge
University Press.
Watts, Duncan J., and Steven H. Strogatz (1998) “Collective dynamics of
‘small-world’ networks,” Nature 393:440–42.
Weiner,
Norbert
(1961;
and
ed.)
Cybernetics:
or
Control
and
Communication in the Animal and the Machine. Cambridge, MA: MIT
Press.
White, Steve R., Jeffrey O. Kephart, and David M. Chess (1995)
“Computer Viruses: A Global perspective,” Proceedings of the 5th
Virus Bulletin International Conference, Abingdon, England: Virus
Bulletin Ltd.
Whiten, Andrew (ed.) (1991) Natural Theories of Mind: Evolution,
Development and Simulation of Everyday Mindreading. London:
Blackwell.
Whiten, Andrew, Jane Goodall, William C. McGrew, T. Nishida, Vernon
Reynolds, Y. Sugiyama, C.E. Tutin, Richard W. Wrangham, and
Christophe Boesch (1999) “Chimpanzee cultures,” Nature 399:682–85.
Whiten, Andrew, and R. Ham (1992) “On the nature and evolution of
imitation in the animal kingdom: A reappraisal of a century of
research.” In: Advances in the Study of Behavior, Vol. 21, P.J.B.
Slater, J.S. Rosenblatt, C. Beer, and M. Milkinski (eds.). New York:
Academic Press, pp. 239–83.
Wilkins, John (1999) “Memes ain’t (just) in the head,” Journal of
Memetics–Evolutionary Models of Information Transmission .3.
<http://www.cpm.mmu.ac.uk/jom-emit/1999/vol3/wilkins_j.html>
Wilkins, John (1998) “What’s in a meme? Reflections from the
perspective of the history and philosophy of evolutionary biology,”
Journal
of
Memetics–Evolutionary
Models
of
Information
Transmission 2.
<http://www.cpm.mmu.ac.uk/jom-emit/1998/vol2/wilkins_j.html>
Williams, George C. (1995) “A Package of Information.” In: The Third
Culture: Beyond the Scientific Revolution, John Brockman (ed.). New
York: Simon and Schuster.
Williams, George C. (1992) Natural Selection: Domains, Levels, and
Challenges. New York: Oxford University Press.
Wilson, D.S. (1999) “Flying over uncharted territory” (review of Susan
Blackmore’s The Meme Machine), Science 285:206.

—— 372 · Bibliography ——
Winterhalder, Bruce, and Eric Alden Smith beds.) (1981) Hunter-Gatherer
Foraging Strategies: Ethnographic and Archaeological Analyses.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Wootters, W.K., and W.H. Zurek (1982) “A single quantum cannot be
cloned,” Nature 299:802.
Wright, Robert (1994) The Moral Animal: Why We Are the Way We Are:
The New Science of Evolutionary Psychology. New York: Vintage.
Yin, Jerry Chi-Ping (1999) “Location, location, location: The many
addresses of memory formation,” PNAS 96:9985–86.
Zhao, Y., H.Z. Sheng, R. Amini, A. Grinberg, E. Lee, S. Huang, M. Taira,
and H. Westphal (1999) “Control of hippocampal morphogenesis and
neuronal differentiation by the LIM someone gene Lhx5,” Science
283:1155–58.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This book is largely the result of numerous Aha! experiences on waking
up in the morning.
Most of these early-rising ideas, bubbling into
consciousness, were killed off by later ones or simply died of their own
memetic defects.
But some of these inspirations have made it into the
final artifact you hold in your hands.
Most have even survived the
treacherous journeys into and back out of the minds of some draft readers
before settling here. The memes that remain have therefore successfully
wended their way through a complex battery of selective tests and will
hopefully replicate far and wide (with my name attached, of course!) now
that they have produced signal templates in this medium of the printed
page.
I want to thank those people who lent their mental energies to this
collective dreck-filtering exercise. My wife, Gillian Bentley, comes first
on the list of thankees, not in the traditional last-but-most-important
position. This is because she insisted on it as recompense for being the
one who primarily had to put up with my ravings on waking up.
(She
eventually learned to simply ignore me.) She has read, and hated, more
versions of this book than anyone else.
Most important, she ran the
household while I meditated on replication issues, and only occasionally
asked me how the book was coming along. She alone can tell me how
much I owe her. My kids, Justin and Amy, eventually learned that when
daddy was sitting at the computer, it was best not to bother him. Thanks
to them for being so clever.
Non-kin who contributed through discussion include Pascal Boyer,
John Constable, Terry Deacon, Dan Dennett, James Griesemer, David
Hull, Nicholas Humphrey, Mark Lake, Kevin Laland, Neil Manson, India
Morrison, John Odling-Smee, Peter Richerson, and Dan Sperber. People
who have commented on parts of the book include Susan Blackmore,
Terry Deacon, Juan Delius, Barry Keverne, Kevin Laland, Tim Lewens,
John McCrone, India Morrison, Henry Plotkin, and John Wilkins. Those
who heroically took on the full manuscript were Peter Richerson and John
van Wyhe.
Many thanks to all for their feedback and forbearance.
(I
apologize to anyone I have forgotten.)
373

—— 374 · Acknowledgements ——
Richard Dawkins, Dan Dennett, Nicholas Humphrey, and David Sloan
Wilson provided important, generous impetus during the early stages of
this project. I was also fortunate in having John Brockman and Katinka
Matson, agents extraordinaire, as my avatars during virtual negotiations to
get these memes widely distributed. At The Free Press my editor, Stephen
Morrow, was instrumental in getting this book off the ground and very
tactful when pointing out ways to improve it, and he even found ways to
curb my more creative impulses.
The production supervisor, Loretta
Denner, found an able copy editor in Patricia Fogarty and a fine indexer in
Martin L. White.
For preprints and reprints, I thank Susan Blackmore, Thomas Diener,
Peter Godfrey-Smith, James Griesemer, David Hull, Mark Lake, Kevin
Laland, John Odling-Smee, India Morrison, Peter Richerson, Yoshio
Sakurai, Sahotra Sarkar, Stephen Shennan, Dan Sperber, John E. Stewart,
and Eörs Szathmáry.
Thanks also to those who came to the various public presentations I
have made of the ideas in this book and provided such valuable feedback.
For tolerating my haunting of their hallways during the writing of this
book, I thank the faculty in the Department of Biological Anthropology,
Cambridge, and particularly its head, Nick Mascie-Taylor.
Robert Bailey played no role in this book whatsoever but did ably
mentor my earlier incarnation as an empirical scientist studying cultural
transmission, which first prompted me to think about many of the issues
here.
Without that grounding and experience, I doubt the present book
would have taken its current form.
So I guess Bob is somewhat
responsible, after all.
Finally, I can’t quit without thanking Patrick Bateson, Provost of
King’s College Cambridge, as well as the general Fellowship, both for
their warm collegiality and for an extended period of essentially
uninterrupted and unencumbered time for the free exploration of meme-
space. Such generosity and dedication to the old-fashioned, gentlemanly
pursuit
of scientific
interests is
(unfortunately)
truly rare
in
the
contemporary academic world. The College even allowed me to organize
a conference that was a crucial forebear to my work on this book. I hope
the result is worth the investment. In any case, it is certainly clear (to me
at least) that the development of novel meme-complexes, such as appear
here, is likely to occur only in such an intellectually liberating
environment.

