
The Routledge Handbook of
Applied Linguistics
The Routledge Handbook of Applied Linguistics serves as an introduction and reference point
to key areas in the ﬁeld of applied linguistics.
The ﬁve sections of the volume encompass a wide range of topics from a variety of
perspectives:

Applied linguistics in action

Language learning, language education

Language, culture and identity

Perspectives on language in use

Descriptions of language for applied linguistics
The 47 chapters connect knowledge about language to decision-making in the real world. The
volume as a whole highlights the role of applied linguistics, which is to make insights drawn from
language study relevant to such decision-making.
The chapters are written by specialists from around the world. Each one provides an over-
view of the history of the topic, the main current issues and possible future trajectory. Where
appropriate, authors discuss the impact and use of new technology in the area. Suggestions for
further reading are providedwith every chapter. The Routledge Handbook of Applied Linguistics is
an essential purchase for postgraduate students of applied linguistics.
James Simpson is a senior lecturer in the School of Education, University of Leeds.

Routledge Handbooks in Applied Linguistics
Routledge Handbooks in Applied Linguistics provide comprehensive overviews of the key
topics in applied linguistics. All entries for the handbooks are specially commissioned and
written by leading scholars in the ﬁeld. Clear, accessible and carefully edited, Routledge
Handbooks in Applied Linguistics are the ideal resource for both advanced undergraduates and
postgraduate students.
The Routledge Handbook of Forensic Linguistics
Edited by Malcolm Coulthard and Alison Johnson
The Routledge Handbook of Corpus Linguistics
Edited by Anne O’Keeﬀe and Mike McCarthy
The Routledge Handbook of World Englishes
Edited by Andy Kirkpatrick
The Routledge Handbook of Applied Linguistics
Edited by James Simpson
Forthcoming:
The Routledge Handbook of Multilingualism
Edited by Marilyn Martin-Jones, Adrian Blackledge and Angela Creese
The Routledge Handbook of Second Language Acquisition
Edited by Susan Gass and Alison Mackey
The Routledge Handbook of Discourse Analysis
James Paul Gee and Michael Handford
The Routledge Handbook of Translation Studies
Edited by Carmen Millan Varela and Francesca Bartrina
The Routledge Handbook of Language Testing
Edited by Glenn Fulcher and Fred Davidson
The Routledge Handbook of Intercultural Communication
Edited by Jane Jackson

The Routledge Handbook of
Applied Linguistics
Edited by
James Simpson

First edition published 2011
by Routledge
2 Park Square, Milton Park, Abingdon, OX14 4RN
Simultaneously published in the USA and Canada
by Routledge
270 Madison Avenue, New York, NY 10016
Routledge is an imprint of the Taylor & Francis Group, an informa business
© 2011 Selection and editorial matter, James Simpson; individual chapters, the
contributors
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reprinted or reproduced or utilised in
any form or by any electronic, mechanical, or other means, now known or hereafter
invented, including photocopying and recording, or in any information storage or
retrieval system, without permission in writing from the publishers.
British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library
Library of Congress Cataloging in Publication Data
The Routledge handbook of applied linguistics / [edited by] James Simpson. – 1st ed.
p. cm.
Includes index.
1. Applied linguistics–Handbooks, manuals, etc. I. Simpson, James, 1954–
P129.R68 2010
418–dc22
2010023814
ISBN: 978-0-415-49067-2 (hbk)
ISBN: 978-0-203-83565-4 (ebk)
ISBN 0-203-83565-4 Master e-book ISBN
This edition published in the Taylor & Francis e-Library, 2011.
To purchase your own copy of this or any of Taylor & Francis or Routledge’s
collection of thousands of eBooks please go to www.eBookstore.tandf.co.uk.

Contents
List of tables and ﬁgures
ix
List of contributors
xi
Acknowledgements
xix
Introduction: applied linguistics in the contemporary world
1
James Simpson
PART I
Applied linguistics in action
9
1
Language policy and planning
11
Lionel Wee
2
Business communication
24
Vijay Bhatia and Aditi Bhatia
3
Translation and interpreting
39
Mona Baker and Luis Pérez-González
4
Lexicography
53
Thierry Fontenelle
5
The media
67
Anne O’Keeﬀe
6
Institutional discourse
81
Celia Roberts
7
Medical communication
96
Sarah Collins, Sarah Peters and Ian Watt
8
Clinical linguistics
111
Michael Perkins and Sara Howard
v

9
Language and ageing
124
Kees de Bot and Nienke van der Hoeven
10 Forensic linguistics
138
Frances Rock
PART II
Language learning, language education
153
11 Key concepts in language learning and language education
155
Diane Larsen-Freeman
12 Second language acquisition
171
Lourdes Ortega
13 Language teaching methodology
185
Scott Thornbury
14 Technology and language learning
200
Richard Kern
15 Language teacher education
215
Simon Borg
16 Bilingual education
229
Ingrid Gogolin
17 English for academic purposes
243
Nigel Harwood and Bojana Petric´
18 Language testing
259
Barry O’Sullivan
19 Classroom discourse
274
Amy B. M. Tsui
20 Language socialization
287
Agnes Weiyun He
PART III
Language, culture and identity
303
21 Language and culture
305
Claire Kramsch
Contents
vi

22 Identity
318
Bonny Norton
23 Gender
331
Judith Baxter
24 Ethnicity
344
Roxy Harris
25 Sign languages
359
Bencie Woll and Rachel Sutton-Spence
26 World Englishes
373
Andy Kirkpatrick and David Deterding
27 Linguistic imperialism
388
Suresh Canagarajah and Selim Ben Said
28 Multilingualism
401
Jasone Cenoz and Durk Gorter
29 Language and migration
413
Mike Baynham
PART IV
Perspectives on language in use
429
30 Discourse analysis
431
Guy Cook
31 Critical discourse analysis
445
Kieran O’Halloran
32 Neurolinguistics
460
Elisabeth Ahlsén
33 Psycholinguistics
472
John Field
34 Sociocultural and cultural-historical theories of language development
487
Steven L. Thorne and Thomas Tasker
35 Sociolinguistics
501
Carmen Llamas
Contents
vii

36 Linguistic ethnography
515
Janet Maybin and Karin Tusting
37 Literacy
529
Doris S. Warriner
38 Stylistics
541
Elena Semino
PART V
Descriptions of language for applied linguistics
555
39 Grammar
557
Michael Swan
40 Lexis
571
Joe Barcroft, Gretchen Sunderman and Norbert Schmitt
41 Phonetics and phonology
584
Helen Fraser
42 Corpus linguistics
597
Svenja Adolphs and Phoebe M. S. Lin
43 Cognitive linguistics
611
Hans-Jörg Schmid and Friedrich Ungerer
44 Systemic functional linguistics
625
Lynne Young
45 Generative grammar
638
Shigenori Wakabayashi
46 The emergence of language as a complex adaptive system
654
Nick C. Ellis
47 Multimodality
668
Theo van Leeuwen
Index
683
Contents
viii

Tables and ﬁgures
Tables
8.1
Articles published in Clinical Linguistics and Phonetics according
to linguistic theme
119
15.1
LTE literature in six journals, 2005–9
218
18.1
Model details
263
24.1
Tensions between tradition and modernity
346
24.2
Tensions between modernity and late modernity
347
31.1
SFL description of The Mirror text’s angle of representation
456
42.1
Ten most frequent words in the BNC (written) and LCIE (spoken)
600
42.2
Ten most frequent 2-word, 3-word and 4-word units in LCIE
results per million words
601
42.3
Concordance of the word ‘stand’, taken from the BNCWeb
604
Figures
2.1
Dynamics of business communication: motivation and inspiration
25
2.2
Academic task demands in speciﬁc business disciplines
29
11.1
Questions related to key concepts in language learning and education
156
14.1
Arabic Without Walls
207
14.2
Student screen from videoconferencing session in French using Skype
208
18.1
A reconceptualisation of Weir’s socio-cognitive framework
261
26.1
Sign on the door of a shop in Singapore
380
31.1
The scope and foci of critical discourse analysis
447
35.1
Rhoticity across socio-economic class (SEC) in various speech styles
504
40.1
Revised hierarchical model
579
42.1
A KWIC concordance of the word ‘corpus’ using the BNCWeb
603
43.1
Illustration of the encoding of motion event-frame components in
English and Spanish
617
44.1
A system network
630
45.1
Derivation in Government and Binding Theory
641
45.2
Derivation in the Minimalist Program
642
45.3
VP Structure
642
45.4
T’ Structure
642
45.5
TP Structure
643
45.6
C’ Structure
644
ix

45.7
CP Structure
644
45.8
wh-movement in (8a)
647
45.9
wh-movement in (8b)
647
47.1
Social distance (system network)
674
47.2
Rhythmic analysis of an excerpt from North by Northwest
(Alfred Hitchcock 1959)
678
47.3
Rhythmic structure of Latin American Rhapsody
679
Illustrations
x

Contributors
Svenja Adolphs is Professor in Applied Linguistics at the University of Nottingham, UK. Her
research interests are in corpus linguistics and discourse analysis and she has published
widely in these areas. Her books include Introducing Electronic Text Analysis: A Practical
Guide for Language and Literary Studies (Routledge, 2006) and Corpus and Context:
Investigating Pragmatic Functions in Spoken Discourse (John Benjamins, 2008). She has a
particular interest in the development and analysis of multi-modal corpora of spoken
English, and in the relationship between language-in-use, gesture, prosody, and context.
Elisabeth Ahlsén is Professor of Neurolinguistics at the SSKKII Interdisciplinary Centre of the
University of Gothenburg. She is a speech and language therapist. Her main research
areas are neurolinguistics, aphasiology, pragmatics, and embodied and multimodal
communication.
Mona Baker is Professor of Translation Studies at the Centre for Translation and Intercultural
Studies, University of Manchester; author of In Other Words and Translation and Conﬂict;
Founding Editor of The Translator; and Vice-President of the International Association of
Translation and Intercultural Studies.
Joe Barcroft is Associate Professor of Spanish and Second Language Acquisition at
Washington University in St Louis, MO. His research focuses on second language vocabu-
lary acquisition, lexical input processing, acoustic variability in language learning and
processing, and the bilingual mental lexicon.
Judith Baxter is Senior Lecturer of Applied Linguistics at Aston University. She wrote The
Language of Female Leadership (Palgrave Macmillan, 2010) and won an ESRC grant to
conduct research into gender and the language of business leadership.
Mike Baynham is Professor of TESOL at the University of Leeds and co-convenor of the
AILA Language and Migration Research network. He has research interests in migration
narratives and edited Dislocations/Relocations: Narratives of Displacement (St Jerome
Publishing, 2005) with Anna de Fina. He recently edited, with James Collins and Stef
Slembrouck, Globalization and Language Contact, published by Continuum in 2009.
Selim Ben Said is a doctoral student in applied linguistics at the Pennsylvania State University.
His research interests include multilingualism, language policy and planning, and linguistic
landscapes.
xi

Aditi Bhatia is an Assistant Professor in the Department of English at the City University of
Hong Kong. Her research interests include discourse analysis of political, professional and
institutional contexts, in particular the discourses of terrorism and the environment. She
has been published in international journals such as Journal of Pragmatics and Discourse
and Society, and is currently engaged in an international project on collective argumentation
in the climate change debate.
Vijay Bhatia is a Visiting Professor of English at the City University of Hong Kong. His
research interests are: genre analysis; ESP and professional communication; simpliﬁcation
of legal and other public documents; cross-cultural and cross-disciplinary variations in
professional genres. Two of his books, Analysing Genre: Language Use in Professional Set-
tings and Worlds of Written Discourse: A Genre-based View, are widely used in genre
theory and professional practice.
Simon Borg is Reader in TESOL in the School of Education, University of Leeds. His key
areas of research are teacher cognition, teacher education, grammar teaching and teacher
research. Full details of his work and publications are available at: www.education.leeds.ac.
uk/people/staﬀ.php?staﬀ=29
Suresh Canagarajah is Kirby Professor in Language Learning at the Pennsylvania State
University. He teaches and publishes on bilingualism, literacy, and critical pedagogy. His
Resisting Linguistic Imperialism in English Teaching (Oxford University Press, 1999) won
MLA’s Shaughnessy Award.
Jasone Cenoz is Professor of Research Methods in Education at the University of the Basque
Country in San Sebastian/Donostia. She works on multilingualism and language acquisi-
tion in educational contexts. She is editor of the International Journal of Multilingualism.
Her recent publications include a monograph on Towards Multilingual Education (Multilingual
Matters, 2009) and an edited book on The Multiple Realities of Multilingualism (with Elka
Todeva, Mouton de Gruyter, 2009).
Sarah Collins is a lecturer in communication at Manchester Medical School, University of
Manchester. Her interdisciplinary research focuses on communication in healthcare
consultations, and on developing applications for medical and nursing education.
Guy Cook is Professor of Language and Education at the Open University, UK. He has pub-
lished extensively on discourse analysis, applied linguistics, and language teaching. He was
co-editor of Applied Linguistics (2004–9) and is Chair of the British Association for Applied
Linguistics.
Kees de Bot is Chair of Applied Linguistics and Vice-Dean of the Faculty of Arts of the
University of Gröningen, the Netherlands. His research interests focus on language
development over the lifespan, in particular from a Dynamic Systems perspective.
David Deterding is an Associate Professor at the University of Brunei Darussalam. His book
Singapore English was published by Edinburgh University Press in 2007, and he has papers
on the pronunciation of various East Asian Englishes in World-Wide English and RP
British English in Journal of the International Phonetic Association.
Contributors
xii

Nick C. Ellis is Professor of Psychology, Research Scientist in the English Language Institute,
Professor of Linguistics, and Associate of the Center of the Study of Complex Systems at
the University of Michigan. He serves as the General Editor of Language Learning.
John Field teaches psycholinguistics at the University of Reading and cognitive approaches to
SLA at Cambridge University. He has a long-term commitment to making psycholinguis-
tics more accessible within applied linguistics. His research interests lie in ﬁrst and second
language listening; his latest book is Listening in the Language Classroom (Cambridge
University Press, 2008).
Thierry Fontenelle is currently Head of the General Aﬀairs Department of the Translation
Centre for the Bodies of the European Union in Luxembourg. He is also Past President of
the European Association for Lexicography (EURALEX) and an Associate Editor of the
International Journal of Lexicography. His books include Turning a Bilingual Dictionary
into a Lexical-Semantic Database (Max Niemeyer Verlag, 1997) and, as editor, Practical
Lexicography: A Reader (Oxford University Press, 2008).
Helen Fraser studied linguistics and phonetics at Macquarie University, Sydney, and the
University of Edinburgh, then taught at the University of New England, Australia, from
1990–2008. Since 1998, a great deal of her research and practice has been focused on
applied topics, especially second language pronunciation and forensic phonetics.
Ingrid Gogolin is Professor for Comparative and Intercultural Education at the University of
Hamburg, Germany. Her research area concerns migration and multilingualism with special
focus on the educational attainment and success of immigrant minority children in schools.
Durk Gorter is Ikerbasque Research Professor at the Faculty of Education of the University of
the Basque Country in San Sebastian/Donostia, where he carries out work on multi-
lingualism and minority languages in Europe. His two most recent edited books are Lin-
guistic Landscape: Expanding the Scenery (with Elana Shohamy, Routledge, 2009) and
Multilingual Europe: Facts and Policies (with Guus Extra, Mouton de Gruyter, 2008).
Roxy Harris is a member of the Centre for Language, Discourse and Communication at
King’s College London. He researches the links between language, power, ethnicity and
culture. He is the author of New Ethnicities and Language Use (Palgrave Macmillan, 2006).
Nigel Harwood is a Senior Lecturer at the University of Essex. He has published articles on
how pronouns and citations are used in academic prose and on taking a critical pragmatic
approach to EAP. His main research interests are in the areas of academic writing, EAP,
materials design, and corpus-driven pedagogy.
Agnes Weiyun He is an Associate Professor of Applied Linguistics and Asian Studies at Stony
Brook University. She is the author of Reconstructing Institutions (Greenwood, 1998),
co-editor of Talking and Testing (John Benjamins, 1998) and primary editor of Chinese as a
Heritage Language (University of Hawaii Press, 2008).
Sara Howard is Reader in Clinical Phonetics and ESRC Research Fellow in the Department
of Human Communication Sciences at the University of Sheﬃeld. She has published widely
Contributors
xiii

in the area of clinical phonetics and phonology and is currently President of the International
Clinical Phonetics and Linguistics Association.
Richard Kern is Associate Professor of French and Director of the Berkeley Language Center
at the University of California at Berkeley. He teaches courses in French language and
linguistics, applied linguistics, and foreign language pedagogy. His research interests include
foreign language learning, literacy, and relationships between language and technology.
Andy Kirkpatrick is Chair Professor of English as an International Language at the Hong
Kong Institute of Education. His most recent book is English as a Lingua Franca in
ASEAN: The Multilingual Model (Hong Kong University Press, 2010). He is also editor of
The Routledge Handbook of World Englishes, published in 2010.
Claire Kramsch is Professor of German and Aﬃliate Professor of Education at the University
of California at Berkeley. She is the author of Context and Culture in Language Teaching
(Oxford University Press, 1993), Language and Culture (Oxford University Press, 1998) and
The Multilingual Subject (Oxford University Press, 2010).
Diane Larsen-Freeman is Professor of Education, Professor of Linguistics, former Director and
current Research Scientist at the English Language Institute, University of Michigan, Ann
Arbor. She is also a Distinguished Senior Faculty Fellow at the SIT Graduate Institute in
Brattleboro, Vermont. Her academic interests include second language acquisition/develop-
ment, language teaching methodology, language teacher education, English grammar, and
complexity theory.
Phoebe M. S. Lin is a Senior Research Fellow in the Department of Chinese, Translation and
Linguistics at the City University of Hong Kong. Her recent research examines the prosody
of English phraseology in a multimodal corpus of British academic speech. More generally,
her research interests include corpus linguistics, lexical studies, English intonation, spoken
discourse, psycholinguistics, and second/foreign language acquisition.
Carmen Llamas lectures in sociolinguistics in the Department of Language and Linguistic
Science, University of York. She is co-editor of The Routledge Companion to Socio-
linguistics (with Peter Stockwell and Louise Mullany, Routledge, 2007) and Language and
Identities (with Dominic Watt, Edinburgh University Press, 2010).
Janet Maybin is a Senior Lecturer in Language and Communication at the Open University.
Originally trained as a social anthropologist, she has written extensively for Open
University courses on language, literacy and learning, and also researches and writes on
children and adults’ informal language and literacy practices.
Bonny Norton is Professor and Distinguished University Scholar in the Department of Lan-
guage and Literacy Education, University of British Columbia, Canada. Her award-winning
research addresses identity, language learning, critical literacy, and international development.
Her Website can be found at: http://lerc.educ.ubc.ca/fac/norton/
Kieran O’Halloran is a Senior Lecturer in Linguistics in the Centre for Language and Com-
munication at the Open University, UK. Publications include Critical Discourse Analysis
Contributors
xiv

and Language Cognition (Edinburgh University Press, 2003), Applying English Grammar:
Functional and Corpus Approaches (with Caroline Coﬃn and Ann Hewings, Hodder
Arnold, 2004) and Applied Linguistics Methods: A Reader (with Caroline Coﬃn and Theresa
Lillis, Routledge, 2009).
Anne O’Keeﬀe, Senior Lecturer at Mary Immaculate College, University of Limerick, Ireland,
has published Investigating Media Discourse (Routledge, 2006), From Corpus to Classroom:
Language Use and Language Teaching (with Ronald Carter and Michael McCarthy, Cam-
bridge University Press, 2007), The Vocabulary Matrix (with Michael McCarthy and Steve
Walsh, Heinle, 2009) Introducing Pragmatics in Use (with Brian Clancy and Svenja Adolphs,
Routledge, 2011). She has edited The Routledge Handbook of Copus Linguistics (with
Michael McCarthy, Routledge, 2010).
Barry O’Sullivan is Professor of Applied Linguistics, and Director of the Centre for Language
Assessment Research, Roehampton University, London. He has published widely in the area
and has presented his work at conferences around the world. He is active in language testing
globally, working with ministries, universities and examination boards.
Lourdes Ortega is Professor of Second Language Studies at the University of Hawai’i at
Ma-noa and serves as Journal Editor of Language Learning. Recent books are Synthesizing
Research on Language Learning and Teaching (co-edited with John Norris, John Benjamins,
2006), The Longitudinal Study of Advanced L2 Capacities (co-edited with Heidi Byrnes,
Routledge, 2008), and Understanding Second Language Acquisition (Hodder Arnold, 2009).
Luis Pérez-González is Senior Lecturer in Translation Studies at the Centre for Translation
and Intercultural Studies, University of Manchester; author of numerous papers in scho-
larly journals and collected volumes on translation studies; and editor of the Features
section of The Interpreter and Translator Trainer.
Michael Perkins is Emeritus Professor of Clinical Linguistics in the Department of Human
Communication Sciences at the University of Sheﬃeld. He has published numerous articles
and books both in his specialism of clinical linguistics and in areas such as pragmatics,
semantics and language development.
Sarah Peters is a Senior Lecturer and chartered health psychologist at the University of
Manchester. Her research focuses on the communication of emotion and illness cognition
within clinical settings, with a particular interest in managing and negotiating uncertainty.
Bojana Petric´ is a Lecturer at the University of Essex. She has published papers on citations
in student writing, students’ conceptions of voice, contrastive rhetoric, plagiarism, writer
identity, and English teacher identities. Her research interests include academic writing,
EAP, and cultural and identity issues in the teaching/learning of English as a global
language.
Celia Roberts is Professor of Applied Linguistics at King’s College London. She works on the
relationship between language and cultural processes in institutional settings and has a
particular interest in the practical relevance and application of sociolinguistics to real world
problems.
Contributors
xv

Frances Rock is Senior Lecturer in the Centre for Language and Communication Research at
CardiﬀUniversity. She has worked on the language of arrest and detention, police inter-
views and calls for police assistance. She uses a broadly interactional sociolinguistic
approach.
Hans-Jörg Schmid holds the Chair of English Linguistics at Munich University, Germany.
He is author of English Abstract Nouns as Conceptual Shells (Mouton de Gruyter, 2000) and
co-author of An Introduction to Cognitive Linguistics (2nd edn, Pearson Education, 2006)
and has published in the areas of lexical semantics, word-formation, pragmatics and corpus
linguistics.
Norbert Schmitt is Professor of Applied Linguistics at the University of Nottingham, and is
interested in all aspects of second language vocabulary. He recently published a vocabulary
research manual entitled Researching Vocabulary with Palgrave Press.
Elena Semino is a Senior Lecturer in the Department of Linguistics and English Language
at Lancaster University. Her books include Cognitive Stylistics: Language and Cognition
in Text Analysis (co-edited with Jonathan Culpeper, John Benjamins, 2002), Corpus
Stylistics: Speech, Writing and Thought Presentation in a Corpus of English Writing (with
Mick Short, Routledge, 2004) and Metaphor in Discourse (Cambridge University Press,
2008).
Gretchen Sunderman is Assistant Professor of Spanish at Florida State University. Her
research focuses on the bilingual mental lexicon, the role of individual diﬀerences in second
language lexical processing, and second language vocabulary acquisition.
Rachel Sutton-Spence is Senior Lecturer in Deaf Studies at the University of Bristol. Her
research and teaching are in the ﬁeld of sign language, especially in creative signing in
narratives, poetry and humour.
Michael Swan is a freelance writer specializing in English language teaching and reference
material. His interests include descriptive and pedagogic grammar, cross-language inﬂu-
ence, instructed and naturalistic second language acquisition, and the relationship between
applied linguistic theory and language-teaching practice.
Thomas Tasker is a doctoral candidate at the Pennsylvania State University. He works within
a CHAT framework to explore teacher learning through inquiry-based approaches to
professional development.
Scott Thornbury is Associate Professor of English Language Studies at the New School,
New York. His research interests include language teaching methodology and pedagogical
language analysis.
Steven L. Thorne holds faculty appointments in the Department of Foreign Languages and
Literatures at Portland State University (USA) and in the Department of Applied Linguistics
at the University of Gröningen, the Netherlands. His research has examined social media,
multiplayer online gaming, intercultural communication, and cultural-historical and usage-
based approaches to second and foreign language development.
Contributors
xvi

Amy B. M. Tsui is Pro-Vice-Chancellor and Vice President as well as Chair Professor of
Language and Education at the University of Hong Kong. She has published eight books
and numerous articles in the areas of conversation analysis, teachers’ professional development,
classroom discourse, and language policy.
Karin Tusting is RCUK Research Fellow in Changing Literacies at the Literacy Research
Centre, Lancaster University. Her research draws on linguistic ethnographic methodologies
to study literacy practices, with a particular interest in workplace practices and the impact
of paperwork demands on people’s lives and identities.
Friedrich Ungerer is Emeritus Professor of English Linguistics at the University of Rostock,
Germany, but he has also taught at the Universities of Munich, Jena and Minneapolis. He
is co-author of An Introduction to Cognitive Linguistics (2nd edn, Pearson Education, 2006)
and has published on lexical concepts and their conceptual hierarchies, on emotion concepts
and metaphors, and also on iconicity.
Nienke van der Hoeven holds degrees in English Language and Literature and Applied Lin-
guistics. She teaches at the University of Gröningen Language Centre and her Ph.D. studies
are in the area of language, cognition and ageing.
Theo van Leeuwen is Professor of Media and Communication and Dean of the Faculty of
Arts and Social Sciences at the University of Technology, Sydney. He has published
widely in the area of critical discourse analysis, social semiotics and multimodality.
His books include Reading Images: The Grammar of Visual Design (with Gunther
Kress, Routledge, 1996), Speech, Music, Sound (Palgrave Macmillan, 1999), Multimodal
Discourse: The Modes and Media of Contemporary Communication (with Gunther
Kress, Hodder Arnold, 2001), Introducing Social Semiotics (Routledge, 2005), Discourse
and Practice (Oxford University Press, 2008), and The Language of Colour (Routledge,
2010).
Shigenori Wakabayashi is Professor of Applied Linguistics at Chuo University, Japan. He
teaches courses in English language, theoretical and applied linguistics, and foreign lan-
guage pedagogy. His research interests lie in generative approaches to ﬁrst and second
language acquisition, and psycholinguistics. He is a founding member and currently the
secretary of the Japan Second Language Association (J-SLA).
Doris S. Warriner is an Assistant Professor of Applied Linguistics at Arizona State University.
Her teaching and scholarship on experiences of language learning and displacement is
informed by a critical perspective and focuses on questions of access and engaged participation
among recently arrived immigrant and refugee families.
Ian Watt is a Professor of Primary and Community Care at the University of York, and a
practising GP. His research interests include: communication and health care; eﬀectiveness
of health and healthcare interventions; and the dissemination of research evidence and
professional behaviour change.
Lionel Wee is an Associate Professor in the Department of English Language and Literature
at the National University of Singapore. He is co-author of Language Policy and Modernity
Contributors
xvii

in Southeast Asia, and Style, Identity and Literacy: English in Singapore (forthcoming), and
author of Language Without Rights (forthcoming).
Bencie Woll is Professor of Sign Language and Deaf Studies at UCL and Director of the
Deafness, Cognition and Language Research Centre. Her research and teaching interests
embrace a wide range of topics related to sign language.
Lynne Young is an Associate Professor in the School of Linguistics and Language Studies at
Carleton University, Ottawa, Canada. Her research has focused on SFL and CDA; more
recently she has extended her studies into the related areas of Multimodality and Social
Semiotics.
Contributors
xviii

Acknowledgements
My sense of gratitude on the publication of this volume is deep, for its writing and editing has
been a cooperative and collaborative process. First and foremost I wish to thank the con-
tributors for their participation, and for their tolerance of my editorial eﬀorts. I would also like
to express my thanks to the following, who generously devoted their time and expertise to
read, comment upon and otherwise help develop chapters in the volume: Richard Badger,
Mike Baynham, Krystina Benson, Andrew Blake, David Block, John Callaghan, Lynne
Cameron, Ron Carter, Michael Clyne, Caroline Coﬃn, Guy Cook, Melanie Cooke, Justine
Coupland, Alice Deignan, Gibson Ferguson, John Flowerdew, Carmen Fought, Maria Luisa
Garcia Lecumberri, Phil Graham, Johanna Gundlach, Naseem Hallajow, Roger Hawkins,
Margaret Hearnden, Michael Hepworth, Encarna Hidalgo Tenorio, John Ingram, Alison
Johnson, Clara Keating, Paul Kerswill, Martin Lamb, Diane Larsen-Freeman, Clare Mar
Molinero, John Matthews, Melissa Moyer, Paul Nation, Kieran O’Halloran, Andreas Papapavlou,
J. C. Pascual, Graeme Porte, Ben Rampton, John Rickworth, Celia Roberts, Penelope
Robinson, Denise Santos, Stef Slembrouck, Ruth Swanwick, Jane Sunderland, Paul Thompson,
David Thornton, Steve Walsh, Martin Wedell, Lydia White, Melinda Whong and Stephen
Woulds. My advisory board – Ron Carter, Guy Cook, Diane Larsen-Freeman and Amy Tsui –
have oﬀered swift, sound and wise advice at all stages of the production of this Handbook, and
I would like to thank them most sincerely. My colleagues in the School of Education, Uni-
versity of Leeds, and in particular Mike Baynham and Tom Roper have made every eﬀort to
enable me to work within and around institutional constraints at crucial points. Catherine
Howarth and Louise Williams provided attentive assistance in preparing chapters for pub-
lication. Louisa Semlyen at Routledge, and her colleagues Sophie Jacques, Sam Vale Noya and
Ursula Mallows, have been unstinting in their support. Finally, as always, to my wife Mary
and my sons Joe, Daniel and Lucas I owe untold personal debts.
The publishers wish to thank The Mirror, ‘Air protesters target travellers’, 13 August 2007;
by permission of The Mirror.
xix


Introduction
Applied linguistics in the contemporary world
James Simpson
This Handbook is a reference work covering key topics in applied linguistics. Each chapter
provides an accessible introductory overview of an area of the ﬁeld. The book is intended for a
diverse audience, but is ﬁrmly oriented towards newcomers: you, the reader, might be a researcher, a
graduate student, an academic wanting to familiarize yourself with the ﬁeld, or a indeed a language
professional looking for a ‘way in’ to one of the many topics encompassed by applied linguistics.
Applied linguistics
Applied linguistics is the academic ﬁeld which connects knowledge about language to decision-
making in the real world. Generally speaking, the role of applied linguists is to make insights
drawn from areas of language study relevant to such decision-making. In this sense applied
linguistics mediates between theory and practice.
The origins of applied linguistics lie in the mid-twentieth century eﬀort to give an academic
underpinning to the study of language teaching and learning. Until at least the 1980s applied lin-
guistics was most closely associated with the problems and puzzles surrounding language
pedagogy, learning and acquisition. This focus is still prominent for many: it remains the most active
area of applied linguistic enquiry, though the time is past when it could be considered
the sole motivation for the ﬁeld. As chapters in this volume demonstrate, applied linguistics
concerns range from the well-established ones of language learning, teaching, testing and teacher
education, to matters as disparate as language and the law, the language of institutions, medi-
cal communication, media discourse, translation and interpreting, and language planning.
Applied linguistics engages with contemporary social questions of culture, ethnicity, gender,
identity, ageing, and migration. Applied linguists adopt perspectives on language in use span-
ning critical discourse analysis, linguistic ethnography, sociocultural theories, literacy, stylistics
and sociolinguistics. And applied linguistics draws upon descriptions of language from tradi-
tions such as cognitive linguistics, corpus linguistics, generative linguistics and systemic
functional linguistics, among others.
Though this is an applied ﬁeld and an interdisciplinary one, it is not fragmented. The dis-
tinctive identity of contemporary applied linguistics can be characterized both in conceptual
terms and in terms of its scope and coverage.
1

The most widely cited deﬁnition of applied linguistics comes from Christopher Brumﬁt,
who describes it as: ‘the theoretical and empirical investigation of real-world problems in
which language is a central issue’ (1995: 27). Brumﬁt’s deﬁnition is broad enough to encom-
pass the range of areas of enquiry indicated above. It also ﬁrmly distinguishes applied lin-
guistics from other related ﬁelds by making it problem-oriented. While language is, of course,
fundamental to human life, and surrounds us, the problem orientation helps to delimit the
ﬁeld. That is, the motivation for applied linguistics lies not with an interest in autonomous or
idealized language, as with understandings of linguistics which deal in linguistic universals:
applied linguistics data is typically collected empirically in contexts of use. Nor is its concern
with the entirety of ‘language in use’. It is demarcated by its interest in how language is
implicated in real-world decision-making.
Yet though the problem orientation helpfully bounds applied linguistics, the array of issues
opened up by Brumﬁt’s deﬁnition can still seem unconstrained, a point made often before. The
main ramiﬁcation is that practically everything in life poses a problem in which language is
central: ‘It is hard to think of any “real-world” problems’, says Greg Myers (2005: 527), ‘that
do not have a crucial component of language use’, for language is a central issue in most
human endeavour. Hence a challenge for this volume is to present a view on the extent of the
ﬁeld. Readers will judge the success or otherwise of this, as I sketch out the sections and
chapters below.
The scope of this volume
Each chapter in this volume focuses on a speciﬁc area of applied linguistics. The chapters
share broadly the same format, covering a history of the area, a critical discussion of its main
current issues, and an indication of its emergent debates and future trajectory. Where appropriate,
authors discuss the inﬂuence of new technology in the area. Chapters conclude with a list of
related topics in the volume. Each chapter has a section on further reading: a short annotated
list of works which readers might consult for a more in-depth treatment of the area. Finally,
bibliographical references appear at the end of each chapter, making them self-contained.
In a collection of such size and diversity, there will be aspects to regard critically. Some
readers will doubtless disapprove of the way authors have examined a particular topic. Others
will take issue with the organization of the volume. And others still will ﬁnd that the inevitable
gaps are insupportable. Clearly, and despite my intention to cover much ground, certain areas
are not as fully dealt with as some might wish. Nonetheless, the ﬁve sections of the volume do
group into broad themes: here I take each in turn to provide an outline.
Part I: Applied linguistics in action
‘One is tempted to wonder’, says Martin Bygate (2005: 570) ‘what is so special about studying
language within real-world problems if the only purpose is to use it as a stimulus for academic
reﬂection.’ The ﬁrst section of this Handbook consists of chapters on a variety of applied lin-
guistics topics which explain ways in which the study of language involves not only the
description of real-world matters, but suggestions about how they can be addressed. Hence, in
this section above all, the practical general relevance of applied linguistics is apparent, the
issues with which it engages are to the fore, and the breadth of contemporary applied linguis-
tics is reﬂected. Of the areas chosen, some are well-established sub-ﬁelds of applied linguistic
study, while others have hitherto been considered independent or peripheral. Readers will
realize that in this section, chapters would surely have proliferated, had space allowed.
James Simpson
2

A number of the chapters invoke globalization. Opening the book, Language Policy and
Planning has a long history in terms of interventions into language practices, as Lionel Wee
says, but a short one as an area of academic study. Wee examines the valuable contributions
which applied linguistics can make in this diﬃcult area. For Vijay Bhatia and Aditi Bhatia,
Business Communication refers speciﬁcally to English business communication and English for
Business Purposes. Positioning the area ﬁrmly in relation to the globalization of trade and
commerce, they trace the development of an applied linguistics interest in business commu-
nication to sociolinguistically-informed English for Speciﬁc Purposes (ESP), genre analysis,
and communication studies. Mona Baker and Luis Pérez-González adopt an ideologically
critical stance towards their topic, Translation and Interpreting, noting its social relevance in
globalized, postcolonial society.
For most chapters in the section, the inﬂuence of new technology is a crucial current
concern.
Thierry Fontenelle’s chapter on Lexicography delves into the fascinating history of the
subject. His focus then turns to pedagogical dictionaries for foreign language learners and
bilingual dictionaries, and he brings us up to date with informed discussion of the inﬂuence of
what he rightly terms ‘the corpus revolution’. Also concerned with new technology is Anne
O’Keeﬀe: her chapter on The Media discusses the applied linguistic interest in print and
broadcast genres, and most recently, in what is broadly termed ‘new media’.
Celia Roberts, in her chapter on Institutional Discourse, describes how institutions are held
together by language, and how a study of the language of institutions can aﬀord insights into
the way they function. The primary focus of the related chapter, Medical Communication, as
Sarah Collins, Sarah Peters and Ian Watt note, is the language practices surrounding the
doctor-patient relationship, in consultations and other encounters. They attend to the increas-
ing interest in cultural and linguistic diversity, and to the inﬂuence of new technology as the
computer enters the relationship. Clinical Linguistics, explain Michael Perkins and Sara
Howard in their foundational survey of the area, involves the study of how language and
communication may be impaired. They point to its interdisciplinarity, its connections with
social and medical sciences as well as linguistics. Kees de Bot and Nienke van der Hoeven
present a cognitively oriented chapter on Language and Ageing, covering the eﬀects of ageing
on language use and cognitive processing.
Finally, in this section there are few areas where the practical nature of applied linguistics is
more apparent than with Forensic Linguistics, which, as Frances Rock notes in her chapter,
‘permits linguists to make positive contributions to the operation of law and thus society’.
Part II: Language learning, language education
Language learning and language education are at the historical heart and core of applied lin-
guistics, a ﬁeld with a commitment to mediating between theory and practice (Widdowson
1984). This obligation is clear in the study of language learning, which investigates the two-
way relationship between the tangible practical experience of learners and teachers on the one
hand, and more abstract perspectives on language and learning on the other. As Cook and
Seidlhofer (1995: 10) suggest: ‘Teachers like to have a sound theoretical underpinning for what
they do: one which does justice to the complexity of language, language learners, language
learning, and the social context in which these exist.’ Applied linguists with an interest in
language teaching will certainly ﬁnd much of relevance beyond this section: other practically
oriented and more theoretically oriented chapters will no doubt inform those involved in lan-
guage teaching and learning. Inclusion of the topics in this section clears the ground for a
Introduction
3

considered reﬂection of the ﬁeld for those professionals for whom language learning and
teaching are their daily concern.
Language pedagogy is both fast-moving and at the same time subject to shifts of fashion
which are confusing for novices and veterans alike. The three opening chapters provide an
accessible basis for an informed understanding. The ﬁrst chapter frames the section: Diane
Larsen-Freeman writes about Key Concepts in Language Learning and Language Education.
Lourdes Ortega’s chapter on Second Language Acquisition and Scott Thornbury’s on Lan-
guage Teaching Methodology complement the opening chapter with, on the one hand, a focus
on theory, and on the other, attention to practice.
The global relevance of applied linguistic concerns is greatly in evidence in this section.
Richard Kern, in his chapter Technology and Language Learning, describes the purposes for
which digital technology has been used in language learning, relating these to features of
electronic discourse and the aﬀordances of new technologies. Not least among these is the
ability learners now have to engage with communication in a new language and culture. Simon
Borg, in addressing the ‘diverse global scope’ of Language Teacher Education, stresses the
connections between contexts of initial and continuing teacher education, regardless of the
languages at issue or where the activity takes place. Ingrid Gogolin discusses the speciﬁc issues
of Bilingual Education in an increasingly multilingual world.
Nigel Harwood and Bojana Petric´ present an overview of English for Academic Purposes.
They point out that although EAP relates to the very practical matter of assisting learners’
study of English, research in the area has contributed to applied linguistic theory more gen-
erally. The chapter on Language Testing, by Barry O’Sullivan, likewise engages with the
practical and the theoretical, including a treatment of validity and test validation, and critical
discussion of emerging debates. Amy Tsui’s chapter on Classroom Discourse explains how
discourse analysis is employed to study a range of issues relating to language use in language
classrooms.
Finally, in this section Agnes He discusses a view of language in which she considers it not
as a body of knowledge but as semiotic resource. Language Socialization is concerned with
how novices, who might be children, language learners, or new members of communities, are
socialized to be competent members in the ‘target culture’ through language use, and how they
are socialized to use language. This is an approach which provides a counterbalance in lan-
guage pedagogy to more familiar understandings of the nature of language, its learning, and
its use.
Part III: Language, culture and identity
Understanding language learning and use involves far more than an investigation of its formal
properties. Chapters in this section give voice to the recognition that matters of culture and
identity are intertwined with language use, and with knowledge about language. The applied
linguistic concern with language in the social world entails an exploration of phenomena,
connections and relationships from the micro to the macro scale – from language-related issues
of individual identity to those of globalized society.
The study of culture and of identity runs as a thread through contemporary social sciences.
The ﬁrst two chapters of this section, presenting an applied linguistics exploration of the sub-
jects, complement and to an extent contrast with each other. Claire Kramsch, in her chapter
Culture, discusses the development of an interest in culture in applied linguistics. Bonny
Norton’s focus is on Identity and the individual. In each case, the authors argue against a
conception of language as abstract and of language learning as a decontextualized skill.
James Simpson
4

Claire Kramsch maintains a position whereby language is viewed as cultural understanding.
For Bonny Norton, the study of identity aﬀords an insight into ‘the relationship between the
language learner and the larger social world’. Closely related concerns are the topics of the next
two chapters. In her chapter on Gender, Judith Baxter discusses gender, ideology and identity
from a sociolinguistic perspective. Roxy Harris’s chapter is on Ethnicity, a much-neglected
topic in applied linguistics, towards which he adopts a critical stance. The very particular
issues relating to the description and use of the group of languages known as Sign Languages
are the subject of the chapter which follows, by Bencie Woll and Rachel Sutton-Spence.
Globalization is the concern of the next chapters in the section. Language teachers of all
stripes will ﬁnd these chapters relevant and interesting, relating as they do to questions of
diﬀerences between and within languages, the dominance of one language or variety of a lan-
guage over others. The position and role of world languages, and the growth of English in
particular, is a key applied linguistic concern which relates to English language learning, for
example. Andy Kirkpatrick and David Deterding discuss the status, development and future of
World Englishes. World languages are examined from a more critical perspective by Suresh
Canagarajah and Selim Ben Said, in their chapter on Linguistic Imperialism.
Global society in the post-colonial age is characterized by international ﬂows of people,
bringing the issues of multilingualism and migration to the fore. In their chapter on Multi-
lingualism, Jasone Cenoz and Durk Gorter note that ‘a traditional monolingual view has seen
multilingualism as a problem’. The alternative view which they outline considers it as ‘a pow-
erful resource for individuals and societies’. Migration is increasingly of interest to language
professionals, for example those whose concern is with the teaching of a new language to
migrants. The ﬁnal chapter in this section, Language and Migration by Mike Baynham,
presents a framework for its study.
Part IV: Perspectives on language in use
Language surrounds us: it is central to psychological and cognitive development, and to social
contact, relationships and understandings; it pervades human life. Perspectives on the study of
language in use are therefore by deﬁnition wide-ranging. The varied and intersecting chapters
in this section examine approaches to the study of language use, language development in the
brain and the mind, and language in society. The particular aspect of language in use that is
the object of enquiry will bear on the view of language itself, and these chapters usefully
develop the question of the complexity and multiplicity of what language is, and thus
foreshadow the ﬁnal section.
Guy Cook’s chapter on Discourse Analysis opens the section. Cook reminds us that an
interest in discourse analysis originated ‘in an awareness of the inability of formal linguistics to
account for how participants in communication achieve meaning’. As such, it has been highly
inﬂuential in pushing the entire ﬁeld of applied linguistics towards its current independent
status. Cook ends on a quizzical note, however, contemplating the very identity of discourse
analysis as a distinct area of study. Kieran O’Halloran writes on another signiﬁcant and
somewhat contested applied linguistic area, Critical Discourse Analysis, the investigation of
how ‘language use may be aﬃrming and indeed reproducing the perspectives, values and ways
of talking of the powerful, which may not be in the interests of the less powerful’.
Language development as it relates to individual neurological and psychological processes,
and to the broader social context, is the focus of the following three chapters. Elisabeth Ahlsén
notes that Neurolinguistics, the study of language and the brain, is a truly interdisciplinary
pursuit, involving neuroscience, psychology, linguistics, speech pathology and biology. Its
Introduction
5

relevance to therapy in particular makes it an applied linguistic concern. In his chapter Psy-
cholinguistics, John Field explores some familiar territory for applied linguistics, as he examines
the cognitive processes at play in language use and acquisition. Sociocultural and Cultural-
Historical Theories of Language Development, explain Steven Thorne and Thomas Tasker,
view mental development as fundamentally constructed through ‘engagement with cultural
practices, artifacts, and milieus’. This understanding of language development stresses the
relationship between an individual’s development and ‘the social and material conditions of
everyday life, including those comprising formal instructional settings’.
Sociolinguistics – the topic of the chapter by Carmen Llamas – is itself a broad ﬁeld of
language study, and concerns language in social contexts, language change and variation, and
the signalling and interpretation of meaning in interaction, all matters of central relevance and
connection to applied linguistics. Janet Maybin and Karin Tusting write on Linguistic Ethno-
graphy, a fast-growing area which combines ethnography with linguistics and other strategies
to investigate social processes. Perhaps because of its emic perspective and sensitivity to con-
textual features, linguistic ethnography is emerging as a key paradigm for investigating lan-
guage in use in the world today. Doris Warriner adopts an approach to Literacy which also
regards language and literacy practices as contextually situated. Such practices – as she says –
can be seen not as problems but as resources ‘which might be diﬀerentially valued and sup-
ported depending on situation, place, audience, and goals’. Finally, in this section Stylistics is
concerned with the description and interpretation of distinctive linguistic choices and patterns
in general and literary texts, as Elena Semino explains in her overview.
Part V: Descriptions of language for applied linguistics
At a time when applied linguistics was still establishing its identity as a ﬁeld of study, debates
emerged about whether ‘applied linguistics’ should in fact be properly thought of as ‘linguistics
applied’ (Widdowson 1984). That is to say, how far should linguistics provide the basic prin-
ciples upon which applied linguistics should draw? In the ‘linguistics-applied’ view, the theo-
retical foundations derive from linguistics: for proponents of this view, linguistic theories came
ﬁrst and were applied – and in the early days, were applied exclusively – to language teaching
problems. In short, in the ‘linguistics-applied’ view there is no sense that applied linguistics
needs its own theory, for the theories come from linguistics. (See Davies 1999: chapter 1,
and Cook 2005, for discussions.) With the widespread acceptance of Brumﬁt’s formulation –
the theoretical and empirical investigation of real-world problems – the sanction for applied
linguistics to develop its own models of description is now no longer contended. The
central questions for theory therefore become, in Widdowson’s words (1984: 22): ‘how can
relevant models of language description be devised, and what are the factors which will
determine their eﬀectiveness?’ Part V presents descriptions of language for applied linguistics:
in each case, authors discuss the concerns that might be addressed eﬀectively with such
models. It could be said that applied linguistics is in part deﬁned by its approaches to the
description of language: a ﬁeld which is concerned with real-world decision-making
characteristically makes use of empirically secured data and empirical research methods.
Nonetheless, in an echo of earlier chapters, readers will note that no one description, model
or view of language will suﬃce for all intentions: one’s understanding of language will depend
to an extent on one’s particular concern of the time, and it is for readers to judge the relevance
of these descriptions for their own purposes. As Widdowson notes (2003: 14), applied lingu-
sitcs ‘does not impose a way of thinking, but points things out that might be worth thinking
about’.
James Simpson
6

The section opens with three chapters of importance to language teaching and learning, and
certainly with broad general relevance. Michael Swan presents an overview of Grammar in its
‘narrow sense’, that is, morphology and syntax. This chapter is followed by that on Lexis, by
Joe Barcroft, Gretchen Sunderman and Norbert Schmitt, who describe this as the area of
language study where form and meaning meet. Speech, argues Helen Fraser in her chapter on
Phonetics and Phonology, is best regarded as a complex (rather than a complicated) system;
she outlines a theoretical approach to the study of speech that is relevant to practice – for
example, to language teaching.
Svenja Adolphs and Phoebe Lin provide an overview of the data-driven study of language
description that is Corpus Linguistics. The inﬂuence of corpus linguistics is undisputed: many
authors of chapters in this volume describe how the insights gained by the study of machine-
readable samples of real spoken and written language have transformed their own areas. In
Cognitive Linguistics, as Hans-Jörg Schmid and Friedrich Ungerer put it in their chapter,
‘knowledge about linguistic structures is explained with recourse to our knowledge about the
world, and it is assumed that language both reﬂects and contributes to shaping this
knowledge’.
The following three chapters present competing accounts of language description. Lynne
Young, discussing Systemic Functional Linguistics (SFL), explains the view of language
inspired by the work of Halliday: language as a social semiotic, a system of meaning-making
embedded in social contexts of use. Shigenori Wakabayashi makes the case for the relevance of
an area of language description frequently misunderstood as not relevant to applied linguistics –
Generative Grammar. In some contrast, in The Emergence of Language as a Complex Adaptive
System, Nick Ellis describes the emergent patternings of language, and how these are revealed
when it is viewed as a complex system.
The ﬁnal chapter in the volume, on Multimodality, connects linguistic to non-linguistic
dimensions of meaning-making, as Theo van Leeuwen explains how language cannot be
adequately understood without taking non-verbal communication into account.
References
Brumﬁt, C. J. (1995) ‘Teacher professionalism and research’, in G. Cook and B. Seidlhofer (eds)
Principles and Practice in Applied Linguistics: Studies in Honour of H. G. Widdowson, Oxford:
Oxford University Press.
Bygate, M. (2005) ‘Applied linguistics: a pragmatic discipline, a generic discipline?’, Applied Lin-
guistics 26(4): 568–81.
Cook, G. (2003) Applied Linguistics, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
——(2005) ‘Calm seas or troubled waters? Transitions, deﬁnitions and disagreements in applied
linguistics’, International Journal of Applied Linguistics 15(3): 282–302.
Cook, G. and Seidlhofer, B. (eds) (1995) Principles and Practice in Applied Linguistics: Studies in
Honour of H. G. Widdowson, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Davies, A. (1999) An Introduction to Applied Linguistics: From Practice to Theory, Edinburgh:
Edinburgh University Press.
Myers, G. (2005) ‘Applied linguists and institutions of opinion’, Applied Linguistics 26(4): 527–44.
Widdowson, H. G. (1984) ‘Models and ﬁctions’, in H. G. Widdowson (ed.) Explorations in Applied
Linguistics 2, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
——(2003) Deﬁning Issues in English Language Teaching, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Introduction
7


Part I
Applied linguistics in action


1
Language policy and planning
Lionel Wee
Introduction
Understood broadly as interventions into language practices, language policy and planning
(LPP) has had a long and checkered history. As an academic discipline, however, LPP is
relatively recent in origin, having gained momentum from the drives toward nationalism and
nation building (Wright 2004: 8).
The focus of this overview is primarily on developments within LPP as an academic
discipline. The modern history of this discipline can be described in terms of three main
stages (Ricento 2000): (i) an initial stage of optimism in the 1960s and 1970s that the language
problems of newly independent states could be solved via the implementation of rational
and systematic procedures; (ii) a period of disillusionment in the wake of LPP failures (1980s
and 1990s) that opened the way for a more critical and reﬂexive appreciation of the role
that language and linguists play in society; and (iii) in the present period, a growing sense that
LPP needs to be reconstituted as a multidisciplinary and politicized approach, since
the issues it grapples with are complex and represent interests that can pervade multiple
levels of social life, ranging from the individual to the state and across state boundaries
as well.
A motif of this chapter is that it is worth viewing this history of LPP as a dynamic interplay
between academic concerns, on the one hand, and political/bureaucratic interests, on the other.
The beneﬁt of such a perspective is that it provides us with a better awareness of the kinds of con-
straints faced by applied linguistics as it attempts to engage with ‘real world’ language-related
problems.
So, though it is the next section that speciﬁcally delves into the history of LPP, there is good
reason, even as we move on to the later sections, to also keep in mind the challenges that arise
when attempting to marry more intellectual understandings of language with the practical
demands faced by both policy-makers and the people whose lived experiences are aﬀected by
socio-political decisions about language.
11

LPP: a relatively brief history
Developing nation-states, developing LPP
The emergence of LPP as a coherent ﬁeld was closely tied to the fact that newly independent
states in the postcolonial era (mainly Asian and African) were seen as in need of appropriate
modernization and development programs. For these states, the concerns were multiple. There
was often a desire to reclaim some essentialized national identity and a language that could
be emblematic of this identity, as both were felt to have been lost (or least compromised) under
colonial rule. The national identity and language, however mythical, usually had to be (re-)
constructed in the context of an ethnolinguistically diverse populace.
Such a situation already carried the potential for inter-ethnic tensions as competing ethnic
loyalties had to be measured against any proposed candidate for national language status. But
since a signiﬁcant legacy of the colonial rule was an educated elite class with aﬃliations
towards the colonial language, this meant that in addition to the need to manage ethno-
linguistic diversity, there was also the need to stem any potential conﬂict arising from class
divisions. As a consequence, while it was essential that these states worked to forge some sense
of national cohesion, it was equally imperative that they aimed to raise the general level of
education and welfare amongst the citizenry.
The well-intentioned desire to contribute towards programs that could help cultivate
national solidarity whilst also improving on standards of education and creating opportunities
for economic growth led linguists to position themselves as expert consultants with the state as
client. What this means is that LPP practitioners tended to see themselves as devising maxi-
mally rational and eﬃcient ‘solutions’ to the language ‘problems’ faced by these states
(Haugen 1966; Kloss 1969; Rubin and Jernudd 1971). Thus, LPP was described as (Das
Gupta and Ferguson 1977: 4–6):
those planned activities which attend to the valuation of language resources, the assign-
ment of preferences to one or more languages and their functional ordering, and devel-
oping the language resources and their use in a manner consistent with the declared
objectives identiﬁed as planned targets … successful language planning, or degrees of it,
can be understood in terms of the eﬃcacy of planned policy measures as well as the target
populations’ propensity to comply with the public policies pertaining to language
planning.
As a result of this desire to design programs that could contribute to public policy objectives, a
series of technical concepts and distinctions were constructed that aimed to provide linguists
with the theoretical vocabulary to systematically approach and diagnose LPP-related issues.
Examples include:
(i)
The idea of a rational model (Jernudd 1973), where alternative ways of tackling a problem
were carefully compared before settling on the optimal choice. This approach assumed that
LPP issues could be approached in terms of a cost-benefit analysis.
(ii)
The distinction between status planning and corpus planning (Kloss 1969): the former
was concerned with official decisions about the appropriate use of a language. The latter was
concerned with developing the ‘nuts and bolts’ of language itself (its vocabulary, forms
of pronunciation and syntax), so that a language could indeed serve its designated
function.
Lionel Wee
12

(iii) The distinction between processes of language selection, codification of the selected lan-
guage as standard or correct, elaboration of the language form where necessary, and
implementation to ensure that the standards were properly adopted (Haugen 1966). These
processes were typically understood to apply sequentially, so that LPP would be pursued in
a manner that was organized and systematic.
And understandably, the preferred method for data gathering during this period was the
sociolinguistic survey. Given that LPP practitioners were mostly working at the level of the
state, the scale of the envisaged changes made the choice of survey a practical one, as far as
the tracking of language attitude and use amongst a large population were concerned. Infor-
mation gathered via the survey was also more amenable to quantiﬁcation, and relative rates of
success could then be presented in a manner that was digestible to policy-makers.
There is no disputing the fact that these concepts and distinctions, even today, continue to
serve as valuable tools when thinking about LPP. This is because, at bottom, LPP involves
making decisions about the desirability (or not) of promoting some language practices over
others. And all such decisions require some appreciation of the possible relationships between
forms of language and their uses, and the ways in which these relationships might be
inﬂuenced.
What was problematic in this period, however, was the absence of a critical orientation that
might have otherwise prevented a number of assumptions from going unquestioned, such as
the notion that each nation-state would be ideally served by having just one national language;
the concomitant implication that multilingualism is potentially problematic and ought to be
minimized; and the belief that a developmental model designed for one societal context could
be applied to another despite signiﬁcant diﬀerences in socio-cultural and historical speciﬁcities.
As a consequence, these assumptions often guided the enthusiastic articulation of solutions
designed along technocratic lines, when it would perhaps have been more helpful to ask if the
framing of what counts as an LPP problem was itself in need of interrogation. I say ‘perhaps’
because, to be fair to these early attempts at LPP, it is not clear what kind of impact such a
critical orientation – had one been present – would have had on decision-makers involved in
the management of state objectives. There was always the possibility that in challenging or
deconstructing a state’s framing of problems, linguists could simply have found themselves
deemed largely irrelevant to the needs of these newly independent states.
Looking within
By the 1980s and part of the 1990s, however, it became diﬃcult to deny that many of the state-
level LPP projects were failures: either the desired outcomes were not achieved, or worse,
social and ethnic unrest continued to rise in many states despite the careful implementation of
programs. LPP practitioners were then more reticent about acting as advisors to the state. As
Blommaert (1996: 203) puts it:
The grand projects in third world nations more or less disappeared during the 1980s,
either because of manifest failure, or because of a lack of interest, resources, or political
importance. Language planning experts reoriented their work away from the creation of
policies and plans towards the implementation of experimental and mostly small-scale
(nongovernmental) projects, and towards assessments of past experiments and current
situations. The enthusiasm for language planning as an academic subject faded in the
wake of the collapse of state systems and economies in the third world.
Language policy and planning
13

This withdrawal of LPP practitioners from the role of expert consultant was accompanied by
an internal criticism of the ﬁeld itself. In an incisive paper, Luke et al. (1990: 27) suggested that
LPP had been overly concerned with maintaining a ‘verneer of scientiﬁc objectivity’ and had
‘tended to avoid directly addressing larger social and political matters within which language
change, use and development, and indeed language planning itself are embedded’. Luke et al.’s
point is that by viewing LPP as an essentially technocratic process of eﬃciently administering
resources so as to achieve speciﬁc goals, little consideration had been given to questions of
how such processes might help sustain dominance and dependency relations between groups.
In other words, by not adequately attending to the socially and politically contested nature of
language, LPP initiatives, rather than solving problems, may in fact have simply exacerbated
old problems or even created new ones.
In a similar vein, Tollefson (1991) introduced a distinction to characterize what he saw as
two major approaches to LPP: the neoclassical and the historical-structural. The major dif-
ferences between the neoclassical and the historical-structural approaches are as follows (from
Wiley 1996: 115):
1
The unit of analysis employed: While the neoclassical approach focuses on individual
choices, the historical-structural pays attention to relationships between groups.
2
The role of the historical perspective: The neoclassical is more interested in the current
language situation; the historical-structural, in contrast, emphasizes the role of socio-historical
factors.
3
Criteria for evaluating plans and policies: The neoclassical is primarily amoral in its
outlook; policies are evaluated in terms of how eﬃciently they achieve their goals.
The historical-structural is more sensitive to issue of domination, exploitation and
oppression.
4
The role of the social scientist: Consistent with its amoral outlook, the neoclassical
assumes that the social scientist must and can approach language problems in an apolitical
manner. On the other hand, the historical-structural views political stances as inescapable
so that ‘those who avoid political questions inadvertently support the status quo’.
The neoclassical approach thus tends to emphasize the rational and individualistic nature of
choices. As an illustration, individuals may choose to learn a new language because of certain
perceived beneﬁts such as access to better jobs. Or they may decide that the time and money
spent on learning a new language may not be worth the potential beneﬁts, and hence may not
make the eﬀort to expand their linguistic repertoire. Whatever the outcome, the neoclassical
approach treats these as decisions that are freely and rationally made. But Tollefson empha-
sizes that we need to also ask questions like ‘Why must that individual expend those particular
costs? Why are those particular beneﬁts rather than others available to that individual? What
are the costs and beneﬁts for other people in the community?’ (Tollefson 1991: 32). These
kinds of questions require attending to the socio-historical contexts and constraints inherited
by individuals and mutatis mutandis, communities.
LPP in the 1960s and 1970s had tended to work within the neoclassical approach, where, as
we have seen, language-related issues were treated as problems that could be rationally and
logically solved by adopting the appropriate language policy. The individuals, families, or
communities that were the targets of LPP were, by the same token, assumed to be likely to
respond in a neoclassical fashion. Consequently, a major problem was that it had neglected
to take into consideration the eﬀects of socio-historical factors in constraining the nature of
choices.
Lionel Wee
14

Tollefson’s position is that the neoclassical approach had been all too dominant in LPP, and
this state of aﬀairs needed to be changed to show more sensitivity towards the historical-
structural approach. This latter approach pays more careful attention to the kinds of interests
that particular policies may serve. LPP that is informed by the historical-structural approach
would then aim to ‘examine the historical basis of policies and to make explicit the
mechanisms by which policy decisions serve or undermine particular political and economic
interests’ (Wiley 1996: 32). This understanding of LPP would have the advantage of helping
practitioners be more cognizant of the possibility that planning bodies involved in policy-
making may reﬂect the interests of dominant political groups, and that this may work against
any desire to achieve a broader and more equitable distribution of social and economic
resources.
As a result of these critical reﬂections about the ﬂaws and limitations of LPP, energies were
instead directed more towards analyzing language-related decisions in a variety of spheres. In
addition to those decisions initiated by governments (Pennycook 1994), there was stronger
interest in the schools (Corson 1989; Heller 1999), in the workplace (Gee et al. 1996), and
there was also a greater focus on the ways in which public debates about language are initi-
ated, resisted or resolved (Blommaert 1999; Cameron 1995; Milroy and Milroy 1999). And
perhaps paradoxically, the challenges involved in trying to better understand the complex and
often conﬂicted nature of language in social life helped contribute to the invigoration of LPP.
Renewing LPP
In the present period, LPP has seen renewed interest and activity. A signiﬁcant part of the
excitement stems from the appreciation that linguists need not be apologetic about represent-
ing group-speciﬁc interests; they simply need to be clear about the nature of their involvement.
Another reason for the excitement comes from the realization that LPP is even more complex
than has been realized so far, and that if it is to be relevant as a ﬁeld of applied linguistics, it
will need to draw upon the insights of multiple disciplines.
Once it became understood that LPP is always going to be inextricably intertwined with the
advancing of speciﬁc interests, linguists were able to engage in various LPP-related activities
with a clearer appreciation of their roles and responsibilities. ‘Scientiﬁc objectivity’ no longer
means being blind to class interests or political factionalism. Rather, it means being aware that
by acting as expert consultant to a group, community, institution or state, a linguist has to be
clear and comfortable with the goals of the client. Scientiﬁc objectivity, in this case, arises
from the linguist utilizing his/her expert knowledge about sociolinguistic processes and the
ways in which linguistic and non-linguistic variables interact, so as to better advise the client.
This does not mean passively accepting a client’s goals: it is possible to argue that a con-
sultancy also opens up the opportunity for both the linguist and client to learn from each
other. And this process of exchange may lead to an evaluation of the goals as well as a richer
understanding of the social nature of language. For example, in their own experience with
medical health professionals, Roberts and Sarangi (1999: 474) suggest that it might be useful
to adopt a stance of ‘joint problematization’, where the emphasis is one of ‘participatory and
action-oriented research’. The advantage of this, as Roberts and Sarangi (1999: 498) point out,
is that:
In presenting ﬁndings in a non-conclusive way, social scientiﬁc researchers, including dis-
course analysts, can distance themselves from a problem-solver role by underscoring the
fact that practical solutions are not in a one-to-one relationship with research-based
Language policy and planning
15

knowledge. In other words, knowledge generated through research needs to be recontex-
tualized in a reﬂexive way by the practitioners.
In other cases, a linguist may have a very personal commitment towards speciﬁc community
goals. This could because, having conducted ﬁeldwork in a particular community, a linguist
might form a strong attachment to that community and a desire to help improve its wellbeing.
In such a case, the linguist is essentially acting as not just expert consultant, but also as
advocate. One example is the Master-Apprentice Program that was developed by Leanne
Hinton (see Hinton 1997) in 1992 in California. The program aims to prevent, as far as pos-
sible, the indigenous Native American languages from dying out. The program pairs master
speakers (the tribal elders) with language learners in learning situations with relatively modest
outcomes. Apprentices are not expected to develop the same level of ﬂuency as the masters,
since many of the masters themselves may have not used their own languages for quite some
time. Rather, it is hoped that by the end of about three years, apprentices will be able to hold
simple conversations. As Grenoble and Whaley (2006: 63) point out:
The program does not attempt to revitalize speaker bases and make the target language
a fully used system of communication in all aspects. Instead, it is a realistic, practical
approach in situations of severe language attrition where it is most probably impossible to
build a new speaker community.
The complexity (Spolsky 2004: 39ﬀ) comes from the awareness that LPP can operate at
units of varying sizes, including the individual, the family, the social group, the school, the
state and the diasporic community. LPP also involves ‘a wide range of linguistic and non-linguistic
elements’, such as age, ethnicity, education, economic progress, gender, religious beliefs, among
many others. Furthermore, LPP is not limited to just named varieties of language (‘English’,
‘Spanish’, ‘Malay’) but can involve smaller bits of language (pronunciation, punctuation, word
choice) and also bigger bits as well (forms of discourse). To make this complexity more tract-
able, LPP needs to consistently distinguish between the language practices of a community, the
language beliefs or ideology, and any eﬀorts to modify or inﬂuence the practices (Spolsky
2004: 5). The ﬁrst two components are always present in any community, since people will be
using language for the conduct of activities, and people will also have various beliefs about
language. The third component may not be present, since there may not be any actual eﬀorts
made to inﬂuence language practices. Under such circumstances, ‘ideology operates as “default”
policy’ (Lo Bianco 2004: 750).
This appreciation that LPP must acknowledge the ideological basis of language practices
has led to greater convergences with work coming from linguistic anthropology, since it is the
latter that has contributed much to theorizing the processes by which language ideologies
come to be formed. It should be clariﬁed here that the anthropological notion of ideology is
not to be simply equated with false beliefs. Rather, ideologies here refer to the speciﬁc social
positions that individuals/communities/institutions all inevitably occupy, and which mediate
the understanding of sociolinguistic facts. In other words, ‘the very real facts of linguistic
variation constrain what linguists and native speakers can persuasively say and imagine about
them’, but at the same time ‘there is no “view from nowhere” in representing linguistic diﬀer-
ences’ so ‘those representations, in turn, inﬂuence the phenomena they purport to represent’
(Irvine and Gal 2000: 78–9).
Sensitivity to the contestable nature of language decisions has also meant a greater need to
attend to the variability and context when studying LPP. This in turn has led to a widening of
Lionel Wee
16

the methods that might be considered useful to LPP. Because language ideologies are highly
variable and context-dependent, data gathered via the analysis of narratives, ethnographic
approaches, and historically sensitive comparisons (Heller 1999; Milani 2007; Pennycook
1998; Philips 2000, among others), all came to be considered relevant to the study of LPP,
in addition to surveys. This is not to deny the value of larger scale statistical data, but
such data are primarily ‘synoptic’ representations that abstract away from speciﬁc situational
details (Bourdieu 1977: 107). They need to be complemented by richer understandings of the
roles that actual language practices and the valuations accorded to them play in the lives of
individuals and communities.
Paralleling this interest in ideology, Lo Bianco (2004: 743, italics in original) has suggested
that in addition to corpus and status planning, LPP also needs to recognize discourse planning,
which refers to:
the inﬂuence and eﬀect on people’s mental states, behaviors and belief systems through
the linguistically mediated ideological workings of institutions, disciplines, and diverse
social formations. Although discourse is quintessentially dialogical, and by deﬁnition
permits contest and negotiation, planning discourse refers to the eﬀorts of institutions and
diverse interests to shape, direct and inﬂuence discursive practices and patterns.
This suggestion that attention be paid to discourse planning is obviously entirely congruent
with the call by Luke et al. that LPP needs to be more appreciative of the fact that there is no
such thing as a purely objective or interest-free policy. All such initiatives represent speciﬁc
agenda, covertly or otherwise (Shohamy 2006). A discourse orientation can thus highlight the
ways in which problems are framed, the interests served in such framings, and the possibility
of alternative framings (Lakoﬀ2004; Schön 1993).
Finally, works drawing together the insights of scholars with backgrounds in economics,
political philosophy, political science, social theory, as well as linguistics, are slowly becoming
more regularly produced (Brown and Ganguly 2003; Kymlicka and Patten 2004; Rappa and
Wee 2006). This is a particularly important development that should be further encouraged,
since it promises to beneﬁt these contributing disciplines as well as enrich our understanding of
LPP. For example, while linguists can hope to learn more about the political complexities that
inevitably accompany language in social life, political theory, too, can grow from taking
greater note of the complications posed by language, since linguistic diversity ‘has received
relatively little attention from political theorists’ (Patten and Kymlicka 2004: 1). In fact, De
Schutter (2007: 1) has pointed out that unless there is greater cross-disciplinary work, there is a
danger that debates in political philosophy will end up ‘steering its own independent course
apart from existing debates over language policy’.
The developments described here are critical because they put LPP in a position to better
handle a number of important challenges, and it is to a discussion of these challenges that we
now turn.
Challenges for LPP
It would not be an overstatement to suggest that LPP is in fact gaining in practical
importance and urgency because of the way the world is developing. As a branch of applied
linguistics, there is much that LPP can do to make a contribution to debates and
discussions about the role of language in a fast-changing and increasingly culturally complex
world.
Language policy and planning
17

One signiﬁcant challenge for LPP is to ﬁnd ways of addressing multiculturalism. Much of
the recent theorizing regarding multiculturalism and the politics of identity has come from
philosophically inclined political or legal theorists (Benhabib 2002; Ford 2005; Kymlicka 1995;
Taylor 1994) rather than linguists. While such theorizing is undoubtedly valuable, it is usually
based on an ‘outdated empirical understanding of the concept of language itself’ and tends to
be ‘unaware of important sociolinguistic and other research on these matters’ (De Schutter
2007: 3). Where LPP is concerned, the most prominent response has been to call for the
adoption of language rights (May 2001; Phillipson and Skutnabb-Kangas 1995). The general
motivation behind the proposal for language rights is to ensure that an identiﬁable group –
usually a discriminated or stigmatized ethnic minority – is granted speciﬁc forms of protection
and consideration on the basis of their associated language. The concept of language rights
has had enormous appeal, ﬁnding a broad swathe of support amongst linguists, sociologists,
political philosophers, policy-makers and community activists (Kymlicka 1995; May 2001;
Phillipson and Skutnabb-Kangas 1995). However, this actually makes it all the more critical
that language rights be subjected to careful scrutiny (Blommaert 2001; Stroud 2001). For
example, while language rights may be useful as a short-term measure, it is not clear that they
are tenable in the longer term. One reason for this is that there will be parties who have a
vested interest in maintaining their (usually hard-won) language rights, and their motivations –
such as the desire to cling to political power or to continue enjoying the beneﬁts aﬀorded by
such rights – can be quite independent of how eﬀective such rights may actually have been in
dealing with discrimination. This means that LPP needs to better understand the pros and
cons of language rights, and where necessary, explore alternative ways of responding to mul-
ticulturalism. This requires combining the insights of social and political theorists with a more
sophisticated appreciation of the nature of language (Makoni and Pennycook 2007; see also
discussion below).
The interest in multiculturalism and language rights gains further resonance because of
complications posed by the commodiﬁcation of language. As Budach et al. (2003: 604, upper
case in original) point out:
in a new world dominated by service and information economies, globalization engenders
a seemingly paradoxical valuing of community and authenticity … In the new econ-
omy … the value of community and authenticity takes on a new shape in which COM-
MODIFICATION is central. At the same time, commodiﬁcation provokes a potential
uncoupling of language and community.
Speakers and communities are likely to be increasingly caught up in the contradictions
between treating language as a mark of cultural heritage, and as a skill or resource to be used
for socio-economic advancement. And this can have interesting repercussions on speciﬁc
implementations of LPP. For example, in Singapore, the policy of multiracialism aims to
guarantee equal status amongst the three oﬃcial ethnic mother tongues: Mandarin (for the
Chinese community), Malay (for the Malay community) and Tamil (for the Indian commu-
nity). However, the state has recently argued that, in addition to heritage reasons, Mandarin
should also be learned in order to take advantage of China’s growing economy, thereby
actively conceding that instrumental value is an important motivating factor in language
choice. As a result, Mandarin is now becoming so popular that a growing number of non-
Chinese parents want schools to allow their children to study the language. This new emphasis
on Mandarin as a language commodity has led to concerns within the Chinese community
that the language is being learnt for the ‘wrong’ reasons: the language is being treated less as
Lionel Wee
18

an emblem of local ethnicity and more as an economic resource for conducting business
negotiations with China. More generally, these developments potentially undermine the mul-
tiracial logic of the policy, since the equal status that all three mother tongues are supposed to
enjoy is compromised by the fact that neither Malay nor Tamil can be claimed to enjoy the
same level of economic cachet as Mandarin (Wee 2003).
Thus, another important challenge for LPP is to take better account of the fact that tradi-
tional notions of ethnicity and nation do not ﬁt easily with the multilingual dynamics of late
modern societies, which are increasingly characterized by a pervasive culture of consumerism
(Baudrillard 1988; Bauman 1998), where ‘people deﬁne themselves through the messages they
transmit to others through the goods and practices that they possess and display’ (Warde 1994:
878). In this regard, Stroud and Wee (2007) have suggested that the concept of sociolinguistic
consumption should be given a more foundational status in language policy in late modernity,
suggesting that this might oﬀer a more comprehensive account of the dynamics of language
choice and change.
Finally, one of the most pressing challenges facing the world today is that of global migra-
tion and the related issue of ensuring the wellbeing and dignity of individuals as they move
across the globe in search of a better life. As many states work to accommodate the presence of
foreign workers, asylum seekers and other aliens within their territories, the need to come up
with realistic and sensitive language policies will require the input of LPP specialists. If such
input is absent, there is a danger that language policies may unfairly penalize the very people
they were intended to help. Maryns (2005) provides one such example in her discussion of a
young female from Sierra Leone seeking asylum in Belgium. Even though applicants are given
the opportunity to declare what language they want to use for making their case, Maryns
(2005: 300) notes that:
Actual practice, however, reveals serious constraints on language choice, and these con-
straints are language-ideologically based: only monolingual standard varieties qualify for
procedural interaction. This denial of linguistic variation leads to a denial of pidgins and
creoles as ‘languages in their own right.’
The eﬀect of ideology of monolingualism is to deny pidgins and creoles any legitimate pre-
sence in the asylum-seeking procedure despite the fact that for many asylum seekers, such
mixed languages might constitute their most natural communicative codes. Thus, the move to
a foreign country is not simply a shift in physical location; it is also a shift into a location
where linguistic codes are diﬀerently valued. And the asylum seeker is expected to accom-
modate the foreign bureaucratic context despite the communicative problems this raises.
Maryns (2005: 312) points out that:
The asylum seeker has to explain her very complex and contextually dense case, addres-
sing an oﬃcial with diﬀerent expectations about what is relevant and required in a
bureaucratic-institutional context. The bureaucratic format of the interview and the time
pressure under which the interaction takes place oﬀer very little space for negotiating
intended meanings.
In the particular case that Maryns observed, the female applicant’s (2005: 313) ‘intrinsically
mixed linguistic repertoire’ (West African Krio) was displaced by the bureaucracy’s require-
ment that interviews and reports utilize only monolingual standards. The interview was con-
ducted in English and a subsequent report written in Dutch, neither of which were languages
Language policy and planning
19

that the applicant was comfortable with. As a result, details of the applicant’s narrative were
omitted or misunderstood, and the applicant had no opportunity to correct any inaccuracies.
Thus, the state representatives oﬃciating over asylum-granting procedures often conduct
interviews with asylum seekers in contexts where the linguistic codes being used are not likely
to be shared by those whose communicative needs are greatest. Notice that the problem here
goes much deeper than making available diﬀerent languages, such as Dutch, English, Xhosa
or Bantu. It involves a general reluctance to treat certain codes as being proper languages in
the ﬁrst place because of their mixed heritage. On this basis, mixed codes become stigmatized
and are automatically ruled out of oﬃcial consideration despite the fact that these codes are
precisely what might be needed in order for asylum seekers to gain a fair hearing.
Even when a migrant has been granted permission to stay, challenges to LPP remain. For
example, most Western countries have assumed that migrants will assimilate into their new
societies by learning the dominant language (and its associated culture). But this assumption is
increasingly being challenged by the fact that ‘the size of minority residential communities’
makes it possible ‘that many of their members will be able to live out their lives using only, or
predominantly, the minority language’, and also by the ‘tendency of migrants to maintain
closer and more regular connections with their countries of origin’ (Ferguson 2006: 7).
The future of LPP
The closing observation in the previous section highlights an urgent need for LPP to start
rethinking the ontological nature of language, and seriously evaluate the material implications.
For too long, LPP has worked with a relatively convenient conception of language as a stable
and identiﬁably bounded entity corresponding to established language names, despite being
aware that this overlooks ‘the problematic history of the construction of such languages’
(Makoni and Pennycook 2007: 11).
Consider a brief example (from Makoni and Pennycook 2007: 9). Sir George Abraham
Grierson’s linguistic Survey of India, which was completed in 1928, had to face the problem of
deciding on the boundaries between languages and dialects. To do this, Grierson openly
admitted the need to invent language-names while ignoring the complexity of actual language
use (1907: 350, quoted in Makoni and Pennycook 2007: 10):
nearly all the language-names have had to be invented by Europeans. Some of them, such
as Bengali, Assamese, and the like, are founded on words which have received English
citizenship, and are not real Indian words at all, while others, like ‘Hindostani’, ‘Bihari’,
and so forth, are based on already existing Indian names of countries and nationalities.
The signiﬁcance of this is that ‘these were not just new names for existing objects … but rather
the invention and naming of new objects. The naming performatively called the languages into
being’ (ibid.). This does not mean that LPP should dismiss language names as mere ﬁction. As
a metalinguistic label, it very possibly orients the language practices and social evaluations of
speakers towards each other, and conversely, towards those whom they might consider non-
members of the group. But LPP needs to start being more attentive to the problematic ways in
which speciﬁc language practices get categorized under particular labels (including that of non-
language), and the attendant impact of such categorizations on the social trajectories of
diﬀerent individuals and communities.
Similar considerations apply to concepts such as community, identity, and practice (Heller
2008), which have for too long tended to be treated as ‘stable and bounded’ rather than
Lionel Wee
20

‘shifting and dynamic’. These are concepts that ﬁgure, in one way or another, in LPP studies,
and unless they are reconceptualized, LPP will continue to be encumbered by ‘some of their
built-in limitations in current confrontations with the way things are unfolding in the world
around us, confounding our attempts to understand them’ (2008: 505).
Concluding remarks
It is appropriate to end this chapter by returning to the theme of how LPP practitioners
should engage policy-makers and the general public. The critical revaluation of concepts such
as language, community and identity is part and parcel of the intellectual maturity of the ﬁeld.
But translating the insights gained by this maturity into relevant practical implications is a
diﬃcult enterprise. This is because there is an inevitable lag between the scholarly critique of
concepts and the ways in which these are apprehended by the broader community. And if
policy-makers and members of the public are still operating with less nuanced understandings
of such concepts, these could make them less receptive to LPP initiatives that are grounded in
more critical orientations.
This is not to say that linguists should be considered ﬁnal arbiters of appropriate LPP
initiatives (recall the reference to Roberts and Sarangi’s notion of ‘joint problematization’). But
it does mean that linguists need to be more strategic about how they position themselves as
participants in language ideological debates. Speciﬁcally, they need to ask how they can resist
the pressure to oversimplify their own expert knowledge of language whilst still remaining
relevant to the ‘real’ world.
Related topics
bilingual education; ethnicity; institutional discourse; language and migration language learning
and language education; language testing; linguistic imperialism; multilingualism; world Englishes
Further reading
Blommaert, J. (ed.) (1999) Language Ideological Debates, Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter. (This edited
collection provides an excellent overview of some of the processes by which public controversies
and political debates around language come to be shaped.)
Cameron, D. (2000) Good to Talk? Living and Working in a Communication Culture, London: Sage.
(Cameron’s work presents a highly readable and insightful account of LPP – although this is not
a term that is used in the book – in the call center industry and its connections to the broader
global economy.)
Makoni, S. and Pennycook, A. (eds) (2007) Disinventing and Reconstituting Languages, Clevedon:
Multilingual Matters. (This is an important book that reminds us of the need to rethink our
assumptions about language and the implications for applied linguistics.)
Spolsky, B. (2004) Language Policy, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. (Spolsky provides an
invaluable introduction to key concepts in the study of LPP, conveying the complexities of the
ﬁeld in a highly accessible manner.)
Tollefson, J. W. (1991) Planning Language, Planning Inequality, London: Longman. (This is a theo-
retically rich and ethnographically sensitive book that gives a special focus to language education
policies aﬀecting migrants.)
References
Baudrillard, J. (1988) Selected Writings, Cambridge: Polity Press.
Bauman, Z. (1998) Work, Consumerism and the New Poor, Buckingham: Open University Press.
Language policy and planning
21

Benhabib, S. (2002) The Claims of Culture: Equality and Diversity in a Global Era, Princeton, NJ:
Princeton University Press.
Blommaert, J. (1996) ‘Language planning as a discourse on language and society: the linguistic
ideology of a scholarly tradition’, Language Policy and Language Planning 20: 199–222.
——(ed.) (1999) Language Ideological Debates, Berlin: Mouton de Grutyer.
——(2001) ‘The Asmara Declaration as a sociolinguistic problem: reﬂections on scholarship and
linguistic rights’, Journal of Sociolinguistics 5(1): 131–42.
Bourdieu, P. (1977) Outline of a Theory of Practice, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Brown, M. and Ganguly, S. (eds) (2003) Fighting Words: Language Policy and Ethnic Relations in
Asia, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Budach, G., Roy, S. and Heller, M. (2003) ‘Community and commodity in French Ontario’, Lan-
guage in Society 32: 603–27.
Cameron, D. (1995) Verbal Hygiene, London: Routledge.
Corson, D. (1989) Language Policy Across the Curriculum, Philadelphia, PA: Multilingual Matters.
Das Gupta, J. and Ferguson, C. A. (1977) ‘Problems of language planning’, in J. Rubin, B. H. Jernudd,
J. Das Gupta, J. A. Fishman and C. A. Ferguson (eds) Language Planning Processes, The Hague:
Mouton.
De Schutter, H. (2007) ‘Language policy and political philosophy’, Language Problems and Lan-
guage Planning 31(1): 1–23.
Ferguson, G. (2006) Language Planning and Education, Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press.
Ford, R. T. (2005) Racial Culture: A Critique, Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Gee, J. P., Hull, G. and Lankshear, C. (1996) The New Work Order: Behind the Language of the
New Capitalism, NSW, Australia: Allen and Unwin.
Grenoble, L. A. and Whaley, L. J. (2006) Saving Languages, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Haugen, E. (1966) Language Conﬂict and Language Planning: The Case of Modern Norwegian,
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Heller, M. (1999) Linguistic Minorities and Modernity, London: Longman.
——(2008) ‘Language and the nation-state: challenges to sociolinguistic theory and practice’,
Journal of Sociolinguistics 12(4): 504–24.
Hinton, L. (1997) ‘Survival of endangered languages: The California Master-Apprentice Program’,
International Journal of the Sociology of Language 123: 177–91.
Irvine, J. T. and Gal, S. (2000) ‘Language ideology and linguistic diﬀerentiation’, in P. V. Kroskrity
(ed.) Regimes of Language: Ideologies, Polities and Identities, Santa Fe, NM: School of American
Research Press.
Jernudd, B. H. (1973) ‘Language planning as a type of language treatment’, in J. Rubin and
R. Shuy (eds) Language Planning: Current Issues and Research, Washington, DC: Georgetown
University Press.
Kloss, H. (1969) Research Possibilities in Group Bilingualism, Quebec: International Center for
Research on Bilingualism.
Kroskrity, P. V. (ed.) (2000) Regimes of Language: Ideologies, Polities, and Identities, Santa Fe, NM:
School of American Research Press.
Kymlicka, W. (1995) Multicultural Citizenship: A Liberal Theory of Minority Rights, Oxford:
Clarendon Press.
Kymlicka, W. and Patten, A. (2004) Language Rights and Political Theory, Oxford: Oxford Uni-
versity Press.
Lakoﬀ, G. (2004) Don’t Think of an Elephant! Know your Values and Frame the Debate, Vermont:
Chelsea Green.
Lo Bianco, J. (2004) ‘Language planning as applied linguistics’, in A. Davies and C. Elder (eds)
Handbook of Applied Linguistics, Oxford: Blackwell.
Luke, A., McHoul, A. and Mey, J. L. (1990) ‘On the limits of language planning: class, state, and
power’, in R. B. Baldauf, Jr and A. Luke (eds) Language Planning and Education in Australasia
and the South Paciﬁc, Clevedon: Multilingual Matters.
Makoni, S. and Pennycook, A. (2007) ‘Disinventing and reconstituting languages’, in S. Makoni
and A. Pennycook (eds) Disinventing and Reconstituting Languages, Clevedon: Multilingual
Matters.
Maryns, K. (2005) ‘Monolingual language ideologies and code choice in the Belgian Asylum
Procedure’, Language and Communication 25: 299–314.
Lionel Wee
22

May, S. (2001) Language and Minority Rights: Ethnicity, Nationalism, and the Politics of Language,
London: Longman.
Milani, T. M. (2007) ‘Debating Swedish: Language Politics and Ideology in Contemporary
Sweden’, Ph.D. dissertation, Stockholm University.
Milroy, J. and Milroy, L. (1999) Authority in Language, 3rd edn, London: Routledge.
Patten, A. and Kymlicka, W. (2004) ‘Introduction’, in W. Kymlicka and A. Patten (eds) Language
Rights and Political Theory, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Pennycook, A. (1994) The Cultural Politics of English as an International Language, Harlow:
Longman.
——(1998) English and the Discourses of Colonialism, London: Routledge.
Philips, S. U. (2000) ‘Constructing a Tongan nation-state through language ideology in the
courtroom’, in P. V. Kroskrity (ed.) Regimes of Language: Ideologies, Polities, and Identities,
Santa Fe, NM: School of American Research Press.
Phillipson, R. and Skutnabb-Kangas, T. (1995) ‘Linguistic rights and wrongs’, Applied Linguistics
16(4): 483–504.
Rappa, A. L. and Wee, L. (2006) Language Policy and Modernity in Southeast Asia, New York:
Springer.
Ricento, T. (2000) ‘Historical and theoretical perspectives in language policy and planning’, in
T. Ricento (ed.) Ideology, Politics and Language Policies: Focus on English, Amsterdam: John
Benjamins, pp. 9–25.
Roberts, C. and Sarangi, S. (1999) ‘Hybridity in gatekeeping discourse: issues of practical relevance
for the researcher’, in S. Sarangi and C. Roberts (eds) Talk, Work and Institutional Order: Dis-
course in Medical, Mediation and Management Settings, Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter.
Rubin, J. and Jernudd, B. H. (eds) (1971) Can Language be Planned? Sociolinguistic Theory and
Practice for Developing Nations, Honolulu: University of Hawaii Press.
Shohamy, E. (2006) Language Policy: Hidden Agendas and New Approaches, London: Routledge.
Schön, D. A. (1993) ‘Generative metaphor: a perspective on problem-setting in social policy’, in
A. Ortony (ed.) Metaphor and Thought, 2nd edn, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Spolsky, B. (2004) Language Policy, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Stroud, C. (2001) ‘African mother-tongue programs and the politics of language: linguistic citizen-
ship versus linguistic human rights’, Journal of Multilingual and Multicultural Development 22(4):
339–55.
Stroud, C. and Wee, L. (2007) ‘Consuming identities: language planning and policy in Singaporean
late modernity’, Language Policy 6: 253–79.
Taylor, C. (1994) ‘The politics of recognition’, in A. Gutmann (ed.) Multiculturalism: Examining the
Politics of Recognition, Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Tollefson, J. W. (1991) Planning Language, Planning Inequality: Language Policy in the Community,
New York: Longman.
Warde, A. (1994) ‘Consumption, identity-formation and uncertainty’, Sociology 28(4): 877–98.
Wee, L. (2003) ‘Linguistic instrumentalism in Singapore’, Journal of Multilingual and Multicultural
Development 24(3): 211–24.
Wiley, T. G. (1996) ‘Language planning and policy’, in S. McKay and N. Hornberger (eds) Socio-
linguistics and Language Teaching, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Wright, S. (2004) Language Policy and Language Planning: From Nationalism to Globalization,
Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan.
Language policy and planning
23

2
Business communication
Vijay Bhatia and Aditi Bhatia
Introduction
Business communication, as used in this chapter, refers to English business communication
and English for Business Purposes (EBP), and represents a development that integrates three
main areas of study. The ﬁrst signiﬁcant area is English for Speciﬁc Purposes (ESP), which
draws its strength from linguistics, particularly from sociolinguistics, through the analyses of
functional variation in language use, and curriculum studies. In fact, the ESP tradition can be
considered an outcome of analysis of various forms of academic and disciplinary discourses
within the framework of register analysis, and more recently, genre analysis (Swales 1990),
which may be considered the second major area of study that has inﬂuenced business com-
munication. The third main tradition, which has signiﬁcantly inﬂuenced current thinking in
business communication, is communication studies, which has several dimensions, some of
which include organizational communication, management communication, and corporate
communication, all of which are often grouped under professional communication. Unlike
ESP, which draws its inspiration from language description, none of these rather diﬀerent sub-
areas of communication studies have been seriously inﬂuenced by studies in discourse and
genre analysis until recently. Instead, they have traditionally drawn their strength from various
communication theories. The focus in these individual dimensions of professional commu-
nication has been primarily on text-external factors, including context. It is interesting to note
that of these major traditions, two at least, i.e. ESP and communication studies, developed
almost independently of each other, and remained so for a long time, the latter focusing pri-
marily on ﬁrst language users, and the former targeting second or foreign language users.
Register and genre analysis developed when the ﬁeld of applied linguistics became seriously
interested in all forms of academic and professional genres, including those associated with
business contexts. However, in recent years, it has been taken more seriously by both the
traditions, that is, ESP as well as communication studies, especially professional communica-
tion, management communication, organizational communication and, certainly business
communication. This can be represented and summarized as follows (Figure 2.1):
24

We would now like to give more substance to this view of business communication as
emerging from the recent works published in these three rather distinct areas of study and
application. Let us begin with English for Business Purposes.
English for business purposes
Ever since English became the primary language of international business, research in the
nature and function of what has come to be known as Business English has ﬂourished.
Approaches to course design and materials development in ESP in general, and English for
Business Purposes in particular, have been overwhelmingly driven by descriptions of restricted
uses of language, initially identiﬁed as register (Halliday et al. 1964) with emphasis on ‘tex-
tualization’, and then as discourse (Widdowson 1973) with emphasis on coherence and orga-
nization, and in more recent years, as genre (Swales 1990; Bhatia 1993), with emphasis on
wider context and conventions of language use (see Bhatia 2004: 12 for a detailed account of
the development of genre analysis). In the last two decades, genre analysis has become one of
the most favoured approaches to the design of ESP syllabuses and materials.
ESP drew its inspiration from the work of Halliday et al. on functional variation in English,
which put forward the notion that ‘language varies as its function varies; it diﬀers in diﬀerent
situations’ (1964: 87). They pointed out that a variety of language distinguished according
to its use was register. Halliday and his colleagues rightly indicate that register could be
diﬀerentiated as sub-codes of a particular language on the basis of the occurrence of lexico-
grammatical features of that register. Thus according to them, it was possible to characterize
the register of business by identifying the use of an above-average incidence of a speciﬁc set of
Figure 2.1 Dynamics of business communication: motivation and inspiration
Business communication
25

lexico-grammatical features in that register. Subsequently, there have been several studies
identifying and describing typical characteristics of various academic and professional regis-
ters, such as scientiﬁc English, business English, and legal English. Originally, much of the
work done on the functional variation in English focused on scientiﬁc English, particularly in
academic settings.
English for Business Purposes (EBP), also known as Business English, became an indepen-
dent area of study in the early 1990s, primarily as a consequence of the globalization of trade
and commerce, which made it necessary for business people to move out of their home
grounds and operate across territorial, linguistic, cultural as well as socio-political boundaries.
This new business environment achieved further incentive through the massive inﬂux of mul-
timedia that seeped into the traditional business world, with the result that the business people
found themselves operating in a vibrant international marketplace, which was so diﬀerent from
their more traditional base. Computer-mediated communication, in certain respects, was con-
sidered a sub-ﬁeld of business communication; however, the blending of multimedia in the
traditional business environment is deteriorating this distinction, as mediated communication
‘is infused into nearly any business communication context, perhaps even coming to dominate
certain areas as public relations’ (Jackson 2007: 10).
This kind of merging of disciplinary boundaries also brought the predominantly American
business communications research tradition into close contact with the EBP/ESP tradition,
which was typically British and European (Dudley-Evans and St John 1998). There were
obvious advantages in identifying and analysing ESP registers and using them as input for
various kinds of ESP courses. Swales, referring to the early work of Halliday et al. (1964),
further points out:
[T]he 1964 ‘manifesto’ oﬀered a simple relationship between linguistic analysis and ped-
agogic materials … there was no strong emphasis on the need for practitioners to have …
content knowledge of the ﬁelds or professions they were trying to serve … The early LSP
practitioners were thus well equipped to carry out relatively ‘thin’ descriptions of their
target discourses. What they principally lacked was a perception of discourse itself and of
the means for analyzing and exploiting it – lacunae that were largely rectiﬁed by the 1980s.
(Swales 2000: 60)
The inspiration for ESP courses continued to come from studies of functional analyses of sub-
sets of English, which gradually developed as discourse analysis, and later in the 1980s as
genre analysis. In more recent years the frameworks and methods of language description have
become increasingly sophisticated, focusing more on context, rather than just the text. This
has prompted investigations into variations in professional discourses, emphasizing genres and
genre systems, mixing, embedding and bending of genres, further leading to critical examina-
tion of professional practices. Also, with the emphasis on text-task relationships, the focus
shifted to the achievement of successful outcomes in professional activities, rather than just on
the writing of a grammatically correct and acceptable text. Livesey (2002) puts emphasis on
language not simply as an instrument or tool for accomplishing particular managerial objectives,
but as the very means for expressing identity. He further says:
Formal and surface features of texts are thus brought together with narratives of context
derived by the authors from their study of historical materials. Both text and researcher
are embedded in diﬀerent cultural contexts, which constitute ‘horizons’ of meaning that
are never precisely the same … Fusing the text’s and the researcher’s ‘horizons’, however,
Vijay Bhatia and Aditi Bhatia
26

leads to a creative-critical moment of understanding. This reveals the ideological meaning
of particular texts and the sectional interests that they serve.
(Livesey 2002: 7–9)
Communication thus is not simply a matter of putting words together in a grammatically
correct and rhetorically coherent textual form, but more importantly, it is a matter of
having a desired impact on how a speciﬁcally relevant professional community views it and
how the members of that community negotiate meanings in professional documents. In this
sense, written communication is more than knowing the semantics of lexico-grammar; in
fact, it is a matter of understanding why members of a speciﬁc business or disciplinary
community communicate the way they do. This may require, among a host of other inputs, the
discipline-speciﬁc knowledge of how professionals conceptualize issues and talk about them
in order to achieve their disciplinary and professional goals. Often it is found that outsiders
to a discourse or professional community are not able to follow what specialists write and
talk about even if they are in a position to understand every word of what is written or said.
Being a native speaker in this context is not necessarily beneﬁcial if one does not have
enough understanding of the more intricate insider knowledge, including conventions of the
genre and professional practice. Widdowson (1998: 7) highlights this aspect of commu-
nicative eﬃciency when he indicates that genre analysis seeks to identify the particular con-
ventions for language use in certain domains of professional and occupational activity. He
further points out that it is a development from, and an improvement on, register analysis
because it deals with discourse and not just text. It seeks to reveal how lexico-grammatical
forms realize the conceptual and rhetorical structures, modes of thought and action, which
are established as conventional for certain discourse communities. Genre analysis thus is about
the conventions of thought and communication which deﬁne speciﬁc areas of professional
activity.
Genre theory has thus become a favourite tool for the analysis of professional and academic
discourses (Swales 1990; Bhatia 1993). In more recent years, genre theory has become
increasingly multi-perspective (Bhatia 2004) through an integration of a number of diﬀerent
methodologies (Zhang 2007), such as textography (Swales 1998), interpretive ethnography
(Smart 1998), corpus analysis (Pinto dos Santos 2002; Nelson 2006; Fuertes-Olivera 2007),
participant-perspectives on specialist discourses (Louhiala-Salminen 1996; Locker 1999; Rogers
2000), cross-cultural and intercultural perspectives (Bilbow 1999; Gimenez 2001; Vergaro
2004; Planken 2005; Vuorela 2005), multimodal analysis (Brett 2000), and observation analysis
(Louhiala-Salminen 2002), to name only a few. The implication for ESP/EBP thus is that text-
based analyses within register or genre analysis have become increasingly inadequate in
explaining and accounting for the typical use of language in various business contexts.
The other signiﬁcant development in ESP and EBP was the analysis of the needs of the
specialist group of ESP/EBP learners (Munby 1978; Chambers 1980; Jacobson 1986; Coleman
1988; Nickerson 1998). The rationale for needs analysis was that since ESP learners have a
limited set of requirements for which they often use English as a second language, there
was no use giving them extensive courses in all forms and functions of English, which can
be time-consuming, diﬃcult, and ineﬀective. It was possible to design short-term courses in the
teaching of English to meet their speciﬁc needs more economically and eﬀectively. In terms of
teaching methodology, one of the typical characteristics of many of the EBP courses has been
the appropriation and often integration of speciﬁc disciplinary approaches. In the case of EBP,
for instance, one of the most useful and popular trends has been the use of the case study
method, which many consider an integral part of all EBP programs (Westerﬁeld 1989;
Business communication
27

Esteban and Cañado 2004). Similarly, the role of new media and technology can hardly be
overlooked.
Variations in business discourse
ESP has always been identiﬁed in terms of disciplinary variations, so that English for law,
English for science and technology, English for marine engineering, etc., have been some of
the successful and pragmatically eﬀective labels. In recent years, ESP practitioners have been
motivated to go a step further to investigate the role of sub-disciplinary variation in order to
sharpen the focus in speciﬁc ESP courses. English for Business Purpose courses, for instance,
have been further classiﬁed on the basis of variations in the use of language across sub-disciplines
of business, that is, economics, marketing, management, and accountancy. The assumption
that every discipline has its own repertoire of typical genres, which are unlikely to be used by
members of other disciplinary or professional communities, seems to be well established in
recent genre-analytical literature (Swales 1990; Bhatia and Candlin 2001; Bhatia 2004). This is
due to the fact that each discipline has its own typical ways of constructing, interpreting, and
using genres, deﬁning membership characteristics of such communities, specifying and vali-
dating evidence to construct valid and acceptable arguments and make sustainable claims
within their speciﬁc contexts (Bhatia 1999a; Hewings and Nickerson 1999; Hyland 2000). All
these factors contribute to the determination of typical ways of thinking and behaving in spe-
ciﬁc disciplines or sub-disciplines. Assumptions of this kind may lead one to say ‘He behaves
like an accountant’, or ‘That’s very typical of a marketing person.’ Specialists within broad
disciplines, such as law and accountancy, have a general aﬃliation to a professional commu-
nity, and they generally operate rather distinctively within their own disciplinary frame. How-
ever, they may also create disciplinary conﬂicts within the general community of professionals,
if they operate in an interdisciplinary context, which quite often is the case when in a business
meeting we have an engineer, a lawyer, and an accountant. Just as it is true of such broad
disciplines, to a somewhat more limited extent, it is also true of sub-disciplines, such as,
accountancy, marketing, management, and economics (Bhatia 1999b). The sub-disciplinary
distinctions across these areas may be as valid as the ones we see across major disciplinary
cultures. To give more substance to this claim, we would like to refer to an extensive study of
disciplinary variations in business education undertaken by Bhatia and Candlin (2001). The
main purpose of this study, which was undertaken by a group of researchers from ﬁve Hong
Kong universities, was to determine the nature of the competing interdisciplinary discursive
practices (modes of discourse and genre presentation, student and teacher expectations in
interdisciplinary academic contexts, individual study patterns, patterns of assessment, etc.) in
an attempt to understand the extent to which disciplinary specialists (both students and
teachers) were aware of the subject-speciﬁc frames that underlie their practices, and also to
what extent they were responsive to the interdisciplinary requirements of their students’
communicative performance.
The ﬁndings of this study clearly established that there were some fundamental and peda-
gogically important sub-disciplinary diﬀerences that inﬂuenced the teaching and learning of
academic discourses particularly relevant to EBP or business communication programmes.
Although there were considerable overlaps in business discourses of various kinds, there were
nonetheless distinctive generic characteristics, which were reﬂective of the requirements of the
diﬀerent sub-disciplines.
The study also revealed that there was an initial general perception on the part of many of
the stakeholders that the tasks, such as projects, presentations, essays, reports, and other
Vijay Bhatia and Aditi Bhatia
28

written assignments, case studies, and analysis of business situations that students had to carry
out during their academic study were similar across diﬀerent disciplines. The subject teachers
had the impression that such tasks involved applying theory to the real world to solve a par-
ticular business-related problem; however, there were clearly signiﬁcant disciplinary and sub-
disciplinary diﬀerences, which represented diﬀerent perspectives and hence warranted diﬀerent
approaches to business studies. The tasks in Accountancy were mostly calculations-based
essays or reports, often emphasizing individual work and analytical skills, but de-emphasizing
the application of theory. In Economics, on the other hand, there was a greater emphasis on
theory, writing essays, drawing diagrams, and interpreting graphs; tasks often focusing on the
‘real world’ of supply and demand. In Management the tasks were frequently case studies,
projects, or essays, with greater focus on deﬁnitions and on argument. In Finance the focus
was also on calculation, but this was all done within the framework of case studies and essays.
Finally, in Marketing there was a greater focus on projects, collaborative work, and applying
theory to investigating the needs of customers, with some use of calculation. The distinctive
character of such disciplinary tasks, as revealed in that study, can be visually represented as
follows (Figure 2.2).
An interesting issue for us is to what extent these sub-disciplinary variations are likely to
create academic problems for students in their academic study. Bhatia and Candlin (2001), in
their study, raised this issue in their discussions with teachers and students. Teachers’ views, in
terms of disciplinary variation, and the ability of students to handle this within and across
subject boundaries reﬂected interesting disparities. Many staﬀmembers commented that they
were not actually aware of common concepts appearing in other disciplines and of being
treated diﬀerently in terms of application/concept, etc., as subject teachers only prepared their
own courses and did not generally collaborate with other subject teachers. Others felt that
Figure 2.2 Academic task demands in speciﬁc business disciplines
Business communication
29

there were no great diﬀerences across the demands of the diﬀerent disciplines and students
knew how to adjust from one to another. They speculated that students generally compart-
mentalized the subject and particular skills of a discipline, and probably did not carry skills,
style or methods over to another discipline.
On the other hand, some teachers pointed out that the boundaries across sub-disciplines
were not distinctive, and that students were sometimes confused about overlapping concepts.
For example, it was easy for students to confuse the management concept of corporate strategy
(the long-term overall aim of a company) with the marketing concept of strategy (marketing a
product or service). There was a common perception that students in their initial years had
problems in adapting from discipline to discipline as it required a lot of eﬀort, and that no one
actually explicitly pointed out the diﬀerences in disciplinary demands to them. However, some
of them believed that as they progressed through the programmes, especially in the second and
the ﬁnal year, they started handling these diﬀerences in the language and terminology of
various disciplines.
There are a number of ways these generic variations can be studied. The variations can
occur within a speciﬁc domain, or across several domains. In order to handle domain-speciﬁc
genres, Devitt (1991) proposed the notion of genre set to refer to a range of texts that a par-
ticular professional group produces in the course of their daily routine. She discussed the case
of tax accountants, who in their daily work produced a limited range of generic texts, some
of which might include various kinds of letters such as an opinion letter to the client, a
response letter to the client, a letter to tax authorities, all of which are considered distinct, but
at the same time intertextually linked to each other. The typical set of products resulting from
these tasks formed a genre set. The genres comprising a set are individually distinct, but at the
same time, intertextually linked. The texts from a particular genre set also display typical
patterns found in similarly produced texts by other fellow professionals in the same ﬁeld. This
rather limited set of generic texts resulting from a narrowly deﬁned professional activity
represents the participation of only one side of the professional output. The professional
activity might also involve a number of other participants from within or outside the profes-
sion, texts, or other semiotic constructs, but the concept of genre set seems to include one side
of the professional practice. As Bazerman mentions,
The genre set represents … only the work of one side of a multiple person interaction. That
is, the tax accountants’ letters usually refer to the tax code, the rulings of the tax depart-
ment in this case, the client’s information and interests, and these references are usually
presented in highly anticipatable ways appropriate to the genre of the letter, but the genre
set is only the tax accountant’s participations, as intertextually linked to the participations
of the parties.
(Bazerman 1994: 98–9)
To extend the concept of genre set in an attempt to account for the full set of genres, Bazer-
man (1994: 97) proposed the concept of systems of genres, which refer to all ‘the interrelated
genres that interact with each other in speciﬁc settings’. He pointed out:
The system of genres would be the full set of genres that instantiate the participation
of all the parties – that is the full ﬁle of letters from and to the client, from and
to the government, from and to the accountant. This would be the full interaction, the full
event, the set of social relations as it has been enacted. It embodies the full history of
Vijay Bhatia and Aditi Bhatia
30

speech events as intertextual occurrences, but attending to the way that all the intertext is
instantiated in generic form establishing the current act in relation to prior acts.
(Bazerman 1994: 99)
The notion of a system of genres is thus a useful development on the earlier notion of genre
set, and is a very useful tool to investigate intertextually and interdiscursively (see Bhatia 2004,
2008a, 2008b, 2010 for a detailed account) related text-genres embedded within a speciﬁc
professional activity. Generic versatility also functions in yet another way. Genres generally
operate across disciplinary boundaries, so that we ﬁnd a constellation of reporting genres of
various kinds, some of which include newspaper reports, business reports, science reports,
medical reports, police reports, technical reports, all of which display interesting generic
similarities. However, it is also necessary to consider variations within a broad discipline.
For example, one may ﬁnd interesting variation in business reports in terms of their
sub-disciplinary frames. Some variations include:

Investigation report (suggesting solutions for existing problems)

Performance report (evaluating an individual product, service or activity)

Progress or status report (reporting development as part of a project / activity)

Process report (reporting on how-to aspects of projects or activities)

Feasibility report (reporting on chances of failure or success of projects)

Sales report (reporting on periodic sales ﬁgures, may include market analysis)

Field trip report (recording business activities at various locations)

Annual report (reporting on overall perspective on an organization)

Audit report (indicating economic eﬃciency).
An interesting aspect of such variation is that just as it is possible to view individual genres as
part of a speciﬁc disciplinary domain, it is equally possible to view some other aspects of these
very genres displaying overlaps across a number of sub-disciplinary domains. Therefore, the
reality of the situation can only be captured by a much more complex and perhaps dynamic
picture displaying similarities as well as overlaps within and across disciplinary frames and
discursive practices (Bhatia 1999a). It is thus possible for us to view any one of these reporting
genres, business reports, for example, and identify similarities as well as distinctions across
more speciﬁc realizations of this genre. Obvious examples will include sales reports, progress
reports, project reports, audit reports, ﬁnancial reports, and annual reports, to name a few. The
diﬀerences between these are less discernible in terms of broad communicative purposes but
more in terms of the nature of activity, task, or sub-domain they serve, but all of them are
valid instances of business reports.
As mentioned in the beginning, although there was no direct relationship between the ﬁrst
two main dimensions, that is, communication studies and ESP, there have always been
impressions of overlap between these in terms of their concerns, methodologies, materials and
applications. Williams et al. (1984) regard these two traditions as two halves of a single pro-
fession, in that both were concerned with the teaching and learning of eﬀective communication
through English in business contexts.
Business communication
Business communication in its present form combines the strengths of both these traditions to
look for eﬀective and eﬃcient ways of training uninitiated learners into the intricacies of
Business communication
31

business communication, both written as well as spoken. Bargiela-Chiappini and Nickerson
(2002), introducing the special issue of International Review of Applied Linguistics (IRAL) on
Business Communication, deﬁne it as talk and writing between individuals whose main work,
activities, and interests are in the domain of business and who come together for the purpose
of doing business, which usually takes place within a corporate setting, whether physical or
virtual. The label ‘Business Communication’ thus seems to be best understood as a discipline
integrating communication in business, including organizational and management contexts,
and other ESP-based approaches to the teaching and learning of English for business
purposes. Suchan and Charles (2006: 393) explain that the ‘lack of a research identity’ and the
copious multi-disciplinarity is a consequence of the signiﬁcantly diﬀerent departments
and schools, such as English, business and management, speech communications, and even
information technology. They argue that
These diﬀerent disciplinary homes result in our using theories, frameworks, and informa-
tion sources that lack signiﬁcant overlap. This lack of overlap contributes to the shape-
lessness of our ﬁeld and makes it diﬃcult for us to deﬁne to our stakeholders and
ourselves the work we do and the value it provides.
(Suchan and Charles 2006: 393)
However, interdisciplinarity across seemingly diverse disciplines must not be seen as under-
mining the contribution that each discipline makes towards a better understanding of the
nature and function of communication in professional and corporate settings. It is, instead,
recognition of the complex and dynamic nature of the discursive realities of the corporate
world that are more accurately understood through multiple as well as complementary per-
spectives. Despite growing criticism that business communication research lacks a ‘compre-
hensive theoretical grounding’ (Shelby 1988: 13) and instead draws its ﬁndings from many
diﬀerent places, Rogers (2001: 16) argues that ‘there are signs that we’re growing more com-
fortable with our plurality, even beginning to acknowledge some of its value’. She also claims
(2001: 15) that convergence is not an entirely foreign concept as far as business communication
research is concerned, as academics in this discipline have been ‘navigating multiple disciplines
and diverse methods for some time now. In fact, our diversity in backgrounds, cultures,
approaches, and institutions has become central to our identity.’ The ability of business com-
munication to draw from diﬀerent ﬁelds only emphasizes its ‘unique place at the intersection
of business and communication’ (Reinsch and Lewis 1993: 450). Similarly, Ulijn et al. emphasize
the need for new approaches to the study of globalism, organizations, and communication.
They rightly say that
multiparadigmatic approaches facilitate the work of scholars who ﬁnd both value and
disappointment in various theoretical perspectives but who understand the need to
acknowledge and integrate multiple approaches in an eﬀort to clarify complex and
obscure human and organizational phenomena.
(Ulijn et al. 2000: 310–11)
A special issue of Management Communication Quarterly (1996) demonstrates that there is a
wide scope for dialogue and possible cross-fertilization across disciplines, even if some of them
(e.g. organizational communication) are seen to be more dependent on a symbiotic relationship
with the corporate world (Mumby and Stohl 1996).
Vijay Bhatia and Aditi Bhatia
32

In this context, it is interesting to note that Rogers (1998: 80), who has a background in
management studies, in her discussion of national agendas in business communication found
at least ﬁve key concerns. First, it was felt that teaching and research in business commu-
nication must go hand-in-hand, which has also been a main concern in ESP/EBP. Second, it
was found that to enhance business practice, research must focus on authentic texts, which
has also been a consistent argument in ESP/EBP ever since the 1970s. The third concern was
that research must be multidisciplinary, just as ESP is. The fourth concern was that one must
take into account research in cross-cultural communications and intercultural negotiations.
Rogers concluded that language learning, linguistic analyses, and discourse patterns are some
of the main areas of research and investigation. In her subsequent study, Rogers (2000) says
that in text-based genre analyses there is a strong tendency to conceptualize communicative
purposes in terms of the strategies of the speakers or writers, but she argues that such purposes
cannot be fully understood without some understanding of how these purposes are interpreted
by members of the specialist community, for which she recommends user-based analyses.
Rogers (2000: 426) thus extends the boundaries of genre analysis to take it beyond the text to
context and audience response, looking for the relevance of user-based analytical tools to
analyze a small corpus of CEO presentations in the context of earning announcements. It is
hardly surprising then that in much of Rogers’ work we ﬁnd a ﬁne integration of not simply
the two strands of Business Communication, that is EBP and Professional Communication,
but also that of genre analysis. Similarly, Charles (1996: 20) makes a necessary attempt to ﬁll
in the gap between a contextual business approach and a linguistic text-based approach. Her
work on business negotiations examines the particular ways in which the extra-linguistic
‘business context shapes negotiation discourse, and thus creates a mutual interdependency’.
Relatedly, Nickerson (1998), in her survey of the impact of corporate culture on non-native
corporate writers working in a multinational and multilingual context, also adopted an inter-
disciplinary approach which incorporated not only ESP research but also organizational
theories that account for the general patterns of communication found within multinational
corporations.
Yet another methodological procedure, which allows one to incorporate intercultural
and cross-cultural variations in business communication, has, once again, its roots in both
professional communication and ESP/EBP. Gimenez’s study on cross-cultural business nego-
tiations focuses on cross-cultural negotiations and communication styles, and he discovered
that some of the ‘cultural diﬀerences seemed to be overridden by the status-bound behaviour
of the negotiators’ (2001: 188). On the other hand, Vergaro (2004) undertook a contrastive
study to investigate the rhetorical diﬀerences between Italian and English sales promotion
letters, which are considered standardized, ritualistic or even formulaic. Her main concern was
to explore how information was presented and what rhetorical strategies were used to obtain
compliance by a given readership in a given culture. She used pragmatic and ethno-linguistic
research by contrastively analyzing a corpus of authentic Italian and English business
letters. Similarly, Planken (2005) studied how facework was used to achieve interpersonal
goals in intercultural sales negotiations by undertaking linguistic analyses of ‘rapport
management’, which, in a negotiation context, is aimed primarily, but not exclusively, at
building a working relationship. Coming from the communication angle, Varner (2000: 44)
views intercultural communication diﬀerently from intercultural business communication. He
mentions that in intercultural business communication the business strategies, goals, objectives,
and practices become an integral part of the communication process and help create a
new environment out of the synergy of culture, communication, and business. He further
argues that:
Business communication
33

as the study of culture is not an end in itself, so communication is not an end in itself. In
intercultural business communication the communication has a business purpose. The
channels, levels of formality, use of technology, content and style of delivery, are inﬂu-
enced by cultural and business considerations. The objectives of the business, the level of
internationalization, the structure of organization, will help determine the intercultural
business communication strategy.
(Varner 2000: 48–9)
Bhatia (2004, 2008a, 2010) argues that the study of conventional systems of genres (Bazerman
1994) often used to fulﬁl the professional objectives of speciﬁc disciplinary or professional
communities may not be suﬃcient to understand the complexities of business communication.
He argues that a comprehensive understanding of the motives and intentions of business
practices is possible only if one goes beyond the textual constraints to look at the multiple
discourses, actions and voices that play a signiﬁcant role in the formation of speciﬁc discursive
practices within the institutional and organizational framework. He develops the notion of
‘interdiscursivity’ as a function of appropriation of contextual and text-external generic
resources within and across professional genres and professional practices. Devitt (1996: 611)
argues that ‘we need to ﬁnd ways to keep genre embedded and engaged within context while also
keeping our focus on learning about genre and its operations’. Devitt (2004: 188) also adds
that ‘to teach students the rhetorical and cultural signiﬁcance of one genre will require
teaching the signiﬁcance of its genre set and the place of that genre within that set’. Similarly,
Bremner (2008: 308) favours a more comprehensive understanding of interdiscursive voices in
any system of activity. He points out that genres are interconnected in wider systems of
activity, and they inﬂuence each other in the system. He says that:
A key feature of intertextuality to consider, then, is that it is not simply a link between
texts, but a phenomenon that helps shape other texts: as genres combine to achieve dif-
ferent goals, they contribute to the development of new genres as they are recontextua-
lised (Linell, 1998). Thus the generic, linguistic and rhetorical choices that a writer makes
will be inﬂuenced by the texts that precede or surround the text under construction, and
will in turn have an eﬀect on the ﬁnal textual product.
(Bremner 2008: 308)
Louhiala-Salminen’s (2002) work is also important in that, in order to look at the full poten-
tial of who contributed what in which context, she closely observed a business manager’s pro-
fessional practice in a Finnish multinational corporation by tape recording most of the
discourse activities during the day, and accessing copies of all the written materials. She sup-
plemented this data with interviews in order to understand some of the typical features of the
discourse activities in a multinational corporation.
Concluding remarks
We have presented in this chapter the current view of business communication as a truly
interdisciplinary area of study and application, which may be viewed as an integration not
only of two of the rather distinct approaches to the teaching and learning of English used
in the professions, that is ESP and professional communication studies, but also as seriously
nurtured by multidimensional and multi-perspective analyses of systems of business genres
(Bhatia 2004). We have also made an eﬀort to point out that advances in the ﬁeld of genre
Vijay Bhatia and Aditi Bhatia
34

analysis, particularly the eﬀort to go beyond the textual artefacts to investigate context of
various kinds, including intertextuality as well as interdiscursivity, are crucial to a compre-
hensive understanding of business communication. Babcock and Du-Babcock (2001: 373–6)
nicely sum up the intercultural variables we have discussed in the preceding paragraphs, when
they point out that:
Language can be seen as the gateway to culture as it frames the nature of cultural expo-
sure and contact as well as how information is ﬁltered through the perceptual screens of
all communicators … language shapes how international business communicators per-
ceive cultural inﬂuences and cues in diﬀerent communication zones as they engage in the
international business communication process.
(Babcock and Du-Babcock 2001: 373–6)
It may also be said at this stage that research in areas such as the relationship between discursive
activities and professional practices in most disciplinary, professional and institutional con-
texts (Bhatia 2006, 2008a, 2008b) is still in its early stages, and a lot more work is needed
before we can ﬁnd convincing answers to the question that Bhatia (1993) raised, that is, ‘why do
most professionals use the language they way they do?’ For instance, we still have no com-
prehensive understanding of ‘what makes a novice accounting student into a good accountant’,
or ‘how do we identify, train, and appraise a good manager, marketing executive, or a public
relations expert?’ One may also raise a number of other similar questions, such as the following:

What is the role of language in the development of specialist expertise in a particular
professional ﬁeld?

What are the core competencies that are needed to make a person a competent
professional?

Are these competencies teachable?, and

Is it possible to assess the acquisition of such expertise?
Although we seem to be a long way from any kind of deﬁnite and convincing answers to
some of these questions, and a lot more work is needed, we seem to be heading in the right
direction.
To conclude, we would like to suggest a few directions in which research in the future
is likely to go. In our view, there is a need to integrate English for Business Purposes with
current research in business communication, as these are simply two sides of the same
coin. This will also help us to have a more comprehensive view of business communication.
In addition to this, the ﬁeld of business communication can be enriched by integrating
insights from and about business practices, which can and have, in recent genre analytical
studies, been successfully undertaken with insightful conclusions. If we can continue to explore
some of these perspectives, we feel that we will be very close to demystifying some of the
hitherto hidden complexities associated with acquisition of specialist business and disciplinary
competence.
Related topics
English for academic purposes; institutional discourse; language education; language learning
Business communication
35

Further reading
Bargiela-Chiappini, F. and Nickerson, C. (eds) (2002) Writing Business: Genres, Media and Dis-
course, London: Longman. (This book oﬀers a comprehensive account of business discourses in
speciﬁc and yet diverse business contexts, integrating insights from discourse analysis and
business practices.)
Bhatia, V. K. (2004) Worlds of Written Discourse: A Genre-based View, London and New York:
Continuum. (This volume oﬀers a comprehensive genre analytical framework for the study
of discursive and professional practices in a number of diﬀerent business and disciplinary
contexts.)
——(2006) ‘Discursive practices in disciplinary and professional contexts’, Linguistic and Human
Sciences 2(1): 5–28. (This paper argues for an integrated view of management and discourse
analytical theories for the study of business and other disciplinary practices.)
——(2008) ‘Genre analysis, ESP and professional practice’, English for Speciﬁc Purposes 27(2):
161–74. (This paper explores professional practices through discourse and genre analysis.)
Smart, G. (2006) Writing the Economy: Activity, Genre and Technology in the World of Banking,
London: Equinox Publishing. (An engaging and well-researched analysis of an important bank-
ing institution.)
References
Babcock, R. D. and Du-Babcock, B. (2001) ‘Language-based communication zones in international
business communication’, Journal of Business Communication 38(4): 372–412.
Bargiela-Chiappini, F. and Nickerson, C. (eds) (2001) Writing Business: Genres, Media and Dis-
course, London: Longman.
Bazerman, C. (1994) ‘Systems of genres and the enhancement of social intentions’, in A. Freedman
and P. Medway (eds) Genre and New Rhetoric, London: Taylor & Francis.
Bhatia, V. K. (1993) Analysing Genre: Language Use in Professional Settings, Harlow: Longman.
——(1999a) ‘Integrating products, processes, purposes and participants in professional writing’,
in C. N. Candlin and K. Hyland (eds) Writing: Texts, Processes and Practices, London:
Longman.
——(1999b) ‘Disciplinary variation in business English’, in M. Hewings and C. Nickerson (eds)
Business English: Research into Practice, Englewood Cliﬀs, NJ: Prentice Hall.
——(2004) Worlds of Written Discourse: A Genre-based View, London and New York: Continuum.
——(2006) ‘Discursive practices in disciplinary and professional contexts’, Linguistic and Human
Sciences 2(1): 5–28.
——(2008a) ‘Genre analysis, ESP and professional practice’, English for Speciﬁc Purposes 27(2):
161–74.
——(2008b) ‘Creativity and accessibility in written professional discourse’, World Englishes 27(3):
319–26.
——(2010) ‘Interdiscursivity in professional communication’, Discourse and Communication 21(1):
32–50.
Bhatia, V. K. and Candlin, C. N. (eds) (2001) Teaching English to Meet the Needs of Business
Education in Hong Kong. A project report to the SCOLAR Language Fund, Government of
Hong Kong, published by the Centre for English Language Education and Communication
Research, City University of Hong Kong.
Bilbow, G. T. (1999) ‘Look who’s talking: an analysis of “Chair-talk” in business meetings’, Journal
of Business and Technical Communication 12(2): 157–97.
Bremner, S. (2008) ‘Intertextuality and business communication textbooks: why students need more
textual support’, English for Speciﬁc Purposes 27(3): 306–21.
Brett, P. (2000) ‘Integrating multimedia into the business English curriculum: a case study’, English
for Speciﬁc Purposes 19(3): 269–90.
Chambers, F. (1980) ‘A re-evaluation of needs analysis in ESP’, The ESP Journal 1: 25–33.
Charles, M. (1996) ‘Business communications: interdependence between discourse and the business
relationship’, English for Speciﬁc Purposes 15(1): 19–36.
Coleman, H. (1988) ‘Analysing language needs in large organizations’, English for Speciﬁc Purposes
7(3): 155–69.
Vijay Bhatia and Aditi Bhatia
36

Devitt, A. (1991) ‘Intertextuality in tax accounting: generic, referential and functional’, in
C. Bazerman and J. Paradis (eds) Textual Dynamics of the Professions, Madison: University of
Wisconsin Press.
——(1996) ‘Genre, genres, and the teaching of genre’, College Composition and Communication
47(4): 605–16.
——(2004) Writing Genres, Carbondale: Southern Illinois University Press.
Dudley-Evans, T. and St John, M. (1998) Developments in English for Speciﬁc Purposes: A Multi-
disciplinary Approach, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Esteban, A. A. and Cañado, M. L. P. (2004) ‘Making the case method work in teaching business
English: a case study’, English for Speciﬁc Purposes 23(2): 137–61.
Fuertes-Olivera, P. A. (2007) ‘A corpus-based view of lexical gender in written business English’,
English for Speciﬁc Purposes 26(2): 219–34.
Gimenez, J. C. (2001) ‘Ethnographic observations in cross-cultural business negotiations between
non-native speakers of English: an exploratory study’, English for Speciﬁc Purposes 20: 169–93.
Halliday, M. A. K., McIntosh, A. and Strevens, P. (1964) The Linguistic Sciences and Language
Teaching, London: The English Language Book Society and Longman Group.
Hewings, M. and Nickerson, C. (eds) (1999) Business English: Research into Practice, London:
Longman/The British Council.
Hyland, K. (2000) Disciplinary Discourses: Social Interactions in Academic Writing, Harlow: Pear-
son Education.
Jackson, M. H. (2007) ‘Should emerging technologies change business communication scholarship?’
Journal of Business Communication 44(1): 3–12.
Jacobson, W. H. (1986) ‘An assessment of the communication needs of non-native speakers of
English in an undergraduate Physics lab’, English for Speciﬁc Purposes 5(2): 173–87.
Livesey, S. M. (2002) ‘Interpretive acts: new vistas in qualitative research in business communica-
tion’, Journal of Business Communication 39(1): 6–12.
Louhiala-Salminen, L. (1996) ‘The business communication classroom vs. reality: what should we
teach today?’ English for Speciﬁc Purposes 15(1): 37–51.
——(2002) ‘The ﬂy’s perspective: discourse in the daily routine of a business manager’, English for
Speciﬁc Purposes 21(3): 211–31.
Locker, K. O. (1999) ‘Factors in reader responses to negative letters: experimental evidence for
changing what we teach’, Journal of Business and Technical Communication 13(1): 5–48.
Mumby, D. K. and Stohl, C. (1996) ‘Disciplining organizational communication studies’, Management
Communication Quarterly 10(1): 50–72.
Munby, J. (1978) Communicative Syllabus Design, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Nelson, M. (2006) ‘Semantic associations in business English: a corpus-based analysis’, English for
Speciﬁc Purposes 25(2): 217–34.
Nickerson, C. (1998) ‘Corporate culture and the use of written English within British subsidiaries in
the Netherlands’, English for Speciﬁc Purposes 17(3): 281–94.
Pinto dos Santos, V. B. M. (2002) ‘Genre analysis of business letters of negotiation’, English for
Speciﬁc Purposes 21(2): 167–99.
Planken, B. (2005) ‘Managing rapport in lingua franca sales negotiations: a comparison of profes-
sional and aspiring negotiators’, English for Speciﬁc Purposes 24(4): 381–400.
Reinsch, N. L. Jr and Lewis, P. V. (1993) ‘Author and citation patterns for The Journal of Business
Communication, 1978–92’, The Journal of Business Communication 30: 435–62.
Rogers, P. S. (1998) ‘National agendas and the English divide’, Business Communication Quarterly
61(3): 80.
——(2000) ‘CEO presentations in conjunction with earning announcements: extending the con-
struct of organizational genre through competing values proﬁling and user-needs analysis’,
Management Communication Quarterly 13(3): 426–85.
——(2001) ‘Convergence and commonality challenge business communication research’, Journal of
Business Communication 38(1): 14–23.
Shelby, A. N. (1988) ‘A macro theory of management communication’, Journal of Business
Communication 25(2): 13–28.
Smart, G. (1998) ‘Mapping conceptual worlds: using interpretive ethnography to explore
knowledge-making in a professional community’, Journal of Business Communication 35(1):
111–27.
Business communication
37

Suchan, J. and Charles, M. (2006) ‘Business communication research: past, present, and future’,
Journal of Business Communication 43(4): 389–97.
Swales, J. M. (1990) Genre Analysis: English in Academic and Research Settings, Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
——(1998) Other Floors Other Voices: A Textography of a Small University Building, London:
Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
——(2000) ‘Language for speciﬁc purposes’, Annual Review of Applied Linguistics 20: 59–76.
Ulijn, J., O’Hair, D., Weggeman, M., Ledlow, G. and Hall, H. T. (2000) ‘Innovation, corporate
strategy, and cultural context: what is the mission for international business communication?’,
Journal of Business Communication 37(3): 293–317.
Varner, I. I. (2000) ‘The theoretical foundation for intercultural business communication: a con-
ceptual model’, Journal of Business Communication 37(1): 39–57.
Vergaro, C. (2004) ‘Discourse strategies of Italian and English sales promotion letters’, English for
Speciﬁc Purposes 23(2): 181–207.
Vuorela, T. (2005) ‘How does a sales team reach goals in intercultural business negotiations? A case
study’, English for Speciﬁc Purposes 24(1): 65–92.
Westerﬁeld, K. (1989) ‘Improved linguistic ﬂuency with case studies and a video method’, English
for Speciﬁc Purposes 8(1): 75–83.
Widdowson, H. G. (1973) ‘An Applied Linguistic Approach to Discourse Analysis’, Ph.D. thesis,
University of Edinburgh.
——(1998) ‘Communication and community: the pragmatics of ESP’, English for Speciﬁc Purposes
17(1): 3–14.
Williams, R., Swales, J. and Kirkman, J. (1984) Common Ground: Shared Interest in ESP and
Communication Studies, ELT Documents 117. Oxford: Pergamon Press in association with the
British Council.
Zhang, Z. (2007) ‘Towards an integrated approach to teaching business English: a Chinese
experience’, English for Speciﬁc Purposes 26(4): 399–410.
Vijay Bhatia and Aditi Bhatia
38

3
Translation and interpreting
Mona Baker and Luis Pérez-González
Introduction
Translation and interpreting are forms of linguistic mediation that involve rendering written or
oral text from one language to another. As language-based activities that have practical
implications, they are often seen as falling within the remit of applied linguistics. Following a
brief introduction and historical survey of the ﬁeld, this chapter focuses on some of the main
issues that have interested both translation scholars and applied linguists in recent years. It
does not engage with the use of translation in language teaching (for an authoritative overview
of this issue, see Cook 2009).
Increased globalization, growing mobility of people and commodities, and the spread and
intensity of armed conﬂicts in recent years have established translation and interpreting more
ﬁrmly in the public consciousness. As both facilitators and beneﬁciaries of increased global
interconnectedness, translators and interpreters have become important economic players in
the services sector worldwide, with surveys forecasting an average annual business growth of
5–7.5 per cent between 2005 and 2010 (CSA 2004; EUATC 2005) and the global translation
industry turnover expected to exceed €12 billion in 2010 (ABI 2002). Recent comparable
reports on the interpreting industry estimate the global outsourced interpreting market at
$2.5 billion, $700 million of which is generated by the burgeoning ﬁeld of telephone inter-
preting (CSA 2008). At the same time, translators and interpreters have become more widely
recognized as important political players, with their involvement in Kosovo, Iraq and Afghanistan
in particular receiving widespread media attention.
Economic clout and political impact aside, the growing pervasiveness of translation and
interpreting in all domains of private and public life has also heightened the need for a better
understanding of their social relevance. Against the backdrop of the growing dominance of
English as a lingua franca, translation and interpreting have become central to promoting
cultural and linguistic diversity in the information society and in the development of multi-
lingual content in global media networks and the audiovisual marketplace. They have also
become central to the delivery of institutional agendas in a wide range of settings, from
supranational organizations to judicial and healthcare services at community level. The
importance of translation and interpreting as tools of empowerment is further evident in the
39

emergence of new forms of intersemiotic assistive mediation; these include subtitling for the
deaf and hard-of-hearing and audio description for the blind, both of which aim to facilitate
access to information and entertainment for sensory-impaired members of the community.
Historical overview
The study of translation has a very long history, going back several centuries to scholars like
Cicero, Horace and Jerome, all of whom commented extensively on strategies of translation (e.g.
word-for-word versus sense-for-sense). But the academic study of translation and interpreting
dates back only to the middle of the twentieth century. Initially focusing on short, often
decontextualized stretches of text, much theorizing during the 1950s, 1960s and 1970s revolved
around elaborating taxonomies of diﬀerent types of equivalence that may hold between a
source text and its translation. Largely understood as a semantic category in the 1950s,
equivalence was ﬁrst deﬁned as
a process by which a spoken or written utterance takes place in one language which is
intended and presumed to convey the same meaning as a previously existing utterance in
another language. It thus involves two distinct factors, a ‘meaning’, or reference to some
slice of reality, and the diﬀerence between two languages in referring to that reality.
(Rabin 1958: 123, emphasis added)
The notion of equivalence here is similar to that of synonymy, except that one applies to items
in two diﬀerent languages and the other to items in the same language. As a semantic cate-
gory, the notion of equivalence is static – it is not dictated by the requirements of the
communicative situation but purely by the semantic content of the source text.
Partly in response to developments within linguistics, which for a long time was the main
source of theorization about translation, the treatment of equivalence as a semantic category
soon came to be regarded as untenable. One of the ﬁrst alternatives to be oﬀered was a deﬁ-
nition of equivalence not as a question of ‘how close’ a target text is to the same reality por-
trayed in the source text but rather as how close it comes to reproducing the same eﬀect or
response in the target readers. This approach originated with Bible translators: Nida (1964);
Nida and Taber (1969); and Larson (1984). The idea of equivalent eﬀect proved equally pro-
blematic, however, since no reliable way could be found for measuring eﬀect in readers. Not
only is it impossible to know how two people are likely to respond to a given text, but even the
same reader will respond diﬀerently to the same text on diﬀerent occasions. Some scholars
later attempted to salvage something of the potential usefulness of the idea of ‘equivalent
eﬀect’ by limiting it to ‘similarity’ in a very immediate sense. For instance, Hervey and Higgins
(1992: 23) suggest that the translator of a portion of a source text which makes the
source reader laugh can attempt to produce a translation which makes its own reader laugh.
As they themselves go on to explain, this is ‘a gross reduction of the eﬀects of a text to a single
eﬀect’.
An alternative which gained much ground in the 1970s and 1980s was equivalence of func-
tion. Scholars such as Reiss (1971) and House (1981) tried to categorize the range of possible
textual functions or communicative purposes and suggest ways in which equivalence may be
achieved in relation to the most prominent function in the source text. House’s model of
quality assessment, for example, draws on Halliday’s notions of ideational and interpersonal
functions and involves three steps: drawing a textual proﬁle which characterizes the function
of the source text, drawing a similar proﬁle for the translated text, and comparing the two to
Mona Baker and Luis Pérez-González
40

identify any shifts in function. The result is a statement of the relative match of the two
functional components (the ideational and interpersonal).
Apart from the obvious problems of deﬁning a single function for a text, this approach is
divorced from the realities of translation in that it assumes that the function of the target text
has to be equivalent to that of the source text. But in the professional world it is common for
clients to request rough translations which allow for a basic understanding of the content of
source texts (e.g. contracts or judgments) but are not meant to serve an equivalent (regulatory
or argumentative) function in the target context. In response to this challenge, new approaches
emerged in the 1980s, particularly in Germany, which pointed out that the reasons for com-
missioning or initiating a translation are independent of the reasons for creating the source
text. What matters, therefore, is the function of the translated text, not that of the source text.
Equivalence here becomes a function of the commission accompanying a request for translation
(Vermeer 1989b/2000). Scholars like Vermeer therefore talk of ‘adequacy’ with regard to the
commission or purpose of translation, rather than equivalence, as the standard for judging
target texts. Nord (1991) takes this further by suggesting that it is not the text itself that has a
function – rather a text acquires its function in the situation in which it is received.
As can be seen from the development of thinking about equivalence, by the late 1980s stu-
dies of translation had begun to widen their scope of analysis considerably: they gradually
moved outwards from the word to the sentence, to structures above the sentence, to the text as
a unit of analysis, and ﬁnally to the text as a cultural artefact that functions in a speciﬁc
context of situation. By then, too, the text had come to be seen as an instance of interaction
that embodies the values a given culture attaches to certain practices and concepts. Cultural
studies and literary theory in particular came to exercise considerable inﬂuence on the study of
translation from this non-linguistic perspective (Venuti 1995; Hermans 1996; Tymoczko 1999).
As far as linguistics is concerned, scholars of translation also began to draw on an expanding
array of theoretical strands and ﬁelds – including but not limited to critical discourse analysis,
pragmatics, sociolinguistics, conversation analysis, psycholinguistics and semiotics (Saldanha
2009). The work of Hatim and Mason (1990, 1997) proved extremely inﬂuential in widening
the remit of linguistically informed studies of translation and interpreting, in particular by
engaging with issues of ideology and positioning.
Corpus linguistics has provided a robust methodology for studying translation since the
mid-1990s (Laviosa 2002). The application of corpus-based methodologies in translation stu-
dies uniquely involves comparing a computer-held corpus consisting exclusively of translated
text and one consisting exclusively of non-translated texts (or utterances) produced in the same
language. Such comparison aims to demonstrate the distinctive nature of translation as a genre
in its own right by identifying recurrent patterns in the language produced by translators
(Baker 1996; Laviosa 1998; Olohan 2003) and interpreters (Pérez-González 2006a). Baker
(1993) ﬁrst proposed that translation is subject to a set of constraints which inevitably leave
traces in the language that translators produce: the fact that a translated text is constrained by
a fully articulated text in another language, for instance, constitutes a major and unique con-
straint. This builds on the work of Frawley (1984), who suggested that the confrontation of
source text and target language during the process of translation results in creating what he
called a ‘third code’. In other words, the language that evolves during translation and in which
the target text is expressed is a kind of compromise between the norms of the source language
and those of the target language. But corpus-based studies of translation go further, by sug-
gesting that, for example, translators have a tendency to make explicit what is either implicit in
the source text or would be implicit in a non-translated text in the same language. Along these
lines, corpus-based studies undertaken by Burnett (1999) and Olohan and Baker (2000) have
Translation and interpreting
41

since revealed a much higher tendency to spell out the optional that in reporting structures in
translated English text compared to non-translated English text belonging to the same genres.
Similarly, Olohan (2003) found a noticeable tendency to avoid contractions (as in won’t
instead of will not) in translated vs non-translated English text.
Since the 1990s, many studies have focused on the role played by ideology and power in
shaping translational behaviour. The extent to which translational behaviour lends support to
or undermines the use of language as an instrument of ideological control is becoming a
recurrent object of enquiry in studies informed by critical discourse analysis; Saldanha (2009)
oﬀers a detailed overview of such advances. Other research strands drawing on the social sci-
ences attempt to account for the impact of mediators’ view of the world on their translational
behaviour by exploring the narratives to which they and their communities subscribe (Baker
2006). Such studies interrogate the way in which the professional conduct of translators and
interpreters is negotiated against the backdrop of existing norms of translation as a social
institution, and have challenged the widely held perception of translation and interpreting as
routinized, uncritical activities.
Current research issues in translation and interpreting
Translation and interpreting as institutionalized and institution-building practices
Koskinen (2008: 17) argues that institutions, which she deﬁnes as forms of ‘uniform action
governed by role expectations, norms, values and belief systems’, can be studied on diﬀerent
levels of abstraction. This section focuses on two types of institutional settings: local/national
organizational systems and supranational bureaucratic cultures.
With increased globalization, migration and other forms of mobility, encounters between
representatives of institutions and lay citizens requesting a range of services have come to be
heavily mediated by interpreters and translators. Bilingual courtroom proceedings in English-
speaking countries, for instance, are characterized by sophisticated use of questioning strate-
gies by barristers; the eﬀectiveness of such strategies is heavily dependent on the interpreters’
mediation, as demonstrated in a number of studies (Berk-Seligson 1999; Hale 2001; Pérez-
González 2006a). Recognizing the potential impact of interpreters on the judicial process, the
legal profession has attempted to regulate the interpreters’ role by means of codes of practice
that require them to refrain from explicating or clarifying those elements which are deliber-
ately left ambiguous, implicit or unclear in the counsel’s original formulation. Similarly,
interpreters involved in doctor-patient interaction and interviews of asylum seekers and poli-
tical refugees are expected to align themselves with the interactional goals of their respective
institutions, rather than with the individuals requiring institutional assistance. Interpreters
have been shown to reinforce institutional discourses and agendas by enforcing certain inter-
actional patterns, such as rigid question-answer exchanges that prevent political refugees from
launching into a narrative of their personal tragedies while their asylum claims are being
assessed (Jacquemet 2005), and by exercising their discretion in organizationally sanctioned
ways. Medical interpreters, for example, tend to elicit from the patient and pursue issues that
they regard as diagnostically relevant and excise those parts of the patient’s response that
contain subjective accounts of their concerns (Bolden 2000).
Despite ongoing eﬀorts to limit the interpreter’s latitude, work on institutional interpreting,
including research informed by various strands of linguistic theories, has shown that even
interpreters bound by the strictest codes of ethics often fail to provide the sort of straightfor-
ward, unedited renditions which their organizational co-interactants expect (Berk-Seligson
Mona Baker and Luis Pérez-González
42

1999; Angelelli 2004). For one thing, lack of syntactic and semantic equivalence between lan-
guages, together with the stress under which interpreters operate, often lead them to inad-
vertently alter the tenor of the original utterance, for example by downgrading the suggestive
and intimidating nature of key questions and statements. At the same time, even conference
interpreters working in a highly formal context have been shown to depart from their canon-
ical roles as conduits and speak in their own voice in order to defend themselves against
charges of misinterpreting by other interactants wishing to use them as scapegoats (Diriker
2004). In the light of such ﬁndings, the overall ﬁeld of interpreting studies, it has been argued,
should refrain from ‘comparing the propositional meaning of utterances and their interpreta-
tion’ and seek instead to challenge the conceptualization of the role of interpreters as neutral
conduits by describing ‘the behaviour of all parties in terms of the set of factors governing the
exchange’ (Mason and Stewart 2001: 54). Such arguments have paved the way for the
emergence and consolidation of dialogue interpreting, a distinct sub-ﬁeld within interpreting
studies which has enhanced the study of mediation in institutional settings. Dialogue inter-
preting approaches face-to-face encounters as three-way interactions, understood as a series
of triadic exchanges between the institutional representative, the client and the interpreter
(Mason 2001).
The power imbalance inherent in interpreter-mediated institutional encounters makes
politeness theory an attractive framework to draw on. Interpreters occasionally need to miti-
gate the face-threatening acts of an interactant – for example, when a powerless speaker refu-
ses or fails to comply with the requirements of the institutional representative. They also need
to protect their own face, perhaps by distancing themselves from the contributions of one or
more speakers. Such dialectics of interactional status and face-saving work has also been
explored through investigations of turn-taking management and the use of hedging, down-
toning or amplifying interactional devices. Here, Goﬀman’s (1981) ‘participation framework’
has proved helpful (Wadensjö 1998; Roy 2000) and has also been applied in studies of sign
language interpreting (Metzger 1999). Documented shifts in footing reveal the interpreters’
alignments in relation to other interactants and highlight their role as institutional ‘gate-
keepers’ (Wadensjö 1998). In managing the exchanges between lay people and institutional
representatives, interpreters perform a range of repairing and bridging work required for a
successful unfolding of the ongoing encounter. In the course of doing so, they often
interpret selectively; indeed, medical interpreters have been found to oﬀer their own answers to
patients’ questions without the physician necessarily being aware of it, thus acting as covert
co-diagnosticians (Davidson 2000). Interpreters thus claim a participatory role for themselves
‘as speaking agents who are critically engaged in the process of making meaningful utterances
that elicit the intended response from, or have the intended eﬀect upon, the hearer’ (Davidson
2002: 1275). Ultimately, interactants, including the interpreter, realign themselves as required
by the turn-by-turn unfolding of the conversation by exploiting the politeness and face-saving
strategies available at each stage in order to maximize the eﬀectiveness of the ongoing interview
or interrogation.
Studies such as those discussed above have drawn attention to interpreters’ active partici-
pation in the management of institutional interaction. At the same time, the vulnerability of
interpreters to exercises of power by institutional representatives has received some attention
from scholars interested in the workings of institutions that regulate the ﬂow of asylum seekers
and political refugees (Barsky 1996; Jacquemet 2005; Inghilleri 2007), from journalists reporting
on the involvement of interpreters and translators in various wars (Levinson 2006; Packer
2007), and from professionals concerned about the welfare of interpreters operating in conﬂict
zones (Kahane 2007). Interpreters working in the asylum system are often co-opted into the
Translation and interpreting
43

relevant institutional cultures and made to assume responsibilities that lie outside their cano-
nical role, for example by participating in the evaluation of the asylum applicant’s credibility, thus
exacerbating their shifting perceptions of their own position as mediators within these struc-
tures of power. Similarly, interpreters working for the American troops in Iraq in the ﬁrst
decade of the twenty-ﬁrst century were often assigned intelligence-gathering tasks that further
alienated them from their local community and put their lives at greater risk (Packer 2007).
In addition to nationally based systems such as asylum, court and medical institutions,
international organizations like the United Nations and the European Union also rely heavily
on translators and interpreters. Indeed, they address their respective constituencies through
translated and interpreted texts, such that ‘in a constructivist sense, the institution itself gets
translated’ (Koskinen 2008: 22). One issue raised in the relatively small body of literature on
international organizations available so far concerns eﬀorts by these organizations to hide their
translational character, and their subsequent eﬀacement of the role played by translators and
interpreters at diﬀerent levels. On the one hand, translators’ and interpreters’ individual iden-
tities and contributions are diluted through the enforcement of collective workﬂow processes
which serve to strengthen the public perception of the organizational voice. On the other hand,
translators’ and interpreters’ ability to exercise their professional discretion is signiﬁcantly
restricted by means of institutional guidelines which seek to eﬀect a gradual routinization and
mechanization of translational behaviour and ensure that the language they produce ‘functions
seamlessly as part of the discourse’ of the institution in question (Kang 2009: 144). Once
again, despite the eﬀorts of international organizations to develop translational cultures of
their own, current research has identiﬁed a slippage between what translators and interpreters
are oﬃcially expected or asked to do and what they actually do. This has been attributed to
mismatches between institutional doctrine and ‘interpreting habituses’ (Marzocchi 2005) and
to the growing impact of the economics of translation (i.e. time/costs factors), rather than
socio-cultural policies, as the driving force behind institutional agendas (Mossop 2006). Mason
([2003] 2004: 481) also reports on the ‘little uniformity of practice or evidence of inﬂuence of
institutional guidelines on translator behaviour’ that he found in his analysis of data from the
European Parliament and UNESCO. His study suggests that institutional translators are
responsible for numerous ‘discoursal shifts’, i.e. concatenations of small shifts in the use of
transitivity patterns throughout the translated text, which result in attenuating or intensifying
the message conveyed in the original text. Mason’s contention that such discoursal shifts dis-
play traces of the ideologies that circulate in the translators’ environment reinforces their
interactional status as agents who are actively engaged in the production of institutional dis-
courses, rather than simple mouthpieces whose role consists of consolidating ‘habitualized’
discourses through mechanistic practices of mediation.
Power, inequality, minority
Much of the current literature on translation and interpreting approaches cross-cultural
encounters that involve an element of interlinguistic mediation as a space of radical inequality.
Translators and interpreters mediating these encounters play a major role in asserting, ques-
tioning and sometimes forcefully resisting existing power structures. Viewed from this per-
spective, translation does not resolve conﬂict and inequality by enabling dialogue but rather
constitutes a space of tension and power struggle in its own right. Casanova (2010), for
example, examines translation as a factor in the struggle for legitimacy in the literary and
political ﬁelds – a factor that participates in the consecration of authors and works, both
nationally and internationally, and in the distribution and transfer of cultural capital. In her
Mona Baker and Luis Pérez-González
44

model, structural inequality evident in the imbalance between dominating and dominated
languages and literatures reﬂects the struggle within any ﬁeld in Bourdieu’s terms. Inghilleri
similarly draws on Bourdieu’s notions of habitus, ﬁeld, capital and illusio to demonstrate that
interpreters working in the asylum system ‘act within and are constituted by … power-laden
macro-structures … that impact directly and indirectly on the interpreting activity’ (2003: 261).
Growing interest in issues of power and inequality has naturally drawn attention to the role
played by translation and interpreting in shaping the relationship between minority and
majority groups in any society. Translation has always been a powerful instrument of the
nation-state, not only in colonial and postcolonial contexts (Niranjana 1990; Dodson 2005)
but also in the context of more modern, multicultural and multi-ethnic societies. Minority
issues become particularly acute, with translation and interpreting acquiring increased sig-
niﬁcance, in diglossic situations, where the dominant, colonial or majority language inhabits
and has monopoly on oﬃcial, public life, and where the native language is relegated to the
realm of the home, the casual, the ephemeral. Cronin (1998) was among the ﬁrst to stress the
urgency of exploring the eﬀects of translation on various minority languages given their
diminishing numbers across the world. He distinguishes between translation eﬀorts that seek
to obliterate the minority language by assimilating it to the dominant language and those
which seek to retain and develop the minority language and resist its incorporation into the
dominant language. Examples of the former abound in the Irish experience and are brought to
life vividly in Brian Friel’s Translations (Friel 1981), a play that depicts the process of angli-
cizing Ireland through the British Ordnance Survey in 1833. Examples of the latter include
translation both from and into Welsh in many oﬃcial contexts today, and translations under-
taken from a wide range of prestigious literatures and languages into Scots in order to ‘raise its
status and establish its validity as a literary medium’ (Corbett 1999: 3). Beyond the mere sur-
vival of the dominated language, translation into a minority language like Corsican is some-
times also ‘a way of demonstrating a new conﬁdence in [that] language and identity by acting
as if it were a language of power’ (Jaﬀe 1999: 264; original emphasis).
The deaf and hard-of-hearing are often treated as a minority group, and their interaction
with the hearing community is seen as a site of power struggle in which translation and
interpreting can play either an oppressive or empowering role. Those who are born deaf, in
particular, generally do not acquire the majority language, or do not acquire it to native-
speaker level, and because of their inability to hear they rely on interpreters throughout their
life, and in a wide range of contexts. Improved access to interpreting services allows this par-
ticular minority group to participate more fully in various aspects of social life. It also
improves their chances of advancing in their careers by using their own native, sign language
in meetings and other face-to-face work encounters, rather than having to lip read,
for instance. However, McKee (2003) warns that for various reasons to do with lack of cultural
knowledge, issues of literacy, and the gap between the experience of the hearing interpreter
and the deaf person, the mere provision of interpreting services can have a disempowering
eﬀect by creating an illusion of access or independence without necessarily putting the deaf
person on an equal footing with their hearing co-interactants.
Translators and interpreters in the war zone
Scholars of translation have only recently begun to engage in a sustained manner with various
aspects of the role and positioning of translators and interpreters in the war zone. Their focus
has varied from an interest in the impact of interpreter and translator behaviour on other
parties in the conﬂict, and the way they align or do not align with the institutions that employ
Translation and interpreting
45

them (Jacquemet 2005; Baker 2006; Salama-Carr 2007), to the impact of the war situation and
proximity to violence on the interpreters and translators themselves (Maier 2007; Inghilleri
2008, 2009; Stahuljak 2010).
Drawing on narrative theory, Baker (2006) demonstrates how the discursive negotiation of
competing narratives of wars and armed conﬂicts is realized in and through acts of translation
and interpreting in the media, literature, scholarly articles, documentary ﬁlm, political reports
and Websites. Rafael (2007) argues that in the case of armed conﬂicts, interpreters can become
particularly involved on the ground and ﬁnd themselves occupying precarious positions, often
exposed to extreme discursive violence and distrusted by the very same parties which deployed
them as instruments of surveillance. He examines the tensions and indeterminacy inherent in the
positions that translators and interpreters occupy in the context of various wars. Despite their
essential function in ﬁghting insurgents, he argues, locally hired interpreters are also feared as
potential insurgents themselves. Distrust of local interpreters and translators in the context of
colonial expansion and armed conﬂict is well documented historically. Niranjana (1990) notes
that the colonial governor of India, William Jones, and his British administrators found it
‘highly dangerous to employ the natives as interpreters, upon whose ﬁdelity they could not
depend’ (1990: 774), and that their remedy for this state of aﬀairs was to substitute local
interpreters and translators with British ones. Takeda (2009) similarly reports that interpreters
and translators of Japanese origin were not used in code-breaking work in the USA during the
Second World War for security reasons, and that their non-Japanese colleagues were secretly
instructed to monitor them and to ensure that they were translating and interpreting accu-
rately. Stahuljak (2010) oﬀers a more extended and speciﬁc account of interpreting in con-
temporary war zones, with reference to the war in Croatia in the early 1990s.
Research on the role of translators and interpreters in mediating armed conﬂict suggests
that they typically assume a wide range of tasks that extend well beyond any canonical deﬁ-
nition of their responsibilities and obligations. Based on interviews with British and French
journalists who worked in Iraq following its invasion by US troops in 2003, Palmer (2007)
conﬁrms that interpreters often selected the individuals to be interviewed by the media repre-
sentative and advised on whether it was safe or practical to travel to a particular place to
secure an interview. Takeda (2009: 52) states that second-generation Japanese Americans
recruited and trained by the US military during the Second World War ‘translated captured
enemy documents, interrogated Japanese prisoners of war, persuaded Japanese soldiers and
civilians to surrender, and participated in propaganda activities’. Similar ﬁndings have
emerged from the UK-based Languages at War Project, run by the University of Reading and
the University of Southampton in conjunction with the Imperial War Museum.
Translation and interpreting in the globalized information society
Recent technological developments have made it possible to overcome spatial barriers and
speed up the circulation of information. This ‘de-materialization of space’ (Cronin 2003) is
responsible for the creation of supraterritorial readerships and audiences and accounts for the
growing importance of instantaneity in the translation profession. Although these develop-
ments have strengthened the translation and interpreting industries in economic terms, the
current literature on globalization has failed to engage meaningfully with the role that these
forms of mediation play within the global deterritorialized space. As noted by Bielsa (2005),
theorists of cultural globalization have tended to put a positive spin on the instantaneity of
global ﬂows and to assume uncritically that it allows a straightforward juxtaposition of cul-
tures and spaces. The emphasis on the dynamics of instant circulation also glosses over the
Mona Baker and Luis Pérez-González
46

problematic reliance of users and viewers on content in English as a lingua franca. Translation
scholars have sought to tackle the complexity of this situation, either by attempting to estab-
lish how the dominant lingua franca inﬂuences other languages via processes of translation
and multilingual text production, or by exploring the way in which translation can serve as a
strategy of resistance against the linguistic and cultural dominance of English.
Bennett (2007) examines the role of translation in strengthening the position of English as a
lingua franca in academic discourse, and hence in conﬁguring knowledge and controlling
the ﬂow and format of information. Referring to the discourse routinely employed by
academics and academic translators as ‘predatory’, she describes some of its main principles as
follows: the discourse has to be clear and coherent; the language must be impartial and
objective; the text has to be hierarchically organized into sections with a clear introduction,
development and conclusion; the prose must be lucid, economical and precise; vagueness and
verbosity must be avoided; impersonal structures, including use of the passive and nomi-
nalized forms, are preferred; and material and existential processes tend to dominate, reﬂect-
ing a preoccupation with statements of fact and descriptions of actions. Bennett draws on
examples of Portuguese academic articles translated for publication in English to demon-
strate the extent to which the ideological framework that informs the original articles is dis-
rupted and replaced by a positivist structure inherent to English academic discourse. She
concludes that translators’ complicity in enforcing ideologies embedded in English academic
discourse must be questioned since it can lead to the systematic destruction of rival forms of
knowledge.
In studies conducted over the past decade, House (2004, 2008) explored the impact of
English on a number of target languages more systematically by investigating the commu-
nicative norms operating in a wide range of texts translated from English and those operating
in comparable texts written originally in the target language. In attempting to establish whe-
ther translation from English results in eroding the communicative norms of a target language,
House assumes that, whether inadvertent or not, choices made in the course of translation
either reinforce cultural diversity or participate in imposing Anglo-Saxon norms on other
cultures under the guise of ‘universality’. Although the studies conducted so far have not
produced clear-cut evidence, they suggest that textual norms in languages other than English
are likely to be adapted to Anglophone ones, ‘particularly in the use of certain functional
categories that express subjectivity and audience design’ (House 2008: 87). Such adaptations
include shifts from the ideational (message-oriented) to the interpersonal (addressee-oriented)
function of language, from informational explicitness to inference-inducing implicitness, and
from ‘densely packed information to loosely linearized information’ (House 2004: 49).
Another aspect of the interface between globalization and translation which has attracted
growing scholarly attention is the impact of new information and communication technologies
on the way we use and conceptualize language, including translational practices. The instan-
taneity of global ﬂows resulting from technological advances is often an oppressive factor
forcing translators to produce assignments within increasingly short response periods.
According to Cronin (1998), technology-driven instantaneity generates pressure on translation
to become a uniform, transparent medium of ﬂuid exchange: as professionals struggle to
translate more and faster, the communicative norms and specialized terminology of dominant
languages are more likely to ﬁnd their way into the target texts, thus gradually eroding the
native resources. But the eﬀects of technology can be more speciﬁc, particularly in the context
of machine translation systems and translation memory tools. As Raley (2003) explains,
machine translation technologies place particular emphasis on functionality and utilitarianism:
reasonably accurate and functional draft translations are thus only feasible when the input is
Translation and interpreting
47

basic, and when both input and output are restricted in terms of style, vocabulary, ﬁgurative
expression and content. Unsurprisingly, given its centrality to technological developments,
English is the language which has most informed the design of input entry protocols in
machine translation, thus further contributing to the growing hegemony of this language and
its communicative norms. The privileging of English modes of expression in the context of
machine translation, however, can also be resisted. As suggested by Raley (2003), the ‘broken’
English which makes up machine translation input and output lends itself to ‘free’ adaptation
by native and non-native speakers alike. Ultimately, free adaptation can contribute to severing
the link between English and speciﬁc geophysical spaces as well as undermining collective
identities based on this link. Beyond machine translation as such, translation memory tools
have also been found to impact our use of language in a number of ways. Translating in this
environment, for instance, involves the mechanical segmentation of the source text into trans-
lation ‘units’. Translators are thus prompted to use the same number of segments in the target
language, which often results in the erosion of cohesion resources and, more widely, a partial
excision of the rhetorical element of language.
Technological advances have also stimulated interest in the diversity of resources that can be
used to create texts. In addition to the spoken and written word, diﬀerent semiotic modalities
such as gestures, visuals and music are often co-deployed within a multimodal text to create
meaning. Although the study of multimodal translational behaviour has traditionally focused
on the subtitling and dubbing of ﬁlms and other audiovisual broadcasts, attention is increas-
ingly shifting towards new areas of multimodal mediation, often involving the transfer of
meaning across semiotic modes. These include subtitling and interpreting for the hard of
hearing and the deaf, as well as the audio description of ﬁlms for the blind. Audio description
consists of a spoken account of those visual aspects of a ﬁlm which play a role in conveying its
plot, rather than a translation of linguistic content (Pérez-González 2009).
Recent changes in the audiovisual landscape, including the development of digitization
techniques and emergence of new patterns in the distribution and consumption of audiovisual
products, have encouraged the emergence of interventionist practices such as ‘fansubbing’,
whether for aesthetic or political reasons. Unhappy with the shortage and cultural insensitivity
of commercial translations of their favourite audiovisual programmes and genres, networks of
fans, known as fansubbers, produce their own subtitled versions which are then circulated
globally through Internet-based channels. In order to allow their fellow fans to experience the
cultural ‘otherness’ of the programme they are subtitling, these amateur translators exploit
traditional meaning-making codes in a creative manner and criss-cross the traditional bound-
aries between linguistic and visual semiotics in innovative ways. For example, they use ‘head-
notes’ and written glosses at the top of the screen to expand or elaborate on the meaning of
‘untranslatable’ cultural references in the ﬁlm dialogue; the cultural references in question still
feature untranslated within the ‘traditional subtitle’ displayed simultaneously at the bottom of
the screen. Fansubbers also favour the ‘dilution’ of subtitles within the image: technological
developments allow them to display subtitles in unusual angles, perspectives and fonts which
blend in with the aesthetics of the ﬁlm, thus maximizing the viewer’s enjoyment of the visuals
(Pérez-González 2006b). But subtitling is also being increasingly appropriated by politically
engaged groups without formal training in translation to undermine the socio-economic
structures that sustain global capitalism. Pérez-González (2010) describes how these commu-
nities of politicized ‘non-translators’ capitalize on the potential of networked communication
to circulate translations of audiovisual content that would otherwise be only available in
English. This interventionist engagement of activist communities represents a challenge to the
control that media corporations have traditionally exerted over the distribution and reception
Mona Baker and Luis Pérez-González
48

of their news programmes: audiovisual content mediated by activists often takes on new
resonances when displaced from the global circuits it was originally intended for and watched
by a national audience with a speciﬁc take on what is reported.
Concluding remarks
The prevalence and pervasiveness of translation and interpreting in all areas of social inter-
action have important consequences for society as a whole, as this entry has attempted to
demonstrate. More speciﬁcally, their impact is also being felt in the academy. Translation and
interpreting are increasingly being acknowledged as core areas of research. Rather than a sub-
ﬁeld of linguistics or cultural studies, translation studies has become an interdisciplinary ﬁeld
in its own right. Its remit encompasses, extends and surpasses a range of issues with which
other disciplines have traditionally engaged from diﬀerent perspectives. As it continues to
develop in the twenty-ﬁrst century, many scholars now believe that its next and most con-
sequential challenge is to shed its Eurocentric origins and prepare to embrace the variety of
theoretical perspectives, experiences and traditions that the West’s many ‘others’ have to oﬀer.
This challenge is already being undertaken, with a growing number of voices of non-Western
scholars continuing to gain strength and calling into question much of our received wisdom in
the ﬁeld (Hung and Wakabayashi 2005; Cheung 2006; Bandia 2008; Selim 2009).
Related topics
corpus linguistics; critical discourse analysis; culture; discourse analysis; identity; institutional
discourse; linguistic imperialism; medical communication; migration; multimodal communication;
sign language; the media
Further reading
Baker, M. (ed.) (2010) Critical Readings in Translation Studies, Abingdon and New York: Routledge.
(A thematically organized reader which prioritizes latest developments in the ﬁeld rather than
foundational texts and features detailed summaries of each article, follow-up questions for
discussion and recommended further reading.)
Baker, M. and Saldanha, G. (eds) (2009) The Routledge Encyclopedia of Translation Studies, 2nd
edn, Abingdon and New York: Routledge. (A standard reference in the ﬁeld which features
extended entries on core concepts, types of translation and interpreting and theoretical approa-
ches, plus entries which summarize the history of translation in a wide range of Western and
non-Western societies.)
Munday, J. (2001) Introducing Translation Studies: Theories and Applications, London and New
York: Routledge. (Munday provides a balanced and accessible overview of the main theoretical
strands in the discipline, supported by illustrative case studies in diﬀerent languages, suggestions
for further reading and a list of discussion and research points.)
Pöchhacker, F. (2004) Introducing Interpreting Studies, London: Routledge. (A clear and compre-
hensive introduction to interpreting studies as an academic discipline, outlining its origins and
development to the present day.)
Venuti, L. (2004) The Translation Studies Reader, 2nd edn, London and New York: Routledge.
(A chronologically organized reader which focuses largely on foundational texts. Extended
introductions to each section clearly outline the main trends during the relevant period.)
References
ABI (Allied Business Intelligence Inc.) (2002) Language Translation, Localization and Globalization:
World Market Forecasts, Industry Drivers and eSolutions, USA. Available at: www.abiresearch.
com/
Translation and interpreting
49

Angelelli, C. (2004) Re-visiting the Role of the Interpreter: A Study of Conference, Court and Med-
ical Interpreters in Canada, Mexico and the United States, Amsterdam and Philadelphia: John
John Benjamins.
Baker, M. (1993) ‘Corpus linguistics and translation studies. Implications and applications’, in
M. Baker, G. Francis and E. Tognini-Bonelli (eds) Text and Technology: In Honour of John
Sinclair, Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
——(1996) ‘Corpus-based translation studies: the challenges that lie ahead’, in H. Somers (ed.)
Terminology, LSP and Translation: Studies in Language Engineering, in Honour of Juan C. Sager,
Amsterdam and Philadelphia: John Benjamins.
——(2006) Translation and Conﬂict: A Narrative Account, London and New York: Routledge.
Bandia, P. (2008) Translation as Reparation: Writing and Translation in Postcolonial Africa,
Manchester: St Jerome Publishing.
Barsky, R. (1996) ‘The interpreter as intercultural agent in convention refugee hearings’, The
Translator 2(1): 45–63.
Bennett, K. (2007) ‘Epistemicide!: the tale of a predatory discourse’, The Translator 13(2): 151–69.
Berk-Seligson, S. (1999) ‘The impact of court interpreting on the coerciveness of leading questions’,
Forensic Linguistics 6(1): 30–56.
Bielsa, E. (2005) ‘Globalisation and translation: a theoretical approach’, Language and Intercultural
Communication 5(2): 131–44.
Bolden, G.B. (2000) ‘Toward understanding practices of medical interpreting: interpreters’
involvement in history taking’, Discourse Studies 2(4): 387–419.
Burnett, S. (1999) ‘A Corpus-based Study of Translational English’, M.Sc. Dissertation, Manchester:
Centre for Translation Studies, UMIST.
Casanova, P. (2010) ‘Consecration and accumulation of literary capital: translation as unequal
exchange’, translated from French by S. Brownlie, in M. Baker (ed.) Critical Readings in
Translation Studies, Abingdon and New York: Routledge.
Cheung, M. (ed.) (2006) An Anthology of Chinese Discourse on Translation, vol. 1: From Earliest
Times to the Buddhist Project, Manchester: St Jerome Publishing.
Cook, G. (2009) ‘Foreign Language Teaching’, in M. Baker and G. Saldanha (eds) Routledge
Encyclopedia of Translation Studies, 2nd edn, Abingdon and New York: Routledge.
Corbett, J. (1999) Written in the Language of the Scottish Nation: A History of Literary Translation
into Scots, Clevedon: Multilingual Matters.
Cronin, M. (1998) ‘The cracked looking glass of servants: translation and minority languages in a
global age’, The Translator 4(2): 145–62.
——(2003) Translation and Globalization, London and New York: Routledge.
CSA (Common Sense Advisory Inc.) (2004) Global Business Conﬁdence Survey: Translation, USA.
Available at: www.commonsenseadvisory.com/
——(2008) Telephone Interpretation, USA. Available at: www.commonsenseadvisory.com/
Davidson, B. (2000) ‘The interpreter as institutional gatekeeper: the social-linguistic role of interpreters
in Spanish-English medical discourse’, Journal of Sociolinguistics 4(3): 379–405.
——(2002) ‘A model for the construction of conversational common ground in interpreted discourse’,
Journal of Pragmatics 34: 1273–300.
Diriker, E. (2004) De-/Re-Contextualizing Conference Interpreting: Interpreters in the Ivory Tower?,
Amsterdam and Philadelphia: John Benjamins.
Dodson, M. S. (2005) ‘Translating science, translating empire: the power of language in colonial
North India’, Society for Comparative Study of Society and History 809–35.
EUATC (European Union of Associations of Translation Companies) (2005) The European Trans-
lation Industry. Facing the Future. Available at: www.euatc.org/
Frawley, W. (1984) ‘Prolegomenon to a theory of translation’, in W. Frawley (ed.) Translation: Literary,
Linguistic, and Philosophical Perspectives, London and Toronto: Associated University Press.
Friel, B. (1981) Translations, London: Faber and Faber.
Goﬀman, E. (1981) Forms of Talk, Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press.
Hale, S. (2001) ‘How are courtroom questions interpreted? An analysis of Spanish interpreters’
practices’, in I. Mason (ed.) Triadic Exchanges: Studies in Dialogue Interpreting, Manchester:
St Jerome Publishing.
Hatim, B. and Mason, I. (1990) Discourse and the Translator, London and New York: Longman.
——(1997) The Translator as Communicator, London and New York: Routledge.
Mona Baker and Luis Pérez-González
50

Hermans, T. (1996) ‘The translator’s voice in translated narrative’, Target 8(1): 23–48.
Hervey, S. and Higgins, I. (1992) Thinking Translation: A Course in Translation Method: French to
English, London and New York: Routledge.
House, J. (1981) A Model for Translation Quality Assessment, Tübingen: Gunter Narr.
——(2004) ‘English as a lingua franca and its inﬂuence on other European languages’, in J. M. Bravo
(ed.) A New Spectrum of Translation Studies, Valladolid: Universidad de Valladolid.
——(2008) ‘Global English and the destruction of identity?’, in P. Nikolaou and M.-V. Kyritsi (eds)
Translating Selves: Experience and Identity between Languages and Literatures, London and New
York: Continuum.
Hung, E. and Wakabayashi, J. (eds) (2005) Asian Translation Traditions, Manchester: St Jerome Publishing.
Inghilleri, M. (2003) ‘Habitus, ﬁeld and discourse: interpreting as a socially situated activity’, Target
15(2): 243–68.
——(2007) ‘National sovereignty versus universal rights: interpreting justice in a global context’,
Social Semiotics 17(2): 195–212.
——(2008) ‘The ethical task of the translator in the geo-political arena: from Iraq to Guantánamo
Bay’, Translation Studies 1(2): 212–23.
——(2009) ‘Translators in war zones: ethics under ﬁre in Iraq’, in E. Bielsa and C. W. Hughes (eds)
Globalization, Political Violence and Translation, Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan.
Jacquemet, M. (2005) ‘The registration interview: restricting refugees’ narrative performance’, in
M. Baynham and A. de Fina (eds) Dislocations/Relocations: Narratives of Displacement,
Manchester: St Jerome Publishing.
Jaﬀe, A. (1999) ‘Locating power: Corsican translators and their critics’, in J. Blommaert (ed.) Lan-
guage Ideological Debates, Berlin and New York: Mouton de Gruyter; reprinted in M. Baker
(ed.) (2010) Critical Readings in Translation Studies, Abingdon and New York: Routledge.
Kahane, E. (2007) ‘Interpreters in conﬂict zones: the limits of neutrality’, Communicate! (AIIC’s
online journal). Available at www.aiic.net/ViewPage.cfm?page_id=2691
Kang, J.-H. (2009) ‘Institutional translation’, in M. Baker and G. Saldanha (eds) Routledge
Encyclopedia of Translation Studies, 2nd edn, Abingdon and New York: Routledge.
Koskinen, K. (2008) Translating Institutions, Manchester: St Jerome Publishing.
Larson, M. (1984) Meaning-based Translation: A Guide to Cross-language Equivalence, Lanham,
MD, New York and London: University Press of America.
Laviosa, S. (ed.) (1998) L’approche basée sur le corpus/The Corpus-Based Approach, special issue,
Meta 43(4). Available at: www.erudit.org/revue/meta/
Laviosa, S. (2002) Corpus-based Translation Studies: Theory, Findings, Applications, Amsterdam
and New York: Rodopi.
Levinson, C. (2006) ‘Iraq’s “Terps” Face Suspicion from Both Sides’, Christian Science Monitor,
17 April. Available at: www.csmonitor.com/2006/0417/p01s01-woiq.html
McKee, R. (2003) ‘Interpreting as a tool for empowerment of the New Zealand deaf community’, in
S. Fenton (ed.) For Better or For Worse: Translation as a Tool for Change in the South Paciﬁc,
Manchester: St Jerome Publishing.
Maier, C. (2007) ‘The translator’s visibility: the rights and responsibilities thereof’, in M. Salama-Carr
(ed.) Translating and Interpreting Conﬂict, Amsterdam: Rodopi.
Marzocchi, C. (2005) ‘On a contradiction in the discourse on language arrangements in EU
institutions’, Across Languages and Cultures 6(1): 5–12.
Mason, I. (2001) Triadic Exchanges: Studies in Dialogue Interpreting, Manchester: St Jerome Publishing.
——(2003) ‘Text parameters in translation: transitivity and institutional cultures’, in E. Hajicova,
P. Sgall, Z. Jettmarova, A. Rothkegel, D. Rothfuß-Bastian and H. Gerzymisch-Arbogast (eds)
Textologie und Translation, Tübingen: Gunter Narr. Reprinted in L. Venuti (ed.) (2004) The
Translation Studies Reader, 2nd edn, London and New York: Routledge.
Mason, I. and Stewart, M. (2001) ‘Interactional pragmatics, face and the dialogue interpreter’, in
I. Mason (ed.) Triadic Exchanges: Studies in Dialogue Interpreting, Manchester: St Jerome Publishing.
Metzger, M. (1999) Sign Language Interpreting: Deconstructing the Myth of Neutrality, Washing-
ton, DC: Gallaudet University Press.
Mossop, B. (2006) ‘From culture to business: federal government translation in Canada’, The
Translator 12(1): 1–27.
Nida, E. A. (1964) Toward a Science of Translating, with Special Reference to Principles and
Procedures Involved in Bible Translating, Leiden: E. J. Brill.
Translation and interpreting
51

Nida, E. A. and Taber, C. (1969) The Theory and Practice of Translation, Leiden: E. J. Brill.
Niranjana, T. (1990) ‘Translation, colonialism and the rise of English’, Economic and Political
Weekly, 14 April: 773–9.
Nord, C. (1991) Text Analysis in Translation, Amsterdam and Atlanta, GA: Rodopi.
Olohan, M. (2003) ‘How frequent are the contractions? A study of contracted forms in the trans-
lational English corpus’, Target 15(1): 58–89.
Olohan, M. and Baker, M. (2000) ‘Reporting that in translated English: evidence for subconscious
processes of explicitation?’, Across Languages and Cultures 1(2): 141–58.
Packer, G. (2007) ‘Betrayed: the Iraqis who trusted America the most’, The New Yorker, 26 March.
Available at: www.newyorker.com/reporting/2007/03/26/070326fa_fact_packer
Palmer, J. (2007) ‘Interpreting and translation for western media in Iraq’, in M. Salama-Carr (ed.)
Translating and Interpreting Conﬂict, Amsterdam and New York: Rodopi.
Pérez-González, L. (2006a) ‘Interpreting strategic recontextualization cues in the courtroom:
corpus-based insights into the pragmatic force of non-restrictive relative clauses’, Journal of
Pragmatics 38: 390–417.
——(2006b) ‘Fansubbing Anime: insights into the butterﬂy eﬀect of globalisation on audiovisual
translation’, Perspectives: Studies in Translatology 14(4): 260–77.
——(2009) ‘Audiovisual translation’, in M. Baker and G. Saldanha (eds) Routledge Encyclopedia of
Translation Studies, 2nd edn, Abingdon and New York: Routledge.
——(2010) ‘Ad-hocracies of translation activism in the blogosphere: a genealogical case study’, in
M. Baker, M. C. Perez and M. Olohan (eds) Text and Context: Essays on Translation and
Interpreting in Honour of Ian Mason, Manchester: St Jerome Publishing.
Rabin, C. (1958) ‘The linguistics of translation’, in H. Smith (ed.) Aspects of Translation: Studies in
Communication, London.
Rafael, V. L. (2007) ‘Translation in wartime’, Public Culture 19(2): 239–46.
Raley, R. (2003) ‘Machine translation and global English’, The Yale Journal of Criticism 16(2):
291–313.
Reiss, K. (1971) Möglichkeiten und Grenzen der Übersetzungskritik, Munich: Hueber.
Roy, C. (2000) Interpreting as a Discourse Process, New York and Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Salama-Carr, M. (ed.) (2007) Translating and Interpreting Conﬂict, Amsterdam and New York:
Rodopi.
Saldanha, G. (2009) ‘Linguistic approaches’, in M. Baker and G. Saldanha (eds) Routledge Ency-
clopedia of Translation Studies, 2nd edn, Abingdon and New York: Routledge.
Selim, S. (ed.) (2009) Nation and translation in the Middle East, special issue, The Translator 15(1).
Stahuljak, Z. (2010) ‘War, translation, transnationalism: interpreters in and of the war (Croatia,
1991–92)’, in M. Baker (ed.) Critical Readings in Translation Studies, Abingdon and New York:
Routledge.
Takeda, K. (2009) ‘War and interpreters’, Across Languages and Cultures 10(1): 49–62.
Tymoczko, M. (1999) Translation in a Postcolonial Context: Taming the Wild Irish, Manchester:
St Jerome Publishing.
University of Reading (n.d.) Languages at War Project. Available at: www.reading.ac.uk/languages-
at-war/lw-home.aspx
Venuti, L. (1995) The Translator’s Invisibility, London and New York: Routledge.
Vermeer, H. J. (1989b/2000) ‘Skopos and Commission in Translational Action’, in A. Chesterman
(ed.) Readings in Translation Theory, Helsinki: Oy Finn Lectura Ab; reprinted in L. Venuti (ed.)
The Translation Studies Reader, London and New York: Routledge.
Wadensjö, C. (1998) Interpreting as Interaction, London and New York: Longman.
Mona Baker and Luis Pérez-González
52

4
Lexicography
Thierry Fontenelle
Introduction
Lexicography is an area of applied linguistics that focuses on the compilation of dictionaries
(practical lexicography) as well as on the description of the various types of relations found in
the lexicon (theoretical lexicography). It is neither a new science nor a new craft. Historians
generally agree that the ﬁrst dictionaries can be traced back to the explanations of diﬃcult
words inserted into Latin manuscripts in the Middle Ages. These glosses evolved into glos-
saries which were sorted alphabetically or thematically and, as Cowie (2009: 2) points out,
came to fulﬁll a vital function in teaching and the transmission of knowledge. The use of Latin
words to explain more diﬃcult Latin ones foreshadowed monolingual dictionaries, with their
headwords and deﬁnitions, while explanations of hard Latin words in Old English or Old
French can be seen as a precursor of modern bilingual dictionaries.
Dictionaries are primarily compiled to meet practical needs. They are also cultural artifacts
which convey a vision of a community’s language. The tension between prescriptive and
descriptive approaches has often made lexicographers uncomfortable, since, as Atkins and
Rundell argue (2008: 2), many users perceive dictionaries as ‘authoritative records of how
people ought to use language’. Modern lexicography is more concerned with a descriptive
approach where the lexicographer compiles a description of the vocabulary of a given speech
community.
Robert Cawdrey’s A Table Alphabetical (1604) is usually considered as the ﬁrst printed
monolingual English dictionary. However, the history of lexicography remembers Samuel
Johnson’s Dictionary of the English Language (1755) as the ﬁrst modern and innovative dic-
tionary of English. Johnson’s dictionary reﬂected the need for a prescriptive and normative
authority which would serve to establish a standard of correctness. In his ‘Plan of a Dictionary
of the English Language’, addressed to Lord Chesterﬁeld in 1747, Johnson discussed all the
crucial issues which lexicographers are faced with, even today, when starting a dictionary
project, ranging from inﬂectional and derivational morphology, to pronunciation and etymol-
ogy. The representation of syntactic information (Johnson did not use the modern term ‘sub-
categorization’) attracted his attention when he pointed out that one ‘dies of one’s wounds
while one may perish with hunger’. He stressed that ‘every man acquainted with our language
53

would be oﬀended with a change of these particles’. Johnson’s preoccupations are still at the
heart of the creation of current dictionaries, especially learners’ dictionaries. He was a radical
thinker who was well ahead of his time and who managed to shed light on the nature of lan-
guage and meaning, long before philosophers like Wittgenstein started addressing the crucial
issue of word meaning. He asked many important questions which are still hotly debated in
contemporary lexicography circles. He was aware of the need to establish clear criteria for
selecting words to be included in dictionaries, or for distinguishing between general language
and specialized terminology. The term ‘corpus lexicographer’ did not exist in 1755, but
because he was the ﬁrst to base his dictionary on authentic examples of usage, collected from
the works of English authors, he was deﬁnitely a precursor of corpus lexicography.
A monument of English lexicography is undoubtedly Murray’s Oxford English Dictionary
(OED), whose ﬁnal section was published in 1928. The original aim of the project, which
started in 1879, was to produce a four-volume dictionary which would record the history of
the English language from Anglo-Saxon times, using nearly two million citation forms to track
the genesis and evolution of lexical items. Several supplements were published in the twentieth
century (the ﬁrst supplement appeared in 1933) and, today, the OED includes around 300,000
entries deﬁning over half a million lexical items (Murray et al. 1933). The electronic version,
which corresponds to the 20-volume integrated work, oﬀers powerful search and browse
functionalities which provide scholars with exciting vistas to research the history and evolution
of the English language.
Historical dictionaries have been compiled for several other languages, such as for French,
the prime example being the Trésor de la langue française, whose sixteen volumes are based on
a huge corpus of millions of authentic citations from literary texts. It took nearly 150 years to
compile the Dutch Woordenboek der Nederlandsche Taal (WNT), which, with its 40 volumes
and 400,000 headwords, aims to provide an objective linguistic description of the vocabulary
stock of that language. All these major historical dictionaries cover general-language words,
but also dialectal, jargon and slang terms, as well as oﬀensive and swear words which are more
likely to be left out from general-purpose dictionaries.
The advent of learners’ dictionaries
The vocabulary control movement
The most noticeable impact of lexicography on applied linguistics is probably related to the
advent of learners’ dictionaries, which has heavily inﬂuenced Anglo-Saxon lexicography.
One of the chief weaknesses of native-speaker dictionaries is that the words used in deﬁnitions
are often diﬃcult to understand for non-native speakers, which means that these dictionaries
do not meet the speciﬁc needs of second language learners. The history of monolingual lear-
ners’ dictionaries can be traced back to the contributions of a number of key ﬁgures such as
A. S. Hornby, Michael West and H. E. Palmer, who created the so-called ‘vocabulary control
movement’ and can justiﬁably be seen as the founding fathers of applied linguistics (see also
Cowie 2009 for more information about this major development). The leading ﬁgure of this
movement, Harold Palmer, was interested in identifying the set of words which speakers use
most frequently to communicate. After realizing that a high level of natural communication
could be achieved by using a vocabulary of around 1,000 words, he worked with A. S. Hornby
to produce Thousand-Word English (Palmer and Hornby 1938), a word list of initially 900
words which was intended to lighten the learning load of foreign students. Michael West took
the vocabulary control idea further by developing a limited vocabulary of about 1,500 words
Thierry Fontenelle
54

which he used to write the deﬁnitions of his New Method English Dictionary (West and
Endicott 1935). West’s subsequent General Service List (1953), which includes frequency rat-
ings for words in their particular senses as well as collocations and idioms, also deﬁnitely
inﬂuenced the next generation of learners’ dictionaries. The ﬁrst edition of the Longman Dic-
tionary of Contemporary English, a.k.a. LDOCE (Procter 1978) followed this tradition by
using a controlled vocabulary of about 2,000 words to write the deﬁnitions, while, more
recently, the Macmillan English Dictionary for Advanced Learners, MEDAL (Rundell 2007)
uses a limited deﬁning vocabulary of about 2,500 words. In LDOCE1, the words which do not
belong to this set are printed in small capitals. Consider the deﬁnition of mink, where weasel
and carnivorous are not part of the controlled vocabulary of this dictionary:
mink n 1 [Wn1;C] a type of small WEASEL-like animal – see picture at CARNIVOROUS 2 [U]
the valuable brown fur of this animal, often used for making ladies’ coats
The vocabulary control movement therefore inﬂuenced the macrostructure of the dictionary.
The list of words that are granted entry status is indeed signiﬁcantly smaller than a native-
speaker dictionary’s macrostructure and rare and highly technical words are not likely to be
included in learners’ dictionaries.
The second edition of the Macmillan (MEDAL) dictionary (Rundell 2007) highlights the
top 7,500 words which account for about 92 per cent of most texts. This distinction between
high-frequency core vocabulary and less common lexical items reﬂects the distinction between
receptive and productive vocabulary. In this dictionary, the core headwords are shown in red
and are banded by frequency into three equal sets of 2,500 words each. This system is based
upon research into vocabulary size, which has shown that learners need to be familiar with a
fairly large number of lexical items to perform successfully at advanced level (see also Barcroft
et al.’s chapter on Lexis in this volume for more details about vocabulary learning). Head-
words that are part of the core vocabulary will therefore receive more extensive treatment and
will provide users with more information in the form of additional examples, in-depth infor-
mation about collocational and subcategorization preferences, frequent mistakes typically
made by learners, etc.
The way deﬁnitions are written is also diﬀerent from what can be found in dictionaries for
native speakers. The use of a strictly controlled vocabulary facilitates the decoding task
(understanding what a word means) and forces the lexicographer to resort to speciﬁc deﬁning
patterns or formulae. The following examples, excerpted from LDOCE1, illustrate patterns
such as ‘a person who’ to deﬁne nouns denoting professions, or ‘(cause to)’ and ‘make or
become’, used to indicate that a verb participates in the so-called causative-inchoative alternation,
which is typical of change-of-state verbs like open, break, boil or increase:
ﬂorist n a person who keeps a shop for selling ﬂowers
herbalist n 1 a person who grows and/or sells HERBS, esp. for making medicine
shorten v [T1; I0] to make or become short or shorter
develop [T1; I0] to (cause to) grow, increase or become larger or more complete
Combining dictionaries and grammars
The examples in the preceding section illustrate the use of a feature which distinguishes lear-
ners’ dictionaries from their unabridged counterparts for native speakers, namely a system of
Lexicography
55

grammar codes designed to represent the types of syntactic environment in which a given
lexical item can be inserted. The ﬁrst learners’ dictionaries owed much to Harold Palmer’s
pioneering work in the ﬁeld of verb syntax. Palmer had experimented with various systems for
accounting for verbal valency (i.e. the nature and number of complements a verb can take)
before publishing his Grammar of English Words in 1938, which was the ﬁrst learners’ dic-
tionary to contain a verb-pattern scheme. In this dictionary, each verb pattern was identiﬁed
by means of a number code, and one or more codes were included in verb entries. Palmer
heavily inﬂuenced A. S. Hornby in the 1930s and the latter took over this idea of using verb-
pattern schemes in his Idiomatic and Syntactic English Dictionary (Hornby et al. 1942), which,
in 1952, would become known as the Advanced Learner’s Dictionary of Current English.
Hornby improved on Palmer’s presentation of verb patterns and started to arrange the pat-
terns and illustrative examples in a series of tables where vertical divisions are made to corre-
spond to the major structural elements of a pattern, for example, noun phrases corresponding
to the Object in the pattern VP9 corresponding to ‘Verb + Object + Past Participle’. In 1974,
Hornby adopted the verb-complementation scheme of Quirk et al.’s Grammar of Con-
temporary English, grouping together verb patterns that had the same major function (e.g. the
class of ditransitive verbs corresponded to Verb Patterns 11 to 21).
In addition to information on pronunciation, syllable division, compounds and irregular
inﬂections, the ﬁrst edition of LDOCE in 1978 proposed a systematic organization of grammatical
categories and codes. The double articulation of the LDOCE table of grammar codes made it
possible to represent the syntactic function of a given constituent class. The codes were made
up of a capital letter, corresponding to word classes or parts of speech, followed by a number
representing the type of environment in which a code-bearing item can be found. In the
examples above, the letter T in the code T1 (in shorten) corresponds to a transitive verb and
the number 1 indicates that this verb can be followed by one or more noun phrases. The letter
I in I0 indicates that the verb can be used intransitively, 0 meaning that it need not be followed
by anything. Other letters are used to denote ditransitive verbs (D), linking verbs (L),
uncountable nouns (U), count nouns (C), etc.
Combining the letter and number information gives a very sound and systematic indication
of the syntactic environment in which a word is used in a given sense. This double articulation
was at the time an innovative feature. The similarity between the realizations of syntactic
patterns described by codes like T5, D5 or U5 is reﬂected in the make-up of the codes themselves
(the code-bearing lexical item is italicized in the examples below):
[D5]: ditransitive verb with Noun Phrase followed by a that-clause: He warned her that he
would come.
[T5]: monotransitive verb with one that-clause object. I know that he’ll come.
[U5]: uncountable noun followed by a that-clause. Is there proof that he is here?
The three codes describe a pattern that includes a common element (a that-clause), a similarity
which they reﬂect in their internal organization, since the three codes have [5] as second ele-
ment. In 1978, this was a highly innovative approach, since the only major rival at the time –
Hornby’s Oxford Advanced Learners’ Dictionary (1974) – relied upon unanalyzed codes such
as VP9 (S + V + that) or VP11 (S + V + NP + that), which did not enable the user to ﬁgure
out that the patterns included this common element.
As can be seen above, the system of grammar codes found in learners’ dictionaries is
designed to meet the encoding needs of users, especially non-native speakers of English, who
need explicit guidance to produce grammatically and stylistically correct documents. This
Thierry Fontenelle
56

points to the dual function of dictionaries, which can be used for receptive use (to decode or
understand a text), or for productive use (to encode a text).
Lumping vs splitting
One of the key questions in lexicography is the issue of word senses and polysemy. As noted by
Kilgarriﬀ(1997), dictionaries, which are frequently called upon to resolve disputes about
meaning, must be clear and draw a line around a meaning, so that a use can be classiﬁed as on
one side of the line or the other. Lexicographers are therefore under pressure to present sets of
discrete, non-overlapping meanings for a word. Yet, when one examines corpus data and
actual evidence of usage based upon collections of millions of words of authentic texts, one
quickly realizes that these discrete, non-overlapping sets of senses are frequently a myth. Two
key concepts to understand the dilemmas lexicographers regularly face are lumping (consider-
ing two slightly diﬀerent patterns of usage as a single meaning) and splitting (which happens
when the lexicographer separates slightly diﬀerent patterns of usage into distinct meanings).
Consider the following LDOCE1 deﬁnition for the verb shorten, which illustrates the lumping
strategy: one single deﬁnition captures two distinct types of subcategorization possibilities, an
intransitive use and a transitive one:
shorten v to make or become short or shorter
The same lexical-semantic property is accounted for via the splitting strategy in the same
dictionary for other verbs, like addle:
addle v 1 [T1; I0]
a: to cause (an egg) to go bad
b: (of an egg) to go bad
The advantage of splitting the diﬀerent syntactic patterns is clear: addle indeed has a
speciﬁc collocational preference for the noun egg used as a patient argument (the entity that
changes state). The verb shorten does not exhibit speciﬁc collocational preferences, which
makes it possible to lump all the relevant information into one single deﬁnition, the conjunc-
tion or in make or become indicating that the verb participates in two distinct syntactic
constructions.
The question whether word senses exist at all is an important one. Dictionaries are based on
a huge oversimpliﬁcation which posits that words have enumerable, listable meanings which
are divisible into discrete units. Yet, corpus linguistics and the systematic analysis of authentic
evidence have shown that the concepts of polysemy and word senses are a lot more mysterious
than we think. Some linguists prefer to talk about ‘meaning potentials’, which are ‘potential
contributions to the meanings of texts and conversations in which the word is used and acti-
vated by the speaker who uses them’ (Hanks 2000). In this sense, dictionaries only contain lists
of meaning potentials, while electronic corpora contain traces of meaning events. Word sense
disambiguation therefore boils down to trying to map the one onto the other and it is crucial
for lexicographers to devise systems to discover the contextual triggers that activate the com-
ponents making up a word’s meaning potential. Recent work on Corpus Pattern Analysis,
CPA (Hanks and Pustejovsky 2005), to build up an inventory of syntagmatic behaviour that is
useful for automatic sense disambiguation seems to be a promising attempt to contribute to
the development of such systems.
Lexicography
57

Even if the existence of enumerable and listable meanings is an oversimpliﬁcation, for
practical purposes, lexicographers do divide polysemous words into numbered senses. Samuel
Johnson was aware of this problem when he wrote that ‘the shades of meaning … pass
imperceptibly into each other; so that it is impossible to mark the point of contact’ (1755: 5).
However frequently meanings blur into each other, the lexicographer needs to sort them out
and present them to the dictionary user in such a way that the information can be used to
decode a text and to produce grammatically correct and natural sentences. The next section
discusses the techniques used by today’s lexicographers to address this issue.
Lexicography and corpus linguistics
The recent generation of learners’ dictionaries owes a lot to the late John Sinclair’s work on
corpora at the University of Birmingham in the 1970s and 1980s. His research led to the
publication of the COBUILD (Collins Birmingham University International Language Data-
base) series of monolingual dictionaries. The ﬁrst edition of Cobuild (Sinclair 1987) truly
revolutionized the ﬁeld of dictionary-making, to such an extent that all dictionaries nowadays
claim to be ‘corpus-based’ and to provide a description of the English vocabulary based upon
‘natural’ or ‘real’ data. Yet, it might be objected that even the previous generation of diction-
aries resorted to ‘real’ data. The main diﬀerence is that lexicographers of the pre-corpus era
used to record their ﬁndings on slips of paper that they conscientiously kept in shoeboxes.
They were primarily concerned with rare phenomena and weird contexts and combinations
which had attracted their attention. It has been shown that such shoeboxes were excellent
repositories of idiosyncratic descriptions which would be better found in historical dictionaries
than in monolingual learners’ dictionaries, whose task is primarily to capture the most fre-
quent patterns of usage. Unfortunately, these shoeboxes frequently failed to record the proto-
typical uses of a word. Moreover, they usually included citations from well-respected literary
texts only.
Another diﬀerence is that pre-corpus lexicographers had to rely on their own reading
program and their encyclopedic skills. The advent of computers has now made dozens of
millions of words available to them. The sorting functionalities provided by modern con-
cordancers enable lexicographers to examine the right and left contexts of a given word with
thousands of KWIC (Key-Word In Context) lines. Such concordances have now become the
primary material they use. KWIC lines are tapped to identify the typical preposition used with
a given adjective or verb, they reveal collocational preferences (preferred contexts), or
show that a given word is used only, say, in non-assertive contexts (consider budge, which is
used exclusively in negative contexts like ‘the door wouldn’t budge’), etc. Some linguists
talk about colligational preferences, colligations being seen as a midway relation between
grammar and collocation (Hoey 2005: 43). Colligation will, for example, include, in a verb, a
marked preference for one particular form or use (e.g. passive or progressive form), or, in a
noun, a marked preference for either the singular or plural form. Similarly, the marked pre-
ference for attributive position after a noun in the adjective galore (‘there will be food galore at
the party’) will be described as a colligational preference that should be mentioned in a
dictionary entry.
The following example illustrates the concept of KWIC line, in which a given word (the
node) is centered in the middle of the table. A number of words to the right and left of the
node are displayed. Most concordancers or corpus tools make it possible to sort such data on,
say, the ﬁrst word to the right or the ﬁrst word to the left, which is a very eﬀective means of
discovering regular patterns in which the word can be found.
Thierry Fontenelle
58

ordainements. 4. cysticercosis in <bovines,> swine, sheep and goats when no
nged to grey in the case of
<bovine> meat or to ash grey in the case o
evel of concern surrounding
<bovine> spongiform encephalopathy (bse) a
disease was transmitted to <bovines> through animal protein rations (
seminar on the diagnosis of
<bovine> spongiform encephalopathy (bse) c
a prohibition on the use in
<bovine> rations of meat meal and bonemeal
sease. the scientiﬁc facts
<bovine> spongiform encephalopathy is a tr
ransmitted via ingestion in
<bovine> rations of meat meal and bonemeal
is aspect. 2) the brains of
<bovines> which when alive have presented
inutes of the conference on
<bovine> spongiform encephalopathy held at
om in view of the spread of
<bovine> spongiform encephalopathy in that
ncrease in the incidence of
<bovine> spongiform encephalopathy in the
ou our information pamphlet <‘bovine> spongiform encephalopathy (bse)’
rmality which aﬀects adult
<bovines> and culminates in death. it is c
As can be seen above, a word like bovine can readily be described as a noun (which can be
pluralized – bovines) or as an adjective. Sorting the data on the ﬁrst item to the right reveals
that bovine is frequently found in multi-word entries like bovine spongiform encephalopathy
(a.k.a. BSE) or in collocations like bovine meat and bovine rations.
Today, with the entire Web at the lexicographers’ ﬁngertips, one of the major problems
which they face is no longer the scarcityof the data. Rather, the analysts are confrontedwith awealth
of data which, after a given threshold, can no longer be analyzed manually. A hundred KWIC
lines are manageable. Five thousand lines cannot be read and ‘digested’ by any human being
working under the time constraints imposed by publication deadlines. Yet, with corpora of
hundreds of millions of words, most queries are likely to generate several thousand lines.
Computational linguists have therefore collaborated with lexicographers to propose a number
of statistical methods whose aim is precisely to help the latter separate the wheat from the chaﬀand
identify central and typical usages. One such method relies on the concept of mutual infor-
mation (MI), which is used to identify relations between words which occur more often than
chance (Church and Hanks 1990; Church et al. 1994). MI values may be used in deciding
whether a sequence of two words such as ‘requested and’ is more or less interesting than the
sequence ‘requested anonymity’. Lexicographers intuitively feel that the former sequence is
linguistically (and lexicographically) uninteresting, while the latter combination probably
deserves more attention and is a suitable candidate for inclusion in a dictionary (whether as an
example of what one can typically request or as an example of which verb typically combines
with anonymity). Intuition is not reliable, however, and cannot be readily tapped to discover
that one typically requests anonymity, permission (to do something), political asylum, copies
(of a document) or documents themselves. The very ﬁrst applications in printed dictionaries
can be found in the Cobuild dictionary (Sinclair 1987). Variations of MI scores were then adapted
and reﬁned, for instance by taking into account the relative frequencies of the words, because
the original MI statistics unfortunately gave too much weight to low-frequency words. In more
recent learners’ dictionaries, such as MEDAL (Rundell 2007), the lexicographers have part-
nered with computational linguists who have developed techniques to ‘summarize’ the data
extracted from corpora. The MEDAL team used the Sketch Engine (Kilgarriﬀet al. 2004),
which produces ‘word sketches’, which can be seen as distinct collocate lists for subjects, direct
objects, adjectives, Noun of Noun phrases, etc., extracted from a lemmatized and parsed corpus.
Word sketches provide an interesting synthesis of the grammatical and collocational envir-
onment in which lexical items can be inserted. The most salient and relevant collocations are
Lexicography
59

displayed, exploiting MI and frequency statistics. The subject-of or object-of relations allow
lexicographers to quickly identify typical predicates (bank is frequently found as the object of
the verbs burst, rob or privatize). Words are automatically grouped as a function of the relation
which links them to the node item, which facilitates the lexicographer’s task of selecting
examples and summarizing this into a dictionary entry. Of course, the ultimate analysis still
requires lexicographical and linguistic interpretive skills, since nothing in the lists of collocates of
bank generated by the sketch engine indicates that the verbs burst or overﬂow are linked to the
‘river bank’ sense while the object of the verbs rob or privatize is the ‘ﬁnancial institution’ sense
of bank.
The main advantage of such a tool is that it is nearly impossible to miss common and
typical patterns and that the lexicographer has access to a treasure trove of pre-digested
material to choose from. In MEDAL2, such collaboration between lexicographers and com-
putational linguists has resulted in the creation of ‘collocation boxes’ which list common
collocates of frequent words, as in the following entry:
campaign 1 n
Collocations
Verbs frequently used with campaign as the object:
conduct, ﬁght, launch, lead, mount, spearhead, wage
One of the next steps will be to create tools that help lexicographers identify good examples
and relevant lexical items whose collocates are worth including in a dictionary. This area of
research is still in its infancy, but the results of preliminary investigations seem to be promising
(Kilgarriﬀ2006).
The systematic inclusion of information about collocational preferences in dictionary entries
testiﬁes to the revival undergone by the study of multi-word units over the last twenty years.
Much of this contemporary research into the distribution of phraseological units is based
upon Sinclair’s ‘idiom principle’, which states that language users have available to them a
large number of semi-preconstructed phrases that constitute single choices, even though they
might appear to be analyzable into segments (Sinclair 1991: 110). The idiom principle is gen-
erally opposed to the open-choice principle, which states that a large number of choices opens
up and the only restraint is grammaticalness.
Learners’ dictionaries now also increasingly beneﬁt from the analysis of learner language
and learner corpora. Most of these dictionaries now include speciﬁc sections that address
writing issues, using typologies of frequent mistakes compiled on the basis of large learner
corpora such as the International Corpus of Learner English (ICLE, Granger et al. 2002) or
the Cambridge Learner Corpus. The second edition of the MEDAL dictionary (Rundell 2007)
is a case in point, with its dozens of ‘Get it Right’ boxes which, at the level of individual
entries, identify common errors, give examples from learner corpora and suggest the correct
forms, as in the following:
Contribute
Get it Right!
Don’t use a verb in the inﬁnitive after contribute. Use the pattern contribute to doing
something:
û Technology has contributed to improve our lives.
ü Technology has contributed to improving our lives.
Thierry Fontenelle
60

û A positive aspect of education is that it contributes to conﬁrm one’s identity.
ü A positive aspect of education is that it contributes to conﬁrming one’s identity.
You can also use the pattern contribute to something:
Technology has contributed to improvements in our lives.
The role of examples
One of the key questions in lexicography is what constitutes a good example to illustrate the
meaning of a word and its lexical properties. Earlier dictionaries such as the OED or Johnson’s
Dictionary, as we saw above, mainly tapped literary texts and the best authors as sources of
citations. The advent of computerized corpora like the HarperCollins Bank of English in
the 1980s and 1990s and, more recently, the use of the Web as a corpus (Kilgarriﬀand Gre-
fenstette 2003) have put hundreds of billions of words of texts at the linguist’s disposal for
language research, for the compilation of dictionaries, as well as for the development of nat-
ural language processing systems. The availability of examples does not mean that the lexico-
grapher’s task is made a lot easier, however. Twenty years ago, the controversy about the
relative merits of authentic and invented examples was raging. The eﬀectiveness of examples
was discussed at length by applied linguists, who were trying to ﬁgure out whether the exam-
ples to be included in dictionaries should be excerpted from a corpus or invented by the lex-
icographer. Laufer (1992) showed that examples made up by lexicographers are sometimes
pedagogically more beneﬁcial for language learners than authentic ones. There is clearly a
diﬀerence between interesting examples and authentic examples and it is essential that the user
of the dictionary not be distracted with unintelligible examples. The key to the eﬀectiveness of
dictionary examples is for the compiler to select real, natural, typical, informative and intelli-
gible sentences illustrating common usage and to resist the temptation to focus on abnormal
and idiosyncratic usages. A lexicographer who would record untypical and abnormal usages in
a dictionary would not do learners any favours. Atkins and Rundell (2008: 458–61) provide a
series of clearly bad, uninformative and abnormal examples published in some contemporary
dictionaries, a case in point being the idiom ‘bring up the rear’, illustrated by a totally unin-
formative although authentic example (‘John brought up the rear’). The most eﬃcient exam-
ples are probably those that are based upon corpus data and that have been carefully edited to
remove the irrelevant portions that distract the user.
Deﬁnitions
Lexicographers are often judged by their ability to write deﬁnitions for dictionaries. Deﬁni-
tions are an essential component of monolingual dictionaries, since users tend to turn to dic-
tionaries mainly to look up words in order to ﬁnd out about their meanings. In most
cases, dictionaries adopt the classical Aristotelian model of deﬁnitions based upon the dis-
tinction between genus (a superordinate word which locates the item being deﬁned in the right
semantic category) and diﬀerentiae (additional information which indicates what makes this
item unique and how it diﬀers from its cohyponyms, i.e. the other members of the same
category). The diﬃculty is to choose a genus term that is neither too general nor too speciﬁc.
In many cases, dictionaries tend to deﬁne by synonym and antonym. So, if, to quote
Atkins and Rundell (2008: 414), the noun convertible is deﬁned as ‘car with a folding or
detachable roof’, car is the genus term and the diﬀerentia is the expression with a folding
or detachable roof, which distinguishes a convertible from its cohyponyms saloon, estate car or
people carrier.
Lexicography
61

Another strategy, introduced by the Cobuild lexicographers (Sinclair 1987), is to write
longer deﬁnitions in which the deﬁniendum (the word that is deﬁned) is incorporated into the
deﬁnition, which then takes the form of a full sentence. Consider the deﬁnition for the verb
capsize in COBUILD1:
capsize
When you capsize a boat or when it capsizes, it turns upside down in the water.
Criticizing the over-use of parentheses to indicate likely objects and subjects, Hanks (1987)
argues that the traditional conventions used in most modern dictionaries make deﬁnitions
diﬃcult reading for ordinary readers. Cobuild’s full-sentence deﬁnitions (FSDs) were con-
sidered a real revolution at the time, with a ﬁrst part placing the word being explained in a
typical structure (A brick is … ; Calligraphy is … – Hanks 1987: 117), and the second part
identifying the meaning. In his discussion of the pros and cons of the traditional deﬁnitions,
which are supposed to be substitutable in any context for the deﬁniendum, Hanks stresses the
importance of collocational and syntactic information and argues that full-sentence deﬁnitions
make it possible to suggest much more easily whether collocates are obligatory, common but
variable, or simply open. Selection preferences are easier to integrate into such deﬁnitions,
Hanks claims, giving the example of an ‘ergative’ (causative-inchoative) verb like fuse, as in
the following COBUILD1 deﬁnition:
2 When a light or some other piece of electrical apparatus fuses or when you fuse it, it
stops working because of a fault, especially because too much electricity is being used.
The revolution created by the introduction of full-sentence deﬁnitions attracted a lot of atten-
tion and certainly inﬂuenced other learners’ dictionaries. However, Cobuild’s relatively dog-
matic approach also attracted some criticism. Rundell (2006) explains why such deﬁning
conventions have not been adopted universally. He acknowledges that the FSD model works
better than alternative models in a number of cases (for instance if a verb is nearly always used
in the passive form, like lay up, a full sentence deﬁnition is clearly better – ‘If someone is laid
up with an illness, the illness makes it necessary for them to stay in bed’). The disadvantages of
the FSD model cannot be ignored, however: the coverage of an FSD-based dictionary is
reduced because these deﬁnitions are on average much longer than traditional deﬁnitions. The
complexity of these longer deﬁnitions is also the source of a number of problems and can be
challenging for learners. Pronoun references in if-deﬁnitions can be unclear, for instance, and
the redundancy found in some long-winded structures is not always informative (‘You use X to
describe something that … ’). Rundell recommends using hybrid approaches and recognizes
that FSDs work in some cases, but that, in many other cases, simplicity and economy are more
adequate.
Bilingual dictionaries
A chapter on lexicography would not be complete without a section on bilingual dictionaries,
given their importance in foreign language learning. Bilingual lexicography has also undergone
signiﬁcant changes over the last twenty years, thanks to the availability of multilingual corpora
and to advances in the ﬁeld of natural language processing, which now make it possible for
lexicographers to identify the collocational patterns that help users match equivalents across
languages.
Thierry Fontenelle
62

Four major functions are generally assigned to bilingual dictionaries, depending on whether
the user is using the dictionary to understand or translate a text written in the foreign language
(L2) or in the ﬁrst language (L1):
Reception in L2
Reception in L2 + production in L1
Production in L2
Reception in L1 + production in L2.
Most of the burning questions discussed above in the context of monolingual lexicography
also apply to bilingual dictionaries. Should the lexicographer favour lumping or splitting stra-
tegies, for instance? Some other questions are more speciﬁc: should sense divisions be based
upon the source language or the target language? It should indeed be realized that many
bilingual dictionaries divide the semantic space of source items as a function of the target
language. A word which is considered as monosemic in a monolingual dictionary may there-
fore be regarded as polysemic in a bilingual dictionary because the target language makes
distinctions which are non-existent in the source language. Consider the entry for croak in the
Cambridge International Dictionary of English (Procter 1995) below, which oﬀers one deﬁni-
tion to cover the general SOUND meaning (grammar codes appear between square brackets;
e.g. [I] = intransitive use):
croak
[SOUND] v (of animals) to make deep rough sounds such as a FROG or
CROW makes, or (of people) to speak with a rough voice because of a sore or
dry throat. I could hear frogs croaking by the lake. [I] ‘Water, water’, he
croaked. [+ clause]
In comparison, a bilingual dictionary such as the Collins-Robert Dictionary (Atkins and
Duval 1993) makes distinctions which are based solely on the existence of diﬀerent potential
translations:
croak 1 vi (a) [frog] coasser; [raven] croasser; [person] parler d’une voix rauque;
(*grumble) maugréer, ronchonner.
These examples point to the all-important nature of the metalinguistic indicators (frog, raven,
person, grumble) in a good bilingual dictionary (see also Duval 1991; Béjoint and Thoiron
1996). Such dictionaries make use of collocates, subject labels, and various types of indicators
to capture typical subjects or objects to provide foreign language users with as much
information as possible about the semantic, syntactic and combinatory properties of lexical
items.
Conclusion
It is not possible to discuss all aspects of lexicography as a branch of linguistics. In this article,
we have focused on the applied linguistics features of dictionaries, which manifest themselves
more clearly in pedagogical dictionaries for foreign language learners as well as in bilingual
dictionaries. We deliberately excluded the very vibrant and active ﬁeld of computational lexi-
cography dealing with the construction of lexicons for natural language processing, which
would be better suited for a handbook of computational linguistics and would deserve a
Lexicography
63

chapter on its own. Building dictionaries is a time-consuming and costly activity that requires
very special linguistic skills and lexical acquisition, the branch of lexicography that deals with
the identiﬁcation, acquisition and representation of lexicographically relevant facts in big cor-
pora, is far from a trivial task. NLP researchers have been trying to construct very large lex-
icons for thirty years, ﬁrst by trying to reuse existing machine-readable dictionaries like the
Longman Dictionary of Contemporary English, then by exploiting large corpora and develop-
ing machine-learning techniques. The research in this ﬁeld has allowed the creation of the
WordNet lexical database, which combines a thesaurus and a dictionary and bridges the gap
between traditional semasiological (word-to-meaning) lexicography and onomasiological
(meaning-to-word) lexicons. WordNet is deﬁnitely not a pedagogical tool, but applied linguists
have beneﬁted from research in that ﬁeld, with the development of production dictionaries
designed to meet the encoding needs of learners, such as the Longman Language Activator
(Summers 1993), the Word Routes series developed by Cambridge University Press (McCarthy
and Walter 1994) or, more recently, the Macmillan thesaurus (Rundell 2007).
We have discussed several of the hot topics that are debated in lexicography circles, includ-
ing the impact of the ‘corpus revolution’, which now allows lexicographers to compile dic-
tionary entries on the basis of linguistic evidence extracted from corpora of hundreds of
millions of words. Computers are good at counting and extracting patterns of usage, but
condensing linguistic facts in an intelligible way and making sense of these masses of data to
create reference works that are useful to language learners is still something for which
lexicographers will always be needed for years to come.
Related topics
corpus linguistics; lexis
Further reading
Atkins, B. T. S. and Rundell, M. (2008) Oxford Guide to Practical Lexicography, Oxford: Oxford
University Press. (A down-to-earth, step-by-step textbook on the making of dictionaries; an
essential course for the training of lexicographers.)
Cowie, A. P. (ed.) (2009) Oxford History of English Lexicography, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
(Two volumes that present the fullest account of the lexicography of English; covers general-
purpose and specialized dictionaries, including the evolution of dictionaries aimed at foreign
learners of English.)
Fontenelle, T. (2008) Practical Lexicography: A Reader, Oxford: Oxford University Press. (A col-
lection of articles that have become classics in the ﬁeld of lexicography; it covers topics hotly
debated in lexicography circles: collocations and idioms, tools and methods, dictionary use,
grammar and usage, word senses and polysemy, Johnson’s Plan of a Dictionary, etc.)
Hartmann, R. R. K. and James, G. (1998) Dictionary of Lexicography, London: Routledge.
(A useful resource to get deﬁnitions of terms used in dictionary making.)
Landau, S. (2001) Dictionaries: The Art and Craft of Lexicography, Cambridge: Cambridge Uni-
versity Press. (A classic volume recommended for anyone who wants to know what goes in to the
production of a published dictionary.)
References
Atkins, B. T. S. and Duval, A. (1978) Robert and Collins Dictionnaire Français-Anglais, Anglais-
Français, Paris: Le Robert/Glasgow: Collins.
——(1993) Collins-Robert Dictionary, Paris: Le Robert/Glasgow: Collins.
Thierry Fontenelle
64

Atkins, B. T. S. and Rundell, M. (2008) Oxford Guide to Practical Lexicography, Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Béjoint, H. and Thoiron, P. (1996) Les dictionnaires bilingues, Aupelf-Uref, Duculot: Louvain-la-
Neuve.
Church, K., Gale, W., Hanks, P., Hindle, D. and Moon, R. (1994) ‘Lexical substitutability’, in
B. T. S. Atkins and A. Zampolli (eds) Computational Approaches to the Lexicon, Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Church, K. and Hanks, P. (1990) ‘Word association norms, mutual information, and lexicography’,
Computational Linguistics 16(1): 22–9; reproduced in Fontenelle, T. (2008) Practical Lexico-
graphy: A Reader, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Cowie, A. P. (ed.) (2009) Oxford History of English Lexicography, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Duval, A. (1991) ‘L’équivalence dans le dictionnaire bilingue’, in F. J. Hausmann, O. Reichmann,
E. Wiegand and L. Zgusta (eds) Wörterbücher/Dictionaries/Dictionnaires. Ein internationales
Handbuch zur Lexikographie/An International Encyclopedia of Lexicography/Encyclopédie
internationale de lexicographie, 3, Berlin and New York: De Gruyter; reprinted (in English) in
Fontenelle, T. (2008) Practical Lexicography: A Reader, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Granger, S., Hung, J. and Petch-Tyson, S. (eds) (2002) Computer Learner Corpora, Second Lan-
guage Acquisition and Foreign Language Teaching, Language Learning and Language Teaching 6,
Amsterdam and Philadelphia: John Benjamins.
Hanks, P. (1987) ‘Deﬁnitions and explanations’, in J. Sinclair (ed.) Looking Up, London: Collins.
——(2000) ‘Do word meanings exist?’, Computers and the Humanities 34 (1–2): 205–15; reprinted in
Fontenelle, T. (2008) Practical Lexicography: A Reader, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Hanks, P. and Pustejovsky, J. (2005) ‘A pattern dictionary for natural language processing’, Revue
Française de Linguistique Appliquée – Numéro spécial: Dictionnaires: nouvelles approches, nou-
veaux modèles, December Vol. X(2): 63–82.
Hoey, M. (2005) Lexical Priming: A New Theory of Words and Language, London: Routledge.
Hornby, A. S., Cowie, A. P. and Windsor Lewis, J. (eds) (1974) Oxford Advanced Learner’s Dic-
tionary of Current English, 3rd edn, London: Oxford University Press.
Hornby, A. S. Gatenby, E. V. and Wakeﬁeld, H. (1942) Idiomatic and Syntactic English Dictionary,
Tokyo: Kaitakusha.
Kilgarriﬀ, A. (1997) ‘I don’t believe in word senses’, Computers and the Humanities 31(2): 91–113;
reprinted in Fontenelle, T. (2008) Practical Lexicography: A Reader, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
——(2006) ‘Collocationality (and how to measure it)’, in E. Corino, C. Marello and C. Onesti (eds)
Proceedings of the XIIIth EURALEX International Congress, Turin: Università di Torino,
pp. 997–1004.
Kilgarriﬀ, A., Rychly, P., Smrž, P. and Tugwell, D. (2004) ‘The sketch engine’, in G. Williams and S.
Vessier (eds) Euralex 2004 Proceedings, Lorient: University of Bretagne-Sud, pp. 105–16; rep-
rinted in Fontenelle, T. (2008) Practical Lexicography: A Reader, Oxford: Oxford University
Press.
Kilgarriﬀ, A. and Grefenstette, G. (2003) ‘Introduction to the special issue on the Web as corpus’,
Computational Linguistics 29(3): 333–48; reprinted in Fontenelle, T. (2008) Practical Lexico-
graphy: A Reader, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Kilgarriﬀ, A., Husak, M., McAdam, K., Rundell, M. and Rychl, P. (2008) ‘GDEX: automatically
ﬁnding good dictionary examples in a corpus’, in E. Bernal and J. DeCesaris (eds) Proceedings of
the XIIIth EURALEX International Congress, Barcelona.
Laufer, B. (1992) ‘Corpus-based vs lexicographer examples in comprehension and production of
new words’, in Euralex’ 92 Proceedings, University of Tampere, pp. 71–6; reprinted in Fontenelle,
T. (2008) Practical Lexicography: A Reader, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
McCarthy, M. and Walter, E. (1994) Cambridge Word Routes – Lexique Thématique de l’Anglais
Courant, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Murray, J. A. H., Bradley, H., Craigie, W. A. and Onions, C. J. (eds) (1933) The Oxford English
Dictionary, Being a Corrected Reissue, with a Supplement (OED1), 2nd edn, Oxford: Clarendon
Press. Available at: www.oed.com
Palmer, H. E. (1938) A Grammar of English Words, London: Longmans, Green.
Palmer, H. E. and Hornby, A. S. (1938) Thousand-Word English, London: George Harrap.
Procter, P. (ed.) (1978) Longman Dictionary of Contemporary English (1987, LDOCE1, D. Summers
(ed.), 2nd edn), Harlow: Longman.
Lexicography
65

——(1995) Cambridge International Dictionary of English, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Rundell, M. (ed.) (2007) Macmillan English Dictionary for Advanced Learners, Oxford: Macmillan
Publishers (2nd edn – MEDAL).
Rundell, M. (2006) ‘More than one way to skin a cat: why full-sentence deﬁnitions have not been
universally adopted’, in E. Corino, C. Marello and C. Onesti (eds) Proceedings of the XIIth
EURALEX International Congress, Turin: Università di Torino, pp. 323–38; Reprinted in
T. Fontenelle (2008) Practical Lexicography: A Reader, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Sinclair, J. (ed.) (1987) Collins COBUILD English Language Dictionary, London and Glasgow: Collins.
Sinclair, J. (1991) Corpus, Concordance and Collocation, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Summers, D. (1993) Longman Language Activator, London: Longman.
Van Sterkenburg, P. (ed.) (2003) A Practical Guide to Lexicography, Amsterdam and Philadelphia:
John Benjamins.
West, M. P. and Endicott, J. G. (1935) The New Method English Dictionary, London: Longmans,
Green.
Thierry Fontenelle
66

5
The media
Anne O’Keeffe
Historical overview of media discourse
‘The media’ is a very broad term, encompassing print and broadcast genres, that is anything
from newspaper to chat show and, latterly, much more besides, as new media emerge in line
with technological leaps. The study of ‘the media’ comes under the remit of media studies
from perspectives such as their production and consumption, as well as their aesthetic form.
The academic area of media studies cuts across a number of disciplines including commu-
nication, sociology, political science, cultural studies, philosophy and rhetoric, to name but a
handful. Meanwhile, the object of study, ‘the media’, is an ever-changing and ever-growing
entity. The study of ‘the media’ also comes under the radar of applied linguistics because
at the core of these media is language, communication and the making of meaning, which is
obviously of great interest to linguists. As Fairclough (1995a: 2) points out, the substantively
linguistic and discoursal nature of the power of the media is a strong argument for analysing
the mass media linguistically.
Central to the connection between media studies and studies of the language used in the
media (media discourse studies) is the importance placed on ideology. A major force behind
the study of ideology in the media is Stuart Hall (see, for example, Hall 1973, 1977, 1980,
1982). Hall (1982), in his inﬂuential paper, notes that the study of media (or ‘mass commu-
nication’) has had a chequered past. He charts its early years from the 1940s to the 1960s as
being dominated by what he terms sociological approaches of ‘mainstream’ American beha-
vioural science (Hall’s emphasis). From the 1960s began the emergence of an alternative
paradigm, a ‘critical’ one. In looking at ideology in the media, one is essentially taking a cri-
tical stance. As Hall puts it, ‘the simplest way to characterise the shift from “mainstream” to
“critical” perspectives is in terms of the movement from, essentially, a behavioural to an
ideological perspective’ (1982: 1).
An interesting example of a behaviourist-type study of the media is Horton and Wohl
([1956] 1979). Horton and Wohl were among the ﬁrst to write about the way the media and
media performers create the illusion of an interpersonal relationship between them and their
audience. The concept of mediated (pseudo-)relations obviously has enormous relevance for
the study of media discourse today in all its forms. Horton and Wohl referred to it as a
67

‘para-social’ relationship because it is based on an implicit agreement between the ‘performer’
and the audience that they will pretend the relationship is not mediated and is carried on as
though it were face-to-face. In their study of the television chat show The Johnny Carson Show
audiences, Horton and Wohl found that many viewers, in 1950s America, claimed that they
‘knew’ Johnny Carson better than their next-door neighbour. They also note the emergence of
(marked words as in original):
a new type of performer: quiz-masters, announcers, ‘interviewers’ in a new ‘show-business’
world – in brief, a special category of ‘personalities’ whose existence is a function of the
media themselves. These ‘personalities’ usually, are not prominent in any of the social
spheres beyond the media. They exist for their audiences only in the para-social relation.
(Horton and Wohl [1956] 1979: 186)
This early study still has resonance for the study of media discourse today in that our rela-
tionship with media personae has, if anything, grown and deepened, compared with the days
of Johnny Carson, and this is very much linked to how we use language in the creation,
expression and maintenance of pseudo-intimate relationships (see O’Keeﬀe 2006).
Ideology has also had a major impact on the study of language in the media. O’Halloran
(2010) explains that ideology is about looking at representations of aspects of the world which
contribute to establishing and maintaining social relations of domination, inequality and
exploitation. White (1997), for example, claims that by ‘severely’ circumscribing subjective
interpersonal features in hard news reports, journalists can, through ‘objective’ language, pur-
port to be neutral, essentially where formal language provides the veneer of neutrality. The
dominant methodology which addresses this within media discourse studies is Critical Dis-
course Analysis (CDA), which we shall discuss further below. Van Dijk (2001: 352) oﬀers the
following deﬁnition of CDA:
Critical discourse analysis (CDA) is a type of discourse analytical research that primarily
studies the way social power abuse, dominance, and inequality are enacted, reproduced,
and resisted by text and talk in the social and political context. With such dissident
research, critical discourse analysts take an explicit position, and thus want to understand,
expose, and ultimately resist social inequality.
(Van Dijk 2001: 352)
In a later publication, van Dijk (2009), opting to use the term Critical Discourse Studies (CDS),
brings further clarity to the notion of a critical approach to discourse studies in general, stating that
it characterizes the orientation of the researcher rather than their method. CDS scholars are socio-
politically committed to social equality and justice, he explains. This comes through in their
research ‘by the formulation of speciﬁc goals, the selection and construction of theories, the use and
development of methods of analysis and especially in the application of such research in the study
of important social problems and political issues’ (van Dijk 2009: 63). Critical scholars are inter-
ested in the way ‘discourse (re)produces social domination, that is the power abuse of one group
over others, and how dominated groups may discursively resist that abuse’ (ibid.). Van Dijk
observes that critical studies of discourse are problem-led rather than discipline- or theory-oriented.
Obvious examples of problems which relate to abuses of power and injustice are in relation to
gender, race and class. As we will further discuss below (in the second and third sections), looking
at ideological issues, or taking a critical stance, in relation to the study of media discourse, has
proven to be very important to our understanding as consumers of mass media.
Anne O’Keeffe
68

While CDA takes an ideological or critical stance in its approach to media discourse, other
methodologies oﬀer descriptive insights at the level of discourse and interaction. From the
American tradition comes Conversation Analysis (CA), an approach which has its origins in
ethnomethodology, a branch of sociology. In stark contrast to CDA, it is ‘essentially grounded
in surface data, without theoretical assumptions’ (Lesser 2003). The area of Corpus Linguis-
tics (CL), a relatively established area in its own right, is increasingly emerging in the study of
language in the media (e.g. O’Keeﬀe 2002, 2003, 2005, 2006; Chang 2002; O’Halloran 2010).
While CL can be purely descriptive and ideology-neutral, it can also work very well in tandem
with critical approaches (see O’Halloran 2010, and O’Halloran, this volume). The added value
of corpus linguistics in the study of media discourse is its ability to look at large amounts of
media material (both written or spoken). Also, it allows researchers to make both qualitative
and quantitative statements about the data.
Written versus spoken media discourse studies
Much study of language and the media over the years has focused on the written genres, particu-
larly newspapers. This is largely because they are more readily available for analysis by virtue
of being in written form compared with the ephemerality of spoken media discourse, which
has to be recorded and then transcribed. The ease of recording and storage aﬀorded by digital
technology now means that there is much more scope for studies of spoken media discourse.
However, the drudge of accurate transcription is still a barrier to research in the area.
Written media studies
Within the study of written media texts, there has been a growing body of quantitative and
qualitative descriptive linguistic analyses by corpus linguists. Distinct registers, or genres, of
media language are being examined using collections of empirical data. Biber et al. (1999), for
example, identify the language of newspapers as one of the four major registers in all of the
English language, along with spoken conversation, academic writing, and ﬁction. In their
grammar of the English language, they proﬁle syntactic patterns and lexico-grammatical usage
across all four of these registers. This gives us a baseline for the use and frequency of language
patterns in newspapers, against which other media-based ﬁndings can be compared and con-
trasted. Much attention is given to genre analysis (see Swales 1990) in the study of the lan-
guage of newspapers. That is where the language used in print media is described in terms of
what makes it diﬀerent to other ‘genres’ of language, and in so doing linguists aim for a better
understanding of generic characteristics. Toolan (1988) examines the language of press adver-
tising. Other studies have examined sports reporting in newspapers (Wallace 1977; Ghadessy
1988; Bhatia 1993).
Many studies identify the mutually deﬁning link between language variation and context
(Halliday 1978; Leckie-Tarry 1995; Hasan 1996). Stubbs (1996) points out that texts encode
representations of the world and so help to construct social reality. Thus textual analysis, he
posits, is a vantage point from which to observe society. Other studies have looked at how
diﬀerent newspapers are socially stratiﬁed (see Bell 1991) and how this has an implication for
the type of reality they construct for their respective readers. According to Hodge (1979: 157),
‘newspapers only supply partial versions of the world and what they do present depends on
what is expected of that newspaper’. In another study, Bell (1991) looked at one linguistic
variable, determiner deletion in appositional naming expressions (e.g. ‘Chairman of the board,
Michael Milken’ as opposed to non-determiner deletion: ‘The chairman of the board, Michael
The media
69

Milken’) and found that the ‘quality’ US broadsheets such as the Boston Globe, Washington
Post, Hartford Courant, and New York Times had a much lesser rate of determiner deletion
than the popular press (i.e. tabloids). He concluded from this that the structure of determiner
deletion reﬂects the social stratiﬁcation of the papers in US print media.
According to Bell (1991), irrespective of what actually happens in real life, newspapers
present their particular interpretations of events and so readers know in advance what they are
buying. Along the same lines, McQuail (1994) claims that news content is moulded according
to what journalists perceive the news public to ﬁnd relevant and intrinsically interesting and he
argues that the depiction of events in the print media is therefore inherently ideological. White
(1997) asserts that hard news reports construct a model of social order and that events or
situations that are construed as threatening to that social order are deemed newsworthy.
Spoken media
Studies of how the spoken media, especially television, have evolved show a fascinating move
from the deferential host to the performer/public persona. The formality and rigidness of the
early years of television were underpinned by varying state broadcasting controls and pre-
scripted interviews and performances. Corner (1991) provides an insight into the evolution of
the media interview, particularly within documentaries. He attributes the change and devel-
opment in the mid- to late 1950s, where interviews became more immediate and natural, to
the move towards on-location reality settings for the actual interviews. This development, he
suggests, freed the programme makers from the limitations of studio treatments and, along
with ‘a newly democratic/populist sense of appropriate topics and framing’, helped to con-
struct ‘naturalisms of behaviour and speech to exploit fully the possibilities for heightened
immediacy and dynamism’ (1991: 40).
Whale (1977) tells us that, until the 1950s, the broadcast interview was of little importance
largely because until then broadcasting the spoken word was traditionally regarded as a matter
of reading the printed word aloud. Moreover, statutory requirement for impartiality was
strictly interpreted. As Dimbleby (1975: 214) noted, the interview was not yet:
a means of extracting painful or revealing information; it did not test or challenge ideas,
beliefs, attitudes and assumptions. The interviewer had not yet become an oﬃcial tribune
of the people, or prosecuting counsel, or chat-show host. His job was to discover some
very simple facts: if he did more than that, it was chance not design. It was not thought
proper to enquire (even gently) into private lives, or social problems.
(Dimbleby 1975: 214)
Thus, as Wedell (1968) puts it, interviewers were little more than respectful prompters who fed
the interviewees with soft soap questions in interviews that were often prearranged and lacking
spontaneity (Day 1961). The broadcast interview was a set piece interaction in which the
function of the interviewer was simply to provide a series of topic headings ‘for the carefully
prepared views of famous men and women designed to impart to their viewers or listeners’
(Wedell 1968: 205). In the UK, the monopoly of deferential interviewing style prompted by the
BBC and copied by many national broadcasting stations was undermined with the advent of
Independent Television (ITV) in the mid-1950s. ITV producers took a looser interpretation of
statutory obligations and brought more inquiry and investigation into news stories. This
facilitated a more direct, searching and penetrating style of interviewing (Day 1961). Inter-
viewers began to challenge and probe where previously they would have moved politely onto
Anne O’Keeffe
70

the next pre-arranged question. As a result, the news interview became a more ﬂexible, lively,
and inﬂuential instrument of journalistic inquiry, to the point where, for example, in the fol-
lowing extract, we see a serving British prime minister being challenged, contradicted and
interrupted by his interviewer. The interview, in February 2003, was part of a special BBC
Newsnight programme in the lead up to the invasion of Iraq. The interview, between then
British Prime Minister, Tony Blair, and Newsnight’s presenter Jeremy Paxman, was held in
front of a live public audience in Gateshead. In the later stages of the programme, the audience
asked the prime minister questions. The transcript and video clip are available online.
[+ MARKS AN INTERRUPTED UTTERANCE]
JEREMY PAXMAN: And you believe American intelligence?
TONY BLAIR:
Well I do actually believe this intelligence +
JEREMY PAXMAN: Because there are a lot of dead people in an aspirin factory in Sudan who
don’t.
TONY BLAIR:
Come on. This intelligence is backed up by our own intelligence and in any
event, you know, we’re not coming to this without any history. I mean let’s
not be absurdly naïve about this+
JEREMY PAXMAN: Hans Blix said he saw no evidence of hiding of weapons.
TONY BLAIR:
I’m sorry, what Hans Blix has said is that the Iraqis are not cooperating
properly.
(6 February 2003. Full transcript and actual interview available at: http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/
hi/programmes/newsnight/2732979.stm)
As mentioned earlier, discourse studies of the spoken media are relatively few given how per-
vasive it has been in everyday life, especially since the 1950s. As we pointed out, the challenge
of recording and transcribing the ephemeral word has been the central impediment. The bulk
of studies undertaken in the area of spoken media discourse centre around the analysis of
turn organization within a CA framework (see below). Clayman and Heritage (2002: 7), for
example, set as their goal to ‘examine the inner workings of the news interview in Anglo-
American society’. In line with CA methodology, they contrast the rules of conversation with
what happens during news interviews. In comparing British and American news interviews,
they conclude that in spite of diﬀerent developments due, in part, to diﬀering laws about
broadcasting in these two countries, the development of news interviews and their current state
is remarkably similar. They also explain that the practices that they describe are ‘shaped by the
basic institutional conditions of broadcast journalism in Western democracies’ (2002: 337).
Harris (1991) looks at political interviews and how politicians in particular respond evasively
to questions in interviews. She ﬁnds that there is empirical evidence that politicians are evasive
in political interviews especially when compared to responses with other non-politician respon-
dents. She also notes that politicians are to a certain degree constrained by the syntax of the
question and they are not free to ignore it with impunity. Blum-Kulka (1983) attempts to deﬁne
the relationship between questions and answers in political interviews within the conﬁnes of
diﬀerent types of cohesion. Jucker (1986), in his study of news interviews, maintains that it is
diﬃcult to determine on syntactic grounds whether a politician has given a direct answer to a
question. Clayman (1993) looks at how reformulations of interviewers’ questions by the inter-
viewee, as a preface to a response, can be used both to answer questions and to manipulate them
and evade answering them in various ways, for example shifting the topical agenda, ignoring
the second part of a two-part question, agreeing with some embedded proposition in the
question without engaging with the main proposition, and so on. Carter and McCarthy (2002)
The media
71

tell us that conversation analysts, discourse analysts and pragmaticians have revealed much
about the political interview and other broadcast interviews as genres, and have done so largely
by comparing interviews with the social, pragmatic or structural norms of everyday mundane
conversation. In this way, phenomena such as sequential organization, preference organization,
turn-taking, topic management, opening and closure, etc. have been accurately described as
indices of the unique generic conﬁguration of the broadcast interview.
Apart from news interviews, radio chat shows and phone-ins have been the focus of various
studies. Hutchby (1996a: 4) noted that many studies of talk radio fail to focus on the talk that
actually takes place. Hutchby’s analytical standpoint is ﬁrmly within the CA tradition. He
points out that talk radio is a form of institutionalized interaction, where talk takes place
within an organization, the broadcasting company, which has its own structure and stability
(Hutchby 1996a: 7). Within the CA model, this structure and stability, as discussed by analysts
such as Boden (1994) and Drew and Heritage (1992), propagates itself through talk and
interaction. Hutchby’s work focuses on The Brian Hayes Show, a daily show on London’s LBC
station (see Hutchby 1991, 1992, 1995, 1996a, 1996b, 1999).
Research methods and paradigms in media discourse
The dominant, though not exclusive, research method for the study of spoken language has
been CA, while the study of written texts in the media has been dominated by studies of power
and ideology within the research paradigm of critical discourse analysis (CDA).
Conversation analysis
CA focuses on the social organization of conversation, or ‘talk-in-interaction’, by a detailed
inspection of tape recordings and transcriptions (ten Have 1986). Core to its inductive analysis
of the structure of conversations are the following areas (see Richards et al. 1992):
1
How speakers decide when to speak during conversation, i.e. the rules and systematicity
governing turn-taking (the turn-taking structure of casual conversation was delineated in
the influential paper by Sacks et al. 1974).
2
How speaker turns can be related to each other in sequence and might be said to go
together as adjacency pairs (for example, complaint + denial A: You left the light on. B: It
wasn’t me.).
3
How turns are organized in their local sequential context at any given point in an inter-
action and the systematicity of these sequences of utterances (see Schegloff 1982).
4
How seemingly minor or mundane changes in placement within utterances and across
turns are organized and meaningful (for example, the difference between the placement of
a vocative at the beginning, mid or end point of an utterance; see Jefferson 1973).
The turn-by-turn analysis of CA has made it very applicable to the study of areas such as
radio talk shows and phone-ins (for example, Hutchby 1991; Thornborrow 2001a, 2003b,
2001c; Rama Martínez 2003). Hutchby and Wooﬃtt (1998) point out that as far as CA is
concerned, what characterizes interaction as institutional is not to do with theories of social
structure but with the special character of speech exchange systems that participants can be
found to orient to. Take for example this contrast between the canonical (or typical) sequence
of turns in a telephone call between callers who have an unmarked relationship (that is, neither
intimates nor strangers, Drew and Chilton 2000) from Schegloﬀ(1986):
Anne O’Keeffe
72

Canonical call opening between ‘unmarked forms of relationships’
Summons-answer:
0. Phone rings
1. Answerer:
Hello
Identiﬁcation-recognition:
2. Caller:
Hello Jim?
3. Answerer:
Yeah
4. Caller:
‘s Bonnie
Greetings:
5. Answerer:
Hi
6. Caller:
Hi
‘How are you?’ sequences:
7. Caller:
How are yuh
8. Answerer:
Fine, how’re you
9. Caller:
Oh, okay I guess
10. Answerer:
Oh okay
First Topic:
11. Caller:
What are you doing New Year’s Eve?
Compare this with the call opening sequence presented by Whalen and Zimmerman (1987) as
the typical sequence between strangers on an emergency phone line:
Call opening between strangers – Whalen and Zimmerman 1987 (after Hopper and
Drummond 1992: 191)
Summons-Answer:
0. Phone rings
1. Answerer:
Mid-city Emergency
Business of Call:
2. Caller:
Um yeah. Somebody jus’ vandalized
my car.
Compare both of these with a call opening sequence in a radio phone-in show. Ostensibly, the
participants are strangers:
Call opening from the Brian Hayes Show (a radio talk show broadcast on LBC radio,
adapted from Hutchby 1991: 120–21)
Summons, identiﬁcation
& greeting:
1. Presenter: John is calling from Ilford good morning
Greeting, identiﬁcation,
& business of call:
2. Caller:
h. good morning Brian (pause: 0.4).hh
what I’m phoning up is about the cricket
What CA does powerfully is to show us typical patterns or sequences of turn organization and
allows us see, by comparison, as Hutchby and Wooﬃtt (1998) put it, the special character of
speech exchange systems that participants can be found to orient to. In the three extracts
above we can see how, in institutional interactions, the turn sequences are attenuated (i.e. cut
short). We can see that in the radio example, the typical call opening sequence is turned on its
head when the ‘answerer’, that is the radio presenter in this case, conducts the summons,
identiﬁcation and greeting stage and the adjacent pair to this on the part of the caller is the
reciprocation of greeting, identiﬁcation and identiﬁcation of the business of the call. This is all
achieved in two turns compared with the canonical sequence which does not get to the business
of the call until turn 11.
In this way, CA provides a research paradigm which has facilitated the detailed analysis of news
interviews using natural conversation as a baseline for comparison. Heritage (1985), for example,
compares questions-and-answer sequences in news interviews with casual conversation and
The media
73

courtroom interactions and ﬁnds that unlike casual conversation, it is possible to search
through hours of courtroom and news interview interactions without encountering a single
mm hm, oh newsmarker (see Jeﬀerson 1984) or aﬃliative assessment. Instead, Heritage tells us,
the interviews are conducted almost exclusively through chains of questions and answers,
and in so doing, he claims, narratives are elicited step-by-step or opinions are developed and
elaborated component-by-component.
Greatbatch (1988) proﬁles the turn-taking conventions of interviews using the baseline
canonical framework provided by Sacks et al. (1974) as a comparison. He notes that inter-
viewers and interviewees generally conﬁne themselves, respectively, to turn-types recognizable
as questions and answers. The interviewer does not normally engage in a wide range of
responses that questioners normally engage in when they react to what they hear in a casual
conversation (see Schegloﬀ1982; Jeﬀerson 1984; Greatbatch 1986; Tottie 1991; McCarthy and
Carter 2000; McCarthy 2002). Clayman (1991) looks in detail at news interview openings and
concludes that they are highly organized so as to achieve institutional ends: (a) they mark the
encounter from the outset as having been pre-assembled on behalf of the viewing audience,
and (b) they set the agenda for the interview which is linked to newsworthy events in the world
at large.
CA therefore has provided a very useful research paradigm for the study of media discourse
by comparing its turn sequentiality with the canonical sequences of everyday conversation.
The shortcoming of CA, however, is that it looks in detail at short sequences of interaction at
turn level. CDA on the other hand is more focused on the recurring use of certain lexical items
and how these are linked to ideology.
Critical discourse analysis
As discussed above, CDA brings a critical perspective to the study of media discourse. This
involves the researcher taking a critical stance in respect of a media text. In applying a CDA
framework, the researcher is not looking at the language in a neutral descriptive way, she/he is
addressing fundamental issues of injustice and exposing how language has been used to sustain
dominant ideologies. As O’Halloran (2010) puts it, CDA seeks to illuminate how language use
contributes to the domination and misrepresentation of certain social groups.
CDA, it is argued, goes beyond academic inquiry. As van Dijk (1997: 22–3) explains, the
‘ultimate goal is not only scientiﬁc, but also social and political, namely change’; or as
O’Halloran (2010: 564) puts it, CDA is ‘a form of social critique’ which ‘encourages reﬂection
on social and cultural processes and their relationship with language use’ (see also O’Halloran,
this volume). Over the years, Fairclough has contributed much to the study of language and
the media and has raised awareness as to its importance (see also Fairclough 1988, 1989,
1995b, 2000). According to Fairclough (2000: 158–9), CDA ‘sees language as one element of a
social practice … this approach is particularly concerned with social change as it aﬀects dis-
course, and with how it connects with social relations of power and domination’.
While CDA oﬀers a powerful research framework, it often falls short as a research instru-
ment because it can be overly qualitative. In other words, its assertions can be criticized on the
basis of being overly interpretative or even subjective. However, this has been overcome by the
use of corpus linguistics as a means of looking at language patterns across large amounts of
media texts. By way of example, let’s return to the BBC interview quoted from above, between
Jeremy Paxman and Tony Blair. In this one short extract from the prime minister, we could
make a statement about power and ideology based on the use of the pronoun we (marked in
italic):
Anne O’Keeffe
74

Tony Blair: The danger is that if we allow Iraq to develop chemical, biological, and
nuclear weapons they will threaten their own region, there is no way that we would be
able to exclude ourselves from any regional conﬂict there was there as indeed we had to
become involved last time they committed acts of external aggression against Kuwait.
We could say that the prime minister appropriates the use of we to speak from the nation, in
other words, he is positioning himself dominantly as the uniﬁed voice of Britain facing unan-
imously into war. We could extract many further examples to back up the above assertion but
if we apply corpus linguistics, in tandem with CDA, we have a very powerful means of showing
consistent use of language. We will return to this example below and apply corpus linguistic
software to the interview.
Corpus linguistics
Corpus linguistics is essentially a research instrument which has application to many areas. It
involves the principled gathering of spoken or written texts in electronic form to make a
corpus. These can be explored using software which typically carries out the core functions of
(1) word frequency counts, (2) key word calculations, and (3) key word in context (KWIK)
searches (see Evison 2010; Scott 2010 and Adolphs and Lin, this volume, for an overview). For
the purposes of the study of media discourse, it means that a researcher can address research
questions over a large amount of data. The core functions of corpus software allow the
researcher not only to look within the texts or transcripts but to compare these ﬁndings with
other contexts. For example, the theme of evaluation, that is the expression of opinion (and
ultimately stance), is one which has emerged strongly and is also linked to the use of more
qualitative approaches to looking at media discourse through the use of corpora. Bednarek
(2006a, 2006b) presents a corpus-based account of evaluation, which is based on 100 news-
paper articles (a 70,000 word corpus), drawn from both tabloid and broadsheet media. Bednarek’s
work is quantitative and she provides detailed explanations and justiﬁcations of her framework
of evaluation and bias in newspapers. O’Keeﬀe (2006) looks at over 200,000 words of transcripts
from radio phone-ins, chat shows and political interviews from around the world.
Possibly the greater potential for CL, however, is in how it can complement other research
frameworks. For example, O’Keeﬀe and Breen (2007), using over a corpus of 500,000 words of
newspaper reports on child sexual abuse cases, over ﬁve years, conducted a content analysis
and corpus-based lexiogrammatical analysis. The corpus-based component was able to provide
consistent evidence for the ﬁndings from the content analysis component of the study. Carter
and McCarthy (2002) show how CA and CL can work together when they look at one BBC
radio interview with former British Prime Minister, Tony Blair, using a dual approach to its
analysis. First, they apply the framework of CA in their analysis and subsequently they con-
duct corpus-based analysis on the same data. They conclude that the CA analysis shows that
the interviewer and interviewee both adhere to and exploit the generic conventions of the
interview in terms of turn-taking, topic management and participant relationships. The inter-
viewer presses an agenda of getting the interviewee to commit to action; the interviewee, in
turn, responds cohesively and coherently and yet avoids direct commitment to action and
maintains his topical agenda without losing face (and with useful soundbites delivered along
the way, which are likely to be extracted and quoted in subsequent national news bulletins).
The application of corpus techniques to the transcript reveals much about the lexical envir-
onment, especially the semantic prosody of the high-frequency key words. Carter and
McCarthy show how CA and corpus linguistics can complement each other and oﬀer a more
The media
75

integrated way of understanding how conversational agendas are achieved when the two
methods are used in combination than either of them can aspire to alone.
O’Halloran (2010) shows how CL can be a powerful complementary tool to CDA when he
examines a set of texts over a six-week period in the British popular tabloid newspaper The
Sun on the topic of the European Union (EU) expansion on 1 May 2004. The corpus he built
consists of Sun texts in the six weeks prior to 1 May which contain the cultural keywords:
‘(im)migration’, ‘(im)migrant(s)’, ‘EU’ and ‘European’. In all, the corpus comprises seventy-six
texts, a total of 26,350 words, and is in chronological order from 20 March to 30 April 2004.
O’Halloran is able to show, in a convincing and powerful way, how the language and ideology
were intertwined in that period. For example, key words such as ‘high unemployment’,
‘impoverished’, ‘poor’ were linked to ‘Eastern European’ and were tied up with the pre-
supposition that EU enlargement would mean that migrants would be a drain on social
services, etc.
By way of further illustration, we return to the BBC public interview between Tony Blair
and Jeremy Paxman. Above we looked at one extract from what the prime minister said and
made claims about his use of the pronoun we. By saving the transcript of the interview as a
plain text ﬁle and using concordance software to search for we, we can make the following
empirically-based assertion and hence illustrate the complementarity of CDA and CL:
We is used 49 times in the interview and 86 per cent of these are uttered by the Prime
Minister to mean, ‘we the people of Britain who are in favour of going to war’. As such, it
shows a consistent dominant use of the pronoun to coercively position the people of
Britain in line with the Prime Minister’s stance on the justiﬁcation of invading Iraq.
New media
The explosion of new media poses interesting challenges for the study of discourse in the
media. Access to ‘the media’ used to be in the control of broadcasting companies. New media
are there for the ordinary person to access as long as they have the technological know-how
and the necessary hardware. Therefore, ‘the media’ is now much more ‘our media’. The pro-
cess of democratization means that lay people can access and ‘broadcast’ on new media such
as the Internet and mobile phone technology, through Websites, blogs, wikis, tweets and text
messages. In addition, the ever-expanding possibilities of virtual social networks mean that
private personae can now co-exist in a public identity, within a shared social network. Such
advances bring about new mediated participation frameworks (after Goﬀman 1981) and as a
result mark another phase of change in how language is used. This change is revolutionary
because of its democratized nature, and merits academic exploration.
Traditional deﬁnitions have mutated. We now see greater levels of intertextuality and a
blurring of the lines between spoken and written media. Newspapers have Web and video links and
sound clips, television news programmes have text on screen and Websites where you can
‘chat’. Social network pages can link to clips for television, radio, newspapers as well as
broadcast the mundane and minute from participants’ daily lives, such as ‘Going for a coﬀee’, ‘Oh
no, time to wash the dog’, ‘Remind me never to go to a Whitney Houston concert again’, and so on.
This kind of new order of things renders many old metaphors and frameworks anachronis-
tic. In the literature, the accepted metaphor for audiences seemed to be ‘overhearers’ or
‘eavesdroppers’. For example, Montgomery (1986: 428) refers to the audience as the ‘overhearing
recipient of a discourse’ (see also Heritage 1985).
Anne O’Keeffe
76

Now, with the advent of new media, audiences regularly voice their opinion and the tradi-
tional media of radio and television now regularly solicit text messages and tweets in real time
during shows and report these back to the audience. As such, the television and radio audi-
ences have been ‘brought into the room’ (or have brought themselves into the room) whereas
before the hearing status of the audience in broadcast genres (such as radio phone-ins, TV chat
shows, news interviews and so on) was for the most part ignored by analysts (see O’Keeﬀe
2006: ch. 3 for a detailed discussion).
Looking to the future
Because of the advent of new media, and the ever-changing nature of these, it is both an
exciting and challenging time in the study of media discourse. There is a wealth of uncharted
research territory. The arrival of ‘the audience voice’ into traditional media of television, radio
and newpapers needs to be redeﬁned and analyzed. The constructing of public identities on
social networking sites, blogs and tweets, the creating and sustaining of these social networks,
linguistically, also beg to be explored. However, the challenges remain. First, at a methodolo-
gical level, the additionality of using CL to provide quantitative back-up to the qualitative
approaches of CA and CDA needs to be reﬂected upon and scrutinized. Second, there needs
to be a paradigm shift in terms of how we deﬁne communication within ‘the new media’. In the
old days, we could say that there were newspapers and there were readers or there were
television or radio presenters and their audiences. The new democratized nature of things in
the media begs for a new paradigm to encapsulate the changed dynamics, power structures,
participation frameworks and discourses that are ever-emerging.
Related topics
CDA; corpus linguistics; discourse analysis
Further reading
Bednarek, M. (2006) Evaluation in Media Discourse: Analysis of a Newspaper Corpus, London:
Continuum. (A corpus-based study of evaluation in newspapers based on a corpus of 100
newspaper articles comprising a 70,000 word corpus, from both tabloid and broadsheet
media.)
Horton, D. and Wohl, R. R. (1956) ‘Mass communication and para-social interaction: observations
on intimacy at a distance’, reprinted in G. Gumpert and R. Cathcart (eds) (1979) Inter/Media:
Interpersonal Communication in a Media World, Oxford: Oxford University Press. (Given that
this was written in the early days of television, it provides thought-provoking material that still
has relevance to current-day studies of the media.)
O’Halloran, K. A. (2010) ‘How to use corpus linguistics in the study of media discourse’, in
A. O’Keeﬀe and M. J. McCarthy (eds) The Routledge Handbook of Corpus Linguistics, London:
Routledge. (An insightful illustration of the application of corpus linguistics to critical discourse
analysis, using a corpus of articles from the UK newspaper, The Sun, as a case study.)
O’Keeﬀe, A. (2006) Investigating Media Discourse, London: Routledge. (A look at spoken
media discourse using a combination of approaches including conversation analysis, discourse
analysis and pragmatics in the exploration of a corpus of over 200,000 words of spoken media
interactions.)
Stubbs, M. (1996) Text and Corpus Analysis: Computer-assisted Studies of Language and Culture,
Oxford: Blackwell. (This book provides the ground-breaking framework for the computer-assis-
ted analysis of texts and shows how corpus analysis can give insights into culturally signiﬁcant
patterns of language use.)
The media
77

References
Bednarek, M. (2006a) Evaluation in Media Discourse. Analysis of a Newspaper Corpus, London and
New York: Continuum.
——(2006b) ‘Evaluating Europe: parameters of evaluation in the British press’, in C. Leung and
J. Jenkins (eds) Reconﬁguring Europe: The Contribution of Applied Linguistics, BAAL/Equinox
(British Studies in Applied Linguistics).
Bell, A. (1991) The Language of the News Media, Oxford: Basil Blackwell.
Bhatia, V. K. (1993) Analysing Genre: Language Use in Professional Settings, London: Longman.
Biber, D., Johansson, S., Leech, G., Conrad, S. and Finegan, E. (1999) Longman Grammar of
Spoken and Written English, Harlow: Pearson Longman.
Blum-Kulka, S. (1983) ‘The dynamics of political interviews’, Text 3(2): 131–53.
Boden, D. (1994) The Business of Talk: Organizations in Action, Cambridge: Polity Press.
Carter, R. A. and McCarthy, M. J. (2002) ‘From conversation to corpus: a dual analysis of a
broadcast political interview’, in A. Sánchez-Macarro (ed.) Windows on the World: Media Dis-
course in English, Valencia: University of Valencia Press.
Chang, P. (2002) ‘Who’s behind the personal pronouns in talk radio? Cartalk: a case study’, in
A. Sánchez-Macarro (ed.) Windows on the World: Media Discourse in English, Valencia:
University of Valencia Press.
Clayman, S. (1991) ‘News interview openings: aspects of sequential organization’, in P. Scannell
(ed.) Broadcast Talk, London: Sage.
——(1993) ‘Reformulating the question: a device for answering/not answering questions in news
interviews and press conferences’, Text 13(2): 159–88.
Clayman, S. and Heritage, J. (2002) The News Interview: Journalists and Public Figures on the Air,
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Corner, J. (1991) ‘The interview as a social encounter’, in P. Scannell (ed.) Broadcast Talk, London: Sage.
Day, R. (1961) Television: a Personal Report, London: Hutchinson.
Dimbleby, J. (1975) Richard Dimbleby: A Biography, London: Hodder and Stoughton.
Drew, P. and Chilton, K. (2000) ‘Calling just to keep in touch: regular and habitual telephone calls
as an environment for small talk’, in J. Coupland (ed.) Small Talk, London: Longman.
Drew, P. and Heritage, J. (1992) Talk at Work: Interaction in Institutional Settings, Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Evison, J. (2010) ‘What are the basics of analysing a corpus?’, in A. O’Keeﬀe and M. J. McCarthy
(eds) The Routledge Handbook of Corpus Linguistics, London: Routledge.
Fairclough, N. (1988) ‘Discourse representation in media discourse’, Sociolinguistics 17: 125–39.
——(1989) Language and Power, London: Longman.
——(1995a) Media Discourse, London: Edward Arnold.
——(1995b) Critical Discourse Analysis, London: Longman
——(2000) New Labour, New Language, London: Routledge.
Ghadessy, M. (1988) ‘The language of written sports commentary: soccer – a description’, in
M. Ghadessy (ed.) Registers of Written English: Situational Factors and Linguistic Features,
London and New York: Pinter
Goﬀman, E. (1981) Forms of Talk, Oxford: Basil Blackwell.
Greatbatch, D. (1986) ‘Aspects of topical organization in news interviews: the use of agenda-shifting
procedures by interviewees’, Media Culture and Society 8: 441–5.
——(1988) ‘A turn-taking system for British news interviews’, Language in Society 17: 401–30.
Halliday, M. A. K. (1978) Language as Social Semiotic: The Social Interpretation of Language and
Meaning, London: Edward Arnold.
Hall, S. (1973) ‘Encoding and decoding in the media discourse’, stencilled paper no.7, Birmingham,
Centre for Contemporary Cultural Studies (revised as Hall 1980).
——(1977) ‘Culture, the media, and the “ideological eﬀect”’, in J. Curran, M. Gurevitch and
J. Woollacott (eds) Mass Communication and Society, London: Edward Arnold.
——(1980) ‘Encoding/decoding’, and ‘recent developments in theories of language and ideology’,
Culture, Media, Language, London: Hutchinson.
——(1982) ‘The rediscovery of “ideology”: return of the repressed in media studies’, in
M. Gurevitch, T. Bennett, J. Curran and S. Woollacott (eds) Culture, Society and the Media,
London: Methuen.
Anne O’Keeffe
78

Harris, S. (1991) ‘Evasive action: how politicians respond to questions in political interviews’, in
P. Scannell (ed.) Broadcast Talk, London: Sage.
Hasan, R. (1996) Ways of Saying: Ways of Meaning, London: Cassell.
Heritage, J. (1985) ‘Analysing news interviews: aspects of the production of talk for an overhearing
audience’, in T. A. van Dijk (ed.) Handbook of Discourse Analysis, vol. 3: Discourse and
Dialogue, London: Academic Press.
Hodge, R. (1979). ‘Newspapers and Communities’, in R. Fowler, B. Hodge, G. Kress and T. Trew
(eds) Language and Control, London: Routledge/Kegan Paul.
Hopper, R. and Drummond, K. (1992) ‘Accomplishing interpersonal relationship: the telephone
openings of strangers and intimates’, Western Journal of Communication 56: 185–99.
Horton, D. and Wohl, R. R. (1956) ‘Mass communication and para-social interaction: obser-
vations on intimacy at a distance’, reprinted in G. Gumpert and R. Cathcart (eds) (1979)
Intermedia – Interpersonal Communication in a Media World, Oxford: Oxford University
Press.
Hutchby, I. (1991) ‘The organisation of talk on talk radio’, in P. Scannell (ed.) Broadcast Talk,
London: Sage.
——(1992) ‘Confrontation talk: aspects of “interruption” in argument sequences on talk radio’,
Text 12(3): 343–71.
——(1995) ‘Aspects of recipient design in expert advice-giving on call-in radio’, Discourse Processes
19: 219–38.
——(1996) Confrontation Talk: Arguments, Asymmetries, and Power On Talk Radio, Mahwah, NJ:
Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
——(1999) ‘Frame attunement and footing in the organisation of talk radio openings’, Journal of
Sociolinguistics 3: 41–64.
Hutchby, I. and Wooﬃtt, R. (1998) Conversation Analysis: Principles, Practices and Applications,
Cambridge: Polity Press
Jeﬀerson, G. (1973) ‘A case of precision timing in ordinary conversation: overlapping tag-positioned
address terms in closing sequences’, Semiotica 9: 47–96.
——(1984) ‘Notes of a systematic development of the acknowledgement token “yeah” and “mm
mm”’, Papers in Linguistics 17(2): 197–216.
Jucker, A. (1986) News Interviews, A Pragmalinguistic Analysis, Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Leckie-Tarry, H. (1995) Language and Context: a Functional Linguistic Theory of Register, London:
Pinter.
Lesser, R. (2003) ‘When conversation is not normal: the role of conversation analysis in language
pathology’, in C. L. Prevignano and P. J. Thibault (eds) Discussing Conversation Analysis: The
Work of Emanuel A. Schegloﬀ, Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
McCarthy, M. J. (2002) ‘Good listenership made plain: non-minimal response tokens in British and
American spoken English’, in R. Reppen, S. Fitzmaurice and D. Biber (eds) Using Corpora to
Explore Linguistic Variation, Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
McCarthy, M. J. and Carter, R. A. (2000) ‘Feeding back: non-minimal response tokens in everyday
English conversation’, in C. Heﬀer and H. Sauntson (eds) Words in Context: A Tribute to John
Sinclair on His Retirement, Birmingham: ELR Discourse Monograph no. 18.
McQuail, D. (1994) Mass Communication Theory, London: Sage.
Montgomery, M. (1986) ‘DJ talk’, Media, Culture and Society 8: 421–40.
O’Halloran, K. A. (2010) ‘How to use corpus linguistics in the study of media discourse’, in
A. O’Keeﬀe and M. J. McCarthy (eds) The Routledge Handbook of Corpus Linguistics, London:
Routledge.
O’Keeﬀe, A. (2002) ‘Exploring indices of national identity in a corpus of radio phone-in data from
Irish radio’, in A. Sánchez-Macarro (ed.) Windows on the World: Media Discourse in English,
Valencia: University of Valencia Press.
——(2003) ‘“Like the wise virgins and all that jazz”: using a corpus to examine vague language and
shared knowledge’, in U. Connor and T. A. Upton (eds) Applied Corpus Linguistics: A Multi-
dimensional Perspective, Amsterdam: Rodopi.
——(2005) ‘“You’ve a daughter yourself?”: a corpus-based look at question forms in an Irish radio
phone-in’, in K. P. Schneider and A. Barron (eds) The Pragmatics of Irish English, Berlin:
Mouton de Gruyter.
——(2006) Investigating Media Discourse, London: Routledge.
The media
79

O’Keeﬀe, A. and Breen, M. (2007) ‘At the hands of the brothers: a corpus-based lexico-grammatical
analysis of stance in newspaper reporting of child sexual abuse’, in J. Cotterill (ed.) The Language
of Sexual Crime, Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan.
Rama Martínez, M. E. (2003) Talk on British Television: The Interactional Organisation of Three
Broadcast Genres, Vigo: Servicio de Publicacións da Universidade de Vigo.
Richards, J. C., Platt, J. and Platt, H. (1992) Dictionary of Language Teaching and Applied
Linguistics, Singapore: Longman.
Sacks, H., Schegloﬀ, E. A. and Jeﬀerson, G. (1974) ‘A simplest systematics for the organisation of
turn-taking for conversation’, Language 50(4): 696–735.
Schegloﬀ, E. (1982) ‘Discourse as interactional achievement: some uses of “uh huh” and other
things that come between sentences’, in D. Tannen (ed.) Analysing Discourse: Text and Talk,
Washington, DC: Georgetown University Press.
——(1986) ‘The routine as achievement’, Human Studies 9: 111–52.
Scott, M. (2010) ‘What can corpus software do?’, in A. O’Keeﬀe and M. J. McCarthy (eds) The
Routledge Handbook of Corpus Linguistics, London: Routledge.
Stubbs, M. (1996) Text and Corpus Analysis: Computer-assisted Studies of Language and Culture,
Oxford: Blackwell.
Swales, J. (1990) Genre Analysis, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
ten Have, P. (1986) ‘Issues in qualitative data interpretation’, paper read at the International
Sociological Association, XIth World Congress of Sociology, New Delhi, August 1986. Available
at: www.pscw.uva.nl/emca/mica.htm
Thornborrow, J. (2001a) ‘Authenticating talk: building public identities in audience participation
broadcasting’, Discourse Studies 3(4): 459–79.
——(2001b) ‘Authenticity, talk and mediated experience’, Discourse Studies 3(4): 391–411.
——(2001c) ‘Questions, control and the organization of talk in calls to a radio phone-in’, Discourse
Studies 3(1): 119–43.
Toolan, M. (1988) ‘The language of press advertising’, in M. Ghadessy (ed.) Registers of Written
English: Situational Factors and Linguistic Features, London: Pinter.
Tottie, G. (1991) ‘Conversational style in British and American English: the case of backchannels’,
in K. Aijmer and B. Altenberg (eds) English Corpus Linguistics, London: Longman.
van Dijk, T. (1997) ‘The story of discourse’, in T. A. van Dijk (ed.) Discourse as Structure and
Process, London: Sage.
——(2001) ‘Critical discourse analysis’, in D. Schiﬀrin, D. Tannen and H. Hamilton (eds) The
Handbook of Discourse Analysis, Oxford: Blackwell.
——(2009) ‘Critical discourse studies: a sociocognitive approach’, in R. Wodak and M. Meyer (eds)
Methods of Critical Discourse Analysis, London: Sage.
Wallace, W. D. (1977) ‘How registers register: a study in the language of news and sports’, Studies in
the Linguistic Sciences 7(1): 46–78.
Wedell, E. G. (1968) Broadcasting and Public Policy, London: Michael Joseph.
Whale, J. (1977) The Politics of the Media, London: Fontana.
Whalen, M. R. and Zimmerman, D. H. (1987) ‘Sequential and institutional context in calls for
help’, Social Psychology Quarterly 50(2): 172–85.
White, P. (1997) ‘Death, disruption and the moral order: the narrative impulse in mass-media “hard
news” reporting’, in F. Christie and J. R. Martin (eds) Genre and Institutions, London: Cassell.
Anne O’Keeffe
80

6
Institutional discourse
Celia Roberts
The development of the idea of ‘institutional discourse’
Early theories
Institutions are held together by talk and texts both to maintain themselves and to exclude
those who do not belong. The study of institutional discourses sheds light on how organisa-
tions work, how ‘lay’ people and experts interact and how knowledge and power get con-
structed and circulate within the routines, systems and common sense practices of work-related
settings. ‘Institutional discourse’, therefore, spans many areas and this reﬂects the diﬀerent
theoretical backgrounds of those who have written about institutions.
These theorists can usefully be divided into those who look at the underlying processes that
construct, maintain and give power to institutions and those who analyse the detailed conduct
of how organisations work and interact with others. A fundamental notion of the institutional
derives from a social constructivist view of reality in which all institutions are made up of
shared habitual practices. Stable and enduring features are assembled through particular social
settings:
insitutionalisation occurs wherever there is a reciprocal typiﬁcation of habitualised actions
by types of actors.
(Berger and Luckmann 1967: 40)
So the institution is brought about by the gradual sedimentation of repeated actions, which
provide a common stock of cultural knowledge (Mumby and Clair 1997). Those ‘in the know’
are the professionals, experts and bureaucratic oﬃcials who assess people and problems
according to this shared cultural knowledge.
The anthropologist Mary Douglas discusses how this knowledge is created and used to
establish and maintain institutional life and bind society together: ‘This is how … we build
institutions, squeezing each other’s ideas into a common shape’ (1986: 91). This squeezing is
done through a process of building classiﬁcations which are then presented as natural and
reasonable. Douglas argues that not only are organisations bound together by these
81

classiﬁcations but they have a wider inﬂuence in maintaining social order. The feminist eth-
nographer Dorothy Smith, taking a more overtly critical stance, also extends the notion of
‘institutional’ beyond the organisation to work outside formal contexts. Her notion of ‘insti-
tutional ethnography’ encompasses the everyday world of women’s work in supporting the
home and family where this ‘world’ is ‘organised by and sustains the institutional process’
(1987: 166).
This notion of the ‘institutional process’ is not, therefore, tied to a particular organisation
but is ‘any relatively durable set of social relations which endows individuals with power, status
and resources of various kinds’ (Bourdieu 1991: 8). This complex of relations is what Smith
calls ‘the ruling apparatus’:
In contrast to such concepts as bureaucracy, ‘institution’ does not identify a determinate
form of social organisation, but rather the intersection and co-ordination of more than
one relational mode of the ruling apparatus.
(Smith 1987: 160)
So institutional discourse covers both the objective and regulatory elements of any organised
group of people, and also the wider set of ideologies and sets of relations which form this
ruling apparatus.
Michel Foucault’s work remains central to our understanding of institutional discourse. His
historical studies of how institutions developed for discipline and punishment and for medicine
are shaped by his theories of discourse. In ‘The Order of Discourse’ (1981) he describes how
institutions both support powerful discourse (through pedagogy, books, labs, etc.) and in turn
are supported by disciplines and codiﬁed ways of thinking. Institutions, he argues, try to
organise and control the power of discourse and its ‘great incessant and disordered buzzing’
(1981: 68). They do this by regulating who is allowed to speak certain discourses and by the
discursive policing which allows only certain discourses, including classiﬁcation and metaphors,
to be used at any one historical time.
But even more signiﬁcantly, institutions are part of the wider discourse in which truth is
conﬂated with knowledge. Foucault contrasts the ancient idea of truth as some eternal, innate,
ritualised truth, one based on ritual and the authority of speakers, with a notion of truth based
on empirical knowledge, systems of classiﬁcation, codiﬁed knowledge and disciplines which
produce their own truth, and so power, since they impose ‘a certain position, a certain gaze
and a certain function’ (Foucault 1981: 56). The current focus on evidence-based practice and
randomised control trials is an extreme form of this ‘will to know’ being equated with the ‘will
to truth’. The result of a clinical trial, for example, is treated not only as useful knowledge but
as the truth of the matter. Institutions can use this over-arching truth/knowledge discourse to
maintain themselves and increase their power. All the more so since this kind of ‘truth’ masks
itself and the act of its production. We are unaware of ‘the will to truth, that prodigious
machinery designed to exclude’ (1981: 58).
By contrast with these more abstract theories of institutional discourse, are those which deal
with the conduct, text and talk of speciﬁc institutions. The most systematic literature in this
area stems from the sociological tradition of Conversation Analysis (CA) which focuses on the
detailed interactional processes of speciﬁc activities such as service encounters or proceedings
in court. For example, in their wide-ranging overview of talk at work, Drew and Heritage (1992)
describe ‘institutional interaction’ as task-oriented and involving at least one participant who
represents a formal organisation:
Celia Roberts
82

talk-in-interaction is the principal means through which lay persons pursue various prac-
tical goals and the central medium through which the daily working activities of many
professionals and organisational representatives are conducted. We will use the term
‘institutional interaction’ to refer to talk of this kind.
(Drew and Heritage 1992: 3)
The focus on talk in interaction grounds ‘institutional discourse’ in the social, the local and the
organisational. Rather than addressing the underlying processes and discourses of an institu-
tion, these studies are concerned with the practical accomplishment of activities in socially
competent ways. The pressure to be socially competent was brilliantly examined by Goﬀman
in what he called ‘total institutions’ such as the asylum in which all aspects of everyday life are
subject to a single authority (1961: 17).
Some of the diﬀerent theoretical and empirical diﬀerences in approach are reﬂected in the
debates around organisational discourse analysis and organisational discourse studies (Grant
and Iedema 2005). Organisational discourse analysis based on sociolinguistic, pragmatic and
CA theory uses technical linguistic analysis to look at how talk and text produce organisa-
tional life. Organisational discourse studies have emerged from management and organisa-
tional theory. Here discourse is treated as a rhetorical principle or set of arguments which
challenge organisational stability.
So, discourse stretches from the micro-phenomena of pauses and prosody in the speciﬁc
activities and the interactions of representatives of organisations to the orders and relations
which are part of the ‘ruling apparatus’ (Smith 1987: 160), both in particular bounded insti-
tutions or, more generally, in everyday practices which are aﬀected by and feed into the wider
social order of such institutions as the family or the rule of law.
Institutional and professional settings and discourses
Most of the studies of institutional and workplace life involve professionals, and many studies
include both ‘institutional’ and ‘professional’ discourse and use either as a cover term for both
(Gunnarsson 2009). However, there are useful distinctions to be made between institutional
and professional discourse (Sarangi and Roberts 1999). The latter is acquired by professionals
as they become teachers, doctors, human resources personnel and so on. The notion of a
profession is drawn from the concept of a vocation in which professed knowledge is learnt and
used. Implied in the term is some notion of autonomy or freedom as a result of acquiring a
body of knowledge through rigorous training. Professional discourse is a form of ‘habitus’
(Bourdieu 1991), a set of linguistic practices and conventionalised behaviour and values that
the professional has to acquire mastery over.
Institutional discourse, by contrast, is formed both by the wider ideologies and relations of
the ruling apparatus and, following Weber (1947) and the critical theorist Habermas (1979), is
also characterised by rational, legitimate accounting practices which are authoritatively
backed up by a set of rules and regulations, a bureaucracy (Sarangi and Slembrouck 1996)
governing an institution. Unlike the professional’s judgement based on their expertise, institu-
tional representatives emphasise objectivity and rule-governed organisation. So, for example,
in the medical setting, the diagnosis and agreed course of action or the clinicians’ working up
of narratives into a case are professional discourses but the gatekeeping functions of selection,
assessment and training rely on institutional discourse. Indeed, increasingly professional con-
cerns have to be cast in institutionally acceptable frames and institutional demands can be
imposed on professional knowledge and practices.
Institutional discourse
83

So, in most settings, professionals are using both types of discourses, and it is the interplay
of the two which is typical of organisational life. For example, record keeping has both pro-
fessional and institutional functions (Garﬁnkel 1967). Cicourel (1981) shows that the recoding
of patient information into abstract categories both relates to clinical treatment but also,
institutionally, to the systematic organisation of patient care. At this level, the more abstract
categories feed into the accounting practices and rules which construct the institution. Record
keeping in medical (Cicourel 1981; Iedema 2003), educational (Mehan 1993), legal settings
(Cicourel 1968) and other bureaucratic encounters (Sarangi and Slembrouck 1996) is an
obvious activity where professional knowledge is recontextualised into a form where it can be
institutionally managed.
Increasingly, professional discourses are laminated over by institutional discourses (Roberts
and Sarangi 1999) as institutions act to maintain and defend themselves. This is particularly
noticeable in the impact of the market economy discourses on speciﬁc services. These dis-
courses are produced to maintain and manage such institutions as law, medicine and educa-
tion within a model of late capitalism. For example, in British higher education, the
professional discourses of learning and assessing and staﬀ-student relationships are reworked,
recontextualised, as institutional discourses of consumption and accountability (Fairclough
1993; Mautner 2005).
The distinction between professional and institutional discourse is also apparent in some of
the ‘frontstage’ and ‘backstage’ work of professionals. Erving Goﬀman made the distinction
between the ‘performance’ aspect of social life and the ‘backstage’ where this performance is
knowingly contradicted (Goﬀman 1959). In institutional settings, the backstage is where pro-
fessional knowledge is produced and circulated but also where staﬀand professional groups do
the institutional work. Much of the frontstage work is between the expert and the lay client or
applicant in service encounters in healthcare (Fisher and Todd 1983; West 1984; Heritage and
Maynard 2006), social work (Hall 1997) or other bureaucratic settings (Collins 1987). Other
frontstage work is even more clearly a performance, as in educational settings (Mehan 1979)
or in legal settings (Atkinson and Drew 1979; Eades 2008). The backstage work is where, for
example, care plans and records are discussed and made accountable, where decisions are
ratiﬁed and the initial professional frontstage work is not so much contradicted, in Goﬀman’s
terms, but reshaped and reframed to ﬁt into institutional categories (Agar 1985).
For this chapter, the discussion will be limited to those approaches and methodologies
based on sociolinguistic, conversation analytic, ethnographic and micro-ethnographic meth-
odologies from both descriptive and critical perspectives. The focus will be on speciﬁc activities
where there is at least one institutional/organisational representative, rather than on wider
institutional discourses of, for example, the media (Fairclough 1995; Richardson 2007; Mayr
2008), but we will also include studies where the analysis is informed by an understanding of
these wider discourses that construct and control social and institutional life.
Major themes
Power and asymmetry
Institutional discourse cannot be uncoupled from powerful discourse, as Foucault’s studies
have shown, and institutional relations, ideologies and categories assume a hierarchy of
knowledge, status and degree of belonging which produce asymmetrical interactions. Most
studies of institutional discourse recognise its asymmetrical character, as these major themes
illustrate. Typically these include: the degree of control over the content of talk; the allocation
Celia Roberts
84

of turns; the special inferencing that experts have access to; the diﬀerential distribution of
participation rights; and the very diﬀerent impact that decisions have for the client or applicant
(see below) (Drew and Heritage 1992; Thornborrow 2002). The asymmetrical nature of medical
consultations has been widely studied to show these inequalities (Fisher and Todd 1983; West
1984; Mishler 1984).
The professional rarely has to exert raw power since their authority is acknowledged in the
applicant’s or patient’s conduct. For example, in medical settings, studies show how patients are
interrupted (Frankel 1984), do not challenge the health professional’s decision or manage their
explanations with the doctor’s expertise in mind (Gill and Maynard 2006). The exercise of
power and authority is also laminated over with language and bodily conduct which implies
equality; for example in the ‘conversational’ mode of institutional talk where covert mechan-
isms of control are substituted for overt markings of power (Fairclough 1992). Talk becomes
euphemised and cautious; for example, the ‘little chat’ describes a high-stakes gatekeeping
interview and professional elicitations are embedded in seemingly casual conversation.
The simulation of equality and the euphemised talk (Bourdieu 1991) of institutional inter-
action illustrate the ways in which authority masks its own power. But these covert means are also
sensitive to the social relations and alignments required in the moral conduct of face-to-face
activities (Goﬀman 1959). Goﬀman’s notion of ‘footing’ captures in its metaphor some of the
delicate interactional footwork that has to be done by participants if they are to manage their
professional or client identities, their roles and the moment-to-moment ways of relating to the
other. For institutional representatives, their reputation, how they save ‘face’ and are sensitive
to potential face loss in others, has to be managed within what is widely recognised as asym-
metrical relations in most institutional interaction. Institutional talk takes on a special kind of
asymmetry when both sides do not share the grounds for negotiating understanding, as is
often the case with linguistic and socio-cultural diﬀerences between lay and expert participants
(see the section on recent developments below).
Goal-oriented encounters
In comparing institutional talk to ordinary conversation, Drew and Heritage (1992: 21–4)
suggest that its deﬁning characteristic is that it is goal-oriented and that this, in turn, involves
particular constraints on what is allowable, and special aspects of reasoning or inference.
These goals may be more or less explicitly deﬁned but they all have some element of what
Agar calls ‘diagnosis’ (Agar 1985). For example, in emergency calls (Zimmerman 1992), the
participants are clearly oriented to an urgent task and the institutional representatives’ talk is
highly scripted. By contrast, at the opening of an encounter between a family doctor and a
patient, the routine is for the doctor to elicit some display of symptoms from the patient so
that the goal of the consultation is clear, but the way in which it will then develop will depend
upon local contingencies (Heath 1981). Home visits by a health visitor consist of several less
well-deﬁned goals (Heritage and Seﬁ1992) and the purpose of the encounter is jointly
negotiated over the course of the interaction.
Similarly, the constraints on contributions, while generally giving an interaction its institu-
tional character, vary depending on the overall function of the event. Courtroom interaction
(Atkinson and Drew 1979), prisoner rehabilitation training (Mayr 2004), police interrogations
(Heydon 2005), police cautions (Rock 2007) and job interviews (see below) have clearly ritual
and formal components which constrain turn-taking and what are allowable contributions.
Any one institutional encounter also entails ‘special inferences’ (Levinson 1979; Trinch
2003) drawn from both background knowledge and from the structural properties of the
Institutional discourse
85

activity. This is well illustrated in Levinson’s telling examples from courtroom testimony of a
rape victim. Here the sequencing of the questions builds up a set of inferences to make what
appears a natural argument for the jury that the victim’s behaviour encouraged the defendant.
The fact that the defence barrister has control over what topics are initiated and over the turn-
taking system and that the young woman is positioned by these structural constraints means
that she has no or little opportunity to challenge or rework the argument.
Gatekeeping and labelling
Most institutional and workplace encounters involve some sort of labelling and sorting process
where people are checked through an invisible gate. In service encounters, ‘the institutional
representative uses his/her control to ﬁt the client into the organisational ways of thinking
about the problem’ (Agar 1985: 153) and this may happen both frontstage and backstage. In
studies of workplace settings, the labelling and sorting of people, information and arguments is
distributed across many diﬀerent groupings so that the decision-making process is hard to pin
down to one event or encounter (Boden 1994).
The notion of gatekeeping implies the ‘objective’ assessment of applicants with a view to
making decisions about scarce resources. These may be jobs, educational or training oppor-
tunities, housing and other social beneﬁts and so on (Weber 1947). Ironically, these ‘objective’
procedures are in part a response to an increasingly ethnically and linguistically diverse society
and yet studies of institutional discourse have shown how these very procedures tend to
reproduce inequality:
[G]atekeeping encounters are not a neutral and ‘objective’ meritocratic sorting process.
On the contrary, our analysis suggests that the game is rigged, albeit not deliberately, in
favour of those individuals whose communication style and social background are most
similar to those of the interviewer with whom they talk.
(Erickson and Schultz 1982: 193)
In their seminal study of educational counselling interviews, Erickson and Shultz show how
decisions about students depend upon judgements of their ‘performed social identity’ (Erickson
and Schultz 1982) as they are played out through the social and cultural organisation of
the interaction. They identiﬁed two factors that were crucial in determining whether the
counsellor’s advice oﬀered or closed down educational opportunities for students: one related
to solidarity through shared membership of a group or community – co-membership – and the
other to the interactional performance, in particular the rhythmic co-ordination of the inter-
view. Lack of co-membership and conversational arhythmia led to less helpful and optimistic
advice for students.
The relationship between language and the socio-cultural order, illustrated in this micro-
ethnographic study, is particularly associated with John Gumperz and his studies of institutional
responses to a linguistically diverse society (Gumperz 1982a, 1982b, 1992). Organisations have
their own cultural practices, as the previous section has shown, and the gatekeepers tend to
align to these ways of interacting since their own socio-cultural norms and styles of commu-
nicating are similar. There is a ﬁt between their own ways of understanding and doing and the
distinctive interests of the institution. However, where the lay participant brings to the inter-
view diﬀerent linguistic behaviour and socio-cultural knowledge, there is no easy ﬁt and the
social evaluation of the applicant is based on the uncomfortable moments and lack of align-
ment experienced by both sides. This can lead to less good advice or failure to secure a job or,
Celia Roberts
86

in even more high-stakes encounters, as in asylum seeker interviews, deportation from a safe
country to a dangerous one (Maryns 2006).
Gatekeeping decisions are interactionally produced but they are also the product of what
Mehan calls the ‘politics of representation’. This is the means by which various interested
groups compete with each other over what is the correct, appropriate or preferred way of
representing the particular slice of the world which is within the institutional gaze:
Proponents of various positions in conﬂicts waged in and through discourse attempt to
capture or dominate modes of representation. … If successful, a hierarchy is formed, in
which one mode of representing the world … gains primacy over others, transforming
modes of representation from an array on a horizontal plane to a ranking on a vertical
plane.
(Mehan 1993: 241)
These modes of representation include the technical jargon of institutions, the means of clas-
sifying and coding events and people and the way in which institutional representatives speak
for the institution, for example, the use of ‘we’ rather than ‘I’ in patient-health care profes-
sional consultations. Linked to the notion of how lay stories can be ﬁtted into institutional
criteria, Mehan is interested in how categorical ‘facts’ and categories such as ‘intelligence’,
‘special needs’, ‘deviance’ emerge from the ambiguity of everyday life. Whereas many of the
studies of institutional encounters focus on the formal face-to-face encounter, Mehan’s ethno-
graphic study of how children are considered for placement in special education programmes
included observations and video recordings of frontstage settings (classrooms, testing rooms)
and backstage ones such as teachers’ lounges, referral committee meetings, and also interviews
with parents and gatekeepers and reviews of student records.
With these diﬀerent data types, Mehan illustrates how a general call for help from a class-
room teacher becomes transformed into the more abstract and distant language of institu-
tional discourse: from a schoolchild who ‘needs help’ into a ‘learning disabled child’. Drawing
on Habermas’ distinction between the lifeworld and the systems world, Rick Iedema (2003)
calls this process part of the new linguistic technologies in which power is simultaneously
hidden and reinforced. Texts and modes of talking which are increasingly distant from active
doing and saying become timeless and taken for granted. Power inheres in these increasingly
abstract forms since only those in the know can fully understand their meanings. This deper-
sonalised and distant institutional language is summed up by the critical anthropologist and
social theorist Pierre Bourdieu as: ‘impartiality, symmetry, balance, propriety, decency and
discretion’ (Bourdieu 1991: 130), and by his notion of ‘euphemisation’ in which uncomfortable
judgements are masked by discreet language. The psychologist’s role in labelling the child and
deciding on what action to take over-rides the more contextual accounts from teachers and
parents. So both the modes of representation and the interactional constraints imposed in
such meetings ensure that institutional categories dominate and, in making decisions about
ordinary people, the institution also looks after itself.
Methodologies and analytic frameworks
The studies discussed here share a common methodological interest. They reﬂect a social
constructivist perspective in which small-scale routines and habits of institutional life are
seen as feeding into wider social structures. They are also grounded in the observations,
recordings and textual data of institutional activities, giving primacy to the ﬁne-grained
Institutional discourse
87

detail of these activities. Other studies, particularly of institutional written texts, use corpus
linguistics.
Ethnographic studies
Some of the early ethnographies of the workplace stem from the tradition of the Chicago
school where the focus on the observation of socially and culturally bounded worlds drew on
methods of participant observation and interviews. Long periods spent within institutions
provided insights not only into how they functioned as workplaces but also into the perspec-
tive of those who were regulated by them, for example, Goﬀman’s account of ‘total institutions’
(Goﬀman 1961). More recent ethnographic work has combined detailed recordings of talk
with a more traditional ethnography in educational settings (see the discussion above of
Mehan 1993) and medical settings (Mishler 1984; Cicourel 1992; Atkinson 1995).
Sociolinguistics and linguistic ethnography
Early sociolinguistic studies were concerned with the relationship between language and con-
text and how certain variables explain the nature of institutional interaction. However,
increasingly, sociolinguists have drawn on ethnographic methods and on conceptual frame-
works informed by social and critical theory, notably Foucault and Bourdieu (for example,
Heller in French Canadian educational contexts [2006] and Gumperz in gatekeeping contexts
[1992]). Interactional Sociolinguistics (IS), drawing on the ethnography of communication,
pragmatics and conversation analysis (see below) has made gatekeeping encounters in linguis-
tically diverse settings a special focus of interest (Gumperz 1982a, 1992). Gumperz and his
associates (Gumperz 1999) link the CA methods of interactional analysis with a sociolinguistic
understanding of a variety of communicative styles and relate situated interpretive processes to
wider ideological discourses. This approach has recently been combined with extended ethno-
graphic ﬁeldwork to form a new hybrid methodology: linguistic ethnography (Rampton et al.
2007).
Conversation analysis
The most extensive and methodologically coherent studies of institutional talk are within
CA. Drawing on Harvey Sacks’ plea for an aesthetic of ‘smallness and slowness’ (Silverman
1999) the orthodox CA position is that the how of talk-in-interaction discovered through
technical analysis must come before the why, and that the participants’ orientation to what is
happening should take priority over the analysts’. The interpretation of data depends on how
participants display their understanding of the interaction rather than on any outside con-
textual information. Two edited collections (both already referred to), Drew and Heritage
1992 and Heritage and Maynard 2006, represent well CA methodology.
Discourse analysis and critical discourse analysis
Early discourse analysis (DA) used speech act theory to try to formulate rules for coherent
discourse in institutional settings. However, the emphasis on rules for well-formed discourse
underplayed the mutual negotiation of understanding and the active context creating function
of interaction, which is the focus of CA and IS research. While Critical Discourse Analysis
(CDA) maintains the focus on the detailed analysis of talk and text, it takes a radically
Celia Roberts
88

diﬀerent stance from the earlier studies and from CA. Detailed linguistic analysis is integrated
with critical theory, drawing on Habermas, Foucault and Bourdieu to understand how insti-
tutional discourse serves to both reﬂect and construct unequal power relations. This under-
standing is designed to contribute to social change (Fairclough 1992; Caldas-Coulthard and
Coulthard 1996; Sarangi and Slembrouck 1996; Wodak 1996; Iedema and Wodak 1999).
However, CDA has been criticised for its over-reliance on social theoretical explanations, for
overlooking sociolinguistics and for a lack of engagement with social actors.
Recent developments
The study of institutional discourse and its relation to other applied and sociolinguistic work
is changing as a result of three main inﬂuences: theories of late modernity or postmodernism,
new technologies, and globalisation; the latter two being aspects of what is referred to as new
or fast capitalism. Postmodernity, while having an enormous impact on social theory, has
tended to shift the sociolinguistic focus away from traditional institutional studies and more towards
groups, styles and local communities where identity is assembled and displayed through
a kaleidoscopic set of diﬀerent conditions and aﬃliations (Bauman 1992). Relatively few
studies of how such ideas aﬀect institutions such as education have been carried out, but a
notable exception is Rampton’s analysis of urban classrooms (Rampton 2006).
In contrast, the impact of new technologies and global mobility on workplaces and institu-
tional life is changing the landscape of institutional discourse studies. The globalisation of the
market and the new digital technologies have created a ‘new work order’ (Gee et al. 1996)
supported by the discourses of new or fast capitalism. The need to constantly change products
and customise them to survive in the globalised market place has led to a restructuring of the
workplace. There is an increased use of technologies, more multi-tasking at all levels, more
ﬂexibility required of workers as hierarchical structures are ﬂattened, and workers are required
to be more autonomous and self-regulating. The more textualised workplace has also created a
‘new word order’ (Farrell 2001) or ‘wordforce’ (Heller 2010) in which talk and text take on a
new signiﬁcance. However, new technologies that have helped to create the new work order
have refocused linguists on the multimodality of everyday activities (Jewitt 2009). Language
interacts with the texts and materialities of these new technologies which themselves facilitate
new forms of language.
Many studies of workplaces have shown how routine activities are mediated by digital
technologies (Suchman 1992; Goodwin 1995; Hindmarsh et al. 2006; Heath and vom Lehn
2008). There are new work genres, and new work and professional identities are constructed
and negotiated through talk on the shopﬂoor (Hull 1997; Kleifgen 2001; Iedema and Scheeres
2003), health settings (Greatbatch et al. 1993; Cook-Gumperz and Messerman 1999) and in
call centres (Cameron 2000; Heller 2002; Budach et al. 2003).
Changes in the nature of work itself have occurred at much the same time as global ﬂows of
people have begun to transform institutions and organisations. Early work on the impact
of language diversity on institutions tended to focus on particular ethnolinguistic groups
(Gumperz 1982a, 1982b; Goldstein 1997; Berk-Seligson 2002) and on clear demarcations of
language use. Recent changes in migration and mobility have led to increasing situations of
‘superdiversity’ (Vertovec 2007) where no single ethnic group stands out but where employees
are from many diﬀerent backgrounds. Similarly, recent theorising about space, language and
culture has raised questions about language choice and mix. Rather than language practices
being determined unproblematically by speciﬁc domains, with, for example, a particular lan-
guage used in one domain rather than another, they are more highly situated and dependent
Institutional discourse
89

upon the context of the particular interaction, the institutional response to multilingualism
and the mutual resources of the speakers (Blommaert et al. 2005; Blommaert 2007). This does
not, however, mean that there is some free market in multilingualism, far from it. Particular
languages, language varieties and indeed opportunity to use any talk at all are still regulated
by overt and covert institutional practices and ideologies. ‘In the workplace power is exercised
precisely in those areas where language is most intense’ (McCall 2003: 249).
Three examples illustrate some of these issues arising from the new work order and mobility
from a critical perspective. The ﬁrst one is based on the multilingual practices of a Belgian
health clinic (Collins and Slembrouck 2006). It describes how local institutional economies
adjust to a multilingual patient population. The linguistic ideologies of the institution perme-
ate the decisions about how to respond to the ‘language problem’. The preferred solution was
to produce a multilingual consultation manual. However, after initial enthusiasm, it was found
to be too unwieldy for situated communication. Collins and Slembrouck argue that this lit-
eracy solution had a strong institutional rationale behind it. A written text was thought to
better regulate and control the consultation and eliminate the institutional unease felt about
translation and, by transference, about the people who were the interpreters and translators. It
was also a tangible product to show how the organisation had responded to multilingualism.
So linguistic and institutional ideologies dominated over local, interactional solutions because
alternatives such as more interpreters and more trust in them would invest linguistic minorities
with relative power, status and competence.
The second example discusses the use of bilingual call workers in French Ontario. This is
part of a growing literature that suggests there is a persistent gap between the oﬃcial rhetoric
of institutions and the policies on the ground in relation to multilingualism, and that linguistic
ideology underpins both of them, either explicitly or implicitly. The oﬃcial rhetoric that mul-
tilingualism is an asset was not played out in the local practices of the call centres. French
bilingual speakers were excluded from the better paid bilingual jobs because of the commodi-
ﬁcation, standardisation, and codiﬁcation of the dominant language, French (Budach et al.
2003). So the eﬀect of globalisation in the new international call centres has local, exclu-
sionary repercussions, even for bilingual and multilingual speakers, and shows that there is a
linguistic market place (Bourdieu 1991; McCall 2003) which determines what counts as lin-
guistic capital, what standards of linguistic acceptability are set and who is excluded by these
linguistic and institutional ideologies.
The third and more extended example illustrates both some of the newer themes in institu-
tional studies and those from the earlier studies. This example is from a series of studies on job
interviews from both the English-speaking world and from Germany, the Netherlands and
Scandinavia and draws, speciﬁcally, on two British studies on selection interviews for low-paid
and junior management posts. Most of this research takes a critical stance, inﬂuenced by
Gumperz’s position that there is a communicative dimension to discrimination (Gumperz
1982a, 1982b, 1992) in which language and socio-cultural knowledge interact to produce and
reproduce inequality.
The British research shows that it is not ethnicity per se that disadvantages minority ethnic
groups in job interviews but a lack of socialisation into the norms and assumptions of this
activity, since it is candidates who were born overseas, whatever their linguistic background,
that fare less well (Roberts and Sarangi 1999; Roberts and Campbell 2005; Campbell and
Roberts 2007). We argue that there is a ‘linguistic penalty’ experienced by this group. This
penalty is faced by anyone who has not developed the ‘linguistic capital’ of the particular
institutional sub-ﬁeld of the job interview (Bourdieu 1991). The discourses required and the
ability to move between and blend them into a convincing synthetic whole, interactionally
Celia Roberts
90

construct the ideal candidate. The fact that this ‘linguistic capital’ is taken for granted by
employers as a matter of individual competence or merely a question of adequate preparation
masks its power in reproducing structural inequalities. Failed candidates ‘just don’t have the
skills’.
In Britain, North America and other parts of the west, interviews are now routinely con-
structed around a competency framework that includes competencies such as team working,
communications, customer focus, adaptability and ﬂexibility. These reﬂect the discourses of the
‘new work order’ (Gee et al. 1996) discussed above. When there is no shared ‘socially con-
structed knowledge of what the interview is about’ (Gumperz 1992: 303), candidates cannot
cue into the special inferences required to understand a competency question such as the fol-
lowing: ‘right, what would you tell me is the advantage of a repetitive job?’ So, despite
attempts to make interviews culturally and ideologically neutral, current workplace ideologies
leak into the interview at all points.
The interview also contains other inherent contradictions in its presentation as an
objective sorting process (Linell and Thunquist 2003) since as a social encounter, it is shot
through with subjectivities. Issues of personality, social class or ethnicity remain ‘unmention-
ables’ and are only conveyed implicitly (Komter 1991; Birkner 2004: 298), and yet personal
liking and co-membership (Erickson and Schultz 1982) are at the hidden heart of
decision-making.
The sequential organisation of the interview illustrates its fundamentally asymmetrical
character and the role of the interviewer in the ﬁnal decision-making. Candidates are routinely
blamed for what is a joint production (Campbell and Roberts 2007). The interview is con-
trolled almost entirely by the interviewers who govern the interactional norms, allocation of
turns and speaking roles (Komter 1991; Birkner 2004). Unlike the evidence from earlier studies,
gatekeepers are now drawn from minority backgrounds as well as from the white majority.
The institution’s response to more diverse institutional representatives is to require a script-like
interaction in which set questions are asked and in which only certain answers are allowable
and institutionally processable. Ironically, such script-like performances from gatekeepers pro-
duce an even more damaging linguistic penalty for those who lack the linguistic capital of the
job interview (Roberts and Campbell 2005). So, the interview is not only a site for individual
selection and the reproduction of inequality, it is also a site for the production and main-
tenance of institutional and social order. This order includes the defence of itself as an insti-
tution, and part of this defence is to present a public face of equal opportunity (Auer and
Kern 2000; Makitalo and Saljo 2002).
The relationship between institutional discourse, globalisation, new technology and migra-
tion on a large scale has only just begun to be explored. There are still relatively few studies
that examine the impact of the new work order on talk and text in institutions or the eﬀect on
social relations of working across distances in globalised organisations (Gunnarsson 2009).
The work in ethnomethodology and conversation analysis on human-computer interaction has
led to an increasing interest in the role of multimodality in workplace discourse (Hindmarsh
et al. 2006, Heath and vom Lehn 2008). However, very little of the analysis of these changes to
institutional and professional life has been framed by the profound change created by the
global ﬂows of people to wealthy countries (but see some exceptions, above). Future studies
are likely to focus on how multilingualism interacts with other institutional changes. In parti-
cular, research is needed on how multilingualism and lingua franca regimes operate in speciﬁc
organisations and whether new linguistic inequalities are produced. Within institutions, more
research is needed on the impact of institutional and linguistic ideologies as exclusionary
forces and, more widely, how the discourses that hold institutions together will manage the
Institutional discourse
91

tension between being fair and accessible to all while maintaining their character as
representative of the nation state in which they are established.
Summary
Institutional discourse is realised both in the objective, regulatory and accounting practices of
any organisation or group of people organised through relations of power, and in the wider
ideologies, means of classiﬁcation and representation which create the ‘ruling apparatus’. Stu-
dies of institutional life show how the depersonalised and distant discourse of the institution
interacts with professional discourses to produce asymmetrical, goal-oriented and often
exclusionary encounters where one version of reality prevails. Recent studies have begun to
show the complex relationship between the new work order of globalised work practices, new
technologies and the increasing mobility of people across the world. Despite the transforma-
tions resulting from the global market and the management of information, institutional
practices and discourses still produce inequality.
Related topics
critical discourse analysis; linguistic ethnography
Further reading
Drew, P. and Heritage, J. (1992) Talk at Work: Interaction in Institutional Settings, Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press. (Drawing very substantitally on conversation analysis, this edited
collection examines some of the theoretical issues in institutional talk and analyses talk in a range
of settings including health, the media and legal and workplace encounters.)
Mayr, A. (2008) Language and Power: An Introduction to Institutional Discourse, London: Con-
tinuum. (This takes a critical perspective on institutional discourse and analyses contexts which
include prisons, the military, academia and the media.)
Sarangi, S. and Roberts, C. (eds) (1999) Talk, Work and Institutional Order: Discourse in Medical,
Mediation and Management Settings, Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter. (An interdisciplinary approach
to health, mediation and management settings is used to discuss the relationship between inter-
actional and institutional orders.)
Thornborrow, J. (2002) Power Talk: Language and Interaction in Institutional Discourse, London:
Longman. (Discourse, power and ideology are examined in several institutional settings including
police and media interviews and the classroom.)
Wodak, R. (1996) Disorders of Discourse, London: Longman. (Using critical discourse analysis, this
book looks at the barriers to communication in the coutroom, the school and the outpatient clinic.)
References
Agar, M. (1985) ‘Institutional discourse’, Text 5(3): 147–68.
Atkinson, M. and Drew, P. (1979) Order in Court: The Organization of Verbal Interaction in
Judicial Setting, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Atkinson, P. (1995) Medical Talk and Medical Work: The Liturgy of the Clinic, London: Sage.
Auer, P. and Kern, F. (2000) ‘Three ways of analysing communication between East and West
Germans as intercultural communication’, in A. Di Luzio, S. Günthner and F. Orletti (eds)
Culture in Communication: Analysis of Intercultural Situations, Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Bauman, Z. (1992) Intimations of Post-Modernity, London: Routledge.
Berger, P. and Luckmann, T. (1967) The Social Construction of Reality: A Treatise in the Sociology
of Knowledge, New York: Anchor Books.
Berk-Seligson, S. (2002) The Bilingual Courtroom: Court Interpreters in the Judicial Process, 2nd
edn, Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Celia Roberts
92

Birkner, K. (2004) ‘Hegemonic struggles or transfer of knowledge? East and West Germans in job
interviews’, Journal of Language and Politics 3(2): 293–322.
Blommaert, J. (2007) ‘Sociolinguistics and discourse analysis: orders of indexicality and polycentricity’,
Journal of Multicultural Discourses 2: 115–30.
Blommaert, J., Collins, J. and Slembrouck, S. (2005) ‘Polycentricity and interactional regimes in
“global neighborhoods”’, Ethnography 6(2): 205–35.
Boden, D. (1994) The Business of Talk: Organisations in Action, Cambridge: Polity Press.
Bourdieu, P. (1991) Language and Symbolic Power, J. Thompson (ed.), G. Raymond and
M. Adamson (trans.), Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Budach, G., Roy, S. and Heller, M. (2003) ‘Community and commodity in French Ontario’, Language
and Society 32: 603–27.
Caldas-Coulthard, C. and Coulthard, M. (1996) Texts and Practices: Readings in Critical Discourse
Analysis, London: Routledge.
Cameron, D. (2000) Good to Talk? Living and Working in a Communication Culture, London: Sage.
Campbell, S. and Roberts, C. (2007) ‘Migration, ethnicity and competing discourses in the job
interview: synthesising the institutional and personal’, Discourse and Society 18(3): 243–71.
Cicourel, A. (1968) The Social Organisation of Juvenile Justice, New York: Wiley.
——(1981) ‘Notes on the integration of micro- and macro-levels of analysis’, in K. Knorr-Cetina and
A. Cicourel (eds) Advances in Social Theory and Methodology, London: Routledge.
——(1992) ‘The interpenetration of communicative contexts: examples from medical encounters’, in
A. Duranti and C. Goodwin (eds) Rethinking Context: Language as an Interactive Phenomenon,
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, pp. 291–310.
Collins, J. (1987) ‘Conversation and knowledge in bureaucratic settings’, Discourse Processes 10: 303–19.
Collins, J. and Slembrouck, S. (2006) ‘“You don’t know what they translate”: language contact,
institutional procedure and literary practice in a neighbourhood health clinic in urban Flanders’,
Journal of Linguistic Anthropology 16(2): 249–68.
Cook-Gumperz, J. and Messerman, L. (1999) ‘Local identities and institutional practices: con-
structing the record of professional collaboration’, in S. Sarangi and C. Roberts (eds) Talk, Work
and Institutional Order: Discourse in Medical, Mediation and Management Settings, Berlin:
Mouton de Gruyter.
Di Luzio, A., Günthner, S. and Orletti, F. (eds) (2000) Culture in Communication: Analysis of
Intercultural Situations, Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Douglas, M. (1986) How Institutions Think, Syracuse, NY: Syracuse University Press.
Drew, P. and Heritage, J. (eds) (1992) Talk at Work: Interaction in Institutional Settings, Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Eades, D. (2008) Courtroom Talk and Neo-colonial Control, Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter.
Erickson, F. and Schultz, J. (1982) The Counsellor as Gatekeeper: Social Interaction in Interviews,
New York: Academic Press.
Fairclough, N. (1992) Discourse and Social Change, Cambridge: Polity Press.
——(1993) ‘Critical discourse analysis and the marketisation of public discourse: the universities’,
Discourse and Society 4: 133–68.
——(1995) Media Discourse, London: Arnold.
Farrell, L. (2001) ‘The “new word order”: workplace education and the textual practice of global-
isation’, Pedagogy, Culture and Society 9(1): 57–74.
Fisher, S. and Todd, A. (eds) 1983 The Social Organization of Doctor-Patient Communication,
Washington, DC: Center for Applied Linguistics.
Foucault, M. (1981) ‘The order of discourse’, in R. Young (ed.) Untying the Text, London: Routledge/
Kegan Paul.
Frankel, R. (1984) ‘From sentence to sequence: understanding the medical encounter through
micro-interactional analysis’, Discourse Processes 7: 135–70.
Garﬁnkel, H. (1967) Studies in Ethnomethodology, Englewood Cliﬀs, NJ: Prentice Hall.
Gee, J. P., Hull, G. and Lankshear, C. (1996) The New Work Order: Behind the Language of the
New Capitalism, St Leonards, NSW, Australia: Allen and Unwin.
Gill, V. and Maynard, D. (2006) ‘Explaining illness: patients’ proposals and physicians’ responses’,
in J. Heritage and D. Maynard (eds) Communication in Medical Care: Interaction between Primary
Medical Care and Patients, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Goﬀman, E. (1959) The Presentation of Self in Everyday Life, New York: Doubleday.
Institutional discourse
93

——(1961) Asylums: Essays on the Social Situation of Mental Patients and Other Inmates, New
York: Doubleday Anchor.
——(1981) Forms of Talk, Oxford: Blackwell.
Goldstein, T. (1997) Two Languages at Work: Bilingual Life on the Production Floor, Berlin:
Mouton de Gruyter.
Goodwin, C. (1995) ‘Seeing in depth’, Social Studies of Science 25: 237–74.
Grant, D. and Iedema, R. (2005) ‘Discourse analysis and the study of organisations’, Text 25(1):
37–66.
Greatbatch, D., Luﬀ, P., Heath, C. and Campion, P. (1993) ‘Interpersonal communication and the
human-computer interaction’, Interacting with Computers 5(12): 193–216.
Gumperz, J. J. (1982a) Discourse Strategies, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
——(ed.) (1982b) Language and Social Identity, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
——(1992) ‘Interviewing in intercultural situations’, in P. Drew and J. Heritage (eds) Talk at Work:
Interaction in Social Settings, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
——(1999) ‘On interactional sociolinguistic method’, in S. Sarangi and C. Roberts (eds) Talk, Work
and Institutional Order: Discourse in Medical, Mediation and Management Settings, Berlin:
Mouton de Gruyter.
Gunnarsson, B. (2009) Professional Discourse, London: Continuum.
Habermas, J. (1979) Communication and the Evolution of Society, T. McCarthy (trans.), London:
Heinemann.
Hall, C. (1997) Social Work as Narrative, Basingstoke: Avebury.
Heath, C. (1981) ‘The opening sequence in doctor–patient interactions’, in P. Atkinson and
C. Heath (eds) Medical Work: Realities and Routines, Aldershot: Gower.
Heath, C. and vom Lehn, D. (2008) ‘Construing interactivity: enhancing engagement with new
technologies in science centres and museums’, Social Studies of Science 38: 63–96.
Heller, M. (2002) ‘Globalization and the commodiﬁcation of bilingualism in Canada’, in D. Block
and D. Cameron (eds) Globalization and Language Teaching, London: Routledge.
——(2006) Linguistic Advances and Modernity, London: Continuum.
——(2010) ‘Language as a resource in the globalized new economy’, in N. Coupland (ed.) Handbook
of Language and Globalization, Oxford: Blackwell, pp. 349–65.
Heritage, J. and Maynard, D. (eds) (2006) Communication in Medical Care: Interaction between
Primary Medical Care and Patients, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Heritage, J. and Seﬁ, S. (1992) ‘Dilemmas of advice: aspects of the delivery and reception of advice
in interactions between health visitors and ﬁrst-time mothers’, in P. Drew and J. Heritage (eds)
Talk at Work: Interaction in Social Settings, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Heydon, G. (2005) The Language of Police Interviewing: A Critical Analysis, Basingstoke: Palgrave
Macmillan.
Hindmarsh, J., Heath, C. and Fraser, M. (2006). ‘(Im)materiality, virtual reality and inter-
action: grounding the “virtual” in studies of technology in action’, Sociological Review 54(4): 795–817.
Hull, G. (ed.) (1997) Changing Work, Changing Workers: Critical Perspectives on Language, Lit-
eracy and Skills, Albany, NY: State University of New York Press.
Iedema, R. (2003) Discourses of Post-Bureaucratic Organization, Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Iedema, R. and Scheeres, H. (2003) ‘From doing to talking work: renegotiating knowing, doing and
talking’, Applied Linguistics 24: 316–37.
Iedema, R. and Wodak, R. (1999) ‘Organisational discourses and practices’, Discourse and Society
10(1): 5–20.
Jewitt, C. (ed.) (2009) Routledge Handbook of Multimodal Analysis, London: Routledge.
Kleifgen, J. (2001) ‘Assembling talk: social alignments in the workplace’, Research on Language and
Social Interaction 34(3): 279–308.
Komter, M. (1991) Conﬂict and Co-operation in Job Interviews, Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Lemke, J. (2002) ‘Travels in hypermodality’, Visual Communication 3: 299–325.
Levinson, S. (1979) ‘Activity types and language’, Linguistics 17(5): 356–99.
Linell, P. and Thunquist, D. (2003) ‘Moving in and out of framings: activity contexts in talks with
young unemployed people within a training project’, Journal of Pragmatics 35: 409–34.
McCall, C. (2003) ‘Language dynamics in the bi- and multilingual workplace’, in R. Bayley and
S. Schecter (eds) Language Socialization in Bilingual and Multilingual Societies, Clevedon:
Multilingual Matters.
Celia Roberts
94

Makitalo, A. and Saljo, R. (2002) ‘Talk in institutional context and institutional context in talk:
categories and situational practices’, Text 22: 57–82.
Maryns, K. (2006) The Asylum Speaker: Language in the Belgian Asylum Procedure, Manchester:
St Jerome Publishing.
Mautner, G. (2005) ‘The entrepreneurial university: a discursive proﬁle of a higher education buzzword’,
Critical Discourse Studies 2(2): 95–120.
Mayr, A. (2004) Prison Discourse: Language as a Means of Control and Resistance, Basingstoke:
Palgrave Macmillan.
——(2008) Language and Power: An Introduction to Insitutional Discourse, London: Continuum.
Mehan, H. (1979) Learning Lessons: Social Organization in the Classroom, Cambridge, MA:
Harvard University Press.
——(1993) ‘Beneath the skin and the between the ears: a case study in the politics of representation’, in
S. Chaiklin and J. Lave (eds) Understanding Practice, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Mishler, E. (1984) The Discourse of Medicine: The Dialectics of Medical Interviews, Norwood, NJ:
Ablex.
Mumby, D. and Clair, R. (1997) ‘Organizational discourse’, in T. A. van Dijk (ed.) Discourse Studies,
vol. 2: Discourse as Social Interaction, London: Sage.
Rampton, B. (2006) Language in Late Modernity: Interaction in an Urban School, Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Rampton, B., Maybin, J. and Tusting, K. (eds) (2007) ‘Linguistic ethnography’, special issue, Journal
of Sociolinguistics 11(3): 575–716.
Richardson, J. (2007) Analysing Newspapers: An Approach from CDA, Basingstoke: Palgrave
Macmillan.
Roberts, C. and Campbell, S. (2005) ‘Fitting stories into boxes: rhetorical and textual constraints on
candidate’s performances in British job interviews’, Journal of Applied Linguistics 2(1): 45–73.
Roberts, C. and Sarangi, S. (1999) ‘Hybridity in gatekeeping discourse: issues of practical relevance
for the researcher’, in S. Sarangi and C. Roberts (eds) Talk, Work and Institutional Order: Dis-
course in Medical, Mediation and Management Settings, Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter.
Rock, F. (2007) Communicating Rights: The Language of Arrest and Detention, Basingstoke: Palgrave
Macmillan.
Sarangi, S. and Roberts, C. (1999) ‘The dynamics of interactional and institutional orders’, in
S. Sarangi and C. Roberts (eds) Talk, Work and Institutional Order: Discourse in Medical, Mediation
and Management Settings, Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter.
Sarangi, S. and Roberts, C. (eds) (1999) Talk, Work and Institutional Order: Discourse in Medical,
Mediation and Management Settings, Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter.
Sarangi, S. and Slembrouck, S. (1996) Language, Bureaucracy and Social Control, London: Longman.
Silverman, D. (1999) ‘Warriors or collaborators: reworking methodological controversies in the
study of institutional interaction’ in S. Sarangi and C. Roberts (eds) Talk, Work and Institutional
Order: Discourse in Medical, Mediation and Management Settings, Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter.
Smith, D. (1987) The Everyday World as Problematic: A Feminist Sociology, Boston: Northeastern
University Press.
Suchman, L. (1992) ‘Technologies of accountability: of lizards and airplanes’, in G. Button (ed.)
Technology in Working Order: Studies of Work Interaction and Technology, London: Routledge.
Thornborrow, J. (2002) Power Talk: Language and Interaction in Institutional Discourse, London:
Longman.
Trinch, S. (2003) Latinas’ Narratives of Domestic Abuse: Discrepant Versions of Violence, Amsterdam:
John Benjamins.
Vertovec, S. (2007) ‘Superdiversity and its implications’, Ethnic and Racial Studies 30(6): 1024–54.
Weber, M. (1947) The Theory of Social and Economic Organization, M. Henderson and T. Parsons
(trans.), Glencoe, IL: Free Press.
West, C. (1984) Routine Complications: Troubles in Talk between Doctors and Patients, Bloomington:
Indiana University Press.
Wodak, R. (1996) Disorders of Discourse, London: Longman.
Zimmerman, D. (1992) ‘The interactional organisation of calls for emergency assistance’, in P. Drew
and J. Heritage (eds) Talk at Work: Interaction in Social Settings, Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.
Institutional discourse
95

7
Medical communication
Sarah Collins, Sarah Peters and Ian Watt
Historical background
The main arena for medical communication can be most comprehensively viewed in terms of
the doctor-patient relationship. The relationship between the patient and the doctor provides
the foundations for establishing trust, rapport and understanding, explaining diagnoses, dis-
cussing prognoses, and negotiating treatment. The ways the doctor and patient use language to
convey their perspectives determine how the patient’s problem is understood, as well as shap-
ing the relationship, which can have a therapeutic value in its own right.
Although there are earlier references to the nature and evolution of the relationship between
patient and doctor, the 1950s saw the start of a growing body of cross-disciplinary work to
develop theoretical underpinnings of the patient-professional relationship, to produce insights
into uses of language in the healthcare consultation, and to engage professionals and the public
in debates to promote ‘good’ consulting behaviours and to involve patients and enable their
voices to be heard. Several strands of work developed in parallel: the therapeutic nature of
the doctor-patient relationship (Balint 1957); consultation activities and doctors’ consulting
behaviours (Byrne and Long 1976); the concept of biopsychosocial medicine (Engel 1977);
ethnographic observations of healthcare settings (e.g. Sudnow 1967).
Balint’s (1957) work introduced the psychosocial element into understanding patients’ pro-
blems. Drawing on psychotherapeutic principles, Balint turned doctors’ attention to how lis-
tening to the patient and treating the patient’s language as relevant, diagnostically and
therapeutically, can signiﬁcantly enhance medical practice.
Byrne and Long (1976) conducted a study of the primary care consultation, based on audio
recordings of over 2,000 consultations. Their research was the ﬁrst to detail the structure and
delivery of the healthcare consultation. They identiﬁed six consultation phases: establishing a
relationship; discovering the reason for a patient’s attendance; conducting a verbal and/or
physical examination; evaluating the patient’s condition; detailing treatment or further inves-
tigation; and closing. Byrne and Long’s analyses focused on doctors’ statements and practices,
and treated doctors’ actions as causal. They were thus able to appraise the eﬀectiveness of
individual consultations, based on descriptions of how language is used and deployed by
doctors. They observed, for example, that dysfunctional consultations tended to have less
96

silence. They also found that the fourth phase of the consultation (evaluating the patient’s
condition) was accorded little attention by most doctors, who tended to move from examining
the patient to detailing treatment ‘with hardly a word to the patient en route’ (Byrne and Long
1976: 50). Through their examination of doctors’ language use, they identiﬁed a spectrum of
consulting styles, from doctor-centred to patient-centred.
Sudnow (1967) conducted an ethnographic study of hospital practices in death and dying, in
two diﬀerent hospitals. His observations of the words and actions of hospital staﬀshowed how
death and dying is diﬀerently pronounced for patients according to individual and socio-
demographic characteristics, and how a hospital’s organisation impacted on forms of com-
munication between staﬀ, patients and their families. For example, Sudnow described how
nurses approached the relative of a dying patient in such a way as to prepare them for what lay
ahead and for meeting with the doctor, before any words were uttered. He recorded the words
staﬀused to report a death to each other, and how their reports were diﬀerently phrased and
pitched for relatives of the deceased. His identiﬁcation of diﬀerential applications of terms
such as ‘dead on arrival’, according to an individual’s social characteristics, highlighted social
inequalities in death and dying.
Understanding communication in healthcare consultations has evolved through a combi-
nation of disciplinary approaches and in response to particular societal expectations (e.g. what
a patient wants from their doctor). Few of these early studies fall within the ﬁeld of linguistics
per se, but they all draw on language and communication to explain the complex processes
housed within the doctor-patient relationship.
Main current issues
Since the 1980s, medical communication has developed as a ﬁeld of research in its own right,
as documented in numerous reviews (e.g. Ong et al. 1995; Stewart et al. 2003). This research
has explored a range of communication features and dimensions to highlight their role in the
delivery and uptake of healthcare. The predominant focus has been on the doctor-patient
consultation in general practice.
Language and communication in the general practice consultation
Studies of the general practice consultation include empirical research into the details of language
use and interaction and explorations of patients’ and doctors’ perceptions and experiences of their
communication with one another, as well as conceptual studies of patient-centredness or shared
decision-making.
Research employing conversation analysis has focused on particular consultation activities
or phases. To give two examples, Heritage and Stivers (1999) identiﬁed features of doctors’
‘on-line commentaries’ during physical examinations. These can provide reassurance, justify a
forthcoming diagnostic evaluation, and shape the patient’s expectations towards a ‘no-problem’
explanation (i.e. one which does not require treatment or is not a particular cause for concern).
Stivers (2005) described diﬀerent formats in which doctors present treatment recommendations
to patients, and showed that doctors who provide a speciﬁc, positive recommendation followed
by a negative one are most likely to obtain patient acceptance when recommending a non-antibiotic
treatment.
Discourse analytic studies of communication in consultations have addressed themes such as
the place of the patient’s narrative, the ways in which decisions are managed and negotiated,
and cultural inferences and interpretations. Studies adopting a narrative-based approach
Medical communication
97

(Greenhalgh and Hurwitz 2004) have attended to how symptomatic information provided by a
patient is contextualised through the ‘story’ they tell in the consultation. In hearing patients’
stories, it is argued, doctors begin the cognitive processes of prediction, evaluation, planning
and explanation, through the patient’s words and the connections they make between symp-
toms, events and illness episodes. In research on decision-making, Elwyn et al. (1999) identi-
ﬁed that consultations containing conﬂict about treatment for upper respiratory tract infection
exhibited none of the ideological competencies of ‘shared decision-making’. The authors
argued that to address diﬀerences in understanding where the doctor and patient hold oppos-
ing views, further detailed empirical research, as well as revision of concepts of shared deci-
sion-making, are required. Roberts et al. (2005) explored how patients with limited English
and culturally diﬀerent communication styles consulted with doctors. Their analyses identiﬁed
four categories of ‘talk’ contributing to misunderstandings: pronunciation and word stress;
intonation and speech delivery; grammar, vocabulary and lack of contextual information; and
style of presentation. In particular, they noted that the patient’s style of self-presentation could
lead to misunderstandings.
While much of the research on communication in the general practice consultation centres
on the words used and how they are said, some speciﬁcally considers the relationship between
verbal and non-verbal elements. For example, Ruusuvuori (2001) discriminated between
‘patient-embodied’ actions directed to the patient, and ‘patient-inscribed’ actions that draw
on other information sources such as case notes, showing how doctors’ movements away from
or towards the patient can present problems for patients in determining whether the doctor is
listening and can disrupt the ﬂow of their talk. In paediatric primary care consultations, gaze
direction has been noted to be one communication practice through which doctors’ questions
target either the child or the parent as respondent (Stivers 2001).
Other studies have employed observational, survey, interview and focus group data. These
have explored patients’ health and illness beliefs and doctors’ responses to these (e.g. Britten
et al. 2000), patients’ views of patient-centredness (e.g. Little et al. 2001), doctors’ views of
shared decision-making (e.g. Elwyn et al. 2000) and concepts such as trust and empathy
(Wright et al. 2004). Britten et al.’s (2000) study employed a combination of audio-recorded
consultations and semi-structured interviews with patients and doctors to explore mis-
understandings in prescribing. The fourteen categories of misunderstanding identiﬁed were all
associated with a lack of patient participation in the consultation, and all carried potential or
actual adverse outcomes, such as the patient deciding not to take a prescribed medicine.
Britten et al. found that patients’ preferences and expectations about medicines were rarely
voiced in the consultations and doctors were unaware of the relevance of these for successful
prescribing. Little et al.’s (2001) survey of patient-centredness demonstrated that patients
valued communication and partnership most highly in consultations. Elwyn et al.’s (2000)
exploration of doctors’ views concerning shared decision-making, through focus groups,
revealed doctors’ ideological principles and consultation practices that added to existing
models (e.g. Towle and Godolphin 1999): for example, participating doctors stressed the
importance of portraying options before sounding out the patient’s wishes for involvement in
decision-making. Wright et al. (2004) interviewed patients with breast cancer and found that
they valued trust in doctors’ expertise above the communication skills that doctors are tradi-
tionally taught, such as demonstrating empathy. They gauged trust in terms of (among other
features) doctors’ displays of technical expertise, doctors ‘being frank’, and doctors who
‘answered questions without hesitation’.
This research has been paralleled by conceptual and theoretical work on patient-centredness
(Stewart 2001), patient participation (Coulter 2002) and shared decision-making (Towle and
Sarah Collins, Sarah Peters and Ian Watt
98

Godolphin 1999). This reﬂects the shift from a paternalistic view of the patient to one in which
the patient brings their expertise and knowledge to the consultation and in which shared
decision-making can occur. Research has also identiﬁed how and to what extent these ideals
are realised in practice. Studies have focused on the patient’s role in decision-making, identi-
fying strategies through which patients may get the most out of their consultations (Tuckett et al.
1985); on the ways patients interpret measures of their involvement (Entwistle et al. 2004); and
on the variety of forms of patient participation (Collins et al. 2007).
When taken together, ﬁndings from these studies aﬀord a view of the healthcare consulta-
tion in which diﬀerent applications of language research combine to provide insights into
the details of interaction and language use (word choice, phrasing of treatment options, non-
verbal cues) as well as the expressed views and preferences of patients, their interpretations
of the care they receive, and doctors’ intentions and ideals. These observations of
language and how it is employed in healthcare consultations build understanding of how the
doctor-patient relationship, as the foundation of good medical practice, is established and
maintained.
Extending the view beyond the general practice consultation
Research on the themes indicated above has extended to other types of healthcare consultation.
This allows comparative research across diﬀerent clinical settings and health professionals, to
identify their unique and shared communication features. Studies in, for example, hospital
settings consultations involving the patient and a carer/family member, nursing, pharmacy,
physiotherapy and complementary and alternative medicine illustrate dimensions for further
research and for extending our understanding of the healthcare consultation in general. The
following are some examples.
Salter et al.’s (2007) study of pharmacists’ home visits to the elderly revealed how, in that
context, pharmacists’ advice was generally ill-ﬁtted and met with resistance. In a comparison
of decision-making practices of GPs and hospital surgeons, Braddock et al. (1999) found that
both groups infrequently had complete discussions of treatment decisions with patients.
Coupland et al. (1994), in their study of doctor-patient communication in a geriatric out-
patients’ clinic, observed less division between medical and social talk than the literature
generally suggests. Boundaries between social and medical topics were negotiated, and doctors
frequently continued a social, conversational line, even when patients indicated readiness to
move to the medical agenda. Beresford and Sloper (2003) used interviews and group discus-
sions to document inﬂuences of chronic illness and parental involvement on adolescents’
communication with doctors. They discovered how: the series of questions deployed by doc-
tors to monitor the everyday management of an illness deterred adolescents from participat-
ing; talking with parents provided opportunities to rehearse concerns before presenting them
to the doctor; through a sustained relationship with their doctor, adolescents could move
beyond pretending about adherence to lifestyle or treatment regimens and talk openly about
them. In complementary and alternative medicine research, randomised controlled trials
have recently been conducted to explore whether the practitioner-patient relationship can
enhance the eﬀects of treatment. For example Kaptchuk et al.’s (2008) study with three parti-
cipant groups (one receiving real acupuncture, one receiving sham acupuncture, and one
receiving no acupuncture), revealed no therapeutic diﬀerence between the ‘sham’ and real
acupuncture groups, suggesting that the process of receiving acupuncture may have its own,
beneﬁcial, placebo eﬀect, and highlighting the therapeutic eﬀects of communication and the
patient-practitioner relationship.
Medical communication
99

Such studies indicate dimensions for comparison and further research: the ways doctors
engage with patients in conversation as well as formal interaction, blurring distinctions
between social and medical talk; how a planned policy intervention, such as pharmacists’
home visits to the elderly, may be ill-ﬁtted to certain healthcare contexts or professional roles;
ways of isolating therapeutic eﬀects of communication; and features of patient-doctor com-
munication that promote or hinder patients’ participation.
Cultural and linguistic diversity
Research exploring cultural and linguistic issues (see Roberts 2007 for a comprehensive dis-
cussion) has considered diﬀerences in cultural understandings of illness, the inﬂuences of
multiple languages in a consultation, and how perceptions of race, education and social class
shape doctor-patient communication.
In a review of research on culture and somatisation (the process by which psychological
distress manifests in physical symptoms), Kirmayer and Young (1998) report that somatisation
has been observed across all studied ethnocultural groups and societies, with signiﬁcant cul-
tural variations even where access to health services is relatively equitable. Patients’ reports of
bodily symptoms encode cultural models that supply patients with a vocabulary for describing
symptoms, as well as a means of explaining them. One cultural diﬀerence concerns how dis-
tress is expressed. Kirmayer and Young (1998: 424) report that the idiom ‘heart distress’
among Iranians is a culturally prescribed way of talking about problems related to grief, and:
‘Throughout the Middle East, references to the heart are commonly understood not just as
potential signs of illness but as natural metaphors for a range of emotions.’
Research on consultations involving more than one language has explored the linguistic
challenges that such consultations present, as well as highlighting features of language use that
pertain to all healthcare consultations. Studies have shown how interpreters not only convey
the meaning of the patient’s words, but also how they are centrally involved in negotiating and
achieving interactional goals with real consequences for the patient’s care: for example the
reporting of the patient’s symptoms and the process of arriving at a diagnosis can be shaped
by what the interpreter says and how they choose to present the patient’s problem in medical
and lay terms. For example, Davidson (2000) found that in consultations with English-speaking
doctors, Spanish-speaking patients were left with concerns that were unaddressed; and Bolden
(2000) found that the interpreter was oriented to achieving the goals of history-taking in what
they perceived to be the most eﬃcient manner, with the interpreter editing out information
and words from the patient which the interpreter considered to be irrelevant. It has also been
noted that where the patient and doctor speak diﬀerent languages, patients have reported less
than satisfactory interpersonal care, with or without an interpreter present (e.g. Ngo-Metzger
et al. 2007). In such consultations, patients are more likely to have their comments ignored
(Rivandeneyra et al. 2000), and in the absence of an interpreter, discussion of health promotion
is limited (Ngo-Metzger et al. 2007).
Racial and ethnic disparities in quality of care for those with access to a healthcare system
exist in the utilisation of diagnostic procedures and therapeutic interventions. One root cause
of such disparity is variations in patients’ ability to communicate their symptoms to a doctor
who understands their meaning, expectations of care and adherence to lifestyle and medica-
tion regimes (van Ryn and Burke 2000). Stivers and Majid’s (2007) study of doctors’ ques-
tioning in consultations about routine childhood illnesses demonstrated a signiﬁcant eﬀect of
parents’ race and education on whether physicians select children to answer questions. Black
Sarah Collins, Sarah Peters and Ian Watt
100

children and Latino children of low-education parents were less likely to be selected to answer
questions than their same-aged white peers, irrespective of their education.
Linguistic analysis as a diagnostic resource
A recent advance in applications of language research to medical communication concerns
how language used by patients can serve as a diagnostic resource. In psychiatry, doctors
depend on patients’ language for diagnosis and treatment, but how words actually function in
consultations to inﬂuence diagnostic reasoning and treatment decisions remains under-researched
and is little understood (Fine 2006).
Schwabe et al. (2008) have identiﬁed features of patients’ language that may be instrumental
in diﬀerentiating between epileptic (ES) and non-epileptic seizures (NES). Patients with
ES provide coherent accounts of individual seizures, relate subjective seizure experiences and
use consistent metaphoric conceptualizations. Patients with NES tend not to volunteer subjective
seizure symptoms, give accounts of their seizures that are diﬃcult to understand and are
inconsistent in their choice of metaphors.
A substantive and growing body of work on the use of language in diagnosis is research on
communication disorders and language impairments (see Perkins and Howard, this volume).
The patient’s illness experience
Increased emphasis on listening to the patient and understanding their perspective has invited
reconsideration of how, through communication in the consultation, patients’ perspectives can
inform medical understanding: of particular diseases, of the nature of pain and how it may be
described, and of connections between diﬀerent symptoms.
One example is patients whose symptoms are not easily deﬁned or explained according to
physical pathology. Medically unexplained symptoms (MUS) not only present a cognitive
challenge for the doctor, in making conﬁdent use of the label; they also pose a linguistic one,
namely, how to explain and negotiate the ‘unexplained’. Theoretical understanding of MUS
initially led researchers to conceive of these problems as caused by an underlying psychological
disorder (Lipowski 1988) or misattribution of psychological distress to physical causes
(Kirmayer and Robbins 1991), with resultant interventions focused on addressing the patient’s
somatisation (e.g. Morriss et al. 2007). Applications of linguistics have led to more fruitful
ways to understand MUS. Analyses of consultations have revealed complex interactions and
negotiations whereby patients assert authority over their condition (Peters et al. 1998) to shape
the consultation and its outcomes, securing referral to specialists (Salmon et al. 1999). A par-
ticular tension, played out through language use, has been highlighted, in which both patients
and doctors use scientiﬁc discourse, but for diﬀerent reasons: the doctor to maintain their
distance and their expert stance, and the patient to engage the doctor (Chew-Graham et al.
2008). Furthermore, analysing patients’ perceptions of their symptoms revealed that, rather
than having unidimensional causal beliefs, individuals with MUS had a multifaceted under-
standing of their condition that recognised psychosocial factors (Peters et al. 2009). Patients’
own rich illness models contrasted with their perceptions of doctors’ more simplistic under-
standing. This led to patients’ mistrust of their doctors, limiting the information they dis-
closed. Empathic responses to emotional cues appear critical for reassurance and building
trust among patients with MUS (Epstein et al. 2007). This suggests that future interventions
should focus not on reattribution of patients’ understandings, but on developing doctors’
awareness and communication responses to patients’ needs, through linguistic approaches.
Medical communication
101

Inﬂuences of new technology
The inﬂuences of new technology on medical communication in recent years have been mani-
fold: electronic patient records; use of email for consulting; phone-in consultations (such as
NHS Direct, the UK’s National Health Service telephone helpline) which guide the caller
along particular routes according to their reason for calling; templates and aids for decision-
making; and on-line communication, for example, for adolescents consulting about sexual
health (Harvey et al. 2007).
The introduction of the computer into the consultation both hinders and promotes com-
munication between patient and doctor, revealing interesting relations between non-verbal and
verbal activity. For example, Hsu et al. (2005) observed that doctors’ baseline communication
skills (verbal and non-verbal) were ampliﬁed, positively or negatively, by the introduction of a
computer to the consultation. In another study (Margalit et al. 2006), time spent gazing at the
computer screen was inversely related to clinician engagement in psychosocial questioning and
emotional responsiveness, and time spent typing was inversely related to the amount of dia-
logue between clinician and patient. McGrath et al. (2007) found that patients exploited
silences created by the doctor’s use of electronic patient records to ask questions.
Cultural models, broader discourses and media representations
While research on language and medicine has largely centred on examining the structure and
content of the doctor-patient encounter, realms of communication that extend beyond the
consultation and the doctor-patient relationship have also been investigated.
One example is Bell’s (2009) study of cultural models of chemotherapy expressed in a cancer
support group, showing how patients’ understandings of chemotherapy diverge from biome-
dical models of treatment. Iedema’s (2007) investigation of the discourse of hospital commu-
nication explores the complexities of the healthcare system and shows how health
professionals are compelled to reinvent their communication strategies to manage changes in
the system and their relationships with each other. Through textual discourse analysis of key
policy documents and interviews with policy-makers and stakeholders, Shaw and Greenhalgh
(2008) produced a critical assessment of how policy has shifted healthcare research away from
independent enterprise towards a strategic resource and ‘population laboratory’ for large-scale
clinical trials.
Research methods
As illustrated by the research referenced above, diverse methods have been employed to study
various forms of medical communication. These include conversation analysis (e.g. Heritage
and Maynard 2006), discourse analysis (e.g. Roberts et al. 2005) and coding schemes (e.g.
Roter and Larson 2002); corpus linguistics (e.g. Harvey et al. 2007); surveys (e.g. Little et al.
2001); semi-structured interviews (e.g. Wright et al. 2004); focus groups (e.g. Bell 2009);
observation and ethnography (e.g. Sudnow 1967); document analysis (e.g. Shaw and Green-
halgh 2008); and randomised controlled trials (e.g. Heritage et al. 2007).
Regardless of the methods employed, researching medical communication presents ethical
dilemmas and sensitivities that shape the nature of the data collected as well as how it is
analysed. Obtaining consent from prospective participants, positioning recording equipment in
a clinic or patient’s home, being party to a patient’s experience of their illness and treatment:
all these bring further insights. During data collection in a cancer drop-in centre, Watts (2008)
Sarah Collins, Sarah Peters and Ian Watt
102

reported how her position shifted from initiating contact with participants, asking direct
questions, and doing the talking, to one in which participants chose the point of contact and
topic of discussion, seeking her out to report how they were managing, often during times of
crisis. (See Maybin and Tusting, this volume, for an overview of linguistic ethnography.)
Particular methods (or combinations of methods) may be more suited than others, in
researching diﬀerent aspects of medical communication. In using an individual method,
Harvey et al. (2007: 772) argue that, in the study of adolescent health communication, corpus
linguistics is a means of describing a ‘distinctive “genre”’ of messages about sexual health.
‘Comparative keyword analysis’, employed by Seale et al. (2006) in a study exploring gender
diﬀerences in how patients talk about their cancer experience, represents a new use of software
designed for corpus linguistic analysis, as a way of conducting comparative qualitative analyses
of large data sets. One combination that has proved productive is conversation or discourse
analysis of a recorded consultation, coupled with interviews exploring the participants’
perspectives and/or measurement of consultation outcomes (e.g. Barry et al. 2001).
An important distinction concerns the diﬀerent aims and eﬀects of descriptive, as compared
to evaluative, approaches to medical communication research. That is, is the purpose
simply to describe what happens, or is the research being conducted with the aim of improving
the quality of healthcare? The purpose inevitably shapes the choice of methods and hence the
results. For example, in coding consultations, diﬀerent schemes have been developed: some
make assumptions, for example about what is ‘good’ or ‘bad’ communication (Hall et al.
1987); while others are not based on a particular premise and therefore allow testing of dif-
ferent theories (e.g. Salmon et al. 2006). Some, like the Patient Enablement Index (Mercer and
Howie 2006) explicitly combine the use of a schema for research with evaluation of doctors’
consultation skills.
Some studies highlight how the methods employed can allow unexpected ﬁndings and
relations between themes to surface. For example, O’Riordan et al. (2008), in their study of
‘likeable’ patients, employed concordance software alongside interviews. Concordance analysis
uncovered new themes: for example, the words ‘time’ and ‘years’ recurred frequently and
revealed the importance of the ongoing nature of general practice for building relationships
with patients.
Many studies involve forms of comparison: for example professional versus conversational
talk; one disease setting, or professional culture, versus another; or patients’ versus doctors’
perspectives. Comparative studies have revealed points of diﬀerence and similarity that war-
rant further investigation: for example, distinctive features of doctors’, versus nurses’, com-
munication with patients highlight the potential complement between their contributions, for
multidisciplinary healthcare (e.g. Collins 2005).
Effects of language use and communication on healthcare outcomes
There is increasing recognition of how communication can inﬂuence healthcare outcomes.
Communication can positively inﬂuence adherence to treatment (e.g. Dowell et al. 2002).
Studies exploring socio-relational factors, such as patients’ satisfaction and feelings of ease,
show that greater consultation length and continuity of care are positively correlated with
patients’ satisfaction (Mercer and Howie 2006). In consultations where patients perceived that
they found common ground with their doctor in decision-making there were signiﬁcantly fewer
referrals and investigations over the following two months (Stewart et al. 1997). Research
has also shown how patients’ recall and understanding of information may be inﬂuenced
through communication; for example, Britten et al. (2000) noted that doctors could avoid
Medical communication
103

misunderstandings by asking patients directly what they thought about taking medicines. In a
randomised controlled trial, Heritage et al. (2007) found that, depending on the phrasing
doctors employ to elicit patients’ concerns, the patient may be more or less likely to mention
what is troubling them.
Medical education
Recent developments in medical education have given prominence to the importance of com-
munication training, pre- and post-qualiﬁcation. This training is modelled on professional
guidelines for good medical practice (General Medical Council 2003) that pay close attention
to the communication competencies and standards required for maintaining caring relation-
ships with patients. Clinician educators are now expected to bring knowledge of communica-
tion and related research, as well as medicine, to their teaching. Increasingly, communication
training involves the patient’s perspective, conveyed through actors (Spencer and Dales 2006)
or patients as real-life informants (Muir 2007).
Medical communication curricula are increasingly informed by research. The content
employed across the UK for consultation skills teaching is based on the Calgary-Cambridge
framework (Kurtz et al. 2005) compiled from research into the consultation. The design of
curricula has also been informed by the literature in taking an integrative view of the con-
sultation (Stewart et al. 2003): one in which clinical, biomedical tasks are necessarily fused
with patients’ views and psychosocial aspects. Communication is treated as an integral com-
ponent, as reﬂected in teaching communication skills during clinical placements and in
examining communication alongside other clinical skills, with real patients.
Medical education is a growing ﬁeld of research. Linguistic approaches are employed to
inform analyses and to deﬁne areas for further study. For example, regarding assessment of
communication skills, Roberts et al. (2003) video-recorded students’ consultation performance
in clinical exams and analysed these recordings to investigate the details of interaction that
lead to students being assessed as ‘good’ or ‘poor’ communicators. They were able to show,
through reference to a range of constituents, how stronger candidates were ‘empathetic’
(responding attentively and using joint problem-solving) and weaker candidates were ‘retrac-
tive’ (responding inappropriately and demonstrating insensitivity to patients’ understandings).
Humphris and Kaney (2001) devised a coding scheme to assess the development of students’
communication throughout their training. Students’ performance improved over a 17-month
period, but their knowledge and understanding at initial assessment did not show the pre-
dicted association with subsequent communication skills performance. Analyses of doctors’
postgraduate consultation skills assessments (Campion et al. 2002) have identiﬁed that
doctors ﬁnd ‘explanation and planning’ particularly challenging and generally under-perform
in this area.
Conceptual understanding of medical communication is also being advanced. ‘Cultural
competency’, for example, is taught in medical school curricula, but is diﬃcult to deﬁne and is
continually being revisited (e.g. Betancourt et al. 2003) as a consequence of increasing diversity
and change in the ethnic and socio-demographic composition not only of patient populations,
but also of doctor populations, in the UK and elsewhere.
Future trajectory and new debates
The application of linguistics to the study of medical communication oﬀers exciting prospects
and opportunities for new dialogues between disciplines.
Sarah Collins, Sarah Peters and Ian Watt
104

Medical communication is a relatively new ﬁeld of research, in which linguistic exper-
tise has played a small part. Many areas remain under-researched, such as consultations
involving diﬀerent languages (Shaw and Ahmed 2004). Certain linguistic methods and
approaches remain under-used; for example, dialect variation and linguistic accommodation
could be employed to study professional cultures and communication practices across clinical
settings.
There is much that linguistics can oﬀer medical communication. For example, we can
use linguistics to explore how the language we use to describe medical communication creates
a particular impression or reality, such as in the term ‘patient-centred care’. An under-
standing of linguistics can help us to challenge assumptions in medical communication
practice: for example, does a consultation involving a relative stand in the way of commu-
nication with a patient? Or does their presence facilitate the patient’s participation, and in
what ways?
By the same token, there is much that medical communication can oﬀer linguistics. Medical
communication compels researchers to make language-based studies relevant to healthcare
professionals’ and patients’ everyday experience. It is useful to consider, then, whether the
ways we apply linguistics to medical communication do actually translate into practice, and
what is relevant to professional and patient experience (Roberts and Sarangi 2003). For
example, when it is advocated that health professionals ‘integrate’ and ‘weave between’ medi-
cal and patient perspectives (Stewart et al. 2003), how does this translate into the language of
the consultation? While medical students are taught skills such as summarising, whether and
how doctors use summaries in practice, and to what eﬀect, remains unknown. And while
particular phrasings may be suggested by research, Heritage et al. (2007), for example, propose
that ‘something else’ in place of ‘anything else’ is more likely to elicit a patient’s concerns in a
consultation, ‘something else’ may be less natural to say, and may only elicit one of several
concerns. We need, therefore, to develop means of observing and measuring the eﬀects of such
research, as it is applied in medical practice.
The medical consultation and the health professional-patient relationship are likely to come
under new forms of scrutiny as systems of healthcare evolve and as research methods develop.
Extension of analyses of the consultation into a wider sphere (e.g. nurse consultations; use of
the Internet and email; consultations in diﬀerent languages) not only reﬂects increasing complex-
ities and degrees of specialisation in healthcare; it also has the potential to illuminate our
understanding of medical communication in general.
From the point of view of research methods, there is likely to be continued reﬁnement of
existing methods and interfacing with other disciplines (Candlin and Candlin 2003). Com-
parative and longitudinal research, using combinations of methods, will enable further sys-
tematic and detailed exploration. This process may be facilitated by the availability of shared
databases of interviews or recorded consultations with patients and health professionals (e.g.
Field and Ziebland 2008), although these also bring ethical issues concerning maintenance of
personal data and its use by a wider audience. Comparative research needs to accommodate
ordinary conversation alongside medical encounters and other forms of professional and
institutional communication, so that features of medical communication can be precisely
located and comprehensively understood.
Finally, although the doctor-patient relationship is so central to healthcare and so depen-
dent on language, it has been little studied: rather, it has been assumed to play a part and has
provided the impetus for studies. New research directions, such as work on emotion in lan-
guage use (e.g. Ruusuvuori 2007), oﬀer promising insights into the nature of the patient-doctor
relationship.
Medical communication
105

Summary
This chapter reviews research concerning language use in medical communication. The doctor-
patient relationship has provided the impetus for a broad range of studies investigating diﬀer-
ent dimensions of medical communication. Conceptual and empirical work has sought to
describe the constituents of patient-centred approaches in healthcare delivery, at the level of
individual words and actions in consultations, through to patient and health professional per-
spectives and experiences, and ideological and policy-driven discourses. Medical communica-
tion research has employed novel uses of linguistic methods of analysis. These applications of
linguistics have led to further understanding of how healthcare is delivered to, and taken up
by, patients, and are proving increasingly relevant to healthcare education and practice.
Related topics
clinical linguistics; culture; institutional discourse; linguistic ethnography
Further reading
Balint, M. (1957) The Doctor, his Patient, and the Illness, New York: International Universities
Press. (This pioneering work focuses attention on the patient as a person in the consultation and
on the importance of the patient’s language.)
Heritage, J. and Maynard, D. W. (eds) (2006) Communication in Medical Care: Interaction between
Primary Medical Care and Patients, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. (This collection of
studies in primary care illustrates the potential of applying detailed analyses of language use in
interaction to the study of medical communication.)
Kurtz, S., Silverman, J. and Draper, J. (2005) Teaching and Learning Communication Skills in
Medicine, 2nd edn, Oxford: Radcliﬀe Medical Press. (Kurtz et al. provide a comprehensive review
of medical communication research, set within their internationally recognised framework for
teaching consultation skills to doctors.)
References
Adolphs, S., Brown, B., Carter, R., Crawford, P. and Sahota, O. (2004) ‘Applying corpus linguistics
in a health care context’, Journal of Applied Linguistics 1(1): 44–9.
Balint, M. (1957) The Doctor, his Patient, and the Illness, New York: International Universities
Press.
Barry, C. A., Stevenson, F. A., Britten, N., Barber, N. and Bradley, C. P. (2001) ‘Giving voice to the
lifeworld. More eﬀective, more humane care? A qualitative study of doctor-patient communica-
tion in general practice’, Social Science and Medicine 53: 487–505.
Bell, K. (2009) ‘“If it almost kills you that means it’s working!” Cultural models of chemotherapy
expressed in a cancer support group’, Social Science and Medicine 68: 169–76.
Beresford, B. and Sloper, P. (2003) ‘Chronically ill adolescents’ experiences of communicating with
doctors: a qualitative study’, Journal of Adolescent Health 33(3): 172–9.
Betancourt, J. R., Green, A. R., Carrillo, J. E. and Ananeh-Firempong II, O. (2003) ‘Deﬁning cul-
tural competence: a practical framework for addressing racial/ethnic disparities in health and
health care’, Public Health Reports 118: 293–302.
Bolden, G. B. (2000) ‘Toward understanding practices of medical interpreting: interpreters’ invol-
vement in history taking’, Discourse Studies 2: 387–419.
Braddock, C. H., Edwards, K. A., Hasenburg, N. M., Laidley, T. L. and Levinson, W. (1999)
‘Informed decision-making in outpatient practice: time to get back to basics’, Journal of the
American Medical Association 282(24): 2313–20.
Britten, N., Stevenson, F. A., Barry, C. A., Barber, N. and Bradley, C. P. (2000) ‘Misunderstandings in
prescribing decisions in general practice: qualitative study’, British Medical Journal 320: 484–88.
Sarah Collins, Sarah Peters and Ian Watt
106

Byrne, P. S. and Long, B. E. L. (1976) Doctors Talking to Patients: A Study of the Verbal Beha-
viours of Doctors in the Consultation, London: HMSO.
Campion, P., Tate, P., Foulkes, J. and Neighbour, R. (2002) ‘Patient centredness in the MRCGP
video examination: analysis of large cohort’, British Medical Journal 325: 691–2.
Candlin, C. N. and Candlin, S. (2003) ‘Healthcare communication: a problematic site for applied
linguistics research’, Annual Review of Applied Linguistics 23: 134–54.
Chew-Graham, C., Cahill, G., Dowrick, C., Wearden, A., Richardson, V. and Peters, S. (2008)
‘Using multiple sources of knowledge to reach clinical understanding of chronic fatigue syn-
drome’, Annals of Family Medicine 6(4): 340–8.
Collins, S. (2005) ‘Explanations in consultations: the combined eﬀectiveness of doctors’ and nurses’
communication with patients’, Medical Education 39: 785–96.
Collins, S., Britten, N., Ruusuvuori, J. and Thompson, A. (2007) Patient Participation in Health
Care Consultations: Qualitative Perspectives, Maidenhead: Open University Press.
Coulter, A. (2002) The Autonomous Patient: Ending Paternalism in Medical Care, London: The
Stationery Oﬃce and Nuﬃeld Trust.
Coupland, J., Robinson, J. D. and Coupland, N. (1994) ‘Frame negotiation in doctor-elderly patient
consultations’, Discourse and Society 5(1): 89–124.
Davidson, B. (2000) ‘The interpreter as institutional gatekeeper: the social-linguistic role of inter-
preters in Spanish-English medical discourse’, Journal of Sociolinguistics 4(3): 379–405.
Dowell, J., Jones, A. and Snadden, D. (2002) ‘Exploring medication use to seek concordance with
“non-adherent” patients: a qualitative study’, British Journal of General Practice 52: 24–32.
Elwyn, G., Edwards, A., Kinnersley, P. and Grol, R. (2000) ‘Shared decision making and the con-
cept of equipoise: the competences of involving patients in healthcare choices’, British Journal of
General Practice 50: 892–7.
Elwyn, G., Gwyn, R., Edwards, A. and Grol, R. (1999) ‘Is “shared decision-making” feasible in
consultations for upper respiratory tract infections? Assessing the inﬂuence of antibiotic expec-
tations using discourse analysis’, Health Expectations 2: 105–17.
Engel, G. L. (1977) ‘The need for a new medical model: a challenge for biomedicine’, Science 196:
129–36.
Entwistle, V., Watt, I., Gilhooly, K., Bugge, C., Haites, N. and Walker, A. (2004) ‘Assessing
patients’ participation and quality of decision making: insights from a study of routine practice in
diverse settings’, Patient Education and Counselling 55: 105–13.
Epstein, R. M., Hadee, T., Carroll, J., Meldrum, S. C., Lardner, L. J. and Shields, C. G. (2007)
‘“Could this be something serious?”: reassurance, uncertainty and empathy in response to
patients’ expressions of worry’, Journal of General Internal Medicine 22(12): 1731–9.
Field, K. and Ziebland, S. (2008) ‘“Beyond the textbook”: a preliminary survey of the uses made of
the DIPEx Website (www.dipex.org) in healthcare education’. Available at: www.healthtalkonline.
org/Teaching AndLearning (accessed 21 May 2009).
Fine, J. (2006) Language in Psychiatry: A Handbook of Clinical Practice, London: Equinox Publishing.
General Medical Council (2003) Tomorrow’s Doctors, London: HMSO.
Greenhalgh, T. and Hurwitz, B. (eds) (2004) Narrative Research in Health and Illness, London:
BMJ Books.
Hall, J., Roter, D. and Katz, N. (1987) ‘Task versus socio-emotional behaviours in physicians’,
Medical Care 25: 399–412.
Harvey, K. J., Brown, B., Crawford, P., Macfarlane, A. and McPherson, A. (2007) ‘“Am I normal?”
Teenagers, sexual health and the Internet’, Social Science and Medicine 65: 771–81.
Heritage, J. and Maynard, D. W. (eds) (2006) Communication in Medical Care: Interaction between
Primary Medical Care and Patients, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Heritage, J. and Stivers, T. (1999) ‘Online commentary in acute medical visits: a method of shaping
patient expectations’, Social Science and Medicine 49: 1501–17.
Heritage, J., Robinson, J., Elliott, M., Beckett, M. and Wilkes, M. (2007) ‘Reducing patients’ unmet
concerns in primary care: the diﬀerence one word can make’, Journal of General Internal Medi-
cine 22(10): 1429–33.
Hsu, J., Huang, J., Fung, V., Robertson, N., Jimison, H. and Frankel, R. (2005) ‘Health informa-
tion technology and physician-patient interactions: impact of computers on communication
during outpatient primary care visits’, Journal of the American Medical Informatics Association
12(4): 474–80.
Medical communication
107

Humphris, G. M. and Kaney, S. (2001) ‘Assessing the development of communication skills in
undergraduate medical students’, Medical Education 35: 225–31.
Iedema, R. (2007) The Discourse of Hospital Communication: Tracing Complexities in Con-
temporary Health Organisations, Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan.
Kaptchuk, T. J., Kelley, J. M., Conboy, L. A., Davis, R. B., Kerr, C. E., Jacobson, E. E. et al. (2008)
‘Components of placebo eﬀect: randomised controlled trial in patients with irritable bowel syn-
drome’, British Medical Journal (online) 336(7651), doi: 0.1136/bmj.39524.439618.25.
Kirmayer, L. J. and Robbins, J. M. (1991) ‘Three forms of somatization in primary care-prevalence,
co-occurrence, and sociodemographic characteristics’, Journal of Nervous and Mental Disease
179(11): 647–55.
Kirmayer, L. J. and Young, A. (1998) ‘Culture and somatisation: clinical, epidemiological, and
ethnographic perspectives’, Psychosomatic Medicine 60: 420–30.
Kurtz, S., Silverman, J. and Draper, J. (2005) Teaching and Learning Communication Skills in
Medicine, 2nd edn, Oxford: Radcliﬀe Medical Press.
Little, P., Everitt, H., Williamson, I., Warner, G., Moore, M., Gould, C. et al. (2001) ‘Preferences of
patients for patient centred approach to consultation in primary care: observational study’, Brit-
ish Medical Journal 322: 1–7.
Lipowski, Z. J. (1988) ‘Somatisation: the concept and its clinical application’, American Journal of
Psychiatry 145: 1358–68.
McGrath, J. M., Arar, N. H. and Pugh, J. A. (2007) ‘The inﬂuence of electronic medical record
usage on nonverbal communication in the medical interview’, Health Informatics Journal 13(2):
105–18.
Margalit, R. S., Roter, D., Dunevant, M. A., Larson, S. and Reis, S. (2006) ‘Electronic medical
record use and physician-patient communication: an observational study of Israeli primary care
encounters’, Patient Education and Counselling 61(1): 134–41.
Mercer, S. W. and Howie, J. G. (2006) ‘CQI-2 – a new measure of holistic interpersonal care in
primary care consultations’, British Journal of General Practice 56(525): 262–8.
Morriss, R., Dowrick, C., Salmon, P., Peters, S., Dunn, G., Rogers, A. et al. (2007) ‘Exploratory
randomised controlled trial of training practices and general practitioners in reattribution to
manage patients with medically unexplained symptoms’, British Journal of Psychiatry 191:
536–42.
Muir, F. (2007) ‘Placing the patient at the core of teaching’, Medical Teacher 29: 258–60.
Ngo-Metzger, Q., Sorkin, D. H., Phillips, R. S., Greenﬁeld, S., Massagle, M. P., Clarridge, B. and
Kaplan, S. H. (2007) ‘Providing high-quality care for limited English proﬁcient patients: the
importance of language concordance and interpreter use’, Journal of General Internal Medicine
222(Suppl. 2): 324–30.
Ong, L. M. L., de Haesa, C. J. M., Hoosa, A. M. and Lammes, F. B. (1995) ‘Doctor-patient com-
munication: a review of the literature’, Social Science and Medicine 40(7): 903–18.
O’Riordan, M., Skelton, J. and de la Croix, A. (2008) ‘Heartlift patients? An interview-based study
of GP trainers and the impact of “patients they like”’, Family Practice 25: 349–54.
Peters, S., Rogers, A., Salmon, P., Gask, L., Towey, M., Cliﬀord, R. et al. (2009) ‘What do patients
choose to tell their doctors? Qualitative analysis of potential barriers for managing unexplained
symptoms’, Journal of General Internal Medicine 24(4): 443–9.
Peters, S., Stanley, I., Rose, M. and Salmon, P. (1998) ‘Patients with medically unexplained symp-
toms: sources of patients’ authority and implications for demands on medical care’, Social
Science and Medicine 46(4–5): 559–65.
Rivandeneyra, R. M. A., Elderkin-Thompson, V., Silver, R. C. and Waitzkin, H. (2000) ‘Patient
centeredness in medical encounters requiring an interpreter’, American Journal of Medicine
108(6): 470–4.
Roberts, C. (2007) ‘Intercultural communication in healthcare settings’, in H. Kotthoﬀand
H. Spencer-Oatey (eds) Handbook of Intercultural Communication, New York: Mouton de
Gruyter.
Roberts, C., Moss, B., Wass, V., Sarangi, S. and Jones, R. (2005) ‘Misunderstandings: a qualitative
study of primary care consultations in multilingual settings, and educational implications’,
Medical Education 39(5): 465–75.
Roberts, C. and Sarangi, S. (2003) ‘Uptake of discourse research in interprofessional settings:
reporting from medical consultancy’, Applied Linguistics 24(3): 338–59.
Sarah Collins, Sarah Peters and Ian Watt
108

Roberts, C., Wass, V., Jones, R., Sarangi, S. and Gillet, A. (2003) ‘A discourse analysis study of
“good” and “poor” communication in an OSCE: a proposed new framework for teaching
students’, Medical Education 37: 1–10.
Roter, D. and Larson, S. (2002) ‘The Roter Interaction Analysis System (RIAS): utility and ﬂexi-
bility for analysis of medical interactions’, Patient Education and Counselling 46(4): 243–51.
Ruusuvuori, J. (2001) ‘Looking means listening: co-ordinating displays of engagement in doctor-
patient interaction’, Social Science and Medicine 52: 1093–108.
——(2007) ‘Managing aﬀect: integration of empathy and problem solving in two types of medical
consultation’, Discourse Studies 9(5): 597–620.
Salmon, P., Humphris, G. M., Ring, A., Davies, J. C. and Dowrick, C. F. (2006) ‘Why do primary
care physicians propose medical care to patients with medically unexplained symptoms? A new
method of sequence analysis to test theories of patient pressure’, Psychosomatic Medicine 68:
570–7.
Salmon, P., Peters, S. and Stanley, I. (1999) ‘Patients’ perceptions of medical explanations for
somatisation disorders: qualitative analysis’, British Medical Journal 318: 372–6.
Salter, C., Holland, R., Harvey, I. and Henwood, K. (2007) ‘“I haven’t even phoned my doctor yet.”
The advice giving role of the pharmacist during consultations for medication review with patients
aged 80 or more’, British Medical Journal (online) 334(7603), doi: 10.1136/bmj.39171.577106.55.
Schwabe, M., Reuber, M., Schöndienst, M. and Gülich, E. (2008) ‘Listening to people with seizures:
how can linguistic analysis help in the diﬀerential diagnosis of seizure disorders?’ Communication
and Medicine 5(1): 59–72.
Seale, C., Ziebland, S. and Charteris-Black, J. (2006) ‘Gender, cancer experience and Internet use: a
comparative keyword analysis of interviews and online cancer support groups’, Social Science
and Medicine 62: 2577–90.
Shaw, A. and Ahmed, M. (2004) ‘Translating genetics leaﬂets into languages other than
English: lessons from an assessment of Urdu materials’, Journal of Genetic Counselling 13(4):
321–42.
Shaw, S. and Greenhalgh, T. (2008) ‘Best research – for what? Best health – for whom? A critical
exploration of primary care research using discourse analysis’, Social Science and Medicine 66:
2506–19.
Skelton, J. R., Wearn, A. M. and Hobbs, F. D. R. (2002) ‘“I” and “we”: a concordance analysis of
how doctors and patients use ﬁrst person pronouns in primary care consultations’, Family Prac-
tice 19: 484–8.
Spencer, J. and Dales, J. (2006) ‘Meeting the needs of simulated patients and caring for the person
behind them’, Medical Education 40: 3–5.
Stewart, M. (2001) ‘Towards a global deﬁnition of patient centred care’, British Medical Journal
322: 444–5.
Stewart, M. A., Brown, J. B., Donner, A., McWhinney, I. R., Oates, J. and Weston, W. (1997) The
Impact of Patient-Centred Care on Patient Outcomes in Family Practice, Ontario: Thames Valley
Family Practice Research Unit.
Stewart, M. A., Brown, J. B., Weston, W. W., McWhinney, I. R., McWilliam, C. L. and Freeman,
T. R. (2003) Patient-Centred Medicine: Transforming the Clinical Method, 2nd edn, Oxford:
Radcliﬀe Medical Press.
Stivers, T. (2005) ‘Non-antibiotic treatment recommendations: delivery formats and implications for
parent resistance’, Social Science and Medicine 60(5): 949–64.
——(2001) ‘Negotiating who presents the problem: next speaker selection in paediatric encounters’,
Journal of Communication 51(2): 252–82.
Stivers, T. and Majid, A. (2007) ‘Questioning children: interactional evidence of implicit bias in
medical interviews’, Social Psychology Quarterly 70(4): 424–41.
Sudnow, D. (1967) Passing On: The Social Organisation of Dying, Englewood Cliﬀs, NJ:
Prentice-Hall.
Towle, A. and Godolphin, W. (1999) ‘Framework for teaching and learning informed shared
decision making’, British Medical Journal 319: 766–71.
Tuckett, D., Boulton, M., Olson, C. and Williams, A. (1985) Meetings Between Experts: An
Approach to Sharing Ideas in Medical Concultations, London: Tavistock.
van Ryn, M. and Burke, J. (2000) ‘The eﬀect of patient race and socio-economic status on physician’s
perceptions of patients’, Social Science and Medicine 50: 813–28.
Medical communication
109

Wass, V., Roberts, C., Hoogenboom, R., Jones, R. and van der Vleuten, C. (2003) ‘Eﬀect of ethnicity
on performance in a ﬁnal objective structured clinical examination: qualitative and quantitative
study’, British Medical Journal 326(7393): 800–3.
Watts, J. H. (2008) ‘Emotion, empathy and exit: reﬂections on doing ethnographic qualitative
research on sensitive topics’, Medical Sociology Online 3(2): 3–14.
Wright, E. B., Holcombe, C. and Salmon, P. (2004) ‘Doctors’ communication of trust, care and
respect in breast cancer: qualitative study’, British Medical Journal 328: 864–9.
Sarah Collins, Sarah Peters and Ian Watt
110

8
Clinical linguistics
Michael Perkins and Sara Howard
Introduction
Clinical linguistics involves the study of how language and communication may be impaired.
In its narrowest and most applied sense it focuses on the use of linguistics to describe, analyse,
assess, diagnose and treat communication disorders (e.g. Crystal 1981). However, it is also
commonly taken to include the study of clinical language data in order to throw light on the
nature, development and use of normal language and thus to contribute to linguistic theory
(Ball et al. 2008). Indeed, it is sometimes only through the analysis of language breakdown
that we become aware of hitherto unknown features of language structure and function, and
this is part of the reason why the discipline has grown considerably over the last few decades.
The scope of clinical linguistics is broad, to say the least. No level of language organisation,
from phonetics to discourse, is immune to impairment, with problems manifested in both the
production and comprehension of spoken, written and signed language across the human
lifespan. The subject matter of clinical linguistics is thus amenable to study through virtually
all branches of linguistics, and various sub-specialisms have been accorded their own distinct
labels such as ‘clinical phonology’, ‘clinical pragmatics’ and ‘clinical sociolinguistics’. The fact
that communication disorders may be manifested linguistically does not necessarily mean that
they will always have a speciﬁcally linguistic cause, and thus if we are interested in explaining
them fully we are inevitably drawn beyond linguistics to its interfaces with domains such as
physiology, neurology, cognition and social interaction. One might thus deﬁne clinical lin-
guistics as ‘the study of communication disorders, with speciﬁc emphasis on their linguistic
aspects (while not forgetting how these interact with other domains)’. This cross-disciplinary
perspective is a key feature of clinical linguistics. Such a breadth of focus notwithstanding,
establishing a clear causal link between behavioural symptoms and underlying deﬁcits is not
always easy. For example, there is disagreement with regard to whether speciﬁc language
impairment (SLI) (a condition found in otherwise healthy children who have problems with
syntax and/or phonology) is best attributed to underlying deﬁcits in auditory perception, cog-
nitive processing, a dedicated language module or some combination of all of these (see below
for further discussion). Nevertheless, it is still possible to characterise the linguistic features of
SLI precisely enough to be able to design assessments and remedial programmes. It is this key
111

grounding in linguistics – and in particular the focus on linguistic behaviour – which distin-
guishes clinical linguistics from related ﬁelds such as neurolinguistics (see chapter by Ahlsén,
this volume) and speech and language pathology, which accord primary importance to the
underlying causes of communication disorders. This important distinction was ﬁrst outlined by
Crystal (1980) in terms of the ‘behavioural’ as opposed to the ‘medical’ model of language
pathology.
A brief history of clinical linguistics
Our understanding of communication impairment has come a long way in the last hundred
years. As late as the 1920s, Scripture (1923) was still attributing a particular variety of
lisping to neurosis with a recommendation that it be treated using ‘[a]rsenic, quinine,
strychnine, and other tonics, cold rubs, lukewarm or cold half-baths, sprays, moist packs,
electrotherapy, massage, change of climate, and sea baths. … ’ (1923: 185). A major milestone in
putting the study and treatment of communication disorders on a more scientiﬁc footing, based
on the discipline of linguistics, was Roman Jakobson’s Kindersprache, Aphasie und allgemeine
Lautgesetze (Jakobson 1941) (later published in English as Child Language, Aphasia and
Phonological Universals [Jakobson 1968]) which emphasised the importance of studying
systematic patterns of similarity and contrast in clinical language data, and relating these to
linguistic theory. The assumption that atypical speech or language, however deviant, must still
be systematic and rule-driven – and thus amenable to analysis – has remained an article of
faith among clinical linguists ever since Jakobson’s work became more widely known in
the 1970s.
Jakobson’s inﬂuence is evident in publications from the early 1970s, particularly in the USA,
UK and Scandinavia, though the development of clinical linguistics as a branch of applied
linguistics was given a boost in the UK in particular by the publication of the Quirk Report
(1972) which recommended that the training of speech therapists – whose exposure to lin-
guistics had hitherto been largely restricted to phonetics – should be extended to embrace all
levels of language organisation, and that ‘the would-be practitioner of therapy, whether of
speech or hearing, of reading or of writing must in future regard language as the central core
of his basic discipline’ (1972: 6.60). Gradually from the mid-1970s, former two-year diploma
courses were superseded by 3–4 year bachelors degrees in speech and language therapy at a
number of universities across the UK, which resulted in the emergence of a new generation of
therapists who were not only more linguistically knowledgeable than their predecessors, but
also had at their disposal an increasingly extensive linguistic toolkit for use in assessment,
diagnosis and remediation. The linguists who were recruited to teach these students in turn
became more knowledgeable about communication impairments, which in many cases inﬂu-
enced the subsequent direction of their linguistic research. The main driving force behind these
developments in the 1970s and 1980s was David Crystal, who set up the ﬁrst degree course in
Linguistics and Language Pathology at Reading University in 1976. With his colleagues,
Crystal developed an inﬂuential range of analytical procedures for ‘proﬁling’ the phonological,
grammatical, semantic and prosodic characteristics of developmental and acquired commu-
nication disorders (Crystal et al. 1976; Crystal 1982). Versions of LARSP (Language Assess-
ment, Remediation and Screening Procedure), the most widely used, are now available in many
languages (Ball et al. forthcoming). A further milestone was the publication of Clinical Lin-
guistics (Crystal 1981), which consolidated and deﬁned the ﬁeld. Although the term ‘clinical
linguistics’ had appeared in print earlier (e.g. Baltaxe 1976), Crystal’s book had the eﬀect of
according the term oﬃcial status, as it were, with the result that clinical linguistics came to be
Michael Perkins and Sara Howard
112

more and more widely accepted as a distinct subdiscipline of linguistics. The ﬁrst issue of the
journal Clinical Linguistics and Phonetics (CLP) appeared in 1987, inviting submissions ‘either
applying linguistic/phonetic analytic techniques to clinical problems, or showing how clinical
data contribute to theoretical issues in linguistics/phonetics’ (Ball and Kent 1987: 2), thus
acknowledging the reciprocal relationship between language pathology and linguistic theory.
Although phonetics is often subsumed within ‘clinical linguistics’, inclusion of the term in the
journal title deliberately acknowledged that prior to 1987 most research on communication
disorders had concentrated on speech production and organisation, which has remained the
case to the present day as we shall see below. Growing awareness of the inability of the Inter-
national Phonetic Alphabet (IPA) to capture a whole range of articulatory distinctions found
in impaired speech led to the development of a supplementary set of phonetic symbols called
‘ExtIPA’ (extended IPA) (Duckworth et al. 1990) which were oﬃcially recognised by the
International Phonetic Association and incorporated in its Handbook (International Phonetic
Association 1999). CLP became the oﬃcial journal of the International Clinical Phonetics and
Linguistics Association (ICPLA) which was founded in 1990 and has since raised the global
proﬁle of clinical linguistics through its conferences around the world.
Research methods in clinical linguistics
The linguistics tradition
Because of its inherent interdisciplinarity, clinical linguistics embraces a wide range of research
methods, but the core of the discipline, with its roots in the earlier work of Jakobson and
Crystal, tends to follow the qualitative research paradigms of mainstream linguistics. One
strong tradition, typiﬁed by Crystal’s language proﬁles (Crystal 1982), is that of linguistic
ﬁeldwork and language description. In the case of clinical linguistics, the ‘ﬁeld’ is typically the
speech and language therapy clinic but with an emphasis on naturalistic language data,
wherever possible, which is audio- or video-recorded and transcribed. Analysis involves the
identiﬁcation of systematic patterns in the data, making use of either predetermined or ad hoc
categories as appropriate. In both cases, but particularly in the latter, hypotheses are com-
monly reached inductively, then subsequently tested and revised by returning to the data
iteratively. Because clinical intervention usually focuses on the individual, there is a strong
tradition of individual case studies (e.g. Perkins and Howard 1995). However, larger diagnostic
groups can also be identiﬁed based on their linguistic characteristics, and an increasing
number of clinical language corpora are available in repositories such as CHILDES and
TalkBank (http://talkbank.org/), as are increasingly sophisticated computational tools for their
analysis, such as CLAN (MacWhinney 2000).
In addition to the data-driven, naturalistic corpus approach, which focuses on language
behaviour and its products, the theory-driven generative perspective on language as knowledge
is also reasonably well represented in clinical linguistics (for an overview, see Clahsen
2008). Over the years, various categories and concepts from generative grammar have been
used to analyse deviant language patterns. For example, the diﬃculties experienced by
many Broca’s aphasics in understanding passive sentences and other constructions have been
described in terms of the deletion of movement traces (Grodzinsky 2000) and some have tried
to account for the problems shown by children with SLI in marking tense in terms of an
‘extended optional inﬁnitive’ developmental stage (Rice et al. 1995). Evidence from
clinical data – particularly the use of inﬂections – has in turn been used to inform theoretical
debate.
Clinical linguistics
113

Social sciences
Complementing the focus on the treatment of individuals, clinicians also need to be able to
allocate each individual to one or more larger diagnostic groups whose nature and character-
istics are established using the methods of the social sciences, and of psychology in particular.
These typically involve either small or large group studies using both clinical populations and
healthy controls in which hypotheses are tested through experimentation and the results sub-
mitted to statistical analysis. In such studies, a modular view of language and cognition is
commonly assumed according to which language capacity is seen as an amalgam of discrete
interacting components which may be diﬀerentially impaired. Within the experimental paradigm,
linguistic competence is normally assessed through performance on one or more tests.
An alternative to the psychological approach, one which has been gaining ground in clinical
linguistics in recent years, is that of ethnography, which sees communication as an integral
feature of contextualised social action. Rather than targeting underlying linguistic and cogni-
tive deﬁcits, analytical methods such as conversation analysis (Wilkinson 2008) see commu-
nication impairment as a function of the way individuals orient to each other, and are based
on ﬁne-grained analysis of interaction, turn by turn, in usually non-contrived settings.
Medical sciences
Crystal’s earlier strictures notwithstanding (see above), the ‘medical model’ is still alive and
well within the broader discipline of clinical linguistics. It provides an essentially reductionist
view of communication impairment in terms of underlying anatomical, physiological and
neurological ‘causes’ which have become increasingly amenable to analysis through technolo-
gical advances in research methods such as neuroimaging and genetic proﬁling (e.g. Monaco
2007).
Although a great deal of research in clinical linguistics continues to be carried out within a
speciﬁc methodological paradigm, the inherent interdisciplinarity of the subject area generates
an awareness of alternative approaches. At the most applied end of the discipline – i.e. clinical
practice – speech and language therapists beneﬁt from being trained to be at least familiar
with research methods in each of the above areas, and are hopefully able to exercise a degree
of creative eclecticism in the research they draw on in treating any given client.
Key issues in clinical linguistics
Phonetics and phonology
The phonetic characteristics of atypical speech may be captured through the use of speech
instrumentation and phonetic transcription, both separately and in combination. Instrumental
methods have been brought to bear on all the sub-systems of speech production. Electro-
palatography, EMA (Electro-Magnetic Articulography) and ultrasound have each been used to
explore aspects of articulator activity: tongue, lip and jaw movements and coordination
(Cheng et al. 2007; Gibbon 2008). Atypical patterns of nasal resonance, airﬂow and pressure,
as encountered in speakers with neuromuscular diﬃculties associated with dysarthria and in
speakers with structural abnormalities linked to a history of cleft palate have been investigated
using nasometry and aerodynamic techniques (Whitehill and Lee 2008). Laryngography and
videoﬂuoroscopy have provided techniques for gathering detailed and diverse information
about vocal fold activity (Abberton and Fourcin 1997) and spectrography has a long history of
Michael Perkins and Sara Howard
114

application to a wide range of aspects of atypical speech production from an acoustic
perspective (Kent 2003).
Clinical phonetic transcription ranges from broad phonemic approaches to characterising
a speaker’s segmental or phonemic sound systems, to those using narrow phonetic transcrip-
tion in order to capture the ﬁne phonetic detail of speech output in segmental and prosodic
domains, together, sometimes, with supplementary information on voice quality and the
ways in which gesture and gaze interact with the speech signal (see Müller 2006 for an
account of this type of ‘multi-layered’ transcription). Clearly, a range of challenges and
pitfalls faces anyone attempting to make a phonetic transcription of radically atypical speech
production (Howard and Heselwood 2002), and objections have often been raised regard-
ing its validity and reliability. Some of these objections have been met by the development
of consensus methods where a ﬁnal version is reached through discussion among two or more
transcribers (Shriberg et al. 1984) and through careful critiques of the ﬂawed methodological
approaches which have sometimes been used to challenge the value of transcription
(e.g. Cucchiarini 1996).
By combining perceptual and instrumental methods, researchers have also been able to
explore the gap between what a speaker intends and what the listener perceives. A signiﬁcant
body of research has used acoustic and electropalatographic analysis to demonstrate clear and
consistent articulatory diﬀerences made by a speaker for diﬀerent segmental targets, which are
not identiﬁed by the listener (e.g. Howard 1994; Weismer et al. 1981).
Compared with clinical phonetics, which has a pedigree dating back at least as far as Aris-
totle (Eldridge 1967), clinical phonology, which emerged in the 1960s and 1970s at the time
when linguistic approaches generally were beginning to be applied to communication impair-
ments, is a relative latecomer. Nonetheless, it has proved a hugely inﬂuential and creative force
in clinical linguistics. Early phoneme and feature-based accounts of atypical sound systems
gave way in the 1980s to the application of natural phonological process analysis to atypical
speech production, particularly in developmental speech diﬃculties, with work by Ingram
(1976) in the USA and Grunwell (1981) in the UK exerting a huge inﬂuence on phonological
analysis in the clinical context which still endures today (see, for example, Dodd 2005). Current
clinical phonological approaches are drawn from a healthy range of theoretical perspectives
including optimality theory (Gierut and Morrisette 2005), non-linear approaches (Bernhardt
and Stemberger 1998), gestural phonology (Hodson and Jardine 2009) and cognitive/usage-
based phonology (Sosa and Bybee 2008), with accompanying debate about the status of pho-
nological accounts of atypical speech data: are they merely extremely useful descriptive devi-
ces, or do they reﬂect actual psycholinguistic processes? Phonological accounts of speech
impairment have shown, crucially, that they are not necessarily the product of articulatory
constraints, but reﬂect diﬃculties with the organisation and use of sound segments in words, as
shown in the data in Example 1, from a four-year-old child with phonological diﬃculties. Here
we can see that although the child is clearly able to articulate all the alveolar and velar plo-
sives found in English ([t], [d], [k] and [ɡ]), he does not yet use them appropriately in real
words: rather they have an atypical albeit context-conditioned and non-random distribution.
Example 1
DOG
[ɡɒɡ]
DAD
[dæd]
CAT
[tæt]
CAKE [keɪk]
GOAT
[dəʊt]
TAKE
[keɪk]
The child in Example 2, on the other hand, has speech output which is related to a history
of cleft palate. She makes use of subtle and inventive articulatory strategies to maximise
Clinical linguistics
115

phonological contrasts despite complex articulatory constraints which make the production of
oral plosives and fricatives particularly challenging for her.
Example 2
PIG
[ʘɪʔh]
CHAIR
[ʔjɛə]
DOWN
[ʔaʊɴ]
BIG
[mɪʔh]
JAM
[ʔjæm]
CUP
[ʔʊʔh]
(from Howard 1993)
What these examples show is how systematic and patterned atypical speech output is. Clinical
phonetic and phonological analysis demonstrates this convincingly, and can reveal the range
of speaker strategies observable in individuals who struggle to make themselves intelligible.
While such analyses have traditionally focused on single word production, recent research has
pointed to the value of examining the phonetics and phonology of longer utterances, and in
particular how connected speech processes and the organisation of words into longer prosodic
domains also demonstrates consistent patterns and strategies which can be directly related to
speaker intelligibility, where a speaker’s intelligibility in single words may diﬀer radically from
their intelligibility in longer utterances (Howard 2007). Widening the focus of clinical phonetic
and phonological investigations to consider connected speech behaviours in real conversational
interaction may have considerable value both for our understanding of speech impairment and
for intervention by speech and language pathologists.
Grammar and semantics
There is still considerable disagreement about the extent to which grammatical impairment
results from malfunction within a self-contained grammatical system, which is the primary
focus of mainstream linguistics, or else is a consequence of the way language is processed when
it is produced and understood, and therefore inextricably linked with physiology and cognitive
processes such as memory and attention. Thus the kind of structural anomalies evident in
Example 3 (e.g. omission of obligatory clause and phrase elements and problems with agree-
ment and pronominal case marking), spoken by a 51-year-old man with agrammatic aphasia,
are seen by some as the direct consequence of damage to a language module, whereas others
attempt to explain them as a secondary consequence of processing limitations. The latter view
may assume the existence of a grammar module of some kind as part of the computational
system, or else see grammar as entirely epiphenomenal – an emergent by-product of ‘lexical
selection and arrangement’ (van Lancker 2001: 356).
Example 3
and then yeah . well . waste of time . cos mother . here everyday . sit down you know .
mm . go and . clean . forget about it . and then er . me said well rubbish that . rubbish .
er . doctor come for me [‘.’ = a short pause]
(from Perkins and Varley 1996)
The same debate is also prevalent in research into speciﬁc language impairment (SLI) in chil-
dren which is likewise seen as resulting from either a deﬁcit in linguistic competence, a pro-
cessing deﬁcit in a speciﬁc area or a limitation in general processing capacity (Leonard 1998).
A further dimension comes from the developmental nature of the disorder – i.e. to what extent
is the gradual emergence of SLI either exclusively linguistic or inﬂuenced by non-linguistic
factors, and what role is played by the developmental process itself? Some argue, for example,
Michael Perkins and Sara Howard
116

that the purported modular independence of linguistic and cognitive functions found in adults
is not present – at least to such a large extent – in infants, and is largely a consequence of
maturation. Thus, any early problems of a linguistic nature will impact on other processing
areas, setting in train a complex chain of compensatory adaptations with knock-on eﬀects for
the whole organism (Karmiloﬀ-Smith 1998). The initial trigger may even be entirely unrelated
to language – for example, a problem with auditory processing or procedural memory (Tallal
and Piercy 1973; Ullman and Pierpont 2005).
Although aphasia and SLI have attracted the most attention from clinical linguists because
of the supposedly speciﬁcally linguistic nature of the impairment, they are in fact frequently
accompanied by non-linguistic problems, and it would probably be more accurate to regard
them as one end of a continuum of linguistic-cognitive disorders. At the other end are condi-
tions such as Williams syndrome (WS) (sometimes described as the ‘opposite’ of SLI (Pinker
1999)), which is typiﬁed by cognitive impairments but preserved linguistic ability. Here too,
though, research has shown that both expressive and receptive grammatical ability in WS
is far from intact, and that in some ways it resembles that of second language learners
(Karmiloﬀ-Smith et al. 1997; Stojanovik et al. 2006).
With regard to semantics, clinical interest in this area has focused mainly on gaps in the
lexicon, problems with lexical access (or ‘word ﬁnding’) and thematic roles. The ﬁrst is illu-
strated by the fact that it is not uncommon to ﬁnd individuals with aphasia who are unable to
name members of speciﬁc semantic categories such as vegetables, fruit, body parts and tools
(Caramazza 2000). This is sometimes seen as the direct consequence of a lack of conceptual
knowledge, rather than as a purely semantic problem, as is evident in the fact that people with
WS with poor visuo-spatial abilities, for example, may have diﬃculty understanding spatial
expressions (Phillips et al. 2004). In many cases, though, there is clear conceptual under-
standing but an inability to retrieve a word and link it to its referent, as in Example 4 from a
conversation involving P who has anomic aphasia.
Example 4
T
can you tell me what you are wearing on your wrist? [pointing to his watch]
P
it’s er – [sighs] what I put on my hair on . er not my hair . er – [tuts] put it right
er . [sighs] dear dear dear get it . I’ll get it in a minute [looks at watch and shakes
his head] it’s not going through
Clinically oriented work on the syntax-semantic interface – commonly discussed in terms of argu-
ment structure, thematic roles and semantic functions – may prove particularly useful for extending
our knowledge of semantics. Based on an analysis of language output in developmental and
acquired language disorders, Black and Chiat (2008) argue for a level of semantic organisation in
terms of ‘event structure’ which needs to include aspectual properties, causal and temporal relations
between ‘subevents’ and relevant properties of participants such as sentience and animacy.
Pragmatics and discourse
In the clinical domain, pragmatics and discourse analysis have proved particularly helpful in
characterising the communication diﬃculties manifested in conditions such as autism, trau-
matic brain injury (TBI) and right hemisphere brain damage (RHD), whose underlying causes
are usually seen as being primarily neurological and cognitive, rather than linguistic. People
with autism, for example, can ﬁnd it diﬃcult to work out precisely what others mean by what
they say, as in:
Clinical linguistics
117

Example 5
Adult:
can you turn the page over?
Child with autism:
yes [makes no move to turn the page]
and individuals with TBI are known for wandering oﬀtopic – for example:
Example 6
I have got faults and . my biggest fault is . I do enjoy sport . it’s something that I’ve
always done . I’ve done it all my life . I’ve nothing but respect for my mother and father and .
my sister . and basically sir . I’ve only come to this conclusion this last two months . and .
as far as I’m concerned . my sister doesn’t exist
(from Perkins et al. 1995: 305)
The challenge for clinical linguists is to explain such behaviours in ways which are both theo-
retically coherent and practically useful. Extensive use has been made of constructs and con-
cepts from pragmatic theories such as speech act theory, Gricean conversational implicature
and relevance theory to characterise pragmatically anomalous communication, but although
these provide a useful set of descriptive labels for assessment purposes (e.g. we could describe
Example 5 in terms of a lack of illocutionary uptake on the part of the child or a failure to
derive the adult’s intended implicature), in explanatory terms we are still only scratching the
surface. For example, how do we diﬀerentiate between symptoms and causes for remedial
purposes?
The search for the neurological bases of pragmatic impairment has given rise to the rela-
tively new subdiscipline of ‘neuropragmatics’ (Stemmer 2008) which, on the basis of lesion
studies, attempts to identify speciﬁc areas of the brain responsible for pragmatically relevant
cognitive activities. So, for example, our awareness of others’ mental states (often referred to as
‘theory of mind’) has been linked to the right frontal lobe, social reasoning and empathy to the
ventromedial frontal lobe and metamemory judgement to the prefrontal cortex.
An alternative, non-reductionist approach is to see pragmatic and discourse impairment as
being located in the social space constituted by communicating dyads and groups, rather than
being solely attributable to an underlying deﬁcit within an individual. A number of studies
using conversation analysis, for example, have shown that people with neurological and/or
cognitive deﬁcits who have been diagnosed as pragmatically impaired on the basis of formal
assessments in laboratory conditions are still, nonetheless, capable of considerable pragmatic
sophistication outside the constraints of the testing situation (e.g. Schegloﬀ2003). A related
line of research, which gives equal weight to the contribution of the conversational partner,
has demonstrated that in some cases the eﬀect of some supposed deﬁcit within an individual
may be exacerbated – or alternatively ‘neutralised’ – at the level of the dyad by the actions of
the interlocutor (Muskett et al. 2010).
One way of integrating these various diﬀerent perspectives is to see pragmatic/discourse
impairment not as some unitary condition uniquely caused by an underlying neurological or
cognitive deﬁcit within the individual, nor as being a purely socially construct, but instead as
an epiphenomenal consequence of all of these. The so-called ‘emergentist’ account sees prag-
matic and discourse problems as a by-product of the way in which neurological, cognitive,
linguistic and even sensorimotor diﬃculties play out in dyadic or group interaction (Perkins
2008). Such an approach also acknowledges the fact that pragmatic impairment is not a uni-
tary condition. Indeed the label has been applied to a wide array of disparate behaviours in
addition to those already illustrated, such as problems with ﬂuency, prosody, lexical selection,
Michael Perkins and Sara Howard
118

cohesion, eye contact, turn-taking, stylistic variation and sociolinguistic sensitivity (Perkins 2007).
To make things even more complicated, pragmatically inappropriate behaviours by diﬀerent
individuals may appear superﬁcially similar – and therefore be described and categorised in
the same way – while having very diﬀerent underlying causes.
A further complicating factor is that there may not necessarily be a direct relationship
between behaviour and underlying cause. For example, Simmons-Mackie and Damico (1996)
describe how the use of neologisms, stereotyped phrases and other atypical communicative
devices by people with aphasia were seen by interlocutors as symptoms directly caused by
the brain lesions which gave rise to the aphasia, whereas in fact they were used to signal discourse
functions such as turn initiation and termination – and apparently unconsciously recognised as
such by interlocutors. In other words, they proved to be an indirect creative pragmatic solution
to the linguistic problems caused by the aphasia, rather than a direct consequence.
In conclusion, current research in clinical pragmatics suggests that pragmatic and discourse
impairment are complex phenomenona which have disparate and multiple causes, typically
involve compensatory adaptation, and may be best seen as the emergent consequence of inter-
actions between lingustic and cognitive processing both within and between communicating
individuals.
Recent, current and future trends
Although articles under the broad heading of clinical linguistics are published in a wide range
of journals, a good way to get a feel for recent and current trends in the development of the
discipline is to examine what has appeared in its key journal Clinical Linguistics and Phonetics.
In 2002 David Crystal published a brief survey of all the articles published in CLP during its ﬁrst
ﬁfteen years of publication (Crystal 2002). For this chapter we have surveyed articles appear-
ing in the subsequent seven years from 2002 to 2008, using the same categories and analytical
method as Crystal to enable a direct comparison. We will refer to 1987–2001 as period A, and
2002–8 as period B. One of the most striking developments is the increase in number of arti-
cles published: an average of twenty-four per year during period A compared with forty-seven
per year during period B. This is partly a reﬂection of the gradual increase in the number of
issues per year (1987: 2; 1988–96: 4; 1997–9: 6; 2000–5: 8; 2005–7: 10; 2007–8: 12) and also
because more of these issues are now devoted to conference proceedings comprising shorter
articles. Table 8.1 gives a breakdown of articles according to ‘linguistic themes’.
Table 8.1 Articles published in Clinical Linguistics and Phonetics according to linguistic theme
Linguistic theme
% of articles 1987–2001
% of articles 2002–8
Phonetics
Phonology
Graphology
Grammar
Semantics
Discourse
Pragmatics
Sociolinguistics
Linguistic theory
Methodology
38
29
1
9
2
8
2
1
1
7
43
19
1
13
4
6
7
2
0
4
Clinical linguistics
119

The predominant focus of the discipline is clearly on phonetics and phonology with only a
slight decrease from 67 to 62 per cent between periods A and B, and a small shift away from
phonology to phonetics, possibly reﬂecting an increasing interest in the more phonetically-
grounded phonological approaches. In other areas the percentages are relatively small, but
there is a marked increase in the number of articles on pragmatics, and a slight increase in
those devoted to grammar. Semantics (which Crystal [2002: 489] describes as ‘the Cinderella
of clinical linguistics’) remains relatively little studied, which is perhaps surprising given the
strong focus on the lexicon in aphasiology research.
The primary focus on speech has been evident in clinical linguistics since its inception. For
example, out of a retrospective collection of eighty-nine seminal articles on the discipline
(Powell and Ball 2010) more than half (55 per cent) are on phonetics or phonology. The bias
towards phonetics and phonology was diﬃcult to avoid even in the recent Handbook of Clin-
ical Linguistics (Ball et al. 2008) where the editors made a deliberate attempt to provide an
even coverage of the whole discipline. 50 per cent of the book is devoted to phonetics and
phonology and the rest to the whole of syntax, semantics, pragmatics, discourse and socio-
linguistics. This is largely attributable to the fact that there are so many active sub-areas of
clinical phonetics and phonology while the other areas tend to be less well explored.
There is a slight increase from period A to B in the number of articles with a primary focus
on languages other than English (from 12 to 15 per cent), which reﬂects a healthy awareness of
multilingual and crosslinguistic issues. However, of those articles which address either devel-
opmental or acquired communication disorders, the split between the two remains the same
(60/40 in period A and 61/39 in period B). One ﬁnal notable statistic in period B (but not
analysed by Crystal for period A) is that 25 per cent of articles were studies of normal, rather
than clinical, populations, which perhaps reﬂects the strong need for a better characterisation
of typical language behaviour in order to better understand the atypical.
Looking to the future, a number of sub-areas within clinical linguistics are likely to prove
particularly inﬂuential in the years ahead. Work in genetics and neuroscience, aided by tech-
nological advances in brain imaging, is currently transforming our understanding of develop-
mental communication disorders and the way that language is represented in the brain. Linked
to this is a growing interest in focusing on the interfaces between diﬀerent areas of linguistic
and cognitive functioning rather than on their properties in isolation – i.e. on their associations
rather than their dissociations. A related growth area for the study of clinical populations is the
way in which spoken language functions as an integral component of a multimodal signalling
system together with other components such as gesture, posture and eye gaze, and the crucial
role played by interlocutors and social context. Another expanding area of study which is
helping to reﬁne the distinction between universal and local properties of language is the way
in which communication disorders vary across speakers of diﬀerent languages, and how they
may manifest diﬀerently in speakers of more than one language. Finally, although corpora of
disordered language remain tiny compared to what is available for analysis in other areas of
linguistics, they have the potential to play a key role in our understanding of communication
disorders both within and across languages.
Summary
Clinical linguistics has grown extensively as a discipline over the last few decades. While
focusing primarily on the linguistic and phonetic characteristics of communication disorders, it
is typiﬁed by an awareness of other inter-linked areas of processing such as neurology, cogni-
tion and social interaction. This inherent multidisciplinarity is also evident in the variety of
Michael Perkins and Sara Howard
120

research methods used, including those not just from linguistics but also from the social and
medical sciences. Because it is practically grounded in the need to understand and treat the
problems of individuals with communication impairments, clinical linguistics has tended to
make less use of the kind of narrowly focused, more idealised theorising found in much
mainstream linguistics and to favour instead more functionally oriented approaches which are
better geared towards meeting the needs of clinicians. Among its many achievements, clinical
linguistics has demonstrated that it is possible to enhance our understanding of language
structure and use through an awareness of how it can go wrong.
Related topics
neurolinguistics
Further reading
Ball, M. J., Perkins, M. R., Müller, N. and Howard, S. (eds) (2008) Handbook of Clinical Linguis-
tics, Oxford: Blackwell. (The most comprehensive overview of clinical linguistics to date, with
authoritative contributions from leading researchers in the ﬁeld.)
Crystal, D. (1981) Clinical Linguistics, London: Whurr. (Despite its age, a very approachable and
practically oriented account of the application of linguistics to speech and language disorders.)
Damico, J. S., Ball, M. J. and Müller, N. (eds) (2010) The Handbook of Language and Speech Dis-
orders, Oxford: Wiley-Blackwell. (A linguistically informed overview of a comprehensive range of
communication disorders.)
Perkins, M. R. and Howard, S. J. (eds) (1995) Case Studies in Clinical Linguistics, London: Whurr.
(Case studies of a wide range of communication disorders showing how linguistic analysis can
contribute to assessment, diagnosis and treatment.)
Powell, T. W. and Ball, M. J. (eds) (2010) Clinical Linguistics: Critical Concepts in Linguistics,
London: Routledge. (A collection of many of the most important research articles in clinical
linguistics from the last ﬁfty years or so.)
References
Abberton, E. and Fourcin, A. (1997) ‘Electrolaryngography’, in M. J. Ball and C. Code (eds)
Instrumental Clinical Phonetics, London: Whurr.
Ball, M. J., Crystal, D. and Fletcher, P. (eds) (2011) Assessing Grammar: The Languages of LARSP,
Abingdon: Multilingual Matters.
Ball, M. J. and Kent, R. D. (1987) ‘Editorial’, Clinical Linguistics and Phonetics 1: 1–5.
Ball, M. J., Perkins, M. R., Müller, N. and Howard, S. (eds) (2008) Handbook of Clinical Linguistics,
Oxford: Blackwell.
Baltaxe, C. A. M. (1976) ‘Clinical linguistics’, Sixth California Linguistics Association Conference
Proceedings, San Diego, CA: San Diego State University.
Bernhardt, B. and Stemberger, J. (1998) The Handbook of Phonological Development, New York:
Academic Press.
Black, M. and Chiat, S. (2008) ‘Interfaces between cognition, semantics and syntax’, in M. J. Ball,
M. R. Perkins, N. Müller and S. Howard (eds) Handbook of Clinical Linguistics, Oxford:
Blackwell.
Caramazza, A. (2000) ‘The organization of conceptual knowledge in the brain’, in M. S. Gazzaniga
(ed.) The New Cognitive Neurosciences, 2nd edn, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Cheng, H. Y., Murdoch, B. E., Goozee, J. V. and Scott, D. (2007) ‘Physiologic development of
tongue-jaw coordination from childhood to adulthood’, Journal of Speech, Language, and Hear-
ing Research 50: 352.
Clahsen, H. (2008) ‘Chomskyan syntactic theory and language disorders’, in M. J. Ball, M. R. Perkins,
N. Müller and S. Howard (eds) Handbook of Clinical Linguistics, Oxford: Blackwell.
Crystal, D. (1980) Introduction to Language Pathology, London: Edward Arnold.
Clinical linguistics
121

——(1981) Clinical Linguistics, London: Whurr.
——(1982) Proﬁling Linguistic Disability, London: Edward Arnold.
——(2002) ‘Clinical Linguistics and Phonetics’ ﬁrst 15 years: an introductory comment’, Clinical
Linguistics and Phonetics 16: 487–9.
Crystal, D., Fletcher, P. and Garman, M. (1976) Grammatical Analysis of Language Disability,
London: Arnold.
Cucchiarini, C. (1996) ‘Assessing transcription agreement: methodological aspects’, Clinical Lin-
guistics and Phonetics 10: 131–56.
Dodd, B. (2005) The Diﬀerential Diagnosis and Treatment of Children with Speech Disorders,
London: Whurr.
Duckworth, M., Allen, G., Hardcastle, W. and Ball, M. (1990) ‘Extensions to the international
phonetic alphabet’, Clinical Linguistics and Phonetics 4: 273–83.
Eldridge, M. (1967) A History of the Treatment of Speech Disorders, Edinburgh: Livingstone.
Gibbon, F. E. (2008) ‘Instrumental analysis of articulation’, in M. J. Ball, M. R. Perkins, N. Müller
and S. Howard (eds) The Handbook of Clinical Linguistics, Oxford: Blackwell.
Gierut, J. and Morrisette, M. (2005) ‘The clinical signiﬁcance of optimality theory for phonological
disorders’, Topics in Language Disorders 25: 266–80.
Grodzinsky, Y. (2000) ‘The neurology of syntax: language use without Broca’s area’, Behavioral and
Brain Sciences 23: 1–71.
Grunwell, P. (1981) The Nature of Phonological Disability in Children, London: Academic Press.
Hodson, S. and Jardine, B. (2009) ‘Revisiting Jarrod: application of gestural phonological theory to
the assessment and remediation of speech sound disorder’, International Journal of Speech-Language
Pathology 11: 122–34.
Howard, S. J. (1993) ‘Articulatory constraints on a phonological system: a case study of cleft palate
speech’, Clinical Linguistics and Phonetics 7: 299–317.
——(1994) ‘Spontaneous phonetic reorganisation following articulation therapy: an electropalato-
graphic study’, in R. Aulanko and A. M. Korpijaakko-Huuhka (eds) Proceedings of the 3rd
Congress of the International Clinical Phonetics and Linguistics Association, 1993, Helsinki, Depart-
ment of Phonetics, University of Helsinki.
——(2007) ‘The interplay between articulation and prosody in children with impaired speech:
observations from electropalatographic and perceptual analysis’, Advances in Speech-Language
Pathology 9: 20–35.
Howard, S. J. and Heselwood, B. C. (2002) ‘Learning and teaching phonetic transcription for clin-
ical purposes’, Clinical Linguistics and Phonetics 16: 371–401.
Ingram, D. (1976) Phonological Disability in Children, London: Edward Arnold.
International Phonetic Association (1999) Handbook of the International Phonetic Association: A
Guide to the Use of the International Phonetic Alphabet, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Jakobson, R. (1941) Kindersprache, Aphasie und allgemeine Lautgesetze, Uppsala, Sweden: Almqvist
and Wiksell.
——(1968) Child Language, Aphasia and Phonological Universals, The Hague: Mouton.
Karmiloﬀ-Smith, A. (1998) ‘Development itself is the key to understanding developmental dis-
orders’, Trends in Cognitive Sciences 2: 389–98.
Karmiloﬀ-Smith, A., Grant, J., Berthoud, I., Davies, M., Howlin, P. and Udwin, O. (1997) ‘Lan-
guage and Williams syndrome: how intact is “intact”?’, Child Development 68: 246–62.
Kent, R. (ed.) (2003) MIT Encyclopedia of Communication Disorders, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Leonard, L. B. (1998) Children with Speciﬁc Language Impairments, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
MacWhinney, B. (2000) The CHILDES Project: Tools for Analyzing Talk, 3rd edn, vol. 2: The
Database, Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Monaco, A. P. (2007) ‘Multivariate linkage analysis of speciﬁc language impairment (SLI)’, Annals
of Human Genetics 71: 660–73.
Müller, N. (ed.) (2006) Multilayered Transcription, San Diego, CA: Plural Publishing.
Muskett, T., Perkins, M. R., Clegg, J. and Body, R. (2010) ‘Inﬂexibility as an interactional phe-
nomenon: using conversation analysis to re-examine a symptom of autism’, Clinical Linguistics
and Phonetics 19: 379–92.
Perkins, M. R. (2007) Pragmatic Impairment, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
——(2008) ‘Pragmatic impairment as an emergent phenomenon’, in M. J. Ball, M. R. Perkins,
N. Müller and S. Howard (eds) Handbook of Clinical Linguistics, Oxford: Blackwell.
Michael Perkins and Sara Howard
122

Perkins, M. R., Body, R. and Parker, M. (1995) ‘Closed head injury: assessment and remediation of
topic bias and repetitiveness’, in M. R. Perkins and S. J. Howard (eds) Case Studies in Clinical
Linguistics, London: Whurr.
Perkins, M. R. and Howard, S. J. (eds) (1995) Case Studies in Clinical Linguistics, London: Whurr.
Perkins, M. R. and Varley, R. (1996) A Machine-Readable Corpus of Aphasic Discourse, University
of Sheﬃeld, Department of Human Communication Sciences/Institute for Language, Speech and
Hearing (ILASH).
Phillips, C. E., Jarrold, C., Baddeley, A. D., Grant, J. and Karmiloﬀ-Smith, A. (2004) ‘Compre-
hension of spatial language terms in Williams syndrome: evidence for an interaction between
domains of strength and weakness’, Cortex 40: 85–101.
Pinker, S. (1999) Words and Rules: The Ingredients of Language, London: Weidenfeld and Nicolson.
Powell, T. W. and Ball, M. J. (eds) (2010) Clinical Linguistics: Critical Concepts in Linguistics,
London: Routledge.
Quirk Report (1972) Speech Therapy Services, London: HMSO.
Rice, M. L., Wexler, K. and Cleave, P. (1995) ‘Speciﬁc language impairment as a period of extended
optional inﬁnitive’, Journal of Speech and Hearing Research 38: 850–63.
Schegloﬀ, E. A. (2003) ‘Conversation analysis and communication disorders’, in C. Goodwin (ed.)
Conversation and Brain Damage, New York: Oxford University Press.
Scripture, E. W. (1923) Stuttering, Lisping and Correction of the Speech of the Deaf, New York:
Macmillan.
Shriberg, L. D., Kwiatkowski, J. and Hoﬀman, K. (1984) ‘A procedure for phonetic transcription by
consensus’, Journal of Speech and Hearing Research 27: 456–65.
Simmons-Mackie, N. and Damico, J. (1996) ‘The contribution of discourse markers to commu-
nicative competence in aphasia’, American Journal of Speech-Language Pathology 5: 37–43.
Sosa, A. V. and Bybee, J. (2008) ‘A cognitive approach to clinical phonology’, in M. J. Ball,
M. R. Perkins, N. Müller and S. Howard (eds) The Handbook of Clinical Phonetics, Oxford:
Blackwell.
Stemmer, B. (2008) ‘Neuropragmatics’, in M. J. Ball, M. R. Perkins, N. Müller and S. Howard (eds)
Handbook of Clinical Linguistics, Oxford: Blackwell.
Stojanovik, V., Perkins, M. R. and Howard, S. (2006) ‘Linguistic heterogeneity in Williams syn-
drome’, Clinical Linguistics and Phonetics 20: 547–52.
Tallal, P. and Piercy, M. (1973) ‘Developmental aphasia: impaired rate of non-verbal processing as
a function of sensory modality’, Neuropsychologia 12: 83–93.
Ullman, M. T. and Pierpont, E. I. (2005) ‘Speciﬁc language impairment is not speciﬁc to language:
the procedural deﬁcit hypothesis’, Cortex 41: 399–433.
van Lancker, D. (2001) ‘Is your syntactic component really necessary?’ Aphasiology 15: 343–60.
Weismer, G., Dinnsen, D. and Elbert, M. (1981) ‘A study of the voicing distinction associated with
omitted, word-ﬁnal stops’, Journal of Speech and Hearing Disorders 46: 320–7.
Whitehill, T. L. and Lee, A. (2008) ‘Instrumental analysis of resonance in speech impairment’, in
M. J. Ball, M. R. Perkins, N. Müller and S. Howard (eds) The Handbook of Clinical Linguistics,
Oxford: Blackwell.
Wilkinson, R. (2008) ‘Conversation analysis and communication disorders’, in M. J. Ball,
M. R. Perkins, N. Müller and S. Howard (eds) Handbook of Clinical Linguistics, Oxford:
Blackwell.
Clinical linguistics
123

9
Language and ageing
Kees de Bot and Nienke van der Hoeven
Introduction
This contribution presents an overview of work on language and ageing, with an emphasis on
ageing and cognitive processing. First we sketch a short history of the ﬁeld. Then some of the
major issues with regard to theoretical and methodological approaches are discussed. The
focus is on psycholinguistic approaches because most of the work has been done in this area.
However, we also point out the need for a more social/sociolinguistic perspective, because
ageing as a topic of research typically relates to the interaction between individuals and their
environment. The study of ageing has recently become heavily inﬂuenced by developments in
the ﬁeld of neuroscience, in particular the use of new neuroimaging techniques that have
allowed the extraction of ﬁne-grained data on neural substrates of language and cognition.
A part of this contribution is devoted to speciﬁc aspects of multilingualism and their impact
on the ageing process.
Language and ageing: a short history
The interest in language and ageing developed as an oﬀshoot of research on language and
dementia. One of the early studies that have inspired research was Irigaray’s (1973) Le langage
des déments. This is probably the ﬁrst comprehensive study that focuses on the speciﬁcs of
language in this population. This start in pathological language development has deﬁned the
perspective on language and ageing in the sense that the focus has been largely on deﬁcits and
decline. The typical design of studies in the 1980s was to take some aspect of language (word
recognition, verbal ﬂuency, narrative skills) and test groups of young and elderly participants
on these aspects to show how the elderly group diﬀered from the younger group. Sometimes
several age groups were included, but in many studies the ﬁrst year university students typical
of psychological research formed the control group. In the meantime, some of the pioneers of
research on cognitive aspects of ageing, such as Baltes and Schaie, had already moved on to a
somewhat diﬀerent approach, in which life-span development was stressed rather than speciﬁc
characteristics of certain age groups. The main aim of life-span developmental psychology is
to study development as a life-long process. This implies that there may be gains and losses at
124

diﬀerent ages, and that development is not necessarily unidirectional. What counts as growth
or decline is largely dependent on an external and basically inter-subjective criterion. In their
introduction to research methods in life-span developmental psychology, Baltes et al.
(1977) deﬁne the goal of research from this perspective as follows: ‘Life-span developmental
psychology is concerned with ﬁnding models that are appropriate for the construction of a
theory of ontogenetic change over various age changes’ (1977: 88). The study of development
over the life-span covers a wide range of topics, including cognitive development, perceptual
and motor development, social development, personality development and developmental
psychopathology (see Magnusson 1996, and Demetriou et al. 1998, for overviews). In the past,
developments in these areas were treated as specialized subﬁelds that had few connections, but
in the last two decades the awareness of the interconnectedness of developments on diﬀerent
levels and in diﬀerent subsystems has grown. In particular, the booming research on brain
functions has made it clear that cognitive functions interact with neurological functions,
but also with physical changes and changes in the environment. Not all functions and sub-
systems develop in parallel; some support each other’s growth or decline, while others are
compensatory in nature. There is evidence for a task dependency of how individuals diﬀer in
development.
In life-span developmental psychology, the concept of ‘major life events’ has been propa-
gated (Baltes et al. 1977; Braet and Verhofstadt-Denève 1998). This refers to events that have
a signiﬁcant impact on the course of life, such as going to school, getting a job, getting mar-
ried, migration, but also accidents, loss of a friend or relative, losing one’s job and so on. What
makes an event a major life event is highly dependent on individuals’ settings and character-
istics: having a divorce may be the worst possible nightmare for one individual, with very
negative eﬀects on life, and the best thing that could have happened for someone else. For the
study of language development, speciﬁc language related major life events may be relevant (de
Bot 2009). Such language-related events may be insigniﬁcant on the larger scale of life, but
very signiﬁcant for the development of the language system. Going to a bilingual kindergar-
ten, having a penfriend abroad, choosing a school proﬁle which includes foreign languages,
studying abroad, international school exchanges, migration, they may all be relevant. Again,
the patterns will be highly individual.
A critical discussion of main current issues
One issue that continues to generate discussions is what ‘ageing’ actually means and whether
there is suﬃcient ground to treat elderly people as a more or less homogeneous group with its
own speciﬁc characteristics. The life-span perspective discussed earlier provides arguments
against such an approach. Developmental processes are typically gradual and there is no clear
demarcation of age groups. Of course, societal factors such as retirement and speciﬁc institu-
tions for the elderly have led to social stratiﬁcations, in which the third age more or less starts
with retirement. In this respect, the current discussion on raising the retirement age to 67 in
several countries because of the ﬁnancial crisis is interesting.
For the study of language and ageing there are no clear boundaries between age groups.
There is no longitudinal research that is dense enough to show how diﬀerent language skills
develop over time. And even if such studies existed, they would probably show that some
individuals show speciﬁc decline at the age of 60, while others maintain their full language
potential well into their 80s. Language development may be fairly homogeneous in the early
years of life, but individual diﬀerences become more important over time. Diﬀerences in
occupation, study, interest, opportunity and health lead to highly individual tracks over time
Language and ageing
125

(Ardila et al. 2000). The study of development over the life-span is extremely complex: ﬁndings
from longitudinal studies appear not to lead to the same ﬁndings as cross-sectional studies,
and designs have to take into account that cohorts may diﬀer signiﬁcantly even on a year-
to-year basis, due to events such as wars, ﬁnancial crises or changes in the educational system
(Schrauf 2009).
In recent years a new perspective on development and accordingly language development
has emerged that ﬁts very well with the life-span perspective discussed earlier. For quite some
time, van Geert (1994, 2008, 2009) has been arguing for a dynamic systems perspective on
development. Dynamic systems are deﬁned as systems in which variables aﬀect each other’s
change over time. Over the last few years this perspective has been taken up by various
researchers (Larsen-Freeman 1997; Herdina and Jessner 2002; Elman 2005; de Bot et al. 2007;
Larsen-Freeman and Cameron 2008) to describe ﬁrst and second language development.
A full treatment of the dynamic perspective on language development is beyond the scope of
the present contribution. Here, the approach taken by de Bot and Makoni in their 2005 book
on language and ageing in multilingual settings is discussed brieﬂy. Language development is
seen as a dynamic process in which many variables interact over time and that is highly
idiosyncratic: while general factors such as level of education and intelligence are likely to
have an eﬀect on the group level, they are at the same time likely to have diﬀerential eﬀects on
individuals, because these factors may interact in speciﬁc ways with other individual factors.
For instance, a high level of education may have little eﬀect in a setting of migration
where that education is not recognized and the migrant has to turn to manual labour to make
a living. In ageing, three types of change seem to take place: physical changes (loss of brain
cells, changes in sight and hearing), psychological changes (decline of working memory
and speed of processing) and social changes (attitudes to ageing, social changes due to retire-
ment or placement in a home for the elderly). The dynamic aspect is that these diﬀerent
types of factors interact: physical changes will lead to psychological changes and social chan-
ges, but also the other way around. Leading an active life has a positive eﬀect on physical
health and cognitive functioning. Mental activity is likely to lead to more and better
social contacts and more physical activity, which in turn enhance physical health. It is argued
that language is part of this process: physical changes such as hearing loss may lead to a
reduction of communicative interaction, which may lead to a decline in accessibility of lin-
guistic elements, due to non-use. Being seen as old leads to changes in interactions with
younger generations and accordingly to a loss of interest in issues outside the immediate
environment. Changes in health, psychological functioning and social environment may
lead to a negative spiral in which less and less language is used and the language used becomes
simpler. This may lead to reduced interaction with the environment and decline in life
satisfaction.
One of the most burning issues, in particular in Europe, is the development of an ageing
immigrant population. In many countries labour migration in the second part of the twentieth
century has led to the development of large populations of immigrants that, despite intentions
to return to their country of origin, appear to stay on, mainly because their families are now
in the host countries. A study by Warnes et al. (2004) on elderly immigrants in Europe shows
that they are becoming a group with speciﬁc needs:
They include some of the most deprived and socially excluded, and some of the most
aﬄuent and accomplished, but all to a greater or lesser extent are disadvantaged through
an interaction between social policies and their ‘otherness’ by living in a foreign country.
(Warnes et al. 2004: 307)
Kees de Bot and Nienke van der Hoeven
126

While in some host countries, such as Australia and Canada, immigrant communities have set
up their own ethnically oriented care systems for the elderly (Clyne 1977), no such developments
seem to take place in Europe.
With respect to language and ageing, very speciﬁc problems may arise for these immigrant
populations. One phenomenon that is mentioned regularly but little supported by empirical
research is the idea of language reversion: the idea that people return to their ﬁrst language
when they age (de Bot and Clyne 1989; Schmid 2002; Keijzer 2007). It seems quite logical that
immigrants who retire in settings in which they predominantly use their ﬁrst language will lose
some of their skills in the second language. It may also be the case that neurological changes
reverse the order of prominence of diﬀerent languages in the brain. Hyltenstam and Stroud
(1993) suggest that in pathological ageing (Alzheimer’s disease) language reversion, or
regression, to use their terminology, happens occasionally. It is unclear, however, whether
reversion is a sign of decline or attrition or reﬂects limited acquisition. Several of the Dutch
immigrants in Australia studied by de Bot and Clyne (1994) indicated that they learnt English
to just beyond survival level and saw no reasons to continue using it, apart from interaction
with their grandchildren.
Another hotly debated issue that is relevant to the discussion of language and ageing is the
idea of a Cognitive Reserve (CR) as a buﬀer in cognitive ageing. CR has been deﬁned as ‘the
ability of individuals to cope with advancing brain pathology through either a set of acquired
skills or inherent properties’ (Kramer et al. 2006: 68). Interesting evidence on the role of edu-
cation in CR comes from the famous ‘nun studies’ (Snowdon 2003). In this study, the brains of
nuns that had been active as teachers well into their 80s were examined post-mortem. The
brains of some of the nuns were similar to those of Alzheimer patients, although the nuns had
been functioning adequately till shortly before they died. This suggested that their life-long
mental activity and accumulation of knowledge and cognitive skills had given them a reserve
that prevented the emergence of signs of decline. It should be added that Kemper et al. (2001)
found no evidence for CR speciﬁc for language skills based on the written diaries of the nuns
involved. Still it is conceivable that with equal rates of cognitive decline, individuals with larger
vocabularies and language registers will be able to adequately communicate longer than indi-
viduals with smaller or more restricted vocabularies. To what extent being bilingual or multi-
lingual can be seen as part of the CR is unclear. The only evidence we have related to this is
the groundbreaking work by Ellen Bialystok and her colleagues, which will be discussed in the
next section.
Cognitive advantages of bilingualism in ageing
What makes the research carried out by Bialystok and her group fundamentally diﬀerent from
most previous studies on language and ageing is that it is not so much concerned with eﬀects
of age-related biological or cognitive change on language development, but rather with the
reverse, i.e. the eﬀects of multiple language use on cognitive development over the life-span. In
previous research, Bialystok found that bilingualism enhances the development of control
processes in children (for an overview, see Bialystok 2001). This advantage was explained by
the assumption that bilingual children have more practice in exercising inhibitory control than
their monolingual compeers. Since a second language can never be switched oﬀ, but remains
constantly active when the other one is used (see, for example, Francis 1999), bilingual children
seem to develop a mechanism that controls attention to the language which is currently being
processed, and that inhibits the second language from interfering. This control mechanism
might beneﬁt multilingual children in other, non-linguistic, cognitive domains as well, which
Language and ageing
127

could explain the advantage they have over monolinguals in the development of executive
control processes (see Bialystok et al. 2004). Bialystok et al. (2004) investigated whether such
an advantage might continue in adulthood and old age, thus protecting bilingual adults from
age-related decline in executive functions. They reported on three experiments involving a
middle-aged (mean age = 40) and an elderly (mean age = 71) monolingual and bilingual
(English/Tamil) group who performed the Simon task, i.e. a non-linguistic task requiring quick
reactions to congruent and non-congruent information. The bilinguals, apart from being more
eﬃcient on both congruent and incongruent trials than the monolinguals, appeared to show a
reduced Simon eﬀect, that is, they showed less disruption from incongruent information, and
older bilinguals also produced a smaller age-related increase in the Simon eﬀect than mono-
linguals. Moreover, bilinguals responded more rapidly to conditions that placed greater
demands on working memory, which implies that the positive eﬀects of bilingualism are not
restricted to inhibitory control, but that bilingualism may attenuate negative age-related eﬀects
on ‘executive control functions generally’ (Bialystok et al. 2004: 301).
To determine more accurately which executive control functions are aﬀected by bilingual-
ism, a second series of experiments was carried out, involving the antisaccade task (Bialystok
et al. 2006). Here, participants have to resist the impulse to look at a target that appears sud-
denly to the left or right of their focal point, and instead turn their gaze in the opposite
direction. In the ﬁrst experiment, in which eye-movements were measured, there were no
eﬀects of ageing or bilingualism. However, in the second experiment the participants’ reactions
were measured by means of key presses, that is, for antisaccadic items participants had to
press the key opposite to the side of their focal point where the item was presented; now,
bilinguals responded faster than monolinguals, and this advantage increased with age. The
unexpected diﬀerences between these ﬁndings suggest that the bilingual advantage might only
‘manifest itself later on in processing [ … ], in responses that take longer to develop’, and that
the key press paradigm involves ‘some degree of symbolic mapping between the stimulus
complex and the appropriate response’ and that lifelong bilingualism might ‘facilitate this
translation process’ (Bialystok et al. 2006: 1352).
More recently, other groups of researchers have studied potential eﬀects of bilingualism and
executive control as well. Colzato and colleagues (2008) tested groups of young bilingual and
monolingual adults on three tasks (stop signal, inhibition of return, and attentional blink) that
tapped into diﬀerent aspects of inhibitory control, and reported that bilinguals do not diﬀer
from monolinguals in active inhibition, but have acquired a better ability to ‘select goal-relevant
information from competing, goal-irrelevant information’ (2008: 310). Costa et al. (2008)
tested groups of young bilingual and monolingual adults in the attentional network task,
which supposedly taps into three attentional networks: alerting, orienting and executive con-
trol. The bilinguals were not only faster, but also proved more eﬃcient in the alerting and
executive control networks. However, these studies were primarily concerned with the issue of
whether and how bilingualism aﬀects control functions, and particularly inhibition mechanisms,
and did not involve elderly participants.
After testing healthy bilinguals, Bialystok and her colleagues carried out a study involving
elderly participants suﬀering from dementia, the background being that certain ‘lifestyle fac-
tors’, for instance physical activity, high levels of education and occupation, and mentally sti-
mulating leisure activities, may help to build up CR (see Kramer et al. 2006, and the
discussion of this concept in the previous section). Bilingualism, which in earlier studies was
found to enhance executive control in children and adults, might be an example of the com-
plex mental activities contributing to CR, thus protecting older adults from dementia-related
decline. The study by Bialystok et al. (2007) involved a group of 288 patients with cognitive
Kees de Bot and Nienke van der Hoeven
128

complaints, 184 of whom were diagnosed with dementia; 91 of these were monolingual and
93 bilingual (with a variety of mother tongues). The data, derived from the Mini Mental State
Examination (MMSE), were controlled for level of education and occupation. Although
the level of education – one of the main factors supposed to enhance cognitive reserve – of the
bilingual group was signiﬁcantly lower than that of the monolingual group, the bilinguals
appeared to show symptoms of dementia about four years later than the monolinguals.
Moreover, for a period of four years after the ﬁrst diagnosis, a subset of patients in the two
groups received further MMSE tests. No group diﬀerence was found for the rate of decline,
which implies that the factor bilingualism delays the onset of dementia by four years without a
change in progression rate.
The ﬁndings about cognitive advantages of bilingualism have raised many questions con-
cerning the variables that play a role in this eﬀect: can these ﬁndings with early bilingualism be
extended to later, and also to less complete learning and use of a foreign language? In the
studies reported on above, the criteria used for bilingualism were rather high: in all studies,
participants regularly used at least two languages, were ﬂuent in their second language and
had been bilingual from either early childhood (Bialystok et al. 2004, 2006), or at least
from early adulthood (Bialystok et al. 2007: 460) onward. Another question is whether addi-
tional languages also provide additional advantages. In the study by Bialystok et al. on
dementia (2007), no distinction was made between bilinguals and multilinguals. More recently,
this distinction was focused on in a large epidemiological study by Kavé et al. (2008). In a
group of the oldest Israeli-Jewish population (N = 814, mean age = 83), the experimenters
tested by means of a cognitive-screening test and the MMSE whether the number of languages
spoken by the participants predicted cognitive state. Multilingualism, it appeared, ‘added to the
prediction of cognitive state beyond the eﬀect of all the other demographic variables’ (2008: 76),
i.e. age, gender, place of birth, age at immigration, and education. However, their study is
limited by a lack of details on level of proﬁciency, frequency of language use and age of lan-
guage acquisition. Another confusing factor is that, unlike in the studies by Bialystok, where
bilingualism usually resulted from exterior circumstances, for some participants their multi-
lingualism might reﬂect an innate talent for language learning. This might imply that it is not
the use of multiple languages that oﬀers protection from cognitive decline, but that ‘an innate
ﬂexibility in using brain structures’ (Kavé et al. 2008: 77) might be a common cause for
multilingualism and lack of cognitive decline.
Strongly related to the question of which variables aﬀect cognitive advantages of bilingual-
ism, is the most fundamental question: what exactly is the mechanism responsible for
these advantages? As we have seen, Bialystok deﬁned this cognitive advantage as an enhanced
development of executive control functions, most notably inhibitory processing, and attrib-
uted it to the training bilinguals have in keeping their languages apart. These executive
functions are normally considered to be located in areas of the frontal cortex, which leads
Bialystok to speculate that ‘for bilinguals, control over executive functions develops earlier in
childhood and declines later in adulthood’, because the frontal cortex is ‘a region of the
brain that is the last to develop in childhood and the ﬁrst to deteriorate with aging’ (Bialystok
2007: 219–20). In a later article, Bialystok (2009) also speculates that possibly the same
mechanism might be responsible for both the linguistic disadvantage bilinguals have over
monolinguals, i.e. in lexical retrieval, and their advantage, i.e. in executive control functions,
because the ‘joint activation of the two competing language systems’ leads to a conﬂict,
which ‘both compromises lexical access because each selection is more eﬀortful and enhances
executive control through its continuous involvement in language production’ (Bialystok
2009: 7).
Language and ageing
129

An essential notion for Bialystok’s explanations is that, contrary to previous premises in
cognitive psychology, there is ‘a potential for change in the structure and function of cognitive
processes’, so that ‘these processes can be modiﬁed by experience’ (Bialystok 2007: 215; see
also Reuter-Lorenz 2002). Green et al. (2006) examined whether the acquisition of additional
languages may cause functional and structural brain changes, using voxel-based morphometry
(a neuroimaging technique that measures diﬀerences in local concentrations of brain tissue by
means of a voxel-wise comparison of multiple brain images; for a description see Ashburner
and Friston 2000). They report that ‘preliminary analyses indicate an area in the left parietal
cortex that shows a signiﬁcant eﬀect of the number of languages spoken’ (Green et al. 2006:
109). However, research by Mechelli and colleagues (2004), who found that there is an increase
of grey matter density with language learning, but also a decline with the increase of age of
onset of acquisition, makes it unclear whether ‘the density is higher because the L2 has been
used more over the years, or the density is higher in younger years and is maintained over
time’ (de Bot 2006: 129). This line of argument leads to an alternative explanation for the
experience-dependent plasticity of the brain: synaptic pruning. After early childhood, which is
characterised by a peak in synaptic density, synapses that are not being used are eliminated
(see Chechik et al. 1997). This could imply that bilingualism does not cause an increase in grey
matter, but rather that ‘monolingualism leads to extensive pruning’ (de Bot 2006: 130), that is,
of the synapses that are not used for a second language.
Lastly, Green and his colleagues also discuss an individual case (Emil Krebs, who spoke
more than 60 languages; see Amunts et al. 2004) to suggest that there might also be individual
diﬀerences in brain structure that aﬀect the language acquisition process. This evidence is by
no means at odds with theories on multiple language use leading to functional and structural
changes in the brain, as the relationship between language development, cognitive functioning
and brain structures is dynamic, so that changes in all systems mutually aﬀect each other. The
implications of these recent research developments are manifold. First, the possibility that
some people, by virtue of certain characteristics of brain structure, might be more suited for
learning languages than others, is not altogether new, but might oﬀer new challenges in the
ﬁeld of language teaching. Second, the accumulating evidence on cognitive advantages of
bilingualism, and particularly on the protection it might oﬀer against dementia, can only
increase the importance of learning (multiple) languages, also in adulthood.
Language, ageing and identity
In the study of language and ageing a distinction can be made between a psycholinguistic
perspective, which focuses on language processing or on language as a code, and a socio-
linguistic approach, which focuses on the interaction between individuals and their environ-
ment. In the present contribution the emphasis has been more on the former than on the
latter. This diﬀerence in emphasis does not reﬂect a diﬀerence in relevance, but is mainly
caused by the scarcity of research on the sociolinguistic side. In the ﬁeld of sociolinguistics
there are two main lines of research: one of them focuses on the language used with and
among elderly speakers (the so-called ‘Elderspeak’), while the second, related one addresses
the way elderly people express their identity in discourse.
There is a considerable body of research on the language used in interaction with
elderly people. Three aspects in the discussion on Elderspeak, as it is generally called, are
relevant here. The ﬁrst one concerns the characteristics of the language used in communication
with elderly people. The second aspect addresses the question as to what extent accommoda-
tion to perceived communicative problems of elderly people actually helps to make
Kees de Bot and Nienke van der Hoeven
130

communication more eﬀective, while the third one concerns the issue to what extent such
adaptations of speech are valued by the elderly interactants. The language used with elderly
people has been compared with the languages used with children (caretaker speech) and with
foreigners (foreigner talk). It is characterized by a slow speech rate, exaggerated intonation,
shortening and simpliﬁcation of sentences, and use of highly frequent vocabulary (Kemper
et al. 1995). But not all these adaptations appear to enhance either the quality of the interac-
tions or the self-image of elderly people. In their evaluation study, Kemper and Harden
conclude:
providing semantic elaborations and reducing the use of subordinate and embedded
clauses beneﬁt older adults and improve their performance on the referential commu-
nication task, whereas reducing sentence length, slowing speaking rate and using high
pitch do not. The use of short sentences, a slow rate of speaking, and high pitch resulted
in the older adults’ reporting more communication problems.
(Kemper and Harden 1999: 656)
Apart from the counter-eﬀectiveness of the wrong type of adaptations, the use of Elderspeak is
not evaluated positively by all elderly people. Research by Ryan and her colleagues points to
the fact that the kind of modiﬁcations used in Elderspeak are primarily based on ‘negative
expectations of incompetence and dependency … (occurring) independently of actual functioning’
(Ryan et al. 2000: 272).
The other main line of sociolinguistic research on ageing concerns the sociolinguistic and
discursive perspective on diﬀerent age phases. In her introduction to a special issue of the
journal Ageing and Society (Coupland 2009), Coupland reviews the still limited set of research
on this topic. She draws an interesting parallel with sociolinguistic research on gendered
speech and notices that ‘There is very little age-focused research that could, for example, bear
comparison with the feminist perspectives that drove sociolinguistics forward during and after
the 1970s.’ (2009: 849). One of the seminal publications on this perspective on language and
ageing is Language, Society and the Elderly by Coupland et al. (1991). The relative lack of
interest generated by sociolinguistic ageing research may be a result of the fact that the qua-
litative research methods used in this ﬁeld were considered to be at odds with the more con-
trolled and experimental information processing paradigms that were prevalent in the 1990s.
The contributions to the special issue of Ageing and Society show that the use of such methods
yields highly relevant and informative perspectives on perceptions and views of ageing. They
show that ageing is at least partly socially constructed, and that the micro-social and macro-
social perspectives in the study of language and ageing should be connected: the macro-social
deﬁnitions of ageing do not necessarily reﬂect micro-social, individual and local experiences of
elderly people (Nikander 2009).
Future trajectory and new debates
In recent years interest in ageing and multilingualism has grown, due in part to the ﬁndings on
cognitive advantages of multilingualism in ageing and dementia by Bialystok and colleagues,
described above. The socio-economic impact of potential delays in the onset of dementia is so
high, that it seems highly recommendable to extend the line of research begun by Bialystok:
which types of bilingualism will bring about these positive eﬀects, and can other types of
attentional control oﬀer this protection too? The work that has been done so far (Bialystok
et al. 2004, 2007) has been carried out with participants who grew up with two or more
Language and ageing
131

languages. One of the intriguing questions that follow from this is whether these ﬁndings
with ‘early bilingualism’ can be extended to later and less complete learning of a foreign
language.
Views on education have also changed in the last few decades. The idea of a separate phase
of life that is devoted to learning and that ends in the mid-20s at the latest has been replaced
by what is generally referred to as ‘lifelong learning’. The thinking behind this is that in a
world that is changing quickly, yesterday’s knowledge may not be suﬃcient for today. With
respect to ageing, continuous learning is part of a strategy to keep elderly people mentally
alert and active. Learning or relearning languages is seen as a relevant and eﬀective way to
keep the mind active. Van der Hoeven and de Bot (forthcoming) looked at diﬀerences between
three age groups (students/middle-aged/elderly) in the learning and relearning of words in
French as a foreign language. Their main ﬁnding was that there was no diﬀerence in relearning
words between the three groups, but that in particular the oldest group had signiﬁcant
problems learning new words.
The inﬂuence of new technology: neuroimaging and media
There are two types of technology that are relevant for the topics dealt with in this contribu-
tion: the use of new neuroimaging techniques for the study of the brain structures involved in
language use on the one hand, and the role of electronic media in the lives of the elderly on the
other.
In the last few decades a range of new neuroimaging techniques have been developed to
study information processing in the in vivo brain. A very useful overview of techniques used in
cognitive neuroscience is provided by Kramer et al. (2006). In their introduction these authors
warn against overoptimistic expectations with regard to what we might learn about cognitive
processes through the use of such techniques: ‘However, electrophysiological techniques do not
lend themselves to the unambiguous localization of the sources of brain activity that support
the multitude of perceptual, cognitive and action-based processes of interest to researchers who
study aging’ (2006: 57). Grosso modo there are three types of techniques: techniques aimed at
ﬁnding out the locus of cerebral activity during the performance of speciﬁc activities (fMRI,
PET), techniques measuring the timing of activities in speciﬁc parts of the brain (ERP) and
techniques creating short temporally and spatially delimited virtual lesions (TMS). Optical
imaging techniques using parameters of near-infrared light have been shown to combine the
advantages of fMRI and ERP, since both the spatial and the temporal resolution are suﬃcient.
This allows the gathering of data using one instrument/technique, which removes the problem
of aligning data from separate techniques. The speciﬁc advantage of TMS is that it allows for
the study of the role of diﬀerent brain structures in processing. By temporarily ‘switching oﬀ’
speciﬁc parts of the brain, their contribution to a task can be studied. There are some pro-
blems in applying these techniques in studying elderly informants. Kramer et al. (2006: 62)
warn against simplistic comparisons between younger and older individuals, since ageing may
involve anatomical and physiological changes that may have an impact on the propagation of
electrical and magnetic signals to the scalp.
While there are some studies using these techniques for the study of language skills in
elderly populations (see Burke and Shafto 2008), this is only the beginning and unreplicated
ﬁndings ﬂourish. Still, there can be no doubt that the application of such techniques will in the
end provide us with rich data on the link between brain structures and cognitive functioning.
Compared to the vast amount of research using neuroimaging techniques for the study of
language functions in ageing, research on the impact of technology on language in ageing is
Kees de Bot and Nienke van der Hoeven
132

relatively scarce, which does not imply, however, that the role actually played by technology
here is insigniﬁcant as well. To start with, old age is often accompanied by a decline in acuity
of the senses, notably hearing and sight. As some researchers have pointed out (see, for example,
Baltes and Lindenberger 1997), such a decline is bound to aﬀect cognitive performance as
well: most notably, declines in speech perception can have their impact on language compre-
hension (see Schneider and Pichora-Fuller 2000). Moreover, data from the British Royal
National Institute for Deaf People (www.rnid.org) suggest that age-related hearing decline
(presbycusis) is the rule rather than the exception. RNID estimates that 71.1 per cent of over-
70s in the UK suﬀer from some kind of hearing loss. The potential impact of technology such
as hearing aids on language development in the elderly, and thus on their social functioning
and well-being, can therefore hardly be overestimated. Likewise, although generally the impact
of age-related decline in sight on elderly people’s language use may be less signiﬁcant, it should
be noted that progress in ophthalmic treatments, particularly in cataract surgery, has made it
possible for elderly people to, for instance, continue reading till a very old age.
Another technological development that has had an impact on language use by the elderly
is the advent of the home computer, and in its wake the recent rise of the Internet. Whereas initially
the elderly had less access to and knowledge of computers and the Internet than younger age
groups – a phenomenon described as the generational digital divide – there is some evidence
that older people are now catching up and showing increasing interest in computer and
Internet use: for instance, in 2005, 22.4 per cent of people over 65 in the USA connected to the
Internet, compared to 34.9 per cent in 2007 (data derived from the US Census Bureau).
Whatever the reason may be for the closing of this generation gap – the eﬀect of computer
courses for the elderly, or of younger, computer-literate generations ‘pushing up’ – it seems
that, as far as computers are concerned, in the future older generations will no longer be
completely ‘linguistically excluded’ (see Harwood 2007: 245). Some research has focused on
what the elderly use computers and the Internet for; it seems that apart from maintaining social
networks, ﬁnding medical and other information, the elderly also seem to use the Internet for
identity functions (Harwood 2004, 2007: 256). However, what is still lacking is research on
how computer and Internet use by the elderly aﬀects their language performance.
Last but not least, use of another technological device, the television, will no doubt have an
impact on language performance by the elderly, too. However, here as well research has
focused mainly on the use of this medium, as well as on how the elderly are portrayed in tel-
evision programmes. However, there has also been some research on television-watching habits
of the elderly in relation with potential eﬀects of leisure-time activities on cognitive state.
Lindstrom and colleagues report an association between increased television viewing in midlife
and an increased risk of Alzheimer’s disease in later life (Lindstrom et al. 2005). Fogel and
Carlson (2006) report that in a group of 289 older women, soap operas and talk shows as
favourite television programmes are associated with lower scores on cognitive tests. As yet, it
seems much too early to draw any causal conclusions from these studies, as both watching
television and having preferences for certain programmes might very well reﬂect a cognitive
state instead of inducing it, by way of taking up time that could have been spent on more
stimulating activities. Still, these studies might initiate a line of research that may also address
the issue of the impact of elderly people’s TV-watching habits on language performance.
Summarizing comments
In this chapter an overview is presented on language and healthy ageing with an emphasis on
bilingualism. It is argued that we need to move from a deﬁcit and medicalized perspective on
Language and ageing
133

ageing to a life-span and dynamic perspective in which language development is seen as a
process that starts at birth and continues over the course of life. Language-related major life
events will aﬀect language development at diﬀerent ages and some age-related physical chan-
ges will have an impact on both cognitive functioning and interaction with the social envir-
onment. A perspective based on dynamic systems theory provides some ways to understand
how a multitude of factors play a role in language development over the life-span and how
earlier stages continue to aﬀect the present.
Critical issues in the study of language and ageing are the interest in individual diﬀerences
in the study of development, the roles of cognitive reserve and of bilingualism as a potential
part of that, and the speciﬁc problems relating to immigration and ageing.
Recent developments in neuroimaging techniques have been aﬀecting the research ﬁeld of
cognitive processing, and studies including elderly populations are beginning to be published.
Such studies will provide us with a better understanding of the role of diﬀerent brain structures
in language use and the timing of language processing over time and across individuals. A largely
unexplored area is the role of various types of electronic media, ranging from television and
radio to messaging and on-line spoken communication, with regard to language and ageing.
Related topics
clinical linguistics; language learning; multilingualism; neurolinguistics; psycholinguistics
Further reading
Burke, D. and Shafto, M. A. (2008) ‘Language and aging’, in F. I. M. Craik and T. A. Salthouse
(eds) The Handbook of Aging and Cognition, New York: Psychology Press. (This is probably the
most complete overview of research on language and ageing available at the moment. It is an
excellent starting point for any study of this topic.)
Craik, F. and Bialystok, E. (2006) ‘Cognition through the life-span: mechanisms of change’, Trends
in Cognitive Sciences 10(3): 131–8. (In this article the main ﬁndings on cognitive changes over the
life-span, including the impact of multilingualism, are discussed. It also provides a cognitively
based theoretical approach to change over time.)
de Bot, K. and Makoni, S. (2005) Language and Aging in Multilingual Settings, Clevedon: Multi-
lingual Matters. (While the literature discussed in this book is beginning to be outdated, it con-
tinues to be the only book on this topic providing both information on models of multilingualism
and empirical work on a number of diﬀerent elderly populations.)
Harwood, J. (2007) Understanding Communication and Aging, Los Angeles, CA: Sage. (This book
takes a broad perspective on language and education by focusing on the communicative aspects,
including health care communication and the use of new media, rather than adopting the
narrower focus on psycholinguistic skills typically found in the literature.)
References
Amunts, K., Schleicher, A. and Ziller, K. (2004) ‘Outstanding language competence and cytoarchi-
tecture in Broca’s speech region’, Brain and Language 89: 346–53.
Ardila, A., Ostrosky-Solis, F., Rosselli, M. and Gomez, C. (2000) ‘Age-related cognitive decline
during normal aging: the complex eﬀect of education’, Archives of Clinical Neuropsychology 15:
495–513.
Ashburner, J. and Friston, K. (2000) ‘Voxel-based morphometry: the methods’, NeuroImage 11:
805–21.
Baltes, P. and Lindenberger, U. (1997) ‘Emergence of a powerful connection between sensory and
cognitive functions across the adult life span: a new window to the study of cognitive aging?’,
Psychology and Aging 12: 12–21.
Kees de Bot and Nienke van der Hoeven
134

Baltes, P., Reese, H. and Nesselroade, J. (1977) Life-span Developmental Psychology: Introduction to
Research Methods, Monterey, CA: Brooks/Cole Publishing Company.
Bialystok, E. (2001) Bilingualism in Development: Language, Literacy and Cognition, New York:
Cambridge University Press.
——(2005) ‘Consequences of bilingualism for cognitive development’, in J. F. Kroll and A. M. B. de
Groot (eds) Handbook of Bilingualism, Psycholinguistic Approaches, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
——(2007) ‘Cognitive eﬀects of bilingualism: how linguistic experience leads to cognitive change’,
The International Journal of Bilingual Education and Bilingualism 10(3): 210–23.
——(2009) ‘Bilingualism: the good, the bad, and the indiﬀerent’, Bilingualism: Language and
Cognition 12(1): 3–11.
Bialystok, E., Craik, F. and Friedman, M. (2007) ‘Bilingualism as a protection against the onset of
symptoms of dementia’, Neuropsychologia 45: 459–64.
Bialystok, E., Craik, F., Klein, R. and Viswanathan, M. (2004) ‘Bilingualism, aging, and cognitive
control: evidence from the Simon task’, Psychology and Aging 19(2): 290–303.
Bialystok, E., Craik, F. and Ryan, J. (2006) ‘Executive control in a modiﬁed antisaccade task:
eﬀects of aging and bilingualism’, Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory and
Cognition 12(6): 1341–54.
Braet, C. and Verhofstadt-Denève, L. (1998) ‘Developmental psychopathology’, in A. Demetriou,
W. Doise and C. van Lieshout (eds) Life-span Developmental Psychology, Chichester: John Wiley.
Burke, D. and Shafto, M. (2008) ‘Language and aging’, in F. Craik and T. A. Salthouse (eds) The
Handbook of Aging and Cognition, New York: Psychology Press.
Chechik, G., Meilijson, L. and Ruppin, E. (1997) ‘Synaptic pruning in development: a computa-
tional account’, Neural Computation 10: 1759–77.
Clyne, M. (1977) ‘Bilingualism in the elderly’, Talanya 4: 45–65.
Colzato, L., Bajo, M., van den Wildenberg, W., Paolieri, D., Nieuwenhuis, S., La Heij, W. and
Hommel, B. (2008) ‘How does bilingualism improve executive control? A comparison of active
and reactive inhibition mechanisms’, Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory and
Cognition 34(2): 302–12.
Costa, A., Hernández, M. and Sebastián-Gallés, N. (2008) ‘Bilingualism aids conﬂict resolution:
evidence from the ANT task’, Cognition 106: 59–86.
Coupland, J. (2009) ‘Discourse, identity and change in mid-to-late life: interdisciplinary perspectives
on language and ageing’, Ageing and Society 29: 849–61.
Coupland, N., Coupland, J. and Giles, H. (1991) Language, Society and the Elderly, Oxford:
Blackwell.
de Bot, K. (2006) ‘The plastic bilingual brain: synaptic pruning or growth? Commentary on Green
et al.’, in M. Gullberg and P. Indefrey (eds) The Cognitive Neuroscience of Second Language
Acquisition, Malden, MA: Blackwell Publishing.
——(2009) ‘Multilingualism and aging’, in W. C. Ritchie and T. K. Bhatia (eds) The New Hand-
book of Second Language Acquisition, San Diego, CA: Elsevier.
de Bot, K. and Clyne, M. (1989) ‘Language reversion revisited’, Studies in Second Language
Acquisition 11: 167–77.
——(1994) ‘A 16-year longitudinal study of language attrition in Dutch immigrants in Australia’,
Journal of Multilingual and Multicultural Development 15: 17–28.
de Bot, K. and Makoni, S. (2005) Language and Aging in Multilingual Societies: A Dynamic
Approach, Clevedon: Multilingual Matters.
de Bot, K., Verspoor, M. and Lowie, W. (2007) ‘A dynamic systems theory approach to second
language acquisition’, Bilingualism: Language and Cognition 10: 7–21.
Demetriou, A., Doise, W. and van Lieshout, C. (1998) Life-span Developmental Psychology,
Chichester: John Wiley.
Elman, J. (2005) ‘An alternative view of the mental lexicon’, Trends in Cognitive Sciences 8: 301–6.
Fogel, J. and Carlson, M. C. (2006) ‘Soap operas and talk shows on television are associated with
poorer cognition in older women’, Southern Medical Journal 99: 226–33.
Francis, W. (1999) ‘Cognitive integration of language and memory in bilinguals: semantic repre-
sentation’, Psychological Bulletin 125: 193–222.
Green, D. W., Crinion, J. and Price, C. J. (2006) ‘Convergency, degeneracy and control’, in
M. Gullberg and P. Indefrey (eds) The Cognitive Neuroscience of Second Language Acquisition,
Malden, MA: Blackwell Publishing.
Language and ageing
135

Harwood, J. (2004) ‘Relational, role, and social identity as expressed in grandparents’ personal Web
sites’, Communication studies 55: 300–18.
——(2007) Understanding Communication and Aging, Los Angeles, CA: Sage.
Herdina, P. and Jessner, U. (2002) A Dynamic Model of Multilingualism. Perspective of Change in
Psycholinguistics, Clevedon: Multilingual Matters.
Hyltenstam, K. and Stroud, C. (1993) ‘Second language regression in Alzheimer’s disease’, in
K. Hyltenstam and A. Viberg (eds) Progression and Regression in Language: Sociocultural, Neu-
ropsychological, and Linguistic Perspectives, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Irigaray, L. (1973) Le langage des déments, The Hague: Mouton.
Kavé, G., Eyal, N., Shorek, A. and Cohen-Mansﬁeld, J. (2008) ‘Multilingualism and cognitive state
in the oldest old’, Psychology and Aging 23(1): 70–8.
Keijzer, M. (2007) ‘Last in First Out? An Investigation of the Regression Hypothesis in Dutch
Emigrants in Anglophone Canada’, Ph.D. Dissertation, Free University, Amsterdam.
Kemper, S., Vandeputte, D., Rice, K., Cheung, H. and Gubarchuk, J. (1995) ‘Speech adjustments to
aging during a referential communication task’, Journal of Language and Social Psychology 14:
40–59.
Kemper, S. and Harden, T. (1999) ‘Experimentally disentangling what’s beneﬁcial about elderspeak
from what’s not’, Psychology and Aging 14: 656–70.
Kemper, S., Greiner, L., Marquis, J., Prenovost, K. and Mitzner, T. (2001) ‘Language decline across
the life span: ﬁndings from the nun study’, Psychology and Aging 16: 227–39.
Kramer, A., Fabiani, M. and Colcombe, S. (2006) ‘Contributions of cognitive neuroscience to the
understanding of behavior and aging’, in J. E. Birren, K. W. Schaie, R. P. Abeles, M. Gatz and
T. A. Salthouse (eds) Handbook of the Psychology of Aging, New York: Academic Press.
Larsen-Freeman, D. (1997) ‘Chaos/complexity science and second language acquisition’, Applied
Linguistics 18: 141–65.
Larsen-Freeman, D. and Cameron, L. (2008) Complex Systems and Applied Linguistics, Oxford:
Oxford University Press.
Lindstrom, H. A., Fritsch, T., Petot, G., Smyth, K. A., Chen, C. H., Debanne, S. M. et al. (2005)
‘The relationships between television viewing in midlife and the development of Alzheimer’s
disease in a case-control study’, Brain and Cognition 58: 157–65.
Magnusson, D. (1996) The Lifespan Development of Individuals: Behavioral, Neurobiological, and
Psychosocial Perspectives, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Mechelli, A., Crinion, J. T., Noppeney, U., O’Doherty, J., Ashburner, J., Frackowiak, R. S. et al.
(2004) ‘Structural plasticity in the bilingual brain’, Nature 431: 757.
Nikander, P. (2009) ‘Doing change and continuity: age identity and the micro–macro divide’,
Ageing and Society 29: 863–81.
Reuter-Lorenz, A. (2002) ‘New visions of the aging mind and brain’, Trends in Cognitive Sciences
6(9): 394–400.
Royal National Institute for Deaf People (n.d.) Statistics on age-related hearing loss, based on a
member survey in 2005. Available at: www.rnid.org.uk/information_resources/aboutdeafness/
statistics/statistics.htm#age (accessed 29 October 2009).
Ryan, E., Kennaley, D., Pratt, M. and Shumovich, M. (2000) ‘Evaluations by staﬀ, residents, and
community seniors of patronizing speech in the nursing home: impact of passive, assertive, or
humorous responses’, Psychology and Aging 15: 272–85.
Schmid, M. (2002) First Language Attrition, Use and Maintenance. The Case of German Jews in
Anglophone Countries, Amsterdam and Philadephia: John Benjamins.
Schneider, B. A. and Pichora-Fuller, M. K. (2000) ‘Implications of perceptual deterioration for
cognitive aging research’, in F. I. M. Craik and T. A. Salthouse (eds) The Handbook of Aging and
Cognition, Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Schrauf, R. (2009) ‘Longitudinal designs in studies of multilingualism’, in K. de Bot and R. Schrauf
(eds) Language Development over the Life Span, New York: Routledge.
Snowdon, D. (2003) ‘Healthy aging and dementia: ﬁndings from the nun study’, Annals of Internal
Medicine 139(5 part 2): 450–4.
U.S. Census Bureau (2007) Population Survey Report on Computer and Internet Use in the United
States (Tables 2 and 4: ‘Reported Internet usage for individuals 3 years and older, by selected
characteristics’).
Available
at:
www.census.gov/population/www/socdemo/computer/2007.html
(accessed 29 October 2009).
Kees de Bot and Nienke van der Hoeven
136

van der Hoeven, N. and de Bot, K. (forthcoming) ‘Relearning in the elderly: age-related eﬀects on
the size of savings’, Language Learning.
van Geert, P. (1994) Dynamic Systems of Development: Change Between Complexity and Chaos,
New York: Harvester.
——(2008) ‘The dynamic systems approach in the study of L1 and L2 acquisition: an introduction’,
Modern Language Journal 92(2): 179–99.
——(2009) ‘A comprehensive dynamic systems theory of language development’, in K. de Bot and
R. Schrauf (eds) Language Development Over the Life Span, New York: Routledge.
Warnes, A. M., Friederich, K., Kellaher, L. and Torres, S. (2004) ‘The diversity and welfare of older
migrants in Europe’, Ageing and Society 24: 307–26.
Language and ageing
137

10
Forensic linguistics
Frances Rock
Introduction
Have you ever puzzled over the ‘small print’ on a mobile telephone contract or insurance
agreement, trying to ﬁgure out how it relates to you? Have you ever clicked your consent to a
Website’s terms and conditions without having even glanced at them? Have you ever scruti-
nised a roadside parking restrictions sign and wondered where you stand – or park? If so, you
have encountered the potentially unsettling eﬀects of legal language. You can probably recall
many more examples, as law pervades daily life. Language is integral to this; repeatedly we are
told ‘the law is a profession of words’ (Mellinkoﬀ1963: vii) and ‘our law is a law of words’
(Tiersma 1999: 1). Yet many other aspects of social life also rely on words. What is so special
about connections between language and law?
Language sets up law, deﬁning oﬀences, obligations and rights and presenting these for legal
specialists and for members of society who decide whether to live by law’s words or face con-
sequences also stated in language. Legal language governs relationships between individuals,
companies and institutions. Law is also conducted, enforced, indeed brought into existence through
language. In police stations, courts and prisons, for example, law moves oﬀthe page and into
people’s lives through the collection and use of evidence in interviews, cross examinations and
review panels, and through communication of legal outcomes which shape social relations in
areas as wide-ranging as who lives with whom and who faces what punishment. All of this
provides stimulating foci for descriptive linguistics particularly at the discourse level. However,
such study also illuminates the law and the ways in which society conducts important parts of its
operation, concerning life, death, pain, retaliation, retribution, harm and change. With this in
mind, language study in the legal system is more than the study of an interesting artefact of
itself. Rather, linguists who study legal systems potentially become involved in the working of
those systems, moving beyond description by turning their observations into social commen-
tary or even activism or intervention. So, here is one crucial reason why the observation that
language is essential to law is more than just a platitude; the study of language in legal systems
permits linguists to make positive contributions to the operation of law and thus society.
Language is also essential to law because of the frequency with which language becomes
part of legally sanctioned activities. Oﬀences are planned and executed through language, so
138

audio records of alleged oﬀences can become subject to linguistic analysis, as can written texts
potentially produced by perpetrators. In civil and criminal law, acts of misrepresentation, per-
suasion, and deception can underpin such oﬀences as bribery, defamation, perjury, blackmail,
threatening, libel and slander, rendering them amenable to linguistic analysis (e.g. Shuy 2010).
Here, linguists with specialisms ranging from phonetics to pragmatics can perform tasks as
fundamental as informing decisions about whether an illegal activity has occurred.
The term forensic linguistics is hotly debated. For some, it denotes only the work of those
who provide expert evidence on language for police investigations or court hearings. For these
terminological purists, the forensic linguist is essentially a consultant for hire. For others,
the term has a wider meaning which extends to examining courtrooms, particularly criminal
ones, by analysing talk from lawyers and witnesses. Finally, increasingly the term is coming to
have a wider application to denote research on all areas of legal activity from the language of
legislation through police stations and even into prisons and out into the worlds of consumers,
families and corporations. Other labels circulate, such as language and law (Levi 1994), foren-
sic English (Philbrick 1949) and the more specialised forensic discourse analysis (Coulthard
1994) and forensic phonetics (e.g. Foulkes and French 2001), yet forensic linguistics has, parti-
cularly outside the USA, become an umbrella term for all forms of language-based research
on matters legal. No doubt the exact scope of the area will continue to shift as scholars pursue
new foci and new alignments with the forensic linguistic label. Societies’ changing notions of
legality and law’s scope will also be an inﬂuence. For now, this chapter is organised around a
distinction between expert witness work, in which language becomes evidence, and descriptive
research on language within, and reaching out from, legal systems.
Main current issues
Forensic linguistics is so new that its history is still being written and so diverse that this his-
tory has been traced from several directions. For example, scholars observe roots of the sub-
ﬁeld in detailed descriptions of legal language (Tiersma 1999), in analyses of texts arising from
early miscarriages of justice (Coulthard and Johnson 2007: 5) and in research on legal lan-
guage in social settings (Danet 1990). These diﬀerent histories illustrate the diversity and
vitality of the sub-ﬁeld from its inception and, conversely, the potential for it to be viewed as
merely a rag-bag collection of potentially disparate activities.
Current research tests the bounds of the forensic linguistic enterprise. Thus, the main issues
it now faces are wide-ranging and topical, spanning questions like ‘How distinctive is each
individual’s writing style?’, ‘What makes language diﬃcult to understand?’, ‘How do speakers
exert power over each other and what does that achieve?’, ‘What is the eﬀect of an interpreter
on one-to-one interactions?’, ‘How are “facts” best extracted from children?’, ‘How should
linguists present information to non-linguists?’. Each of these is a huge question. Answering
requires recourse to many approaches to language study, and this chapter gives a ﬂavour of
how some approaches are applied in tasks and settings which relate to law.
Language and expertise
Someone has been threatened and police are trying to discover who made the threat (e.g.
Labov 1988). Someone has apparently killed themselves, leaving a suicide note and detectives
are trying to discover whether the note was genuine or the suicide really a murder (e.g. Chaski
2005). Someone has been arrested and interviewed and they claim that the resulting written
police statement has been tampered with – the words attributed to them are not theirs
Forensic linguistics
139

(e.g. Coulthard 2002). All of these scenarios have attracted forensic linguists’ attention, working
for prosecution, defence or within police investigations. Linguists have also become involved
in investigating more unusual situations, for example cheating (fraud) in a game show
(French and Harrison 2004). Whilst these various criminal and civil matters appear disparate,
forensic linguistic case work always involves the linguist being set an exercise to complete
using analytic tools. If they cannot complete the exercise with the tools available to them, they
should refer the case to another linguist who has access to diﬀerent, apparently necessary
resources (e.g. knowledge of an additional language or technique) or they should report that
the exercise is not amenable to linguistic analysis. What diﬀers across the casework examples
above is the degree of frequency with which forensic linguistic practitioners encounter each
type of problem. Questions of authorship, broadly ‘who wrote this’, are fairly established, as
are questions such as ‘Who said this?’ for the forensic phonetician (see Fraser, this volume).
Authorship investigation, for example, receives extensive scholarly attention both from those
who take casework in this area (e.g. Eagleson 1994) and from those (not necessarily diﬀerent
individuals) who seek to answer big questions about whether and how writers reveal some-
thing about who they are through their linguistic choices (e.g. Grant 2008). Such researchers
use established notions around sociolinguistic variation, identities and stylistics to test novel
ways of measuring texts for their potential to distinguish individuals. They examine authorship
markers (Grant 2008) or style markers (McMenamin 2002: 115), in other words, features of
language in use which might discriminate authors. A great many markers have been investi-
gated at the levels of vocabulary, phrase choice, syntax, spelling and discourse, for example
verb forms (Chaski 2001), hapax legomena (words occurring only once) (Woolls 2003: 106)
and mean word or sentence length (Grant 2007: 11). Authorship scholars do not naively ask
whether one speaker or writer produces language which is completely unique to them. Rather,
using markers they address more subtle questions about degrees of diﬀerence between a closed
set of authors or, commonly, about whether the author of a ‘questioned’ text or texts is the
same person as the author of a set of ‘reference texts’ which have been assembled for the
investigation with such issues as writers’ purpose and genre in mind.
Some scholars take an essentially quantitative line, seeking to count multiple authorship
markers (e.g. Chaski 2001; McMenamin 2002: 137–61); others are more qualitative, examining
particular occurrences of marked features in detail (e.g. Coulthard 2002). Both approaches
have attracted criticism; for example, whilst quantiﬁcation can appear rigorous, that which
considers neither sampling nor variation as a complex sociolinguistic phenomenon risks
‘dangerous’ conclusions (Grant 2007: 2). Some qualitative work risks assuming that an indi-
vidual’s idiolect will identify them with too much conviction (Kniﬀka 2007: 185). As McMenamin
notes, ‘sometimes the linguistic signiﬁcance of an identiﬁed variable is not captured by count-
ing’ (2002: 131). He exempliﬁes through a case of a contested will. Violet Hussein, born in
Japan, had grown up in Hawaii before moving to Alaska where she eventually passed away.
Her will, leaving an estate of $1.6 million to her neighbours, was a standardised one, pur-
chased from a stationery store, accompanied by letters to a friend named Kim whom no one
knew or could ﬁnd. Her siblings contested the will.
The deceased woman’s known writings included many Creole language features such as
mass nouns replacing count nouns (e.g. ‘our deepest appreciations’) and an absence of number
concord between subjects and particular verbs (e.g. ‘all of them was tops’) (McMenamin 2002:
134). Yet the questioned writings, ‘the “Kim” letters’, incorporated only one such feature;
deletion (of, for example auxiliary do (e.g. ‘He say he not want my money’) and of plural
markers (e.g. ‘I tell you these thing’) (2002: 132)). Aside from the predictable question about
whether the questioned and known writings were suﬃciently diﬀerent to suggest a diﬀerent
Frances Rock
140

author, the ‘Kim’ letters invited consideration of whether there is any variety of English which
can be characterised by only one grammatical process, deletion, and thus whether the letters
were more generally plausible. McMenamin proposed that the presence of only deletions sug-
gested authorship by ‘a dialect imitator who stereotypically views Creole-English as just stan-
dard-English-with-things-missing’ (2002: 135). The judge in the case found in favour of the
siblings and against the neighbours who had, he ruled, prepared or directed the preparation of
the ‘Kim’ letters.
The presentation of information by expert witnesses interests both forensic linguistic prac-
titioners whose concern is how to communicate their evidence (e.g. Storey-White 1997; French
and Harrison 2007) and descriptive linguists conceptualising expert testimony as an arte-
fact of courtroom procedure (e.g. Hobbs 2002). Evidential rules, speciﬁc to each jurisdiction,
restrict what can be presented and how. For example, criteria arising from the case of Daubert
v. Merrow Dow Pharmaceuticals Inc. (1993) apply in the USA. These criteria seek to establish
the acceptability of expert evidence by asking whether a method has been generally accepted,
tested and peer-reviewed with a known error rate established. This challenges, for example,
qualitative researchers and those using new or adapted methods. Linguists can equip them-
selves for court by reading about other linguists’ experiences (e.g. Lakoﬀ1986), courts’ per-
spectives (Tiersma and Solan 2002) or by digesting information on how to be a forensic
linguist, such as Shuy’s ‘nuts-and-bolts guide book’ (2006: v).
Good expert witnesses ground their work in research and remain cautious about what
they can do. Unfortunately, in the area of so-called ‘language analysis’ or ‘linguistic identiﬁ-
cation’ the potential for language to identify speakers does not necessarily receive such
respect. Language analysis is employed, in principle, to investigate claims from those
seeking refugee status or asylum upon arriving in a new country in search of the help and
safety that they lost at home (Eades and Arends 2004: 179–80). Potential host countries have
devised ways to ‘test’ asylum claims. Tests rest on the assumption that some aspect of the
speech of an asylum seeker will indicate their origin. Whilst such a relationship between lan-
guage variables and social variables could be seen as perhaps the most central tenet of socio-
linguistics, the tests ‘are increasingly raising concerns about over generalised and erroneous
assumptions and practices involved’ (Eades and Arends 2004: 180). In particular, the tests
connect language straightforwardly to place, assuming that if one comes from place ‘A’ one
will speak (only) variety ‘X’. Thus reports are often ‘linguistically naïve’, suggesting
that analysts do not understand linguistic processes such as variation within a variety,
language change and code-switching (Eades 2005: 510). Eades exempliﬁes this through a
typical excerpt from a report on an analysis, in this case disputing a claim to Afghanistan
nationality:
The applicant speaks Dari Hazaragi, which is spoken in central Afghanistan as well as in
the Quetta area in Pakistan, with a Pakistani accent and … he uses several Iranian words
which the analyst states are not used in Afghan Dari but which do feature in the Dari
Hazaragi as it is spoken in Pakistan.
(Eades 2005: 510)
Blommaert notes not only linguistic naivety but also naivety about the state of the world,
speciﬁcally contemporary inter-relationships between dialects, languages, nations, nation
states, geographic mobility, time and individuals (2009). He describes the experience of one
young man whose sociolinguistic history, which passed through a number of locations and
living arrangements, had created in him a linguistic repertoire which did not conclusively link
Forensic linguistics
141

him to any particular place in the way that immigration oﬃcials expected. He concludes that one’s
‘linguistic repertoire reﬂects a life, not just birth’ and that ‘if such a life develops in a place
torn by violent conﬂicts and dislodged social and political relations, the image of someone being
born and bred in one community with one language as his “own” is hardly useful’ (2009: 424).
As well as form, content of asylum seeker accounts has also attracted linguists’ attention.
Maryns’ case studies of Belgian procedures show how asylum seekers frequently come to believe
that ‘their account is not sayable in an institutional context’, leading them to ‘hide behind a
constructed story which in many cases … falls short as a consistent and reliable narrative’
(2006: 314). This provides a clear transition to our discussion of language in the legal system.
Describing the legal system: policing
Police interviews are typically face-to-face encounters during which a member of the public is
questioned by one or more investigators. They aim to gather evidence concerning possible
crimes. Understandably, interviews are traditionally divided according to whether the inter-
viewee is a suspect or witness. However, for linguistic study it is more useful to divide them
according to whether the interview is audio-recorded or not because this more directly
inﬂuences researchers’ work.
Interviews which are not audio-recorded, which I will discuss ﬁrst, are transitory – for
legal purposes they do not exist beyond the interview interaction itself. From these interviews then,
the only record is a written statement which is produced during and through the interview.
This dialogic text production process leads to a particular interaction between talk and text
(Jönsson and Linell 1991). Komter used conversation analysis to examine this within an
interview through which a Dutch police oﬃcer created a suspect’s statement by typing onto a
computer. She explored how talk interwove with typing which became ‘a special type of turn’
which typically followed suspect’s talk, yet did not function as a spoken turn in this position
would, holding the ﬂoor, for example (2006: 222). Turning to text production she noted that
the typist-interviewer was ‘informed’ by the computer screen ‘projecting what to ask and write
next’ (2006: 223). Thus the technology inﬂuenced both the form and content of interviews.
The data below show the inﬂuence of a diﬀerent recording technology, pen and paper on a
witness interview. This technology aﬀords limited editorial opportunities once words reach the
page so the oﬃcer leads the witness through the crime narrative repeatedly, eliciting more or
diﬀerent detail each time, only then marking the oﬃcial statement sheet. This practice, described
in detail in Rock (2001), conforms to contemporary oﬃcer training (e.g. Benneworth 2009).
The excerpt below, from the ﬁnal written statement, describes events preceding the killing of
the witness’ friend:
Excerpt 1: The written statement
We were all drinking and I drank about 2 pints of cider and some spirits. These were
given to me by Colin.
How did this text about drinking emerge through the statement-taking session? Initially, the
witness volunteered a fairly monologic account, including the following:
Excerpt 2: Initial rendition
I was with ur (.) one geezer called Col I go to-like I went to his house at ﬁrst-James and
Dave but wha-everyone knows him as David and urm drinking at (.) Colin’s house (.) and
that him-they all got a bit drunk and that
Frances Rock
142

Here, in only the fourth turn of the interview, the witness mentions drinking. He does not
explicitly state that he was drinking. This could be inferred from drinking at although the
witness only speciﬁes that other people all got a bit drunk. After a further six turns, the
witness’ initial account of the whole crime narrative ends. After some negotiation the oﬃcer
begins a second, more meticulous, pass through the narrative which includes over 250
questions from him. Within this extended dialogic account, the oﬃcer raises the topic of
alcohol:
Excerpt 3: Second rendition
89
P
how much had you had to drink?
90
W
about I’d had about (.) phhh say had about (.) about two pints (.) in his house
91
P
were you drink-what were you drinking
92
W
was urm (.) some side-bit of cider (.) bit of ur (.) what was it now urm (.) no
what’s it called not rum the other stuﬀ(.) ur not whisky either (1.5) urm (.)
stuﬀnext ((to that)) next down from rum anyway (.) was spirits anyway
93
P
you was drinking spirits
94
W
yeah
Here, the witness states that he drank two pints of unspeciﬁed liquid. The oﬃcer’s question
(line 91) prompts elaboration including mention of both cider and spirits. Cider has made it
into the statement but the oﬃcer does nothing to identify the stronger drink, simply accepting
spirits in talk and in his written notes. Spirits potentially connotes plurality and suggests a
more prominent interest in drinking strong alcohol than in alcohol appreciation than a speciﬁc
label would. We cannot know whether the oﬃcer leaves this unresolved because of impatience,
confusion or a deliberate attempt to make the witness appear more, or indeed, less drunk than
he might otherwise.
They next return to alcohol after the oﬃcer has initiated a third rendition of the crime
narrative which enables him to check his notes:
Excerpt 4: Third rendition
551
P
you were drinking in Col’s house
552
W
yeah
… description of a man intervenes …
565
P
(3.6) OK you say you went-while you were there you drank about two pints
of cider and spirits who gave you the drink
566
W
Colin
Here, the oﬃcer maintains topic control, initiating (line 551) and revisiting (565) discussion of
alcohol and introducing the alcohol’s source, asking who gave you the drink.
Finally, the oﬃcer begins drafting the statement, reading aloud as he writes (indicated in
italics) and, through such devices as rising intonation, tag questions and pausing, checking
accuracy. We re-join the interview as they discuss alcohol once more:
Excerpt 5: Fourth and ﬁnal rendition
715
P
we were all drinking (6.7) and I drank (3.2) about (.) three pints (2.2) of cider
(.) and some spirits?
716
W
yeh
717
P
(4.5) these were given to me? (6.7) by Col? (.) is that right
Forensic linguistics
143

718
W
yeh
719
P
we’ll say Colin we’ll call him Colin yeh
720
W
yep
This short excerpt illustrates this witness’ response to speech recording technologies, being
typical of this phase of this interview. He does not seek the ﬂoor whilst the oﬃcer writes, as
Komter’s (2006) interviewee did during typing, rather he only speaks to answer questions.
Typing and writing perhaps have diﬀerent signiﬁcance to interlocutors. Regarding text con-
struction, turn 715 sees the oﬃcer transforming two pints which occurred throughout the pre-
vious excerpts into three pints. The fragment of written statement included at the beginning of
this discussion incorporated two rather than three pints; it is unclear why this alternative count
does not materialise in the statement given that this rendition facilitates statement-drafting.
The witness’ lack of comment on this miscalculation raises the question of power asymmetry,
a phenomenon elegantly explored in witness interviews by Thornborrow (2002: 37–60) and
suspect interviews by Haworth (2006), for example. When providing an uninterrupted account
(excerpt 2), the witness used both the address terms Col and Colin. In excerpt 4, the oﬃcer
uses the abbreviation Col and the witness selects more formal Colin. In line 719 the oﬃcer
announces his decision to record in writing the witness’ relatively formal address term Colin.
This metalanguage is not dissimilar to the witness’ clariﬁcation in excerpt 2 everyone knows
him as David, yet the oﬃcer’s words dictate the written text, while the witness’ words did not,
due to both the witness’ words’ position in the initial narrative and the role and asymetrical
status of each speaker.
Through talk, technology and text construction then, the oﬃcer selects Colin, introduces
and speciﬁes the witness’ drinking and its source and selects levels of detail in referring to
alcohol types. Whilst the written text appears to be a monologic account from the witness – as
courtroom participants, who might ultimately use this statement, might assume – it has been
inﬂuenced by the oﬃcer.
Turning now to interviews which are audio-recorded, these, like their non-audio-recorded
counterparts, yield written statements. However, recordings themselves will be available to
investigators and courts. This ensures that investigators can review complete, raw evidence if
necessary and reduces the risk of foul play or error shaping the only record. Talk in audio-
recorded interviews therefore has more potential legal importance than transitory, non-recorded
talk; it has accordingly attracted more linguistic interest. One key characteristic of the proliﬁc
and revealing work on audio-recorded interviews is the use of multiple methods within single
studies. Both Haworth (2006) and Heydon (2005), for example, combine conversation analysis
and critical discourse analysis, demonstrating power and control being discursively constructed
and managed.
Other work examines the impact of particular linguistic features in interview talk. Question
form has attracted attention. Johnson, for example, combines corpus linguistic techniques with
discourse analysis to scrutinise so-prefaced questions such as So are you saying that all evening
you had four pints? (2002: 105). In interviews with children and adolescents so-prefaced ques-
tions allow interviewers to adopt the main storyteller role by providing means to ‘construct,
summarise and organise’ accounts. In adult interviews so-prefacing can ‘recapitulate, sum-
marise and evaluate the interviewee’s previous responses in a way that expects or assumes
agreement’ as in the example above where it combines with evaluative all evening. This can
prove diﬃcult for interviewees to challenge (2002: 108). Stokoe and Edwards show how
so-prefaced turns can become part of a questioning strategy centring on ‘silly questions’,
sometimes explicitly marked as such, for example, it seems a silly question but did you have any
Frances Rock
144

excuse? (2008: 101). Oﬃcers combine these with other strategies such as reformulation to
make suspects’ ‘intentions and knowledge’ explicit. More importantly, by presenting upshots
innocuously, they establish intent by stealth (2008: 108). Interest in audio-recorded interviews
has not been restricted to interviewers’ activities. Examination of answers shows interviewees’
potential to be manipulated but also their capacity to resist control even during extremely
coercive questioning. This casts the police interview as ‘a site of resistance and struggle, where
each participant attempts to accomplish diﬀerent goals and inhabits opposing roles, asking
and demanding [on the part of oﬃcers] versus giving and resisting [from interviewees]’
(Newbury and Johnson 2008: 231).
Language in police custody has also become an established focus as researchers have
examined how rights are presented and explained there (e.g. Cotterill 2000; Gibbons 2001;
Rock 2007). Similarly, telephone calls for emergency police assistance have attracted researchers’
attention. In that setting, the mundane has been scrutinised by conversation analysts who have
focussed on the detail of call openings and closings (e.g. Zimmerman 1992), and the fantastic has
attracted discourse analysts who demonstrate how speakers accomplish complex interactional
tasks (e.g. Tracy and Anderson 1999).
Work on speciﬁc policing settings such as interviews and emergency calls must be set against
that which takes a very diﬀerent stance. Broader-based studies have used such concepts as
community of practice (Ostermann 2003; Rock 2005) and gendered identities (McElhinny
1998) to conceptualise policing as activity and workplace. These studies begin to consider how
identities and practices underpin legal practitioners’ activities.
Describing the legal system: courtroom language
Perhaps the most established focus of forensic linguistics in legal settings is the study of
courtroom language – having relative longevity and thorough coverage. Two research themes
have predominated. First, examining the intricacies of courtroom questioning between lawyers
and witnesses, and second, the words delivered by judges to juries.
When non-lawyers speak in court, whether victims or defendants; claimants or plaintiﬀs; lay
or expert witnesses, their words have the potential to sway decision-makers – jurors, magis-
trates and judges – in ways which lawyers alone simply cannot. However, talk is not simply
delivered by those on the stand in whatever way they wish; rather, testimony is elicited through
question and answer routines which, it has been argued, signiﬁcantly inﬂuence perceptions of
witnesses (e.g. Chang 2004) and constrain their contributions (e.g. Harris 1984; Woodbury
1984). As Philbrick observed back in 1949, ‘lawyers speak to persuade’ (1949: 3) and work such
as Heﬀer’s illustrates through corpora and discourse analysis that this necessitates ‘counsel
being “above all a strategist” seeking to coerce “the witness into answering in a certain fash-
ion”’ (2005: 95). This is subtle due to the multiplicity of courtroom narratives, which are
multiple in being delivered by witnesses in combination, though not necessarily collaboration,
with lawyers (e.g. Cotterill 2003).
Courtroom research has been particularly concerted around the discourse of rape trials (e.g.
Ehrlich 2001; Trinch 2003; papers in Cotterill 2007). For example, Matoesian, using data from
the trial of William Kennedy Smith, shows how:

male and female trial participants are denied equal access to interactional resources which
can naturalise domination of women;

law is gendered through communicative practices which disadvantage female trial
participants;
Forensic linguistics
145


evidential weight is manipulated through exaggeration or minimisation of particular
details;

representation and repetition in court, for example through reported speech, can accom-
plish strategic ends;

audio-recordings of police interviews can be strategically introduced in ways which create
oppression by manipulating constructions of reality.
(Matoesian 2001)
Ehrlich points out the potential of why-questions to allow witnesses to give relatively lengthy
answers in court and thus co-construct a narrative with lawyers (2007: 460). She notes that
through these questions lawyers provide space for their own witnesses to pre-empt possible
criticism from opposing lawyers. Consider the following two examples from a series of Canadian
trials centring on sexual assault and examining the witness’ actions during the alleged attack:
Excerpt 6
L
Why were you mentioning your boyfriend Allan?
W
Because, like I said, I felt like if he ever – if – it might prevent him
from going beyond any more touching
(Ehrlich 2007: 462)
Excerpt 7
L
If you didn’t want to give him a massage at that point in time, why
did you touch his shoulders?
W
I was afraid that if I put up any more of a struggle that it would
only egg him on even more, and his touching would be more forced
(Ehrlich 2007: 463)
In excerpt 6, the lawyer’s why-question allows the witness to present her actions as a strategy
‘to discourage the accused’s sexual advances’ (2007: 460); presumably people who have
boyfriends and draw attention to them do not wish to encourage the sexual advances of others.
Excerpt 7, in contrast, sees the witness presented with an opportunity to explain why she
did engage in conduct which might be construed as the prelude to more intimate activities.
The witness’ explanation draws on the notion that compliance might reduce the severity,
intensity or ferocity of an attack so this why-question allows ‘the complainant’s actions to
be revealed’ not as a precursor to consensual sex but a strategy of resistance (Ehrlich
2007: 464).
As well as the subtle inﬂuence of lawyers’ questions, testimony itself can say more than
speakers might expect. Conley et al. (1978) have illustrated the inﬂuence of speech style, in
Lakoﬀ’s (1975) sense, on jurors’ perceptions of speakers on the stand. Their combination of
courtroom observation and experimentation indicated how such features as hesitations,
hedging and hypercorrection can alter such matters as perceived trustworthiness (Conley
et al. 1978).
Moving to language delivered by judges to juries, we ﬁnd a tradition of examining the dif-
ﬁculty or inadequacy of such language. Jury instructions (as they are known in the USA) or
directions (the UK term) are intended to explain both general points of law and case-speciﬁc
legal issues. Research here has been inﬂuenced by the psychological studies of Charrow and
Charrow (1979). They hypothesised that particular linguistic constructions caused diﬃculty
in jury instructions and that if these were removed, comprehensibility would improve.
Frances Rock
146

Experiments supported their hypothesis. Subsequent research has devoted much attention to
further specifying and testing linguistic characteristics which might cause, or perhaps index,
diﬃculty in legal texts (e.g. Stratman and Dahl 1996; Tiersma 1999; Gibbons 2003) and to
specifying how these relate to judges’ words (e.g. Dumas 2000). Danet (1990), for example,
identiﬁes sources of lexical complexity including technical terms and formal register; syntactic
complexity including passives and strange anaphora and discoursal complexity including poor
signposting and uninformative headings. Dumas (2000) compares jurors to students taking
unfamiliar, diﬃcult courses as they must ‘absorb new information, learn new procedures, and
digest and use new standards quickly, with no time for reading, reviewing, or consulting’. She
suggests that providing a ‘roadmap, list or diagram’ before a trial, indicating what is to come,
might help them to assimilate and use knowledge (2000: 57–8). Some linguists have become
involved in rewriting standardised jury instructions (e.g. Tiersma and Curtis 2008). There is an
obvious potential role for scholars in identifying linguistic features associated with diﬃculty
and working with legal personnel to eradicate them whilst retaining legal sense and eﬀective-
ness. Nonetheless, some sociolinguists have questioned whether there really exists a neat ﬁt
between the presence of ‘diﬃcult’ features in texts and comprehension of those texts by real
listeners and readers in context (e.g. Solomon 1996; Rock 2007).
Heﬀer (2005) moves away from a deﬁcit model through which lay people are taken to be
lacking an adequate grasp of professional codes. Instead he draws on Bruner’s distinction
between narrative and paradigmatic modes of discourse. Narrative mode in court is realised
through a focus on ‘action, intersubjectivity and cultural norms’ and paradigmatic mode
through abstractions which allow participants ‘to form universal rules of conduct’ (2005: 36).
Using naturally occurring courtroom data and observation he demonstrates how judges
giving directions in the abstract, paradigmatic mode shift to the more concrete narrative mode
which jurors might expect (2005: 181). Jurors’ decision-making processes in the jury room have
also received attention where legislation permits. Jackson provides a useful summary (1995:
452–4).
Courtroom studies are not restricted to examining lawyer-witness and judge-jury exchanges.
The inﬂuential openings and closings delivered by lawyers at the beginning and end of the
evidential phase of a trial, for example, illustrate language’s power to persuade, manage
impressions, establish points of view and recontextualise (e.g. Hobbs 2003).
The legal system and its actors face many challenges in dealing equitably with, and
explaining eﬀectively to, lay people. However, in some circumstances, the legal system needs to
work even harder to ensure justice, not only equality (Gibbons 2003: 202), for example, when
attempting to meet the needs of child witnesses (e.g. Aldridge 2007). Lay participants who do
not share the language of the police or courtroom also present challenges which are resolved,
in the eyes of the legal system, by providing an interpreter. Yet this is not straightforward for
any participant. Interpreters have an undeniably tough job. They listen and speak in two lan-
guages whilst simultaneously navigating discoursal and pragmatic obstacles like orienting to
norms of interactional structure (e.g. turn-taking); managing politeness and self-presentation
(e.g. facework); resolving potential ambiguities (e.g. implicature); and attending to speaker
intentions (e.g. speech acts). As if this was not enough for one interactant to handle simulta-
neously, the legal interpreter has to do all of this in a stressful situation often without adequate
breaks, whist being seen by all courtroom participants as a source of unreasonable delay (Hale
and Gibbons 1999) and always on the side of the opposition (Morris 1999).
In both police interviews and courtrooms, interpreters potentially create or develop mis-
communication (e.g. Berk-Seligson 2002; 2009). In court, furthermore, the interpreter’s words
might create in jurors’ minds a particular impression of the speaker they are interpreting for
Forensic linguistics
147

(e. g. Hale 2002). Additional sensitivity is needed when people from diﬀerent cultures routinely
enter the justice system, as they risk not getting the help they need if they appear more
linguistically competent than they really are (e.g. Eades 2004).
The future trajectory of forensic linguistics
Contemporary forensic linguistics sees scholars applying their ﬁndings. Whilst this is inevitable
in the case of experts, those working on legal settings have also taken up this challenge
(e.g. Garner and Johnson 2006; Rock 2007: 245–61) or are considering doing so (e.g. Benneworth
2009: 565–6). Whilst this is not without risks (Rock 2007: 249) the chance that researchers
might improve the operation of societal justice is worth pursuing.
Shuy has frequently stressed that to be a forensic linguist one must ﬁrst be an excellent lin-
guist (2006: ix). As he observes, ‘there’s no need to try to apply linguistics to any other area of
life before you’ve ﬁrst learned what it is that you have to apply’ (2006: 3). This cannot be
stated too strongly. One cannot investigate language in any setting or system without ﬁrst
understanding signiﬁcant and suﬃcient aspects of phonetics, phonology, morphology, syntax,
semantics, sociolinguistics, pragmatics, discourse and so on and without being willing to push
the boundaries of one’s knowledge according to the challenges presented by the data and
contexts encountered. Indeed, study of legal settings gives the individual linguist ways to
understand and develop their own knowledge and perspective on their discipline.
Summary
We have seen that methods are understood, devised and applied diﬀerently in relation to diﬀerent
forensic linguistic endeavours. Compare, for example, the activities of scholars of authorship
and interviews. Yet there exist many connections within forensic linguistics; for example, analysts
of courtrooms and interviews share an interest in power and control, and key principles such
as variation and style underpin forensic activities as they do all language study.
This chapter has illustrated the diversity of the activities of those working as experts
and those examining legal settings. Inevitably, much has been omitted, but readers who reﬂect on
the ubiquity of language about law, noted at the beginning of this chapter, will understand the
potential reach of this sub-ﬁeld and the exciting, informative future it promises.
Appendix
Names and anonymisation
Speakers in excerpts are labelled with consistent abbreviations:
P
Police oﬃcer
W
Witness
All names and other potentially identifying details have been anonymised. Pseudonyms
have been inserted in place of personal names for ease of reading.
Key
(.)
A micropause of 0.9 seconds or less.
(1.2)
A pause of 1.0 second or more, the duration appearing within the brackets. In this
case, for example, the pause lasted for 1.2 seconds.
Frances Rock
148

-
Self correction or speaker breaking oﬀ.
(( ))
Unclear speech
?
Rising intonation
Related topics
classroom discourse; corpus linguistics; critical discourse analysis; discourse analysis; ESP and
business communication; institutional discourse; linguistic ethnography; medical communication;
phonetics and phonology; sociolinguistics
Further reading
The ﬁrst two books listed below oﬀer overviews of forensic linguistics; the ﬁrst is a single-
authored book, the second an edited collection of papers. The ﬁnal two items go into more
detail about particular issues, the ﬁrst relating to expert witness work, the second to language
and the legal system.
Brennan, M. and Brown, R. (2004) Equality Before the Law: Deaf People’s Access to Justice,
Gloucestershire: Douglas McLean. (Valuable work on the particular challenges in a marginalised
group’s contact with the criminal justice system.)
Coulthard, R. M. and Johnson, A. (eds) (2010) Routledge Handbook of Forensic Linguistics,
London: Routledge. (Chapters by authors writing on their areas of specialism. Great coverage
and a good introductory level.)
Solan, L. and Tiersma, P. (2004) ‘Author identiﬁcation in American courts’, Applied Linguistics
25(4): 448–65. (A useful overview of issues around both author identiﬁcation and the regulation
of expert witnesses at the time of writing in the USA.)
References
Aldridge, M. (2007) ‘The questioning of child witnesses: a comparison of the child’s linguistic
experience in the initial interview and in the courtroom cross-examination’, in J. Cotterill (ed.)
The Language of Sexual Crime, Basingstoke: Palgrave, pp. 113–51.
Benneworth, K. (2009) ‘Police interviews with suspected paedophiles: a discourse analysis’, Dis-
course and Society 5(5): 555–69.
Berk-Seligson, S. (2002) The Bilingual Courtroom: Court Interpreters in the Judicial Process, 2nd edn,
Chicago: Chicago University Press.
——(2009) Coerced Confessions: The Discourse of Bilingual Police Interrogations, Berlin: Mouton
de Gruyter.
Blommaert, J. (2009) ‘Language, asylum and the national order’, Current Anthropology 50(4): 415–41.
Chang, Y. (2004) ‘Courtroom questioning as a culturally situated persuasive genre of talk’, Dis-
course and Society 15(6): 705–22.
Charrow, R. and Charrow, V. (1979) ‘Making legal language understandable: a psycholinguistic
study of jury instructions’, Columbia Law Review 79(5): 1306–74.
Chaski, C. (2001) ‘Empirical evaluations of language-based author identiﬁcation techniques’,
International Journal of Speech, Language and the Law 8(1): 1–65.
——(2005) ‘Who’s at the keyboard? Authorship attribution in digital evidence investigations’,
International Journal of Digital Evidence 4(1).
Conley, J., O’Barr, W. and Lind, E. (1978) ‘The power of language: presentational style in the
courtroom’, Duke Law Journal 1375–99.
Cotterill, J. (2000) ‘Reading the rights: a cautionary tale of comprehension and comprehensibility’,
International Journal of Speech, Language and the Law 7(1): 4–25.
——(2003) Language and Power in Court: A Linguistic Analysis of the O. J. Simpson Trial,
Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan.
Forensic linguistics
149

——(ed.) (2007) The Language of Sexual Crime, Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan.
Coulthard, R. M. (1994) ‘Powerful evidence for the defence: an exercise in forensic discourse
analysis’, in J. Gibbons (ed.) Language and the Law, London: Longman.
——(2002) ‘Whose voice is it? Invented and concealed dialogue in written records of verbal evi-
dence produced by the police’, in J. Cotterill (ed.) Language in the Legal Process, Basingstoke:
Palgrave.
Coulthard, R. M. and Johnson, A. (2007) An Introduction to Forensic Linguistics: Language in
Evidence, London: Routledge.
Danet, B. (1990) ‘Language and law: an overview of ﬁfteen years of research’, in H. Giles and
P. Robinson (eds) Handbook of Language and Social Psychology, London: Wiley.
Dumas, B. (2000) ‘US pattern jury instructions: problems and proposals’, International Journal of
Speech, Language and the Law 7(1): 49–71.
Eades, D. (2004) ‘Understanding aboriginal English in the legal system: a critical sociolinguistics
approach’, Applied Linguistics 25(4): 491–512.
——(2005) ‘Applied linguistics and language analysis in asylum seeker cases’, Applied Linguistics
26(4): 503–26.
Eades, D. and Arends, J. (2004) ‘Using language analysis in the determination of national origin of asylum
seekers: an introduction’, International Journal of Speech, Language and the Law 11(2): 179–99.
Eagleson, R. (1994) ‘Forensic analysis of personal written texts: a case study’, in J. Gibbons (ed.)
Language and the Law, London: Longman.
Ehrlich, S. (2001) Representing Rape: Language and Sexual Consent, London: Routledge.
——(2007) ‘Legal discourse and the cultural intelligibility of gendered meanings’, Journal of
Sociolinguistics 11(4): 452–77.
Foulkes, P. and French, J. (2001) ‘Forensic phonetics and sociolinguistics’, in R. Mesthrie (ed.) The
Concise Encyclopaedia of Sociolinguistics, Amsterdam: Elsevier.
French, P. and Harrison, P. (2004) ‘R v Ingram, C. and Whittock, T.: the Who Wants To Be a
Millionaire fraud trial’, International Journal of Speech, Language and the Law 11(1): 131–45.
——(2007) ‘Position statement concerning use of impressionistic likelihood terms in forensic
speaker comparison cases’, International Journal of Speech, Language and the Law 14(1): 137–44.
Garner, M. and Johnson, E. (2006) ‘Operational communication: a paradigm for applied research
into police call-handling’, International Journal of Speech, Language and the Law 13(1): 55–75.
Gibbons, J. (2001) ‘Revising the language of New South Wales police procedures: applied linguistics
in action’, Applied Linguistics 22(4): 439–69.
Grant, T. (2007) ‘Quantifying evidence for forensic authorship analysis’, International Journal of
Speech, Language and the Law 14(1): 1–25.
——(2008) ‘Approaching questions in forensic authorship analysis’, in J. Gibbons and M. Turell
(eds) Dimensions of Forensic Linguistics. Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Hale, S. (2002) ‘How faithfully do court interpreters render the style of non-English speaking wit-
nesses’ testimonies? A data-based study of Spanish–English bilingual proceedings’, Discourse
Studies 4(1): 25–47.
Hale, S. and Gibbons, J. (1999) ‘Varying realities: patterned changes in the interpreter’s representa-
tion of courtroom and external realities’, Applied Linguistics 20(1): 203–20.
Harris, S. (1984) ‘Questions as a mode of control in magistrates’ courts’, International Journal of the
Sociology of Language 49: 5–28.
Haworth, K. (2006) ‘The dynamics of power and resistance in police interview discourse’, Discourse
and Society 17(6): 739–59.
Heﬀer, C. (2005) The Language of Jury Trial, Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan.
Heydon, G. (2005) The Language of Police Interviewing: A Critical Analysis, Basingstoke: Palgrave
Macmillan.
Hobbs, P. (2002) ‘Tipping the scales of justice: deconstructing an expert’s testimony on cross
examination’, International Journal for the Semiotics of Law 15: 411–24.
——(2003) ‘“Is that what we’re here about?”: a lawyer’s use of impression management in a closing
argument at trial’, Discourse and Society 14(3): 273–90.
Jackson, B. (1995) Making Sense in Law: Linguistic, Psychological and Semiotic Perspectives,
Liverpool: Deborah Charles.
Johnson, A. (2002) ‘So … ?: Pragmatic implications of so-prefaced questions in formal police
interviews’, in J. Cotterill (ed.) Language in the Legal Process, Basingstoke: Palgrave.
Frances Rock
150

Jönsson, L. and Linell, P. (1991) ‘Story generations: from dialogical interviews to written reports in
police interrogations’, Text 11(3): 419–40.
Kniﬀka, H. (2007) Working in Language and Law: A German Perspective, Basingstoke: Palgrave
Macmillan.
Komter, M. (2006) ‘From talk to text: the interactional construction of a police record’, Research on
Language and Social Interaction 39(3): 201–28.
Labov, W. (1988) ‘The judicial testing of linguistic theory’, in D. Tannen (ed.) Linguistics in Con-
text, Norwood, NJ: Ablex.
Lakoﬀ, R. (1975) Language and Woman’s Place, New York: Harper and Row.
——(1986) ‘My life in court’, in L. Sutton (ed.) (1998) In Her Own Voice: Collected Writings of
Robin Tolmach Lakoﬀ, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Levi, J. (1994) ‘Language as evidence: the linguist as expert witness in North American courts’,
Forensic Linguistics 1(1): 1–26.
McElhinny, B. (1998) ‘“I don’t smile much anymore”: aﬀect, gender and the discourse of Pittsburgh
Police Oﬃcers’, in J. Coates (ed.) Language and Gender: A Reader, Oxford: Blackwell.
McMenamin, G. (2002) Forensic Linguistics: Advances in Forensic Stylistics, London: CRC
Press.
Maryns, K. (2006) The Asylum Speaker: Language in the Belgian Asylum Procedure, London: St
Jerome Publishing.
Matoesian, G. (2001) Law and the Language of Identity: Discourse in the William Kennedy Smith
Rape Trial, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Mellinkoﬀ, D. (1963) The Language of the Law, Boston: Little, Brown and Company.
Morris, R. (1999) ‘The gum syndrome: predicaments in court interpreting’, Forensic Linguistics
6(1): 6–29.
Newbury, P. and Johnson, A. (2008) ‘Suspects resistance to constraining and coercive questioning
strategies in the police interview’, International Journal of Speech, Language and the Law 13(2):
213–40.
Ostermann, A. (2003) ‘Communities of practice at work: gender, facework and the power of habitus
at an all-female police station and a feminist crisis intervention centre in Brazil’, Discourse and
Society 14(4): 473–505.
Philbrick, F. (1949) Language and the Law: The Semantics of Forensic English, London: Macmillan.
Rock, F. (2001) ‘The genesis of a witness statement’, Forensic Linguistics 8(2): 44–72.
——(2005) ‘“I’ve picked some up from a colleague”: language, sharing and communities of
practice in an institutional setting’, in D. Barton and K. Tusting (eds) Beyond Communities of
Practice: Language, Power and Social Context, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
——(2007) Communicating Rights: The Language of Arrest and Detention, Basingstoke: Palgrave
Macmillan.
Shuy, R. (2006) Linguistics in the Courtroom: A Practical Guide, Oxford: Oxford University
Press.
——(2010) The Language of Defamation Cases, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Solomon, N. (1996) ‘Plain English: from a perspective of language in society’, in R. Hasan and
G. Williams (eds) Literacy in Society, London: Longman.
Stokoe, E. and Edwards, D. (2008) ‘“Did you have permission to smash your neighbour’s door?”
Silly questions and their answers in police–suspect interrogations’, Discourse Studies 10(1):
89–111.
Storey-White, K. (1997) ‘KISSing the jury: advantages and limitations of the “keep it simple”
principle in the presentation of expert evidence to courts and juries’, Forensic Linguistics 4(2):
280–6.
Stratman, J. and Dahl, P. (1996). ‘Readers’ comprehension of temporary restraining orders in
domestic violence cases: a missing link in abuse prevention?’, Forensic Linguistics 3(2): 211–31.
Thornborrow, J. (2002) Power Talk: Language and Interaction in Institutional Discourse, Harlow:
Longman.
Tiersma, P. and Curtis, M. (2008) ‘Testing the comprehensibility of jury instructions: California’s
old and new instructions on circumstantial evidence’, Journal of Court Innovation 1: 231.
Tiersma, P. and Solan, L. (2002) ‘The linguist on the witness stand: forensic linguistics in American
courts’, Language 78: 221–39.
Tiersma, P. (1999) Legal Language, Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Forensic linguistics
151

Tracy, K. and Anderson, D. (1999) ‘Relational positioning strategies in police calls: a dilemma’,
Discourse Studies 1(2): 201–25.
Trinch, S. (2003) Latinas’ Narratives of Domestic Abuse: Discrepant Versions of Violence, Amster-
dam: John Benjamins.
Woodbury, H. (1984) ‘The strategic use of questions in court’, Semiotica 48: 197–228.
Woolls, D. (2003) ‘Better tools for the trade and how to use them’, International Journal of Speech,
Language and the Law 10(1): 102–12.
Zimmerman, D. (1992) ‘Achieving context: openings in emergency calls’, in G. Watson and
R. Seiler (eds) Text in Context: Contributions to Ethnomethodology, London: Sage.
Frances Rock
152

Part II
Language learning,
language education


11
Key concepts in language learning
and language education
Diane Larsen-Freeman
Introduction
In this chapter, I identify key concepts in language learning and language education. Rather
than attempting to compile a comprehensive inventory of concepts, undoubtedly limited by
my own experience, I have chosen a generative, question-posing approach, one that I have
made use of over the years to situate developments in the ﬁeld. It is in answering these ques-
tions that the key concepts emerge, a process I will illustrate by oﬀering a few answers to each
question. In order to bring some coherence to my discussion, I will adopt a heuristic in the
form of a triangle (Figure 11.1).
In the top angle of the triangle, there is the teacher, who does the teaching. In the lower left
angle, there is the subject matter. In the case of language education, this has meant the lan-
guage and usually the culture in which it is embedded. The lower right angle of the triangle
refers to the language learners in the process of doing the learning. The triangle is situated
within a context, broadly interpreted to mean any place, situation, or time in which language
education takes place. For instance, it could be in a national context or a more local classroom
context with a particular group of students at a particular period of time, etc. Contextual
factors aﬀect answers to the questions, as do the prevailing theories at a particular period of
time. In other words, there are no absolute answers to these questions at any one time or over time,
and I make no claim that more recent evolutionary phases are necessarily superior to those
which preceded them. Yet, even though the questions have not always been explicit nor their
answers absolute, in this chapter they provide a useful framework for identifying the key
concepts in the evolution of language learning and education.
History
What is language? What is culture?
Languages have been taught and learned for centuries. Over the years, circumstances have
diﬀered, resulting in one or more of the angles of the triangle being more inﬂuential than the
others. Even within a given angle, the questions have not always been accorded equal
155

treatment. For instance, in deﬁning the subject matter, language educators have sometimes
stressed the inseparability of language and culture, and sometimes ignored treatment of culture
altogether. The latter has been the case, for instance, given national needs during times of war
because it has been assumed that explicit treatment of culture could be sacriﬁced in order to
train proﬁcient speakers and listeners of a ‘strategic’ language in as expeditious a manner as
possible. Another example, this time with regard to the rise of English as an international
language, has been the assumption that one can learn English for utilitarian purposes without
becoming bicultural. However, for many applied linguists, language and culture are inextric-
able, where culture means the way that people express themselves and interpret the expressions
of others as they share a social space and history (see Kramsch, this volume).
What then is language? Becker (1983: 219), a linguist, has written that ‘Our “picture” of
language is the single most important factor … in determining the way we choose to teach it.’ Of
course, even if this is so, it is not always the individual teacher who deﬁnes language for ped-
agogical purposes. It is often the curriculum designer or materials developer who has more say.
Still, the answers to the question have had a formative inﬂuence on language education, either
directly through the textbook author’s interpretation of language or the teacher’s, sometimes
tacit, assumption about its nature. After all, we teach something as we understand it ourselves.
Yet, Langacker’s observation (1968: 3) of four decades ago still holds true:
Despite its prevalence in human aﬀairs, language is poorly understood. Misconceptions
are legion, even among well-educated people, and not even professional linguists can
claim to understand it fully. A person is radically mistaken to assume that the nature of
language is self-evident or to conclude that we know all about a language just because we
speak it.
Thus, the answer to the question ‘What is language?’ is by no means straightforward.
Cook and Seidlhofer (1995: 4) oﬀer a number of answers to the question:
Language is viewed in various theories as a genetic inheritance, a mathematical system, a
social fact, the expression of individual identity, the expression of cultural identity, the
Figure 11.1 Questions related to key concepts in language learning and education
Diane Larsen-Freeman
156

outcome of dialogical interaction, a social semiotic, the intuitions of native speakers, the sum
of attested data, a collection of memorized chunks, a rule-governed discrete combinatory
system, or electrical activation in a distributed network.
Their list is far from exhaustive (the authors do not claim otherwise). And, of course, these
deﬁnitions are not all distinct in that several are implicationally related or apply to diﬀerent
levels of scale; nevertheless, it is easy to see even from this selective rendition that there is quite
a range of views concerning language. Indeed, they are suﬃciently distinctive to inform dif-
ferent approaches to language teaching and learning. For purposes of illustration, and because
they are responsible more than any for pendulum swings in the ﬁeld, let me now contrast two
of Cook and Seidlhofer’s characterizations of language: ‘language as a rule-governed discrete
combinatory system’ and ‘language as social fact’.
The former emanates from a formal or structural view of the language system. Its appear-
ance on the modern scene can be traced to the writings of Saussure (1916), considered by
many to be the founder of the discipline of linguistics. Interested in establishing linguistics as a
science, Saussure chose to focus on the synchronic system of language, in particular langue
(the abstract system of the shared code), as distinct from parole (the individual utterances of
speech). Unpacking the deﬁnition ‘language as a rule-governed discrete combinatory system’,
we see that language is a system, a system comprised of discrete segments: phonemes, lexemes,
morphemes. These forms combine to make words, phrases, clauses, and sentences that comply
with an established set of word order rules. Traditional, structural, descriptive, and generative
linguistics have all adopted and contributed to this understanding of language. In language
education, formal views are responsible for grammatical syllabi, in which linguistic structures
are sequenced and graded according to increasing linguistic complexity. Formal views of lan-
guage have also inspired pedagogical practices such as the use of inductive and deductive
grammar exercises in which a grammar rule is discovered and practised, respectively.
It is not diﬃcult to see that the view of language ‘as a social fact’ contrasts with a structural
perspective. The social-fact view of language was propelled in part by Hymes’ (1972) call for
language education to move beyond linguistic competence to communicative competence: the
knowledge of when and how to say what to whom. Focusing on language use, this view pri-
vileges language functions and meanings over language forms. Functions or speech acts such
as promising, complaining, and inviting replace the structures of grammatical syllabi, and
together with notions such as modality and temporality, make up notional-functional syllabi.
Functional approaches to language have been realized in communicative language teaching
approaches, widely practised these days.
In addition, a functional view of language includes how texts are organized to realize the
meaning potential of language (Halliday 1978), stylistics or the distinctive patterns and choices
people make when using language (Widdowson 1992), how diﬀerent registers and genres are
patterned (Swales 1990), how various conversational moves are structured (e.g., conversation
openings and closings) (Sacks et al. 1974), how these are performed diﬀerently in diﬀerent
speech communities/cultures, the work of cross-cultural pragmatics (Blum-Kulka et al. 1989),
and how the use of language diﬀers across professional and academic contexts (Candlin and
Candlin 2003).
In addition to endorsing communicative language teaching and notional-functional syllabi,
then, a functional view also holds implications for teaching reading and writing and for rea-
lizing one’s educational and professional/occupational ambitions. Of course, the dichotomy,
formal versus functional, is an oversimpliﬁcation, but I have evoked it to support my claim
that it is important to understand the implications of a deﬁnition of language. Clearly, each
Language learning and language education
157

member of the dichotomy is far more complicated than ﬁrst seems. Also, it is fair to say that
most language educators attend to both forms and functions, although a satisfactory interface
between the two has been elusive. While most people accept that ultimately the purpose of
learning a language is to be able to communicate, the question of whether it is better to pre-
pare students to communicate by having them build up a repertoire of lexical items and
structures or by having them launch directly into communicating, however falteringly, has
been at issue.
The problem with the former is that it leads to the inert knowledge problem. Students
acquire a great deal of declarative knowledge or knowledge about language, but little by way
of procedural knowledge, how to do things with language, especially when they attempt to use
their knowledge for their own purposes outside of the classroom. The problem with a com-
munication-ﬁrst approach is that students speak and write with a great deal of inaccuracy.
Moreover, a structural approach has the advantage of being compositional, in that the discrete
pieces of language form natural syllabus units. On the other hand, dividing communication
into discrete lessons is not easy, due to its protean nature (Larsen-Freeman and Freeman
2008). Even when communication is made divisible, say with inventories of functions and
notions or language-use situations such as ordering food in a restaurant, opening a bank
account, buying a bus ticket, etc., how to sequence units in a logical and pedagogically sound
manner is not a straightforward matter.
Of course, as I have just written, many teachers teach their students both structures and
how to communicate; however, even under these circumstances, by treating them separately in
a given lesson, it is left to students to ﬁgure out how to apply their knowledge of grammar
rules while communicating. One proposal that has been made to integrate the two includes
focusing on grammatical form, not adopting a synthetic grammatical syllabus, but rather an
analytic one (Wilkins 1976), where students engage in meaningful activities. During these, the
teacher is encouraged to focus students’ attention on form ﬂeetingly, in a way that would not
disrupt communication, e.g. by recasting or reformulating a student’s error (Long 1991). Pro-
viding such ‘negative evidence’ is considered to be an important function of language teach-
ing. Another proposal involves a procedural or usage-based approach to teaching grammar,
‘grammaring’ (Larsen-Freeman 2003), which calls for students to engage in dynamic, psycho-
logically authentic practice, working not only on the form of grammar structures, but also on
what they mean and when it is appropriate to use them. Gatbonton and Segalowitz’s (1988)
creative automatization is also a potential solution in that in their approach, it is patterns that
are practised in meaningful communication, not grammar rules or structures.
I have chosen but two of the deﬁnitions from Cook and Seidlhofer’s list: formal/structural
and communicative/functional. I will not be able to venture further with the others on the list,
let alone discuss views of language that are not represented there. However, one in the latter
category that bears mentioning for its formative inﬂuence is the view that language serves the
purpose of empowerment. Critical discourse analysts (Fairclough 1995) have pointed out that
language is not a neutral medium of communication, which has led to a heightened sense of
the political dimensions of language teaching and use (see chapter by Norton, this volume).
One way that this view has been made manifest in language education is through a problem-
posing approach, based on the work of Brazilian educator Paolo Freire. In a problem-posing
approach, students are encouraged ‘to perceive critically the way they exist in the world with
which and in which they ﬁnd themselves’ (Freire 1970: 64). The goal of a such an approach is
to help students to understand the social, historical, and cultural forces that shaped the con-
text in which they live, and then to help empower students to take action and make decisions
in order to gain control over their lives in that context. For instance, one pedagogical practice
Diane Larsen-Freeman
158

involves the selection of real-life issues from students’ experience, the creation of short dialo-
gues based upon these issues, and the engagement of students in an open-ended process of
problem-solving.
What is learning? Who are the learners?
Turning now to the second angle of the triangle, we ﬁnd the question ‘What is learning?’
Again, many answers to this question have been proﬀered. Certainly the most prominent
answers in recent memory have been drawn from the theories of behaviourism, innatism,
interactionism, and emergentism.
One version of behaviourism (Skinner 1957) has it that learning takes place through operant
conditioning. There is no mental process involved; instead, learner behaviour is reinforced in
order to condition a voluntary response to a particular stimulus. Key to this approach is the
behavioural shaping, such as learning to make a new sound, that comes from selective rein-
forcement. Structuralists, such as Bloomﬁeld (1942), had already introduced the idea that
learning took place through habit formation. When language is construed as verbal behaviour,
acquired through habit formation, it seems that the best way to learn a new language in the
classroom is to ‘overlearn’ it – i.e. learners should practise the new patterns of the target language
so thoroughly that they can choose the appropriate forms of the language while focusing their
attention on the meanings they wish to express. Practices such as ‘mimicry-memorization’
(Bloomﬁeld 1942) and pattern and dialogue practice (Fries 1945) became common.
Innatism entered the scene with Chomsky (1965). Chomsky questioned how it was possible
for a child learning its native language to induce the rules necessary to produce grammatical
sentences, given the impoverished input to which the child was exposed. There had to be, he
reasoned, some innate faculty, a Language Acquisition Device (LAD) that guides the child in
the language acquisition process. Without it, the child would generate countless hypotheses
about the rules such that the induction problem would be insoluble, certainly within the time it
normally takes a child to acquire his or her native language. Although the speciﬁcs of the
LAD have changed over the years, perhaps the most productive contemporary description is
that the LAD consists of innate general principles of language, which the child has to then but
tune to the ambient language, said to involve a process of parameter-setting. Not much by way
of pedagogical implications has followed from this position, but it has inspired considerable research
in second language acquisition as researchers seek to establish the principles of a universal
grammar (UG) and to discover whether they are still accessible during second language
acquisition, in which case learners would then only have to learn to reset the parameters.
Chronologically, interactionism followed thereafter. Interactionists (e.g. Snow 1979) believe
that it is not necessary to appeal to an innate LAD to explain the facts of language acquisi-
tion. They could instead be accounted for by looking closely at the interaction between the
child and its caregivers, and the support the latter provides. For instance, even neonates engage
in ‘conversations’ with their caretakers, with the latter making particular accommodations to
facilitate language acquisition. The interactionist explanation has been extended to second
language acquisition (Long 1996; Gass 1997). As native speakers and non-native speakers
of the target language interact, language acquisition takes place, providing that native
speakers accommodate non-native speakers, thereby making the input easier to comprehend
(Krashen 1982).
In language education, a similar motivation applies to the use of meaning-based or task-
based syllabi (Prabhu 1987; Willis 1996). The thinking goes: If communication is the end goal,
why not make communication the means as well? Making communication the means calls for
Language learning and language education
159

language students to engage in meaningful communication, such as using a map in order to
give directions in the target language to some geographical point of interest. The goal is not to
focus upon language forms or functions explicitly, but to solve some problem or to accomplish
some task. Out of the interactions involved in performing the tasks, language is learned.
A more recent view of learning, inspired by seeing language from a complexity theory per-
spective (Larsen-Freeman 1997) as a complex adaptive system (Ellis and Larsen-Freeman
2009), has been called emergentism (Ellis and Larsen-Freeman 2006). Also rejecting the idea
of the need to posit an innate LAD, emergentists argue instead that humans are well suited to
perceive and to assimilate the patterns in the language spoken to them (and therefore the input
is not as impoverished as Chomsky maintained). Emergentists have demonstrated that both
children learning their native language (Goldberg 2006; Tomasello 2003) and adult learners
learning a target language (Ellis and Larsen-Freeman 2009) can ‘bootstrap’ their learning by
attending to frequently occurring form-meaning-use constructions in the language to which
they are exposed. Learners build categories around frequent prototype exemplars, and from
the categories extract the semantic and pragmatic information that allows them to analogize
beyond the forms they have encountered. Frequent and reliably contingent form-meaning-use
constructions are made more available to the learners through a social process of co-adaptation,
an iterative process, with each interlocutor adjusting to the other over and over again (Larsen-
Freeman and Cameron 2008). Emergentists (and connectionists) assert that this way of look-
ing at learning ﬁnds empirical support in the architecture of the brain. With each new instance
of meaningful language the learner encounters or uses, certain neural connections are
strengthened and others atrophy, creating a dynamic, interconnected network of language-using
patterns in memory (Larsen-Freeman and Cameron 2008).
Remaining in this angle of the triangle, but moving on to the question of ‘Who are
the language learners?’, it should not be surprising that any answer to this question is multi-
faceted as well. Certainly, even a cursory response to this question would include learners’
ages, the native or other languages that they speak, and their individual diﬀerences. Taking
these one at a time, starting with age, it was hypothesized by Eric Lenneberg (1964) that there is a
critical period for language acquisition, usually ending around the time of puberty, after which
a ﬁrst language is no longer learned in a normal way. Most applied linguists accept that there
is no absolute age threshold when the shift takes place, but they do point to the decrease in
brain plasticity after puberty (or perhaps a bit earlier) to explain the apparent diﬀerences
between the learning of languages by younger and older learners and the diﬀerential success of
the latter. Of course, this hypothesis is not without controversy; nevertheless, it is diﬃcult to
argue that adult learners approach the challenge of learning another language in exactly the
same way that children do, if only because the circumstances surrounding the learning are
discrepant.
Furthermore, it is also well known that the native language that a learner speaks can make
an impact on the way that the second language develops. This observation is supported by
the Sapir-Whorf hypothesis, in which it is proposed that language determines thought. A more
modest and more recent proposal, ‘thinking for speaking’, comes from Dan Slobin (1996). For
Slobin, the native language does not determine thinking, but instead acts as a ﬁlter through
which the world is perceived and registered. Even advanced second language learners, there-
fore, while otherwise producing accurate L2 utterances, may, at the same time, evidence L1
syntactic patterns. Brian MacWhinney (2006) attributes the L1 patterns cloaked in L2 words
to the ‘neural commitment’ that L1 speakers have already made to their the native language.
The neural connections made and strengthened over the years in the brain act as a deterrent to
the acquisition of native-like L2 skills.
Diane Larsen-Freeman
160

Of course, L1 language diﬀerences are embedded in L1 cultural diﬀerences, and these, too
can have a profound eﬀect on language education. To cite an obvious cultural diﬀerence with
regard to language education, the way that languages are taught and mastered in Asia is much
more text-and-memorization based than the way that it is taught elsewhere (Li 1998). Then,
too, in many parts of the world, students are likely to expect, and even demand, that attention
be given to grammar (Schultz 2001). Such diﬀerences have led certain applied linguists to warn
against ‘exporting’ language teaching methods from Western countries to others (Holliday
1994).
It should also be noted that since its genesis, the subﬁeld of SLA has adopted a bifurcated
research agenda, which features both questions about the nature of the SLA process and about
learners’ diﬀerential success. There were four individual diﬀerences that were attested to inﬂu-
ence language learners in 1976 (Schumann 1976), seventy-four in 1989 (Spolsky 1989) and
now there are more likely over 100, as the list keeps growing. These factors are varied and
range from innate language aptitude (Carroll 1963), to motivation (Gardner and Lambert
1972), to aﬀective factors such as social attitudes toward the target language group (Gardner
1985), to learning style diﬀerences (Gardner 1983), to the preference for diﬀerent learning stra-
tegies (Oxford 1989), to the circumstances of learning (i.e. as a second or a foreign language),
and to the goals or needs of the learner.
To exemplify the last point, it is increasingly common to ﬁnd heritage speakers in language
classrooms these days. For these learners the language of the home is diﬀerent from the
ambient language and the language of the school. Nevertheless, heritage speakers have not had
an opportunity to master their home language and so seek to do so through formal instruction.
Having had some exposure to the language, at least in the language spoken around them, their
needs are diﬀerent from other learners who have no prior experience with the language they
are studying. For instance, heritage speakers might understand the language, but not be able to
speak it, or may be ﬂuent orally (at least around certain topics), but not have developed
literacy skills in the home language.
Such an observation underscores a critical issue in the ﬁeld of language learning and lan-
guage education: to what extent it is possible to make generalizations about learners apart
from the circumstances of, and reason for, their learning? As Kramsch (2002: 4) has put it:
It is no longer suﬃcient to talk about ‘individual diﬀerences’ in SLA against the backdrop
of the universal learner. Diﬀerence and variation itself have moved to the center of lan-
guage acquisition research. Variation becomes the primary given; categorization becomes
an artiﬁcial construct of institutionalization and scientiﬁc inquiry.
It is common knowledge that there is a great deal of variation in L2 learner performance.
Given the number of variables involved and the fact that they interact dynamically, inﬂuencing
a learner in diﬀerent ways at diﬀerent times (for instance, motivation is not a steady state,
but is characterized by ebbs and ﬂows [Dörnyei 2009]), the question then becomes whether or
not the variation is limitless and the experience of each individual learner unique. Perhaps if
we are content to talk about tendencies, patterns, and contingencies, rather than absolute
predictions and generalizations, then although individuals follow diﬀerent trajectories in
learning a second language, there may be some patterns that supersede the individual level
(Larsen-Freeman 2006).
Another tension in the ﬁeld of language learning has been the one between those who
believe the learning process is essentially cognitive and individual, the learning by individuals
of a mental grammar, and those who believe that learning is essentially a social enterprise (see,
Language learning and language education
161

for example, Laﬀord 2007). Although most educators would again feel that both cognition
and social interaction play a part, the important question of how they interface remains
(Larsen-Freeman 2007).
What is teaching? Who are the teachers?
Visiting the ﬁnal angle of the triangle, I begin with ‘What is teaching?’ As readers will have
come to expect, there are diﬀerent answers to this question as well. A traditional view of
teaching has been characterized as ‘knowledge transmission’. In this teaching-centred view,
teachers are seen to be responsible for transmitting what they know to their students. These
days it is common to be critical of a knowledge transmission view of teaching for the passive
role it ascribes to language learners. Freire (1970: 72) has referred to knowledge transmission
in terms of a banking metaphor: the teacher makes deposits of information into students who
are to receive, memorize, and repeat them. However, knowledge transmission remains a
common practice in many parts of the world. A skilled teacher’s organization of knowledge
can help students understand and remember what has been transmitted.
In contrast to knowledge transmission is a prominent alternative, student-centred, view of
teaching, namely constructivism. The American philosopher of education John Dewey (1916)
is generally considered to be the founder of constructivism. Like Freire, Dewey rejected
approaches that construed learners as receptacles of the teacher’s knowledge. In its place,
Dewey believed that learning should be socially constructed and teaching meaningful, building
on what students already know. This should be accomplished through active engagement with
fellow students, the teacher, the world and by reﬂecting on these experiences. For this reason, a
constructivist approach could also be called ‘experiential’. Practices associated with this approach
are procedures in which students are active thorough experimentation, problem-solving, and
dialoguing. Students are also encouraged to reﬂect upon these experiences by talking about
what they did and what understanding they came to.
Another answer to the question about language teaching comes from sociocultural theory,
inspired by the Russian psychologist Lev Vygotsky. Vygotsky, in common with Freire and
Dewey, saw the importance of social interaction in education. In fact, according to Vygotsky,
it is through social interaction that higher order thinking emerges. The ‘place’ where this is
most likely to be facilitated is in the ‘zone of proximal development or ZPD’, ‘the distance
between the actual developmental level [of the learner] as determined by independent problem-
solving and the level of potential development as determined through problem solving under
adult guidance or in collaboration with more capable peers’ (Vygotsky 1978: 86). More cap-
able peers (and teachers) aid or ‘scaﬀold’ learners in the ZPD, thus contributing a socially
oriented rationale for interactive and collaborative pair and group work (Lantolf 2000).
It is a fact that each of the three approaches to teaching that I have brieﬂy touched upon –
knowledge transmission, constructivism, and socioculturalism – all confer diﬀerent roles on
language teachers. This is also true of the more narrowly-focused language teaching methods,
positioning teachers across the spectrum from drill conductor and model (e.g. the Audio-Lingual
Method) to facilitator and counsellor (e.g. Community Language Learning) (Larsen-Freeman
2000). While some say today’s times call for us to move beyond methods, adopting post-
method macro-strategies in place of prescribed and proscribed methodological practices
(Kumaravadivelu 1994), the fact is that most teachers practise an eclectic form of teaching.
Work on teacher cognition has played an increasingly important role in helping us under-
stand how teachers think and therefore the work of teaching (see Borg, this volume). For
instance, in the language teaching ﬁeld, Woods (1996) has demonstrated the importance of
Diane Larsen-Freeman
162

understanding the thinking process that underlies the decisions that teachers make moment by
moment in conducting their lessons. Another widespread role ascribed to teachers and other
professionals, ever since the publication of Schön’s (1983) inﬂuential book, is that of ‘reﬂective
practitioner’, someone who can detach oneself from experience, examine it, and learn from it
(Richards and Lockhart 1994). This resonates with Allwright’s (2003) ‘exploratory practice’.
Teachers are encouraged to experiment, to take risks, around some particular issue of interest
in their teaching practice. They are then to step back and watch what happens. This set of
procedures helps them to clarify issues around their own teaching practice and prevents it from
going stale.
A recurring issue with which the ﬁeld is sometimes called to contend is the widespread
belief among non-professionals that if one can speak a language, one can teach it. This is
known to be nonsense, although in truth little is known about the amount of training that is
optimal or the way it should be distributed in teacher education programmes, i.e. the pre-
versus in-service balance, with some arguing that a lengthy time spent on pre-service education
before teacher-learners step into the classroom is not productive, and that at a minimum,
learners of teaching should undergo a supervised teaching practicum (Bailey 2006).
Another issue that never seems to go away is the one regarding the speaker status of a tea-
cher, i.e. native speaker or non-native speaker. While native speakers are preferred in many
language education programmes, presumably for the model they provide and the access they
have to intuitions about what is correct and how the language works, in actual fact, non-native
speakers bring a great number of strengths to language teaching, not the least of which is that
they are role models of successful learning themselves. Besides, if they speak the language of
their students, they know the obstacles to acquisition and how to surmount them.
As I have visited each of the angles of the triangle, I have avoided suggesting that more
recent developments have been superior to what preceded them. In fact, many of the educa-
tional developments, both old and new, are widely practised today. While it is true that one
approach to language, teaching, and learning seeks to compensate for the perceived inade-
quacies of its predecessors, there is no perfect approach to language education, nor will there
ever be (Prabhu 1990). Following from this premise and the recognition of learner diﬀerences,
it is quite natural that language teachers would be eclectic. In fact, perhaps the most important
role for a language teacher is that of mediator between the textbook/curriculum and the
students, in order to address the multifarious and diverse needs of the present class.
Intersecting angles
This sequential treatment of the issues in the diﬀerent angles suggests a more disjointed view
of language education than is warranted. In truth, some of the most striking developments in
the ﬁeld have taken place at the intersection of the angles. Although I have already implicitly
dealt with their connection in a few cases (e.g. the connection between a teacher and his or her
conception of language; the connection between an interactionist perspective on SLA and
task-based syllabi), I should also point out a few more overlaps between them to illustrate
their interaction.
Language and learning
Answers to the question about language and about learning often come together in deﬁning
diﬀerent language teaching methods. Another sector of the ﬁeld at this intersection, which I
have yet to introduce, is that of language assessment. From the ongoing assessment of
Language learning and language education
163

language learning that teachers perform in order to decide on their next teaching move, to the
design and administration of high-stakes language proﬁciency tests to certify language skills
and general proﬁciency, assessing the language that has been learned is a major force in lan-
guage education. While standardized tests have typically made use of indirect measures of
language proﬁciency, such as multiple-choice tests, more and more direct measures, such as
oral proﬁciency interviews, are being employed these days (see O’Sullivan, this volume).
Reasoning that it would be important to facilitate comparisons of language proﬁciency
among individuals and between diﬀerent systems of qualiﬁcations, the Common European
Framework of Reference was developed. Through it, individuals can self-report or be assessed
at certain levels deﬁned by what they can do in another language. It is also important to
recognize that individuals do not have complete and separate competences of the languages
they have knowledge of (Cook 2002). As a result, the Council of Europe (2001) has developed
the European language portfolio, a document in which learners can record their individual
language and cultural experiences.
Language and teaching
A recent example of the intersection between language and teaching is one in which language
teaching materials are informed by linguistic corpora, large databases of spoken utterances
and written materials/texts, which can be mined with computer search engines to reveal lan-
guage patterns. The patterns reveal collocations or conventionalized sequences for particular
lexical items. The way that we express meaning in language is not through stringing together
individual words, but rather is in the form of phrasal units and lexicalized stems that become
conventionalized over time with use (see Adolphs and Lin, this volume).
Learners and language
The learner’s age is often the deciding factor as to what type of language is studied. Many
younger learners these days are being taught language through content. In content and lan-
guage integrated learning (CLIL) or content-based language teaching, the language is the
vehicle through which other school subjects are learned. This approach has often been adop-
ted with the needs of immigrant children in mind. It is thought that postponing children’s
education in other subjects while they learn the language of instruction might be detrimental
to their overall education. However, these days it is being implemented in some countries,
Spain and the Netherlands, for example, as a way to integrate English into the curriculum of
all children.
The focus of instruction for older students is frequently diﬀerent. Their reason for studying
a language is often due to a particular goal, which results in their study of language for a
speciﬁc occupational, technical, or academic purpose.
Context
One aspect of the ﬁgure that I have yet to discuss is the role of context, which can mean many
things, not the least of which is the physical locale – where the language learning/education
has taken place.
Much of the language learning in the world, although by no means all, takes place in
classrooms, though this may be changing with the possibility of more autonomous learning,
aided by technological advancements (see below). For example, in a new study conducted in
Diane Larsen-Freeman
164

Austria, it was reported that 15 per cent of Austrians older than ﬁfteen have learned one or
more foreign languages outside of high school or university in the last ten years. However, in
many parts of the world, classes are very large, and as much for classroom management as for
promoting language acquisition, much of the work is done individually in a written form or in
whole group choral responses. Although some SLA research has found that learning in and
outside of the classroom is similar in certain respects (e.g. Felix 1981), others have found this
not to be true in the case of the type of errors learners commit, for example (Pica 1983).
Through language immersion programmes and study abroad opportunities, students can
receive intensive experiences with language, which compensates for the slow progress and
incomplete acquisition of many who study languages exclusively in the classroom.
Political pressures present in the context can also be inﬂuential. For instance, whereas
bilingual education used to be a popular way to help students acquire another language while
maintaining their heritage language and not falling behind in other subject matter, it has been
considered a politically unpopular educational option in some circles and has been abolished
in certain states of the USA. Then, too, whereas multilingualism is prevalent in many parts of
the world and the plurilingualism of individuals promoted, increasing globalization has given
rise to ‘utilitarian’ language teaching, and the dominance of a few languages, especially English
as an international language of trade, commerce, technology, and science.
Also playing a contextual role are national language policies. One striking example of this is
the termination of Russian language programmes in countries that formerly comprised the
Soviet Union. For instance, Tajikistan has drafted a new law banning the use of Russian and
other minority languages in advertisements, business papers, and government documents.
Since the dissolution of the Soviet Union, students are being instructed in other modern lan-
guages, primarily English. Closely related to which languages are promoted in language poli-
cies is the matter of language ideology or the beliefs that people hold about language. For
instance, Lippi-Green (1997) calls attention to the bias that exists towards an abstract, homo-
geneous standard language, which becomes what is taught despite the fact that there is a great
deal of variation in actual language use outside the classroom.
Future trajectory
With the migration of the world’s population on the rise, one of the current and likely to be
future issues is how to support the complex needs of students being taught and expected to
learn through a language that is not their native tongue (Bailey et al. 2008). General education
teachers are increasingly expected to teach language to students from diverse backgrounds. At
the same time, second language teachers are expected to support these students’ learning
across the curriculum. This demand is pushing the ﬁeld of second language teaching to redeﬁne
its knowledge base and professional competencies.
A not unrelated issue confronting language educators these days is the fact that many of the
world’s languages are endangered. Whereas language policies in some countries have brought
certain languages, such as Irish Gaelic, back from the brink, the rate at which other languages
are dying out is worrisome. Concerted eﬀorts to teach these languages must be made, or they
will be lost forever.
Another related issue is which language to teach. As I have indicated earlier, English is the
current favourite due to the global economy, but perhaps in the future it will be Chinese, as
clearly Chinese is spoken by far more native speakers than English, although English currently
surpasses all other languages in the number of people who speak it non-natively (Graddol
2006). Its dominance has led to concern for linguistic/cultural imperialism (Phillipson 1992)
Language learning and language education
165

(see Canagarajah and Ben Said, this volume). There are those, however, who point out that
there need not be a hegemonic standard English, given that many varieties of world Englishes
exist, moulded by the inﬂuences of (usually) post-colonial contexts in which they are spoken
natively (see Kirkpatrick and Deterding, this volume). For other researchers, English has
already become an international lingua franca and is therefore not owned by native speakers
of English at all. As such, it may evolve a grammar and a sound system that is distinctive from
native dialects, but which is somehow easier to acquire, while facilitating intercultural com-
munication, often among non-native speakers of English with each other (Jenkins 2000;
Seidlhofer 2001). Of course, questions of which language to teach and whose language it is do
not involve English exclusively. Teachers of all languages wrestle with this issue. For example,
Arabic instructors have to choose which dialect of spoken Arabic to teach, as the dialects vary
substantially from one another and from the modern written standard.
A ﬁnal issue that I will point to is the ambivalence to the study of other languages that
exists in some circles. Perhaps, not surprisingly, the ambivalence is often most manifest in
English-speaking countries. Also, not surprisingly, interest in other languages picks up during
times of national crisis, when the government laments not having speakers of particular lan-
guages, deemed ‘strategic’. Under those circumstances, there is a big infusion of government
funding to encourage the teaching of certain languages, such as under the recent National
Strategic Languages Initiative in the United States. At other times, when the perceived crisis is
over, the level of funding is not sustained and the study of other languages languishes. Perhaps
an exception to this trend is the US government’s continuing sponsorship of Language
Resource Centers, sited at universities throughout the country. All these centres have Websites,
many of which oﬀer language teaching materials and other resources, especially helpful in the
case of the less commonly taught languages.
Another example of the ambivalence towards the study of other languages is what is cur-
rently taking place in the UK. It is now compulsory for children in primary schools in
England to be taught a foreign language (this will be the case from 2010), but at the same time
it is no longer mandatory for pupils to study a language beyond the age of fourteen. This
move has led to plummeting numbers of students taking a modern language at GCSE. It
seems the government is sending a mixed message.
Technology
There are three major ways that technology and language learning/education have interfaced
in modern times. They are computer-mediated contact with other languages/cultures, the use
of corpora to inform language teaching materials (and methods), and Internet-delivered
language instruction. I will touch upon each of these in turn (see Kern, this volume).
Computer-mediated contact has meant that learners can engage with other learners of the
same language or even with native speakers of the language they are studying. This might take
the form of students’ interacting in chat rooms or outside of class in online discussions with
classmates. It has been found that such contact encourages the production of more language
on the part of students, especially ones who might be more reticent to participate in face-to-
face discussion in class. Of course, often the exchanges take the form of writing, not speech,
although with increased bandwidth and such programmes as Skype, spoken interaction is
possible. The opportunity for students to make contact with others in chat rooms and social
networking sites has a positive inﬂuence on student motivation. Students who do not see the
point of learning a foreign language ﬁnd interacting with someone who speaks the other lan-
guage very motivating. It should be pointed out, though, that conventional wisdom has it that
Diane Larsen-Freeman
166

the best approach is a blended one, involving both face-to-face and distance/computer-mediated
interaction.
Every day one learns about a new corpus being developed. Each corpus acts as a database
for some language written, or when transcribed, oral data, to, as I mentioned earlier, inform
language teaching materials. Access to corpora comprising millions of words of text, makes it
easy to discern usage patterns, which traditional grammars and descriptions of language have
missed. For example, ‘bordered on’ can have a geographic reference, but it is used more often
in reporting an undesirable situation, e.g. ‘bordering on arrogance’ (Schmitt 2009). In addi-
tion, students themselves are being taught to search corpora when they have their own
question about collocates and connotations and context.
I think it is fair to say that the Internet has not yet delivered on its promise to make lan-
guage education accessible to millions who would otherwise be denied it, especially in chroni-
cally understaﬀed language teaching situations. For example, the demand for English in China
and the increasing popularity of the study of Chinese elsewhere has led to a national shortage
of English teachers in China and a worldwide shortage of Chinese language teachers. However,
technology may provide at least a short-term solution. One of the items making the headlines
recently was an announcement from National Taiwan University that it will develop a
worldwide online Mandarin Chinese teaching project.
Another advantage of Web-based instruction is that it provides access to languages that
might not be oﬀered locally. For instance, earlier this year, the University of California–Los
Angeles (UCLA), went live with its Web-based instructional programmes in Azeri and the
Iraqi dialect of Arabic. This development allows UCLA to send language instruction to other
campuses of the University of California system, and in turn to receive instructional pro-
grammes in Danish, Filipino, Khmer, and Zulu from the University of California, Berkeley,
which may present a partial solution to the problem of keeping robust the less commonly
taught, even endangered, languages.
Chapter summary
In this chapter, I have highlighted some of the issues in language learning and education,
without making the chapter one lengthy list (although it may still seem so to readers). In place
of a list, I have oﬀered readers what I have found to be a useful heuristic for organizing
developments in the ﬁeld, namely a set of questions. As I have considered a few answers to
each, I have looked brieﬂy at diﬀerent deﬁnitions of language, theories of learning, individual
learner factors, approaches to language teaching, and roles of language teachers. In some
cases, I have discussed the pedagogical implications that have been informed by the answers to
the questions. The truth is that the questions, which have yielded diﬀerent answers in diﬀerent
places at diﬀerent times, have implications for language education, though no question-and-
answer or combination of questions and answers will produce a satisfactory solution for all
times and places, due to local social, political, and economic factors, the uniqueness of indi-
vidual language learners and instructional contexts, ever-new research ﬁndings, and the
theoretical commitments educators make.
Although the areas of language learning and language education intersect, there remain
some uneasy ﬁts as well, such as the perennial one between structural and functional approa-
ches. There is also some ebb and ﬂow among the general populace, at least in some countries
of the world, in the interest accorded modern language study. With the economic climate that
globalization has engendered, often it is the international languages that do attract students,
the result being that languages that are spoken by fewer speakers are becoming increasingly
Language learning and language education
167

endangered. Although technology is not likely to resolve every issue, it does promise increased
accessibility to language instruction for those who have the technological wherewithal, the
access, and the computer literacy to take advantage of such instruction. It also may provide
the means to keep some of the less commonly taught languages vital.
Related topics
Due to the broad coverage in this chapter, many of the other chapters in this volume are
related. I have drawn attention to some of these already. Perhaps, though, the chapters that
most complement this one are Scott Thornbury’s chapter on methodology and Lourdes
Ortega’s chapter on second language acquisition.
Further reading
Larsen-Freeman, D. and Anderson, M. (2011) Techniques and Principles in Language Teaching, 3rd
edn, Oxford: Oxford University Press. (This third edition explores a number of language teaching
methods and methodological innovations by oﬀering readers analyses of classroom lessons in
terms of their philosophical underpinnings and the activities that are practised.)
Long, M. and Doughty, C. (eds) (2009) The Handbook of Language Teaching, Malden, MA:
Blackwell. (The chapters in this handbook span a number of topics in the ﬁeld, with each cov-
ering research ﬁndings on core issues.)
Spolsky, B. and Hult, F. (eds) (2008) The Handbook of Educational Linguistics, Malden, MA:
Blackwell. (This volume contains forty-four chapters, featuring reviews of many areas of educa-
tional linguistics, including a section on research-practice relationships.)
References
Allwright, D. (2003) ‘Exploratory practice: rethinking practitioner research in language teaching’,
Language Teaching Research 7(2): 113–41.
Bailey, F., Burkett, B. and Freeman, D. (2008) ‘The mediating role of language in teaching and
learning: a classroom perspective’, in B. Spolsky and F. Hult (eds) The Handbook of Educational
Linguistics, Malden, MA: Blackwell.
Bailey, K. M. (2006) Language Teacher Supervision, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Becker, A. L. (1983) ‘Toward a post-structuralist view of language learning: a short essay’, Lan-
guage Learning 33: 217–20.
Bloomﬁeld, L. (1942) Outline Guide for the Practical Study of Foreign Languages, Baltimore: Lin-
guistic Society of America.
Blum-Kulka, S., House, J. and Kasper, G. (eds) (1989) Cross-cultural Pragmatics: Requests and
Apologies, Norwood, NJ: Ablex.
Candlin, C. N. and Candlin, S. (2003) ‘Healthcare communication: a problematic site for applied
linguistics research’, Annual Review of Applied Linguistics 23: 134–54.
Carroll, J. (1963) ‘Research on teaching foreign languages’, in N. Gage (ed.) Handbook of Research
on Teaching, Chicago: Rand-McNally.
Chomsky, N. (1965) Aspects of the Theory of Syntax, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Cook, G. and Seidlhofer, B. (eds) (1995) Principle and Practice in Applied Linguistics, Oxford:
Oxford University Press.
Cook, V. (2002) Portraits of the L2 User, Clevedon: Multilingual Matters.
Council of Europe (2001) Common European Framework of Reference for Languages: Learning,
Teaching and Assessment, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Dewey, J. (1916) Democracy and Education, New York: Macmillan.
Dörnyei, Z. (2009) The Psychology of Second Language Acquisition, Oxford: Oxford University
Press.
Ellis, N. and Larsen-Freeman, D. (2006) ‘Language emergence: implications for applied linguistics,
introduction to the special issue’, Applied Linguistics 27: 558–89.
Diane Larsen-Freeman
168

——(2009) ‘Constructing a second language: analyses and computational simulations of the
emergence of linguistic constructions from usage’, special issue, Language Learning 59, issue
supplement s1: 90–125.
Fairclough, N. (1995) Critical Discourse Analysis: The Critical Study of Language, Boston: Addison
Wesley.
Felix, S. (1981) ‘The eﬀect of formal instruction on second language acquisition’, Language Learning
31: 87–112.
Freire, P. (1970) Pedagogy of the Oppressed, New York: Herder and Herder.
Fries, C. C. (1945) Teaching and Learning English as a Foreign Language, Ann Arbor, MI:
University of Michigan Press.
Gardner, H. (1983) Frames of Mind: The Theory of Multiple Intelligences, New York: Basic Books.
Gardner, R. (1985) Social Psychology and Second Language Learning: The Role of Attitudes and
Motivation, London: Edward Arnold.
Gardner, R. and Lambert, W. (1972) Attitudes and Motivation in Second Language Learning,
Rowley, MA: Newbury House.
Gass, S. (1997) Input, Interaction, and the Development of Second Languages, Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence
Erlbaum Associates.
Gatbonton, E. and Segalowitz, N. (1988) ‘Creative automatization: principles for promoting ﬂuency
within a communicative framework’, TESOL Quarterly 22: 473–92.
Goldberg, A. (2006) Constructions at Work: The Nature of Generalization in Language, Oxford:
Oxford University Press.
Graddol, D. (2006) English Next, London: The British Council.
Halliday, M. A. K. (1978) Language as Social Semiotic: The Social Interpretation of Language and
Meaning, London: Edward Arnold.
Holliday, A. (1994) Appropriate Methodology and Social Context, New York: Cambridge
University Press.
Hymes, D. (1972) ‘On communicative competence’, in J. B. Pride and J. Holmes (eds) Sociolinguistics:
Selected Readings, Harmondsworth: Penguin Books.
Jenkins, J. (2000) The Phonology of English as an International Language, Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Kramsch, C. (ed.) (2002) Language Acquisition and Language Socialization: Ecological Perspectives,
London: Continuum.
Krashen, S. (1982) Principles and Practice in Second Language Acquisition, Oxford: Pergamon.
Kumaravadivelu, B. (1994) ‘The postmethod condition: emerging strategies for second/foreign lan-
guage teaching’, TESOL Quarterly 28: 27–48.
Laﬀord, B. (ed.) (2007) ‘Second language acquisition reconceptualised? The impact of Firth and
Wagner (1997)’, The Modern Language Journal 91, Focus Issue.
Langacker, R. (1968) Language and its Structure: Some Fundamental Linguistic Concepts, New
York: Harcourt Brace and World.
Lantolf, J. P. (ed.) (2000) Sociocultural Theory and Second Language Learning, Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Larsen-Freeman, D. (1997) ‘Chaos/complexity science and second language acquisition’, Applied
Linguistics 18: 141–65.
——(2000) Techniques and Principles in Language Teaching, 2nd edn, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
——(2003) Teaching Language: From Grammar to Grammaring, Boston: Heinle/Cengage.
——(2006) ‘The emergence of complexity, ﬂuency, and accuracy in the oral and written production
of ﬁve Chinese learners of English’, Applied Linguistics 27: 590–619.
——(2007) ‘Reﬂecting on the cognitive-social debate in second language acquisition’, Modern Lan-
guage Journal 91: 771–85.
Larsen-Freeman, D. and Cameron, L. (2008) Complex Systems and Applied Linguistics, Oxford:
Oxford University Press.
Larsen-Freeman, D. and Freeman, D. (2008) ‘Language moves: the place of “foreign” languages in
classroom teaching and learning’, Review of Research in Education 32: 147–86.
Lenneberg, E. (1964) ‘The capacity for language acquisition’, in J. Fodor and J. Katz (eds) The
Structure of Language, Englewood Cliﬀs, NJ: Prentice Hall.
Li, D. (1998) ‘“It’s always more diﬃcult than you plan and imagine.” Teachers’ perceived diﬃculties
in introducing the communicative approach in South Korea’, TESOL Quarterly 32: 677–703.
Language learning and language education
169

Lippi-Green, R. (1997) English with an Accent, London: Routledge.
Long, M. (1991) ‘Focus on form: a design feature in language teaching methodology’, in K. de Bot,
R. Ginsberg and C. Kramsch (eds) Foreign Language Research in Cross-cultural Perspective,
Amsterdam and Philadelphia: John Benjamins.
——(1996) ‘The role of the linguistic environment in second language acquisition’, in W. C. Ritchie
and T. K. Bhatia (eds) Handbook of Second Language Acquisition, San Diego, CA: Academic
Press.
MacWhinney, B. (2006) ‘Emergentism: use often and with care’, Applied Linguistics 27: 729–40.
Oxford, R. (1989) Language Learning Strategies: What Every Teacher Should Know, Boston:
Heinle/Cengage.
Phillipson, R. (1992) Linguistic Imperialism, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Pica, T. (1983) ‘Adult acquisition of English as a second language under diﬀerent conditions of
exposure’, Language Learning 33: 465–97.
Prabhu, N. S. (1987) Second Language Pedagogy, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
——(1990) ‘There is no best method–why?’ TESOL Quarterly 24: 225–41.
Richards, J. C. and Lockhart, C. (1994) Reﬂective Teaching in Second Language Classrooms,
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Sacks, H., Schegloﬀ, E. A. and Jeﬀerson, G. (1974) ‘A simplest systematics for the organization of
turn-taking for conversation’, Language 50(4): 696–735.
de Saussure, F. (1916) Cours de linguistiques générale, W. Baskin (trans.) (1959) as Course in General
Linguistics, New York: Philosophical Library.
Schmitt, N. (2009) ‘What language models must explain’, presentation at the Conference of the
American Association of Applied Linguists, March 2009, Denver.
Schön, D. A. (1983) The Reﬂective Practitioner: How Professionals Think in Action, London:
Temple Smith.
Schultz, R. (2001) ‘Cultural diﬀerences in student and teacher perceptions concerning the role of
grammar instruction and corrective feedback. USA–Colombia’, Modern Language Journal 85:
244–57.
Schumann, J. (1976) ‘Second language acquisition research: getting a more global look at the learner’,
special issue, Language Learning 4: 15–28.
Seidlhofer, B. (2001) ‘Closing a conceptual gap: the case for a description of English as a lingua
franca’, International Journal of Applied Linguistics 11: 133–58.
Skinner, B. F. (1957) Verbal Behavior, Acton, MA: Copley Publishing Group.
Slobin, D. (1996) ‘From “thought and language” to “thinking for speaking”’, in J. J. Gumperz and
S. C. Levinson (eds) Rethinking Linguistic Relativity, New York: Cambridge University Press.
Snow, C. E. (1979) ‘The role of social interaction in language acquisition’, in A. Collins (ed.)
Children’s Language and Communication: Proceedings of the 1977 Minnesota Symposium on
Child Development, Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Spolsky, B. (1989) Conditions for Second Language Learning, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Swales, J. (1990) Genre Analysis, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Tomasello, M. (2003) Constructing a Language: A Usage-based Theory of Language Acquisition,
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Vygotsky, L. S. (1978) Mind in Society: The Development of Higher Psychological Processes,
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Widdowson, H. G. (1992) Practical Stylistics, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Wilkins, D. A. (1976) Notional Syllabuses, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Willis, J. (1996) A Framework for Task-based Learning, Harlow: Pearson Longman.
Woods, D. (1996) Teacher Cognition in Language Teaching, Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.
Diane Larsen-Freeman
170

12
Second language acquisition
Lourdes Ortega
Introduction
The ﬁeld of Second Language Acquisition (SLA) is a branch of applied linguistics that has a
history extending over half a century. It investigates the human capacity to learn additional
languages during late childhood, adolescence, or adulthood, once the ﬁrst language, in the
case of monolinguals, or the ﬁrst languages, in the case of bilinguals and multilinguals, have
been acquired. SLA researchers strive to shed light on four overarching questions:
1
How do humans learn additional languages after they have learned their first?
2
In what ways is the learning of an additional language different from the learning of
languages for which exposure is available from birth, and in what ways might it be similar?
3
What factors contribute to the variability observed in rates and outcomes of additional
language learning?
4
What does it take to attain advanced language and literacy competencies in a language
that is learned later in life?
SLA shares its interest in explaining human language development with two other ﬁelds, both
of which study ﬁrst language acquisition from the womb to right before children enter school.
These are Bilingual First Language Acquisition (BFLA), which examines language develop-
ment among infants and children when they grow up surrounded by two or more languages
from birth (De Houwer 2009), and First Language Acquisition (FLA), also known as Child
Language Acquisition, which investigates how infants and children learn their ﬁrst language
when they grow up surrounded by one language only (Clark 2003).
The diﬀerences in focus between these two ﬁelds and SLA are important. First, in the ﬁelds
of bilingual and monolingual ﬁrst language acquisition, infants and toddlers are investigated
at the critical point in life when they are discovering human language, as instantiated in the
speciﬁc language(s) that their carers happen to speak to them. By contrast, all participants in
SLA studies will already be relatively mature users of at least one language, often more. Their
existing language competencies will inﬂuence their learning of the language that is being added
to their repertoire. Second, at the point of ﬁrst language acquisition, infants and toddlers must
171

develop socially and conceptually in tandem with developing linguistically. On the other hand,
adults, adolescents, and even children as young as four or ﬁve, can be expected to bring to the
task already relatively sophisticated and increasingly ﬁne-tuned social and conceptual
structures. Finally, BFLA and FLA researchers typically assume naturalistic conditions of
language learning, because infants and toddlers learn language by being surrounded by
meaningful language use and in the absence of instruction. SLA researchers, on the other
hand, investigate language learning in any possible context, ranging from naturalistic acquisition
within a non-instructional community (e.g. a neighbourhood, a church group, the workplace,
or during regular schooling that happens to occur in a new language), to formal instruction of
various kinds (e.g. tutorials or self-access; second, foreign, or heritage language classrooms; or
classroom-engineered immersion settings), and often a combination of the two. This being so,
instruction is an important area of study in SLA (see Larsen-Freeman, this volume).
SLA theories in historical perspective
Scholars have written about how people learn second languages and how to best teach foreign
languages since ancient times. When in the late 1960s SLA emerged as a formal research
community, it did so shaped by these long-standing interests in language learning and teach-
ing. Additional inﬂuences came from more speciﬁc developments in the ﬁeld of FLA, which at
the time had been transformed by a process of theoretical renewal in reaction against the
prevailing behaviourist view of language acquisition and had begun to yield exciting empirical
ﬁndings about how children who grow up monolingual learn their mother tongue (e.g. Brown
1973).
The awakenings of SLA: interlanguage
The years 1967 and 1972 mark the publication of two seminal papers by Pit Corder and
Larry Selinker that are often associated with the awakenings of the ﬁeld because of the
importance of the arguments they put forth. At an empirical level, they called to question
the dominant practice of contrastive analysis, which looked for acquisition answers in the
exhaustive comparison of the linguistic inventories of the language pairs involved in the
learning task, the ﬁrst language and the target language. Instead, Corder (1967) and Selinker
(1972) argued researchers must turn for evidence to the actual language produced by learners
as they try to communicate in the target second language (L2). This meant examining the
‘errors’ learners produce not as something to be pre-empted or remedied but as objects of
study that hold great value for understanding L2 acquisition. At the theoretical level, the
behaviourist view of language acquisition as mere habit formation was rejected and replaced
by a novel conceptualization of acquisition as creative construction. For the ﬁrst time, learners
were viewed as active and rational agents who engaged in the discovery of underlying L2
rules. They formed hypotheses about the language, tested them, and employed a number of
cognitive and social strategies to regulate their learning. These developments made inter-
language investigations during the 1970s and 1980s increasingly more focused on cognitive
and psycholinguistic aspects of acquisition. Nevertheless, a few SLA researchers also working
within the interlanguage tradition turned their attention to exploring the potential of
quantitative sociolinguistic theories of variation for the study of L2 development (e.g. Tarone
1988).
Once the foundations of interlanguage as a novel and distinct object of inquiry were laid
out, there was a justiﬁcation for the need for a ﬁeld that would investigate additional language
Lourdes Ortega
172

development in its own right. After these beginnings, several broad phases can be dis-
tinguished in the history of SLA. The narrative depiction of orderly historical trends that fol-
lows below is only a convenient shorthand that undoubtedly obscures more complicated
developments.
From ﬁrst theories to the cognitive and linguistic emphases of the 1990s
By the early 1980s, the ﬁrst attempt at a formal theory of L2 acquisition was mustered in the
United States by Stephen Krashen (1985). Known as the Monitor Model, this theory became
(and has remained) popular with language teachers. In a nutshell, Krashen proposed that:
(a) the core ingredient of additional language learning is meaningful, comprehensible input;
(b) the processes of additional language acquisition are implicit and subconscious and any
explicit and conscious processes that may be summoned in the classroom can only help careful
monitored performance but will have little eﬀects on true language knowledge or on sponta-
neous performance; and (c) the main obstacles to additional language learning for adults stem
from aﬀective inhibitions. Despite its popularity, already in the mid-1980s the Monitor Model
was evaluated as being too metaphorical to lend itself to proper empirical investigation. The
strongest critiques were levelled by SLA scholars who were well versed in skills acquisition
theory from the ﬁeld of psychology (e.g. McLaughlin 1987), and also by scholars who had
begun applying Universal Grammar theory from the ﬁeld of linguistics to the disciplinary
SLA project (e.g. Gregg 1984). In both cases, the criticisms also served to carve intellectual
spaces for these newer kinds of SLA theories.
Thus, as the 1980s came to a close, the SLA research community had already developed
several theoretically distinct proposals for explaining L2 acquisition. One view (Krashen 1985)
was that L2 acquisition occurs within dimensions deﬁned largely by input and aﬀect and
operating mostly at the unconscious level. Another position (McLaughlin 1987) held that
learning an additional language is a complex, cognitive process similar to any other human
learning (cooking, playing chess, riding a bike, thinking mathematically, knowing history); as
such, it involves great amounts of experience aided by attention and memory and it must
include the development of suﬃcient declarative knowledge about the language and suﬃcient
deliberate practice to eventually support fully automatic use of language. A third view (White
1989) was that the mental grammar of second language learners must be explained by the
relative contributions of two forces that guide tacit language knowledge formation and that
are independent from other cognitive operations, and even relatively independent from sur-
rounding ambient experience, namely abstract knowledge of Universal Grammar (which the
human species is endowed with at birth) and more speciﬁc knowledge of a given ﬁrst language
(which is imprinted in the mind of language users during the critical years of learning a ﬁrst
language or languages).
Particularly during the 1990s, these varied SLA research eﬀorts were strengthened to the
point of cohering into what looked like one of two dominant approaches. A cognitive-
interactionist prism (Larsen-Freeman and Long 1991) was strongly inﬂuenced by Swiss psy-
chologist Jean Piaget and easily accommodated within it the interlanguage research tradition
as well as the skills acquisition theory. It called for the examination of L2 acquisition as the
sum contributions of learner-internal factors, such as attention and memory, and learner-
external factors, such as the interactions oﬀered to learners in the target language and the
quality of any formal instruction they might seek. By contrast, a formal linguistic SLA prism
(Hawkins 2001; White 1989) was strongly inﬂuenced by US linguist Noam Chomsky and
ﬂourished out of the strides made by this linguistic theory during the late 1980s. This research
Second language acquisition
173

programme sought to tease out the degree to which Universal Grammar knowledge, knowl-
edge stemming from the ﬁrst language, or a combination of the two, guided the construction
of mental L2 grammars. These two traditions have enjoyed continuity at both empirical and
theoretical levels up to the present day, thus leading to considerable accumulation of disciplinary
knowledge in the areas to which they have been applied.
The fate of other foundational SLA work, by comparison, appeared less promising. SLA
researchers’ interest in Krashen’s Monitor Model had quickly waned. Likewise, the quantita-
tive sociolinguistic forays into SLA heralded by a few interlanguage researchers (e.g. Tarone
1988) had seemingly remained of interest to only a minority in the ﬁeld. It would take a few
more years for the ﬁeld to return to their important argument that language learning is
fundamentally social.
Theoretical expansions: socioculturalism and emergentism
Already in the mid-1990s, however, two new theoretical forces joined the ﬁeld and began
new SLA traditions that soon would grow enormously in vitality. One is the study of
L2 acquisition through the sociocultural theory of mind developed by Russian psychologist
Lev Vygotsky, a contemporary of Piaget, and led in SLA by James Lantolf (Lantolf
1994). The other is the application of the usage-based, emergentist family of theories devel-
oped in cognitive science and initiated in SLA by Nick Ellis (1996) and Diane Larsen-Freeman
(1997). The coexistence of the two better established approaches with the two young
but bold newcomers created epistemological tension and led to the gradual articulation of
diﬀerences.
On the one hand, the two psychologically oriented approaches, cognitive-interactionist and
sociocultural, consider the learner’s mind and the surrounding environment as essential
dimensions of inquiry, but they diﬀer radically in their position as to how the two should be
investigated. For the cognitive-interactionist approach (well synthesized by Larsen-Freeman
and Long 1991), mind and environment are analytically separable, and the inﬂuences stem-
ming from one or the other should be isolated as learner-internal and learner-external factors,
so that then their interactions can be investigated. This position is also known as interaction-
ism in the ﬁrst language development literature (see Bohannon and Bonvillian 2009).
Mechanisms that explain how the linguistic data available in the surrounding external
environment are used for internally driven learning invoke cognitive constructs such as noti-
cing, when new features of language become available, even if most ﬂeetingly, for conscious
recognition. Environmental constructs of importance include negotiation for meaning, when
interlocutors edit and reformulate their own and each other’s language as they strive to make
themselves understood, and negative feedback, when interlocutors wittingly or unwittingly
oﬀer potential evidence that a language choice may not be sanctioned by the speech commu-
nity. By contrast, for the Vygotskian sociocultural approach (ﬁrst synthesized at book length
by Lantolf and Thorne 2006), mind is irrevocably social, and therefore it can only be investi-
gated holistically in the unfolding process of social action and interaction. The construction of
new knowledge (including knowledge of an additional language) arises in the social plane and
gradually becomes internalized psychologically by the individual. Mechanisms that explain
how new linguistic knowledge and capable behaviour come about invoke social processes such
as mediation of activity by language through private speech (audible speech directed to the
self), social speech (speech by more expert others with the aim to help regulate action by
novices), and inner speech (inaudible speech directed to the self for self-regulation). Another
important construct related to learning is the zone of proximal development. This refers to an
Lourdes Ortega
174

emergent quality of collaborative social action by which knowledge that by itself would be
above the current competencies of one or more of the participants becomes momentarily
attainable through joint context-sensitive collaboration, thus potentially being available for
individual, independent use at a later point.
The formal linguistic approach and the emergentist approach to SLA, too, exhibit key dif-
ferences amidst critically intersecting interests. Both are vested in explaining language devel-
opment as part of cognitive science, but they clash in their incompatible assumptions about
what human language is and about the relative contributions that nature and nurture make to
its development. Formal linguistic SLA researchers (Wakabayashi, this volume) adhere to
radical nativism, modularity, and rule-based representationism. That is, they believe language
is a biologically given faculty unique to the human species (nativism), operating independently
from other cognitive faculties used to learn and process other kinds of knowledge (modularity),
and encoded as a system of abstract rules of the sort that have been described in formal lin-
guistic grammars (rule-based representationism). In sharp contrast, emergentist, usage-based
SLA researchers (Ellis, this volume) are empiricist, generalist, and associationist. In other
words, they hold that language in each individual emerges out of massive amounts of experi-
ence with the linking of form and meaning through language use that is driven by the species’
social need to communicate (empiricism), enabled by simple memory and attention processing
mechanisms that are the same as employed for all other cognitive functions (generalism), and
self-organized out of the human brain’s unique capacity to implicitly and mandatorily tally the
statistical properties and contextual contingencies of the linguistic input they experience over a
lifetime (associationism).
SLA after the social turn
The tensions brieﬂy outlined above were only the tip of the iceberg of a wider social turn
(Block 2003) which continued to gain momentum in the late 1990s. Not only Vygotskian
socioculturalists (e.g. Pavlenko and Lantolf 2000) but also many other scholars from the wider
ﬁeld of applied linguistics criticized the SLA research community for investigating L2 acqui-
sition in a-social and decontextualized ways (e.g. Firth and Wagner 1997).
The crisis fuelled by the social turn has left the ﬁeld richer in theories and approaches.
Among the most important new contributors, we ﬁnd less cognitively and more socially
minded approaches that have undertaken the task to re-specify in social terms all key elements
in the SLA equation. Thus, if Vygotskian SLA already beginning in the mid-1990s oﬀered a
re-speciﬁcation of cognition as fundamentally social (Thorne and Tasker, this volume), since
then other SLA theories have contributed formal ways of studying additional language
learning as social in terms of grammar, oral interaction, learning, and sense of self. Speciﬁ-
cally, grammar and language are theorized as social in systemic functional linguistics for
SLA (Young, this volume); oral interaction is redeﬁned as social in conversation analysis as
well as in other discourse approaches to additional language learning (Hellermann 2008;
Young 2009); learning itself is understood as social in language socialization (He, this volume);
and sense of self is reconceptualized as irrevocably social in identity theory (Norton, this
volume).
Key themes in SLA research
Many themes have attracted attention in SLA, of which I have selected ﬁve that I consider to
be fundamental areas of SLA inquiry.
Second language acquisition
175

Age: what are the effects of an early or a late start?
The question of age is perhaps the most investigated, debated, and misunderstood of all
research areas in SLA, most likely because of its extraordinary theoretical and educational
importance. No researcher denies that starting age greatly aﬀects the eventual success of
additional language learning. Success, naturally, is in the eye of the beholder, and we must not
forget to ask: Who is to judge success: the researcher, the teacher, one of many stakeholders in
the life of the additional language user, or the user him- or herself? When success is strictly
understood in linguistic terms as determined by researchers, then it is an empirically estab-
lished fact that people who begin learning an additional language by naturalistic immersion
very early in life tend to attain high levels of linguistic competence, often (but not always)
similar to others who begin learning the same language at birth. By comparison, people who
begin learning an additional language later in life, and particularly any time after the end of
adolescence, exhibit much greater variability in their levels of linguistic attainment. In addi-
tion, the majority (although not all) of late-starting language users will develop functional
abilities in the new language that are diﬀerent from and seemingly less proﬁcient than the
functional abilities of others who begin learning the same language at birth.
What is hotly debated and remains without a deﬁnitive research answer is what precisely
explains the observed age eﬀects. Proponents of the critical period hypothesis (e.g. Abra-
hamsson and Hyltenstam 2009) believe that the explanation is biological, in that they posit a
maturational, time-locked schedule after which it is no longer possible to learn a language in
exactly the same ways and to exactly the same high degrees of competence as any individual
does between birth and age three or four. Sceptics of the critical period hypothesis (e.g.
Hakuta 2001), on the other hand, point at alternative, non-biological reasons for the attested
age eﬀects, all of which are related to the many diﬀerences in experience (linguistic and non-
linguistic) between infants and adults. For one, it may be that a later start leads to diﬀerential
results because one or more other languages have been learned so well already (Flege 1999).
This argument warrants careful consideration, given that late starters and early starters alike
are usually compared to people who grew up by birth with only one language and therefore
exhibit monolingual competence. Yet, monolingual competence cannot be expected to
be identical to multilingual competence (Cook 2008). It may also be that the diverging lin-
guistic competencies we observe at increasingly older starting ages are reﬂective of the varied
social, educational, and emotional complications as well as the varied demands on time and
pursuits that come with adult life, compared to the more uniform and restricted lives that
infants and toddlers lead before they enter school.
The age debate has been further complicated in recent years by research conducted in foreign
language contexts, where the availability of input is severely limited (e.g. two or three hours a
week of foreign language study, in many school systems). Under such conditions, and when
results have been evaluated at the point of high school graduation, beginning a couple of years ear-
lier or later during elementary or middle school made no sizable overall diﬀerence (Muñoz
2008). As Muñoz notes, the empirical evidence accumulated from foreign language contexts sug-
gests that age is confounded with another variable that must always be evaluated when inter-
preting critical period and age-related SLA studies: the quantity and quality of the ambient input.
Crosslinguistic inﬂuences stemming from already known languages
A second important theme in SLA research is how previously known languages, and particu-
larly the mother tongue, inﬂuence the process of learning an additional language. Both
Lourdes Ortega
176

strategically and unknowingly, learners rely on their ﬁrst language and on other languages they
know in order to accomplish something that is as yet unknown to them in the second lan-
guage. In their comprehensive appraisal of this domain, Jarvis and Pavlenko (2008) identify
several noteworthy insights from accumulated research. One is the realization that cross-
linguistic phenomena can slow down the pace of learning in cases of language areas where
negative transfer occurs, but also accelerate learning and facilitate development in many areas
where positive transfer occurs (e.g. for language pairs that are typologically or genetically
related and whose lexicons contain many helpful cognates, as in Spanish-English creatividad =
creativity). Second, similarities in a given language pair can often lead to greater learning dif-
ﬁculties than diﬀerences do (e.g. in the case of false friends, as when assuming that the words
actualmente in Spanish and actually in English mean the same thing). A third well-attested
ﬁnding is that crosslinguistic inﬂuences are not linearly related to proﬁciency; instead, diﬀerent
areas of the languages of the individual can result in interactions at some levels of proﬁciency
and not others.
The inﬂuence that the mother tongue has on the construction of the new grammar is also
an important area of research for scholars who work with formal linguistic theories
(Wakabayashi, this volume). However, their goals are diﬀerent from those of most of the
research surveyed by Jarvis and Pavlenko (2008). SLA formal linguistic researchers aim to
tease out the diﬀerences in the initial and end states of grammar knowledge that obtains when
one language is learned by birth, on the one hand, and when a second language is added later
in life, on the other. A number of theoretical positions are considered empirically plausible,
which are contained within two extremes. At the one extreme, full access to Universal Gram-
mar is proposed and the inﬂuence of the L1 is believed to be minimal. This position assumes
that ﬁrst and second language acquisition are fundamentally similar in nature. At the other
extreme, no access to Universal Grammar is posited during L2 acquisition and the L1 is
aﬀorded a central position in the construction of the L2 grammar. That is, after learning the
ﬁrst language from birth by recourse to Universal Grammar, any subsequent language learn-
ing is thought to be accomplished through the more detailed knowledge structures instantiated
by the particular ﬁrst-language grammar that is known already, and by resorting to processing
mechanisms that are fundamentally diﬀerent (Bley-Vroman 2009) from those employed by the
infant learning a language or languages from birth to the pre-school years.
Environment and cognition: what are their contributions to additional language
learning?
From the beginnings of the ﬁeld, much SLA research has focused on human interactions
and the discourse strategies in them that bring about potentially useful opportunities for
learning. We know a great deal about how linguistically mature interlocutors can facilitate
additional language learning by rewording their messages through simpliﬁcations and ela-
borations, by asking for clariﬁcations and expansions, and by using language that is appro-
priate, interesting, and yet slightly above the level of their interlocutors (Long 1996). From
socioculturally oriented studies of the environment for SLA, we also know that many addi-
tional language learners are actively involved in their own learning processes, both regulating
challenges and maximizing learning opportunities as they seek environmental encounters
(Brouwer and Wagner 2004; Donato 1994; Kinginger 2004). Finally, we also know that inter-
action is not a panacea, and that learning opportunities may not be actualized at all when
interlocutors are not invested in communicating with each other, when they are antagonistic
or, even worse, prejudiced, or (ironically) when they are so emotionally and intellectually
Second language acquisition
177

engaged in communication that their attention glosses over the formal details of what is new
to them in the L2.
Much SLA research since the mid-1990s has investigated issues related to memory, atten-
tion, and awareness and how they constrain what can be learned of the additional language,
particularly through interaction and formal instruction. While it is clear that the more delib-
erate attention L2 users pay to new language, the more they learn (Schmidt 1995), it is also
clear that much of a new language is learned via implicit attentional processes of extraction of
meaning-form correspondences and their associated frequencies and distributions of occur-
rence (Ellis, this volume). More recently, SLA researchers have turned to the study of the
properties of the linguistic data aﬀorded by the environment, often using tools from corpus
analysis, and how these properties are processed for learning by the cognitive architecture.
Progress in this area will no doubt accelerate in coming years under the impulse of usage-
based, emergentist perspectives, since they place the lion’s share of acquisition with the statistical
and form-and-meaning properties of the input as these interact with the learner’s attentional
capacities. There is already ﬁrm empirical support, for example, that language features that are
highly frequent in the input are acquired earlier by L2 learners, provided that they are also
phonologically salient and semantically prototypical (e.g. argument structure in Ellis and
Ferreira-Junior 2009).
Three approaches to explaining variability of L2 learning across individuals
It has always been noted that adolescents and adults who learn an additional language present
a daunting landscape of variability in terms of rates, processes, and outcomes by the time they
(or the researchers who investigate them) can say they are ‘done’ with L2 learning. This issue
of variability across individuals has been investigated from three perspectives.
The perspective with the longest tradition is known as individual diﬀerences research and
draws on social psychological constructs and methods (see Dörnyei 2005). This research is
quantitative and correlational, and it assumes multiple causal variables interacting and con-
tributing together to explaining variation systematically. We know from SLA research on
individual diﬀerences that people diﬀer in how much of a gift they have for learning foreign
languages and that this natural ability can be measured with precision via language aptitude
tests. In general, we can expect aptitude scores and achievements scores (e.g. end-of-course
grades, teacher evaluations, and even proﬁciency scores) to pattern together by about 16 to 36
per cent overlap. Motivation is another source of individual diﬀerence that has been investi-
gated particularly energetically by SLA researchers over the years, and several theories have
shed light on diﬀerent qualities of motivation that are important in sustaining and nourishing
learning eﬀorts, including integrative motivation, self-determined motivation, and motivation
guided by the positive concept of an L2-speaking self (see Dörnyei 2005).
A second perspective that can help explain individual variability is socio-dynamic and draws
from complexity theory and dynamic systems theory, which are recent approaches within the
emergentist family of SLA theories. As Larsen-Freeman and Cameron (2008) note, in the
socio-dynamic approach all research is made to be centrally and primarily about variability.
Indeed, variability is thought to be an inherent property of the system under investigation and
increased variability is interpreted as a precursor for some important change in the system as
well. This novel perspective calls for the use of new analytical methods that are quantitative, as
in the traditional perspective, but also innovatively diﬀerent because they are stochastic and
non-causal, that is, based on probabilistic estimations that include the possibility of random
variations and ﬂuctuations tracked empirically over time (Larsen-Freeman and Cameron
Lourdes Ortega
178

2008). The new variability-centred framework can be applied to any area of SLA, from inter-
language data (e.g. Verspoor et al. 2008) to the study of aptitude and motivation (e.g. Dörnyei
2010).
A third approach to variability across individuals contrasts sharply with the previous two in
taking a qualitative, sociocultural, and critical perspective towards the problem at hand. As
Norton and Toohey (2001) explain, in this perspective constructs such as motivation, aptitude,
and other individual diﬀerences are reconceptualized as stemming from the interplay between
people’s understanding of themselves in the world and the constraints, material and symbolic,
that their worlds aﬀord them. These understandings are dialectically shaped by the hopes and
aspirations of individuals and by the power structures of the societal milieus that they inhabit.
Thus, there is a constant struggle between societal structure and individual agency. Structural
dimensions include the socioeconomic power and the histories of settlement of each speech
community in a given geography, as well as the naturalized ideologies and worldviews that
construct certain attributes (e.g. ethinicity, race, language, culture) as desirable or undesirable.
In terms of language learning, speciﬁcally, such structural forces shape the symbolic power of
the languages in contact within a given social context, for example, Spanish and English in the
United States (Valdés 2005) or Spanish, Catalan, and English in Catalonia (Pujolar 2010).
They also shape the degree to which an L2 user may be viewed as a legitimate speaker of the
language with the right to be heard by others (Norton Peirce 1995), or the roles and identities
that are made available to them in their surrounding collective discourses (McKay and Wong
1996). Agency, on the other hand, is the relative power that people can garner as they respond
to structural forces in their lives and to the positionalities of their contexts (Norton Peirce
1995; Pavlenko and Lantolf 2000). Agency may allow people to negotiate for themselves,
through and in their new language, other desired roles and identities and to gain some access
to symbolic and material resources that are mediated by their being a user of the additional
language. When the structural and agentive sources of variability are investigated in these
ways, we gain unique and much improved insights into how and why people learn or do not
learn an additional language.
The role of instruction in SLA
People learning an additional language often seek formal instructional experiences to aid
themselves in the process. Answers to what constitutes best language teaching practices have
been sought by researchers who specialize in classroom SLA or instructed SLA (Ellis 2005;
Lightbown and Spada 2006; Long and Doughty 2009). This sector of the SLA community has
directed its eﬀorts towards investigating theoretical questions, of which two seem particularly
salient: the integration of form and meaning and the gauging of ideal degrees of explicitness in
instructional options.
The question of how best to integrate form and meaning in language instruction has
received great attention in instructed SLA. When instruction is designed with the exclusive
goal of facilitating the learning of new forms out of context, it is clear that the results are
unsatisfactory because the grammar that is understood (e.g. in traditional grammar teaching)
or the stock of structures that are memorized (e.g. in audiolingual methods) do not suﬃce to
make students into sophisticated and ﬂuent language users. Conversely, when instruction is
designed with the sole concern to surround learners with L2 input clothed in meaningful and
interesting content in the new language, it has been shown that the results also fall short of the
ideal, because much formal linguistic detail seems to be missed and not learned. This obser-
vation is true notwithstanding strong beneﬁts in comprehension, academic learning, and
Second language acquisition
179

motivation (e.g. in bilingual immersion programmes designed for majority speakers) and
despite deceptively ﬂuent learning of the nuts-and-bolts of basic oral language (e.g. in majority-
language-only submersion conditions typically inﬂected upon minority speakers). Diﬀerent
solutions to the question of form-meaning integration are currently investigated, including
focus-on-form instruction, task-based language learning, content-based learning, and genre-
based language curricula (see chapters in Long and Doughty 2009). The extent to which
instructional eﬀorts should be more explicit or more implicit is another central theoretical
question in instructed SLA. At a broad level, it appears that instruction that is designed to
present language or to directly summon learners to pay attention to language leads to more
tangible results, at least in terms of post-test gains (Norris and Ortega 2000). However, we
need much more nuanced answers as to what really constitutes degrees of ‘explicitness’ or
‘implicitness’ in L2 instruction (Ellis and Sheen 2006) and under what conditions and in what
contexts a continuum of options might be successful.
In the end, beyond these eﬀorts at elucidating the types and qualities of instruction that are
most conducive to supporting L2 development, it is clear from interlanguage ﬁndings accu-
mulated over half a century that with the aid of formal instruction of some kind the develop-
ing L2 repertoire can go further, and does so faster, than when L2 users are left to their own
devices (Ortega 2009).
Looking into the future
Some research trends, already initiated by SLA scholars in recent years, hold particular pro-
mise for the future. First, more SLA researchers are becoming interested in not only the areas
of language traditionally investigated the most (grammar, lexis, and phonology, and to a lesser
extent pragmatics) but also in novel areas such as L2 gestures, conceptual structures, literacy,
discursive practices, and identities (see Jarvis and Pavlenko 2008; Lantolf and Thorne 2006;
Young 2009). Second, we are likely to see more in-depth investigation of the multiple direc-
tions in which all the languages known by an individual interact, for example, as seen in
transfer from the L2 to the ﬁrst language or from the L2 to a third language (Jarvis and
Pavlenko 2008). This trend will hopefully fuel greater recognition by SLA researchers that
crosslinguistic inﬂuences cannot be seen as a monocausal, monodirectional aﬀair involving
privileged knowledge of the mother tongue. Third, more SLA researchers will hopefully
explore the actual empirical consequences of acknowledging that additional language learning
is fundamentally about learning to become a bilingual or a multilingual and, therefore, about
developing multicompetence (Cook 2008), a kind of linguistic competence that is not iso-
morphic with the competence of a monolingual user. Finally, we are likely to see an expansion
of the learner populations studied by SLA researchers, a trend that has already begun, with
some researchers representing a variety of theoretical standpoints currently investigating addi-
tional language acquisition by younger children (e.g. Haznedar and Gavruseva 2008), heritage
learners (e.g. Montrul 2010; Valdés 2005), and youth with low alphabetic print literacy (e.g.
Tarone et al. 2009).
We can expect that much SLA research will continue to engage with the details of how
language competencies are acquired and how language development proceeds, and for this
researchers will continue to employ quantitative tools and language analytical techniques that
are typically employed in linguistically and psycholinguistically oriented studies of BFLA and
FLA as well. A particularly fruitful area for growth in this regard will be the compilation and
analysis of learner corpora (e.g. Granger 2009). Assuming that increasingly more SLA
researchers will be able to secure training in the methodologies of the cognitive sciences, we
Lourdes Ortega
180

may see a burgeoning of SLA studies that probe knowledge of how the brain works as it
processes and acquires language by employing methods such as millisecond-sensitive beha-
vioural measures involving reaction times and eye tracking, brain imaging techniques (e.g.
functional magnetic resonance imaging and event related potentials), and computational
modelling. Particularly important will also be to develop expertise in new graphic and
stochastic-quantitative analyses that have been oﬀered by dynamic systems and complexity
theories aﬃliated with the usage-based, emergentist family of SLA theories (Larsen-Freeman
and Cameron 2008; Verspoor et al. 2011).
On the other hand, given the great expansion of the theoretical landscape that has been
brought about by the social turn, other methodologies drawn from qualitative and mixed
methods repertoires are likely to become particularly useful for the investigation of SLA pro-
blems that are conceptualized as social. Thus, for instance, case study research (Duﬀ2008),
has been a methodology fruitfully employed from the beginning of the ﬁeld and might again
become a preferred choice for SLA researchers in the future. Other qualitative methodological
options that are likely to be vigorously used in the future include the microgenetic method
employed in Vygotskian SLA, the speciﬁc methodologies developed for conversation analysis,
and critical ethnographic and critical discourse methodologies tapped by identity theorists and
language socialization scholars.
Conclusion
The ﬁeld of SLA investigates the acquisition of an additional language after the ﬁrst language
or languages have been already learned in life. As such, it seeks to explain human language
development by older children, adolescents, and adults across a wide variety of naturalistic,
instructed, and mixed contexts. With a history extending over half a century that has been
marked by strong inﬂuences from language teaching, psychology, and monolingual ﬁrst lan-
guage acquisition, SLA continues to be a most porous and interdisciplinary ﬁeld. Today, it
harbours a notable diversity of epistemological approaches. Four theoretical approaches
showed tremendous vitality by the close of the twentieth century: cognitive-interactionist,
formal linguistic, Vygotskian sociocultural, and usage-based emergentist SLA. SLA in the
twenty-ﬁrst century exhibits novel intellectual inﬂuences spurred by the social turn and by new
interdisciplinary connections with bilingualism, psycholinguistics, education, anthropology,
and sociology. These newer inﬂuences have led to the crafting of SLA theories that oﬀer a
social re-speciﬁcation of many SLA interests.
By deﬁnition, factors that are speciﬁc to SLA inquiry and of central importance in under-
standing L2 acquisition include the varying age at which the additional language begins to be
learned and used; the inﬂuence exerted by knowledge of previous languages, including the lan-
guage or languages previously acquired from birth and other previously learned additional
languages; and the possible contributions of formal instruction of various kinds recruited in
support of L2 learning. Other factors of equal central importance are common to the study of
any kind of human language development, notably the relative contributions of environment
and cognition to the processes of acquisition and the psychological and social sources of the
large individual variability observed in additional language learning. Although a shared inter-
est with ﬁelds that focus on any kind of language acquisition, the investigation of environment,
cognition, and individual variability presents unique challenges for SLA researchers. By the
time (younger and especially older) people begin acquiring an additional language, they
already know a lot about language, about the world, and about themselves; knowing so much
both confers advantages and complicates things. Furthermore, life is likely to take each
Second language acquisition
181

adolescent or adult along multifarious and divergent paths, where the make-up of languages
they are exposed to, the educational structures within which they might obtain instruction in
and about those languages, and the things they want to (or have to) do with them are radically
heterogeneous and variable. These variations in surrounding linguistic, educational, social, and
agentive aﬀordances are at the heart of the challenges SLA researchers must contend with as
they describe and explain additional language learning.
Related topics
generative grammar; identity; language emergence; language learning and language education;
language socialization; multilingualism; sociocultural theory; systemic functional linguistics
Further reading
de Bot, K., Lowie, W. and Verspoor, M. (2005) Second Language Acquisition: An Advanced
Resource Book, London: Routledge. (An accessible overview of SLA from a dynamic systems
perspective.)
Doughty, C. J. and Long, M. H. (eds) (2003) The Handbook of Second Language Acquisition,
Malden, MA: Wiley-Blackwell. (An advanced resource with chapters by experts on most central
SLA topics.)
Ellis, R. (2008) The Study of Second Language Acquisition, 2nd edn, Oxford: Oxford University
Press. (An encyclopedic and comprehensive survey of the ﬁeld.)
Herschensohn, J. (2007) Language Development and Age, New York: Cambridge University Press.
(An original treatment of the topic of age from a formal linguistic SLA perspective.)
Ortega,
L.
(2009)
Understanding
Second
Language
Acquisition,
London:
Hodder
Arnold.
(A research-oriented but accessible introduction to SLA.)
References
Abrahamsson, N. and Hyltenstam, K. (2009) ‘Age of L2 acquisition and degree of nativelikeness:
listener perception versus linguistic scrutiny’, Language Learning 59: 249–306.
Bley-Vroman, R. (2009) ‘The evolving context of the fundamental diﬀerence hypothesis’, Studies in
Second Language Acquisition 31: 175–98
Block, D. (2003) The Social Turn in Second Language Acquisition, Washington, DC: Georgetown
University Press.
Bohannon, J. N. I. and Bonvillian, J. D. (2009) ‘Theoretical approaches to language development’,
in J. B. Gleason and N. B. Ratner (eds) The Development of Language, Boston: Allyn and Bacon.
Brouwer, C. E. and Wagner, J. (2004) ‘Developmental issues in second language conversation’,
Journal of Applied Linguistics 1(1): 29–47.
Brown, R. (1973) A First Language: The Early Stages, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Clark, E. V. (2003) First Language Acquisition, New York: Cambridge University Press.
Cook, V. (2008) ‘Multi-competence: black hole or wormhole for second language acquisition
research?’, in Z. Han (ed.) Understanding Second Language Process, Clevedon: Multilingual
Matters.
Corder, S. P. (1967) ‘The signiﬁcance of learners’ errors’, International Review of Applied Linguistics
5: 161–70.
De Houwer, A. (2009) Bilingual First Language Acquisition, Bristol: Multilingual Matters.
Donato, R. (1994) ‘Collective scaﬀolding in second language learning’, in J. P. Lantolf and
G. Appel (eds) Vygotskian Perspectives to Second Language Research, Norwood, NJ: Ablex.
Dörnyei, Z. (2005) The Psychology of the Language Learner: Individual Diﬀerences in Second
Language Acquisition, Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
——(2010) ‘The relationship between language aptitude and language learning motivation: indivi-
dual diﬀerences from a dynamic systems perspective’, in E. Macaro (ed.) Continuum Companion
to Second Language Acquisition, London: Continuum.
Lourdes Ortega
182

Duﬀ, P. A. (2008) Case Study Research in Applied Linguistics, New York: Routledge.
Ellis, N. C. (1996) ‘Sequencing in SLA: phonological memory, chunking, and points of order’,
Studies in Second Language Acquisition 18(1): 91–126.
Ellis, N. C. and Ferreira-Junior, F. (2009) ‘Construction learning as a function of frequency, fre-
quency distribution, and function’, Modern Language Journal 93: 370–85.
Ellis, R. (2005) ‘Principles of instructed language learning’, System 33: 209–24.
Ellis, R. and Sheen, Y. (2006) ‘Re-examining the role of recasts in second language acquisition’,
Studies in Second Language Acquisition 28: 575–600.
Firth, A. and Wagner, J. (1997) ‘On discourse, communication, and (some) fundamental concepts in
SLA research’, The Modern Language Journal 81: 285–300.
Flege, J. E. (1999) ‘Age of learning and second-language speech’, in D. P. Birdsong (ed.) Second
Language Acquisition and the Critical Period Hypothesis, Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Granger, S. (2009) ‘The contribution of learner corpora to second language acquisition and foreign
language teaching: a critical evaluation’, in K. Aijmer (ed.) Corpora and Language Teaching,
Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Gregg, K. (1984) ‘Krashen’s monitor and Occam’s razor’, Applied Linguistics 5: 79–100.
Hakuta, K. (2001) ‘A critical period for second language acquisition?’, in D. B. J. Bailey, J. T. Bruer,
F. J. Symons and J. W. Lichtman (eds) Critical Thinking About Critical Periods, Baltimore, MD:
Paul Brookes Publishing.
Hawkins, R. (2001) Second Language Syntax: A Generative Introduction, Malden, MA: Blackwell.
Haznedar, B. and Gavruseva, E. (eds) (2008) Current Trends in Child Second Language Acquisition:
A Generative Perspective, Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Hellermann, J. (2008) Social Actions for Classroom Language Learning, Clevedon: Multilingual
Matters.
Jarvis, S. and Pavlenko, A. (2008) Crosslinguistic Inﬂuence in Language and Cognition, Mahwah,
NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Kinginger, C. (2004) ‘Alice doesn’t live here anymore: foreign language learning and identity
reconstruction’, in A. Pavlenko and A. Blackledge (eds) Negotiation of Identities in Multilingual
Contexts, Clevedon: Multilingual Matters.
Krashen, S. D. (1985) The Input Hypothesis: Issues and Implications, London: Longman.
Lantolf, J. P. (ed.) (1994) ‘Sociocultural Theory and Second Language Learning’, special issue,
Modern Language Journal 78(4).
Lantolf, J. P. and Thorne, S. L. (2006) Sociocultural Theory and the Genesis of Second Language
Development, New York: Oxford University Press.
Larsen-Freeman, D. (1997) ‘Chaos/complexity science and second language acquisition’, Applied
Linguistics 18: 141–65.
Larsen-Freeman, D. and Cameron, L. (2008) Complex Systems in Applied Linguistics, New York:
Oxford University Press.
Larsen-Freeman, D. and Long, M. H. (1991) An Introduction to Second Language Acquisition
Research, New York: Longman.
Lightbown, P. M. and Spada, N. (2006) How Languages are Learned, 3rd edn, Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Long, M. H. (1996) ‘The role of the linguistic environment in second language acquisition’, in
W. C. Ritchie and T. K. Bhatia (eds) Handbook of Second Language Acquisition, New York:
Academic Press.
Long, M. H. and Doughty, C. J. (eds) (2009) Handbook of Second and Foreign Language Teaching,
Malden, MA: Wiley-Blackwell.
McKay, S. L. and Wong, S.-L. C. (1996) ‘Multiple discourses, multiple identities: investment and
agency in second-language learning among Chinese adolescent immigrant students’, Harvard
Educational Review 66: 577–608.
McLaughlin, B. (1987) Theories of Second Language Learning, London: Edward Arnold.
Montrul, S. A. (2010) ‘How similar are adult second language learners and Spanish heritage
speakers? Spanish clitics and word order’, Applied Psycholinguistics 31: 167–207.
Muñoz, C. (2008) ‘Symmetries and asymmetries of age eﬀects in naturalistic and instructed L2
learning’, Applied Linguistics 29: 578–96.
Norris, J. M. and Ortega, L. (2000) ‘Eﬀectiveness of L2 instruction: a research synthesis and
quantitative meta-analysis’, Language Learning 50: 417–528.
Second language acquisition
183

Norton, B. and Toohey, K. (2001) ‘Changing perspectives on good language learners’, TESOL
Quarterly 35: 307–22.
Norton Peirce, B. (1995) ‘Social identity, investment, and language learning’, TESOL Quarterly
29(1): 9–31.
Ortega, L. (2009) ‘Sequences and processes in language learning’, in M. H. Long and C. J. Doughty
(eds) Handbook of Second and Foreign Language Teaching, Malden, MA: Wiley-Blackwell.
Pavlenko, A. and Lantolf, J. P. (2000) ‘Second language learning as participation and the (re)con-
struction of selves’, in J. P. Lantolf (ed.) Sociocultural Theory and Second Language Learning,
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Pujolar, J. (2010) ‘Immigration and language education in Catalonia: between national and social
agendas’, Linguistics and Education 21: 229–43, doi:10.1016/j.linged.2009.10.004.
Schmidt, R. (1995) ‘Consciousness and foreign language learning: a tutorial on the role of attention
and awareness in learning’, in R. Schmidt (ed.) Attention and Awareness in Foreign Language
Learning, Honolulu, HI: National Foreign Language Resource Center.
Selinker, L. (1972). ‘Interlanguage’, International Review of Applied Linguistics 10: 219–31.
Tarone, E. (1988) Variation in Interlanguage, London: Edward Arnold.
Tarone, E., Bigelow, M. and Hansen, K. (2009) Literacy and Second Language Oracy, Oxford:
Oxford University Press.
Valdés, G. (2005) ‘Bilingualism, heritage language learners, and SLA research: opportunities lost or
seized?’, Modern Language Journal 89: 410–26.
Verspoor, M., de Bot, K. and Lowie, W. (eds) (2011) A Dynamic Approach to Second Language
Development: Methods and Techniques, Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Verspoor, M., Lowie, W. and van Dijk, M. (2008) ‘Variability in second language development from
a dynamic systems perspective’, Modern Language Journal 92: 214–31.
White, L. (1989) Universal Grammar and Second Language Acquisition, Philadelphia, PA: John
Benjamins.
Young, R. (2009) Discursive Practice in Language Learning and Teaching, Malden, MA: Wiley-
Blackwell.
Lourdes Ortega
184

13
Language teaching methodology
Scott Thornbury
Introduction
The choice as to the best, or the most appropriate, or the most eﬀective, way of teaching a
language is ‘a clear and classic applied linguistic problem’ (Cook 2003: 38), with important
implications not just for classroom teaching, but for materials and curriculum design, for tea-
cher education, and for educational policy-making in general. The way that teachers address
this problem in their classroom teaching constitutes their methodology:
Methodology can be characterized as the activities, tasks, and learning experiences selec-
ted by the teacher in order to achieve learning, and how they are used within the teaching/
learning process.
(Richards 1990: 11)
Methodology, then is the how of teaching. But also implicated are the what, the why and the
who. That is, teachers’ choices of activities, tasks, and learning experiences will be inﬂuenced
by their (implicit or explicit) theories of language and of learning, as well as by their assess-
ment of the requirements, learning styles and abilities of their learners. These choices in turn
may be constrained by the curricular demands of their institution, such as its syllabus and
learning objectives, by the teaching materials and technologies available, by the backwash
eﬀect of any tests or examinations that the students may be expected to take, by the local
educational culture, and by the teachers’ own training and experience.
More often than not, the methodological choices will themselves be pre-speciﬁed, and
enshrined in the form of a method. ‘A language teaching method is a single set of procedures
which teachers are to follow in the classroom. Methods are usually based on a set of beliefs
about the nature of language and learning’ (Nunan 2003: 5, emphasis added). Likewise,
Kumaravadivelu (2006) uses method ‘to refer to established methods conceptualised and con-
structed by experts in the ﬁeld’, and methodology ‘to refer to what practicing teachers actually
do in the classroom in order to achieve their stated or unstated teaching objectives’ (2006: 84).
Even so, in order to achieve their stated objectives, teachers may still select a method ‘oﬀthe
shelf’ as it were, thereby blurring the distinction between what experts have conceptualized,
185

and what the teacher actually does. This is especially the case where the materials that are used
themselves instantiate a speciﬁc method. Hence, the distinction between methodology and
method is not always clear-cut, and any discussion of methodology must take into account the
notion of method, and the way that this notion has been represented in the literature. In
tracking these representations, it is useful to think of the history of methodology less as a
history of individual methods than as the recycling of a relatively small set of ‘big ideas’. In
what follows, both the methods and their underlying principles will be reviewed, with special
reference to the teaching of English. Developments in the teaching of other languages have
generally followed a parallel track.
Methods: a brief history
Reformers
The history of methodology is typically construed as both evolutionary and revolutionary: a
process of gradual development and improvement, marked by occasional radical upheavals as
existing orthodoxies are discredited and supplanted. Two such radical departures were the late
nineteenth-century Reform Movement and the Communicative Approach, nearly a century
later. Both developments represented a reaction away from a status quo perceived as being out
of touch with learners’ needs, and out of synch with educational reality. The dominant educa-
tional paradigm that the Reform Movement challenged was grammar-translation, an approach
to modern language teaching that was modelled entirely on the teaching of the classics, and
whose deﬁning procedures were explicit rule statements and translation of written sentences.
There could be no greater contrast than Palmer’s (1921) statement of the basic principles of his
‘Oral Method’ – a precursor of the Direct Method – deﬁned as
learning to use a foreign language … almost entirely without reading, with little or no
writing, without studying a systematized and formal theory of the language-structure, and
without any unnecessary recourse to the mother-tongue as a vehicle for instruction.
(Palmer 1921: 12)
Direct method classes typically revolved around extended teacher-led question-and-answer
sequences (called conversations) that provided a context for new language items. The use of
pictures and actions further reinforced the development of associations between referents and
their linguistic realizations, unmediated by translation. In seeking to apply principles of psy-
chology, such as habit formation, to language teaching, while at the same time devising ped-
agogically appropriate descriptions of language, Palmer and his forbears – most notably Sweet
(1899) and Jespersen (1904) – preﬁgured the advent of applied linguistics as a recognized
discipline.
Structuralists
In fact, the ﬁrst use of the term ‘applied linguistics’ in relation to methodology is attributed to
Charles Fries in the 1940s. The linguistics that Fries applied were structuralist (e.g. Fries 1952)
and provided the ingredient that had been missing from earlier direct method courses: a sys-
tematic (hence gradable) description of sentence structures (or patterns). But otherwise, the
methodology underlying what came to be known as audiolingualism was not very diﬀerent
from Palmer’s, relying as it did on the induction of rules from examples, and on mimicry and
Scott Thornbury
186

memorization. The fundamental principle underlying the methodology continued to be habit-
formation, realized by means of a range of diﬀerent types of pattern-practice drills. It was only
in the 1960s that the behavioural psychology of Skinner (1957) was enlisted to vindicate such
practices, as well as to underpin research into programmed learning and the use of such
technological innovations as the language laboratory.
The eﬀect on methodology of Chomsky’s theory of generative grammar (1957; 1965) was
perhaps less revolutionary, and less the death-blow to audiolingualism, than is sometimes
claimed. For a start, by the 1960s audiolingualism was already losing adherents, not least
because of its failure to deliver (Rivers 1964). The focus on sentence-patterns at the expense of
connected text, and on imitation at the expense of creativity, were seen as serious impediments
to second language ﬂuency. Also, the belief that learners’ errors are caused mainly by mother
tongue interference, and can be predicted through contrastive analysis, was yielding to the
view that errors may in fact be developmental, and evidence of systematic hypothesis testing
(Corder 1967; Selinker 1972). One (relatively short-lived) response to these developments,
known as cognitive code learning (Carroll 1966), promoted a more intellectual, problem-solving
approach, the chief legacies of which have been a greater tolerance for error, and an accep-
tance of the value of explicit rules of grammar. But, in the end, while relaxing the proscription
on talking about grammar, Chomsky’s transformational grammar had little eﬀect on teaching.
As Brumﬁt and Johnson commented, ‘After all, the most it can oﬀer is alternative strategies
for teaching grammar – new ways of teaching the same thing’ (1979: 3).
Natural and humanist approaches
Of greater impact than his linguistics, arguably, was Chomsky’s claim that ‘language acquisi-
tion is based on the child’s discovery of what from a formal point of view is a deep and
abstract theory – a generative grammar of his language’ (1965: 58). The assumption that this
deep and abstract theory could be triggered into life simply by exposure to the target language
underlay what have been termed comprehension approaches (Winitz 1981). Both the natural
approach (Krashen and Terrell 1983) and total physical response (Asher 1977) assume that
language acquisition follows a predetermined path, and that, given the right conditions, this
‘natural’ route can be reactivated for second language acquisition. These conditions include
the provision of comprehensible input (Krashen 1981) during a ‘silent period’ and in a state of
low anxiety. Both approaches enlist direct method-type procedures, such as actions and pic-
tures, in order to ensure comprehensibility of input; at the production stage error correction is
avoided, in the interests of encouraging meaningful communication.
The emphasis on positive aﬀective factors and their facilitative role in learning derives from
another psychological tradition that achieved prominence in the 1960s and 1970s: the huma-
nist psychology associated principally with the work of Carl Rogers (1969) and Abraham
Maslow (1968), and promoted through the writings of Moscowitz (1978) and Stevick (1980).
Humanistic education prioritizes personal growth and self-realization, goals which are achieved
when learners are invested aﬀectively as well as intellectually in the learning process. A number
of language teaching methods that prioritized such principles emerged in close succession in
the decades that followed the demise of audiolingualism. These included the silent way (Gat-
tegno 1972), community language learning (Curran 1976) and suggestopedia (Lozanov 1978).
While the methods themselves never became mainstream, humanistic principles have permeated
more orthodox practices, in the form, for example, of an emphasis on learner-centredness and
self-directed learning, a philosophy that, in turn, nourished the learner autonomy movement of
the 1980s and 1990s (Holec 1980). More recently, the humanistic tradition has absorbed
Language teaching methodology
187

certain ‘new age’ training approaches, such as neuro-linguistic programming (NLP), and the
theory of multiple intelligences (Gardner 1983).
The functional tradition
Running in parallel to these developments, the diﬀerent strands that were to intertwine and
combine to give rise to the communicative approach were gathering strength. The use of
situations to contextualize the structural patterns described by Fries and (on the other side of
the Atlantic) by Hornby (1954), became a distinctive feature of classroom materials in Britain
in the mid-twentieth century. As well as providing a stimulus for elicitation, the use of situa-
tions to contextualize grammar items obviated the need for explanation or translation. Situa-
tional presentations, incorporated into the PPP model of lesson design (Byrne 1976), in which
new patterns are ﬁrst presented, then practised at degrees of decreasing control, before free
production is allowed, came to be known as situational language teaching and proved
remarkably enduring.
The arguments underlying the use of situations date back to the anthropological tradition in
linguistics that underpinned the work of J. R. Firth, whose emphasis on context, meaning, and
use was in sharp distinction to structuralism. Further developed by Firth’s followers, this
functionalist paradigm gathered strength, especially in Britain and Europe, and was reinforced
by the speech act theory of Austin (1962), the sociolinguistics of Labov (1972), Halliday’s
functional grammar (1973), and Wilkins’ notional syllabus (1976), eﬀecting a major revision in
learning goals and in methodology, and culminating in what came to be known as the com-
municative approach. Put simply, there was a marked shift away from a concern for what lan-
guage is (and the way it is represented in the mind) to a concern for what language does (and
the way it operates in the world).
The ‘big idea’ that fuelled the communicative approach, and which gave it its name, was
Hymes’ (1972) notion of communicative competence – the knowledge ‘when to speak, when
not, and as to what to talk about with whom, when, where, in what manner’ (1972: 277). By
redeﬁning the scope of language learning in terms more extensive than Chomsky’s restricted
notion of linguistic competence, Hymes (and subsequently Canale and Swain [1980]) promp-
ted a major re-evaluation of curriculum objectives, so as to include sociolinguistic and strate-
gic, as well as grammatical, goals. Concurrently, the growing demand both for English for
Speciﬁc Purposes (ESP) and for English as a Second Language (ESL) was encouraging course
designers to specify learning objectives – and to assess their achievement – in terms of lan-
guage use, rather than usage (Widdowson 1978). Accordingly, syllabuses were reconﬁgured to
include communicative functions and semantic notions rather than (or alongside) grammatical
structures, and the terms skills and strategies surfaced repeatedly in the literature.
Communicative methodology
This redeﬁnition of goals had a knock-on eﬀect in terms of methodology: the focus on com-
municating messages – as opposed to rehearsing structural patterns – created the need for
activities that encouraged some kind of meaningful exchange, as in information-gap tasks, and,
in order to practise functional language, role plays and simulations became standard practice.
And since communicative competence implies the capacity to communicate one’s meanings
irrespective of formal accuracy, ﬂuency was prioritized, reinforcing the trend towards incor-
porating less-controlled production activities within the PPP format. For similar reasons, the
use of authentic reading and listening materials was promoted, and classroom procedures for
Scott Thornbury
188

minimizing the diﬃculties of these – such as the use of skimming and scanning strategies –
became commonplace. The ﬁrst mainstream coursebook to embody these principles was the
‘Strategies’ series (e.g. Abbs et al. 1975).
More radically, some scholars, such as Allwright, were arguing that, ‘if communication is
THE aim, then it should be THE major element in the process’ (1979: 167, emphasis in ori-
ginal). A much-cited attempt to implement this ‘strong form’ of CLT was the Communica-
tional Teaching Project, better known as the Bangalore Project (Prabhu 1987), whose syllabus
consisted entirely of a succession of tasks, and was the forerunner of what became known as
the task-based approach, or task-based language teaching (TBLT). Various versions of TBLT
have been proposed (e.g. Willis 1996; Ellis 2003), with greater or lesser degrees of explicit
language focus, but all subscribe to the basic principle of ‘learning by doing’, a principle that
also underpins the whole language movement in North America (Freeman and Freeman 1992).
Nevertheless, task-based learning, while attracting considerable theoretical interest, has not
been widely adopted, partly due to the perception that it requires sophisticated classroom
management skills as well as a high degree of target language proﬁciency on the part of the
teacher (Ellis 2003).
Moreover, the selection and grading of syllabus objectives that are semantic and procedural,
rather than structural, has proved a challenge to course designers. EFL contexts are typically
too heterogeneous to provide accurate predictions of learners’ communicative needs. Attempts
to base syllabuses on word frequency data, now more readily available thanks to developments
in corpus linguistics, were short-lived (Willis and Willis 1988). A lexical focus was also urged
by Lewis (1993), who argued that the distinction between vocabulary and grammar was an
artiﬁcial one. Despite being promoted as an ‘approach’, Lewis’s recommendations were absorbed
into mainstream courses mainly in the form of a greater emphasis on lexical ‘chunks’ and
formulaic language.
A creative compromise was to interweave several strands – grammatical, lexical, and functional –
into one integrated course design (e.g. Swan and Walter 1984), thereby oﬀering a more com-
prehensive blueprint for communicative competence. Even so, the problem of how to grade
semantic categories, compared to the relative ease with which structures can be graded, meant that
multilayered syllabuses of this type tended to privilege form over function as the main orga-
nizational criterion. By 1986, with the publication of (the notionally communicative) Headway
Intermediate (Soars and Soars), the grammatical syllabus had all but reasserted itself. In a
sense, a focus on grammar within a communicative framework had already been sanctioned in
Littlewood’s (1981) model of lesson design, which proposed a sequence of activities from pre-
communicative to communicative, with ‘structural activities’ included in the former. Eﬀectively,
this was the old PPP model by another name. It seemed that not a lot had changed since the
situational courses of the 1970s, the main diﬀerences being the greater use of authentic
(or ‘semi-authentic’) texts, more skills work generally, and a greater range of production activities,
including role plays and information-gap tasks, in which meaning is ‘negotiated’ (Long 1983).
Communicative learning theory
One reason for such caution may have been the fact that the communicative approach had
been fuelled by developments at the level of language description, but there had been no
concomitant developments in learning theory (apart, perhaps, from Krashen’s (1985) Input
Hypothesis) and hence no real stimulus to rethink methodology. At most, there was an
underlying assumption that using language in meaningful and communicative ways would
better prepare learners for authentic language use outside the classroom.
Language teaching methodology
189

One theoretical model that arrived in time to ﬁll the gap took the form of cognitive learning
theory. Anderson’s ACT theory (1983) of skills acquisition, for example, vindicated the use of
communicative activities as a means by which declarative knowledge is proceduralized
through successive stages of practice (Johnson 1996). Information-processing models made a
similar distinction between controlled and automatic processes (McLaughlin 1987) and helped
suggest ways that task variables could be calibrated for diﬀerent outcomes, such as accuracy,
ﬂuency and complexity (Skehan 1998). More recently, constructivist and sociocultural learning
theories, aligned with the work of Bruner and Vygotsky, respectively, have provided a socially
grounded rationale for the use of interactive and collaborative pair- and groupwork tasks, in
which learning is jointly constructed, and progresses through stages of ‘other-regulation’ to
‘self-regulation’ (van Lier 1996; Lantolf 2000; see also Thorne and Tasker, this volume).
A logical development of the ‘deep-end’, task-based paradigm has been to blend, or to
merge, language teaching with content teaching. A forerunner of this integrated approach was
the immersion model practised in Canada from the 1960s, in which school subjects were
taught entirely in French to students whose home language was English. Subsequently, a
whole spectrum of diﬀerent content-plus-language models has emerged, diﬀerentiated by the
degree to which they incorporate explicit language instruction, and the extent to which they
are integrated into the curriculum. These include content-based instruction and what is now
generally know in Europe as CLIL (content and language integrated learning). In CLIL classes,
curricular subjects and language are taught in conjunction, with attention being allocated to
either content or language as demanded. Graddol identiﬁes CLIL as being ‘a signiﬁcant cur-
riculum trend in Europe’ (2006: 86) but adds that ‘CLIL is diﬃcult to implement unless the
subject teachers are themselves bilingual’ (ibid.). Nevertheless, CLIL may represent the true
descendant of the ‘strong’ version of the communicative approach.
Meanwhile, the ‘weak’ form of the communicative approach (which is essentially a more
evolved form of situational language teaching) is generally considered to be the dominant
methodological paradigm. Richards and Rodgers note that ‘the general principles of Com-
municative Language Teaching are today widely accepted around the world’ (2001: 151), while
for Harmer, ‘the Communicative approach has left an indelible mark on teaching and learn-
ing’ (2007: 71). Shortly, we will examine the nature of that indelible mark. But ﬁrst of all some
caveats.
Methods: the issues and options
Beyond the ‘methods narrative’
The foregoing historical outline obscures two important facts. The ﬁrst: changes in metho-
dology have not happened uniformly nor in unison. For long periods of time diﬀerent methods
functioned in parallel, and still do. As Larsen-Freeman notes: ‘In some parts of the world,
certain older language teaching methods, such as the Grammar-Translation Method, have
endured for years. Similarly, the Direct Method has been preserved in particular commercial
language teaching enterprises, such as the Berlitz Schools’ (2000: 177). By the same token,
features of diﬀerent methods have often been combined to create methodological blends and
fusions, an eclectic strategy that is probably more widespread than is acknowledged, and as
such serves to blur the distinctions between one method and another. As Corder observed,
some time back, ‘The development of language-teaching methods … has in fact been empiri-
cal rather than theory-directed. [ … ] The fact seems to be that teachers have “followed their
noses” and adopted a generally eclectic approach to teaching methods’ (1973: 135–6).
Scott Thornbury
190

The second point to note is that, as Kelly long ago demonstrated, the history of methods
might more accurately be characterized, not as a linear progression, but as cyclical: ‘Old
approaches return, but as their social and intellectual context are changed, they seem
entirely new’ (1969: 396). Likewise, Pennycook (1989), in a critique of the ‘method construct’,
notes that
while it is clear that language teaching has undergone many transformations over the
centuries, a thorough examination of the past suggests that these changes have represented
diﬀerent conﬁgurations of the same basic options rather than some linear, additive pro-
gress towards the present day, and that these changes are due principally to shifts in the
social, cultural, political, and philosophical climate.
(Pennycook 1989: 608)
What, then, are these ‘basic options’, and in what ways might they be diﬀerently conﬁgured?
Before attempting to answer this question, it is important to distinguish between at least two
‘levels’ of options. In his landmark historical study, Kelly (1969) argued that methodological
choices are contingent on higher-level decisions at the level of principles and beliefs: ‘Matter,
methods, and media relate ultimately to the provenance of ideas’ (1969: 3). According to this
view, a method is one of a set of possible practical implementations of choices made at the
level of ideology.
Beliefs and practices as dimensions of method
A similar two-tier constructional principle underlies more recent explorations in method ana-
lysis, such as Richards and Rodgers (2001), who observe that ‘in describing methods, the dif-
ference between a philosophy of language teaching at the level of theory and principles, and a
set of derived procedures for teaching a language, is central’ (2001: 19). Accordingly, their
model for method analysis incorporates both the approach, ‘the level at which assumptions
and beliefs about language and language learning are speciﬁed’ (ibid.), and the actual class-
room procedures by means of which the approach is implemented. A third strand, the design,
roughly parallels Kelly’s category of matter, where decisions about syllabus and materials are
instantiated.
More recently, Richards and Schmidt have identiﬁed the following broad areas, beliefs
about which, they argue, serve to distinguish methods:
(a)
the nature of language
(b)
the nature of second language learning
(c)
goals and objectives in teaching
(d)
the type of syllabus to use
(e)
the role of teachers, learners, instructional materials
(f)
the activities, techniques and procedures to use.
(Richards and Schmidt 2002: 330)
The historical account we have sketched demonstrates how these choices are conﬁgured dif-
ferently for diﬀerent methods, according to where each method positions itself in relation to a
number of key parameters, or dimensions. The notion of dimensions draws on the work of
Stern (1983, 1992), who in turn built on earlier work in the area of ‘methodics’ (Halliday et al.
1964; Mackey 1965), including the method feature analysis undertaken by Krashen and
Language teaching methodology
191

Seliger (1975). Stern identiﬁed three ‘central issues of language learning’ (1983: 400), from
which he derived three dimensions, each representing a continuum of strategic and procedural
choices. These he labelled the intralingual-crosslingual dimension, the analytic-experiential
dimension, and the explicit-implicit dimension. Expanding on these options so as to be able to
map them on to the six domains identiﬁed by Richards and Schmidt (2002, above), and
updating them in the light of recent educational, theoretical and ideological developments, we
ﬁnd at least ten dimensions to the concept of method:
The nature of language

the formal vs functional dimension: the method construes language as a structural system,
internalized as formal operations or rules, vs the method construes language as ‘meaning
potential’, internalized as a system of semantic choices.
The nature of second language learning

the analytic vs experiential dimension: the method prioritizes formal instruction and inten-
tional learning, vs the method seeks to replicate naturalistic, informal, experiential, or
incidental learning processes.
Goals and objectives in teaching

the product vs process dimension: the method focuses on the teaching and assessing of pre-
specified linguistic goals, vs the method aims at developing and assessing the learner’s
capability for language learning and use.

the accuracy, vs fluency dimension: the method aims at achieving formal accuracy, parti-
cularly of grammar, vs the method aims at achieving communicative fluency, particularly at
the level of discourse.
The type of syllabus to use

the systems vs skills dimension: the syllabus is organized according to linguistic criteria (e.g.
grammar, phonology), vs the syllabus foregrounds language skills or competences.

the segregated vs integrated dimension: the target language is taught apart from other subjects
in the curriculum, vs the target language is integrated into other curricular content.
The role of teachers, learners, instructional materials

the cognitive vs affective dimension: the method prioritizes mental effort and cognitive
processing, vs the method prioritizes affective and holistic engagement.

the transmissive vs dialogic dimension: teaching is viewed as the transmission of discrete units
of knowledge, vs teaching is viewed as an interactive process in which knowledge is colla-
boratively constructed.
The activities, techniques and procedures to use

the deductive vs inductive dimension: the method favours the explicit presentation of rules
(e.g. of grammar), vs the method expects or invites learners to discover the rules for
themselves.

the cross-lingual vs intralingual dimension: the method acknowledges and exploits the learner’s
L1, vs the method rejects or discourages a role for the L1.
Scott Thornbury
192

The ﬁrst thing to note is that there is considerable correlation across these dimensions.
For example, a method that adopts a functional view of language is likely to articulate its
goals in terms of communicative ﬂuency. Likewise, an analytic approach to language learning
is likely to be realized in a transmissive teaching style. Thus, grammar-translation might be
described as being heavily weighted towards the ‘left-hand’ end of each dimension: it assumes
a formal view of language, and promotes both an analytic learning style and a transmissive
teaching style, where intellectual eﬀort, rather than aﬀective engagement, is encouraged,
and where cross-lingual activities (i.e. translation) are prominent. By contrast, task-based
learning, of the type advocated by Prabhu (1987) occupies points at the other end of the
spectrum.
Methodology: new debates
Beyond methods, towards appropriate methodology
The discussion so far has assumed that the concept of method is unproblematic and that
methods are stable phenomena that can be described and classiﬁed in terms of their distinctive
features. Recent developments in methodology have challenged that assumption. Referring to
what he called ‘the break with the method concept’, Stern (1983) declared that ‘several devel-
opments indicate a shift in language pedagogy away from the single method concept as the
main approach to language teaching’ (1983: 477). One such development was the failure, on
the part of researchers, to ﬁnd any signiﬁcant advantage in one method over another. This was
partly due to diﬃculties in operationalizing the concept of method, but also because of the
complexity of variables involved. And, as has already been noted, the way that methods
are actually implemented in classroom settings suggests that there is as much diversity
within a given method’s application as there is across methods. As Chaudron notes, ‘teachers
of supposedly diﬀerent methodological persuasions in fact acknowledge quite diverse and
overlapping behaviors in classroom practice’ (1988: 8). He adds that comparison studies
‘have rarely involved reliable, controlled observation of the classroom behaviors supposedly
accompanying the methods under investigation’ (ibid.).
Moreover, recognition of the huge range of contextual variables that impact on second
language learning has challenged the notion of a single monolithic method, particularly one
that is generated apart from the context in which it is implemented. This view has given rise to
the notion of appropriate methodology (Holliday 1994), particularly in relation to the design of
large-scale curriculum projects for non-BANA (British, Australian, and North American)
contexts. Holliday warned that
there is a grave danger of teachers and curriculum developers … naively accepting BANA
practice as superior, and boldly carrying what are in fact the ethnocentric norms of par-
ticular professional-academic cultures in English language education from one context to
another, without proper research into the eﬀect of their actions.
(Holliday 1994: 102)
Kramsch and Sullivan (1996) and Canagarajah (1999) show how imported methods are cus-
tomized, and tailored to local conditions – a case not so much of appropriacy as of appro-
priation. And in a much-cited paper in 1990, Prabhu argued that there can be no one method,
but that individual teachers should fashion an approach that accords uniquely with their ‘sense
of plausibility’.
Language teaching methodology
193

Disaﬀection with the method concept has also been fuelled by a general rejection of the
notion that social change and improvement can be eﬀected through the strict application of
scientiﬁc method. The last decades of the last century witnessed a challenge to ‘scientism’ in
the social sciences, a challenge associated with the advent of postmodernism and its rejection
of the idea of universalist, objective knowledge. Allied with the view is that methods are never
disinterested, but serve the dominant power structures in society, leading to ‘a de-skilling of
the role of teachers, and greater institutional control over classroom practice’ (Pennycook
1989: 610). Such a view represents what might be called a ‘critical turn’ in methodology, whose
proponents seek to redress social, cultural and/or linguistic inequalities, and to (re)instate the
learner’s agency and autonomy while, at the same time, wresting power, control, and authority
away from the traditional stakeholders, such as examining bodies, publishers, education min-
istries and universities. To this end, methodology – as instantiated in methods, textbooks,
examinations, oﬃcial dictates, and so on – has been viewed with distrust, if not outright
hostility (see Canagarajah and Ben Said, this volume).
This combination of factors has prompted a number of scholars to announce the ‘death of
method’ (Allwright 1991) and to herald what is known as the postmethod condition (Kumar-
avadivelu 1994). Kumaravadivelu argues that, rather than subscribe to a single set of proce-
dures, postmethod teachers should adapt their approach in accordance with local, contextual
factors, while at the same time being guided by a number of macrostrategies that are ‘derived
from the current theoretical, practical, and experiential knowledge base’ (Kumaravadivelu
2006: 69). Two such macrostrategies, for example, are ‘Maximise learning opportunities’ and
‘Promote learner autonomy’. In a similar spirit, Allwright (2003) proposes an alternative to
method called Exploratory Practice, predicated on the view that teachers can become their
own researchers ‘so that working for understanding is part of the teaching and learning, not
extra to it’ (2003: 127). More recently, the learners themselves have been enlisted as active
partners in this developmental framework (Allwright and Hanks 2009).
Nevertheless, and in spite of the claims of the postmethodists, the notion of method does not
seem to have entirely disappeared. In the on-line advertising for language courses, for example,
the term method occurs frequently, collocating with adjectives such as unique, eﬀective, new
and modern. It seems that – in the public mind, at least – the method concept is alive and well.
This is a view supported by Bell (2007) who interviewed a number of teachers on the subject,
and concluded: ‘Methods, however the term is deﬁned, are not dead. Teachers seem to be
aware of both the usefulness of methods and the need to go beyond them’ (2007: 143).
Some scholars, such as Larsen-Freeman (2000), actively promote the concept of method as
a useful heuristic device in teacher development, on the grounds that ‘methods serve as a foil
for reﬂection that can aid teachers in bringing to conscious awareness the thinking that
underlies their actions’ (2000: ix) and that, moreover, ‘a knowledge of methods is part of the
knowledge base of teaching’ (ibid.)
On the other hand, Akbari (2008) suggests that, in many EFL contexts, the concept of
method has been replaced by the textbook as the primary knowledge base for teaching. This is
perhaps not surprising, given the global marketing of textbooks. As Kumaravadivelu notes,
‘Because of the global spread of English, ELT has become a global industry with high eco-
nomic stakes, and textbook production has become one of the engines that drives the industry’
(2003: 255). And, arguably, one that drives and perpetuates the methodology – a methodology
that has been characterized as being one in which, despite a nominal allegiance to the com-
municative approach, ‘the textbook represents all types of issues and all types of discourse as
not requiring much thought or action beyond the decision as to the appropriate grammatical
structure – everything is reducible to form’ (Grady 1997: 9).
Scott Thornbury
194

A signiﬁcant development in recent years has been the integration of new technologies into
coursebook design and content delivery. Whereas twenty years ago the only accompanying
aids might have been a set of classroom cassettes, nowadays coursebooks have audio CDs and
video DVDs, CD-ROMs, dedicated Websites including downloadable podcasts, interactive
whiteboard software, and test-generating software (although the extent to which teachers are
taking advantage of these resources has yet to be properly evaluated). Moreover, the expo-
nential growth of Web-based facilities such as social networking sites, blogs, wikis, and simu-
lated environments, has fuelled the rapid development of on-line teaching and learning
resources such that the hegemony of print materials is being seriously challenged (see also
Kern, this volume). Inevitably, perhaps, there has been a reaction away from an over-reliance
on materials and technology, and theories of language socialization (e.g. Kramsch 2002) have
been invoked to argue for ‘a pedagogy of bare essentials’ (Meddings and Thornbury 2009).
Research into methodology
The shift away from a preoccupation with methods in favour of a concern for methodology,
and the way that this is realized in actual classroom practice, has opened up new directions in
classroom research, particularly in the area of classroom observation (Allwright 1988; van Lier
1988). If, according to the deﬁnition we started out with, methodology indeed comprises ‘the
activities, tasks, and learning experiences selected by the teacher in order to achieve learning,
and how they are used within the teaching/learning process’ (Richards 1990: 11), then it sug-
gests that a primary research goal might be to identify what these activities, etc., are and to
track the ways that they are used. Attempts to do this have involved both quantitative and
qualitative methods of data collection and analysis.
Interaction analysis, discourse analysis, and conversation analysis are three related meth-
odologies that, in conjunction with classroom observation, have been used as a means of
obtaining objective and quantitative data as to what really goes on in classrooms. In interac-
tion analysis, researchers typically employ a checklist of categories in order to capture and
code observable classroom behaviours, especially the interactions between teachers and lear-
ners, and between the learners themselves. Discourse analysts and conversation analysts share
an interest in ﬁne-grained analyses of classroom talk, the former – following Sinclair and
Coulthard (1975) – ascribing speciﬁc functions to diﬀerent utterances (such as initiation,
response and follow-up), and mapping these on to a hierarchically structured system of ‘ranks’.
Often working in the sociocultural tradition, researchers have looked at the way learners
co-construct learning during the performance of tasks (Bygate et al. 2001; Ellis 2003), and at
how teachers structure and ‘scaﬀold’ teacher-learner talk in order to maximize learning
opportunities (Jarvis and Robinson 1997; McCormick and Donato 2000; see also Tsui, this
volume). In an extended study of classroom talk, Johnson (1995) uses an eclectic methodology
to demonstrate how ‘the patterns of classroom communication depend largely on how teachers
use language to control the structure and content of classroom events’ (1995: 145). Likewise,
Walsh (2006), using a ‘variable approach to investigating L2 classroom interaction’ (2006: 55),
including discourse analysis, identiﬁes four ‘modes’ of classroom interaction, each with its
distinctive discourse features, which provides a framework for self-evaluation and teacher
development.
An ethnographic approach to classroom research ‘attempts to interpret behaviours from the
perspective of the participants’ diﬀerent understandings rather than from the observer’s or
analyst’s supposedly “objective” analysis’ (Chaudron 1988: 14–15). Rather than apply pre-
determined categories to the observation data, the researcher (who may also be a participant)
Language teaching methodology
195

simply describes, and draws connections between, classroom processes, ‘not as these processes
are depicted in methodology texts and position papers, but as they are experienced and
understood by language learners and teachers’ (Bailey and Nunan 1996: xi). As an example,
Toohey (1998) in a longitudinal study, showed how certain classroom practices had a pre-
judicial eﬀect on the few ESL children in a class of mainly Anglophone children. McDonough
and Chaikitmongkol (2007) use a portfolio of research tools, including observations, inter-
views, and learning notebooks, to track teachers’ and learners’ reactions to a task-based EFL
course over a twelve-month period. A more recent development, but one consistent with an
ethnographic approach, is the use of ecological research models (van Lier 2004) which ‘regard
the educational context as a complex, messy system’ (2004: 204). Ecological approaches ‘situ-
ate’ language classrooms in their particular contexts; critical approaches to classroom research
(Pennycook 1994) do the same, but foreground the view that ‘all knowledge production is
situated in a particular social, cultural, and political context’ (1994: 693). Canagarajah (1999),
for example, shows how learners in periphery contexts resist the cultural, political and educational
values enshrined in materials from ‘the centre’.
Summary
This brief survey of research into language teaching methodology demonstrates how much
more complex the situation is than a traditional ‘methods’ view of teaching might suggest.
Classrooms are indeed ‘complex, messy systems’ that resist neat classiﬁcations. Factoring in
the huge range of context variables – centre vs periphery; EFL vs ESL; child vs adult; native-
speaker teacher vs non-native speaker; public vs private sector education; on-line vs face-to-face;
integrated vs segregated curriculum; and so on – produces a situation that would seem to defy
any attempts to deﬁne a set of core principles for language teaching. At the same time, walk-
ing into a language classroom in any part of the world, the visitor will be struck by just how
much is shared across all these diﬀerent contexts. Testimony to this fact is that, more than
ever, teachers from diﬀerent contexts regularly exchange experiences and beliefs about their
teaching in on-line discussion groups or, directly, at conferences. They are trained in the same
or similar methods, use the same or similar textbooks, read the same or similar teachers’
guides, and use the same downloadable resources from the Internet. They also encounter the
same or similar constraints in their local teaching contexts, and work at overcoming
them using similar strategies. Language teaching methodology seeks to identify and describe
these global commonalities while at the same explaining and vindicating diversity at the
local level.
Related topics
classroom discourse; language learning and language education; language teacher education;
technology and language learning
Further reading
Harmer, J. (2007) The Practice of English Language Teaching, 3rd edn, London: Pearson. (This
remains the classic manual for teacher training courses which subscribe to a communicative
approach, and now has an accompanying DVD.)
Kumaravadivelu, B. (2003) Beyond Methods: Macrostrategies for Language Learning, New Haven,
CT: Yale University Press. (The writer lucidly outlines the rationale and design features of a
post-method methodology.)
Scott Thornbury
196

Larsen-Freeman, D. (2000) Techniques and Principles in Language Teaching, 2nd edn, Oxford:
Oxford University Press. (This is a very readable overview of a range of teaching methods with
blow-by-blow descriptions of how they might be implemented in practice.)
Richards, J. and Rodgers, T. (2001) Approaches and Methods in Language Teaching, 2nd edn,
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. (This is an updated version of a core text, describing
methods in terms of their underlying principles as well as their surface practices.)
References
Abbs, B., Ayton, A. and Freebairn, I. (1975) Strategies: Integrated English Language Materials,
London: Longman.
Akbari, R. (2008) ‘Postmethod discourse and practice’, TESOL Quarterly 42: 641–52.
Allwright, D. (2003) ‘Exploratory practice: re-thinking practitioner research in language teaching’,
Language Teaching Research 7(2): 113–41.
——(1991) The Death of Method, Working Paper 10, The Exploratory Practice Centre, University
of Lancaster.
——(1988) Observation in the Language Classroom, London: Longman.
——(1979) ‘Language learning through communication practice’, in C. J. Brumﬁt and K. Johnson
(eds) The Communicative Approach to Language Teaching, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Allwright, D. and Hanks, J. (2009) The Developing Language Learner: An Introduction to Explora-
tory Practice, Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan.
Anderson, J. R. (1983) The Architecture of Cognition, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Asher, J. (1977) Learning Another Language through Actions: The Complete Teacher’s Guide Book,
Los Gatos, CA: Sky Oaks Productions.
Austin, J. L. (1962) How to Do Things with Words, Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Bailey, K. M. and Nunan, D. (eds) (1996) Voices from the Language Classroom, Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Bell, D. M. (2007) ‘Do teachers think that methods are dead?’, ELT Journal 61: 135–43.
Brumﬁt, C. J. and Johnson, K. (1979) ‘The linguistic background’, in C. J. Brumﬁt and K. Johnson
(eds) The Communicative Approach to Language Teaching, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Bygate, M., Skehan, P. and Swain, M. (2001) Researching Pedagogic Tasks: Second Language
Learning, Teaching and Testing, London: Longman.
Byrne, D. (1976) Teaching Oral English, Harlow: Longman.
Canagarajah, A. S. (1999) Resisting Linguistic Imperialism in English Teaching, Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Canale, M. and Swain, M. (1980) ‘Theoretical bases of communicative approaches to second lan-
guage teaching and testing’, Applied Linguistics 1: 1–47.
Carroll, J. B. (1966) ‘The contributions of psychological theory and educational research to the
teaching of foreign languages’, in A. Valdman (ed.) Trends in Language Teaching, New York:
McGraw-Hill.
Chaudron, C. (1988) Second Language Classrooms: Research on Teaching and Learning,
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Chomsky, N. (1965) Aspects of the Theory of Syntax, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
——(1957) Syntactic Structures, The Hague: Mouton.
Cook, G. (2003) Applied Linguistics, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Corder, S. P. (1973) Introducing Applied Linguistics, Harmondsworth: Penguin.
——(1967) ‘The signiﬁcance of learners’ errors’, International Review of Applied Linguistics in
Language Teaching 5: 161–70.
Curran, C. A. C. (1976) Counseling-learning in Second Languages, Apple River, IL: Apple River Press.
Ellis, R. (2003) Task-based Language Learning and Teaching, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Freeman, Y. S. and Freeman, D. E. (1992) Whole Language for Second Language Learners,
Portsmouth, NH: Heinemann.
Fries, C. C. (1952) The Structure of English, New York: Harcourt, Brace and Co.
Gardner, H. (1983) Frames of Mind: The Theory of Multiple Intelligences, New York: Basic Books.
Gattegno, C. (1972) Teaching Foreign Languages in Schools: The Silent Way, 2nd edn, New York:
Educational Solutions.
Language teaching methodology
197

Graddol, D. (2006) English Next, London: British Council.
Grady, K. (1997) ‘Critically reading an ESL text’, TESOL Journal 6(4): 7–10.
Halliday, M. A. K. (1973) Explorations in the Functions of Language, London: Edward Arnold.
Halliday, M. A. K., McIntosh, A. and Strevens, P. (1964) The Linguistic Sciences and Language
Teaching, London: Longman.
Harmer, J. (2007) The Practice of English Language Teaching, 3rd edn, London: Pearson.
Holec, H. (1980) Autonomy and Foreign Language Learning, Strasbourg: Council of Europe.
Holliday, A. (1994) Appropriate Methodology and Social Context, Cambridge: Cambridge Uni-
versity Press.
Hornby, A. S. (1954) Guide to Patterns and Usage in English, London: Oxford University Press.
Hymes, D. (1972) ‘On communicative competence’, in J. Pride and J. Holmes (eds) Sociolinguistics:
Selected Readings, Harmondsworth: Penguin Books.
Jarvis, J. and Robinson, M. (1997) ‘Analysing educational discourse: an exploratory study of teacher
response and support to pupils’ learning’, Applied Linguistics 18: 212–28.
Jespersen, O. (1904) How to Teach a Foreign Language, London: George Allen & Unwin.
Johnson, K. (1996) Language Teaching and Skill Learning, Oxford: Blackwell.
——(1995) Understanding Communication in Second Language Classrooms, Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Kelly, L. G. (1969) 25 Centuries of Language Teaching, Rowley, MA: Newbury House.
Kramsch, C. (ed.) (2002) Language Acquisition and Language Socialization: Ecological Perspectives,
London and New York: Continuum.
Kramsch, C. and Sullivan, P. (1996) ‘Appropriate pedagogy’, ELT Journal 50: 199–212.
Krashen, S. D. (1985) The Input Hypothesis: Issues and Implications, New York: Longman.
——(1981) Second Language Acquisition and Second Language Learning, Oxford: Pergamon.
Krashen, S. D. and Seliger, H. W. (1975) ‘The essential contributions of formal instruction in adult
second language learning’, TESOL Quarterly 9: 173–83.
Krashen, S. D. and Terrell, T. D. (1983) The Natural Approach: Language Acquisition in the
Classroom, Oxford: Pergamon.
Kumaravadivelu, B. (2006) Understanding Language Teaching: From Method to Postmethod,
Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
——(2003) Beyond Methods: Macrostrategies for Language Learning, New Haven, CT: Yale Uni-
versity Press.
——(1994) ‘The postmethod condition: (E)merging strategies for second/foreign language teaching’,
TESOL Quarterly 28: 27–48.
Labov, W. (1972) ‘The study of language in its social context’, in J. B. Pride and J. Holmes (eds)
Sociolinguistics: Selected Readings, Harmondsworth: Penguin Books.
Lantolf, J. P. (ed.) (2000) Sociocultural Theory and Second Language Learning, Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Larsen-Freeman, D. (2000) Techniques and Principles in Language Teaching, 2nd edn, Oxford:
Oxford University Press.
Lewis, M. (1993) The Lexical Approach, Hove: Language Teaching Publications.
Littlewood, W. (1981) Communicative Language Teaching, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Long, M. (1983) ‘Native speaker/non-native speaker conversation and the negotiation of meaning’,
Applied Linguistics 4: 126–41.
Lozanov, G. (1978) Suggestology and Outlines of Suggestopedy, New York: Gordon and Breach.
McCormick, D. E. and Donato, R. (2000) ‘Teacher questions as scaﬀolded assistance in an ESL
classroom’, in J. K. Hall and L. S. Verplaetse (eds) Second and Foreign Language Learning
through Classroom Interaction, Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
McDonough, K. and Chaikitmongkol, W. (2007) ‘Teachers’ and learners’ reactions to a task-based
EFL course in Thailand’, TESOL Quarterly 41: 107–32.
Mackey, W. F. (1965) Language Teaching Analysis, London: Longman.
McLaughlin, B. (1987) Theories of Second Language Learning, London: Edward Arnold.
Maslow, A. (1968) Towards a Psychology of Being, New York: Van Nostrand Reinhold.
Meddings, L. and Thornbury, S. (2009) Teaching Unplugged: Dogme in English Language Teaching,
Peaslake: Delta Publishing.
Moscowitz, G. (1978) Caring and Sharing in the Foreign Language Class, Cambridge, MA:
Newbury House.
Scott Thornbury
198

Nunan, D. (ed.) (2003) Practical English Language Teaching, New York: McGraw-Hill.
Palmer, H. (1921) The Oral Method of Teaching Languages, Cambridge: Heﬀer.
Pennycook, A. (1994) The Cultural Politics of English as an International Language, Harlow:
Longman.
——(1989) ‘The concept of method, interested knowledge, and the politics of language teaching’,
TESOL Quarterly 23: 589–618.
Prabhu, N. S. (1990) ‘There is no best method – why?’, TESOL Quarterly 24: 161–76.
——(1987) Second Language Pedagogy, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Richards, J. (1990) The Language Teaching Matrix, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Richards, J. and Rodgers, T. (2001) Approaches and Methods in Language Teaching, 2nd edn,
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Richards, J. and Schmidt, R. (eds) (2002) Dictionary of Language Teaching and Applied Linguistics,
3rd edn, Harlow: Longman.
Rivers, W. (1964) The Psychologist and the Foreign Language Teacher, Chicago: University of
Chicago Press.
Rogers, C. (1969) Freedom to Learn: A View of What Education might Become, Columbus, OH:
Charles E. Merrill.
Selinker, L. (1972) ‘Interlanguage’, International Review of Applied Linguistics in Language Teaching
10: 219–31.
Sinclair, J. M. and Coulthard, R. M. (1975) Towards an Analysis of Discourse: The English Used by
Teachers and Pupils, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Skehan, P. (1998) A Cognitive Approach to Language Learning, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Skinner, B. F. (1957) Verbal Behavior, New York: Appleton-Century-Crofts.
Soars, J. and Soars, L. (1986) Headway Intermediate, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Stern, H. H. (1992) Issues and Options in Language Teaching, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
——(1983) Fundamental Concepts of Language Teaching, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Stevick, E. (1980) Teaching Languages: A Way and Ways, Rowley, MA: Newbury House.
Swan, M. and Walter, C. (1984) Cambridge English Course, 1, Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.
Sweet, H. (1899, 1964) The Practical Study of Languages, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Toohey, K. (1998) ‘“Breaking them up, taking them away”: ESL students in grade 1’, TESOL
Quarterly 32: 61–84.
van Lier, L. (2004) The Ecology and Semiotics of Language Learning: A Sociocultural Perspective,
Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic.
——(1996) Interaction in the Language Curriculum: Awareness, Autonomy and Authenticity,
Harlow: Longman.
——(1988) The Classroom and the Language Learner, Harlow: Longman.
Walsh, S. (2006) Investigating Classroom Discourse, London: Routledge.
Widdowson, H. (1978) Teaching Language as Communication, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Wilkins, D. A. (1976). Notional Syllabuses, London: Oxford University Press.
Willis, J. and Willis, D. (1988) Collins COBUILD English Course, London: Collins.
Willis, J. (1996) A Framework for Task-based Learning, Harlow: Pearson Longman.
Winitz, H. (ed.) (1981) The Comprehension Approach to Foreign Language Instruction, Rowley,
MA: Newbury House.
Language teaching methodology
199

14
Technology and language learning
Richard Kern
Introduction
The relationship between technology and language learning begins over 5,000 years ago with
the development of writing. Using clay tablets and reed styluses, Mesopotamian scribes used
writing chieﬂy for accounting purposes, but pedagogy had its place too. Archaeological ﬁnd-
ings include lexical lists – thematically organized groupings of Sumerian words for professions,
places, trees, wooden objects, leather objects, stones, ﬁsh, and so on – which scribes used to
teach the conventions of the cuneiform writing system to their apprentices (Green 1986).
Racing through millennia, through the use of wax tablets and papyrus rolls in Ancient
Greece, through parchment manuscripts in medieval times, we come to the form of technology
that has without question had the greatest impact on language learning: the printed book.
Books could be perused in nonlinear fashion, and were therefore well suited for reference use
and autonomous study. Once they become aﬀordable through mass production, they altered
the relationship between learner and teacher. With knowledge and standards transmitted by
print, teachers were no longer necessarily the ultimate source of all knowledge and came
increasingly to be viewed as interpreters of books (Kelly 1976).
In the last 150 years, the phonograph, radio, ﬁlm, tape recorders, television, and the com-
puter have all played their role in language learning. Computer technology, because it incor-
porates and remediates all of the foregoing media, and because it has become so integrated
into people’s daily lives in industrialized societies, will be the focus of this chapter. But it
should be borne in mind that the questions and issues raised are usually not just pertinent to
computers but relate to technological support in general. Similarly, debates about the primacy
of teachers versus technologies in teaching are not new. Despite the cries of doomsayers who
believe that computers will replace teachers, teachers in the digital age are as essential as ever
in helping students to make and interpret meaning in a new language and culture.
A unique and deﬁning feature of digital technology is that it combines previous media
which were traditionally displayed in their own speciﬁc medium and format (e.g. paper, vinyl,
magnetic tape, cellulose) and represents text, image, sound, and video with a common under-
lying data structure encoded in zeros and ones, allowing unprecedented integration and
manipulability of media. These changes in the material infrastructure of media, by allowing
200

rapid electronic transfer, have been accompanied by social changes as well. Information and
communication technologies have made it possible for us to make contact with people, images,
ideas, and information from around the world faster and more cheaply than ever before. The
rapid spread of participatory tools and sites facilitating social networking, interactive game
playing, collaborative writing and editing, and multimodal production provide opportunities
for new kinds of social encounters, new kinds of communities, and new kinds of learning
environments.
We will begin our exploration of the topic by outlining some common metaphors of
technology and language learning.
Metaphors of technology and language learning
Digital technology has been used for a wide range of purposes related to language teaching
and learning. We can roughly categorize these uses in terms of three metaphors: computer as
tutor, computer as tool, and computer as medium.
The ‘tutor’ metaphor implies that the computer is simulating a teacher in some way, such as
when computers are used to present material (e.g. grammar, vocabulary, or cultural informa-
tion – see Vlugter et al. 2009 as an example), to provide language practice (such as exercises in
pronunciation, writing, listening or reading), to analyze learners’ language performance and
provide feedback (see Meurers 2009), or to test learners’ knowledge of language and culture
(see Chapelle and Douglas 2006). Voice interactive programs involving automated speech
recognition and text-to-speech synthesis can also simulate communicative interaction (Holland
and Fisher 2007) and chatbots (i.e. automated conversational agents) have been explored as
learning resources (Coniam 2008; Sha 2009). Although research on tutorial applications has
been dwarfed in recent years by work in electronically mediated communication, this area
holds signiﬁcant promise for developing learners’ conscious knowledge of the language, for
enhancing listening and reading comprehension, and for improving pronunciation (Hubbard
and Siskin 2004).
The ‘tool’ metaphor puts the focus on individual learner capabilities and cognitive goals and
needs. In this role, computers (via the Internet) provide learners ready access to a wide variety
of written, audio, and visual materials relevant to the language and culture being studied. Such
materials include news media, ﬁlm clips and videos (some with closed captions or subtitles),
radio and television broadcasts, special interest Websites, blogs, advertisements, and realia.
The Internet also provides reference and research tools such as search engines, online diction-
aries, grammar and style checkers, and audio waveform analysis. Corpus analysis and con-
cordancing (see Adolphs and Lin, this volume), providing insight into the real-world contexts
in which words and collocations occur across various genres, registers, and language varieties
(including learner language) has been an increasingly researched area (see, for example, Braun
et al. 2006; Belz and Vyatkina 2008). Finally, automated writing assessment tools (Warschauer
and Grimes 2008) and the use of mobile devices such as iPods, cellphones, and personal digital
assistants for language learning purposes (e.g. Schmidt 2008; Abdous et al. 2009; Pachler et al.
2010) are recent tool-oriented developments to watch in the coming years.
The computer as ‘medium’ metaphor emphasizes the communicative agency of language
learners, who express themselves and interact with other people ‘through’ the computer.
Learners can use computers to engage in a wide variety of communicative practices – some-
times in instructional contexts, but often not. The ‘medium’ metaphor is by far the broadest in
scope and includes work in computer-mediated communication (Danet and Herring 2007;
Herring 1996), social networking (Alemán and Wartman 2009), and network-based language
Technology and language learning
201

teaching (Warschauer and Kern 2000). Speciﬁc applications of the computer-as-medium
metaphor will be described in the following section.
The tutor, tool, and medium metaphors relate more to functional uses of computers than to
software applications, since applications may appeal to more than one metaphor. For example,
using a word processor to write to a foreign pen pal (medium) may well involve the use of
search function, online thesaurus, font selection and formatting commands (tool). If the soft-
ware checks grammar and spelling automatically and signals errors to the learner, it then
becomes a kind of tutor. Some of the most ambitious technology-based language learning
projects, for example Gilberte Furstenberg’s À la rencontre de Philippe; Dans un quartier de
Paris; and Cultura (Furstenberg and Levet 1999, Furstenberg et al. 2001, Furstenberg et al.
1993) integrate elements relating to each of the three metaphors.
These three metaphors of technology interact with three metaphors of language learning.
The ﬁrst, associated with psycholinguistic, information processing approaches to language
acquisition (see Field, this volume), metaphorically frames the learner as a computer that
receives and processes language input in order to generate rules and verbal output. The
second, associated with discourse analytic and anthropological approaches to language socia-
lization (Ochs and Schieﬀelin 2008), frames the learner as an apprentice who uses language
and behaviour to enter and participate in a community of practice, and who further learns
language and behaviour by virtue of that participation (see He, this volume). A third, emer-
gent metaphor of language ecology attempts to encompass the full complexity of the rela-
tionships and processes involved in learning to live in one or more languages and cultures
(Kramsch 2002; Kramsch, this volume).
At ﬁrst glance, the learner as computer metaphor would seem to map neatly onto the ‘tutor’
and ‘tool’ metaphors of technology, with the learner as apprentice metaphor corresponding to
the ‘medium’ metaphor of technology. However, in practice, one ﬁnds that such mappings are
not so tidy since all three technology metaphors can be applied in various permutations to
both language acquisition and socialization metaphors (e.g. studying input/uptake in online
exchanges, or learner socialization in computer-assisted tutorials). The ecology metaphor –
because it focuses speciﬁcally on relationships between learners and their environments
(including non-human artefacts such as computers) – has become particularly appealing for
those who work in the area of technology and language learning (e.g. Lam and Kramsch 2003;
van Lier 2003).
Features of electronically mediated communication
To elaborate on the ‘medium’ metaphor outlined above, electronically mediated communica-
tion (EMC) is often categorized as synchronous or asynchronous. Synchronous modes include
text chat, instant messaging, Voice over Internet Protocol (e.g. Skype), videoconferencing,
online games, MOOs, and virtual worlds (e.g. Second Life). Asynchronous modes include
email, bulletin boards, forums, wikis, blogs, SMS texting, social networking sites (e.g.
Facebook, MySpace). The synchronous/asynchronous distinction is not always clear cut,
however, and often is determined more by the user than by the interface. For example, email
or a Facebook page can be used ‘synchronously’ like instant messaging if the communicating
parties are online at the same time. Conversely, instant messaging can be used ‘asynchro-
nously’ like email if the user allows messages to collect and does not respond. In any event,
none of the written modes is truly synchronous since messages are sent after being composed,
rather than keystroke by keystroke (as was the case for the earliest texting systems). An
important question (to be explored below) is whether the ‘medium’ or interface in these
Richard Kern
202

environments is really as neutral as is often thought and to what extent it becomes a social
actor interacting with human actors (Latour 2005).
Although EMC has recently become increasingly speech- and video-mediated, the bulk of
EMC is still currently written via keyboard. Written EMC ranges along a continuum from
‘product’-oriented forms resembling paper-based writing (e.g. Websites, most email) to more
‘process’-oriented interactive discourse (e.g. instant messaging, chat) that shares many features
of speech (Baron 2000). Blogs and wikis would be variably placed along the continuum,
depending on the nature of the writing. On the product-oriented end of the continuum, mes-
sages are composed as wholes before being ‘released’ to their reader(s). On the process-oriented
end, utterances may be more fragmentary, and multiple participants can communicate spon-
taneously and simultaneously (even contributing comments at the same moment). In the face
of quick ﬂurries of messages, some users will break up a single message into segments sent
over several turns in order to maintain a quick interactive rhythm and to keep their place and
visibility in the exchange. Communicative motivation or purpose tends to vary along the
continuum as well: the ‘product’ end is biased toward information exchange, whereas the
‘process’ end is biased toward social contact.
The interactive and fragmentary nature of chat and instant messaging make them
seem somewhat speech-like. However, unlike spoken communication, the binary on/oﬀnature
of the medium does not allow backchannelling (‘uh-huh’, ‘right’, shaking of head, etc.) from a
partner while one is communicating. This is symptomatic of the reality that EMC is a ‘leaner’
overall medium than face-to-face communication in the sense that information is
commu-
nicated principally in textual form, whereas in face-to-face communication auditory, tactile,
olfactory as well as visual channels operate in parallel – allowing eye contact, context per-
ception, gestural and prosodic information – all of which enrich communication (Herring
1996). The relative leanness of EMC creates a diﬀerent dynamic from that of spoken com-
munication, and this diﬀerence may well be signiﬁcant for language learning contexts that are
exclusively EMC-based (e.g. tandems or ‘key-pal’ projects).
In some respects, however, less is more. In the case of instant messaging and email, for
example, the text-only channel minimizes intrusiveness and aﬀords the possibility of avoiding
or delaying communication, and this is no doubt one reason why people often prefer instant
messaging or email to a face-to-face meeting or a telephone call.
Another signiﬁcant diﬀerence between EMC and spoken communication is that most (but
not all) forms of written EMC leave an enduring trace, allowing them to be searched, sorted,
reviewed, forwarded, and recontextualized. This has potential beneﬁts for language learning in
that exchanges can be mined for vocabulary, structures, discourse markers, and so on, but it
also raises issues of privacy (see Erickson 1999).
Genre and register in EMC
Genres have to do with purposes of language use. They establish norms of interaction by
codifying the respective roles of readers/listeners and writers/speakers and the relationships
between them, and by setting corresponding parameters of appropriateness for language use.
Narrative, lecture, conversation, discussion, report, interview, explanation, poem, are all
examples of genres. Because genres are fundamentally social phenomena they most often vary
across cultures.
As should be clear from the previous section, EMC is not a genre. Rather, its various modes
(email, blogs, forums, etc.) can be linked to a range of genres, some of which are speciﬁc to the
technological medium (e.g. SMS texting), some not (e.g. memoranda). Knowledge of genres
Technology and language learning
203

gives learners a sense of organization beyond the sentence and paragraph level and allows
them to make connections between social purposes, interactions they observe or participate in
online, and what they learn in their language classes. On the other hand, mismatches of genres
can render intercultural communication problematic (e.g. Kramsch and Thorne 2001; Hanna
and de Nooy 2009).
Just as EMC is too broad to be linked to a single genre, it also cannot be tied to any par-
ticular register. Registers are varieties of language that relate to features of situational context.
Halliday (1978) describes situational context in terms of ‘ﬁeld’ (what is taking place), ‘tenor’ (who
is taking part), and ‘mode’ (channel of communication). The EMC mode (email, blog, chat,
etc.) thus plays a role in inﬂuencing linguistic form, but it is not the only factor involved; the
particular social and cultural contexts, purposes, and demands of a given act of communica-
tion will always inﬂuence the particular form it takes. Within the mode of ‘email’, for example,
one ﬁnds chatty, conversational messages as well as formal administrative communications.
From a teaching perspective, many instructors note that learners’ language use in EMC
environments is often less correct, less complex, less coherent than the language they use in
their ordinary written assignments. Herring (2001) points out that non-standard features are
generally not due to inattentiveness or not knowing the standard forms, but are often delib-
erate choices to minimize typing eﬀort, to imitate speech or sounds, or to be inventive.
Warner’s (2004) work on language play corroborates this view by showing how learners of
German used code-mixing in their synchronous chat sessions. Crystal (2006) adds that sim-
pliﬁcation (e.g. omission of prepositions, copulas, auxiliary verbs) is not just a matter of typing
economy but likely represents dialect features, reﬂecting the pressure to accommodate many
diverse group members. Sometimes accommodations go beyond simpliﬁcation and become
multilingual hybrid forms (Bloch 2004; Lam 2004).
Such tendencies in online discourse create tensions for teachers intent on helping their stu-
dents develop proﬁciency in standard forms of language. Because language learners may not
have any intuitions about what constitutes standard versus non-standard forms, they may end
up learning the non-standard forms rather than the standard ones (Crystal 2006). From a
pedagogical standpoint, this raises the issue of teaching students how to discern among stan-
dard, non-standard, and hybrid uses and how to use diﬀerent registers appropriately in diﬀerent
communicative contexts.
But the interplay between EMC and language use may be even more subtle. As mentioned
earlier, the electronic medium is often thought of as a neutral conduit. In the following section
we will look critically at this assumption.
Mediation in EMC
Etymologically, the words ‘medium’ and ‘mediate’ have to do with being in the middle. What
is ‘in the middle’ in online communicative interaction? Certainly language – writing in text-
based EMC and speech/gesture/facial expressions/postures in audiovisual EMC. But that
language and body language is in turn mediated materially by some kind of interface. The
hardware and the software, the core of the interface, can be familiar or unfamiliar to the users,
and this can make a diﬀerence in how communication unfolds. Hardware and software
can also introduce time lags and distortions (sometimes without users’ awareness) as well as
noise and connection problems – all of which can aﬀect communication. A technologically
induced time lag, for example, might be interpreted by the receiver as meaningful hesitation on
the part of the writer (and the writer, not aware of the time lag, might not know what to make
of a response that attributed hesitation to him).
Richard Kern
204

But, as in all acts of communication, the physical spaces, the temporal contexts, the cultural
contexts, and the activity frames in which people communicate are also mediators. The dif-
ference is that these are more often out of sight and out of mind in EMC environments than in
face-to-face communication. When these dimensions are closely aligned with participants’
expectations or mental models, communication is facilitated; when they are not, confusion or
misinterpretations may occur. An email riddled with typographical errors might lead me to
attribute carelessness or ignorance to the author if I envision him or her writing at home on a
desktop computer. But if I know he or she is on a crowded bus, typing into an iPhone while
being jostled by other passengers I will read with a great deal more tolerance. The problem is
that one usually doesn’t know. The more the channel allows users to manage the ‘mutual
monitoring possibilities’ of interaction (Jones 2004), the more agency they have to shape what
counts as context, but even in videoconferencing environments participants’ understanding of
the other’s context is often more illusory than real.
As suggested earlier, the mediational qualities of EMC environments will inﬂuence genre
and register conventions. Consider, for example, Burbules’s (2006) interrogation of the rela-
tionship between computers and the ‘discussion’ genre:
are we more likely to debate contentiously or criticize when we cannot see our partners in
online dialogue; are we more or less likely to disclose personal conﬁdences when we feel
safe behind a certain level of distance and anonymity; are we more or less likely to trust
our partners in conversation … ? The space of online communication, like any other, is
not neutral and shapes the form and content of what is said or written within it: Dynamic
and ﬂexible as these channels are, they have speciﬁc features – such as synchrony or
asynchrony – which privilege certain voices, perspectives, and ways of communicating.
(Burbules 2006: 117)
What is ‘in the middle’ is therefore not a clear conduit, but a dynamic ecology of complex
human and technological relationships and interactions, which has the potential to transform
both the human and the technological participants.
Hutchby (2001) takes up this issue in his study of conversation mediated by the telephone
and by Internet Relay Chat. ‘To what extent’, he asks, ‘are we “technologized” conversation-
alists? … or from the opposite angle, how far may we as competent conversationalists be
conﬁgurers of the communicative properties of these technologies?’ (2001: 7). To address these
questions, Hutchby adopts what he calls a ‘relational’ perspective (cf. the ecology metaphor
described above), drawing on Gibson’s (1986) notion of ‘aﬀordances’. Technologies may be
designed to serve particular functions, but end users establish their own relationships to them,
making use of technologies in ways that suit their purposes, regardless of the designer’s intention.
Hutchby uses the terms ‘design-features’ and ‘features-in-use’ to characterize this intended vs
actualized distinction (cf. de Certeau’s (2002) notions of ‘strategy’, ‘tactics’ and ‘making do’).
Hutchby illustrates with the example of the telephone, which, despite being marketed as a busi-
ness tool for men and as a household management tool for women, was quickly transformed
by telephone users into a tool for social chatting.
Lamy and Hampel (2007) discuss the cyclical nature of this human-technological mutual
‘shaping’ and give an example from blogging: whereas blogs began as ‘Web logs’ (i.e. personal
journals uploaded to the Web – a re-mediation of a long-standing human practice), they
were quickly transformed (i.e. by human creativity) into a range of genres such as video logs
(vlogs), photoblogs, niche blogs, research blogs, corporate blogs, and legal blogs (blawgs),
all of which blend users’ personal interests, social purposes, and subject matter knowledge.
Technology and language learning
205

These, in turn, become resources for future technological/social innovations, and the cycle
continues.
Mediation is a fact of life in all forms of technology use. Although it is not always obvious,
its eﬀects are nevertheless powerful. Consequently, we are wise to follow Lamy and Hampel’s
(2007) advice that mediation ‘needs to be foregrounded in any examination of the learning
process where computers are involved’ (2007: 47).
Instructional and non-instructional applications
Technology aﬀords an ever-widening array of uses for language teaching (see Blake 2008;
Chun 2008; Kern et al. 2008 for recent overviews). This section will focus on three major areas
of current interest in the ﬁeld: distance and blended learning, intercultural online encounters,
and community participation (forums, games, and virtual worlds).
Distance and blended learning
Distance learning involves taking courses without physical presence in a classroom, and is the
modern equivalent of correspondence courses. The traditional form of distance learning is by
video teleconference, in which the instructor meets with students at various sites at speciﬁed
times. Internet-based distance learning is often more ﬂexible and many learner activities can be
done according to learners’ schedules, allowing them to self-pace, which fosters learner
autonomy. In recent years the number of distance learning programmes has mushroomed, and
most are now Internet-mediated. In the USA, more than 3.9 million students took one or
more online courses in the fall 2007 term, and this was a 12 per cent increase over the previous
year (Allen and Seaman 2008).
‘Blended’ or ‘hybrid’ learning environments typically involve a distance learning component
but also traditional face-to-face teaching (and sometimes out-of-class learning). As online and
self-directed learning components have become more common in foreign language teaching,
blended learning is increasingly becoming the norm in university level courses.
The use of multimedia (Jewitt and Kress 2003; Mayer 2005) together with EMC is exem-
pliﬁed in courses such as Spanish Without Walls (Blake and Delforge 2007), Arabic Without
Walls (Shiri 2004; see Figure 14.1), and languages taught at the Open University. EMC is
essential to such courses, as it allows interaction and feedback between learner and teacher as
well as among learners. However, Blake (2005) underlines the importance of training for both
instructors and students in dealing with the idiosyncrasies of audiographic EMC, such as time
lags, overlapping turns, knowing when to write and when to speak, and so on.
For more on distance learning, see Hauck and Stickler (2006) as well as Holmberg et al.
(2005), and White (2003, 2006).
Online intercultural encounters
School pen pal exchanges and even multimedia exchanges have existed since at least the 1920s,
when Célestin Freinet established the Modern School Movement in Europe. With the devel-
opment of the Internet, such exchanges have gained an unprecedented immediacy. An
increasing trend in language teaching is the development of long-distance collaborations
involving two or more classrooms, usually in diﬀerent countries. Often referred to as tele-
collaboration, these international partnerships generally place an emphasis on culture in
language use and learning.
Richard Kern
206

One of the best known and most long-standing projects is Cultura (http://Web.mit.edu/french/
culturaNEH/2006s/index.html). Developed in the late 1990s by Gilberte Furstenberg and her
colleagues at MIT, Cultura is a set of online modules designed to encourage language learners
from diﬀerent countries to engage in dialogue about the concepts, values, beliefs and attitudes that
undergird their respective cultures and language use (Furstenberg et al. 2001). The idea is not to
transmit culture, but to problematize it by juxtaposing materials, interpretations, and responses
to interpretations. In addition to working extensively with a wide variety of texts, questionnaires,
images, and ﬁlms, students ‘meet’ in an online forum that gives them time to read, think, and for-
mulate their answers to their correspondents’ questions. Their discussion of these questions leads
to new questions, feeding an ongoing cycle of reﬂection, discussion, and further reﬂection.
A number of studies have found promising results regarding the viability of online encoun-
ters for developing intercultural competence and understanding (e.g. Kinginger 2000; Meskill
and Ranglova 2000; von der Emde and Schneider 2003). Other studies show, however, that
intercultural contact in and of itself does not necessarily lead to cultural understanding.
Learners’ language ability, linguistic style, academic cultures, and institutional and cultural
characteristics can aﬀect their negotiation of meaning and cultural understanding (Belz 2002;
2003; Belz and Müller-Hartmann 2003; O’Dowd and Ritter 2006). More subtle, yet signiﬁcant
factors are diﬀerences in communicative medium and communicative genres. For example,
Ware (2005) found that the asynchronous discussion tool she used in a German-American
telecollaborative exchange contributed (because of delayed response time and no consequences
for dropping topics) to a disengagement she calls ‘missed communication’. Kramsch and
Thorne (2001) question the very premise that the kind of communication found in inter-
cultural EMC exchanges fosters intercultural understanding. In their analysis of a conﬂictual
French-American email exchange, they propose that a clash in cultural frames and commu-
nicative genres, not just linguistic misunderstandings, is what hindered the students’ ability to
Figure 14.1 Arabic Without Walls
Source: http://uccllt.ucdavis.edu/aww/info.html
Technology and language learning
207

establish common ground for cross-cultural understanding. What needed to be negotiated,
they argue, ‘was not only the connotations of words … but the stylistic conventions of the
genre (formal/informal, edited/unedited, literate/orate), and more importantly the whole
discourse system to which that genre belonged’ (2001: 98).
In a recent and very promising development, online encounters have begun to incorporate
Web-based videoconferencing, allowing participants to see and hear one another (Figure 14.2).
Whereas written EMC exchanges are mediated by words, symbols, and their timing and
layout, desktop videoconferencing adds voice, gesture, gaze, movement, and images of a phy-
sical setting framed by a Webcam. The advantages and constraints of combining audio, video,
and text in online exchanges are explored in Develotte et al. (2008); Jauregi and Bañados
(2008); Kern (2008); and O’Dowd (2006).
In sum, intercultural EMC studies indicate that just putting people together to communicate
does not ensure cultural understanding, which depends on a negotiation of diﬀerences in
genres, interaction styles, local institutional cultures, and culture more broadly. When designing
exchanges for language learning purposes, teachers or researchers on both sides therefore need
to determine how they will make students aware of this broad range of potential diﬀerences
and what kinds of opportunities for negotiation they will provide.
Community participation (forums, games, and virtual worlds)
The Internet oﬀers a wide range of opportunities for learners to participate in various sorts of
online communities. Three that we will consider here are discussion forums, games, and virtual
worlds.
Discussion forums are a potential gold mine for language learning, since learners can
become involved in discussions in the target language on any conceivable topic of interest –
thereby capitalizing on any areas of personal expertise they might have and boosting their
motivation and degree of engagement. Although some forums are speciﬁcally designed for
language learners and teachers (e.g. Simpson 2005), most are not. This poses potential risks to
learners, who are attempting to enter into discussion with ‘real people’ who may have little
patience for those who are still learning the language.
Figure 14.2 Student screen from videoconferencing session in French using Skype
Richard Kern
208

To date, the use of forums destined for the general public has appeared only rarely in the
literature on language learning (e.g. Wanner 2008), but a collection of case studies by Hanna
and de Nooy (2009) provides excellent coverage of this important topic. Underscoring the
importance of communicative genres, they show that the ease with which learners enter into
discussion with native speakers can be deceptive, precisely because what constitutes the genre
called ‘discussion’ is not universal but varies across cultures (and across mediums, as we saw in
the section on mediation above). In the context of online forums, Hanna and de Nooy show
that politeness and linguistic accuracy prove to be much less important than a willingness to
be socialized into the discourse rules of a particular online community. This means we must
understand communicative competence as a relative construct, shaped by the conditions and
constraints of particular communicative contexts.
Computer-mediated games provide a diﬀerent kind of environment for language learning.
Largely through the work of James Gee (2003), video games have gained educational respect-
ability in recent years. Thorne (2008) considers the aﬀordances of massively multiplayer online
games (MMOGs), which have become immensely popular. Because players need to collabo-
rate with other players in order to achieve certain goals, communication plays a central role.
According to Thorne, MMOG players, who come from around the world and can number in
the thousands at any given time, ‘must learn to negotiate complex scenarios, be socialized into
culturally speciﬁc discourse formations, and be capable of negotiating play in real-time with
game-driven characters as well as other co-present gamers’ (2008: 317). Analyzing the written
interaction of two players (one American, one Russian) in World of Warcraft, Thorne shows
how players can be exposed to, and can appropriate, elements of a new language.
O’Brien and Levy (2008) developed their own virtual reality game in which German stu-
dents needed to assemble clues (from spoken or written commands, conversations between
characters, radio and TV broadcasts, cellphone messages, and signs) to ﬁnd the mayor of
Salzburg’s missing daughter. Students reported that the game was more favourable for devel-
oping listening skills than other aspects. The authors argue that students’ virtual world
experience may enhance their awareness of the target culture, but primarily in terms of
cultural products rather than practices.
Similar in certain respects to gaming is participation in virtual worlds such as Second Life;
Open Life; Active Worlds; or There. These are multimedia simulated 3-D environments in
which one navigates (walking, jumping, or ﬂying) by means of a user-conﬁgurable online
avatar. ‘Speaking’ to other avatars or to bots (resident robots) is usually done in writing (with
cartoon-style speech bubbles appearing above avatars’ heads), although voice chat has recently
become the default mode in some environments. Unlike games, the ‘content’ of virtual worlds
is mostly created by users themselves with the tools and infrastructure provided by the com-
pany that has designed the product. Meeting and interacting with other people (i.e. their ava-
tars), acquiring virtual goods, and designing one’s own custom environment are the chief
activities in these environments. Given the essentially social nature of these worlds, and the
widely international provenance of their ‘residents’, many teachers and researchers see them as
exciting sites for language learning. To date, however, little research has been done in this area.
Deutschmann et al. (2009) assessed the aﬀordances of Second Life for developing the oral/
aural abilities of their graduate students. To their surprise, they learned that the limited
expressive qualities of the avatars was actually beneﬁcial, since students reported they had to
focus more on ‘the speaking and listening aspects of language’ (2009: 210). They also found that
focused role-play tasks that worked well in the classroom were not successful in Second Life,
perhaps because of the distraction of dealing with the interface (the ‘human-machine’ part of
communication), which reduced attention to the ‘human-human’ communication (2009: 223).
Technology and language learning
209

Consequently, Deutschmann et al. recommend that teachers train students in the particular
technical and social dimensions of the virtual world environment before launching into
learning tasks.
Future directions
As the use of digital technologies continues to expand in the coming years, teachers and
researchers may wish to consider the following points.
First, as text-only environments become increasingly multimodal with image, voice, and
sound, our resources for expressing culture and representing ourselves online expand corre-
spondingly. More than ever, we need to remain attuned to the subtle interactions between
medium, genre, register, and culture so that students can be prevented from jumping to facile
conclusions about ‘the’ way that their correspondents think, feel, express themselves, and so
on. The broader the variety of modes of communication, the richer students’ interpretive base
will be, but teachers need to consider how the diﬀerent groups involved relate to the electronic
medium itself as a cultural tool of communication, in order to better understand how cultures
of use might aﬀect intercultural communication.
Second, on a related note, we will need more critical explorations of how culture is under-
stood in online environments. In the case of games and virtual worlds, whose culture is
expressed? Is there only the simulational (and commercial) computer culture? In the case of
online exchanges, terms such as cross-cultural, intercultural, and transcultural have been used
rather interchangeably, and the task of educators will be to reﬁne the terms and develop viable
methodologies and theories for examining issues of (pluri)cultural representation, identiﬁcation,
and contact in online contexts.
Third, because online environments are partly shaped by the cultures of their inhabitants,
ethnographic research is of key importance. Miller and Slater (2000) advocate what they call a
‘comparative ethnographic’ approach that centres on the dynamics of objectiﬁcation, mediation,
normative freedom, and positioning.
To eﬀectively study such dynamics, a great deal more longitudinal research is needed (e.g.
Chen 2006; van Deusen-Scholl 2008). Tracking language learning through year-long or multi-
year studies helps mitigate, for example, concerns about how the novelty of technology might
aﬀect learner outcomes. Furthermore, longitudinal studies provide a more adequate basis for
understanding how language learning might transfer across skill areas, as researchers are more
able to track students across multiple contexts of use.
Fourth, we need to be open to novel ways of integrating multiple ways of learning – some
classroom-based and some not related to formal instruction. ‘School’ versus ‘home’ uses of
computers is becoming a meaningless distinction, and some of the richest learning environ-
ments may not be at all ‘pedagogical’ in purpose (e.g. forums). At the same time, teachers
must be wary of co-opting learners’ established online practices by pedagogizing them.
Finally, given the rapid evolution of technologies and the ﬂuidity of communicative envir-
onments, teachers face increasingly complex decisions related to teaching with technology.
Success in technology-mediated projects has been repeatedly shown to depend largely on tea-
chers’ eﬀorts in coordinating learners’ activities, structuring language and content, and helping
learners to reﬂect critically on language, culture, and context. But keeping on top of project
goals, activity/task design, technology interface, and the management of often complex logis-
tical realities is challenging, and ﬂexibility is a key asset. Teachers also need to know how
technology can constrain as well as enhance their students’ language use and know when it is
better not to use computers.
Richard Kern
210

Summary
Millennia old, the relationship between technology and language learning has never been as
complex or as interesting as it is today. The accelerating diﬀusion of digital media and wireless
networks, together with the increased naturalization of EMC, promises that technology-supported
language learning will remain a critical area for teaching and research.
This chapter began by considering ‘tutor’, ‘tool’ and ‘medium’ metaphors of computer use in
relation to the learning metaphors of acquisition, socialization, and ecology, suggesting that
the ecology metaphor, despite and because of its complexity, deserves special attention in
future research.
The broad area of electronically mediated communication was described as a process-product
continuum of modes, with process-oriented modes biased toward social contact and product-
oriented modes biased toward information exchange. The notions of genre and register were
discussed in relation to standard and non-standard language forms in EMC, and mediational
factors (e.g. mode, interface, setting) were considered with regard to their interaction with
genre and communication. A central point was that the communicative medium (book, cell-
phone, chat, email, etc) is not neutral but it does not determine the characteristics, purposes,
and contours of communication by itself. Rather, it does so in interaction with cultural factors.
Technologies are therefore not just a matter of hardware and media; they are intrinsically
bound to culturally embedded beliefs, habits, and procedures.
Three categories of instructional (and non-instructional) applications of technology to lan-
guage learning (distance/blended learning, online exchanges, and community participation)
were then presented, with examples from the research literature, followed by a few thoughts
about future directions in technology and language learning and the crucial importance of
teachers to students’ learning.
Related topics
classroom discourse; corpus linguistics; language and culture; language learning and language
education; language socialization; language teacher education; language teaching methodology;
multimodality; psycholinguistics; SLA
Further reading
Belz, J. A. and Thorne, S. L. (eds) (2006) Internet-mediated Intercultural Foreign Language Educa-
tion and the Intercultural Speaker, Boston, Heinle IV, New York: Routledge. (A four volume set
on CALL that introduces critical concepts and reprints some of the most inﬂuential scholarship
in the ﬁeld over the past twenty-ﬁve years.)
Chapelle, C. A. (2003) English Language Learning and Technology: Lectures on Applied Linguistics
in the Age of Information and Communication Technology, Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
(A thought-provoking series of essays on the interplay between technology and applied linguis-
tics, on how second language acquistion theory can help inform technology-based language
learning practices, and how technology can be used as a tool for applied linguistics research.)
Goodfellow, R. and Lamy, M.-N. (eds) (2009) Learning Cultures in Online Education, London:
Continuum. (A collection of empirical case studies of online learning communities in diverse
international contexts that highlights the importance of cultural identities, linguistic practices,
aﬀect/emotion/play, and technology as a social actor.)
Hubbard, P. (ed.) (2009) Computer Assisted Language Learning: Critical Concepts in Linguistics,
vols I–IV, New York: Routledge. (A four-volume set on CALL that introduces critical
concepts and reprints some of the most inﬂuential scholarship in the ﬁeld over the past twenty-ﬁve
years.)
Technology and language learning
211

Magnan, S. S. (ed.) (2008) Mediating Discourse Online, Amsterdam: John Benjamins. (An excellent
collection of essays and research studies generally taking an ecological approach to issues of
collaboration, speech and writing, narrative, identity, voice, and the ethics of researching online
interaction.)
References
Abdous, M., Camarena, M. M. and Facer, B. R. (2009) ‘MALL technology: use of academic pod-
casting in the foreign language classroom’, ReCALL 21: 76–95.
Alemán, A. M. M. and Wartman, K. L. (2009) Online Social Networking on Campus: Under-
standing What Matters in Student Culture, London: Routledge.
Allen, I. E. and Seaman, J. (2008) Staying the Course: Online Educaiton in the United States, 2008,
Needham, MA: Sloan Consortium.
Baron, N. S. (2000) Alphabet to Email: How Written English Evolved and Where it’s Heading,
London: Routledge.
Belz, J. A. (2002) ‘Social dimensions of telecollaborative foreign language study’, Language Learn-
ing and Technology 6: 60–81.
——(2003) ‘Linguistic perspectives on the development of intercultural competence in tele-
collaboration’, Language Learning and Technology 7: 68–99.
Belz, J. A. and Müller-Hartmann, A. (2003) ‘Teachers as intercultural learners: negotiating
German-American telecollaboration along the institutional fault line’, Modern Language Journal
87: 71–89.
Belz, J. A. and Vyatkina, N. (2008) ‘The pedagogical mediation of a developmental learner corpus
for classroom-based language instruction’, Language Learning and Technology 12: 33–52.
Blake, R. (2005) ‘Bimodal CMC: the glue of language learning at a distance’, CALICO Journal 22:
497–511.
Blake, R. and Delforge, A. (2007) ‘Online language learning: the case of Spanish without walls’, in
B. Laﬀord and R. Salaberry (eds) The Art of Teaching Spanish: Second Language Acquisition
from Research to Praxis, Washington, DC: Georgetown University Press.
Blake, R. J. (2008) Brave New Digital Classrooms: Technology and Foreign-Language Learning,
Washington, DC: Georgetown University Press.
Bloch, J. (2004) ‘Second language cyber rhetoric: a study of Chinese L2 writers in an online
USENET group’, Language Learning and Technology 8(3): 66–82.
Braun, S., Kohn, K. and Mukherjee, J. (2006) Corpus Technology and Language Pedagogy: New
Resources, New Tools, New Methods, New York: Peter Lang.
Burbules, N. C. (2006) ‘Rethinking dialogue in networked spaces’, Cultural Studies – Critical
Methodologies 6: 107–22.
Chapelle, C. A. and Douglas, D. (2006) Assessing Language Through Computer Technology, Cam-
bridge: Cambridge University Press.
Chen, C.-F. E. (2006) ‘The development of email literacy: from writing to peers to writing to
authority ﬁgures’, Language Learning and Technology 10: 35–55.
Chun, D. (2008) ‘Computer-mediated discourse in instructed environments’, in S. S. Magnan (ed.)
Mediating Discourse Online, Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Coniam, D. (2008) ‘Evaluating the language resources of chatbots for their potential in English as a
second language’, ReCALL 20: 98–116.
Crystal, D. (2006) Language and the Internet, 2nd edn, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Danet, B. and Herring, S. C. (eds) (2007) The Multilingual Internet: Language, Culture, and Com-
munication Online, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
de Certeau, M. (2002) ‘“Making do”: uses and tactics’, in The Practice of Everyday Life, Berkeley:
University of California Press.
Deutschmann, M., Panichi, L. and Molka-Danielsen, J. (2009) ‘Designing oral participation in
second life: a comparative study of two language proﬁciency courses’, ReCALL 21: 206–22.
Develotte, C., Guichon, N. and Kern, R. (2008) ‘“Allo Berkeley? Ici Lyon … Vous nous voyez
bien?” Étude d’un dispositif de formation en ligne synchrone franco-américain à travers les dis-
cours de ses usagers’, ALSIC 11: 129–56.
Erickson, T. (ed.) (1999) Special issue of the Journal of Computer Mediated Communication on
persistent conversation, (4)4.
Richard Kern
212

Furstenberg, G. and Levet, S. (1999) Dans un quartier de Paris, New Haven, CT: Yale University
Press.
Furstenberg, G., Levet, S., English, K. and Maillet, K. (2001) ‘Giving a virtual voice to the silent
language of culture: the CULTURA project’, Language Learning and Technology 5: 55–102.
Furstenberg, G., Murray, J. H., Malone, S. and Farman-Farmaian, A. (1993) A la rencontre de
Philippe, New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.
Gee, J. P. (2003) What Video Games have to Teach Us About Learning and Literacy, New York:
Palgrave Macmillan.
Gibson, J. J. (1986) The Ecological Approach to Visual Perception, Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum
Associates.
Green, M. W. (1986) ‘Archaic Uruk Cuneiform’, American Journal of Archaeology 90: 464–6.
Halliday, M. A. K. (1978) Language as Social Semiotic: The Social Interpretation of Language and
Meaning, Baltimore: University Park Press.
Hanna, B. E. and de Nooy, J. (2009) Learning Language and Culture via Public Internet Discussion
Forums, Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan.
Hauck, M. and Stickler, U. (2006) ‘What does it take to teach online?’, CALICO Journal 23: 463–75.
Herring, S. C. (ed.) (1996) Computer-mediated Communication: Linguistic, Social and Cross-cultural
Perspectives, Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Herring,
S.
C.
(2001)
‘Computer-mediated
discourse’,
in
D.
Schiﬀrin,
D.
Tannen
and
H. E. Hamilton (eds) The Handbook of Discourse Analysis, Malden, MA: Blackwell.
Holland, V. M. and Fisher, F. P. (eds) (2007) The Path of Speech Technologies in Computer Assisted
Language Learning: From Research Toward Practice, London: Routledge.
Holmberg, B., Shelley, M. and White, C. (eds) (2005) Distance Education and Languages: Evolution
and Change, Clevedon: Multilingual Matters.
Hubbard, P. and Siskin, C. B. (2004) ‘Another look at tutorial CALL’, ReCALL 16: 448–61.
Hutchby, I. (2001) Conversation and Technology: From the Telephone to the Internet, Cambridge:
Polity Press.
Jauregi, K. and Bañados, E. (2008) ‘Virtual interaction through video-Web communication: a step
towards enriching and internationalizing language learning programs’, ReCALL 20: 183–207.
Jewitt, C. and Kress, G. (2003) Multimodal Literacy, New York: Peter Lang.
Jones, R. H. (2004) ‘The problem of context in computer-mediated communication’, in P. LeVine and
R. Scollon (eds) Discourse and Technology: Multimodal Discourse Analysis, Washington, DC:
Georgetown University Press.
Kelly, L. G. (1976) Twenty-ﬁve Centuries of Language Teaching, Rowley, MA: Newbury House.
Kern, R. (2008) ‘Literacy and technology in French language teaching: issues and prospects’, in
D. Ayoun (ed.) Studies in French Applied Linguistics, Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Kern, R., Ware, P. D. and Warschauer, M. (2008) ‘Network-based language learning and teaching’,
in N. van Deusen-Scholl and N. H. Hornberger (eds) Encyclopedia of Language and Education,
2nd revised edn, vol. 4, Heidelberg: Springer.
Kinginger, C. (2000) ‘Learning the pragmatics of solidarity in the networked foreign language
classroom’, in J. K. Hall and L. S. Verplaetse (eds) Second and Foreign Language Learning
Through Classroom Interaction, Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Kramsch, C. (2002) ‘Introduction: “How can we tell the dancer from the dance?”’, in C. Kramsch (ed.)
Language Acquisition and Language Socialization: Ecological Perspectives, London: Continuum.
Kramsch, C. and Thorne, S. L. (2001) ‘Foreign language learning as global communicative practice’,
in D. Block and D. Cameron (eds) Globalization and Language Teaching, London: Routledge.
Lam, E. (2004) ‘Border discourses and identities in transnational youth culture’, in J. Mahiri (ed.)
What They Don’t Learn in School: Literacy in the Lives of Urban Youth, New York: Peter Lang.
Lam, W. S. E. and Kramsch, C. (2003) ‘The ecology of an SLA community in a computer-mediated
environment’, in J. Leather and J. van Dam (eds) Ecology of Language Acquisition, Dordrecht:
Kluwer Academic.
Lamy, M.-N. and Hampel, R. (2007) Online Communication in Language Learning and Teaching,
Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan.
Latour, B. (2005) Reassembling the Social: An Introduction to Actor-network-theory, Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Mayer, R. E. (ed.) (2005) The Cambridge Handbook of Multimedia Learning, Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Technology and language learning
213

Meskill, C. and Ranglova, K. (2000) ‘Curriculum innovation in TEFL: a study of technologies
supporting socio-collaborative language learning in Bulgaria’, in M. Warschauer and R. Kern
(eds) Network-based Language Teaching: Concepts and Practice, Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Meurers, W. D. (ed.) (2009) Special issue of CALICO Journal on the automatic analysis of learner
language, (26)3.
Miller, D. and Slater, D. (2000) The Internet: An Ethnographic Approach, Oxford: Berg.
O’Brien, M. G. and Levy, R. M. (2008) ‘Exploration through virtual reality: encounters with the
target culture’, Canadian Modern Language Review 64: 663–91.
O’Dowd, R. (2006) ‘The use of videoconferencing and email as mediators of intercultural student
ethnography’, in J. A. Belz and S. L. Thorne (eds) Computer-mediated Intercultural Foreign
Language Education, Boston: Heinle and Heinle.
O’Dowd, R. and Ritter, M. (2006) ‘Understanding and working with “failed communication” in
telecollaborative exchanges’, CALICO Journal 23: 623–42.
Ochs, E. and Schieﬀelin, B. B. (2008) ‘Language socialization: an historical overview’, in P. A. Duﬀ
and N. H. Hornberger (eds) Encyclopedia of Language and Education, 2nd edn, vol. 8: Language
Socialization, Heidelberg: Springer.
Pachler, N., Bachmair, B. and Cook, J. (2010) Mobilelearning: Structures, Agency, Practices, New
York: Springer.
Schmidt, J. (2008) ‘Podcasts as a learning tool: German language and culture every day’, Die
Unterrichtspraxis/Teaching German 41: 186–94.
Sha, G. (2009) ‘AI-based chatterbots and spoken English teaching: a critical analysis’, Computer
Assisted Language Learning 22: 269–81.
Shiri, S. (2004) Arabic Without Walls, Davis, CA: University of California Consortium for Lan-
guage Learning and Teaching.
Simpson, J. (2005) ‘Learning electronic literacy skills in an online language learning community’,
Computer Assisted Language Learning 18: 327–45.
Thorne, S. L. (2008) ‘Transcultural communication in open Internet environments and massively
multiplayer online games’, in S. S. Magnan (ed.) Mediating Discourse Online, Amsterdam: John
Benjamins.
van Deusen-Scholl, N. (2008) ‘Online discourse strategies: a longitudinal study of computer-mediated
foreign language learning’, in S. S. Magnan (ed.) Mediating Discourse Online, Amsterdam: John
Benjamins.
van Lier, L. (2003) ‘A tale of two computer classrooms: the ecology of project-based language
learning’, in J. Leather and J. van Dam (eds) Ecology of Language Acquisition, Dordrecht:
Kluwer Academic.
Vlugter, P., Knott, A., McDonald, J. and Hall, C. (2009) ‘Dialogue-based CALL: a case study on
teaching pronouns’, Computer Assisted Language Learning 22: 115–31.
von der Emde, S. and Schneider, J. (2003) ‘Experiential learning and collaborative reading: literacy
in the space of virtual encounters’, in P. Patrikis (ed.) Reading Between the Lines: Perspectives on
Foreign Language Literacy, New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.
Wanner, A. (2008) ‘Creating comfort zones of orality in online discussion forums’, in S. S. Magnan
(ed.) Mediating Discourse Online, Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Ware, P. D. (2005) ‘“Missed” communication in online communication: tensions in a German-
American telecollaboration’, Language Learning and Technology 9(2): 64–89.
Warner, C. N. (2004) ‘It’s just a game, right? Types of play in foreign language CMC’, Language
Learning and Technology 8(2): 69–87.
Warschauer, M. and Grimes, D. (2008) ‘Automated essay scoring in the classroom’, Pedagogies
3: 22–36.
Warschauer, M. and Kern, R. (eds) (2000) Network-based Language Teaching: Concepts and Prac-
tice, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
White, C. (2003) Language Learning in Distance Education, Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.
——(2006) ‘Distance learning of foreign languages’, Language Teaching 39: 247–64.
Richard Kern
214

15
Language teacher education
Simon Borg
Introduction
This chapter examines key contemporary themes in the ﬁeld of language teacher education
(henceforth LTE), focusing speciﬁcally on the initial preparation and continuing professional
development of second (L2) and foreign language (FL) teachers. My scope is broad, and the
analysis that follows is not determined by a concern for particular languages, types of teachers
and learners, teacher education programmes or geographical contexts. In fact, highlighting the
diverse global scope of LTE – and the need for greater connections among its various sectors – is
one of my goals here.
Brief history
As a ﬁeld of activity, LTE does not have a long formal history; Schulz’s (2000) review of
articles about FL teacher development published in the Modern Language Journal between
1916 and 1999 suggests that methodology courses for FL teachers in the USA were available
in the 1920s. The ﬁrst teacher training course for EFL (English as a foreign language) tea-
chers, however, only started in London in 1962 (Haycraft 1988). These courses were the pre-
cursors of the Certiﬁcate level TESOL (Teaching English to Speakers of Other Languages)
qualiﬁcations that exist today in the form of the Cambridge ESOL’s CELTA and Trinity’s
Cert. TESOL (see Howatt and Widdowson 2004: 246, for a brief comment on the emergence
of these courses).
The 1960s also witnessed the emergence of applied linguistics as a ﬁeld, and ‘with it came a
body of specialized academic knowledge and theory that provided the foundation of the new
discipline. This knowledge was represented in the curricula of MA programs, which began to
be oﬀered from this time’ (Richards 2008: 159). On such programmes, professional develop-
ment as a language teacher largely entailed becoming familiar with the latest theory and
research in applied linguistics; it was assumed that such knowledge would enhance teachers’
classroom practices.
Early in the 1980s, teacher training emerged as a priority in the work of the Council of
Europe (see Trim 2007 for a historical account of modern language teaching in Europe). It is
215

not clear how the work on LTE being done in continental Europe and that in the UK and
USA interfaced at this time.
As a ﬁeld of inquiry (i.e. one which is systematically researched and theorized), it is only in
the last twenty years that LTE has emerged. In 1990, Richards and Nunan (1990: xi) wrote that
the ﬁeld of teacher education is a relatively underexplored one in both second and foreign
language teaching. The literature on teacher education in language teaching is slight
compared with the literature on issues such as methods and techniques for classroom
teaching. Few of the articles published in the last twenty years are data-based, and most
consist of anecdotal wish lists of what is best for the teacher.
(Richards and Nunan 1990: xi)
The publication this extract comes from was a landmark in the development of LTE as a ﬁeld.
First, it acknowledged the limited empirical basis of LTE and stressed the need to address this.
Second, this text argued for a new view of the education of language teachers, which it
summarized as follows:

a movement away from a ‘training’ perspective to an ‘education’ perspective and a recog-
nition that eﬀective teaching involves higher-level cognitive processes, which cannot be
taught directly;

the need for teachers and student teachers to adopt a research orientation to their own
classrooms and their own teaching;

less emphasis on prescriptions and top-down directives and more emphasis on an inquiry-
based and discovery-oriented approach to learning (bottom-up);

a focus on devising experiences that require the student teacher to generate theories and
hypotheses and to reﬂect critically on teaching;

less dependence on linguistics and language theory as a source discipline for second lan-
guage teacher education, and more of an attempt to integrate sound, educationally based
approaches;

use of procedures that involve teachers in gathering and analyzing data about teaching.
(Richards and Nunan 1990: xii)
These perspectives on LTE have been developed through a number of publications since;
some early ones were Wallace (1991), Flowerdew et al. (1992) and Richards and Lockhart
(1994). More recent contributions which have extended our understandings of what it means
to become, be and develop as a language teacher are Freeman and Richards (1996), Richards
(1998a), Tedick (2005), Grenfell (1998 – in the context of MFL – Modern Foreign
Languages – in the UK), Johnson (2000), Johnson (1999), Johnson and Golombek (2002),
Tsui (2003), Woods (1996), Borg (2006b), Farrell (2008b), Malderez and Wedell (2007), Bailey
(2006), Johnson (2009) and the collection of thirty chapters on LTE in Burns and Richards
(2009). Many of these sources which pre-date 2000 were reviewed in Crandall (2000), who
identiﬁed four trends characterizing the LTE literature in the 1990s. These were:

a shift from transmission, product-oriented theories to constructivist, process-oriented theories
of learning, teaching, and teacher learning;

eﬀorts … to transform teaching through a focus on situated teacher cognition and practice
and the development of concrete, relevant linkages between theory and practice throughout
the teacher education programme;
Simon Borg
216


a growing recognition that teachers’ prior learning experiences play a powerful role in
shaping their views of eﬀective teaching and learning and their teaching practices;

a growing concern that teaching be viewed as a profession (similar to medicine or law) with
respect for the role of teachers in developing theory and directing their own professional
development through collaborative observation, teacher research and inquiry, and sustained
inservice programmes.
(Crandall 2000: 34–6)
This list and that above from Richards and Nunan (1990) overlap in certain respects; together
they provide a summary of key themes in LTE in the 1990s. As we will see below, these themes
continue to be of relevance today.
The analysis I present in the remainder of this chapter derives predominantly from literature
on LTE published since 2005. This is not to suggest that material that predates this period is
no longer valuable; as noted above, seminal work in the ﬁeld stems from the 1990s. It has,
though, been reviewed and discussed elsewhere (Richards 1998b, 2008, Crandall 2000, Borg
2003, Freeman 2002). I will thus focus here on more recent work in the ﬁeld of LTE.
Volume of LTE research
It is clear from the available literature that a substantial body of work exists in relation to
TESOL teacher education. In other areas of LTE the picture, however, varies. In the teaching
of English language learners in the USA, for example, research interest in teacher education is
a recent phenomenon (see the review in Lucas and Grinberg 2008), while the context of
English as an additional language (EAL) in the UK would not seem to be characterized by
any formal process of teacher preparation itself (Franson 2007), let alone a body of research
examining this process. Also in the UK, a rapidly evolving ESOL context has in recent years
witnessed increased LTE activity (see Morton et al. 2006 for a review of this work). MFL
teacher education in the UK, at both primary and secondary level, does not seem to have been
extensively researched (but see Hunt et al. 2005), while language teacher education in con-
tinental Europe has been the focus of projects supported by the Council of Europe and the
European Commission (e.g. Kelly and Grenfell 2005) and also of some research articles (e.g.
Garrido and Alvarez 2006; Ruiz 2008). FL teacher education in the USA has also been the
subject of a number of recent journal articles (e.g. Antenos-Conforti 2008; Bateman 2008; Bell
2005; Geyer 2008; Pearson et al. 2006). The diversity of LTE is a theme I want to continue
emphasizing, and the varying levels of research activity in the diﬀerent domains noted here
continues to support this point. One other point I want to stress further is the general lack of
connections across the LTE sector as a whole. Lucas and Grinberg (2008) is an example of
this; they present a thorough review of research on the preparation of non-specialist (in a
language teaching sense) classroom teachers to support English language learners in the USA; the
review is thoroughly grounded in mainstream teacher education literature yet makes no reference
to key work in the ﬁeld of TESOL teacher education generally or to the UK ESOL sector.
In addition to this general survey of the volume of research available in diﬀerent areas of
LTE, I assessed the prevalence of LTE research by examining the contents pages of six applied
linguistics journals for the period 2005–9. Table 15.1 presents the results of this analysis.
These ﬁgures indicate that, between 2005 and 2009, less than 10 per cent of the articles in
the journals analyzed focused on LTE. This suggests that LTE, while an established domain of
enquiry, still lags far behind language learning and language teaching as core areas of research
interest.
Language teacher education
217

Current issues in LTE
I will now provide concise commentaries on six themes which currently characterize LTE.
Teacher cognition
Teacher cognition is concerned with understanding what teachers think, know, and believe,
and how these relate to what teachers do (see Borg 2006b). Writing about LTE, Johnson
(2006: 235) claims that in the past forty years ‘many factors have advanced the ﬁeld’s under-
standing of L2 teachers’ work, but none is more signiﬁcant than the emergence of a sub-
stantial body of research now referred to as teacher cognition’. As noted earlier, contemporary
views of LTE acknowledge teachers as active, thinking decision-makers whose actions are
inﬂuenced by the unobservable cognitive (and aﬀective) dimension of teaching. Teacher cog-
nition is also a fundamental element in teacher learning; drawing on constructivist theories of
learning, it is now accepted in LTE that how and what teachers learn is shaped in no small
way by their prior experience, knowledge and beliefs. Such views (and hence teacher cognition)
are also central to contemporary sociocultural perspectives on LTE (Johnson 2009), which are
based on the view that ‘teachers’ prior experiences, their interpretations of the activities they
engage in, and, most important, the contexts within which they work are extremely inﬂuential
in shaping how and why teachers do what they do’ (Johnson 2006: 236). For all the above
reasons, understanding teacher cognition is now recognized as a central part of understanding
what it means to be, become and develop as a teacher. It is also accepted that the design and
implementation of teacher education initiatives will be more eﬀective when these are based on
and take account of the cognitions teachers – whether pre-service or in-service – have. An
analysis of contemporary research on LTE demonstrates the central standing a concern for
teacher cognition has; among the ninety-three articles referred to in Table 15.1, those exam-
ining aspects of teacher cognition formed the largest single group; speciﬁc issues examined, for
example, are teachers’ perceptions of errors (Hyland and Anan 2006) and teachers’ (and
students’) perceptions of eﬀective FL teaching (Brown 2009).
The knowledge base for LTE
As Graves (2009) explains, the knowledge base of language teaching – i.e. what teachers need
to know – has been traditionally divided into two separate domains – knowledge of language
and knowledge of teaching. Current thinking in the ﬁeld conceptualizes the knowledge base
for LTE in much more complex terms. Heavily inﬂuenced by work in education generally (e.g.
Shulman 1986), LTE now recognizes that teachers require several types of knowledge.
Table 15.1 LTE literature in six journals, 2005–9
Journal
Volumes
Total articles
LTE articles
%
Applied Linguistics
26(1)–30(2)
141
5
3.5
Foreign Language Annals
38(1)–42(2)
177
19
10.7
Language Teaching Research
9(1)–13(3)
90
16
17.8
Modern Language Journal
89(1)–93(2)
225
14
6.2
System
33(1)–37(2)
180
15
8.3
TESOL Quarterly
39(1)–43(1)
212
24
11.3
Total
1,025
93
9.1
Simon Borg
218

Richards (1998a), for example, proposes a scheme made up of six types of knowledge (theories
of teaching, teaching skills, communication skills, subject matter knowledge, pedagogical rea-
soning and decision-making skills, and contextual knowledge). One feature of such con-
temporary typologies is the inclusion of knowledge which is internal to and created by
teachers (e.g. personal theories and beliefs). This contrasts with views of the knowledge base
for teaching which see it exclusively in terms of external knowledge which teachers must
acquire and then apply.
Also, whereas diﬀerent types of teacher knowledge were previously conceived of separately
in LTE, contemporary thinking in the ﬁeld argues for the need to develop in teachers an
integrated knowledge base which they can deploy eﬀectively in the classroom. Thus, for
example, Morton et al. (2006: 38) conclude that LTE ‘should recognise the complexities of
what constitutes “subject knowledge” in language teaching, and how it is inseparable from
“teaching knowledge” and involve participants in activities which capture the fusion of
content and process typical of language teaching’.
These advances in how the knowledge base for LTE is conceptualized have not been
reﬂected in LTE practices globally. Writing about the education of language teachers in K-12
settings in the USA, Tedick (2009: 265) argues that ‘foreign language preservice teachers …
are left to their own devices to make the connections as they take courses in literature or
phonology’, suggesting that the dichotomies between subject matter and pedagogy referred to
above continue to present a challenge to the eﬀective education of language teachers.
Arguments originally put forward by Freeman and Johnson (1998) and since developed
further (e.g. Freeman and Johnson 2005) critique conceptualizations of the knowledge base for
LTE which are rooted in disciplinary traditions of linguistics and second language acquisition
and which assume that learning to teach equates to the acquisition and transfer of knowledge
from such disciplines. Without negating the value of such knowledge for teachers, Freeman
and Johnson have argued that LTE needs to be grounded in the study of the activities of
teaching itself and the social context in which they occur, and that a recognition of the teacher
as a learner of language teaching is central to this process (see Johnson 2009 for an extended
account of this position).
Knowledge about language
Linked to the previous theme, one aspect of teacher knowledge that has attracted speciﬁc
research attention is teachers’ knowledge about language. The papers in Bartels (2005) share a
concern for diﬀerent types of knowledge about language; collectively they demonstrate both
the relevance of such knowledge to the work of language teachers, as well as some of the
problems that can arise when teachers need to apply to pedagogical contexts theoretical
knowledge acquired in the context of teacher education (see, for example, Bigelow and Ranney
2005). These themes are reprised in Bartels (2009), who also makes suggestions for the kinds
of LTE practices which would make it more likely for teachers to use knowledge about lan-
guage acquired through teacher education in their teaching (e.g. linking the analysis of such
knowledge to real-life problems in classrooms). Andrews (2007) examines in detail teacher
language awareness (TLA) – teachers’ knowledge and understandings of the language
systems – and argues that ‘the possession of an adequate level of TLA is an essential attribute
of any competent L2 teacher’ (2007: ix). More recently, with reference to FL teacher education in
the USA, Lantolf (2009: 270) has also argued ‘that foreign language (FL) teacher education
programs need to (re)invest in courses designed to enhance the depth and breadth of explicit
knowledge of the target language (TL) of their graduates’. While, as noted above, there is
Language teacher education
219

evidence that improved knowledge about language can enhance teaching, it is also important
to remember the point made above that such knowledge alone – when divorced from knowl-
edge about teaching and knowledge about learners – will not guarantee eﬀective classroom
practice.
In terms of empirical research, there is not much evidence of recent work on teachers’
knowledge about language and its use in teaching. More research is needed into how knowl-
edge about language can be developed through LTE in ways that enable teachers to use it
productively to support learning.
Reﬂective practice
Reﬂective practice is another recurrent theme in contemporary LTE literature. Seminal think-
ing in relation to reﬂection stems from the work of Dewey (1933) and Schön (1983), while in
LTE the notion was popularized by Wallace (1991). A number of deﬁnitions of reﬂection have
been put forward (see the discussion in Korthagen 2001) but in essence, being reﬂective
involves teachers in an on-going process of critically examining their beliefs and practices with
a view to becoming aware of and enhancing them. While diﬀerent perspectives on reﬂection
exist, ‘most teacher educators would argue that reﬂection is an essential tool in professional
development’ (Burton 2009: 300).
Farrell (2007b) discusses how reﬂective practice can be promoted in LTE and outlines sev-
eral strategies which can support reﬂective practice, such as action research, journal writing,
and teacher study groups. The use of technology in promoting reﬂective practice among lan-
guage teachers has also emerged an area of research interest (e.g. Lord and Lomicka 2007;
Pellerin 2008). In the European context, a concern for reﬂection is evident in the development
of the EPOSTL, the European Portfolio for Student Teachers of Languages (for a description,
see Burkert and Schweinhorst 2008).
Although the positive impact of reﬂection on teachers’ knowledge and attitudes has been
demonstrated (e.g. Kabilan 2007), evidence that reﬂection leads to better quality language
teaching and learning is generally hard to locate. In his review of literature, Akbari (2007)
concludes that ‘there is little evidence that engaging teachers in reﬂection will result in higher
student achievement and better teacher performance’ (2007: 198). Such critical perspectives on
reﬂection are valuable. In fact, my view on reﬂection is that the positive rhetoric in the litera-
ture is insuﬃciently grounded in the realities that language teachers work in, and a closer
empirical analysis of these realities is required before reﬂective practice can become a viable
global strategy for LTE (especially in in-service contexts). Some insights into teacher resistance
to reﬂection are presented in Moon and Boullón (1997) while more recently A’Dhahab (2009)
has shown that when language teachers are required (without adequate guidance or obvious
purpose) to engage in reﬂective writing they complete the task mechanically, treating it as an
administrative requirement which makes no contribution at all to their professional development.
The practicum
The practicum is a period of practice teaching in real classrooms that is a typical element in
initial LTE programmes. In a practicum, teacher candidates are usually supervised – i.e. they
are observed while teaching and receive feedback on their performance; the practicum is also
normally assessed. The practicum can have range of goals (Gebhard 2009 lists eight), though
primary amongst these is providing teachers with opportunities to develop their practical skills
and pedagogical reasoning by working in a real classroom.
Simon Borg
220

Periodic studies of the practicum in LTE settings have appeared (e.g. Johnson 1992; Numrich
1996) though this area is not characterized by an extensive research base. Much has been
written on the subject of the supervision of language teachers generally – (see the discussion in
Bailey 2006) but this often perpetuates assumptions about appropriate practices (e.g. that non-
directive supervision is preferable to directive supervision) rather than interrogating such views
empirically. Having said that, there have been some recent examples of research focusing on
aspects of the practicum in LTE. Farrell (2007a) examined the experience of a student teacher
who failed the practicum, while Farrell (2008a) and Smith and Lewis (2009) studied the per-
spectives of the practicum of student teachers and mentors respectively. Luk (2008) studied
reﬂective writing in the context of the practicum, while a paper which explores how the
practicum may actually limit language teacher learning is Ong’Ondo and Borg (forthcoming).
The practicum involves various processes which we currently know little about. The transfer
issue is an important one, in terms of how the learning that takes place on the practicum
inﬂuences what teachers do once they become qualiﬁed teachers (some earlier LTE research,
e.g. Spada and Massey 1992 – suggested that transfer may sometimes be very limited but this
is not an issue that has been widely studied). The nature of the triadic relationship among
student teachers, university supervisors and school-based mentors, and how this relationship
shapes teacher learning on the practicum, are also issues we know little about. More speciﬁ-
cally, more research on the role of mentors in LTE is required (see Hobson et al. 2009 for a
review of international literature on mentoring beginning teachers).
Teacher research
The last contemporary theme in LTE I will comment on here is teacher research, which is the
process through which teachers systematically investigate aspects of their own professional
practices with a view to enhancing, ﬁrst, their understanding of these and, subsequently, the
quality of their work. In the context of LTE, teacher research is seen to have the potential to
contribute in many ways to teacher professional development (see, for example, Jones 2004;
Nunan 1989). A number of publications in LTE have also appeared which provide evidence of
teachers researching their own contexts and of the learning they derive from this process (e.g.
Borg 2006a; 2008; Mitchell-Schuitevoerder and Mourão 2006; Burns and Burton 2007). The
positive rhetoric in the literature on teacher research, though, obscures the fact that it remains
a minority activity in the ﬁeld of language teaching. It is important, from a LTE perspective,
to consider the reasons for this, as a better understanding of them can enable teacher educa-
tors to approach the task of promoting language teacher research more feasibly. Work on
language teachers’ perceptions of research (Borg 2007a, 2009; Reis-Jorge 2007) and on the
challenges language teachers wanting to do research face (Allison and Carey 2007) is impor-
tant here as it provides insights into factors which may oppose engagement in this activity by
teachers. Teacher educators in LTE can beneﬁt from an awareness of such factors (see Borg
2007b for a discussion of this issue). For example, language teacher educators must be aware
that making teacher research happen – especially in in-service contexts – involves much more
than ensuring teachers have the technical competence to do research, and invokes a range of
psychological, social, institutional, commercial and political considerations. These factors are,
unfortunately, often overlooked in discussions of teacher research as a strategy for LTE. Much
work has been done in mainstream education on ways of promoting and supporting teacher
research (e.g. Sharp 2007; Davies et al. 2007) and LTE could beneﬁt from a greater awareness
of this literature. Borg (2010) provides a comprehensive review of the literature on language
teacher research engagement.
Language teacher education
221

Other themes
I will comment very brieﬂy on three additional themes in LTE which merit further attention:

Teacher educator development. Who are the teacher educators in LTE? How do they
become language teacher educators? What skills and knowledge do they need? Wright and
Bolitho (2007), Malderez and Wedell (2007) and Waters (2005) provide valuable experi-
ence-based insights into being a language teacher educator; empirical studies of these issues
though are lacking.

Novice teachers. What is the nature of the transition from student teacher to practising
teacher? What impact does the ﬁrst year have on teachers’ subsequent careers? These are
just two examples of questions relevant to an understanding of novice language teachers.
Farrell (2008b) adds to early work on this theme (e.g. Pennington and Richards 1997) but
research here remains limited (but see also Ruohotie-Lyhty and Kaikkonen 2009 for
another study of relevance).

Teacher expertise. The work of Tsui (2003, 2005) has made a central (though largely soli-
tary) contribution to our understandings of what it means to develop expertise in language
teaching. These understandings remain, however, incipient.
Future directions
There are two key messages I want to stress as a result of the above review of issues in LTE.
Enhancing cross-sector links
LTE as a ﬁeld is immense in scope, spanning multiple and diverse international sites, socio-
political contexts, teacher education programme structures, teacher educator backgrounds, and
prospective and practising teacher proﬁles. While this scope means that each LTE context,
such as primary MFL in the UK, or the teaching of ELLs in the USA, will have its unique
concerns, it also presents excellent opportunities for shared knowledge development and
practical advancement on a global scale. Having surveyed work across a range of LTE sectors,
my ﬁrst point here is that these opportunities for cross-sector links are not being exploited.
There will be clear pragmatic reasons for this. However, it is clear that innovative work being
conducted in particular LTE sectors may be of value to the ﬁeld generally. This applies con-
ceptually, empirically, and in more practical terms. It would seem that a review of LTE lit-
erature which looked globally at thinking, research, and practice would be an invaluable
resource for language teacher educators. The production of such a review, placing it in the
context of what is known about mainstream teacher education generally, therefore, is my ﬁrst
suggestion for future work in LTE. The analysis I have presented here merely hints at the
potential that a much larger and more systematic analysis of issues across LTE worldwide
could have.
Strengthening the empirical base
My second concluding point here is that in empirical terms LTE remains undeveloped. A
number of concerns signalled in the mainstream teacher education literature are also being
addressed in LTE (e.g. concerns with professional development and with the practicum).
However, we are not in a position to provide conﬁdent research-based answers to many of the
Simon Borg
222

key questions that challenge language teacher educators. The vast pool of accumulated prac-
tical experience that language teacher educators around the world possess is undeniably valu-
able. If we are to make progress with some of the most pressing questions we face as a ﬁeld,
though, we also require systematic programmes of both qualitative and quantitative research,
with scope for replications across diﬀerent contexts, and which collectively will provide a
knowledge base which can inform the continuing development of LTE as a ﬁeld. Each of the
key LTE themes I discussed above is in need of detailed speciﬁc study. Also, despite advances
in this respect, LTE can also beneﬁt from a greater awareness of the research being conducted
in teacher education more generally. Readers here are referred to Cochran-Smith and Zeichner
(2005), Darling-Hammond and Bransford (2005) and Cochran-Smith et al. (2008), which
focus on the US context. Substantial work on mainstream teacher education has also been
conducted in Europe, as exempliﬁed in a report by the European Trade Union Committee for
Education (ETUCE/CSEE 2008). Internationally, the OECD has also contributed to teacher
education policy, most recently in its Teaching and Learning International Survey (TALIS)
project. The ﬁrst results from this project (drawing on responses from nearly 74,000 lower
secondary school teachers) were released in mid-2009 (OECD 2009).
The issue of the impact of LTE is also one that has to date attracted limited empirical
attention: what diﬀerence does LTE make to teachers and to their learners? There has been
some limited debate of the relationship between teacher learning and student learning in LTE
(Freeman and Johnson 2005; Borg 2006b; Andrews 2007), but Schulz’s (2000) conclusion on
reviewing eighty-ﬁve years of literature on FL teacher education in the USA applies today to
LTE generally: ‘our progress (i.e., any documented, measurable impact on quality, quantity, or
both) in the area of teacher development has been disappointingly small’. Research in main-
stream teacher education suggests that relationships between teacher education and student
learning are diﬃcult to study (Kwang et al. 2007); however, this is a challenge which confronts
us as a ﬁeld and which awaits a systematic response.
Thus, the development of systematic programmes of focused research is the second sugges-
tion for the future I want to make here. An increase in the volume of high quality LTE
research would justify the creation of an international journal dedicated solely to such work.
Given the levels of LTE research activity I have noted here, though, such an exercise is at
present not viable, though it is positive to note the continued periodic publication of special
topic issues of leading journals dedicated to LTE (e.g. in 2010, Language Teaching Research
vol. 14(3)).
Summary
The purpose of this chapter was to provide a critical overview of the ﬁeld of language teacher
education (LTE). I started by noting the global and varied scope of LTE, followed by a brief
comment on the relatively recent history of LTE as a ﬁeld of inquiry. An analysis of research
published in six applied linguistics journals suggested that research outputs relevant to LTE
were not currently particularly high. The limitations of the existing research base in LTE were
highlighted in the core of the chapter, where key themes suggested in the current literature
were discussed. For each theme, the discussion concluded that strong evidence in relation to
central aspects of LTE is lacking and that widely accepted ideas in the ﬁeld, while supported
by experience, require empirical support too. Research from TESOL dominates LTE generally,
though I did apply myself here to the task of surveying work from the range of LTE sectors
identiﬁed earlier in the chapter. In terms of taking the ﬁeld forward, I ended with two sug-
gestions. One is the need for an international cross-sector review of what is known about LTE;
Language teacher education
223

the second called for the development and implementation of systematic programmes of LTE
research on a broad range of fundamental issues.
Related topics
key concepts in language learning and language education; language teaching methodology
Further reading
Andrews, S. (2007) Teacher Language Awareness, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. (An
analysis of the value to teachers of an awareness of language systems.)
Borg, S. (2006) Teacher Cognition and Language Education: Research and Practice, London:
Continuum. (A review of research on language teachers’ beliefs and knowledge and the methods
used in such research.)
Burns, A. and Richards, J. C. (eds) (2009) The Cambridge Guide to Second Language Teacher
Education, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. (A collection of overviews of key themes in
the ﬁeld of L2 teacher education.)
Cochran-Smith, M. and Zeichner, K. (eds) (2005) Studying Teacher Education: The Report of the
AERA Panel on Research and Teacher Education, Mahwah, NJ: AERA/Lawrence Erlbaum
Associates. (A review of research on initial teacher education in the USA.)
Johnson, K. E. (2009) Second Language Teacher Education: A Sociocultural Perspective, London:
Routledge. (An analysis of the implications of sociocultural theory for the practice of second
language teacher education.)
References
A’Dhahab, S. M. (2009) ‘EFL teachers’ perceptions and practices regarding reﬂective writing’, in
S. Borg (ed.) Researching English Language Teaching and Teacher Development in Oman, Oman,
Muscat: Ministry of Education.
Akbari, R. (2007) ‘Reﬂections on reﬂection: a critical appraisal of reﬂective practices in L2 teacher
education’, System 35(2): 192–207.
Allison, D. and Carey, J. (2007) ‘What do university language teachers say about language teaching
research?’, TESL Canada Journal 24(2): 61–81.
Andrews, S. (2007) Teacher Language Awareness, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Antenos-Conforti, E. (2008) ‘How far is Georgia?: New Jersey’s teachers of Italian evaluate their
preparation’, Foreign Language Annals 41: 542–61.
Bailey, K. M. (2006) Language Teacher Supervision, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Bartels, N. (ed.) (2005) Applied Linguistics and Language Teacher Education, New York: Springer.
Bartels, N. (2009) ‘Knowledge about language’, in A. Burns and J. C. Richards (eds) The
Cambridge Guide to Second Language Teacher Education, Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.
Bateman, B. E. (2008) ‘Student teachers’ attitudes and beliefs about using the target language in the
classroom’, Foreign Language Annals 41: 11–28.
Bell, T. R. (2005) ‘Behaviors and attitudes of eﬀective foreign language teachers: results of a ques-
tionnaire study’, Foreign Language Annals 38: 259–70.
Bigelow, M. and Ranney, M. (2005) ‘Pre-service ESL teachers’ knowledge about language and
its transfer to lesson planning’, in N. Bartels (ed.) Applied Linguistics and Language Teacher
Education, New York: Springer.
Borg, S. (2003) ‘Teacher cognition in language teaching: a review of research on what language
teachers think, know, believe, and do’, Language Teaching 36(2): 81–109.
——(2006b) Teacher Cognition and Language Education: Research and Practice, London: Continuum.
——(2007a) ‘Research engagement in English language teaching’, Teaching and Teacher Education
23(5): 731–47.
——(2007b) ‘Understanding what teachers think about research’, The Teacher Trainer 21(2): 2–4.
——(2009) ‘English language teachers’ conceptions of research’, Applied Linguistics 30(3): 355–88.
Simon Borg
224

——(2010) ‘Language teacher research engagement’, Language Teaching 43(4): 391–429.
Borg, S. (ed.) (2006a) Language Teacher Research in Europe, Alexandria, VA: TESOL.
——(2008) Investigating English Language Teaching and Learning in Oman, Oman, Muscat: Min-
istry of Education.
Brown, A. V. (2009) ‘Students’ and teachers’ perceptions of eﬀective foreign language teaching: a
comparison of ideals’, Modern Language Journal 93(1): 46–60.
Burkert, A. and Schweinhorst, K. (2008) ‘Focus on the student teacher: the European Portfolio for
Student Teachers of Languages (EPOSTL) as a tool to develop teacher autonomy’, Innovation in
Language Learning and Teaching 2: 238–52.
Burns, A. and Burton, J. (eds) (2007) Language Teacher Research in Australia and New Zealand,
Alexandria, VA: TESOL.
Burns, A. and Richards, J. C. (eds) (2009) The Cambridge Guide to Second Language Teacher
Education, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Burton, J. (2009) ‘Reﬂective practice’, in A. Burns and J. C. Richards (eds) The Cambridge Guide to
Second Language Teacher Education, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Cochran-Smith, M., Feiman-Nemser, S., McIntyre, J. D. and Demers, K. E. (eds) (2008) Handbook
of Research on Teacher Education: Enduring Questions in Changing Contexts, New York:
Routledge/Association of Teacher Educators.
Cochran-Smith, M. and Zeichner, K. (eds) (2005) Studying Teacher Education: The Report of the AERA
Panel on Research and Teacher Education, Mahwah, NJ: AERA/Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Crandall, J. A. (2000) ‘Language teacher education’, Annual Review of Applied Linguistics 20: 34–55.
Darling-Hammond, L. and Bransford, J. (2005) Preparing Teachers for a Changing World, San
Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
Davies, P., Hamilton, M. and James, K. (2007) Maximising the Impact of Practitioner Research: A
Handbook of Practical Advice, London: NRDC.
Dewey, J. (1933) How We Think, Buﬀalo, NY: Prometheus Books.
ETUCE/CSEE (2008) Teacher Education in Europe, Brussels: ETUCE/CSEE.
Farrell, T. S. C. (2007a) ‘Failing the practicum: narrowing the gap between expectations and reality
with reﬂective practice’, TESOL Quarterly 41(1): 193–202.
——(2007b) Reﬂective Language Teaching: From Research to Practice, London: Continuum.
——(2008a) ‘“Here’s the book, go teach the class”: ELT practicum support’, RELC Journal 39:
226–41.
Farrell, T. S. C. (ed.) (2008b) Novice Language Teachers: Insights and Perspectives for the First
Year, London: Equinox.
Flowerdew, J., Brock, M. and Hsia, S. (eds) (1992) Perspectives on Second Language Teacher Edu-
cation, Hong Kong: City Polytechnic.
Franson, C. (2007) ‘Challenges and opportunities for the teaching profession: English as an addi-
tional language in the UK’, in J. Cummins and C. Davison (eds) International Handbook of
English Language Teaching, New York: Springer.
Freeman, D. (2002) ‘The hidden side of the work: teacher knowledge and learning to teach’,
Language Teaching 35(1): 1–13.
Freeman, D. and Johnson, K. E. (1998) ‘Reconceptualizing the knowledge-base of language teacher
education’, TESOL Quarterly 32(3): 397–417.
——(2005) ‘Towards linking teacher knowledge and student learning.’, in D. Tedick (ed.) Second
Language Teacher Education: International Perspectives, Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum
Associates.
Freeman, D. and Richards, J. C. (eds) (1996) Teacher Learning in Language Teaching, Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Garrido, C. and Alvarez, I. (2006) ‘Language teacher education for intercultural understanding’,
European Journal of Teacher Education 29: 163–79.
Gebhard, G. (2009) ‘The practicum’, in A. Burns and J. C. Richards (eds) The Cambridge Guide to
Second Language Teacher Education, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Geyer, N. (2008) ‘Reﬂective practices in foreign language teacher education: a view through micro
and macro windows’, Foreign Language Annals 41: 627–38.
Graves, K. (2009) ‘The curriculum of second language teacher education’, in A. Burns and
J. C. Richards (eds) The Cambridge Guide to Second Language Teacher Education, Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Language teacher education
225

Grenfell, M. (1998) Training Teachers in Practice, Clevedon: Multilingual Matters.
Haycraft, J. (1988) ‘The ﬁrst international house preparatory course: an historical overview’, in
T. Duﬀ(ed.) Explorations in Teacher Training: Problems and Issues, London: Longman.
Hobson, A. J., Ashby, P., Malderez, A. and Tomlinson, P. D. (2009) ‘Mentoring beginning teachers:
what we know and what we don’t’, Teaching and Teacher Education 25(1): 207–16.
Howatt, A. P. R. and Widdowson, H. G. (2004) A History of ELT, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Hunt, M., Barnes, A., Powell, B., Lindsay, G. and Muijs, D. (2005) ‘Primary modern foreign lan-
guages: an overview of recent research, key issues and challenges for educational policy and
practice’, Research Papers in Education 20: 371–90.
Hyland, K. and Anan, E. (2006) ‘Teachers’ perceptions of error: the eﬀects of ﬁrst language and
experience’, System 34(4): 509–19.
Johnson, K. E. (1992) ‘Learning to teach: instructional actions and decisions of preservice ESL
teachers’, TESOL Quarterly 26(3): 507–35.
——(1999) Understanding Language Teaching: Reasoning in Action, Boston, MA: Heinle and Heinle.
——(2006) ‘The sociocultural turn and its challenges for second language teacher education’,
TESOL Quarterly 40: 235–57.
——(2009) Second Language Teacher Education: A Sociocultural Perspective, London: Routledge.
Johnson, K. E. (ed.) (2000) Teacher Education, Alexandria, VA: TESOL.
Johnson, K. E. and Golombek, P. R. (eds) (2002) Teachers’ Narrative Inquiry as Professional
Development, New York: Cambridge University Press.
Jones, J. F. (2004) ‘The many beneﬁts of a research component in English language teacher educa-
tion: a case study’, Prospect 19(2): 25–38.
Kabilan, M. K. (2007) ‘English language teachers reﬂecting on reﬂections: a Malaysian experience’,
TESOL Quarterly 41(4): 681–706.
Kelly, M. and Grenfell, M. (2005) European Proﬁle for Language Teacher Education. A Frame of
Reference. Available at www.lang.soton.ac.uk/proﬁle/index.html (accessed 20 April 2010).
Korthagen, F. A. J. (2001) Linking Practice and Theory: The Pedagogy of Realistic Teacher Edu-
cation, Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Kwang, S. Y., Duncan, T., Silvia, W. Y., Scarloss, B. and Shapley, K. L. (2007) Reviewing the Evi-
dence on How Teacher Professional Development Aﬀects Student Achievement, Washington, DC:
U.S. Department of Education, Institute of Education Sciences, National Center for Education
Evaluation and Regional Assistance, Regional Educational Laboratory Southwest.
Lantolf, J. P. (2009) ‘Knowledge of language in foreign language teacher education’, Modern
Language Journal 93(2): 270–4.
Lord, G. and Lomicka, L. (2007) ‘Foreign language teacher preparation and asynchronous CMC:
promoting reﬂective teaching’, Journal of Technology and Teacher Education 15: 513–32.
Lucas, T. and Grinberg, J. (2008) ‘Responding to the linguistic reality of mainstream teachers: pre-
paring all teachers to teach English language learners’, in M. Cochran-Smith, S. Feiman-Nemser,
J. D. McIntyre and K. E. Demers (eds) Handbook of Research on Teacher Education: Enduring
Questions in Changing Contexts, New York: Routledge/Association of Teacher Educators.
Luk, J. (2008) ‘Assessing teaching practicum reﬂections: distinguishing discourse features of the
“high” and “low” grade reports’, System 36(4): 624–41.
Malderez, A. and Wedell, M. (2007) Teaching Teachers: Processes and Practices, London:
Continuum.
Mitchell-Schuitevoerder, R. and Mourão, S. (eds) (2006) Teachers and Young Learners: Research in
Our Classrooms, Canterbury: IATEFL.
Moon, J. A. and Boullón, R. (1997) ‘Reluctance to reﬂect: issues in professional development’, in
D. Hayes (ed.) In-Service Teacher Development: International Perspectives, London: Prentice Hall.
Morton, T., Maguire, T. and Baynham, M. (2006) A Literature Review of Research on Teacher
Education in Adult Literacy, Numeracy and ESOL, London: NRDC.
Newman, M. and Hanauer, D. (2005) ‘The NCATE/TESOL teacher education standards: a critical
review’, TESOL Quarterly 39(4): 753–64.
Numrich, C. (1996) ‘On becoming a language teacher: insights from diary studies’, TESOL Quarterly
30(1): 131–53.
Nunan, D. (1989) Understanding Language Classrooms, New York: Prentice Hall.
OECD (2009) Creating Eﬀective Teaching and Learning Environments: First Results from TALIS.
Available at www.oecd.org/dataoecd/17/51/43023606.pdf (accessed 20 April 2010).
Simon Borg
226

Ong’Ondo, C. O. and Borg, S. (2011). ‘“We teach plastic lessons to please them”: the inﬂuence of
supervision on the practice of English language student teachers in Kenya’, Language Teaching
Research.
Pearson, L., Fonseca-Greber, B. and Foell, K. (2006) ‘Advanced proﬁciency for foreign language
teacher candidates: what can we do to help them achieve this goal?’, Foreign Language Annals
39: 507–19.
Pellerin, M. (2008) ‘The use of electronic journaling to support and promote the concept of reﬂec-
tive practice with pre-service language teachers’, Technology and Teacher Education Annual 6:
3894–9.
Pennington, M. C. and Richards, J. C. (1997) ‘Reorienting the teaching universe: the experience of
ﬁve ﬁrst-year English teachers in Hong Kong’, Language Teaching Research 1(2): 149–78.
Reis-Jorge, J. M. (2007) ‘“Teachers” conceptions of teacher-research and self-perceptions as
enquiring practitioners: a longitudinal case study’, Teaching and Teacher Education 23(4): 402–17.
Richards, J. C. (1998a) Beyond Training, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
——(1998b) ‘The scope of second language teacher education’, in J. C. Richards (ed.) Beyond
Training, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
——(2008) ‘Second language teacher education today’, RELC Journal 39(2): 158–77.
Richards, J. C. and Lockhart, C. (1994) Reﬂective Teaching in Second Language Classrooms,
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Richards, J. C. and Nunan, D. (eds) (1990) Second Language Teacher Education, Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Ruiz, E. M. (2008) ‘Analysis of the system of practicum in Spanish universities’, European Journal
of Teacher Education 31(4): 339–66.
Ruohotie-Lyhty, M. and Kaikkonen, P. (2009) ‘The diﬃculty of change: the impact of personal
school experience and teacher education on the work of beginning language teachers’, Scandina-
vian Journal of Educational Research 53(3): 295–309.
Schön, D. A. (1983) The Reﬂective Practitioner: How Professionals Think in Action, London:
Temple Smith.
Schulz, R. A. (2000) ‘Foreign language teacher development: MLJ perspectives 1916–99’, Modern
Language Journal 84(4): 496–522.
Sharp, C. (2007) Making Research Make a Diﬀerence. Teacher Research: A Small-Scale Study to
Look at Impact, Chelmsford: Flare.
Shulman, L. S. (1986) ‘Those who understand: knowledge growth in teaching’, Educational
Researcher 15(2): 4–14.
Smith, M. K. and Lewis, M. (2009) ‘The language teaching practicum: perspectives from mentors’,
Teacher Trainer 23: 5–8.
Spada, N. and Massey, M. (1992) ‘The role of prior pedagogical knowledge in determining the
practice of novice ESL teachers’, in J. Flowerdew, M. Brock and S. Hsia (eds) Perspectives on
Second Language Teacher Education, Hong Kong: City Polytechnic.
Tedick, D. (ed.) (2005) Second Language Teacher Education: International Perspectives, Mahwah,
NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Tedick, D. J. (2009) ‘K-12 language teacher preparation: problems and possibilities’, Modern Lan-
guage Journal 93(2): 263–7.
Trim, J. L. M. (2007) Modern Languages in the Council of Europe 1954–1997, Strasbourg: Lan-
guage Policy Division, Council of Europe.
Tsui, A. B. M. (2003) Understanding Expertise in Teaching: Case Studies of ESL Teachers,
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
——(2005) ‘Expertise in teaching: perspectives and issues’, in K. Johnson (ed.) Expertise in Second
Language Learning and Teaching, Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan.
Wallace, M. J. (1991) Training Foreign Language Teachers: A Reﬂective Approach, Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Waters, A. (2005) ‘Expertise in teacher education: helping teachers to learn’, in K. Johnson (ed.)
Expertise in Second Language Learning and Teaching, Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan.
Woods, D. (1996) Teacher Cognition in Language Teaching, Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.
Wright, T. and Bolitho, R. (2007) Trainer Development. Available at: www.lulu.com/content/
554846
Language teacher education
227

Language teacher education Websites
The Teacher Trainer journal. Available at www.tttjournal.co.uk
Professional standards for ESOL in the UK. Available at www.lluk.org/documents/app_ prof_stand
ards_literacy_esol.pdf
Standards for the preparation of ESL educators in the USA (see also Newman and Hanauer 2005).
Available at www.tesol.org/s_tesol/seccss.asp?CID=219andDID=1689
Language teacher cognition bibliography. Available at www.education.leeds.ac.uk/research/ﬁles/146.pdf
Simon Borg
228

16
Bilingual education
Ingrid Gogolin
Introduction
Bilingual education is a highly controversial matter. The debates surrounding the subject of
bilingualism and bilingual education are deeply rooted in historical and political traditions.
The ﬁrst section of this chapter gives a historical outline of these traditions, focussing on the
fact that the controversy took on a special signiﬁcance with the emergence of the ‘classical’
nation state (Hobsbawm 1990). The notion of nation as developed in the eighteenth and
nineteenth centuries gave rise to the idea that a state – and with it all inhabitants – is ‘normally’
monolingual. Since then, the idea of monolingualism in a whole country or territories in a
country has been one of the key characteristics of the classical European concept of ‘nation’.
This historical perspective sets the frame for the development of practice as well as evalua-
tion of and research on bilingual education models. The second section presents a range of
models which have been established under the label of ‘bilingual education’ in recent years. A
critical discussion about the research which has been undertaken in this ﬁeld, namely on the
question of eﬀects and eﬀectiveness of ‘bilingual education’, is presented in the third section.
Historical perspective: nation state and monolingualism
There has long been an air of controversy surrounding the subject of bilingualism and bilin-
gual education. On one hand, the bilingual personality is subject to admiration and respect.
On the other hand, bilingualism is regarded with critical distance or even mistrust. In histor-
ical French reference works, the word ‘bilinguë’ is considered synonymous with ‘cleft tongue’
as well as ‘split personality’.
The ambivalence of the notion of bilingualism took on a special signiﬁcance with the
emergence of the historical idea that a ‘normal’ nation is monolingual. In the era of
the founding and establishment of the European – or ‘classical’ – concept of nation the debate
about the inseparability of the people’s language and the state erupted. Younger concepts
which can for example be found in post-colonial nation states diﬀer considerably from this,
namely with respect to their linguistic constitutions (Alexander 2003). In any case, the European
example is fundamental for historical as well as current debates on bilingual education, and
229

inﬂuences the set of arguments which are used, especially with respect to power relations, often
intrinsic in these debates.
According to the classical concept, monolingualism of a whole country or territories in a
country is one of the key characteristics of a well-functioning and ‘sound’ nation state. Infor-
mation about the language (or languages) a person lives in therefore signiﬁed not only a
matter of language usage, but also the allegiance to a (‘my’) country. The oﬃcial language of
the nation mutated to the ‘mother tongue’ of its constituents. The use of the ‘correct’ language
in the sense of the language of the nation has since then implied solidarity with the community
of all those living in the respective nation.
Johann Gottlieb Fichte was one of the important philosophers to introduce the notion that
the bonds between nation and language are inseparable. Later on, arguments like this are
transferred into a consensus culture (Gramsci 1984): not only ‘the bourgeoisie’ but also ‘the
working class’ identify themselves with the idea of the monolingual nation as the ‘regular
case’. Fichte pointed to the ‘naturalness’ of this for the architecture of a nation (or of territories
within it):
What speaks the same language, that is from the ﬁrst and apart from all human con-
trivance united by mere Nature with a multitude of invisible ties, [ … ] it belongs together
and is by nature one and an indivisible whole.
(Fichte 1896: 259)
Statements like this introduced into the debate the recourse to a common bond, anchored in
Nature itself, between an individual, her/his state, and consequently its language. This has
developed into one of the reality-shaping myths since the close of the eighteenth century
(Hobsbawm 1990).
In the nineteenth century these ideologies or myths were strengthened in nations based on
this idea by argumentation as well as by their spread in discourse about the best and most
appropriate functional systems for societal institutions – such as education, public adminis-
tration and the judiciary – and by their assimilation into the individual’s self-identity. Eric
Hobsbawm (1990) characterized the nineteenth century as the era of inventions that are the
source of the power of nationalism.
Recourse to such history (or rather histories) and their myths ensures they are strengthened –
and transferred in a common sense. The myth of monoligualism as ‘normality’ is today
inscribed in societal structures as well as the self-conception of individuals in the classical
nation states: their monolingual habitus (Gogolin 1994, 2006). It appears in the structures of
public institutions, most notably the education system, but also in the regulation of everyday
social matters. As an illustration I present a section from a widely read pedagogical reference
book of the nineteenth century in which the interplay of arguments is apparent:
The unity of a state and speciﬁcally of the a culture of a state [requires] – merely because
of the community of interests and to ensure all those belonging to it participate in its
beneﬁts, advantages and rights – that the language of those who take an eminent position
of leadership due to education in general or through industriousness, trade, the arts and
science should become the common language of all inhabitants …
(Schubert 1873: 599)
The argument that it is best to live in just one language because it beneﬁts not only society but
also the individual becomes, then, only logical. To illustrate this, I present another example
Ingrid Gogolin
230

from a pedagogical reference book, but in this case dating from the early twentieth century.
Eduard Blocher, a Swiss theologian and campaigner for the status of German in Switzerland,
contributed to Wilhelm Rein’s ten-volume Encyclopdia of Pedagogy (Encyklopädisches Hand-
buch der Pädagogik) of 1910. In his entry on ‘bilingualism’ he argues that it can be beneﬁcial
only in terms of its ‘usefulness’, for example, for the work of interpreters or in cross-border
business relations. Generally, however, his view is that bilingualism is burdened with dis-
advantages; that it means a danger to the physical, mental and spiritual development of the
child:
One disadvantage is the immense amount of time and mental energy needed to maintain
and achieve bilingualism. [ … ] Another disadvantage is dulling and weakening of the
innate sense of language. Here there are of course enormous diﬀerences depending on
aptitude, education and environment. When all damage of a linguistic nature has been
overcome, cognitive processes still show some traces of bilingualism. [ … ] To summarize,
the disadvantages, which do not all need to occur in the same person, are greater expen-
diture of time and energy at the expense of other work, weakening of the innate sense of
language due to mutual interference of the two languages, uncertainty how to express
oneself, mixing of languages, lack of active vocabulary, loss of intellectual community
with monolinguals, i.e. with the vast majority of countrymen.
(Blocher 1910: 667–9)
The idea of ‘subtractive bilingualism’ shimmers through this point of view, as it was presented
in reﬂections about bilingualism in the 1980s (e.g. Skutnabb-Kangas 1984).
In retrospect, the ‘successful career’ of monolingualism as a feature of the individual’s self-
conception as well as that of the nation state is justiﬁed by the societal and technical devel-
opments of the time. The Enlightenment and the French Revolution had initiated the
emergence of a civic public sphere. Access to a common language thus meant at the same time
inclusion and participation. The Industrial Revolution, and speciﬁcally the invention of print,
made it possible to standardize languages as well as circulate the standardized versions among
a large number of people. Systems of general education in the sense that they addressed every
child (or at least every male child) were founded and allowed access to the common language
in its standardized form. Initially, the creation of monolingualism was one of the necessary
prerequisites for the development of democracies in today’s sense.
The ambiguity of this development relates to the fact that the notion of nation developed
into nationalistic concepts in the course of the nineteenth century. Participation in the civic
public sphere was no longer considered a universal human right as it was initially con-
ceptualized, but an exclusive right of the acknowledged member of a state, the citizen. The
focus on functional aspects of language as tools for communication and participation were
increasingly accompanied, if not replaced, by the connotation of language use as an expression
of solidarity and loyalty with ‘emperor, people and fatherland’ – as it was expressed in late
nineteenth-century Germany.
This development brings the close interconnection between language and power to the sur-
face. The creation of a ‘common language’ inevitably meant the exclusion of other languages
in a nation state from the privilege of commonness – or the creation of language minorities.
Since the middle of the nineteenth century (in German-speaking areas, but elsewhere as well at
diﬀerent times) the existence of language minorities within countries has repeatedly led to
disputes about individual versus community versus common language. Not only did aggressive
state activities give rise to such disputes, as in the prohibition of the public use of languages
Bilingual education
231

and their exclusion from the education system, but so also did more peaceful manifestations of
human mobility: namely migration processes.
Again, Germany can serve as an example, namely the industrialized Ruhr area. Many
Polish-speaking people from East Prussia, but also Slovenians, Italians and people from other
countries migrated to the Ruhr at the end of the nineteenth century, mostly in order to ﬁnd
work in the mines. Traces of this migration are obliterated in the German language today;
they can still be found in the names of the oﬀspring – provided their forebears did not make
use of the oﬀer by the authorities to Germanize names in order to erase anything reminiscent
of a foreign origin. In such historical-political constellations the need for regulation of lan-
guage issues grows – as, for example, was the case in Prussia, where several laws were enacted
in reaction to migration and the foreign languages which immigrants brought with them. The
central feature of these laws was prohibition of the use of these languages in public, as exempliﬁed
by the Prussian ‘Business language law’ of 1876, a ‘Court language law’ of 1877, and a piece
of legislation from 1908 governing the language use in clubs and associations. At such points
in history, public institutions of education were always the object of interest and regulation; in
Prussia at the turn of the nineteenth century a number of ordinances were issued that,
depending on the region, highly restricted or prohibited the use of the immigrants’ languages
in schools (see, for an overview, Krüger-Potratz 2005).
All classical nation states, at one point or the other in their histories, experienced processes
of aggressive assimilation of linguistic minorities, be it in their own state territories or in the
course of conquest – including the fact that more or less generous exceptions were made for
certain languages which were provided with exclusive privileges (as was the case since the
twentieth century for Sorbian or Danish in Germany, or for Frisian in the Netherlands, and so
called lesser used languages in many states; see Hogan-Brun and Wolﬀ2003). Since the 1990s,
the European Charter for Regional and Minority Languages (Council of Europe 1992) pro-
vides protection for autochthonous minority languages since they are considered as elements
of the European cultural heritage. The claims for linguistic minority rights are in essence ele-
mentary struggles for participation and inclusion, and access to power in a society (Bourdieu
1991).
Although often forgotten or neglected, this historical development sets the framework for
the controversies which play out around bilingual education in the present day. Any attempt at
a scientiﬁc analysis of bilingual education cannot ignore the historical tradition surrounding
the topic. This is especially true because similarities with earlier events and arguments appear
repeatedly in revivals of the controversy as well as in a number of the arguments presented. If
scientiﬁc dispute related to bilingualism is not to degenerate into mutual criticism of opposing
ideologies, the history of the controversy must be well understood.
Types of bilingual education
As it is the case with the term ‘multilingualism’ (see Cenoz and Gorter, this volume), the term
‘bilingual education’ is broadly used in applied linguistics – but with a considerable range of
connotations. Cenoz and Gorter state that the diﬀerent ways ‘multilingualism’ is used are
linked at least to three sources of variability: the individual versus social dimension, the
number of languages involved, and the level of proﬁciency in the diﬀerent languages. With
regard to the number of languages involved, the term multilingualism implies ‘multiple’ lan-
guages; it usually refers to two or more. In contrast with this, the term ‘bilingualism’ is used
when referring to ‘two languages’ – although ‘bilingualism’ is frequently used in cases where
more than two languages are involved.
Ingrid Gogolin
232

As this chapter focuses on bilingual education, the term ‘bilingualism’ is used when refer-
ring speciﬁcally to models or types of education which explicitly label themselves as bilingual.
This may be independent from the number of languages involved as represented by the
addressees of such education, but in general the intentional education or teaching programmes
focus on two languages.
In line with the historical development as outlined above, bilingual education models have
mostly been established as exceptions to a rule of ‘regular’ education – which was designed in
a monolingual modus. Bilingual education schemes have usually been established to serve the
needs or demands of certain groups in societies, not for societies as a whole. This again is
diﬀerent in the education systems of younger, mostly post-colonial nations. In parts of India or
in some African states, South Africa for example, trilingual schooling was established in which
children are taught in their home language ﬁrst, plus the language of the region and a supra-
regional language, for example, English or French. Where they have been established, these
models replace former post-colonial systems in which the children are taught in their home
language at the beginning of their school careers, but after a foundation phase the teaching
completely shifts to usually English or French as the language of instruction. This very speciﬁc
constellation is conventionally not considered as ‘bilingual education’ (see Heugh 1995;
Hornberger and Corson 1998; Agnihotri 2006).
The establishment of bilingual education models in classical nation states with two or more
national languages, such as Canada, Belgium or Switzerland, seems to be an exception to the
rule. In these countries, children are normally taught (at least one of) the other national lan-
guage(s) at school. This can be organized as foreign language teaching: at a certain point in
the school curriculum, the other national language is introduced to the curriculum as a sub-
ject. More ambitious are the so-called immersion models. Probably the best known and inﬂu-
ential of these are the French immersion models in Canada (see for the following: Allen 2004;
Statistics Canada 2005). Whereas English education models in Canada oﬀer French as a sub-
ject, usually from grade 4, in the French immersion models all teaching (except English lan-
guage and arts) to children in Anglophone school districts is provided in French. The models
are established in diﬀerent ways in nine Canadian provinces. Early immersion programmes
begin in either kindergarten or grade 1; middle immersion programmes start midway through
elementary school; and still others begin in the later grades. Attendance of immersion pro-
grammes varies by the type of programme. In the year 2000 for example, only 21 per cent of the
students enrolled in French immersion in Nova Scotia had been attending immersion before
grade 4, whereas about 80 per cent of the 15-year-olds enrolled in Manitoba, Saskatchewan
and Alberta had started in early immersion programmes.
Statistical data show that the French immersion models in general led to high performance
of the participating students in reading (Allen 2004; OECD 2006). However, it is not evident
that the bilingual education model as such is the causal factor for its success. In analyses of the
socio-economic background and the cultural capital (i.e. the forms of knowledge, skills and
education of a person, Bourdieu 1979) of children participating in French immersion models,
it turns out that they are highly self-selective (Statistics Canada 2005). The parents of immersion
students are from higher socio-economic backgrounds, and are more likely to have a high cul-
tural capital (postsecondary education) than the average school population. A higher propor-
tion of girls enrol in immersion programmes, and as girls generally show better performance in
language than boys, this distorts the results on ‘average success’.
Consequently, more research is needed on the factors which result in the academic success
of French immersion models. Nevertheless, their success story has inspired a number of imi-
tators in many countries, including Australia, England, Scotland, elsewhere in Europe, and the
Bilingual education
233

USA. The numbers and types of models change quickly; overviews can be found in Wikipedia
under the headword ‘bilingual education’. We ﬁnd so-called two-way or dual immersion
models which usually aim at helping children from immigrant minorities to catch up with the
majority language. In theory, these models should be composed of 50 per cent bilingual chil-
dren and 50 per cent monolinguals. Both languages are taught from the beginning, and a
variety of academic subjects is taught in each of the languages. On the other hand, we ﬁnd
transitional bilingual education. Here, all the teaching takes place in the ﬁrst language of the
children in the beginning. The second (or majority) language is gradually introduced, at ﬁrst in
language as a subject only, then after some time also in other content areas. The aim of such
models is to support the acquisition of the second (or majority) language and to prepare their
transition to monolingual mainstream classes (Cummins 2003).
The Canadian model has been transferred to a number of diﬀerent contextual conditions,
and alterations have been made to the programmes – and not surprisingly, the ‘successor
models’ have not necessarily been proven to lead to the academic success of their pupils. This
is unremarkable, as the wholesale transfer of education models to new contexts is rarely suc-
cessful (Seidel and Shavelson 2007; Slavin 2008). This also suggests that bilingual education
models have to be highly adaptive to the particular conditions and requirements of the learners
they address.
Irrespective of this, the Canadian French immersion models are emblematic of the fact that
the establishment of bilingual education models always relates to speciﬁc power relations
which accompany their instigation. On one hand, bilingual education is a privilege for speciﬁc
elites, for example, for the children of diplomats during their stays abroad, or the children of
employees of supranational agencies (e.g. the so-called European schools in a number of
European cities where EU institutions are established), or the children of executive staﬀposted
abroad (e.g. the Japanese schools in some European cities) – or, as it turns out in practice, in
the Canadian French immersion models. In these cases, the models are either designed or
emerge in practice as accessible to more aﬄuent (and perhaps urban) communities, and they
are used as strategies of social distinction (Bourdieu 1986). In the case of these bilingual edu-
cation models, the eﬀectiveness or appropriateness of bilingual education is hardly ever ques-
tioned. It is taken for granted that the learners from aﬄuent backgrounds proﬁt from
bilingualism and bilingual education. Very little research has been carried out about the eﬀects
of such models, the evaluations in the Canadian case being an exception.
On the other hand, bilingual education models have been established to serve the needs of
less privileged groups. This can be autochthonous minorities which, mostly after a period of
struggle, were granted an education system matching their own perceived needs. These might
also be minorities which have emerged as an eﬀect of the change of borders after a war, an
invasion or a treaty. In recent times the most frequent grounds for the development of bilin-
gual models is immigration.
Immigration leads to language communities of varying sizes within the territory of a
majority language. Bilingual education models have been established mostly in the service of
larger immigrant communities. But size is not the only motivation. Another relevant factor is
the access of a community to the power structures in either the country of origin or the
country of residence. Examples of the establishment of bilingual models irrespective of the size
of a language community are schools which are sponsored and supervised by the governments
of the countries of origin. Usually such models emerge on the basis of bilateral agreements
between the respective country of origin and the country of residence, allowing for the estab-
lishment of schools for their own constituents living abroad. A typical example for this are
bilingual models in some German cities: they consist of ‘regular’ schools which oﬀer bilingual
Ingrid Gogolin
234

programmes in immigrant minority languages. The teachers of these programmes are paid by
and work under the supervision of their home countries, for example, Turkey, Spain, or Italy.
The administration of the models is carried out in close cooperation with the regular German
school inspectorate and the consulates of the respective country (see Gogolin et al. 2007).
A wide range of bilingual education models for immigrant minorities, nevertheless, has been
established by countries of residence. It is mainly the latter type of model which is subject to
controversies about its appropriateness and eﬀectiveness – and consequently, the subject of
research. It seems that in the case of privileged groups there is no doubt about the usefulness of
bilingual education, whereas in the case of less privileged groups such doubts are justiﬁed per
se. Jim Cummins, author of a number of major works on bilingual education, has brought this
diﬀerence to attention; he introduced the notions of additive versus subtractive bilingualism for
its description and pointed to the power relation in its background: In a situation of well-being,
bilingualism is presented as a means of enrichment for an individual, whereas in underprivileged
situations the individual seems to run a risk by being bilingual (Cummins 2000).
Another typology of bilingual education models relates to the ways in which educational
programmes are organized and designed. As a general rule – with some, mostly historical
exceptions – bilingual education refers to models in which both languages are used for teach-
ing parts of the content matter. Beyond this general feature, the models can be organized in a
broad range of diﬀerent approaches. Diﬀerences relate to the amount of teaching hours in
both languages – some models provide equal amounts of time for both languages concerned,
others dedicate only a few teaching hours to one of the two languages. Also the sequence in
which both languages are introduced to the curriculum diﬀers – some models start with both
languages at the same time, whereas others start with one language and introduce the second
language gradually. Other diﬀerences can be found with respect to the duration of education in
both languages; some models cover only one or two years of schooling, whereas others provide
bilingual education throughout the whole of primary and even into secondary schooling.
Finally the overall goals of the models can diﬀer. Whereas it is a common characteristic of
all bilingual education models to give learners access to reading and writing in both languages
concerned, the aims of this vary.
On one hand, in so-called language maintenance programmes, the aim can be to produce
ﬂuent and balanced bilingualism – or even more than that, to provide the entire curriculum in
both languages. This kind of model has been established in particular for autochthonous
minorities in areas with quite stable bilingual speech communities, but some attempts have
also been made with respect to immigrant minority communities. Literacy in these models can
be taught in parallel or consecutively. It is normally the case that the teachers involved are
themselves bilingual in the languages concerned.
On the other hand, and very widespread, are the so-called transitional models of bilingual
education. In the majority of cases, these models address immigrant minority students. They
are based on the assumption that it is an advantage for children who grow up bilingually to
develop their ‘ﬁrst language’ – the family language – up to a certain level before the child is
confronted with education in a further language. An inﬂuential theoretical assumption was the
threshold hypothesis (Cummins 1979: 155), indicating that ‘transfer’ between the two lan-
guages is a positive feature for language development. This hypothesis is in educational prac-
tice and in research often misunderstood as a dictum, that a minimum command of the ‘ﬁrst
language’ is necessary in order to learn a second language successfully (see, for example,
Stanat and Christensen 2006).
This general idea can already be found in historical beliefs and observations of the eﬀects of
language development. In the early nineteenth century, renowned pedagogues such as Moritz
Bilingual education
235

Diesterweg (Diesterweg 1836) formulated as an ‘uncontested methodical rule’ that teaching
has to follow the ‘nature’ of learning: the unknown has to be based on the known, the abstract
on the tangible. With respect to language education this basic principle would demand that a
second language should not be oﬀered to the learner before the ‘essence and forms’ (‘ihr
Wesen und ihre Formen überhaupt’ – 1836: 161) of the ‘mother tongue’ are indubitably
acquired – as these are the indispensable prerequisite for learning – and learning in – a second
language. If a new language were brought to a learner too early, ‘obscurity and confusion’
(‘Unklarheit und Verwirrung’) would be the inevitable eﬀect. Diesterweg considered language
development as a stepwise process, and at every step ‘the mind of the learner can only be
occupied with one [task]’ (1836: 165).
The main and resilient argument of the threshold hypothesis today focuses on the interrelatedness
of both languages in the repertoire of a speaker; the current research question is whether and
under which conditions a positive transfer from one language to the other can be expected
(Cummins 2003; 2008). Whereas this consensus has been reached in research, the misunder-
stood version of the threshold hypothesis is still ‘common sense’ for many supporters of transitional
bilingual education models, especially for those which were established in order to facilitate
the acquisition of the second language, generally the language of the majority. Especially in
‘transitional’ models it is a common feature that the amount of teaching hours of the two
languages involved are reversed in the course of the schooling. At the beginning, the majority
of teaching hours is dedicated to the ﬁrst language or mother tongue of the children, and only few
hours are dedicated to the second language. The balance of teaching hours changes gradually
until most hours are taught in the second language. If transitional models are established in
primary education, the shift usually takes place after the foundation period of schooling.
A variation on these models – with some borrowing from the principles of French immersion –
has been established with respect to some immigrant minority languages: the ‘two-way
immersion’ models. In these cases, the addressees of bilingual education are bilingual children
(from autochthonous or immigrant minorities) as well as monolingual children; usually a
composition of 50 per cent of learners from each group is recommended. In practice – at least
in the European versions of such models – this is hardly ever achieved. Two reasons can be
responsible for this: ﬁrst, these models are often situated in multilingual areas, with the result
that students may be bilingual, but represent other home languages than the partner language
which is taught in the bilingual model. And second, the prestige of the languages involved in
the model plays a role. Schools oﬀering models with less prestigious languages face the
possibility that monolingual parents will refuse to choose them for their children.
The curricula of such bilingual models show the tendencies of transitional models, as gra-
dually more teaching hours are dedicated to the main language of schooling. In any case, the
second or partner language is normally not reduced to mere language teaching, but will also
be used for teaching one or more subject areas.
Another variety is bilingual education as an innovative approach in the context of foreign
language education. Here, the second or partner language involved is not any learner’s home
language, but a foreign language for all students. This is known as ‘Content and Language
Integrated Learning’ (CLIL; see Thornbury, this volume). In these models, a common foreign
language – very often English or French in European states – is ﬁrst introduced as a subject to
the students. After a short period in which a certain level of proﬁciency is reached, the lan-
guage teaching is combined with the teaching of another subject, such as history or science.
This is based on the assumption that the results of language learning are more sustainable if
content other than language itself is simultaneously acquired with language skills (e.g. http://
ec.europa.eu/education/languages/language-teaching/doc236_en.htm).
Ingrid Gogolin
236

Transitional bilingual education has played a prominent role in political and scientiﬁc
debates on the eﬀects of bilingual education. The most prominent debates have taken place in
the USA. The ﬁerce arguments around this issue resulted in the abolition of bilingual educa-
tion in the states of Arizona and California (Ricento 2003). The political struggle also gave
rise to a new critical examination of research on the eﬀects and eﬀectiveness of bilingual
education. The following section will present the most important arguments and results of this
research.
Effects and effectiveness of bilingual education
The majority of research studies on the eﬀects and eﬀectiveness of bilingual education have
been carried out in Canada and the USA, including a number of meta-analyses of this
research. An important state-of-the-art review of bilingual education research was initiated by
the Social Science Research Centre Berlin (see Söhn 2005). Two examples of contributions to
this endeavour will illustrate the research as well as the nature of dissent in the debates: a
synthesis of research on the eﬀects on reading instruction by Slavin and Cheung (2005) and a
‘rebuttal’ of former meta-analysis studies by Rossell and Kuder (2005). The presentation of
these studies as examples will show that proponents and opponents of bilingual education shed
light on diﬀerent aspects of the research results. Moreover, both sides have in common that
they accuse the other of being biased at best, and at worst, of arguing ideologically. This
points to the fact that the ‘bilingualism controversy’ cannot be resolved by mere ‘empirical’
argument. The historical tradition in which it is embedded – which was explained in the ﬁrst
sections of this chapter – is always intrinsic to the debates. In the end, a decision about the
value or importance of bilingual (or multilingual) education is generally – explicitly or implicitly –
related to a normative basis. If, in principle, the value of bilingual education is determined by
the point of view that the proﬁciency in both languages counts; the evaluation and judgement
of the ‘success’ or ‘eﬀectiveness’ of bilingual education models will turn out diﬀerently from
approaches in which only the results in one language, namely the majority language, count as
yardstick.
In the ﬁrst example of meta-analysis presented here, Slavin and Cheung (2005) base their
synthesis on research focusing on the eﬀects of education models on reading skills of (mainly
Hispanic) bilingual students in the USA. They use the method of ‘best evidence synthesis’
(Slavin 1986), taking into account consistent, unbiased information from experimental studies
on English-only reading programmes and bilingual programmes. This strategy does not only
re-analyse quantitatively (by eﬀect sizes), but also takes narrative information on the observed
models into consideration. The authors include all studies written in English about eﬀects on
reading skills which met a minimum methodological standard.
Before discussing the general results of their approach, the authors give a detailed insight
into the characteristics of every programme included in their analysis, and thus provide a pic-
ture of the diﬀerences in approach which can be found under the heading of ‘bilingual edu-
cation’ vs. ‘English only’ models. This leads them to conclude that adequate research on eﬀects
of models would most probably have to be carried out with methodological repertoires diﬀer-
ent from those which had been applied until then. Irrespective of the limitations of their own
approach, they come to the conclusion that in 12 out of 17 studies in their review, eﬀects
favouring bilingual approaches can be found. Five studies showed no eﬀect. None of the stu-
dies showed eﬀects in favour of English immersion, that is to say, English monolingual
approaches (Slavin and Cheung 2005: 31). The authors stress that the positive eﬀects of bilin-
gual education models do not relate to transitional bilingual models; the results were in favour
Bilingual education
237

of ‘paired bilingual models’ which introduce both languages in a correlated and continuous
way. Yet the authors conclude that their analysis does not shed light on the question of whe-
ther the language of instruction is the causal factor of positive eﬀects – or if it is a more gen-
eral outcome of the quality of instruction. They conclude that more research and better
evidence is needed – and they plead for an end to ideologically driven rather than empirically
driven debates on the issue (2005: 34).
The second example is a study carried out by Rossell and Kuder (2005). These authors take
an opposing stance, suggesting that positive eﬀects of bilingual education models cannot be
found. In their approach, the authors discuss earlier meta-analysis in the light of their ‘back-
ground political bias’ which led to the exclusion of studies ‘on other grounds’ than methodolo-
gical evidence (2005: 45). They then clarify their view that ‘bilingual’ outcomes of educational
models are not the focus of their own approach:
It is indisputable and uncontroversial that a Spanish speaking child taught to read and
write in Spanish will do better in Spanish than will a Spanish speaking child taught to
read and write in English. What is controversial is the notion that a Spanish speaking
child taught to read and write in Spanish will do better in English [ … ] and so that is the
only outcome we examine or have ever examined.
(Rossell and Kuder 2005: 46)
The authors present the quality criteria which they used for inclusion of studies into their
sample and introduce their own methodological statistical approach for re-analysis, based on
statistical methodology only. Moreover, the studies in their analysis were not focused on
reading skills only, but included scores in reading, language and mathematics.
In the further course of their article, the authors themselves critique a number of critical reviews
of their own earlier studies, pointing out that these reviews did not respect the criteria which
were originally applied but introduced new criteria which Rossell and Kuder did not agree with.
They then present on their part critical reviews of diﬀerent studies – carried out by Slavin,
Cheung and other co-authors, and by Greene (e.g. Greene 1997) – indicating methodological
or theoretical inappropriateness. On the basis of their review, Rossell and Kuder qualify all conclu-
sions testifying to the positive eﬀects of bilingual education models as inappropriate or irrelevant.
In the last parts of their contribution, Rossell and Kuder present a re-analysis of their own
earlier research, restricting the studies included in the sample to projects which were carried
out for no less than a school year. They come to the conclusion that their new approach does
not lead to any revision of former ﬁndings. The best programmes, according to their analysis,
are structured immersion – i.e. English only – programmes. They state that the more ﬁrst
language education children receive, the lower is their achievement in the second language,
namely English. The authors admit that ‘a little bit of native tongue instruction does not hurt
and might help if the ﬁrst language is Spanish’ (Rossell and Kuder 2005: 69). But they stress,
however, that ‘structured immersion’ programmes – English only programmes with speciﬁc
additional support – are the most successful. The authors conclude that the best approach to
educating second language learners cannot be identiﬁed by meta-analysis or similar research:
‘There is too much disagreement over what constitutes scientiﬁc research and too little speciﬁc
research’ (2005: 73). They nevertheless insist on their ﬁnding that structured immersion is the
best approach for second language learners. In any case they claim that Spanish bilingual
education would not be a disaster if the Spanish language were taught in a limited amount of
time and if the idea that the ﬁrst language must be mastered before a child is instructed in the
second language were discarded in bilingual approaches.
Ingrid Gogolin
238

What can we learn about the eﬀects and eﬀectiveness of bilingual education from the
contributions to the ‘bilingualism controversy’ presented above?
First: a consensus has been reached about the eﬀects or eﬀectiveness of one speciﬁc group of
bilingual education models: the transitional bilingual education models. These models are not
supported by empirical research. Whereas supporters of the models are still found in the
public sphere, in particular among lobbyists from minority groups, there is no evidence in
empirical academic work that they are appropriate for the education of second language lear-
ners. A second consensus could possibly be reached through further research concerning the
question of inclusion of ﬁrst language instruction in the curriculum. The open question here is
related to the amount of instruction in the ﬁrst language, taking as a starting point the
assumption that a limited number of lessons (‘a little bit’) could be supportive for the language
development of bilingual learners. There is some evidence from studies on literacy develop-
ment of learners who have ﬁrst contact with the second or third language in older age, namely
as adults, that it is beneﬁcial for them to be taught literacy in their expert languages ﬁrst, then
to transfer those literacy skills to the next language they learn (see Klein and Dimroth 2005;
Tarone et al. 2009). Among the supporters of bilingual education models we ﬁnd a further
consensus, indicating that bilingual education can only have positive eﬀects if both languages
are taught in a coordinated and balanced way.
Second: the examples show that the answer to the question of what bilingual education may
or may not oﬀer is not least dependent on the interests behind the research. As illustrated
above, the question of what is gained from bilingual education can be deﬁned by the criterion
of the advantage it oﬀers for acquisition of the second language. Rossell and Kuder (2005) or
Esser (2006) stress that the question of bilingualism per se is irrelevant. What is relevant is the
eﬀect of teaching (in) the ﬁrst language on mastery of the second. A diﬀerent perspective is
taken by such authors as Slavin and Cheung (and others; see, for example, the contributions by
Bialystok, Auer, Anstatt and Tracy in Gogolin and Neumann 2009). Here, the acquisition of
both languages of a bilingual individual is taken into account. The yardstick in these approa-
ches is suﬃcient mastery of ﬁrst and second language, or to be more precise, no disadvantage
for the second language and at least access to literacy in the ﬁrst language. The bilingualism
controversy as carried out in the presented research is clearly related to a normative perspec-
tive with respect to the question: what counts as relevant and valuable language competence
for a person living in two languages?
Outlook: bilingual education in a multilingual world
Societies of today and the future, and in particular their urban centres, are irreversibly typiﬁed by
diversity in linguistic, cultural and social terms. Vertovec’s framework of super-diversity oﬀers
a theoretical starting point for studying this diversity. Super-diversity refers to the dynamic
interplay of linguistic, cultural and social phenomena which exceeds the magnitude and pre-
sent understanding of complexity in societies. Vertovec refers to the growing complexity of
social and cultural constellations in societies, which becomes obvious by observing the features
of recent immigrations. An ‘increased number of new, small and scattered, multiple-origin,
transnationally connected, socio-economically diﬀerentiated and legally stratiﬁed immigrants’
build the immigrant communities (not only) in urban areas. (Vertovec 2007: 1024).
Within such a framework, it is obvious that bilingual education models can open up possi-
bilities for education in very speciﬁc, clearly deﬁned linguistic constellations of learners, and in
these constellations – provided that the concept and practice of teaching is of good quality –
serve learners’ needs. If the creation of bilingual individuals is the aim, positive eﬀects can
Bilingual education
239

be expected: as is stressed in the overview of the research results presented in the project of the
Social Science Research Center Berlin (Söhn 2005), none of the methodologically acceptable
studies lead to the result that bilingual models (if they oﬀer both languages) harm acquisition
of the second language, but they provide access to two languages within the identical amount
of time in which monolingual models are successful.
In any case, the linguistic reality of present and future society points to the fact that bilin-
gual education is only one possible approach to educational achievement and success in super-
diverse constellations. Further development and research is necessary, taking the multitude of
the linguistic architecture of societies into account. Moreover, the conventional categories of
mono-, bi- or multilingualism as descriptors of individual proﬁciency or social position are
increasingly in question, as are the widely held understandings of linguistic development.
These include, for instance, the normative notion of a sequence of languages acquired in the
linguistic development of a person, and described by concepts such as ‘ﬁrst’ or ‘second’ lan-
guage. In this normative view a simultaneity of contact situations with diﬀerent languages
appears as an exceptional case, whereas it is in fact the reality in contemporary urban centres.
The concept of super-diversity may allow for a change of perspective: towards the develop-
ment of adequate and appropriate models of research on, as well as teaching of, languages in
the complex social environments of today’s societies.
Related topics
language and ageing, language and migration; language policy and planning; multilingualism;
second language acquisition
Further reading
Baker, C. (2006) Foundations of Bilingual Education and Bilingualism, 4th edn, Clevedon: Multi-
lingual Matters. (Key features of the book are the detailed presentation of diﬀerent bilingual
education models, their organizational structures and aims. Pros and cons of bilingual education
and mainstreaming of bilingualism are discussed.)
Cummins, J. (2000) Language, Power and Pedagogy: Bilingual Children in the Crossﬁre, Clevedon:
Multilingual Matters. (In this volume, the historical and political context of the debates around
bilingualism and education is presented and discussed.)
García, O. and Baker, C. (2007) Bilingual Education: An Introductory Reader, Clevedon: Multilingual
Matters. (The volume oﬀers a selection of articles which present experience with bilingual educa-
tion models, not only from Canada and the USA but also from a range of European countries.)
Gogolin, I. and Neumann, U. (eds) (2009) Streitfall Zweisprachigkeit: The Bilingualism Controversy,
Wiesbaden: VS Verlag. (The volume oﬀers a selection of papers which discuss the (dis-)advantages
of bilingual education from diﬀerent disciplinary perspectives, such as sociology, psycholinguistics,
sociolinguistics and educational research.)
Kramsch, C. (2009) The Multilingual Subject, Oxford: Oxford University Press. (The book takes the
perspective of individual bi- or multilingual learners into account, focusing on the question of
how learners’ attitudes and experience inﬂuence their approaches to language learning and to
possible outcomes.)
References
Agnihotri, R. K. (2006) ‘Identity and multiliguality: the case of India’, in A. B. M. Tsiu and J. W.
Tollefson (eds.) Language Policy, Culture, and Identity in Asian Contexts, Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence
Erlbaum Associates.
Alexander, N. (2003) An Ordinary Country: Issues in the Transition from Apartheid to Democracy in
South Africa, New York: Berghahn Books.
Ingrid Gogolin
240

Allen, M. (2004) ‘Reading achievement of students in French immersion programs’, Educational
Quarterly Review 9(4): 25–30.
Blocher, E. (1910) ‘Zweisprachigkeit. Vorteile und Nachteile’, in W. Rein (ed.) Encyklopädisches
Handbuch der Pädagogik, Bd 10, Langensalza: Hermann Beyer & Söhne.
Bourdieu, P. (1979) ‘Les trois états du capital culturel’, Actes de la Recherche en Sciences Sociales
30: 3–6.
——(1986) Distinction: A Social Critique of the Judgement of Taste, London: Routledge/Kegan Paul.
——(1991) Language and Symbolic Power, Cambridge: Polity Press.
Council of Europe (1992) European Charter for Regional or Minority Language, Strasbourg
(European Treaty Series no. 148).
Cummins, J. (1979) ‘Cognitive/academic language proﬁciency, linguistic interdependence, the opti-
mum age question and some other matters’, Working Papers on Bilingualism 19: 121–9.
——(2000) Language, Power and Pedagogy, Bilingual Children in the Crossﬁre, Clevedon: Multi-
lingual Matters.
——(2003) ‘Bilingual education’, in J. Bourne and E. Reid (eds) Language Education: World
Yearbook of Education 2003, London and Sterling: Kogan Page.
——(2003) ‘Bilingual education: basic principles’, in J.-M. Dewaele, A. Housen and L. Wei (eds)
Bilingualism: Beyond Basic Principles, Clevedon: Multilingual Matters.
——(2008) ‘Total immersion or bilingual education? Findings of international research promoting
immigrant children’s achievement in the primary school’, in J. Ramseger and M. Wagener (eds)
Chancenungleichheit in der Grundschule. Ursachen und Wege aus der Krise, Wiesbaden: VS
Verlag.
Diesterweg, A. (1836) ‘Über die Methodik des Sprachunterrichts’, in E. Langenberg (ed.) Adolph
Diesterwegs ausgewählte Schriften, 2nd edn, vol. 1, Frankfurt am Main: Verlag Moritz
Diesterweg.
Esser, H. (2006) Migration, Sprache und Integration, Berlin: Arbeitsstelle Interkulturelle Konﬂikte,
AKI-Forschungsbilanz 4.
Fichte, J. G. (1896) Reden an die deutsche Nation (1807/8). Mit Fichtes Biographie sowie mit erläu-
ternden Anmerkungen versehen von Theodor Vogt. Langensalza: Hermann Beyer & Söhne.
Gogolin, I. (1994) Der monolinguale Habitus der multilingualen Schule, Münster: Waxmann.
——(2006) ‘Linguistic habitus’, in K. Brown (ed.) Encyclopedia of Language and Linguistics, 2nd
edn, Oxford: Elsevier.
Gogolin, I., Neumann, U. and Roth, H.-J. (2007) Bericht 2007, Abschlussbericht über die italienisch-
deutschen, portugiesisch-deutschen und spanisch-deutschen Modellklassen, Universität Hamburg.
Available at: http://www2.erzwiss.uni-hamburg.de/institute/interkultur/Bericht_2007.pdf (accessed 28
April 2010).
Gramsci, A. (1984) ‘Notes on language’, Telos 59: 127–50.
Greene, J. P. (1997) ‘A meta-analysis of the Rossell and Baker review of bilingual education
research’, Bilingual Research Journal 21: Spring and Summer.
Heugh, K. (1995) ‘Disabling and enabling: implications of language policy trends in South Africa’,
in R. Mesthrie (ed.) Language And Social History: Studies in South African Sociolinguistics,
Claremont: David Philip Publishers.
Hobsbawm, E. J. (1990) Nations and Nationalism Since 1780: Programme, Myth, Reality, Cam-
bridge: Cambridge University Press.
Hogan-Brun, G. and Wolﬀ, S. (eds) (2003) Minority Languages in Europe: Status, Frameworks,
Prospects, Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan.
Hornberger, N. H. and Corson, D. (eds) (1998) Encyclopedia of Language and Education, vol. 8:
Research Methods in Language and Education, Dordrecht and Boston: Kluwer Academic.
Klein, W. and Dimroth, C. (eds) (2005) Spracherwerb, Stuttgart: Metzler.
Krüger-Potratz, M. (2005) Interkulturelle Bildung: Eine Einführung, Münster: Waxmann.
OECD (ed.) (2006) Where Immigrant Students Succeed: A Comparative Review of Performance and
Engagement in PISA 2003, Paris: OECD.
Ricento, T. (2003) ‘The discursive construction of Americanism’, Discourse and Society 14: 611–37.
Rossell, C. H. and Kuder, J. (2005) ‘Meta-murky: a rebuttal to recent meta-analyses of bilingual
education’, in Arbeitsstelle Interkulturelle Konﬂikte und gesellschaftliche Integration (ed.) The
Eﬀectiveness of Bilingual School Programmes for Immigrant Children, Berlin: WZB discussion
papers.
Bilingual education
241

Schubert, F. W. (1873) ‘Unterrichtssprache’, in K. A. Schmidt (ed.) Encyklopädie des gesammten
Erziehungs- und Unterrichtswesens. Bearb. von einer Anzahl Schulmänner und Gelehrten unter
Mitw. von Prof. Dr. Palmer und Prof. Dr. Wildermuth. Bd 9. Gotha: Besser.
Seidel, T. and Shavelson, R. J. (2007) ‘Teaching eﬀectiveness research in the past decade: the role of
theory and research design in disentangling meta-analysis research’, Review of Educational
Research 77: 454–99.
Skutnabb-Kangas, T. (1984) Bilingualism or Not: The Education of Minorities, Clevedon: Multilingual
Matters.
Slavin, R. (1986) Educational Psychology: Theory and Practice, Boston: Pearson Education.
——(2008) ‘Perspectives on evidence-based research in education: what works? Issues in synthesizing
educational program evaluations’, Educational Researcher 37(1): 5–14.
Slavin, R. E. and Cheung, A. (2005) ‘A synthesis of research on language of reading instruction for
English language learners’, in Arbeitsstelle Interkulturelle Konﬂikte und gesellschaftliche Inte-
gration (ed.) The Eﬀectiveness of Bilingual School Programmes for Immigrant Children, Berlin:
WZB discussion papers.
Söhn, J. (2005) Zweisprachiger Schulunterricht für Migrantenkinder Ergebnisse der Evaluationsforschung
zu seinen Auswirkungen auf Zweisprachigkeit und Schulerfolg (AKI-Forschungsbilanz 2), Berlin:
Arbeitsstelle Interkulturelle Konﬂikte.
Stanat, P. and Christensen, G. (2006) Where Immigrant Students Succeed, Paris: OECD.
Statistics Canada. (2005) French Immersion 30 Years Later, Ottawa: Statistics Canada.
Tarone, E., Bigelow, M. and Hansen, K. (2009) Literacy and Second Language Oracy, Oxford:
Oxford University Press.
Vertovec, S. (2007) ‘Super-diversity and its implications’, Ethnic and Racial Studies 30(6): 1024–54.
Ingrid Gogolin
242

17
English for academic purposes
Nigel Harwood and Bojana Petric´
What is EAP?
English for Academic Purposes (EAP) ‘is usually deﬁned as teaching English with the aim of
assisting learners’ study or research in that language’, but is also a ‘theoretically grounded and
research informed enterprise’ (Hyland 2006: 1). Ideas about the nature of language, learning, and
teaching all impact on the theory and practice of EAP (Basturkmen 2006). Hence, the roles
and responsibilities of the EAP practitioner are manifold: ‘needs assessor, specialized syllabus
designer, authentic materials developer, and content knowledgeable instructor, capable of coping
with a revolving door of content areas relevant to learners’ communities’ (Belcher 2006: 139).
EAP instruction takes place with a range of learners, in a variety of contexts: (i) in higher
education settings in English-speaking countries; (ii) in settings where English has oﬃcial
status and is used as a medium of instruction; (iii) in settings where certain school/university
subjects are wholly or partly taught in English (e.g. medicine); and (iv) in settings where all
tertiary education is taught in the L1, but English is recognized as an important additional
language for study, and where certain learning materials and texts can only be found in Eng-
lish (Dudley-Evans and St John 1998: 35). Although EAP is traditionally associated exclu-
sively with tertiary education, this perception is being eroded, with a recent special issue of
Journal of English for Academic Purposes devoted to EAP in secondary education (see Johns
and Snow 2006). EAP should not be exclusively associated with the non-native speaker of
English either: the increasingly diverse student population means that some native speakers
will lack the necessary academic communication skills (Hyland 2006).
EAP, together with English for Occupational Purposes (EOP), is a branch of English for
Speciﬁc Purposes (ESP). Depending on the type of academic subject matter, EAP can be fur-
ther divided into more speciﬁc sub-types, e.g. English for Medicine or English for Engineering.
However, as Flowerdew and Peacock (2001) argue, the distinction between EAP and EOP is
not always straightforward as many aspects of EAP are aimed at preparing students for their
future careers in their disciplines. For instance, an English for Engineering course will typically
cover both skills necessary for academic study (EAP), such as reading engineering textbooks
and writing assignments, but also skills for engineers, such as writing technical reports, which
can be classiﬁed as EOP. Flowerdew and Peacock (2001: 12) suggest that EAP should be
243

subdivided into ‘EAP designed to help students with their studies and EAP directed towards
professional preparation’. While both EAP and EOP are carried out at the university, their
goals are diﬀerent in orientation in that the former is purely academic while the latter has a
vocational dimension.
History of EAP
The origins of EAP can be traced back to the 1960s, when a growing interest in language as a
means of communication, language variability in context and functions of specialized lan-
guages prepared the ground for the emergence of EAP (Flowerdew and Peacock 2001). How-
ever, equally important were various non-linguistic factors that led to the need for EAP, such
as the rise of English as a global language.
Stages in the development of EAP
According to Dudley-Evans and St John (1998), the development of ESP (which includes
EAP) can be divided into four stages: (i) register analysis, (ii) rhetorical and discourse analysis,
(iii) study skills, and (iv) needs analysis. It is, of course, overly simplistic to see these stages as
discrete; they overlap and elements of each stage continue to inﬂuence thinking in the ﬁeld
today, albeit to a greater or lesser extent.
Register analysis
The primary goal of register analysis was to identify the grammatical and lexical features
occurring more frequently in scientiﬁc English than in general English; hence the term ‘lex-
icostatistics’ (Swales 1988). The assumption was that this information could then serve as a
basis for syllabus and textbook design. Indeed, some of the ﬁrst EAP textbooks were devel-
oped on the basis of the ﬁndings of register analysis (see Swales 1988, and Dudley-Evans and
St John 1998 for more detail). However, it was realized that teaching the grammatical and
lexical items found to be highly frequent in scientiﬁc English did not necessarily make learners
successful users of scientiﬁc English. Seminal work from this period, together with a helpful
commentary, can be found in Swales (1988). The more recent developments of academic cor-
pora and sophisticated computer-based methods of analysis have renewed the interest in registers,
as discussed in the section on corpora below.
Rhetorical and discourse analysis
The early 1970s brought a growing realization that linguistic analysis needed to take into
account patterns above the sentence or utterance level (Swales 1988). Studies from this period
focus on textual structure, discourse patterns and rhetorical functions of scientiﬁc discourse
with the aim of providing practitioners with information on authentic language use in whole
texts (Hutchinson and Waters 1987). Textbooks based on this work feature material on functions
of scientiﬁc discourse, such as description and classiﬁcation (e.g. Jordan 1990).
Study skills
In line with the focus on communicative skills in general ELT in the late 1970s, greater
importance was given to the skills the learner needed in order to function eﬀectively in
Nigel Harwood and Bojana Petric´
244

academic environments. A typical project exemplifying the type of EAP work in this period is
the University of Malaya ESP Project. Having identiﬁed reading skills as the most relevant to
students studying in Malay but using literature in English, project participants developed a
series of teaching materials speciﬁcally addressing various sub-skills needed for eﬃcient reading
of academic texts (Dudley-Evans and St John 1998; Swales 1988).
Needs analysis
EAP instruction is concerned with preparing students to work eﬀectively within their academic
environment. Given the diversity of the proﬁle of EAP students and their learning situations,
and due also to the limited duration of EAP courses, needs analysis is seen as the ‘cornerstone’
of EAP, since it helps determine ‘the what and how of a course’ (Dudley-Evans and St John
1998: 121). Although needs analysis had played a role in ESP from the 1960s, it was in the late
1970s and early 1980s that it became one of its central concepts. The publication of Munby’s
(1978) volume gave an impetus to the debate about diﬀerent types of needs and procedures to
establish them. The rise of needs analysis can be seen as a reaction against an exclusive focus
on descriptions of language use in target situations of earlier periods, and a shift towards
considering the learner as the centre of the teaching/learning process (Dudley-Evans and St
John 1998). West (1994) oﬀers a comprehensive survey of early work in needs analysis. As one
of the major pillars of ESP, needs analysis continues to attract scholars’ attention, as will be
discussed in more detail in the third section below.
EAP today
All of the stages described above continue to inﬂuence contemporary approaches to EAP, as is
apparent from contributions to the journals in the ﬁeld: English for Speciﬁc Purposes and
Journal of English for Academic Purposes. In the sections that follow, we identify salient topi-
cal issues and areas of research. Current debates are set against a backdrop of unprecedented
growth in EAP across the globe in response to the increasing numbers of international stu-
dents at universities in English-speaking countries, and the establishment of programmes
taught in the medium of English in non-English speaking countries worldwide (see, for
instance, Coleman 2006). That EAP is now a truly global ﬁeld can be seen from the many
national and international publications and conferences on EAP, and the establishment of
EAP research groups worldwide (e.g. the City University of Hong Kong, CERLIS in Italy,
KIAP in Norway, GRAPE and INTERLAE in Spain, and the University of Michigan’s
English Language Institute in the United States).
Current issues in EAP
General vs speciﬁc EAP
Blue (1988) distinguished between English for General Academic Purposes (EGAP) and
English for Speciﬁc Academic Purposes (ESAP), EGAP being academic English skills, lan-
guage, and activities relevant for students studying in any ﬁeld, and ESAP being relevant for
students in certain ﬁelds only. For instance, instruction in how to compile bibliographies, take
notes, and listen to lectures could be covered in an EGAP syllabus, while ESAP would focus
on discipline-speciﬁc requirements, such as writing a chemistry lab report.
English for academic purposes
245

An important debate is how general or speciﬁc EAP pedagogy should be, Spack (1988)
being an advocate of EGAP, and Hyland (2002) of ESAP where possible. Arguments can be
put forward in favour of both approaches, and in favour of a judicious general-speciﬁc com-
bined approach. EGAP may appeal where student populations and ﬁelds of study are diverse,
and where EAP teachers have little time or resources to design subject-speciﬁc programmes,
since the challenges of researching, designing, and implementing as many appropriate pro-
grammes as are needed can be formidable (see Basturkmen 2003; Belcher 2006; Hyland 2006
for further discussion). Furthermore, in many contexts communication/cooperation between
EAP teachers and content lecturers may be poor, thus preventing teachers from learning what
is required of students entering various departments across their university. EGAP is also more
economical, with one class for all, rather than several discipline-speciﬁc ESAP classes. On the
other hand, as we shall see below, much recent EAP research has revealed that academic dis-
course varies from discipline to discipline, making a case for teaching students in discipline-
speciﬁc classes. In addition, learners may ﬁnd an ESAP class more relevant and motivating,
because it directly relates to their ﬁeld of study.
In reality, decisions about speciﬁcity are often constrained by national or institutional
bodies, which do not always take as much account of research ﬁndings in the ﬁeld as they
should. In addition, these bodies may prescribe an EGAP approach when EAP teachers know
very little about content lecturers’ demands, but, as Basturkmen (2003) argues, in order to make
such a course truly relevant for students’ needs, research to identify generic and transferable
academic skills relevant to all will still be required.
Cooperation between EAP teachers and subject teachers
We have seen in the discussion about EGAP and ESAP above that cooperation between EAP
and subject teachers is an important issue. Dudley-Evans and St John (1998) talk of three
levels of cooperation between the EAP teacher and subject teachers, each with an increasing
level of interaction: cooperation, collaboration and team teaching. Cooperation involves
information gathering from the subject department about tasks, syllabi, and other information
useful for EAP course design. Collaboration involves the EAP teacher and the subject teacher
working together in order to develop the EAP course in support of the subject course. Team
teaching involves the two parties teaching together in the classroom. Those studies conducted
to date (e.g. Barron 2002; Dudley-Evans 2001) reveal that factors impacting on the level of
cooperation include the institutional context, diﬀerences in teaching methodologies and
philosophies, the low status of the EAP teacher in some contexts, and related issues of power.
Needs analysis and rights analysis
Needs analysis ‘underlies syllabus design, materials development, text selection, learning goals
and tasks, and, ultimately, evaluation of students and course or program success’ (Carkin
2005: 87). However, the meaning of ‘needs’ has been much debated (see Belcher 2006;
Hutchinson and Waters 1987; Long 2005; West 1994), and there is much discussion about
whose needs EAP teachers should take into account and the instruments teachers should use
to conduct needs analyses (e.g. Jordan [1997] lists 14 diﬀerent methods). Whereas it was the
language ‘expert’ who traditionally identiﬁed needs (see Munby 1978), more recent approaches
have recommended that a number of parties should have a say, including teachers, education
authorities, and other stakeholders (e.g. parents, sponsors), as well as the learners themselves.
In Hyland’s (2006: 73) words, needs analysis must recognize ‘learners’ goals and backgrounds,
Nigel Harwood and Bojana Petric´
246

their language proﬁciencies, their reasons for taking the course, their teaching and learning
preferences, and the situations they will need to communicate in’. Hence Benesch (2001) pre-
fers to speak of rights analysis rather than needs analysis, emphasizing the importance of
giving the learners a say about what they are taught. For a summary of recent criticisms of
needs analysis, see Basturkmen (2006: 19–20).
Critical EAP
Drawing on the teachings of Paulo Freire and writings on critical pedagogy in the education
literature (e.g. Giroux 1988), the critical EAP movement is concerned with social justice,
change, and empowerment of the EAP learner, who may feel the requirements of content lecturers
are unclear – or unfair. It is concerned with ‘critiquing existing educational institutions and
practices, and subsequently transforming both education and society’ (Hall 2000: 3, emphasis
in original. See also Benesch 2001; Canagarajah 2002b; Pennycook 1999). Since critical pedagogy is
sometimes associated with political activism, some teachers (and learners) may feel such a
pedagogy has little relevance to the EAP classroom (cf. Johns 1993; Johnston 1999). One
powerful criticism that has been levelled at critical EAP is its tendency to theorize, rather than to
oﬀer implementable classroom activities (Johnston 1999). However, Benesch (2001) has oﬀered
both theory and practice, describing how critical EAP can provide students with ‘strategies for
challenging the way things are’, as well as describing critical teaching activities and materials.
Both Benesch (2001) and Hyland (2006) point out that there are many types of critical EAP,
with some types being less concerned with (political) transformation than others (cf. Allison
1996; and Harwood and Hadley 2004, who distinguish between ‘pragmatic’ and ‘critical’
approaches to EAP). So, as Benesch (2001) notes, critical EAP is nothing if not locally
appropriate, addressing the learners’ concerns in any given class.
Genre analysis
The concept of ‘genre’ is much discussed (see Johns 2008; Swales 1990, 2004). Hyland (2004: 4)
oﬀers the following accessible deﬁnition: ‘Genre is a term for grouping texts together, repre-
senting how writers typically use language to respond to recurring situations’. Genres are
characterized by their ‘communicative purposes’ as well as by their patterns of ‘structure, style,
content and intended audience’ (Swales 1990: 58). John Swales’ move analysis (e.g. 1981, 1990,
2004) is a particularly inﬂuential type of genre analysis, with ‘move’ referring to a section of
the text which is seen to perform a speciﬁc communicative function. Swales famously demon-
strated how writers of research articles can use their introductions to create a research space,
identifying a gap in research community knowledge which they proceed to ﬁll. A wide range of
academic spoken and written genres has been investigated using move analysis. Some
researchers have analyzed research articles in their entirety in a range of disciplines, including
biochemistry (Kanoksilapatham 2007) and medicine (Nwogu 1997). Others have focused on
speciﬁc parts of the research article, such as introductions (Samraj 2002a) and conclusions
(Yang and Allison 2003). Still others have focused on other genres, such as the Ph.D. thesis
(e.g. Bunton 2005).
As Johns et al. (2006) point out, however, a study of genre involves more than the words of
the speaker or writer, encompassing ‘the complexities of texts, contexts, writers and their pur-
poses, and all that is beyond a text that inﬂuences writers and audiences’ (2006: 247). Hence
so-called ethnographic genre analyses have supplemented textual analysis with interviews with
writers and speakers (and their audiences) and a wider investigation into the context in which
English for academic purposes
247

the texts under study are produced. One such ethnographic genre analysis was conducted by
Samraj (2002b), who found that the ‘contextual layers’ in which the writing/speaking is
produced, such as the given course, task, and ﬁeld of study, can impact on the genre’s form.
Contrastive rhetoric
The ﬁeld of contrastive rhetoric is over forty years old, and has grown in sophistication (see
Connor 2002), telling us much about the diﬀerences in comparable texts across languages and
cultures. Some studies compare non-native writing and speaking with comparable outputs by
native authors, while others compare equivalent genres written in diﬀerent languages. Although
our focus in this chapter is on English academic discourse rather than equivalents in other
languages, comparisons of an equivalent genre across languages may well enhance understandings
of what the English language version requires. For instance, in a comparison of economics
papers written in English by Finnish and Anglo-American academics, Mauranen (1993) found
that English writers used more text-organizational devices (e.g. ‘however’). She argues that this
ﬁnding reveals diﬀerences in the two writing cultures, with English being more reader-oriented,
i.e. more concerned with guiding the reader through text, and Finnish being more writer-
oriented and implicit. She also notes the impact of educational factors, i.e. the diﬀerences in
the writing instruction in the two writing cultures. While English writing manuals encourage
the use of text-organizational devices, Finnish manuals advise writers against using such
‘unnecessary’ words. Additional contrastive studies of written genres include Martín-Martín
and Burgess (2004) and Sanderson (2008) on the research article, Feng (2008) on grant pro-
posals and Salager-Meyer et al. (2007) on academic book reviews. There have also been a few
contrastive studies of spoken genres, including Schleef (2009), who compared German and
American lectures and seminars across diﬀerent disciplines.
Corpora and EAP
Computer corpora, that is, electronically stored databases of authentic spoken and/or written
text (see Sinclair 2004), have led to important insights about the linguistic and rhetorical fea-
tures of EAP spoken and written genres. By examining large amounts of academic speech and
writing, corpus studies enable us to take ‘an evidence-based approach’ (Hyland 2006: 58) to
EAP. Corpora provide the student and teacher of EAP with many diﬀerent insights, including
information about how frequent any given words/phrases are; the lexico-grammatical patterns
which surround these words/phrases; and the text’s keywords, i.e. those which are unusually
frequent. Spoken and written academic discourse, and diﬀerent spoken and written academic
genres, can then be compared. As Hyland (2006) argues, perhaps the most noteworthy impact
of corpora as far as EAP is concerned is the highlighting of the variation across diﬀerent
genres and disciplines, as we shall see below. There is a growing number of spoken and written
corpora of academic English available, such as the British Academic Written English corpus
(BAWE), the British Academic Spoken corpus (BASE), and the Michigan Corpus of Academic
Spoken English (MICASE).
Inter-disciplinary differences
Corpora reveal much about how academic writing diﬀers across the disciplines. For instance,
Hyland (2000) analyzed expressions of praise and criticism in 160 book reviews from eight
diﬀerent disciplines. He found that book reviews in the sciences, such as engineering, contain
Nigel Harwood and Bojana Petric´
248

more instances of praise than criticism, while those in the social sciences, such as sociology,
tend to be more critical. Many corpus-based studies have focused on speciﬁc linguistic
features, such as the function and frequency of imperatives (Swales et al. 1998).
There have also been studies of spoken academic language which highlight disciplinary
diﬀerences, such as Simpson-Vlach’s (2006) research on linguistic items in MICASE. Inter-
disciplinary diﬀerences in spoken academic discourse have been investigated in lectures, with
Thompson (2006) contrasting the language of lectures in the disciplines of economics and
philosophy in the BASE corpus.
Intra-disciplinary differences
A less studied aspect of EAP focuses on how speech and writing can diﬀer in the same dis-
cipline, although evidence of variations in generic structure within a discipline was noted as
early as Swales (1981). Harwood (2006) found striking diﬀerences in the frequency of personal
pronouns in political scientists’ journal articles and he therefore interviewed the writers in an
attempt to account for these discrepancies. The interviewees’ diﬀerent beliefs about (in)appro-
priate pronoun use can partly be explained by looking at the type of research they carry out,
i.e. qualitative versus quantitative. Another recent study of intra-disciplinary diﬀerences is
Ozturk (2007), which reports variations in the structure of research article introductions within
applied linguistics.
Studies of academic speech and writing
A number of corpus studies have compared and contrasted linguistic features in academic
speech and writing, notably the work done by Douglas Biber and colleagues (e.g. Biber 2006).
Biber’s multi-dimensional analysis methodology involves quantitatively and qualitatively ana-
lyzing large corpora of texts and identifying and describing a range of linguistic features con-
tained in these texts. It shows how markedly speech and writing in general, and university
language in particular, varies across registers.
Other studies contrasting academic speech and writing include Carter-Thomas and Rowley-Joli-
vet (2008), who have shown that the functions and frequencies of if-conditionals vary across
written and spoken academic genres. This study compares if-conditionals in a corpus of three
genres in the discipline of medicine: research articles, conference presentations, and editorials,
with if-conditionals occurring almost four times as often in conference presentations as in
research articles.
Learner corpora
Learner corpora, that is, collections of speech and writing by learners of English, are particu-
larly useful for EAP (see Granger 2002). A number of studies have compared corpora of
native and non-native student writing, noting diﬀerences in the frequency of certain linguistic
features (e.g. Ädel 2008; Granger 1998; Hinkel 2002), thereby identifying language that the
learners in question use signiﬁcantly more or less often than native speaker counterparts, or
misuse. A good example of a learner corpus study is Hyland and Milton’s (1997) study of
native and non-native students’ use of epistemic modal language, which showed that the
non-native writers relied on a more restricted set of items than their native speaker counter-
parts. There are also striking diﬀerences in the frequency of certain items: appear, for instance,
is found thirty-three times more often in the native writers’ corpus.
English for academic purposes
249

Corpora and EAP textbooks and teaching materials
Corpora have also been useful for identifying discrepancies between academic discourse and
its representation in EAP textbooks (see Harwood 2005; Paltridge 2002). For instance, several
studies which focus on modal verbs conclude that EAP textbooks and style guides are not only
failing to teach the full repertoire of modal language, they are also failing to teach a number
of items that learners would ﬁnd most useful (Holmes 1988; Hyland 1994; Römer 2004). The
textbooks are also providing misleading explanations for some of the language they do teach.
However, some EAP textbook writers are now exploiting both spoken and written corpus data
in their instructional materials (e.g. Feak et al. 2009; Swales and Feak 2000; and see Harwood
2010). Another encouraging development has seen teachers and researchers getting EAP
learners themselves to consult corpora (Gavioli 2005; Lee and Swales 2006).
Academic vocabulary
Academic vocabulary is deﬁned as words frequently occurring in academic but not other kinds
of texts, words such as ‘subsequent’ or ‘component’ (Coxhead and Nation 2001). The most
well-known list of academic vocabulary is the Academic Word List (AWL) (Coxhead 2000),
which is based on an analysis of a 3,500,000-word corpus of academic English, consisting of a
variety of academic texts covering arts, science, law and commerce. Knowing which words
occur frequently in academic texts is very useful for EAP course and materials designers, as it
enables them to prioritize lexical items to be taught, especially in contexts where general EAP
classes are held for students from a variety of disciplines. Indeed, vocabulary teaching materials
have been developed on the basis of the AWL (e.g. Schmitt and Schmitt 2005).
However, the AWL has recently been criticized by Durrant (2009) and Hyland and Tse
(2007), who show that academic vocabulary varies across disciplines. It is timely, therefore,
that researchers have started developing discipline-speciﬁc wordlists in a variety of ﬁelds and
sub-ﬁelds, such as engineering (Mudraya 2006) and medicine (Wang et al. 2008). However, at
this stage, there is still much work to be done on pedagogical applications of these ﬁndings.
Lexical bundles
There has been much research focused on identifying and analyzing recurrent linguistic items
which feature in academic speech and writing, with various labels used to describe this phe-
nomenon, such as ‘lexical bundles’ (Biber et al. 2004; Hyland 2008). Cortes (e.g. 2004) deﬁnes
lexical bundles as sequences of three or more words that frequently occur in a particular reg-
ister, such as is likely to and these results suggest that, both of which feature in academic
writing. Cortes and Hyland have found important diﬀerences in how lexical bundles are used
across disciplines and by student and expert writers. Focusing on writing in history and bio-
logy, Cortes (2004) demonstrates that biologists use a wider variety of bundles than historians,
and that many of the bundles used frequently by academics are seldom used by students in the
same ﬁelds. Another noteworthy study of lexical bundles in writing is Hyland (2008), while
Nesi and Basturkmen (2006) have also studied lexical bundles, but in lectures, as opposed to
writing.
Li and Schmitt’s (2009) study of lexical bundles is particularly relevant to EAP teachers,
since the focus is on acquisition rather than description. Li and Schmitt chart a Chinese
M.A. student’s use of written bundles over a year. Textual analysis of the student’s phrases
is complemented by interviews to investigate how the phrases were learned. Longitudinal
Nigel Harwood and Bojana Petric´
250

studies of acquisition of salient language for EAP should prove useful in informing teachers
and materials writers how much can be learned (and how), as will Jones and Haywood’s
(2004) account of promoting and assessing the eﬀectiveness of the teaching of lexical
bundles.
Academic lectures
Some of the research on lectures focuses on the language used (e.g. Lindemann and Mauranen
2001; Simpson-Vlach 2006). For instance, Crawford Camiciottoli (2007) identiﬁes a wide range
of discourse structuring expressions used by lecturers (e.g. What I’m going to talk about today;
We’ll come back to that later), and rightly argues that this type of research should enable EAP
materials writers to better prepare learners for lectures by developing more authentic class-
room activities to simulate lecture discourse. Thompson’s study (2003) is notable because it
focuses not only on organizational patterns in lectures, but also on lecturers’ intonation.
Thompson also contrasts her ﬁndings with information given on lecture organizational pat-
terns and intonation in EAP textbooks, showing that the textbook material is potentially
misleading. Other studies try to determine salient linguistic features of lectures that aid or
hinder non-native understanding (e.g. Chaudron and Richards 1986; Flowerdew and Tauroza
1995). For instance, Jung (2006) focuses on contextualization markers which ‘signal how lear-
ners should interpret the incoming information’ (2006: 1929), showing that when these mar-
kers are absent, L2 learners more frequently misunderstand what is said. Other studies adopt
a psycholinguistic perspective, attempting to assess the impact of working memory on
non-natives’ note-taking (e.g. Faraco et al. 2002).
Writing for international publication
Much of the work discussed above concerns university students and student genres, such as
lectures and essays set by lecturers for assessment. However, another current area of EAP
research concerns the dominant position of English in international scholarship and increasing
pressure on scholars worldwide to publish in English. This has led to a growing body of
research on writing for international publication in English (for a review of this work, see
Uzuner 2008). Major themes in this literature include the diﬃculties multilingual scholars
experience when writing for international publication and the strategies they employ to over-
come them (Belcher 2007; Burrough-Boenisch 2003; Canagarajah 2002a, 2002b; Flowerdew
2001; Li and Flowerdew 2007; Lillis and Curry 2006).
Future directions for EAP research
We now identify several areas where further research is needed to enhance the knowledge base
of EAP.
The efﬁcacy of EAP
Master (2005) points to the lack of well-designed empirical research focused on the eﬃcacy of
EAP instruction: does EAP work? If there are two EAP programmes running, which leads to
the better learning outcomes? Some of the work in this area includes Storch and Tapper
(2009), a study of the impact of a postgraduate EAP writing course in Australia, and Robinson
et al.’s (2001) experimental study of the eﬀectiveness of teaching oral discussion skills using
English for academic purposes
251

three diﬀerent methods, one of a few studies which compare and contrast diﬀerent pedagogical
approaches to EAP.
EAP teacher training
In some parts of the world, institutions ask ELT teachers to teach EAP without providing
specialized training. A discussion of the nature of such training has largely been neglected to
date. Notable exceptions include a volume on teacher training for teaching languages for spe-
ciﬁc purposes (Howard and Brown 1997) and articles by Boswood and Marriott (1994), who
describe an ESP teacher training course for experienced ELT teachers, Jackson (1998), who
argues for the use of case studies in ESP teacher training, and Chen (2000), who reports on
self-training through action research.
EAP, second language acquisition, and teaching materials
Basturkmen (2006) comments, ‘ESP has not been much concerned with the debates and issues
emerging in recent years in the ﬁeld of second language acquisition’ (2006: 5). Hence, as
Hyland (2006) argues, ‘Many EAP courses still lack a theoretical or research rationale and
textbooks continue too often to depend on the writer’s experience and intuition rather than on
systematic research’ (2006: 5). Basturkmen (2006) makes a step in this direction by exploring the
links between EAP and SLA theories of language learning, such as information processing.
Ethnographies, academic literacies, and deeper understandings of EAP contexts
A case can be made for the need for EAP research to focus more heavily on ‘processes and
contexts’ (Belcher 2006). The focus has often been on textual description, given the ‘time
sensitive nature of most ESP needs analysis, curriculum development, and the very real-world
needs of learners’, all of which has meant ‘the more time-consuming investigations of pro-
cesses and contexts’ may have been somewhat neglected (2006: 149). However, there have been
a number of landmark qualitative case studies documenting both native and non-native stu-
dents’ diﬃculties, particularly with writing, in university contexts (e.g. Casanave 2002; Leki
2007; Spack 1997). A related body of literature has focused on the process of academic
enculturation (e.g. Casanave and Li 2008; Prior 1998). Another group of researchers asso-
ciated with (critical) ethnographic research is ‘academic literacies’ scholars, who seek to ‘go
beyond texts’, in Connor’s (2004) words, and to gain insights into the contexts in which texts
are produced and the actors who produce them, rather than limiting themselves to textual
analysis (see Lillis and Scott 2007 for a survey of work conducted to date in this ﬁeld).
Descriptions of language use
It will be apparent from this review that more work has been carried out on written than
spoken academic discourse to date. New recording technologies and advances in corpus lin-
guistics will enable more sophisticated analyses of spoken genres. One potentially exciting area
is multimodal analysis, providing insights into sound and image, as well as text (see Kress
2010). One area where applications of multimodal analysis may be useful is the analysis of
university lectures, which increasingly combine lecturer talk with textual, audio and visual
material projected on the screen. Multimodal analysis of Web-mediated communication,
common in today’s workplaces, may also be of relevance to EAP.
Nigel Harwood and Bojana Petric´
252

EAP in dialogue with other ﬁelds
Many salient issues for EAP teachers and researchers are also of interest to scholars in other
ﬁelds such as education and sociology, and EAP could beneﬁt from adopting and adapting
knowledge from a wider disciplinary base. For instance, there has been much interest in citation in
academic writing by EAP researchers, but also by information scientists and sociologists of
knowledge. Recent work (Harwood 2009; Hyland 2003; Petric´ 2007) has drawn on all three
areas, and a similar multidisciplinary approach could be usefully applied in EAP more generally.
Summary
The purpose of this chapter was to introduce the ﬁeld of English for Academic Purposes. We
began by deﬁning EAP before providing an overview of its history and focussing on a number
of pertinent current issues, including how speciﬁc EAP should be, whether and to what extent
EAP and subject teachers should collaborate, diﬀerent approaches to needs analysis, and how
the developments in genre analysis, contrastive rhetoric and corpus-based work inform EAP
pedagogy. The diversity of the directions for future research that we identify reﬂects the
vibrancy of the ﬁeld.
Related topics
corpus linguistics; ESP and business communication; lexis
Further reading
Basturkmen, H. (2007) Ideas and Options in English for Speciﬁc Purposes, Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence
Erlbaum Associates. (This book explores the theories about language, learning and teaching in
ESP, discussing major issues from the perspectives of theoretical background, recent research and
practical applications, which is followed by questions and ideas for projects and suggestions for
further reading.)
Dudley-Evans, T. and St John, M.-J. (1998) Developments in English for Speciﬁc Purposes: A Multi-
Disciplinary Approach, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. (This practical book provides a
good introductory survey of major issues in ESP, including a separate chapter on EAP, with
numerous illustrative examples, tasks for discussion and analysis, excerpts from textbooks, tests and
other materials, an answer key for self-study purposes, and suggested readings for each chapter.)
Flowerdew, J. and Peacock, M. (2001) Research Perspectives on English for Academic Purposes,
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. (The twenty-ﬁve chapters in this book, written by
leading ﬁgures in EAP, provide a comprehensive survey of major issues in EAP from a research
perspective, focusing on research problems, methods, ﬁndings and their practical applications in
various contexts.)
Hyland, K. (2006) English for Academic Purposes: An Advanced Resource Book, Abingdon: Rou-
tledge. (This useful resource book contains twelve units on salient issues in EAP today, each with
excerpts from research articles and discussion and research tasks, as well as a useful glossary and
suggestions for further reading for each topic.)
——(2009) Academic Discourse: English in a Global Context, London: Continuum. (Written in
accessible language, this introductory book oﬀers an overview of academic genres in the area of
research, university instruction, student writing and popular science.)
References
Ädel, A. (2008) ‘Metadiscourse across three varieties of English: American, British, and advanced-
learner English’, in U. Connor, E. Nagelhout and W. V. Rozycki (eds) Contrastive Rhetoric:
Reaching to Intercultural Rhetoric, Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
English for academic purposes
253

Allison, D. (1996) ‘Pragmatist discourse and English for academic purposes’, English for Speciﬁc
Purposes 15: 85–103.
Barron, C. (2002) ‘Problem-solving and EAP: themes and issues in a collaborative teaching ven-
ture’, English for Speciﬁc Purposes 22: 297–314.
Basturkmen, H. (2003) ‘Speciﬁcity and ESP course design’, RELC Journal 34: 48–63.
——(2006) Ideas and Options in English for Speciﬁc Purposes, Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum
Associates.
Belcher, D. D. (2006) ‘English for Speciﬁc Purposes: teaching to perceived needs and imagined
futures in worlds of work, study, and everyday life’, TESOL Quarterly 40: 133–56.
——(2007) ‘Seeking acceptance in an English-only research world’, Journal of Second Language
Writing 16: 1–22.
Benesch, S. (2001) Critical English for Academic Purposes: Theory, Politics, and Practice, Mahwah,
NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Biber, D. (2006) University Language: A Corpus-based Study of Spoken and Written Registers,
Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Biber, D., Conrad, S. and Cortes, V. (2004) ‘If you look at … : lexical bundles in university teaching
and textbooks’, Applied Linguistics 25: 371–405.
Blue, G. (1988) ‘Individualising academic writing tuition’, in P. Robinson (ed.) Academic Writing: Process
and Product. ELT Documents 129, London: Modern English Publications and the British Council.
Boswood, T. and Marriott, A. (1994) ‘Ethnography for speciﬁc purposes: teaching and training in
parallel’, English for Speciﬁc Purposes 13: 3–21.
Bunton, D. (2005) ‘The structure of PhD conclusion chapters’, Journal of English for Academic
Purposes 4: 207–24.
Burrough-Boenisch, J. (2003) ‘Shapers of published NNS research articles’, Journal of Second Lan-
guage Writing 12: 223–43.
Canagarajah, A. S. (2002a) A Geopolitics of Academic Writing, Pittsburgh, PA: University of Pitts-
burgh Press.
——(2002b) Critical Academic Writing and Multilingual Students, Ann Arbor: University of
Michigan Press.
Carkin, S. (2005) ‘English for academic purposes’, in E. Hinkel (ed.) Handbook of Research in
Second Language Teaching and Learning, Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Carter-Thomas, S. and Rowley-Jolivet, E. (2008) ‘If-conditionals in medical discourse: from theory
to disciplinary practice’, Journal of English for Academic Purposes 7: 191–205.
Casanave, C. P. (2002) Writing Games: Multicultural Case Studies of Academic Literacy Practices in
Higher Education, Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Casanave, C. P. and Li, X. (2008) Learning the Literacy Practices of Graduate School: Insiders’
Reﬂections on Academic Enculturation, Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press.
Chaudron, C. and Richards, J. C. (1986) ‘The eﬀect of discourse markers on the comprehension of
lectures’, Applied Linguistics 7: 113–27.
Chen, T.-Y. (2000) ‘Self-training for ESP through action research’, English for Speciﬁc Purposes 19:
389–402.
Coleman, J. A. (2006) ‘English-medium teaching in European higher education’, Language Teaching
39: 1–14.
Connor, U. (2002) ‘New directions in contrastive rhetoric’, TESOL Quarterly 36: 493–510.
——(2004) ‘Intercultural rhetoric research: beyond texts’, Journal of English for Academic Purposes
3: 291–304.
Cortes, V. (2004) ‘Lexical bundles in published and student disciplinary writing: examples from
history and biology’, English for Speciﬁc Purposes 23: 397–423.
Coxhead, A. (2000) ‘A new academic word list’, TESOL Quarterly 34: 213–38.
Coxhead, A. and Nation, P. (2001) ‘The specialized vocabulary of English for academic purposes’,
in J. Flowerdew and M. Peacock (eds) Research Perspectives on English for Academic Purposes,
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Crawford Camiciottoli, B. (2007) The Language of Business Studies Lectures: A Corpus-based
Analysis, Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Dudley-Evans, T. (2001) ‘Team-teaching in EAP: changes and adaptations in the Birmingham
approach’, in J. Flowerdew and M. Peacock (eds) Research Perspectives on English for Academic
Purposes, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Nigel Harwood and Bojana Petric´
254

Dudley-Evans, T. and St John, M.-J. (1998) Developments in English for Speciﬁc Purposes: A Multi-
Disciplinary Approach, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Durrant, P. (2009) ‘Investigating the viability of a collocation list for students of English for Aca-
demic Purposes’, English for Speciﬁc Purposes 28: 157–69.
Faraco, M., Barbier, M. and Piolat, A. (2002) ‘A comparison between notetaking in L1 and L2 by
undergraduate students’, in S. Ransdell and M. Barbier (eds) New Directions for Research in L2
Writing, Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic.
Feak, C. B., Reinhart, S. M. and Rohlck, T. N. (2009) Academic Interactions: Communicating on
Campus, Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press.
Feng, H. (2008) ‘A genre-based study of research grant proposals in China’, in U. Connor,
E. Nagelhout and W. V. Rozycki (eds) Contrastive Rhetoric: Reaching to Intercultural Rhetoric,
Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Flowerdew, J. (2001) ‘Attitudes of journal editors to nonnative speaker contributions’, TESOL
Quarterly 35: 121–50.
Flowerdew, J. and Peacock, M. (2001) ‘Issues in EAP: a preliminary perspective’, in J. Flowerdew
and M. Peacock (eds) Research Perspectives on English for Academic Purposes, Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Flowerdew, J. and Tauroza, S. (1995) ‘The eﬀect of discourse markers on second language com-
prehension’, Studies in Second Language Acquisition 17: 435–58.
Gavioli, L. (2005) Exploring Corpora for ESP Learning, Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Giroux, H. A. (1988) Schooling and the Struggle for Public Life: Critical Pedagogy in the Modern
Age, Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.
Granger, S. (1998) Learner English on Computer, London: Longman.
——(2002) ‘A bird’s-eye view of learner corpus research’, in S. Granger, J. Hung and S. Petch-Tyson
(eds) Computer Learner Corpora, Second Language Acquisition and Foreign Language Teaching,
Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Hall, G. (2000) ‘Local approaches to critical pedagogy: an investigation into the dilemmas raised by
critical approaches to ELT’, CRILE Working Paper 48, Lancaster University.
Harwood, N. (2005) ‘What do we want EAP teaching materials for?’, Journal of English for Aca-
demic Purposes 4: 149–61.
——(2006) ‘(In)appropriate personal pronoun use in political science: a qualitative study and a
proposed heuristic for future research’, Written Communication 23: 424–50.
——(2009) ‘An interview-based study of the functions of citations in academic writing across two
disciplines’, Journal of Pragmatics 41: 497–518.
——(ed.)
(2010)
English
Language
Teaching
Materials:
Theory and
Practice,
Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Harwood, N. and Hadley, G. (2004) ‘Demystifying institutional practices: critical pragmatism and
the teaching of academic writing’, English for Speciﬁc Purposes 23: 355–77.
Hinkel, E. (2002) Second Language Writers’ Text: Linguistic and Rhetorical Features, Mahwah, NJ:
Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Holmes, J. (1988) ‘Doubt and certainty in ESL textbooks’, Applied Linguistics 9: 21–44.
Howard, R. and Brown, G. (eds) (1997) Teacher Education for Languages for Speciﬁc Purposes,
Clevedon: Multilingual Matters.
Hutchinson, T. and Waters, A. (1987) English for Speciﬁc Purposes: A Learning-Centred Approach,
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Hyland, K. (1994) ‘Hedging in academic writing and EAP textbooks’, English for Speciﬁc Purposes
13: 239–56.
——(2000) Disciplinary Discourses: Social Interactions in Academic Writing, Harlow: Longman.
——(2002) ‘Speciﬁcity revisited: how far should we go now?’, English for Speciﬁc Purposes 21: 385–95.
——(2003) ‘Self-citation and self-reference: credibility and promotion in academic publication’,
Journal of the American Society for Information Science and Technology 54: 251–9.
——(2004) Genre and Second Language Writing, Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press.
——(2006) English for Academic Purposes: An Advanced Resource Book, London: Routledge.
——(2008) ‘As can be seen: lexical bundles and disciplinary variation’, English for Speciﬁc Purposes
27: 4–21.
Hyland, K. and Milton, J. (1997) ‘Qualiﬁcation and certainty in L1 and L2 students’ writing’,
Journal of Second Language Writing 6: 183–205.
English for academic purposes
255

Hyland, K. and Tse, P. (2007) ‘Is there an “academic vocabulary”?’, TESOL Quarterly 41: 235–53.
Jackson, J. (1998) ‘Reality-based decision cases in ESP teacher education: windows on practice’,
English for Speciﬁc Purposes 7: 151–67.
Johns, A. M. (1993) ‘Too much on our plates: a response to Terry Santos’ “Ideology in composition:
L1 and ESL”’, Journal of Second Language Writing 2: 83–8.
——(2008) ‘Genre awareness for the novice academic student: an ongoing quest’, Language
Teaching 41: 237–52.
Johns, A. M., Bawarshi, A., Coe, R. M., Hyland, K., Paltridge, B., Reiﬀ, M. J. and Tardy, C. (2006)
‘Crossing the boundaries of genre studies: commentaries by experts’, Journal of Second Language
Writing 15: 234–49.
Johns, A. M. and Snow, M. A. (2006) ‘Introduction to special issue: academic English in secondary
schools’, Journal of English for Academic Purposes 5: 251–3.
Johnston, B. (1999) ‘Putting critical pedagogy in its place: a personal account’, TESOL Quarterly
33: 557–65.
Jones, M. and Haywood, S. (2004) ‘Facilitating the acquisition of formulaic sequences: an explora-
tory study in an EAP context’, in N. Schmitt (ed.) Formulaic Sequences: Acquisition, Processing
and Use, Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Jordan, R. R. (1990) Academic Writing Course: Study Skills in English, 3rd edn, Harlow: Pearson
Education.
——(1997) English for Academic Purposes: A Guide and Resource Book for Teachers, Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Jung, E. H. (2006) ‘Misunderstanding of academic monologues by nonnative speakers of English’,
Journal of Pragmatics 38: 1928–42.
Kanoksilapatham, B. (2007) ‘Rhetorical moves in biochemistry research articles’, in D. Biber,
U. Connor and T. A. Upton (eds) Discourse on the Move: Using Corpus Analysis to Describe
Discourse Structure, Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Kress, G. (2010) Multimodality, London: Routledge.
Lee, D. and Swales, J. M. (2006) ‘A corpus-based EAP course for NNS doctoral students: moving
from available specialized corpora to self-compiled corpora’, English for Speciﬁc Purposes 25:
56–75.
Leki, I. (2007) Undergraduates in a Second Language: Challenges and Complexities of Academic
Literacy Development, Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Li, J. and Schmitt, N. (2009) ‘The acquisition of lexical phrases in academic writing: a longitudinal
case study’, Journal of Second Language Writing 18: 85–102.
Li, Y. and Flowerdew, J. (2007) ‘Shaping Chinese novice scientists’ manuscripts for publication’,
Journal of Second Language Writing 16: 100–17.
Lillis, T. and Curry, M. J. (2006) ‘Professional academic writing by multilingual scholars: interac-
tions with literacy brokers in the production of English-medium texts’, Written Communication
23: 3–35.
Lillis, T. and Scott, M. (2007) ‘Deﬁning academic literacies research: issues of epistemology, ideol-
ogy and strategy’, Journal of Applied Linguistics 4: 5–32.
Lindemann, S. and Mauranen, A. (2001) ‘“It’s just real messy”: the occurrence and function of just
in a corpus of academic speech’, English for Speciﬁc Purposes 20: 459–75.
Long, M. L. (2005) ‘Methodological issues in needs analysis’, in M. H. Long (ed.) Second Lan-
guage Needs Analysis, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Martín-Martín, P. and Burgess, S. (2004) ‘The rhetorical management of academic criticism in
research article abstracts’, Text 24: 171–95.
Master, P. (2005) ‘Research in English for speciﬁc purposes’, in E. Hinkel (ed.) Handbook
of Research in Second Language Teaching and Learning, Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum
Associates.
Mauranen, A. (1993) ‘Contrastive ESP rhetoric: metatext in Finnish-English economics texts’,
English for Speciﬁc Purposes 12: 3–22.
Mudraya, O. (2006) ‘Engineering English: a lexical frequency instructional model’, English for
Speciﬁc Purposes 25: 235–56.
Munby, J. (1978) Communicative Syllabus Design, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Nesi, H. and Basturkmen, H. (2006) ‘Lexical bundles and discourse signalling in academic lectures’,
International Journal of Corpus Linguistics 11: 147–68.
Nigel Harwood and Bojana Petric´
256

Nwogu, K. N. (1997) ‘The medical research paper: structure and functions’, English for Speciﬁc
Purposes 16: 119–38.
Ozturk, I. (2007) ‘The textual organisation of research article introductions in applied linguistics:
variability within a single discipline’, English for Speciﬁc Purposes 26: 25–38.
Paltridge, B. (2002) ‘Thesis and dissertation writing: an examination of published advice and actual
practice’, English for Speciﬁc Purposes 21: 125–43.
Pennycook, A. (1999) ‘Introduction: critical approaches to TESOL’, TESOL Quarterly 33: 329–48.
Petric´, B. (2007) ‘Rhetorical functions of citations in high- and low-rated master’s theses’, Journal of
English for Academic Purposes 6: 238–53.
Prior, P. A. (1998) Writing/Disciplinarity: A Sociohistoric Account of Literate Activity in the Acad-
emy. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Robinson, P., Strong, G., Whittle, J. and Nobe, S. (2001) ‘The development of EAP oral discussion
ability’, in J. Flowerdew and M. Peacock (eds) Research Perspectives on English for Academic
Purposes, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Römer, U. (2004) ‘A corpus-driven approach to modal auxiliaries and their didactics’, in J. Sinclair
(ed.) How to Use Corpora in Language Teaching, Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Salager-Meyer, F., Alcaraz Ariza, M. A. and Pabón, M. (2007) ‘The prosecutor and the defendant:
contrasting critical voices in French- and English-written academia book reviews’, in K. Fløttum
(ed.) Language and Discipline Perspectives on Academic Discourse, Newcastle: Cambridge Scho-
lars Publishing.
Samraj, B. (2002a) ‘Introductions in research articles: variations across disciplines’, English for
Speciﬁc Purposes 21: 1–17.
——(2002b) ‘Texts and contextual layers: academic writing in content courses’, in A. M. Johns (ed.)
Genre in the Classroom: Multiple Perspectives, Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Sanderson, T. (2008) ‘Interaction, identity and culture in academic writing: the case of German,
British and American academics in the humanities’, in A. Ädel and R. Reppen (eds) Corpora and
Discourse: The Challenges of Diﬀerent Settings, Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Schleef, E. (2009) ‘A cross-cultural investigation of German and American academic style’, Journal
of Pragmatics 41: 1104–24.
Schmitt, D. and Schmitt, N. (2005) Focus on Vocabulary: Mastering the Academic Word List,
London: Longman Pearson.
Simpson-Vlach, R. (2006) ‘Academic speech across disciplines: lexical and phraseological distinc-
tions’, in K. Hyland and M. Bondi (eds) Academic Discourse Across Disciplines, Bern: Peter
Lang.
Sinclair, J. (2004) How to Use Corpora in Language Teaching, Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Spack, R. (1988) ‘Initiating ESL students into the academic discourse community: how far should
we go?’, TESOL Quarterly 22: 29–52.
——(1997) ‘The acquisition of academic literacy in a second language: a longitudinal case study’,
Written Communication 14: 3–26.
Storch, N. and Tapper, J. (2009) ‘The impact of an EAP course on postgraduate writing’, Journal of
English for Academic Purposes 8: 207–23.
Swales, J. (1981) Aspects of Article Introductions, Birmingham: Language Studies Unit, University
of Aston.
——(1988) Episodes in ESP, Hemel Hempstead: Prentice Hall International.
——(1990) Genre Analysis: English in Academic and Research Settings, Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
——(2004) Research Genres: Explorations and Applications, Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.
Swales, J., Ahmad, U. K., Chang, Y. Y., Chavez, D., Dressen, D. and Seymour, R. (1998) ‘Consider
this: the role of imperatives in scholarly writing’, Applied Linguistics 19: 97–121.
Swales, J. M. and Feak, C. B. (2000) English in Today’s Research World: A Writing Guide, Ann
Arbor: University of Michigan Press.
Thompson, P. (2006) ‘A corpus perspective on the lexis of lectures, with a focus on economics
lectures’, in K. Hyland and M. Bondi (eds) Academic Discourse Across Disciplines, Bern:
Peter Lang.
Thompson, S. E. (2003) ‘Text-structuring metadiscourse, intonation and the signalling of organisation
in academic lectures’, Journal of English for Academic Purposes 2: 5–20.
English for academic purposes
257

Uzuner, S. (2008) ‘Multilingual scholars’ participation in core/peripheral academic communities: a
literature review’, Journal of English for Academic Purposes 7: 250–63.
Wang, J., Liang, S.-I. and Ge, G.-C. (2008) ‘Establishment of a medical academic word list’, English
for Speciﬁc Purposes 27(4): 442–58.
West, R. (1994) ‘Needs analysis in language teaching’, Language Teaching 27: 1–19.
Yang, R. and Allison, D. (2003) ‘Research articles in applied linguistics: moving from results to
conclusions’, English for Speciﬁc Purposes 22: 365–85.
Nigel Harwood and Bojana Petric´
258

18
Language testing
Barry O’Sullivan
Overview
In this chapter I will present a broad overview of what I see as the critical issues currently
engaging language testers. Limitations of space mean that the overview can be neither com-
prehensive nor in-depth. Nevertheless, I hope it encourages you to continue to explore this
fascinating area.
Brief history of language testing
The Chinese included a signiﬁcant language element in their Imperial Examination system
which was used to identify suitable candidates for the empire’s bureaucracy and lasted for over
1,500 years before its demise in 1905. Within a few years of this the ﬁrst standardised test of
language (actually of handwriting) was developed at Teachers College, Columbia University
by Thorndike (1911). The methodology followed by Thorndike was soon replicated by Hillegas
(1912) who devised the ﬁrst standardised test of English composition. The development of the
multiple choice format by Kelly (1915) revolutionised the newly emerging discipline. The
linking of standardisation to this new methodology oﬀered the opportunity, for the ﬁrst time,
for mass testing.
In 1913, the University of Cambridge Local Examinations Syndicate (UCLES) introduced
the ﬁrst formal test of English as a foreign language, the Certiﬁcate of Proﬁciency in English
(CPE). The CPE was heavily inﬂuenced by Sweet’s The Practical Study of Languages: A Guide
for Teachers and Learners (1899) and was aimed at overseas learners who wished to study at
UK universities. In the same year, the Association of Modern Language Teachers of the
Middle States of Maryland set up a special committee to explore the potential for mass testing
of modern languages. The so-called 1913 Committee recognised the need for the curriculum to
drive the learning environment though they saw practical limitations to the direct testing of
speaking and thus began the move from direct to standardised tests in the USA.
As language learning and teaching became an industry, more and more tests emerged on
both sides of the Atlantic, each essentially following the tradition of testing which dominated
its place of origin. The early post-World War II tests that were developed in the UK by
259

UCLES (such as the First Certiﬁcate in English) followed very much in the footsteps of the
CPE, while the Test of English as a Foreign Language (TOEFL), which was introduced by
Educational Testing Services (ETS) in the USA in 1964, was based on what Spolsky (1998)
has called the psychometric-structuralist approach which had developed over the previous half
century in the USA.
The TOEFL was a signiﬁcant test in that it was the ﬁrst major test of English for speciﬁc
purposes and the ﬁrst major international test – the earlier CPE and FCE were essentially
general language tests and never really reached the same scale of population as achieved by
the TOEFL, though they were to become major international tests in their own right by the
late 1980s. By this time testing had begun to change, with a growing awareness of the need for
domain-speciﬁc examinations built on the pioneering work of Swales (1971 for example) and
others on the theory and practice of English for speciﬁc purposes (ESP). The TOEFL/FCE
comparability study (Bachman et al. 1995) marked the high point of the psychometric-
structuralist driven tests. Despite its ﬂaws, the study had a major impact on the attitude of
UK-based examination boards towards measurement (by which I mean the psychometric
qualities of their examinations). By the end of that decade, most examination boards had
begun to focus on the issue of accuracy (often referred to, mistakenly, as ‘reliability’ – a tech-
nical term which refers only to the internal consistency of a test paper), though the emphasis
in the UK was always on content.
The main current issues in language testing
The nature of validity
At around the same time as Galton (1879) was championing the early use of more scientiﬁc
methods of measurement in the UK, Edgeworth (1888: 600) began to explore the accuracy of
subjective measurement, noting that ‘the observations of the senses are blurred by a fringe of
error and margin of uncertainty’. He went on to propose a procedure for computing test error
based on ‘that part of the Calculus of Probabilities which is known as the Theory of Errors’.
Within less than two decades, Spearman (1904) wrote what Brennan (2001: 297) saw as the
paper that ‘launched measurement as a distinct ﬁeld of inquiry’.
The growth of the testing industry in the USA in the early part of the twentieth century saw
a signiﬁcant rise in interest in the quality of the examinations being developed and by the
middle of the century, the notions of validity and reliability (evidence that a test is measuring
the trait or ability its developer claims to be its focus and the accuracy of this measure
respectively) had been established (e.g. Cronbach and Meehl 1955; Loevinger 1957). At this
time, criterion (comparison with other measures or descriptions of language), content (the
actual content of the test in relation to a hypothesised model of language ability) and con-
struct (i.e. the trait or ability being tested) were seen as distinct types of validity with devel-
opers typically establishing evidence of just one. Cureton (1950) and later Loevinger (1957)
reconceptualised validity, setting the scene for others (particularly Messick 1975, 1980) to
develop the unitary conceptualisation of validity which remains dominant to this day.
Test validation
While applied linguists have for some time recognised the multi-componentiality of language
ability, eﬀorts by language testers have yet to establish evidence of an interaction between
the various components hypothesised to comprise this ability. Even the most promising of the
Barry O’Sullivan
260

models proposed as the basis of language tests (Bachman 1990) has failed to provide a
meaningful basis for developing language tests, though Saville and Hargreaves (1999) adapted
the model which they describe as ‘supporting’ the Cambridge ESOL examinations. McNamara
(2003: 468) in particular has criticised Bachman’s model as being ‘essentially psychological’
with no reference to the social context of language use, a view shared by Kramsch (1986,
1998), Young (2000) and Chalhoub-Deville (2003). O’Sullivan and Weir (2011) support this
view, adding that:
Bachman’s model oﬀered an impressive theoretical model of CLA, albeit with limitations
in both its cognitive and social dimensions, which was potentially useful for academics in testing
research, but it suﬀered in terms of its suitability for use as an operational framework by
language testing practitioners.
The underlying theory of validity that drove Bachman’s attempt to apply practices from edu-
cational measurement to language testing was provided by his interpretation of the work of
Messick. Messick was the most inﬂuential of a group of theorists who argued that construct
was central to any validity argument and that all other kinds of evidence should be regarded
as contributing to our understanding of this construct. He also argued that validity could only
be established through a systematically presented argument composed of evidence from a
variety of sources, including the traditional elements such as criterion and content, while
taking into consideration the social consequences of test use.
However, while the language testing community has long accepted the importance of the
work of Messick and scholars such as Kane (1992), Mislevy et al. (2002, 2003) and Chapelle
et al. (2008) have grappled with his ideas, they have been unable to oﬀer an operational spe-
ciﬁcation for test validation. The cognitive and social aspects of language which had been
highlighted by O’Sullivan (2000a) were instrumental to the development by O’Sullivan and Weir
of a validation framework for speaking in the early 2000s. This work was built upon by Weir
Figure 18.1 A reconceptualisation of Weir’s socio-cognitive framework
Language testing
261

(2005) to include all four skills. Detailed descriptions of the elements of the model can be
found in Weir (2005).
In their most recent paper on the subject, O’Sullivan and Weir (2011) have begun to move
away from the original model to a position taken by O’Sullivan over the past number of years.
The reconceptualisation of the model suggested in this paper (presented here for the ﬁrst time
as Figure 18.1) suggests that the model should be reduced to three basic elements. These ele-
ments are brieﬂy described in Table 18.1. The real strength of this model of validation is that it
comprehensively deﬁnes each of its elements with suﬃcient detail as to make the model oper-
ationalisable and while much work is still needed to ﬁnalise this model (and in truth it may
never be fully ﬁnalised), it has already been shown to oﬀer a useful and practical approach to
test development and validation (see O’Sullivan and Weir 2011).
Professionalisation
As language testing has developed over the past few decades it has grown into a clearly
deﬁned area of academic study in its own right, with a number of journals dedicated to the
area (e.g. Language Testing, Assessing Writing, Language Assessment Quarterly). One result of
this has been to broaden the appeal of the area so that its study has become an international
aﬀair. Examples of this can be seen in the growth of national and international associations
such as the European Association for Language Testing and Assessment (EALTA) and
the International Association of Language Testers (ILTA) and conferences such as the Lan-
guage Testing Research Colloquium (international) and the Language Testing Forum (UK).
At these events, it is not uncommon to have papers delivered on topics of current interest in a
number of international contexts.
As these fora have emerged, the number of applied linguistics and English language teach-
ing programmes that include language testing has grown across the world at undergraduate,
postgraduate and research level. Together, these have prompted a growth in an awareness of
the professional responsibilities of members of the profession and in the level of professional-
ism expected of test developers and researchers. Codes of Practice (from ILTA and EALTA for
example) and of Ethics (again from ILTA) to help guide these practices.
However, there is still some disjuncture between the practice of testing and the theoretical
discussions of academics. This has held back the profession, for example in the way academic
theorists make apparently impractical demands of practitioners while at the same time not
fully understanding that the realities of test development and practice perhaps require theories
that are more operational in nature. While the approach to validation described above goes
some way to meeting this requirement, it may well be that future developments can only
happen with the cooperation of theorists and practitioners.
Localisation
Localisation refers to the recognition by developers of factors of the context and the test-taker
which can impact on test performance. The importance of taking the context and test-taker
into consideration is clearly seen in the validation framework (Table 18.1). If this model is to
drive test development, we should begin the process by clearly deﬁning the test taking popu-
lation in terms of the three sets of characteristics (physical, psychological and experiential). We
then turn to the ability we are attempting to test. At this point we should consider not only the
details of language ability that will be our focus, but also the likely cognitive processing
required for successful completion of the test. This of course means deﬁning success – will it
Barry O’Sullivan
262

Table 18.1 Model details
The test-taker
Individual characteristics
Physical
Includes things such as age and gender as well as both short-term ailments (such as cold,
toothache, etc.) and longer-term disabilities (e.g. dyslexia, limited hearing or sight, etc.).
Psychological
Includes things like memory, personality, cognitive style, affective schemata, concentration,
motivation and emotional state.
Experiential
Includes education (formal and informal) as well as experience of the examination and factors
such as target language country residence.
Cognitive
Processes
Cognitive and metacognitive processing.
Resources
Relates to knowledge of content and to language ability.
The test system
Test task
Performance parameters
These are parameters such as timing, preparation, score weighting, knowledge of how
performance will be scored, etc.
Linguistic demands
This refers to the language of the input and the expected language of the output and can also
include reference to the audience or interlocutor where appropriate.
Test administration
Security
Refers to systems that are put in place to ensure the security of the entire administrative process.
Physical organisation
Refers to room setup, etc.
Uniformity
Systems to ensure that all administrations of the test are the same.
The scoring system
Theoretical ﬁt
The way in which test performance is assessed must ﬁt with the conceptualisation of the ability
being tested. This goes beyond a key or rating scale to inform the philosophical underpinning of
rater and examiner selection, training and monitoring.
Accuracy of decisions
Encapsulates the old idea of reliability, though broadening this to include all aspects of the
psychometric functioning of a test.
Value of decisions
This relates to criterion-related evidence such as comparison with measures such as
teacher estimates, other test scores, performance standards such as the CEFR.

refer to answering a set of questions correctly (irrespective of how) or will it mean using a set
of cognitive processes in such a way as to generate responses or performances that reﬂect ‘real
life’ language use? The latter approach is the basis of the approach to validation suggested
here, while the former typiﬁes much past and current language testing practice.
This suggests that a test designed with no speciﬁc candidature in mind is unlikely to oﬀer an
appropriate measure of the language abilities required for a given context. For example, a
university in the Middle East would be better served building the professional capacity to
develop and validate its own exit test rather than rely on tests such as the International English
Language Testing System (IELTS) or TOEFL Internet-based test (iBT) as these are designed
to oﬀer measures within a relatively narrow range of ability (likely to be beyond that of the
current population) based on language needs identiﬁed in a very diﬀerent context (i.e. uni-
versity life in the UK or USA respectively). If international tests are to be used outside of their
original speciﬁed domain then they really should be validated for such usage. This is rarely
done; witness the use of IELTS for purposes other than which it was developed, discussed
below.
Of course, tests developed for use in a local context are subject to the same requirements of
consistency and accuracy as their international counterparts. While this can prove a challenge
to institutions embarking on a development project, it should be noted that the ﬁgures pub-
lished by large-scale international examination boards are typically based on very large and
linguistically diverse populations. Since the estimates we use to establish consistency are
aﬀected by both number of items and range of candidate ability, it may well be that local
developers are setting themselves unrealistic targets of consistency. Indeed, if international
tests were administered to the same population as a local test it might well be the case that the
diﬀerence in consistency is negligible, or at least signiﬁcantly lessened.
As language testing becomes more professional and as levels of expertise grow and spread,
there is increasingly less and less diﬀerence between local and international tests. This change
has led to the ﬁnal issue to be discussed here, that of fragmentation of the language testing
industry.
Fragmentation
There has been evidence for some time now that the language testing industry is fragmenting.
Not so long ago, test users looked almost exclusively to a handful of test providers in the USA
and the UK. Nowadays, there are many more providers with a range of tests oﬀering very
diﬀerent approaches. One interesting example of this is the Test of Interactive English (TIE –
www.tie.ie) from Ireland. Here, test-takers ﬁrst prepare a project on a self-selected topic, then
read a self-selected book and ﬁnally follow a current news story (TV or newspaper). These
activities are recorded in a logbook and form the basis of the test. While the format of the test
is likely to limit its scope to that of a niche test, as candidates would need to attend a language
school which takes the test as a focus for its courses, it is interesting to see how a non-traditional
approach can result in a format that is radically diﬀerent to that oﬀered by major international
developers. The test was originally designed to meet the needs of learners at a Dublin-based
language school but its appeal has spread in recent years.
The tests provided by major international developers account for just a small (though
important) proportion of the assessment carried out across the world, since the vast majority
of language testing is classroom (i.e. learning domain) based (please note that I use the words
testing and assessment interchangeably in this chapter though I recognise that some readers
will have views as to the distinct meaning of each term). The type of testing and assessment
Barry O’Sullivan
264

carried out in this domain cannot be seen as adding to the fragmentation of the language
testing industry. However, as educators gain more knowledge of how testing and assessment
ﬁts into the learning system, see Poehner (2008) on dynamic assessment, the perception that
more locally appropriate assessment systems are needed grows.
Appropriacy, of course, has many guises. One rarely discussed aspect relates to the high cost
of international examinations. In many emerging economies, this cost serves to disenfranchise
a large proportion of the population. Abad Florescano et al. (2011) describe a project at the
Universidad Veracruzana in which a set of aﬀordable tests were developed speciﬁcally for less-
well-oﬀMexican learners who were in a catch-22 situation in which they needed a recognised
English language qualiﬁcation to get a good enough job to be able to aﬀord the English lan-
guage qualiﬁcation to get the job!
Fragmentation has both positive and negative eﬀects. On the positive side, as the market
fragments there are opportunities for developers who focus on very speciﬁc domains and
contexts to oﬀer tests that more closely ﬁt the requirements of test users who are not looking
to international work, travel or study situations. TIE is a good example of such a test. On the
other hand, there are serious issues emerging regarding the issue of test quality, and in parti-
cular test level. Recent evidence from common European Framework of Reference (CEFR)
linking projects (where developers attempt to establish an empirical link between their tests’
cut scores and a speciﬁc CEFR level or levels) suggest that diﬀerent developers interpret the
CEFR levels diﬀerently and therefore the resultant tests cannot be shown to be at the level
they purport to be (O’Sullivan and de Jong 2010).
Emerging debates
In this section I will outline some of the emerging debates in the area of language testing.
Assessment literacy
In the same way that test speciﬁcations are written with diﬀerent audiences in mind (Alderson
et al. 1995), diﬀerent test stakeholders need to ensure that they have suﬃcient knowledge
to support decisions they will be called on to make in their stakeholder role. Examples of what
I mean include the test-taker, who is likely to be more concerned with the demands of the
test than with its technical attributes. This latter level of knowledge is more appropriate for
policy makers if they are to accredit tests that are suitable for purpose. An example of this
is the recent discussion on the selection of English language tests for prospective students
at UK-based colleges. Existing state bodies, such as the Qualiﬁcations and Curriculum
Development Agency (QCDA) – whose remit it is to accredit examinations for use in the
UK – appear unable to perform their role due to a critically inadequate level of assessment
literacy. We can say essentially the same thing about almost all test stakeholders, and because
of this it falls to language testing professionals to deliver stakeholder-speciﬁc information and
training across society.
One of the key contributions made by Messick was his conceptualisation of the importance
of social consequence to the valid use of tests in speciﬁc contexts. One aspect of test con-
sequence is the misuse of tests by governments and institutions. Though I do not like to single
out particular tests, I feel we should at this point focus on the IELTS, which was developed at
Cambridge ESOL in the early 1980s as a tool to assess the language proﬁciency of students
who were not native speakers of English and who wished to enter the United Kingdom to
study. Two versions of the test are available, academic (for those who wish to study at tertiary
Language testing
265

level) and technical (for those pursuing non-academic training). Though the test was devel-
oped and validated with the above contexts in mind, the IELTS Website currently includes the
claim that
IELTS is a secure, valid and reliable test of real-life ability to communicate in English for
education, immigration and professional accreditation.
(IELTS 2010)
The lack of any information in the public domain regarding the validation of the IELTS for
these additional uses and the implication that neither the government departments who
recognise the IELTS for use (in contexts for which it was never intended) nor the developers
(who are aware of this issue) perceive any need for the publication of this information speaks
volumes for the need for greater levels of assessment literacy among test users.
The practice of making extravagant claims concerning the potential for tests to be used in
contexts for which they were never intended is not, of course, limited to the IELTS. An even
more obvious oﬀender is the Test of English for International Communication (TOEIC),
developed by ETS. The TOEIC is supported for its primary use by a sparse body of published
research and is extremely limited in the language and contexts of language use it attempts to
assess, yet it conﬁdently claims that it is ‘[T]he global standard for measuring English language
skills for business’.
Technical aspects
Stakeholders are beginning to understand more about the relevance of evidence-driven indi-
cators of the level of language tests, thanks to some considerable extent to the inﬂuence of the
CEFR and the Council of Europe’s Manual for linking tests to the CEFR (Council of Europe
2003, 2009). Though the idea that test level is important has been recognised in the world of
educational measurement for some time, it is really quite new to language testing. For exam-
ple, if we look to Bachman’s seminal work of 1990, there is no reference at all to either level
or standards, nor is it mentioned in more recent leading language testing texts (e.g. Alderson
et al. 1995; Brown 1996; Weir 2005). Test developers in Europe and beyond have tended to
look to the CEFR when establishing evidence of the level of their products, though other
standards such as the Canadian and Australian benchmarks have also been used as the basis
of establishing test level. Developers are expected to establish this evidence using a systematic
set of procedures in such a way as to ensure that the claims made are robust and transparent.
The procedures set out in the Council of Europe’s manual (2009) have been widely used,
though not without criticism (O’Sullivan 2010).
One signiﬁcant issue with the CEFR and other standards is the lack of suﬃcient detail
necessary to adequately deﬁne a level for the purposes of test development, though interesting
work has been done to date on the English Proﬁle Project (EPP – www.englishproﬁle.org/) to
identify speciﬁc features of language used at particular CEFR levels using advanced search
engines and large corpora comprised of previously graded learners’ written language (see
Hawkins and Buttery 2009). However, even here there is some cause for concern as it is not
certain that the levels identiﬁed by the EPP researchers truly reﬂect the CEFR levels. Recall
the reference above to the growing debate on the interpretation of level by diﬀerent test
developers (O’Sullivan and de Jong 2010). The only way to fully assuage the concerns of tes-
ters across Europe is to broaden the scope of the corpora – in other words, use samples of
learner language from a variety of diﬀerent learning and assessment contexts.
Barry O’Sullivan
266

Test theorists have got to come to terms with the need to consider level as a central aspect
of development and validation. While I have set out a theoretical framework here (Table 18.1)
and would suggest that level needs to be considered in each of the three aspects, much work is
needed in the coming years to explore the practical delivery of tests developed with this model
as a basis.
Assessment practice
There has been considerable growth in the use of English language tests for young and very
young learners, in fact Khalifa et al. (2010) reported a population of 300,000 candidates for
Cambridge ESOL’s Young Learners English examinations. The majority of tests that exist tend
to consist of a set of low-level tasks (in terms of cognitive load), the format of which reﬂects
the more ‘adult’ or ‘young adult’ populations of the examination board’s more traditional
products. There are few examples of good practice in the area, though there has been one
notable exception. This was an innovative test (entitled The Stolen Elephant) devised for
9-year-olds in Norway, in which the candidates were presented with a mystery in the form of a
comic book. The apparent focus of the activity was to solve the mystery, though in doing so
learners had to respond to a series of tasks; see Hasselgren (2000) for more details of this
fascinating project.
While much excellent work has been done over the past decade on the discrete testing of
grammar (in particular see Purpura 2004) we are still a long way from an empirically based
model of grammar progression for learners. It should be recognised that such a progression is
likely to be limited to suggesting rather than deﬁning a pathway of progression. Projects using
learner corpora, such as the EPP, aim to broaden our understanding of the receptive and
productive skills and knowledge of language learners, and it is through this kind of work that
researchers are beginning to discover the criterial diﬀerences between learners at diﬀerent
levels of language ability.
Corpus-based research on the nature and structure of spoken language has led to some
exciting and potentially inﬂuential ﬁndings with regard to both grammar and ﬂuency. Carter
and McCarthy’s (2006) grammar of spoken language pointed to a new understanding of the
way in which we use language in diﬀerent types of discourse. Recent research by McCarthy
(2005) into the nature of ﬂuency, suggests that we should also revisit the way in which this
aspect of spoken language is assessed. McCarthy sees ﬂuency in interactive discourse as being
co-constructed by the participants in the interaction, an idea reﬂected in the concerns of
McNamara (1997) who argued that meaning in interactive discourse emerges through the
combined input of the interlocutors. The implication of these issues is that the discourse eli-
cited from any individual is likely to be signiﬁcantly aﬀected by their interlocutor, suggesting
that it could well change signiﬁcantly in interactions with diﬀerent interlocutors.
One of the arguments made in support of the paired format in tests of spoken language is
that it facilitates the elicitation of a broader range of language functions than the interview
format. While this is certainly the case (see O’Sullivan et al. 2002), the fact that variation
in candidate performance due to aﬀective reactions to the interlocutor-related (O’Sullivan
2000a, 2000b, 2002; O’Loughlin 2002), the format (Berry 2007) and the task topic (van
Moere 2008) suggests that the format itself is essentially unstable. This instability, when con-
sidered in tandem with tester’s questionable understanding of language accuracy and ﬂuency
(i.e. ignoring discourse type) and the co-constructed nature of interactive discourse, suggests
that we should be extremely wary of using the paired or group format in our high stakes tests
of speaking in the way we currently use the format. This might involve:
Language testing
267


the abandonment of the format entirely, though this will clearly result in a narrowing of the
construct and a corresponding limitation to the generalisability of the test, or

a review of how we use diﬀerent tasks, for example we should consider using each task to
evaluate separate aspects of a candidate’s language; see Upshur and Turner’s (1999) task-
speciﬁc scales for example, though I am suggesting that we need diﬀerent deﬁnitions of
grammar and ﬂuency depending on the discourse type.
Technology and language testing
I will initially focus on reviewing the impact of technology to date with regard to test design,
development and delivery. Finally, I will brieﬂy look at where technology is likely to have the
most signiﬁcant eﬀect over the coming years.
Test design
One signiﬁcant impact of new technology when it was ﬁrst used by test developers was to limit
the type of test tasks and items to those whose responses could be automatically read and
transferred to datasets. However, as the technology improves, we are beginning to see a new
generation of technology-driven tests (e.g. the Pearson Test of English) which are attempting
to use technology in new ways. While the actual content of these new tests remains quite tra-
ditional, the fact that performance is assessed automatically by machine is certainly both
innovative and controversial.
Automated assessment of writing has been the focus of intense research and interest since
Page’s (1968) Project Essay Grader (PEG). The current Pearson engine for assessing writing is
based on an application of Latent Semantic Analysis (LSA), described by Landauer et al.
(2004: 5214) as ‘one of a growing number of corpus-based techniques that employ statistical
machine learning in text analysis’. This (and other) automated scoring systems allow for what
is known as a ‘person-free’ assessment of the written performance of learners and test-takers.
Given the subjective and idiosyncratic of human ratings (see the work of Lumley (2005) and
O’Sullivan (2008) who explored the nature of rating in tests of writing and the impact of
interlocutor-related variables in testing speaking respectively), it is diﬃcult to ignore the claims
made by advocates of these automated systems, particularly when they report very similar
outcomes to those of human raters but with much higher consistency (see, for example, Foltz
et al. 2000). Clearly, we need to investigate the issue of human versus automated rating to
understand better its impact on test validity.
Test development
Technology has also begun to ﬁnd its way into the test development process. While we have
used item banks for some years now (an item bank is a database of test items which have been
tagged for things like diﬃculty, focus and descriptive data; see Vale [2007] for an overview),
more recently, test developers have turned to the Web to access materials (e.g. reading and
listening texts) as well as accessing Web-based research platforms.
I will use a case study to illustrate the point. When developing the vocabulary paper for the
British Council’s International Language Assessment (ILA), I used the online British National
Corpus (BNC) as well as Tom Cobb’s excellent Compleat Lexical Tutor Website. The
combination of these two resources made it possible to develop an item type in which a set of
Barry O’Sullivan
268

words of a known frequency level were selected for a task that engaged the candidates in
identifying both a synonym and a frequently occurring collocation for each word. Since the
words to be matched with a target word were meant to occur less frequently than the target,
the writing of the task would have been incredibly tedious without instant access to resources
which allowed me to both check for frequency of all words and also identify the most
frequently occurring collocation for that word.
Test delivery
Perhaps the most obvious change brought about by technology has been the development of
computer adaptive tests (Davey and Pitoniak 2007). An adaptive test selects items from a bank
in which the focus and diﬃculty of the items have been stored. Depending on the responses of
the candidate on an initial group of items, another set of items are presented that are either
harder or easier than the originals. This process continues until the candidate’s responses sta-
bilise on a set of items of a particular diﬃculty. Each test will diﬀer in terms of speciﬁc content
and in terms of time taken, as candidates will respond in diﬀerent ways to the item sets.
In terms of the scoring of written responses, we have already seen how automated scoring is
becoming a reality, and have also seen the introduction of technology to the scoring of hand-
written responses. While some major examination boards have been exploring the feasibility of
managing scripts online (and by this I mean they scan the original, save it as a PDF ﬁle, make it
available online to raters for scoring and collect the score data also online), there is one
excellent example of how such a system can be developed and sustained over time. The
example I am referring to is the system devised for the CEPA English test in the United Arab
Emirates. In operation now for several years, the CEPA system is an excellent example of what
can be achieved with the intelligent use of technology; see Brown and Jaquith (2011).
Other changes have included the delivery of tests of speaking using computer technology
(again see the Pearson Test of English in which the test performances are scored auto-
matically) and the broader move towards the delivery of computer-assisted tests (where the
actual test is a traditional stand-alone paper one, with only the delivery system changing from
the traditional pen-and-paper) across more and more learning contexts.
The future?
Current approaches to the automated assessment of speaking are, like the Ordinate Technology that
drives the Pearson Test of English, based on statistical predictions of performance based on
word recognition, as well as locating and evaluating ‘relevant segments, syllables and phrases
in speech’. The system ‘then uses statistical modelling technologies to assess the spoken per-
formance’ (Pearson 2007: 6). While the system appears to oﬀer a signiﬁcant advancement in
automated scoring, it is still basically indirect in nature, and as such can only ever oﬀer an
estimate of ability. Voice recognition has come a long way over the past two decades, though it
is still far from ready to allow for full comprehension even with training – though the training
time has been greatly reduced under experimental conditions (the Human Languages Tech-
nology group at IBM is currently engaged in a broad range of research activities including
natural language, speaker recognition and real-time translation of broadcast news). So, at
some point in the not too distant future, we may be able to broaden the application of auto-
mated scoring of speaking to include automated direct measures of performance. However,
even here there will be some issues related to the co-construction of discourse and meaning,
suggesting that technology will continue to struggle with interactive dialogic communication.
Language testing
269

Test developers urgently need to look at what computer-delivered tests can add to our
understanding of the reading construct. In the absence of new item or task types, we need,
for example, to consider things such as expeditious reading. Testing this using the pen-and-
paper format is fraught with diﬃculties, owing not least to the lack of consistency shown by
invigilators, though it is clear that the move to computer delivery should allow us to far more
easily test this aspect of reading as we have full control over timing (for reading and respond-
ing to items).
On a slightly diﬀerent note, I would like to end this section by referring to the continued
impact on test development and validation practice of the Common European Framework of
Reference for Languages (CEFR). The publication of the CEFR by the Council of Europe
(2001) was followed by a set of suggested procedures for establishing evidence of a link
between a test and a speciﬁc CEFR level (Council of Europe 2009). While this has been cri-
ticised (see, for example, Kantarcıog˘lu et al. in press; O’Sullivan in press) it has been inﬂuen-
tial in leading thinking on the importance of standards in test development and theory.
The combination of factors discussed in this chapter, such as professionalisation, localisa-
tion and the CEFR have begun to change the face of testing. Nowadays, it is much more
diﬃcult to convince the education authorities in places such as Hungary that a test is valid for
use in their jurisdiction than it is to get the same sanction for the UK.
Summary
Things are changing in language testing. Ever since Bachman (1990) presented his model of
language ability and demonstrated how this could be used to support a language test which
was designed to reﬂect the then current thinking in educational measurement, a new level of
professionalism has emerged, with a growing worldwide cadre of scholars and practitioners
with a level of technical expertise that far exceeds that of their predecessors. As testing
knowledge spreads, people are beginning to realise that for good testing to happen, the domain
to which it applies must be taken into consideration when interpreting the validation argument
that accompanies it.
The implication here is that examinations are only of value if they are designed to be used
in a speciﬁc domain. Until now, administrators and policy makers have argued, with a lot of
success and some justiﬁcation, that no local test could match the international examinations
for quality. No longer. Nowadays, there are many examples of excellent local examinations in
which the knowledge of the local domain (culture, language, society, etc.) contributes sig-
niﬁcantly to the format and contents of the test.
The process of professionalisation has led, over time, to one of test localisation. The latter
process is the most signiﬁcant current development in language testing, as it is based on the
assumption (correct in my view) that in almost all circumstances, local tests are more likely to
allow us to make more valid assumptions about test-takers than non-test-taker-speciﬁc com-
petitors. While this has always been the case, the level of professionalism amongst local testers
has begun to change dramatically (just look at the country of origin of most Ph.D. candidates
in the USA and the UK over the past decade – you will ﬁnd that they are almost all from
places other than the USA and the UK).
All this has led to fragmentation in the language testing industry. There are still a number of
big players, but they are competing for a limited (though large) market, which is deﬁned by a
small number of very speciﬁc domains – international business and country-speciﬁc higher
education. As local expertise matures and conﬁdence in localised solutions grows, this market
will become ever more focused and local tests will begin to dominate speciﬁc markets.
Barry O’Sullivan
270

Related topics
Since language testing builds on the research carried out across the areas of applied linguistics
and SLA, almost any chapter in this volume will add insight for the test developer. In parti-
cular I would like to highlight the following chapters: corpus linguistics; English for academic
purposes; language and culture; language learning and language education; psycholinguistics;
SLA; technology and language learning
Further reading
Khalifa, H. and Weir, C. J. (2009) Examining Reading: Research and Practice in Assessing Second
Language Reading, Studies in Language Testing 29, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. (An
excellent look at the testing of reading by a leading examining board and an equally interesting
exempliﬁcation of Weir’s (2005) validation framework for reading.)
Martyniuk, W. (ed.) (2010) Relating Language Examinations to the Common European Framework
of Reference for Languages: Case Studies and Reﬂections on the Use of the Council of Europe’s
Draft Manual, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. (A good overview of the sort of research
and development work being undertaken across the world with regard to the CEFR and standard
setting.)
O’Sullivan, B. (ed.) (2011) Language Testing: Theories and Practices, Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmil-
lan. (A set of papers which oﬀer a useful overview of the area, highlighting many of the issues
discussed here.)
References
Alderson, J. C., Clapham, C. and Wall, D. (1995) Language Test Construction and Evaluation,
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Bachman, L. F. (1990) Fundamental Considerations in Language Testing, Oxford: Oxford University
Press.
Bachman, L. F., Davidson, F., Ryan, K. and Choi, I. C. (1995) An Investigation into the Compar-
ability of Two Tests of English as a Foreign Language: The Cambridge-TOEFL Comparability
Study, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Berry, V. (2007) Personality Diﬀerences and Oral Test Performance, Frankfurt: Peter Lang.
Brennan, R. L. (2001) ‘An essay on the history and future of reliability from the perspective of
replications’, Journal of Educational Measurement 38(4): 295–317.
Brown, A. and Jaquith, P. (2011) ‘The development and validation of an online rater training and
marking system: promises and pitfalls’, in B. O’Sullivan (ed.) Language Testing: Theories and
Practices, Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan.
Brown, J. D. (1996) Testing in Language Programs, Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall
Regents.
Cambridge ESOL (2010) ‘What is IELTS?’ Available at: www.ielts.org/institutions/about_ielts.aspx
(accessed 11 March 2010).
Carter, R. and McCarthy, M. (2006) Cambridge Grammar of English: A Comprehensive Guide,
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Chalhoub-Deville, M. (2003) ‘Second language interaction: current perspectives and future trends’,
Language Testing 20(4): 369–83.
Chapelle, C. A., Enright, M. K. and Jamieson, J. (2008) Building a Validity Argument for the Test
of English as a Foreign Language, New York: Routledge.
Council of Europe (2001) Common European Framework of Reference for Languages: Learning,
Teaching, Assessment, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
——(2003) Relating Language Examinations to the Common European Framework of Reference for
Languages: Learning, Teaching, Assessment (CEF). Manual: Preliminary Pilot Version. DGIV/
EDU/LANG 2003, 5. Strasbourg: Council of Europe, Language Policy Division.
——(2009) Relating Language Examinations to the Common European Framework of Reference for
Languages: Learning, Teaching, Assessment: Manual, Strasbourg: Council of Europe, Language
Policy Division.
Language testing
271

Cronbach, L. J. and Meehl, P. E. (1955) ‘Construct validity in psychological tests’, Psychological
Bulletin 52: 281–302.
Cureton, E. E. (1950) ‘Validity’, in E. F. Lindquist (ed.) Educational Measurement, Washington,
DC: American Council on Education.
Davey, T. and Pitoniak, M. J. (2007) ‘Designing computerised adaptive tests’, in S. M. Downing
and T. M. Haladyna (eds) Handbook of Test Development, New York: Routledge.
Edgeworth, F. Y. (1888) ‘The statistics of examinations’, Journal of the Royal Statistical Society
1888: 599–635.
Educational Testing Services (2010) TOEIC: Test of English for International Communication.
Available at: www.ets.org/toeic/ (accessed 18 April 2010).
Florescano, A. A., O’Sullivan, B., Chavez, C. S., Ryan, D. E., Lara, E. Z., Martinez, L. A. S.,
Macias, M. I. M., Hart, M. M., Grounds, P. E., Ryan, P. R., Dunne, R. A. and de Jesus Romero
Barradas, T. (2011) ‘Developing aﬀordable “local” tests: the EXAVER project’, in O’Sullivan, B.
(ed.) Language Testing: Theories and Practices, Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan.
Foltz, P. W., Gilliam, S. and Kendall, S. A. (2000) ‘Supporting content-based feedback in online
writing evaluation with LSA’, Interactive Learning Environments 8(2): 111–29.
Galton, F. (1879) ‘Psychometric experiments’, Brain 2: 149–62.
Hasselgren, A. (2000) ‘Assessment of English ability in Norwegian schools’, Language Testing 17
(2): 261–77.
Hawkins, J. A. and Buttery, P. (2009) ‘Using learner language from corpora to proﬁle levels of
proﬁciency: insights from the English Proﬁle Programme’, in Studies in Language Testing:
The Social and Educational Impact of Language Assessment, Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.
Hillegas, M. B. (1912) A Scale for the Measurement of Quality in English Composition by Young
People, New York: Teachers College Press.
Jaquith, P. (2010) ‘Time trials: an investigation of rater speed as a factor’, Paper Presented at the
Language Testing Research Colloquium, Cambridge.
Kane, M. T. (1992) ‘An argument-based approach to validity’, Psychological Bulletin 112(3): 527–35.
Kantarcıog˘lu, E., Thomas, C., O’Dwyer, J. and O’Sullivan, B. (2010) ‘The cope linking project: a
case study’, in W. Martiynuik (ed.) Relating Language Examinations to the Common European
Framework of Reference for Languages: Case Studies and Reﬂections on the Use of the Council of
Europe’s Draft Manual, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Kelly, F. J. (1915) Kansas Silent Reading Test, Topeka: Kansas State Printing Plant.
Khalifa, H., Ffrench, A. and Papp, S. (2010) ‘The CEFR: its virtues and shortcomings when
teaching and assessing young learners’, Paper Presented at the Language Testing Research
Colloquium, Cambridge.
Kramsch, C. (1986) ‘From language proﬁciency to international competence’, Modern Language
Journal 70(4): 366–72.
——(1998) Language and Culture, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Landauer, T. K., Laham, D and Derr, M. (2004) ‘From paragraph to graph: latent semantic ana-
lysis for information visualization’, PNAS 101(Suppl. 1): 5214–19.
Loevinger, J. (1957) ‘Objective tests as instruments of psychological theory’, Psychological Reports,
Monograph Supplement 3: 635–94.
Lumley, T. (2005) Assessing Second Language Writing: The Rater’s Perspective, Frankfurt: Peter Lang.
McCarthy, M. J. (2005) ‘Fluency and conﬂuence: what ﬂuent speakers do’, The Language Teacher
29(6): 26–8.
McNamara, T. (1997) ‘“Interaction” in second language performance assessment: whose perfor-
mance?’, Applied Linguistics 18(4): 446–66.
——(2003) ‘Looking back, looking forward: rethinking Bachman’, Language Testing 20(4): 466–73.
Messick, S. (1975) ‘The standard program: meaning and values in measurement and evaluation’,
American Psychologist 30: 955–66.
——(1980) ‘Test validity and the ethics of assessment’, American Psychologist 35: 1012–27.
Mislevy, R. J., Steinberg, L. S. and Almond, R. G. (2002) ‘Design and analysis in task-based lan-
guage assessment’, Language Testing 19(4): 477–96.
——(2003) ‘On the structure of educational assessments’, Measurement: Interdisciplinary Research
and Perspectives 1(1): 3–62.
O’Loughlin, K. (2002) ‘The impact of gender in oral proﬁciency testing’, Language Testing 19(2): 169–92.
Barry O’Sullivan
272

O’Sullivan, B. (2000a) ‘Towards a Model of Performance in Oral Language Tests’, Ph.D. thesis,
University of Reading.
——(2000b) ‘Exploring gender and oral proﬁciency interview performance’, System 28(3): 373–86.
——(2002) ‘Learner acquaintanceship and oral proﬁciency test pair-task performance’, Language
Testing 19(3): 277–95.
——(2008) Modelling Performance in Oral Language Testing, Frankfurt: Peter Lang.
——(2010) ‘The city and guilds communicator examination linking project: a brief overview with
reﬂections on the process’, in W. Martyniuk (ed.) Relating Language Examinations to the
Common European Framework of Reference for Languages: Case Studies and Reﬂections on the
Use of the Council of Europe’s Draft Manual, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
O’Sullivan, B. and de Jong, J. (2010) ‘Interpreting the CEFR: are examination boards telling the
same story?’ Paper presented at the annual meeting of the British Association for Applied
Linguistics Aberdeen, September.
O’Sullivan, B., Weir, C. J. and Saville, N. (2002) ‘Using observation checklists to validate speaking-test
tasks’, Language Testing 19(1): 33–56.
O’Sullivan, B. and Weir, C. J. (2011) ‘Language testing = validation’, in B. O’Sullivan (ed.) Language
Testing: Theories and Practices, Basingstroke: Palgrave Macmillan.
Page, E. B. (1968) ‘The use of the computer in analyzing student essays’, International Review of
Education 14: 210–25.
Pearson (2007) PTE academic automated scoring, March 2009. Test documentation. Available
at: www.pearsonpte.com/SiteCollectionDocuments/AutomatedScoringUK.pdf (accessed 5 May
2010).
Poehner, M. E. (2008) Dynamic Assessment: A Vygotskian Approach to Understanding and Promoting
L2 Development, New York: Springer.
Poehner, M. E. and Lantolf, J. P. (2005) ‘Dynamic assessment in the language classroom’, Language
Teaching Research 9(3): 1–33.
Purpura, J. (2004) Assessing Grammar, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Saville, N. and Hargreaves, P. (1999) ‘Assessing speaking in the revised FCE’, ELT Journal 53(1):
42–51.
Spearman, C. (1904) ‘The proof and measurement of association between two things’, American
Journal of Psychology 15: 72–101.
Spolsky, B. (1978) ‘Language testing: art or science?’, in G. Nickel (ed.) Language Testing, Stuttgart:
HochschulVerlag.
Swales, J. (1971) Writing Scientiﬁc English, London: Thomas Nelson.
Test of Interactive English (2010) Test Website. Available at: www.tie.ie/index.htm (accessed 27
April 2010).
Thorndike, E. L. (1911) ‘A scale for measuring the merit of English writing’, Science 33: 935–8.
Upshur, J. A. and Turner, C. (1999) ‘Systematic eﬀects in the rating of second-language speaking
ability: test method and learner discourse’, Language Testing 16: 82–111.
Vale, D. (2007) ‘Computerised item banking’, in S. M. Downing and T. M. Haladyna (eds) Handbook
of Test Development, New York: Routledge.
van Moere, A. (2008) ‘Group Oral Tests: How Does Task Aﬀect Candidate Performance and Test
Scores?’ Unpublished Ph.D. Thesis, Lancaster University, UK.
Weir, C. J. (2005) Language Testing and Validation: An Evidence-Based Approach, Basingstoke:
Palgrave Macmillan.
Young, R. F. (2000) ‘Interactional competence: challenges for validity’, Paper Presented at the
Language Testing Research Colloquium, Vancouver, Canada (March).
Language testing
273

19
Classroom discourse
Amy B. M. Tsui
This chapter provides an overview of the emergence of classroom discourse research as a
ﬁeld of study, the major issues addressed, how the ﬁeld has developed over time, its future
development and the challenges it faces. The paradigm shift in theories of learning and its
impact on classroom discourse research is highlighted. The term ‘classroom discourse’, as used
in the chapter, encompasses linguistic as well as non-linguistic elements of discourse that occur in
the classroom. The discussion focuses on second language (L2) and foreign language (FL)
classroom research, and makes reference to ﬁrst language (L1) classroom research only when it
impacts on the latter.
History
Research on classroom discourse began in the early 1950s in the ﬁeld of teacher education. It
was initially motivated by the search for an ‘objective’ evaluation of classroom teaching
through obtaining a factual record of pedagogical events which could, in turn, provide student
teachers with feedback on their teaching competence. The evaluation and feedback focused on
aspects of teacher behaviour related to learner performance. In order to achieve these objec-
tives, tools for systematic observation of classroom interaction were proposed. One of the ﬁrst
and most widely adopted tools was Flanders’ Interaction Analysis Categories (FIAC) (Flanders
1960). FIAC classiﬁes classroom talk into teacher talk and student talk. Teacher talk is further
categorized according to whether the teacher is exerting direct or indirect inﬂuence on stu-
dents’ behaviour, whereas student talk is further categorized into predictable and unpredictable
responses. This kind of analysis provides an overall picture of the teaching patterns that occur
in a lesson in terms of the proportions of teacher talk and student talk, direct and indirect
teacher inﬂuence, and the types of student behaviour elicited by various teacher behaviours.
Subsequent to FIAC, a large number of observation instruments were generated in the 1970s
and 1980s, for teacher self-analysis and self-improvement.
Studies of L2/FL classroom teaching began in the 1960s, driven by the need to evaluate the
eﬀectiveness of the various FL teaching methodologies, with the aim of identifying the ‘best’
methodology. For example, the Pennsylvania Project set out to demonstrate the superiority of
the audiolingual method over the traditional approach. The inconclusive ﬁndings, however,
274

pointed to the problematic nature of the basic tenets of these studies (Allwright 1988). It was
generally agreed that eﬀorts to establish the superiority of one teaching methodology over
another represented a simplistic view of classroom teaching processes and were unlikely to
yield meaningful results. The aim of classroom-centred research, it was argued, should not be
to prescribe the best method to teachers but to provide them with a detailed account of
classroom teaching processes that focused on teaching styles, rather than teaching methods,
and highlighted the relationship between teacher behaviour and learner achievements. Sub-
sequently, classroom research shifted its focus from prescription to description. One could,
however, argue that the intent was still largely prescriptive because the aim was to identify
eﬀective teaching styles that would lead to positive learning outcomes (Allwright 1988).
Inspired by the work on systematic classroom observation in general education, a number of
descriptive systems for L2/FL classrooms were proposed. FIAC was particularly inﬂuential
because of its focus on the verbal behaviours of teachers and students. One of the earliest and
most inﬂuential tools for L2/FL classroom observation tools was Moskowitz’s Foreign Lan-
guage Interaction (FLint), which extended FIAC to include interactional features character-
istic of FL classrooms, such as the use of English (i.e. L1) instead of the target FL by the
teacher (Moskowitz 1967).
Apart from general education research, L2 classroom discourse research was also inﬂuenced
by L1 classroom discourse research that began in the 1960s as part of the language across the
curriculum movement in Britain. The movement drew attention to the important role of
language in education and a number of studies were conducted on L1 content classrooms.
Particularly inﬂuential was the work of Barnes (1969) on the types of teacher questions
(open versus closed; pseudo versus genuine), the types of learner responses elicited, the
types of learner-talk (exploratory versus ﬁnal draft) and the mental processes reﬂected by
learner-talk.
Tools for teacher training purposes based on Flanders’ work proliferated in the 1970s and
1980s, despite reservations about the underlying assumption of the causal relationship between
teacher behaviour and learner achievement (Rosenshine 1970). During this period, descriptive
systems proposed from alternative perspectives were also drawn on for analyzing L2/FL
classroom discourse. One inﬂuential system was that proposed by Bellack et al. (1966), which
aimed to understand how language was used to structure the classroom learning environment.
Bellack et al.’s conception of classroom interaction as constituted by a ﬁnite set of pedagogical
moves, namely structuring, soliciting, responding, and reacting, has been widely drawn on for
analyzing the organization of classroom discourse. Another highly inﬂuential descriptive
system was that proposed by Sinclair and Coulthard (1975) in their search for a descriptive
model for the grammar of spoken discourse. Adopting Bellack et al.’s notion of moves, they
provided a comprehensive account of all verbal elements of classroom discourse, and proposed
a model of spoken discourse based on Halliday’s categories of grammar (1961) in which dis-
course units, namely acts, moves, exchanges, and transactions, are organized in a hierarchical
manner. The basic unit of organization in classroom discourse is the exchange, which consists
of initiating, responding, and follow-up moves (IRF). Although this descriptive system
was linguistically rather than educationally motivated, it has been widely adapted for the
analysis of classroom discourse. A third inﬂuential system was that proposed by Fanselow
(1977) for both teacher training and research purposes. Building on the work of Bellack et al.,
Fanselow proposed an elaborate descriptive system, FOCUS (Foci for Observing Commu-
nications Used in Settings), which provides an account of ﬁve characteristics of a commu-
nicative event: source, medium, use, content, and pedagogical purpose. Fanselow maintained
that this instrument would enable teachers, teacher trainers, supervisors and researchers to use
Classroom discourse
275

a common language to provide a similar account of the same communicative event in both
teaching and non-teaching settings.
The shift from a prescriptive to a descriptive orientation in classroom discourse analysis in
the 1970s and 1980s resulted in more exploratory and explanatory investigations. Since then,
considerable attention has been given to raising teachers’ awareness of their own language use
and how it aﬀects learning opportunities (see, for example, Walsh 2006). (For an excellent
review of classroom observation and descriptive instruments, see Allwright 1988.)
L2 classroom discourse studies conducted in the 1970s and 1980s focused mainly on the
observables (i.e. what can be observed) in the classroom. By the late 1980s and early 1990s, it
became clear that studies of the observables needed to be illuminated by the unobservables
that also shaped classroom discourse. Researchers suggested that learners’ participation in the
classroom could be aﬀected by their learning styles, psychological states, cultural backgrounds,
and beliefs about classroom behaviour (Allwright and Bailey 1991; Tsui 1996). For example,
studies of Asian learners’ participation in multi-ethnic classrooms showed that they are, in
general, less willing to volunteer answers and they take fewer turns than their non-Asian
counterparts (Johnson 1995), and their observable behaviours are partly shaped by their cul-
tural values and learning styles (Duﬀ2002). Similarly, the way in which teachers pose ques-
tions and provide feedback, and the kind of interaction they engage in with learners, is shaped
by their conceptions of teaching and learning, and their lived experiences of classroom events.
Recognizing the importance of the unobservable dimensions of classroom discourse put into
question the adequacy of descriptive tools that are etic (non-participant) in perspective and
typically do not take context into account. Consequently, research methodologies in neighbour-
ing disciplines have been appropriated. In particular, ethnographic approaches have become
widely adopted. The most characteristic form of ethnographic research involves the researcher
participating, overtly or covertly, in people’s lives for an extended period of time, ‘watching
what happens, listening to what is said, asking questions – in fact, collecting whatever data are
available to throw light on the issues that are the focus of the research’ (Hammersley and
Atkinson 1995: 1). However, as it is not always practicable to be a participant researcher, most
classroom research aims to obtain an emic (participant) perspective on classroom processes
through the collection of a variety of qualitative data, such as lesson plans, teachers’ and
learners’ journals, interviews, and stimulated recall conducted with teachers and learners, in
addition to recording classroom discourse data. Data on the wider educational and socio-
political contexts that are relevant to the research focus are also collected and referenced in the
interpretation of classroom discourse data, such as educational policy, school curriculum, the
socioeconomic background of learners, and school culture (van Lier 1988; Johnson 1995;
Bailey and Nunan 1996). Ethnomethodology, speciﬁcally Conversation Analysis (CA), has also
been adopted to analyze classroom discourse data. For example, Seedhouse (2004) adopted a
CA approach to the analysis of classroom discourse and pointed out that, similar to contexts in
conversation, contexts in the classroom are not static throughout the whole lesson but ﬂuid and
mutually constructed by participants in the moment-to-moment development of the discourse
(see also Markee 2008). He proposed a model in which classroom discourse data can be ana-
lyzed at three levels of context: micro discourse, L2 classroom, and institutional contexts. This
model, according to Seedhouse, enables us to link the micro with the macro, and to see the
speciﬁcity and diversity of instances of L2 classroom discourse at the micro level, as well as the
commonalties between them at the macro level. Based on data from diﬀerent L2 classroom
contexts, he further demonstrated how the CA approach illuminates reﬂexivity of the interac-
tional organization of classroom discourse, as managed by participants, and pedagogical focus.
He cautioned, however, that the direct application of conversational structures to L2
Amy B. M. Tsui
276

classroom discourse structures may result in unintended interactional consequences that work
against pedagogical eﬀorts. For example, the application of preference organization in
conversation (i.e. avoidance of direct and unmitigated negative evaluations) to the treatment
of learners’ errors may reinforce the perception that making errors is embarrassing and
undesirable.
This brief review of the history of classroom discourse research shows that there has been
considerable progress made in the ﬁeld over the ﬁfty years since its inception. From a relatively
simplistic and reductionist view of classroom processes, research on classroom discourse has
moved to a more holistic understanding of classroom processes as a constituent of the larger
society. Accordingly, it has moved from decontextualized micro-level analyses from an ‘etic’
perspective, to an integration of micro and macro levels from an ‘emic’ perspective that draws
on conceptual frameworks and research methodologies from a number of disciplines. In the
ensuing discussion, I shall elaborate on this by outlining the major issues addressed, future
developments, and the challenges faced by the ﬁeld.
Major issues in classroom discourse research
Information-processing approach to classroom discourse research
Much of the early research on classroom discourse (conducted in the 1970s and 1980s) was
guided by an information-processing theory of learning based on an input-output model that
perceived learning as a process that takes place inside the head of the individual (see Ortega,
this volume). The majority of the studies focused on the analysis of language input, interac-
tion, and language output from an etic perspective, and a minimalist approach was adopted
with regard to the role of context (for reviews of classroom discourse research, see Allwright
1988; Chaudron 1988; van Lier 1988; Allwright and Bailey 1991).
Studies of teachers’ language input undertaken at that time were motivated by the belief
that teachers’ language use had a direct impact on learners’ language output. One strand of
research was teachers’ comprehensible input. A number of studies found that linguistic modi-
ﬁcations made by teachers were similar to those used by native speakers (NS) of the target
language when talking to non-native speakers (NNS), referred to as ‘foreigner talk’. Early
studies focused on the linguistic features of teachers’ modiﬁed speech (Gaies 1977; Chaudron
1982). Subsequent studies, however, pointed out that it was the linguistic modiﬁcations made
by teachers in light of learners’ responses that facilitated language learning. The research focus
therefore shifted to the study of the modiﬁcation of interactional structures as a result of the
negotiation of meaning between the teacher and the learners, and the modiﬁcation devices
used by NSs in NS-NNS conversations, such as conﬁrmation, clariﬁcation and comprehension
checks (Long 1983; Varonis and Gass 1985).
Another strand of research on language input was the study of teachers’ questions and their
corrective feedback. Referential questions (analogous to Barnes’ [1969] genuine questions)
were found to elicit linguistically more complex learner responses than display questions
(analogous to Barnes’ pseudo questions) (Long and Sato 1983). Modiﬁcations of questions by
teachers (both comprehension-oriented and response-oriented), and the impact of these modi-
ﬁcations on students’ responses were also investigated (Tsui 1995). The function of teacher
feedback was reconceptualized from evaluation of learners’ response to provision of informa-
tion for learners to conﬁrm or disconﬁrm their hypotheses about the target language. The
notion of error was also reconceptualized from a developmental perspective (Allwright and
Bailey 1991). More recent research has emphasized the importance of form-focused corrective
Classroom discourse
277

feedback and reformulations. The latter, which rephrase learners’ utterances by correcting the
errors without changing the meaning, are considered to facilitate learning (see papers collected
in Doughty and Williams 1998). The research ﬁndings of the studies, however, have been
inconclusive (Lightbown 2000).
A third strand of research was on the language output produced by learners. The lack of
evidence that comprehensible input actually produced higher quality learner output led to the
shift in focus from teachers’ comprehensible input to learners’ language output. Swain (1985)
proposed the Output Hypothesis, which states that pushing learners to produce comprehensible
as well as grammatically accurate output is equally, if not more, important for language
acquisition. According to Swain, attention to output forces learners to process language at a
deeper level and to notice the gaps in their interlanguage (i.e. an emerging linguistic system
developed by learners in the process of learning L2/FL). Subsequently, a number of studies
argued that when communication failure occurs or when learners are required to complete
structured tasks involving information gaps, the process of negotiation of meaning connects
input with output and enhances attention to linguistic form. As such, it is considered parti-
cularly eﬀective for language acquisition (see the Interaction Hypothesis proposed by Long
1996; see also papers collected in Doughty and Williams 1998). However, the ﬁndings of stu-
dies on the relationship between negotiation of meaning and language acquisition have also
been somewhat inconclusive.
In addition to the quality of language output, studies of learners’ output also include lear-
ners’ turn-taking behaviour and the extent to which they participate orally in diﬀerent class-
room settings. Studies were conducted on learners who took more turns and those who took
fewer turns, and their learning eﬀectiveness (Seliger 1983). Subsequently, factors which impinge
on learners’ interactional behaviour, such as cultural background, learning arrangements (such
as teacher-fronted versus pair or group work) and task types were also taken into consideration
(see, for example, Doughty and Pica 1986; Plough and Gass 1993).
Sociocultural perspectives of classroom discourse research
In the 1990s, the shift in the research paradigm in general education from information pro-
cessing to sociocultural theories of learning began to make an impact on L2 research (see
papers collected in Modern Language Journal, vol. 78, 1994). This shift has led to a recon-
ceptualization of language, context, and learning in profound ways. Sociocultural theories
(SCT) of learning conceptualize the relationship between the learner and the social world as
dialectical and mediated by cultural artefacts, among which language is primary. Learners are
not just passive recipients of language input and teachers are not just providers of input.
Rather, the learners, the teacher, and the sociocultural context in which the discourse takes
place are constitutive of what is being learned (see Thorne and Tasker, this volume). Seen from
this perspective, classroom discourse studies based on the input-output model present an
impoverished and reductionist view of L2 learning (see papers collected in Lantolf and Appel
1994; and in Lantolf 2000).
Since the 1990s, an increasing number of studies have begun to examine classroom discourse
more holistically from sociocultural perspectives of learning. Classroom discourse has been
reconceptualized as a major semiotic resource that mediates learning in the classroom. Simi-
larly, curriculum materials, pedagogical activities and tasks have been reconceptualized as
semiotic resources rather than ways of packaging target language input (Tsui 2007). Key
concepts in SCT have been used as interpretive frameworks for analyzing classroom discourse
data, including the Vygotskian concepts of mediated learning, Zone of Proximal Development
Amy B. M. Tsui
278

(ZPD) and scaﬀolding (Bruner 1983). Several studies adopted the notion of scaﬀolded
instruction in the learners’ ZPD and concluded that scaﬀolding facilitates learning only if the
teacher is sensitive to the learners’ level of linguistic competence and the speciﬁc features of
their interlanguage. The studies also pointed out that scaﬀolding can be mutual rather than
unidirectional (i.e. from expert to novice), and that peer scaﬀolding can be highly eﬀective,
even among very young FL learners (Lantolf and Appel 1994). Adopting the notion
of mediated learning, Swain (2000) extended the notion of output as external speech. She
argued that external speech in collaborative dialogues is a powerful mediational tool for lan-
guage learning because it not only encourages learners to reﬂect on what is said in language-
related episodes, while still being oriented to making meaning, but also helps learners to
monitor their own language use, to notice the gaps in their interlanguage, and to set goals for
themselves.
Activity Theory, developed on Vygotsky’s conception of mediated action as the unit of
analysis for understanding human mental processes (Vygotsky 1978; Leont’ev 1978), has also
been drawn on by a number of classroom discourse studies (see, for example, Lantolf and
Appel 1994). According to Leont’ev (1978), goal-oriented human action is part of a larger
activity and is shaped by the broader sociocultural system in which the activity is situated. The
individual’s participation in these socially meaningful activities is mediated by the cultural
tools that he or she appropriates. In the course of the interaction, the cultural tools, the nature
of the activity, and the modes of participation are transformed. The same activity may
be realized by diﬀerent actions mediated by diﬀerent tools; conversely, the same action may be
driven by diﬀerent motives, hence realizing diﬀerent activities (see also Engeström 1999).
According to this perspective of learning, the same learning task may be operationalized as
diﬀerent learning activities with diﬀerent goal-oriented actions by diﬀerent learners, and by the
same learner in diﬀerent contexts (see also Thorne and Tasker, this volume). From this theo-
retical perspective, the discourse that emerges in task completion plays an important part in
shaping the way learners orient themselves to the task and to each other. Hence, it is the
agency of learners in terms of the way they orient themselves to the task, not the task per se,
that determines the way the task will be performed and the learning that will take place. Tasks
should therefore be understood as emergent interactions and not as the packaging of language
input. An example of a classroom discourse study that draws on Activity Theory is Nassaji
and Wells (2000), in which spoken discourse is seen as a mediating tool through which the
goal of an activity system is achieved, and units of discourse are identiﬁed according to their
role in advancing the goal of an activity system in the classroom.
Also working within the sociocultural paradigm, a number of researchers have adopted an
ecological perspective of language learning. For example, van Lier (2000) argued for the
totality of the relationships between the learner and all other elements or participants in the
context with which he or she interacted. He proposed aﬀordance as an alternative conception
of input and pointed out that the environment makes available opportunities for learners to
engage in meaning-making activities with others (a semiotic budget), and what is perceived as
relevant and acted on by the learner becomes an aﬀordance. In other words, input has been
reconceptualized as the linguistic aﬀordances perceived and used by the learner for linguistic
action. Input is therefore not something standing outside the learner waiting to be acquired,
but rather the interaction between the learner and the environment.
Classroom discourse research has also begun to draw on social theories of learning which
are sociocultural in orientation (Lave and Wenger 1991; Wenger 1998). For example, Donato
(2004) distinguished the notion of interaction used in the second language acquisition (SLA)
literature from the notion of collaboration used in social theory of learning. The latter entails
Classroom discourse
279

mutual engagement of participants in a joint enterprise that is socially meaningful to them. He
drew attention to the relational dimension of collaboration, which takes time to develop, and
argued that the analysis of discourse generated by isolated task completion by group members
new to group work does not capture the reality of how learning is co-constructed in colla-
borative work. Drawing on the notions of community of practice and legitimate peripheral
participation (Lave and Wenger 1991), Donato maintained that the value of collaboration lies
in helping novices to move from peripheral to full participation as competent members in their
communities of practice. Also drawing on the notion of learning as moving from peripheral to
fuller participation, Young and Miller (2004) examined students’ changing participation in
discursive practice in writing conferences.
The notion that the classroom is a community of practice and that learners construct iden-
tities as they engage in the processes of classroom discourse, has also begun to receive atten-
tion in recent years (see Norton, this volume). For example, Duﬀ(2002) investigated the
co-construction of cultural identity in classrooms where learners were linguistically and socio-
culturally heterogeneous. Richards (2006) argues that in classroom talk, similar to other forms
of talk, it is through the moment-to-moment development of interaction that the membership
categories, and hence the identities of the participants, are constructed. He shows that class-
room discourse features are reﬂective of the negotiation of diﬀerent types of identity between
the teacher and the students, as well as among students themselves.
Finally, the emphasis on a holistic view of classroom discourse has drawn researchers’
attention to a relatively neglected, but by no means less important, aspect of classroom dis-
course: what is referred to as ‘what happens in the margins of instructional conversations’ by
Bannink and van Dam (2006: 284). This includes silences, disruptions, laughter, and time-out,
as well as the non-verbal, prosodic and paralinguistic features of talk. Bannink and van
Dam argue that these features are important because they aﬀect what is taught and what is
learnt, and can lead to empowerment or disempowerment of learners. They argue that class-
room discourse should take into account the multimodal participation of all parties, with their
multiple agendas and roles. Furthermore, they maintain that the discursive contexts and
interactional conditions that mediate learning should be articulated for teacher education
purposes. The challenge is, as they point out, how the context-sensitive and situated nature of
interactions among multiple participants in the classroom can be adequately captured, and
how these events can be made analytically transparent.
Critical approaches to classroom discourse analysis
A holistic approach to classroom discourse analysis involves situating the classroom in the
larger context of society and seeing classroom processes as shaped by pedagogical concerns as
well as by broader social, economic, political, and cultural forces. Kumaravadivelu (1999)
proposed a critical approach to classroom discourse analysis based on poststructuralist (e.g.
Foucault 1972) and postcolonialist (e.g. Said 1978) perspectives of discourse. He maintained
that analyses of classroom discourse should capture not only its sociolinguistic dimension but
also its sociocultural and sociopolitical dimensions. He suggested critical ethnography as the
research tool to unravel the ‘hidden meanings and underlying connections’ in classroom dis-
course ‘through posing questions relating to ideology, power, knowledge, class, race and gender’
(1978: 476). An example of recent work adopting this approach is Menard-Warwick (2008),
who looks at the issue of gender and social positioning in an ESL course for adult immigrants.
By examining linguistic and interactional structures, she shows the tension between the iden-
tities that the female immigrant learners claimed for themselves as competent members of the
Amy B. M. Tsui
280

community and the gendered social identities that are assigned to them by their teacher. She
argues that teachers should listen for and support learners’ reﬂexive positioning, in order to
facilitate their reconstruction of L2 identities and voices (see also Richards 2006).
Another example of a study that has given voice to students is Fisher and Larkin (2008),
which investigates student and teacher perceptions of talk in school through questionnaire
surveys with over 180 primary pupils and through focus group interviews with over sixty of
these, as well as interviews with eight teachers. The ﬁndings show that the pupils had very
diﬀerent views from their teachers with regard to what they perceived was expected of them
and what constituted good talk. While all teachers mentioned conﬁdence as being an impor-
tant aspect of pupil talk, the pupils saw the teacher being in control of the expected amount,
manner, and topic of talk, and the need for them to conform to these expectations. Fisher and
Larkin observe that because of the unequal power relationship in the classroom, teachers
should reassess their expectations of the rules of participation and value the skills and knowl-
edge that young children bring to school. Whether classroom discourse processes empower or
disempower learners, and whether learners’ voices are heard and respected, are central con-
cerns in critical classroom discourse analysis. To date, these concerns have been much neglec-
ted, not least because of the asymmetrical power relationship between the teacher and the
students in the classroom.
Future developments
Since the 1990s, research on classroom discourse has advanced the ﬁeld in several respects.
First, as we have seen, there has been an emphasis on context, an aspect which was mini-
malized in the 1970s and 1980s. Moreover, instead of focusing on speciﬁc aspects of classroom
interaction, research has taken a more holistic view of classroom interaction, integrating micro
and macro analyses and attending to multiple dimensions of context and multiple levels of
discourse in the classroom. Critical classroom discourse analysis will continue to receive
attention, and issues such as power, identity, culture, and gender, as (co)constructed in the
classroom, and the impact these issues have on learner (dis)empowerment and opportunities
for learning will continue to receive attention (see Norton, this volume).
Second, the theoretical frameworks drawn from neighbouring disciplines to illuminate the
complexity of classroom discourse data will continue to widen. For example, Lantolf (2000)
advocates a pluralistic approach to SLA, and the papers collected in that edited volume
brought together the work of Vygotsky and Bakhtin, social philosophers such as Bourdieu and
Habermas, cognitive psychologists such as Rommeveit, and psychologists such as Gibson,
Bateson, and Bronfrenbrenner. Van Lier (2000) proposed that the input-output model should
be replaced by an ecological perspective. This was echoed by Kramsch (2002), who considered
an ecological approach to language learning a powerful way of capturing the symbiotic rela-
tionship between the language user and the environment (see also van Lier 2004). This
approach is considered to reconcile the tension between language acquisition and language
socialization, and oﬀers a new way of bringing together theoretical frames from other dis-
ciplines to enhance our understanding of the complexities of classroom discourse. In the col-
lection of chapters in Kramsch (2002), concepts in sociology, such as Goﬀman’s frame analysis
and participatory structures (Goﬀman 1974, 1981), have been adopted to analyze the multiple
discourse units and levels recursively embedded in classroom discourse, and the variety of
speaker and addressee roles. Marton and Tsui (2004), building on the theory of variation in
learning in phenomenography, have explored how classroom discourse in a variety of class-
rooms, including L2, can shape learners’ awareness of the critical features of the object of
Classroom discourse
281

learning and how dimensions of its critical features can be varied to bring about learning.
Eﬀorts to unravel the cultural, institutional, and interactional dimensions of the contexts in
which classroom discourse are situated, in order to gain a deeper understanding of its mediating
role in learning, will continue.
Third, classroom discourse studies will increasingly adopt eclectic research methodologies.
For example, Young (2009) has adopted analytic tools from three diﬀerent theoretical frame-
works, namely systemic functional linguistics, social theory of learning and ethnomethodology,
to analyze discursive practices of learners and instructors. Markee (2008) has also demon-
strated how conversational analysis tools can be used to analyze classroom discourse data
from an SLA perspective (see also Nassaji and Wells 2000).
Finally, the teachers’ and the learners’ voices in the analysis of classroom discourse data is
still under-explored. This is an important area of inquiry not only because both teachers
and learners should be aware of the implications of the classroom discourse that they are
co-constructing, but also because both voices provide an emic perspective on the data. In
particular, as Cazden points out, classroom discourse should be the object of focal attention
for students, as well as teachers, because ‘all students’ public words become part of the
curriculum for their peers’ (2001: 169).
Challenges in classroom discourse research
Classroom discourse research has made signiﬁcant progress in illuminating our understanding
of the complex interplay between factors that impinge on what appear to be simple classroom
interchanges. Research in the 1970s and 1980s placed classroom discourse data at the centre of
inquiry and studies were typically ‘data-heavy but theory-light’ (Donato 2004: 299). However,
the last decade has seen more attention being given to theoretical motivation. The appropriation
of theoretical frameworks from neighbouring disciplines has enriched our understanding of
classroom discourse, and the adoption of their research methods has introduced more rigour
into the investigations. These achievements notwithstanding, the ﬁeld is faced with a number
of challenges. I shall only attempt to outline a few obvious ones in this concluding section.
First, as the ﬁeld draws on theoretical concepts from a variety of disciplines, it is important
to ensure that these concepts are explicitly and rigorously deﬁned, with full awareness of their
theoretical assumptions, irrespective of whether they have been adopted wholesale, extended or
redeﬁned. There does seem to be a potential danger that the same terminology may be used
with diﬀerent theoretical assumptions in the discussions. For example, the term community has
been used by diﬀerent researchers in diﬀerent ways, and the term community of practice has
been adopted without regard to the way it was originally deﬁned by Lave and Wenger (1991)
and Wenger (1998) (see papers collected in Zuengler and Mori 2002). There is also a tendency
to adopt uncritically some of the key notions in other disciplines. For example, the notion of
scaﬀolding might be accepted uncritically as assistance that necessarily leads to more eﬀective
learning. As research on learning has shown, scaﬀolded instruction may not facilitate learning;
in fact over-scaﬀolding may even inhibit learning. Another example is the notion of colla-
boration, which has been taken as the corollary of interaction. As Donato (2004) points out,
not all forms of classroom interaction are collaborative and conducive to the development of
discourse competence.
Second, as the ﬁeld adopts an eclectic approach to research methodologies, there could be a
tendency to adopt methodologies without understanding their origins and theory-method
relationships. In this regard, the special issue of Zuengler and Mori (2002), which was devoted
to methodological approaches in the micro-analysis of classroom discourse, was necessary
Amy B. M. Tsui
282

and timely. It presented a collection of papers containing exemplars and critiques of three
inﬂuential and well-deﬁned methodologies, within which classroom discourse analysis had
been conducted: ethnography of communication; conversation analysis; and systemic func-
tional linguistics (which emerged respectively from anthropology, sociology, and linguistics).
More discussion of this kind is necessary to move the ﬁeld forward.
Third, the analysis of classroom discourse as situated in its sociohistorical context typically
involves an eclectic approach in data collection from diﬀerent sources over a period of time.
A rigorous analysis of data requires an iterative process of data interpretation and theory
generation, which is extremely time-consuming. It is often diﬃcult to present a full account of
the research processes within the word limit of a journal article (see, for example, the exem-
plars of research methodologies presented in Zuengler and Mori 2002), and an abbreviated
report often fails to do justice to the complex processes involved in data collection and inter-
pretation. This is probably one of the reasons why, as Donato (2004) points out, research stu-
dies from a sociocultural perspective are rich in theoretical concepts but thin on data.
Finally, similar to all educational research, most classroom discourse studies are motivated
by the ultimate goal of improving student learning. Yet, as we have seen in this review, class-
room processes are highly complex, and the large number of mediating variables makes it
diﬃcult to substantiate claims made about the relationship between language learning and the
data analyzed. This is also why the ﬁndings of research studies relating classroom discourse to
SLA have so far been inconclusive. Nevertheless, this has not stopped researchers from
exploring this area. The conﬂicting ﬁndings of the eﬀect of form-focused corrective feedback,
such as focused recasts, on learners’ output have led researchers to investigate other eﬀective
strategies. For example, Ellis et al. (2001) proposed that pre-emptive rather than corrective
focus on form by the learner was more likely to result in learner uptake. Similarly, the incon-
clusive relationship between negotiation of meaning and language acquisition has led to more
recent studies on the relationship between the two. Foster and Ohta (2005) ﬁnd that with
supportive peer assistance, learners engaged in output modiﬁcation and form-focused nego-
tiation even when they were not required to ﬁll information gaps or repair communication
breakdowns. The challenge is for teachers to interpret judiciously the ﬁndings of these studies
in the speciﬁc contexts in which they operate.
Summary
In this chapter I have reviewed the emergence of classroom discourse analysis as a ﬁeld of
study in the 1960s and how it has developed in the last ﬁfty years. We have seen that the shift
from a prescriptive to a descriptive approach to classroom discourse research in the 1980s was
an important phase in its development in that it resulted in a number of studies which revealed
the complexities of classroom processes. The shift from information-processing to sociocultural
theories of learning in the 1990s was also an important landmark in that more recent studies
have taken a more holistic view of classroom processes. This has led to the adoption of an
eclectic approach to research methodologies and theoretical frameworks, which have illumi-
nated and will continue to shed light on our understanding of the dialectical relationship
between classroom discourse, discourse participants, and context.
Related topics
discourse analysis; identity; institutional discourse; second language acquisition; sociocultural
and cultural-historical theories of language development; systemic functional linguistics
Classroom discourse
283

Further reading
Marton, F. and Tsui, A. B. M. (with contributions from Chik, P., Ko, P. Y., Lo, M. L., Mok, I., Ng,
F. P., Pang, M. F., Pong, W. Y. and Runnesson, U.) (2004) Classroom Discourse and the Space of
Learning, Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates. (This is the ﬁrst volume that attempts to
apply the theory of variation in phenomenography to investigage how classroom discourse can be
either expansive or restrictive in bringing about learning.)
Seedhouse, P. (2004) The Interactional Architecture of Second Language Classroom: A Conversa-
tional Analysis Perspective, Oxford: Blackwell. (This volume draws heavily on the methodological
tools of ethnomethodogy in the analysis of the organization of classroom discourse in relation to
pedagogical focus across a range of L2 classrooms.)
van Lier, L. (2004) The Ecology and Semiotics of Language Learning: A Sociocultural Perspective,
Boston: Kluwer Academic. (In this volume van Lier provides an overview of an ecological world
view and how it could provide a coherent framework for making sense of language learning and
language teaching processes at both micro and macro levels.)
Young, R. (2009) Discursive Practice in Language Learning and Teaching, Malden, MA/Oxford:
Wiley-Blackwell. (The volume draws on ethnomethodology, social theory of learning as partici-
pation, and systemic linguistics in the elucidation of a discourse inside and outside the classroom.)
References
Allwright, D. (1988) Observation in the Language Classroom, London: Longman.
Allwright, D. and Bailey, K. M. (1991) Focus on the Language Classroom, New York: Cambridge
University Press.
Bailey, K. M. and Nunan, D. (eds) (1996) Voices from the Language Classroom, New York: Cam-
bridge University Press.
Bannink, A. and van Dam, J. (2006) ‘A dynamic discourse approach to classroom research’, Lin-
guistics and Education 17: 283–301.
Barnes, D. (1969) ‘Language in the secondary classroom’, in D. Barnes, J. Britton and H. Rosen
(eds) Language, the Learner and the School, Harmondsworth: Penguin.
Bellack, A., Kliebard, H., Hyman, R. and Smith, F. (1966) The Language of the Classroom, New
York: Teachers’ College Press.
Bruner, J. S. (1983) Child’s Talk: Learning to Use Language, New York: Norton.
Cazden, C. (2001) Classroom Discourse: The Language of Teaching and Learning, 2nd edn,
Portsmouth, NH: Heinemann.
Chaudron, C. (1982) ‘Vocabulary elaboration in teachers’ speech to L2 learners’, Studies in Second
Language Acquisition 4: 170–80.
——(1988) Second Language Classrooms, New York: Cambridge University Press.
Donato, R. (2004) ‘Aspects of collaboration in pedagogical discourse’, Annual Review of Applied
Linguistics 24: 284–302.
Doughty, C. and Pica, T. (1986) ‘“Information gap” tasks: do they facilitate second language
acquisition?’, TESOL Quarterly 20: 305–25.
Doughty, C. and Williams, J. (eds) (1998) Focus on Form in Classroom Second Language Acquisi-
tion, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Duﬀ, P. A. (2002) ‘The discursive co-construction of knowledge, identity, and diﬀerence: an ethno-
graphy of communication in the high school mainstream’, Applied Linguistics 23(3): 289–322.
Ellis, R., Basturkmen, H. and Loewen, S. (2001) ‘Preempting focus on form in the ESL classroom’,
TESOL Quarterly 35(3): 407–32.
Engeström, Y. (1999) ‘Activity theory and individual and social transformation’, in Y. Engeström,
R. Miettinen and R.-L. Punamäki (eds) Perspectives on Activity Theory, New York: Cambridge
University Press.
Fanselow, J. (1977) ‘Beyond Rashomon: conceptualizing and describing the teaching act’, TESOL
Quarterly 11(1): 17–39.
Fisher, R. and Larkin, S. (2008) ‘Pedagogy or ideological struggle? An examination of pupils’ and
teachers’ expectations for talk in the classroom’, Language and Education 22(1): 1–16.
Flanders, N. A. (1960) Interaction Analysis in the Classroom: A Manual for Observers, Ann Arbor:
University of Michigan Press.
Amy B. M. Tsui
284

Foster, P. and Ohta, A. S. (2005) ‘Negotiation for meaning and peer assistance in second language
classrooms’, Applied Linguistics 26(3): 402–30.
Foucault, M. (1972) The Archaeology of Knowledge and the Discourse on Language, New York:
Pantheon Books.
Gaies, S. (1977) ‘The nature of linguistic input in formal second language learning: linguistic and
communicative strategies in ESL teachers’ classroom language’, in H. D. Brown, C. A. Yorio and
R. H. Crymes (eds) On TESOL ‘77, Washington, DC: TESOL.
Goﬀman, E. (1974) Frame Analysis: An Essay on the Organization of Experience, New York:
Harper and Row.
——(1981) Forms of Talk, Oxford: Blackwell.
Halliday, M. A. K. (1961) ‘Categories of the theory of grammar’, WORD 17(3): 241–92.
Hammersley, M. and Atkinson, P. (1995) Ethnography: Principles in Practice, 2nd edn, London:
Routledge.
Johnson, K. (1995) Understanding Communication in Second Language Classrooms, New York:
Cambridge University Press.
Kramsch, C. (2002) ‘Introduction: “How can we tell the dancer from the dance?”’, in C. Kramsch
(ed.) Language Acquisition and Language Socialization: Ecological Perspectives, London: Con-
tinuum.
Kumaravadivelu, B. (1999) ‘Critical classroom discourse analysis’, TESOL Quarterly 33: 453–84.
Lantolf, J. P. (2000) ‘Introducing sociocultural theory’, in J. P. Lantolf (ed.) Sociocultural Theory
and Second Language Learning, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Lantolf, J. P. (ed.) (1994) Modern Language Journal.
Lantolf, J. P. and Appel, G. (eds) (1994) Vygotskian Approaches to Second Language Research,
Norwood, NJ: Ablex.
Lave, J. and Wenger, E. (1991) Situated Learning: Legitimate Peripheral Participation, New York:
Cambridge University Press.
Leont’ev, A. N. (1978) Activity, Consciousness, and Personality, Englewood Cliﬀs, NJ: Prentice Hall.
Lightbown, P. M. (2000) ‘Anniversary article: classroom SLA research and second language teach-
ing’, Applied Linguistics 21(4): 431–62.
Long, M. (1983) ‘Native-speaker/non-native speaker conversation and the negotiation of compre-
hensible input’, Applied Linguistics 4: 126–41.
——(1996) ‘The role of the linguistic environment in second language acquisition’, in W. C. Ritchie
and T. K. Bhatia (eds) Handbook of Second Language Acquisition, San Diego, CA: Academic
Press.
Long, M. H. and Sato, C. (1983) ‘Classroom foreigner talk discourse: forms and functions of tea-
chers’ questions’, in H. W. Seliger and M. H. Long (eds) Classroom-oriented Research in Second
Language Acquisition, Rowley, MA: Newbury House.
Markee, N. (2008) ‘Towards a learning behaviour tracking methodology for CA-for-SLA’, Applied
Linguistics 29(3): 404–27.
Marton, F. and Tsui, A. B. M. (2004) Classroom Discourse and the Space of Learning, Mahwah,
NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Menard-Warwick, J. (2008) ‘“Because she made beds every day”: social positioning, classroom dis-
course, and language learning’, Applied Linguistics 29(2): 267–89.
Moskowitz, G. (1967) ‘The FLint system: an observational tool for the foreign language class’, in
A. Simon and E. G. Boyer (eds) Mirrors for Behaviour: An Anthology of Classroom Observation
Instruments, Philadelphia, PA: Center for the Study of Teaching, Temple University.
Nassaji, H. and Wells, G. (2000) ‘What’s the use of “triadic dialogue”? An investigation of teacher-
student interaction’, Applied Linguistics 21(3): 376–406.
Plough, I. and Gass, S. (1993) ‘Interlocutor and task familiarity: eﬀects on interactional structure’,
in G. Crookes and S. Gass (eds) Tasks and Language Learning: Integrating Theory and Practice,
Clevedon: Multilingual Matters.
Richards, K. (2006) ‘“Being the teacher”: identity and classroom conversation’, Applied Linguistics
27(1): 51–77.
Rosenshine, B. (1970) ‘Interaction analysis: a tardy comment’, Phi Delta Kappan 51: 445–6.
Said, E. W. (1978) Orientalism, New York: Pantheon Books.
Seedhouse, P. (2004) The Interactional Architecture of Second Language Classroom: A Conversational
Analysis Perspective, Oxford: Blackwell.
Classroom discourse
285

Seliger, H. W. (1983) ‘Learner interaction in the classroom and its eﬀect on language acquisition’, in
H. W. Seliger and M. H. Long (eds) Classroom-oriented Research in Second Language Acquisition,
Rowley, MA: Newbury House.
Sinclair, J. and Coulthard, R. M. (1975) Towards an Analysis of Discourse: The English Used by
Teachers and Pupils, London: Oxford University Press.
Swain, M. (1985) ‘Communicative competence: some roles of comprehensible input and compre-
hensible output in its development’, in S. M. Gass and C. G. Madden (eds) Input in Second
Language Acquisition, Rowley, MA: Newbury House.
——(2000) ‘The output hypothesis and beyond: mediating acquisition through collaborative dialo-
gue’, in J. P. Lantolf (ed.) Sociocultural Theory and Second Language Learning, Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Tsui, A. B. M. (1995) Introducing Classroom Interaction, London: Penguin.
——(1996) ‘Reticence and anxiety in second language learning’, in K. Bailey and D. Nunan (eds)
Voices from the Language Classroom, New York: Cambridge University Press.
——(2007) ‘Classroom discourse as a semiotic resource for EFL learning’, The Language Teacher
31(7): 13–16.
van Lier, L. (1988) The Classroom and the Language Learner, London: Longman.
——(2000) ‘From input to aﬀordance: social-interactive learning from an ecological perspective’, in
J. P. Lantolf (ed.) Sociocultural Theory and Second Language Learning, Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
——(2004) The Ecology and Semiotics of Language Learning: A Sociocultural Perspective, Boston:
Kluwer Academic.
Varonis, E. M. and Gass, S. (1985) ‘Nonnative/nonnative conversations: a model for negotiation of
meaning’, Applied Linguistics 6: 71–90.
Vygotsky, L. S. (1978) Mind in Society: The Development of Higher Psychological Processes
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Walsh, S. (2006) Investigating Classroom Discourse, London and New York: Routledge.
Wenger, E. (1998) Communities of Practice: Learning, Meaning and Identity, Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Young, R. (2009) Discursive Practice in Language Learning and Teaching, Malden, MA/Oxford:
Wiley-Blackwell.
Young, R. and Miller, E. (2004) ‘Learning as changing participation: discourse roles ESL writing
conferences’, The Modern Language Journal 88: 519–35.
Zuengler, J. and Mori, J. (eds) (2002) (special issue) Applied Linguistics, 23(3).
Amy B. M. Tsui
286

20
Language socialization
Agnes Weiyun He
Introduction
Language socialization is a research tradition that is rooted in linguistic anthropology and that
considers language not as a formal code, a medium of communication or a repository of
meaning, but as a semiotic resource for ‘invoking social and moral sentiments, collective and
personal identities tied to place and situation, and bodies of knowledge and belief’ (Ochs and
Schieﬀelin 2008: 8). In this view, all communicative forms, including lexico-grammar, prosody,
speech styles and genres, turn-taking structures and sequences, language and dialectal choices,
bear a symbiotic relation to culture and context.
As initially formulated by Ochs and Schieﬀelin (Ochs 1990, 1996; Ochs and Schieﬀelin
1984; Schieﬀelin and Ochs 1986a, 1986b, 1996), language socialization is concerned with:
(1) how novices (e.g. children, second/foreign/heritage language learners, new members of
given communities and workplaces) are socialized to be competent members in the target
culture through language use; and (2) how novices are socialized to use language. This
approach focuses on the language used by and to novices and the relations between this lan-
guage use and the larger cultural contexts of communication – local theories and epistemolo-
gies concerning social order, local ideologies and practices concerning socializing the novices
(e.g. rearing children, teaching students, apprenticing newcomers), relationships between the
novice and the expert, the speciﬁc activities and tasks at hand, and so forth. Most work in
language socialization has focused on analyzing the organization of communicative practices
through which novices acquire socio-cultural knowledge. Methodologically, it examines
audio-/video-recorded, carefully transcribed, recurrent socialization activities and relates the
grammatical, discursive, and non-verbal details of interaction to the construction of social and
cultural ideologies that deﬁne a community.
By its very conceptualization, language socialization is centrally concerned with human
development and growth in areas where language and culture intersect. In other words, it
views language education not just as a physical site, but more importantly as a set of practices.
It asks questions such as how learning takes place in and through language, regardless of the
setting. Although earlier work in language socialization has focused on non-school settings
such as traditional cultures, non-American cultures, and everyday encounters (e.g. Goodwin
287

1990; Heath, 1983; Ochs 1988; Schieﬀelin 1990; Watson-Gegeo and Gegeo 1986), subsequent
research guided by language socialization has also directed its attention to formal educational
settings such as second/foreign/heritage/bilingual language teaching and learning in the class-
room (Atkinson 2002; Bayley and Schecter 2003; Crago 1992; Duﬀ2007; He 2000, 2001, 2004;
Kanagy 1999; Lo 2004; Ohta 1999; Poole 1992; Schecter and Bayley 2004; Watson-Gegeo and
Nielsen 2003; Zuengler and Cole 2005).
After a discussion of the notion of indexicality, something that constitutes language as a
context-bound, interactively accomplished phenomenon (Duranti and Goodwin 1992; Ochs
1990), this chapter will provide a brief overview of how a language socialization perspective
can illuminate some central concerns in applied linguistics (cf. Duﬀand Hornberger 2008). It
will then critically evaluate two types of inadequacies in existing language socialization-oriented
applied linguistics research, namely, the focus on a single setting and the conceptualization of
language socialization as linear. Finally, this chapter will delineate the challenges facing language
socialization research, using the socialization of Chinese as a heritage language as an example.
The notion of indexicality
Within the framework of language socialization, indexicality is conceived of as a property of
speech through which socio-cultural contexts (e.g. identities, activities) are constituted by par-
ticular stances and acts which in turn are indexed through linguistic forms (Ochs 1990, 1992,
1993). That is to say, the indexical relationship between linguistic forms and socio-cultural
contexts is often achieved indirectly, instead of directly (i.e. one or more linguistic forms
indexing some contextual dimension). According to language socialization,
[a] feature of the communicative event is evoked indirectly through the indexing of some
other feature of the communicative event. … the feature of the communicative event
directly indexed is conventionally linked to and helps to constitute some second feature of
the communicative event, such that the indexing of one evokes or indexes the other.
(Ochs 1990: 295)
Further, it is not random that some features of the communicative event bear a direct or
indirect relationship to linguistic forms. Major socio-cultural dimensions include social iden-
tities of the participants, relationships among participants, aﬀective dispositions of participants
(feelings, moods, and attitudes of participants toward some proposition), epistemological dis-
positions of participants (beliefs or knowledge vis-à-vis some proposition, e.g. the source of
their knowledge or the degree of certainty of their knowledge), social/speech acts and activities,
and genre.
The advantages of this perspective is illustrated in He (2000), for example, which documents
a three-phased directive pattern in the teacher-student interaction in Chinese language classes,
namely, Orientation ! Evaluation ! Directive. Speciﬁcally, the teacher ﬁrst orients the stu-
dents to some state of aﬀairs which in turn renders the students’ behavior problematic, then
formulates negative consequences which may result from the students’ problematic behavior,
and only then does she issue a directive to correct the behavior. Thus, rather than simply
issuing directives, the teacher weaves cultural values (e.g. appreciating parents’ eﬀorts and
conforming to the group) in the prefaces so as to warrant the directives for desirable behavior.
Moralized directives as described in He (2000) index both an aﬀective disposition and social
identity. They directly index aﬀective dispositions of being moral and authoritative and indir-
ectly index the social identity of the speaker – that of a parent or a teacher, as in the Chinese
Agnes Weiyun He
288

culture parent/teacher roles are largely deﬁned in terms of or constituted by moral and author-
itative dispositions. Confucian teachings, which have provided the dominant educational and
social ethos for the major part of Chinese history, are primarily concerned with moral conduct
as the basis of social harmony. It is thus the teacher’s and the parents’ prerogative as well as
responsibility to socialize the students/children into the various virtues (known as li) that regulate
all human conduct.
Although ‘teacher’ is a universal social role, the communicative practices of teachers vary
considerably across cultures and societies. In other words, there is not a one-to-one mapping
relationship between three-phased moralized directives (language forms) and the social identity
of the teacher (cultural context). Instead, the relation of moralized directives to the identity of
the Chinese teacher is constituted and mediated by the relation of language forms to stances
(e.g. moral and authoritative), activities and other social constructs. As such, students in these
classes come to understand teacher-related meanings in part through coming to understand
certain recurrently displayed stances (e.g. upholding moral values such as ﬁlial piety).
The language socialization approach to indexicality provides a systematic account of how
language relates to cultural context. With language socialization, we can examine how diﬀer-
ent displays of and reactions to certain acts and stances (e.g. moralizing) construct diﬀerent
identities and relationships. It also allows us to examine the construction of multiple yet
compatible/congruent identities, blended and blurred identities in multilingual, multicultural,
immigrant contexts.
Language socialization and applied linguistics
Language socialization considers language learning and teaching as a social, cultural, and
interactional process which inherently involves both the learner/novice and the teacher/expert.
This perspective has appealed to applied linguistics for several reasons. First, it interfaces with some
of the primary concerns of language acquisition research, such as the impact of the acculturation
of the learner on his/her second language acquisition (Schumann 1978). Second, its ethnographic
orientation and the importance it attaches to context shows strong aﬃnity with various socio-
cultural approaches to language learning (e.g. Atkinson 2002; Bayley and Preston 1996; Block
2003; Kramsch 2002; Li 1994; Lantolf 2006; Lantolf and Thorne 2007; Norton 2000; Rampton
1995, 1997, 1999). Third, its focus on communicative practices resonates with the more inter-
actionally and ethnomethodologically oriented approaches to second/foreign language acqui-
sition (Hatch 1978; He 2004; Markee 2000, 2008; Pica 1994; Pica et al. 1987; Young, 2009;
Young and He 1998; Young and Miller 2004). And, last but not least, its emphasis on develop-
mental cultural competence and its theory of indexicality contribute directly to the understanding
of the learner’s language use throughout the developmental stages (Kasper 2001).
Not only has language socialization been appealing, but it has also been challenging to the
ﬁeld of applied linguistics. It reconceptualizes language development in a number of ways. It
redeﬁnes what it means to know a language, advances an indexical (rather than correlational)
view concerning language and culture, enables us to see the acquisition of language forms in a
culturally accountable way, and takes ordinary interaction to be the primary site for learning
and socialization.
What it means to know a language
Language socialization considers language practice as a set of indexicals participating in a
network of semiotic systems and treats language acquisition and socialization as an integrated
Language socialization
289

process. Linguistic meanings and meaning makings are therefore necessarily embedded in
cultural systems of understanding. An account of linguistic behavior (speaking and listening)
must then draw on accounts of culture. Accordingly, the knowledge of a language includes a
set of norms, preferences and expectations relating linguistic structures to context, which
language users draw on in producing and interpreting language (Ochs 1988).
For example, the acquisition of modal elements in language is a particularly interesting area
developmentally. Epistemic modals (e.g. must in ‘Everything that goes up must come down’)
provide learners with a resource for developing the capacity to infer, predict, generalize, and
hypothesize; and deontic modals (e.g. should in ‘When playing with your friends, you should
always take turns’) provide a resource for learner’s exploration and understanding of social
obligations, responsibilities, constraints, and cultural and moral values. Rather than focusing
on the timing and frequency of isolated instances of production, a language socialization
approach would argue that (1) it is not context-free frequency but rather the understanding of
the degree of situational relevance and cultural meaningfulness that indexes the learner’s
competence; and (2) learners’ acquisition and use of modal language is as integral part of a
more general socialization process. Lo (2004), for instance, demonstrates how expressions of
epistemic stance relate to moral evaluations by looking at cases in which teachers in a Korean
language class claim to read their students’ mind with a high degree of certainty. Lo argues
that Korean language learners are socialized to portray their access to the thoughts and sen-
sations of other individuals diﬀerently depending upon who these individuals are. If the indi-
viduals are perceived as morally worthy, then the access is portrayed as distant; if they are
perceived as morally suspect, then the access is presented as self-evident.
How culture/context relates to language
From a language socialization perspective, language learners’ acquisition of linguistic forms
requires a developmental process of delineating and organizing contextual dimensions in cul-
turally sensible ways. Indexical knowledge, as Ochs (1996) argues, is at the core of linguistic
and cultural competence and is the locus where language acquisition and socialization inter-
face. A language socialization model accounts for learners’ grammatical development in terms
of the indexical meanings of grammatical forms. The underlying assumption is that, ‘in every
community, grammatical forms are inextricably tied to, and hence index, culturally organized
situations of use and that the indexical meanings of grammatical forms inﬂuence children’s
[and learners’ in general] production and understanding of these forms’ (Ochs and Schieﬀelin
1995: 74). In this model, learners are viewed as tuned into certain indexical meanings of
grammatical forms that link those forms to, for example, the social identities of interlocutors
and the types of social events. This model relates learner’s use and understanding of gram-
matical forms to complex yet orderly and recurrent dispositions, preferences, beliefs and bodies of
knowledge that organize how information is linguistically packaged and how speech acts are
performed within and across socially recognized situations (Garret and Baquedano-Lopez
2002; Kulick and Schieﬀelin 2004).
What constitutes evidence of learning
While acquisition research has largely focused on frequency in output as evidence of learning,
language socialization research has looked for culturally meaningful practices across settings
and situations (Ochs and Schieﬀelin 1995). Within a socio-cultural perspective, language
socialization views language acquisition ‘as increasing competence in both the formal and
Agnes Weiyun He
290

functional potential of language. By functional, I mean the multiplicity of relations between
language and context, including that in which language creates context’ (Ochs 1988: 13). Over
developmental time, language learners acquire repertoires of language forms associated with
contextual dimensions (e.g. role relationships, acts, events).
In the case of acquisition of modal expressions mentioned above, as directives masked with
modals of low obligation are used by persons of power and authority (e.g. teachers, parents or
any elderly person), a learner who has acquired the meaning of the modal verb ‘can/may’ may
in fact not be using the form in his/her speech to the teacher in the same manner the teacher
does to the students, because it would be pragmatically and culturally inappropriate. Hence
frequency in output alone will lead to a misguided interpretation of the student’s acquisition of
modals (He 2010). From a language socialization perspective, we need to ask the following
questions: (i) In what contexts is the modal form used by the learner? (ii) What is the impact,
if any, of the sequential organization of interaction on the learner’s (non-)use of modals?
(iii) What is the impact, if any, of the local activity on the learner’s (non-)use of modals? (iv)
What stances are exhibited by the (non-)use of modals? and (v) How are these stances associated
with social roles, identities, responsibilities, and obligations in the local community?
Two avenues for further growth
We have seen an increasingly large body of empirical studies documenting the various formal
and functional aspects of language socialization that are concerned with diﬀerent subgroups of
learners (Duﬀand Hornberger 2008). These studies largely focus on one language proﬁciency
level of the subjects at one life stage in one speciﬁc life circumstance. They have shown that
successful language socialization depends on the role of school systems, social institutions, and
historical experiences of particular language communities, as well as language ideologies,
proﬁciency assessment that is suitable for speciﬁc types of learners (second, foreign or heritage
language), and adequate literacy development. They have also indicated that a range of vari-
ables may inﬂuence language socialization, including social prestige of the language, number
of speakers, aﬃnity to native country, vitality of language programs, learners’ social and ethnic
positionings, degree of family bond, and discourse and interactional practices (Baker 2006;
Bayley and Schecter 2003; Creese and Martin 2006; Fishman 2001; Gibbons and Ramirez
2004; He 2006; He and Xiao 2008; Shin 2005; Zentella 1997). However, given that language
socialization and language development are not limited to any speciﬁc point in time or to any
given period of time (He 2006; Markee 2008; Wortham 2005), language competencies, choices,
and ideologies change over the language learner’s lifespan, reﬂecting changing motivations,
social networks, opportunities, and other variables. Consequently, future research needs to
examine the diﬀerent stages as well as diﬀerent domains of language development.
In addition to expansion of research along the temporal dimension, language socialization
studies can also beneﬁt from an extended focus from the individual language learner to other
co-participants as well. It will be important to realize that expert guidance in language socia-
lization may be multiple, conﬂicting and contested. The language learner is engaged in multi-
ple speech events in multiple settings for multiple purposes. The learning of heritage languages,
as shown in the next section for example, takes place through the learner’s interactions with
multiple participants including language instructors, parents, grandparents, siblings, and peers, each
of whom positions the learner in unique speech and social roles and each of whose reactions
and responses to the heritage language learner helps to shape the path of his/her language
development. Future language socialization research needs to highlight the co-constructed,
multi-directional, interactive nature of socialization activities (He 2006; Talmy 2008).
Language socialization
291

Toward a temporal-spatial speciﬁcation: a case in point
To illustrate the potential of, as well as challenges facing, language socialization research
suggested in the previous section, I describe here a proﬁle of a composite heritage language
learner and provide a gist of a multi-site, longitudinal study of this learner’s language socialization
process.
Jason Chen is a sophomore in a Chinese as a heritage language (CHL) class in a university.
He speaks Cantonese and understands Mandarin, but cannot read or write in Chinese. He was
born in China and emigrated to the US when he was three years old. At that time, he spoke
Cantonese at home with his parents, grandmother, and aunt. He had some knowledge of
English from television and from the children he played with who spoke a mixture of English,
Vietnamese, Cantonese, Fujianese, Chaozhou dialect, and Mandarin. When Jason ﬁrst started
school, his English was weak. But very soon, he was speaking English ﬂuently and became one
of the highest achieving students in his class. Since a time he no longer recalls, he has been
speaking English to his parents and his aunt at home too; the only person he still speaks
Cantonese to is his grandmother, with whom he keeps a minimum level of communication.
His parents once sent him to a weekend Chinese language school, where he was taught
Mandarin. He went for a year but felt ‘the teacher was just totally boring’ and he ‘didn’t learn
anything’. His best friends include Brad, his roommate, who is from a Jewish cultural back-
ground. He is also seriously dating a Mandarin-speaking girl. When asked why he is taking
CHL, Jason said, ‘I am Chinese. I feel stupid not knowing the language. Plus I’d like to do
business in China, some day.’
In order to unravel the complexities of Jason’s language development, eﬀorts were made to
reconstruct his life, by collecting data from a wide range of subjects in settings and situations
that Jason has experienced at various stages of his life from kindergarten to university. (The
data segments below are thus drawn from diﬀerent corpora involving diﬀerent participants.)
The end result is a composite ‘Jason’, representing a model of his life experiences with respect
to his language development (see He, in press). The objective is to examine the developmental
stages and diverse spaces of the prototype learner to gain insight into how CHL socialization
takes place as the learner moves across time and space. The approach adopted here enables
one to go beyond the learner’s language use in diﬀerent domains and settings but also to
include the temporal aspect of the analysis, examining how the learner’s behavior changes
according to his diﬀerent developmental stages by deﬁning time as an additional co-ordinate.
As mentioned previously, before entering school, Jason’s exposure to English was limited.
At the beginning of his formal schooling, he was usually only seen but not heard. He rarely
responded to the teacher or other students verbally, as can be seen in (1).
(1) Kindergarten classroom (ﬁeld notes)
MRS B:
My friends, let’s get ready. It’s center time.
((Jason doesn’t move.))
MRS B:
Jason, which center do you wanna go?
((Jason doesn’t respond. Mrs B takes his hand and brings him to the art center
next to an easel.))
MRS B:
You like to paint? I know you are a good artist.
((Jason looks at the easel and then at other kids who are at the number
center working with numbers 0 through 9. Jason joins the number center. Mrs
B leaves.))
Agnes Weiyun He
292

Jason’s parents were concerned with Jason’s lack of English language competence on the one
hand and were doing their best to talk to him in English in spite of their own limited com-
mand of the language. But on the other hand, they also wanted Jason to keep speaking Chi-
nese and to develop literacy in Chinese. As a result, the parents increased their use of English at
home and at the same time sent Jason to a weekend Chinese language school in their community.
(2) is an example of what happens in the classroom of the language school. In cases of data in
Chinese, the ﬁrst line is the Chinese original, the second line is phonetic annotation of Chinese,
the third line is grammatical gloss, and the fourth line is English translation.
(2) Chinese language school (audio- and video-recorded data)
((in the context of ‘孔融让梨’ – Kong Rong yields pears)).
TEACHER:
要把-应该把玩具让:: 给弟弟妹妹
Yao ba yinggai ba wanju rang gei didi meimei
should BA ought BA toy yield DIR younger brother younger sister
Should-Ought to yie::ld the toys to younger brothers and sisters
(.2)
TEACHER:
谦::让:(.) 懂吗? 谦让就是这个意思
Qian rang dong ma qianrang jiu shi zhe ge yisi
Yield understand Q yield just be this CL meaning
Yield
(.) Understand? This is what yield means.
JASON:
让给他? 我们share 就可以了。
Rang gei ta? Women share jiu keyi le
yield DIR he we share just ok CRS
Yield to him? We can share.
TEACHER:
Share (.) 嗷:: share 是不错
Share ao share shi bu cuo
Share PRT share be NEG wrong
Share (.) uh:: share is not wrong
(.4)
TEACHER:
可是能让更好=
Keshi neng rang geng hao
But able yield even better
But being able to YIELD will be EVEN better.
JASON:
= Oh:: no::: Do I really have to?
TEACHER:
不是-不是说非-不是说<必须得让>
Bushi bushi shuo fei- bushi shuo bixu dei rang
NEG NEG say have to- NEG say must must yield
I’m not saying you have to-not saying that you MUST yield
能让(.) 最:好啊
Neng rang zui hao a
Able yield best PRT
Being able to yield is THE BEST ok
Here, the teacher is leading a discussion of the Chinese cultural preference of ‘yielding’ in the
context of a widely circulated folk story of ‘Kong Rong Yields Pears’, which apparently
requires more of a child than the American notion of ‘sharing’, which Jason has brought to
the Chinese class from his daytime regular school. That the two cultural norms could not be
Language socialization
293

reconciled with each other most likely played a role in Jason’s eventual dropping out of Chi-
nese language school.
From 4th grade onward, Jason was consistently one of the top students. He became a very
conﬁdent and successful student at school. His 6th grade school report card reads, ‘Jason is a
superior student who excels across all subject areas … ’ However, he was speaking less and less
at home. (3) is illustrative of the kind of interaction he had at home at that stage.
(3) 6th grade: at dinner table (audio-recorded data)
(This interaction took place when Jason’s Mandarin-speaking paternal grandmother was
visiting around Chinese New Year.)
GRANDMA:
吃，来，吃，来
chi, lai, chi, lai
eat come eat come
eat, come, eat, come
((Grandma pushes Jason to dinner table))
GRANDMA:
那么瘦！多吃多吃不吃怎么胖
name shou Duo chi duo chi bu chi zenme pang
so skinny much eat much eat NEG eat Q fat
So skinny! Eat a lot eat a lot if you don’t eat how can you gain weight
只长个儿不长肉
zhi zhang ge’r bu zhang rou
only grow height NEG grow ﬂesh
[You] only gain height but not weight.
啊哟：：你看看他们拿来这么多吃的
ayo::: ni kan kan tamen na lai zhe me duo chi de
PRT you see they bring DIR this much eat NOM
ayo::: you see they brought this much food
想吃什么？
xiang chi she me
want eat Q
What do you want to eat?
MOTHER:
姥姥跟你说话呢
laolao gen ni shuohua ne
grandma PREP you speak PRT
Grandma is talking to you
这孩子= 哎别拿了够了够=
zhe haizi =
this child
This kid = ai don’t bring anything more enough enough
JASON:
= I’m not hungry.
Jason keeps his speech at the dinner table to a minimum, and when he has to speak, he does so
in English. The attrition of home language and the consequent alienation from family that
accompany English language acquisition (Wong Fillmore 1991) are evident here.
During high school, Jason was perceived diﬀerently by diﬀerent people in his life, as can
be seen in (4). At this point, he was speaking English almost exclusively. His aunt and
Agnes Weiyun He
294

grandmother no longer lived with them. His parents were doing better in their business and
they were also speaking much more, and better English themselves.
(4) High school: others’ perceptions of Jason (interview data)

GUIDANCE COUNSELOR:
He is the kind of student we all dream to have.

SCHOOLMATE:
Oh that Chinese guy? Or is he Vietnamese or some other kind of Asian? He
is okay. Never bothers me. But what is he doing here? I think people like him should go
back to China or wherever they came from.

NEIGHBOR:
Nice young man! He will have a great future. I wish my son more like him.
You know, my son only play with people like him, you know, only Chinese. Too narrow,
you know. You live in America, you want to be American, you know.

An elderly at temple:‘这孩子不错。他父母人很好，可他从来也不叫我奶奶。都美国化了。
(He is a good kid. His parents are very nice people, but he never calls me ‘Grandma’. He is
Americanized.)

MOTHER:
He study not bad. Has good grades. He like computer. Play computer game all
the time. Never stop. Spend a lot money too. He like brand. Waste money!

SISTER:
He talks to me but he really doesn’t talk to anyone else [in the family] that much.
He’s real busy’n stuﬀ.
By the time Jason entered the university, he decided that he would like to seriously learn
Chinese. Due to his language background and language proﬁciency, it was not immediately
clear which track of the elementary Chinese language class Jason should be placed in – the
foreign language track or the heritage language track. In (5), an instructor was interviewing
Jason for the purpose of his placement.
(5) University: with CHL instructor (audio-recorded data)
PROFESSOR:
Ok if I- I speak Mandarin, do you follow me well?
JASON:
I mean (.) >I underSTAND Mandarin.< At home my mom’n my aunt the-
they sometimes speak Mandarin b’t (.) not all that well. .hhh Most of the
time everybody (.) jus speak Canto[nese.
PROFESSOR:
[Ok, =
JASON:
=I like Mandarin. Sounds better than other dialects. >Don’t know why jus
feels that way.< I mean if I want to ﬁnd a jo:b like (.) in China I wanna be in
big (cities/places) like < Beijing > or something =
PROFESSOR:
=Uhuh,
(.2)
JASON:
I don’t wanna be (.) like (.) you know (.) where THEY came from.
One might think that to learn one’s heritage language is to (re)establish similarities with
members of one’s heritage culture and/or to (re)establish diﬀerences from members of main-
stream American culture. However, as can be seen in (5), to learn CHL appears to be not
merely to inherit one’s heritage language and maintain one’s heritage cultural identity but also
to transform the heritage language (in terms of changes in dialect, script, accent, discourse
norms, etc.) and re-create one’s identity. When Jason walks into the CHL classroom, he brings
with him linguistic and behavioral patterns that were formed when he was six or twelve and
that remain active or that await to be reactivated; he brings with him richly textured
Language socialization
295

experiences interacting with his Cantonese- and Mandarin-speaking family members, his
English-, Vietnamese-, Cantonese-, Fujianese-, Chaozhou dialect-, and Mandarin-speaking
neighbors, his English-speaking but multi-ethnic peers and teachers, his English- and Man-
darin-speaking girlfriend; he brings with him ways of speaking and being that mirror those of
these diverse groups of people; he brings with him memories of his past experience learning
CHL as well as expectations and anticipations about the verbal and non-verbal behavior of his
present CHL teacher and CHL classmates; he also brings with him dreams of working in
China some day and ideas of what being a Chinese-American means. In a nutshell, Jason
embodies elements that are both hetero-temporal and hetero-spatial. He has learned and is
still learning to cope with, to understand, to accept or reject, to model or modify the language
and cultural behaviors of every community he has encountered throughout his life. Learning
CHL will enable him to inherit some of the ‘Chineseness’ from his family and his neighbor-
hood but will also enable him to become a very diﬀerent kind of Chinese-American from his
family and his neighbors.
Most interestingly, whereas Jason may consider himself a beginning learner of the Chinese
language, his best friend Brad, who is from a non-Chinese family background and who is
learning Chinese as a foreign language, sees him diﬀerently, as in (6).
(6) University: best friend Brad (who is taking CFL) (audio recorded data)
JASON:
When’s your oral?
BRAD:
Friday, (.) I think, (.) .hhh oh no actually I don think she’s told us yet. I’m
gonna fail hhahaha =
JASON:
=no you won’t,
BRAD:
C’mon (hhh I’m gonna) say ‘wo: (.) jue::de (.2) fa:yin (.) he::n nan’((I think
pronunciation is hard)) hhahhhaha
JASON:
Oh yea you can do it, you just did it hhuhuhuh
BRAD:
Easy for YOU ((it’s)) your (.) lan[guage
JASON:
[ne::: my mom-I don=
BRAD:
=but s[till
JASON:
[I guess.
Here, regardless of Jason’s minimal level of proﬁciency in Chinese, Jason is perceived by Brad
as ‘owning’ the language (‘Easy for YOU ((it’s)) your (.) language’). After a brief and unsuc-
cessful protest of such a characterization, Jason acquiesced.
Earlier, I have discussed the central role of identity formation and transformation in the
development and maintenance of heritage languages. Most often, the connection between
language and identity is tacit and requires inferences. Segment (7), however, caught an extre-
mely rare moment when language and identity was explicitly marked and linked.
(7) University: with math TA (audio- and video-recorded data)
((Jason is seeking help in TA’s oﬃce. TA is a native of China who has arrived in the USA not
long ago for graduate school. ‘ABC’ stands for ‘American-born Chinese’.))
TA:
This-this is the rule, the equation. What I tell you (.2) you mus must follow.
The right way.
Agnes Weiyun He
296

((Jason is still confused))
TA:
Are you Chinese?
((Jason stares at TA))
TA:
I tell you in Chinese.
(.2)
JASON:
uh: my Chinese isn’t that good=
TA:
=So you are ABC. No problem. I tell you again …
What is noteworthy in (7) is that Jason does not seem to be prepared for any explicit discus-
sion of his ethnic identity. When the TA ﬁrst inquires about his ethnicity, Jason gives a blank
answer (both verbally and visually). When the TA assumes that he is an American-born Chi-
nese, Jason does not correct the TA’s mistake (Jason was in fact born in China). This is a
revealing moment where Jason is compelled to confront the issue of identity and yet he
appears ambivalent and ill-equipped to handle the matter.
I argued earlier that heritage language socialization concerns and transforms all parties
involved. As the years went by, Jason’s parents were speaking more and better English. His
father does not speak much in general. By the time Jason is in college, his mother has become
quite comfortable talking to him in English, as seen in (8).
(8) University: with mother (audio recorded data)
JASON:
I’m also (.2) taking uh Chinese history.
(.4)
JASON:
It’s hard.
MOTHER:
Hard? You study hard (.) it’s easy.
JASON:
Ma you don’t get it.
((pause))
MOTHER:
Why- why Chinese history? Economy major need Chinese history? I study
my major I never study history=
JASON:
=Ma you never get it. ni bu dong la:: ((You don’t understand this)) I’m
taking it cus I want to. Nobody asks me to.
Two items are worth particular mention. First, at this stage, Jason is, on of his own initiative,
trying to learn as much Chinese language and history as possible, to an extent that is surprising
and perplexing to his mother. Second, in interaction with his mother, now it is Jason who
code-switches to Chinese from English, while his mother uses English consistently.
The above shows that, in the complex process of heritage language socialization, Jason’s
language and identity resources develop, stabilize, shrink or expand as his social networks,
attitudes, allegiances and aﬃnities evolve over time. Instead of a linear growth (or attrition)
pattern suggested in most existing language acquisition/attrition literature, Jason’s case illus-
trates a language learning trajectory that is sometimes a plateau, sometimes exponential.
Hence in the long process of acquiring, challenging, rejecting, resisting, learning, embracing
Chinese from birth to college, Jason is not learning a ‘target’ language X as a ‘native speaker’
of language Y. His motivation to (re-)learn Chinese is neither strictly ‘instrumental’ nor ‘inte-
grative’. Instead, Jason’s journey in Chinese can be characterized by expanded practices and
participation in everyday life, extended identity options (Norton, this volume) and continual
intercultural adjustments (Kramsch, this volume).
The case of Jason thus epitomizes language socialization’s position that language develop-
ment is grounded in the learner’s participation in social practice and continuous adaptation to
Language socialization
297

the unfolding, multiple activities and identities that constitute the social and communicative
worlds which s/he inhabits. This perspective also compels us to take a more dialectical, dialo-
gical and ecological perspective on language and cultural development, in the sense that the
process will be viewed as reciprocal. Language learners are not merely passive, uniform reci-
pients of socialization. As the learner’s allegiances and competencies evolve, the language
choices and competencies of their parents, siblings, neighbors and friends will also change,
consequently and/or concurrently. In other words, it is important to keep in mind that the
language learner contributes to the socialization process of the very people who socialize him/
her to use the language. Language learning has the potential to transform all parties involved
in the socialization process.
Summary
Language socialization is concerned with the symbiotic process of language and cultural
development. Originating from linguistic anthropology, it is becoming an inﬂuential research
perspective in applied linguistics in general and in language acquisition studies in particular.
Its main thesis is that novices across the lifespan are socialized into using language and
socialized through language in socio-culturally recognized and organized practices. More
recently, language socialization research has expanded from primary language socialization
during childhood to the ﬁelds of bilingualism, multilingualism and second or heritage lan-
guage acquisition in linguistically and socio-culturally heterogeneous settings characterized by
two or more languages and cultures.
Language socialization provides a culturally enriched, theoretically grounded, and empiri-
cally accountable perspective on issues and concerns central to applied linguistics. Along with
parallel socio-cultural approaches to language acquisition (Ortega, this volume), language
socialization has in a sense precipitated a social turn (Block 2003) in applied linguistics. With a
broader temporal and spatial speciﬁcation, research inspired and guided by language sociali-
zation will be poised to further illuminate the nature as well as the trajectory of language and
cultural development across the lifespan and even across generations in multiple, inter-related
spaces for all participants.
Appendix A: Transcription Symbols
CAPS
emphasis, signaled by pitch or volume
.
falling intonation
,
falling-rising intonation
°
quiet speech
[ ]
overlapped talk
-
cut-oﬀ
=
latched talk
:
prolonged sound or syllable
(0.0)
silences roughly in seconds and tenths of seconds
(.)
short, untimed pauses of one tenth of a second or less
( )
undecipherable or doubtful hearing
(( ))
additional observation
< >
slow speech
> <
fast speech
Agnes Weiyun He
298

Appendix B: Grammatical Gloss
COMP
directional or resultative complement of verb
CONJ
conjunction
COP
copula
DUR
durative aspect marker
EMP
emphatic marker
LOC
locative marker
MSR
measure
NEG
negative marker
PERT
perfective aspect marker
POS
possesive
PRT
sentence, vocative or nominal subordinative particle
PTP
pre-transitive preposition
Q
question marker
Related topics
culture; identity; second language acquisition
Further reading
Agha, A. and Wortham, S. (2005) ‘Discourse across speech events: intertextuality and inter-
discursivity in social life’, Journal of Linguistic Anthropology 15(1). (This special issue highlights
the urgent need to examine language and cultural practices on multiple timescales.)
Duﬀ, P. and Hornberger, N. H. (eds) (2008) Encyclopedia of Language and Education, vol. 8: Lan-
guage Socialization, New York: Springer. (This volume presents the most current comprehensive
review of the ﬁeld.)
Kramsch, C. (ed.) (2002) Language Acquisition and Language Socialization: Ecological Perspectives,
New York: Continuum. (This volume presents various socio-cultural, ecological perspectives on
language development in a discussion format.)
Ochs, E. and Schieﬀelin, B. B. (1995) ‘The impact of language socialization on grammatical devel-
opment’, in P. Fletcher and B. MacWhinney (eds) The Handbook of Child Language, Cambridge,
MA: Blackwell. (This chapter delineates how language socialization engages and interfaces with
language acquisition.)
Watson-Gegeo, K. A. (2004) ‘Mind, language, and epistemology: toward a language socialization
paradigm for SLA’, The Modern Language Journal 88(3). (This article speciﬁes a language
socialization take on SLA.)
References
Atkinson, D. (2002) ‘Toward a sociocognitive approach to SLA’, The Modern Language Journal 86:
525–45.
Baker, C. (2006) Foundations of Bilingual Education and Bilingualism, Clevedon: Multilingual
Matters.
Bayley, R. (1996) ‘Competing constraints on variation in the speech of adult Chinese learners of
English’, in R. Bayley and D. R. Preston (eds) Second Language Acquisition and Linguistic Variation,
Philadelphia: John Benjamins.
Bayley, R. and Preston, D. R. (eds) (1996) Second Language Acquisition and Linguistic Variation,
Philadelphia: John Benjamins.
Bayley, R. and Schecter, S. (eds) (2003) Language Socialization in Bilingual and Multilingual
Societies, Clevedon: Multilingual Matters.
Language socialization
299

Block, D. (2003) The Social Turn in Second Language Acquisition, Washington, DC: Georgetown
University Press.
Byon, A. (2003) ‘Language socialization and Korean as a heritage language: a study of Hawaiian
classrooms’, Language, Culture and Curriculum 16(3): 269–83.
Crago, B. M. (1992) ‘Communicative interaction and second language acquisition: an Inuit example’,
TESOL Quarterly 26: 487–505.
Creese, A. and Martin, P. (2006) (eds) ‘Interaction in complementary school contexts’, special issue,
Language and Education 20(1).
Drew, P. and Heritage, J. (eds) (1992) Talk at Work: Interaction in Institutional Settings, New York:
Cambridge University Press.
Duﬀ, P. (2007) ‘Second language socialization as sociocultural theory: insights and issues’, Language
Teaching 40: 309–19.
Duﬀ, P. and Hornberger, N. H. (eds) (n.d.) Encyclopedia of Language and Education, vol. 8: Language
Socialization, New York: Springer.
Duranti, A. and Goodwin, C. (1992) Rethinking Context: Language as an Interactive Phenomenon,
New York: Cambridge University Press.
Fishman, J. A. (2001) ‘300-plus years of heritage language education in the United States’, in
J. K. Peyton, D. A. Ranard and S. McGinnis (eds) Heritage Languages in America: Preserving A
National Resource, McHenry, IL: CAL.
Garret, P. B. and Baquedano-Lopez, P. (2002) ‘Language socialization: reproduction and continuity,
transformation and change’, Annual Review of Anthropology 31: 339–62.
Gibbons, J. and Ramirez, E. (2004) Maintaining a Minority Language: A Case Study of Hispanic
Teenagers, Clevedon: Multilingual Matters.
Goodwin, M. H. (1990) He-Said-She-Said, Bloomington: Indiana University Press.
Hatch, E. (1978) ‘Discourse analysis and second language acquisition’, in E. Hatch (ed.) Second
Language Acquisition: A Book of Readings, Rowley, MA: Newbury House.
He, A. W. (2000) ‘Grammatical and sequential organization of teachers’ directives’, Linguistics and
Education 11(2): 119–40.
——(2001) ‘The language of ambiguity: practices in Chinese heritage language classes’, Discourse
Studies 3(1): 75–96.
——(2003) ‘Novices and their speech roles in Chinese heritage language classes’, in R. Baley and S.
Schecter (eds) Language Socialization in Bilingual and Multilingual Societies, Clevedon: Multi-
lingual Matters.
——(2004) ‘Identity construction in Chinese heritage language classes’, Pragmatics 14(2–3):
199–216.
——(2005) ‘Discipline, directives, and deletions: grammar and interaction in Chinese heritage language
classes’, in C. Holten and J. Frodesen (eds) The Power of Context in Language Teaching and
Learning: A Festschrift for Marianne Celce-Murcia, Boston: Thomson Heinle.
——(2006) ‘Toward an identity theory of the development of Chinese as a heritage language’,
Heritage Language Journal 4(1): 1–28.
——(2009a) ‘Sequences, scripts, and subject pronouns in the construction of Chinese heritage
identity’, in A. Reyes and A. Lo (eds) Beyond Yellow English: Toward a Linguistic Anthropology
of Asian Paciﬁc America, New York: Oxford University Press.
——(2009b, July) ‘Heritage language across the life span’, Lecture Presented at the 3rd National
Heritage Language Summer Research Institute, Urbana Champaign, Illinois.
——(2009c) ‘Conversational repair: where modality and morality converge’, in Y. Xiao (ed.) 21st North
American Conference on Chinese Linguistics Conference Proceedings, Smithﬁeld, RI: Bryant University.
——(2010) The heart of heritage: socio-cultural dimensions of heritage language learning, Annual
Review of Applied Linguistics 30, 66–82.
——(in press) ‘Heritage language socialization’, in A. Duranti, E. Ochs and B. Schieﬀelin (eds) The
Handbook of Language Socialization, Oxford: Blackwell.
He, A. W. and Xiao, Y. (eds) (2008) Chinese as a Heritage Language: Fostering Rooted World
Citizenry, Honolulu: University of Hawaii Press.
Heath, S. B. (1983) Ways with Words: Language, Life and Work in Communities and Classrooms,
New York: Cambridge University Press.
Kanagy, R. (1999) ‘Interactional routines as a mechanism for L2 acquisition and socialization in an
immersion context’, Journal of Pragmatics 31: 1467–92.
Agnes Weiyun He
300

Kasper, G. (2001) ‘Four perspectives on L2 pragmatics development’, Applied Linguistics 22: 502–30.
Kulick, D. and Schieﬀelin, B. B. (2004) ‘Language socialization’, in A. Duranti (ed.) A Companion
to Linguistic Anthropology, Oxford: Blackwell.
Lantolf, J. P. (2006) ‘Sociocultural theory and L2: state of the art’, Studies in Second Language
Acquisition 28: 67–109.
Lantolf, J. P. and Thorne, S. L. (2007) Sociocultural Theory and the Genesis of Second Language
Development, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Lemke, J. (2002) ‘Language development and identity: multiple timescales in the social ecology of learn-
ing’, in C. Kramsch (ed.) Language Acquisition and Language Socialization: Ecological Perspectives,
New York: Continuum.
Li, W. (1994) Three Generations, Two Languages, One Family, Clevedon: Multilingual Matters.
Lo, A. (2004) ‘Evidentiality and morality in a Korean heritage language school’, Pragmatics,
14(2/3): 235–56. Reprinted in A. Reyes and A. Lo (eds) (2009) Beyond Yellow English: Toward a
Linguistic Anthropology of Asian Paciﬁc America, New York: Oxford University Press.
Markee, N. (2000) Conversation Analysis, Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
——(2008) ‘Towards a learning behavior tracking methodology for CA-for-SLA’, Applied Linguistics,
29(3): 404–27.
Norton, B. (2000) Identity and Language Learning: Gender, Ethnicity, and Educational Change,
Harlow: Longman.
Ochs, E. (1988) Culture and Language Development, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
——(1990) ‘Indexicality and socialization’, in J. W. Stigler, R. Shweder and G. Herdt (eds) Cultural
Psychology: Essays on Comparative Human Development, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
——(1992) ‘Indexing gender’, in A. Duranti and C. Goodwin (eds) Rethinking Context: Language
as an Interactive Phenomenon, New York: Cambridge University Press.
——(1993) ‘Constructing social identity’, Research on Language and Social Interaction 26: 287–306.
——(1996) ‘Linguistic resources for socializing humanity’, in J. J. Gumperz and S. C. Levinson
(eds) Rethinking Linguistic Relativity, Cambridge University Press.
Ochs, E. and Schieﬀelin, B. B. (1984) ‘Language acquisition and socialization: three developmental
stories’, in R. Schweder and R. LeVine (eds) Culture Theory: Essays on Mind, Self and Emotion,
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
——(1995) ‘The impact of language socialization on grammatical development’, in P. Fletcher and
B. MacWhinney (eds) The Handbook of Child Language, Cambridge, MA: Blackwell.
——(2008) ‘Language socialization: an historical overview’, in P. Duﬀand N. Hornberger (eds)
Encyclopedia of Language and Education, vol. 8: Language Socialization, New York: Springer.
Ohta, A. S. (1999) ‘Interactional routines and the socialization of interactional style in adult learners
of Japanese’, Journal of Pragmatics 31: 1493–1512.
Park, E. (2008) ‘Intergenerational transmission of cultural values in Korean American families:
an analysis of the verb suﬃx–ta’, Heritage Language Journal 6(2). Available at: www.
heritagelanguages.org
Pica, T. (1994) ‘Research on negotiation: what does it reveal about second-language learning con-
ditions, processes, and outcomes?’, Language Learning, 44: 493–527.
Pica, T., Young, R. and Doughty, C. (1987) ‘The impact of interaction on comprehension’, TESOL
Quarterly 21: 737–58.
Poole, D. (1992) ‘Language socialization in the second language classroom’, Language Learning 42:
593–616.
Rampton, B. (1995) Crossing: Language and Ethnicity Among Adolescents, New York: Longman.
——(1997) ‘A sociolinguistic perspective on L2 communicative strategies’, in G. Kasper and
E. Kellerman (eds) Communication Strategies: Psycholinguistic and Sociolinguistic Perspectives,
London: Longman.
——(1999) ‘Dichotomies, diﬀerences and ritual in second language learning and teaching’, Applied
Linguistics 20(3): 316–40.
Reyes, A. and Lo, A. (eds) (2009) Beyond Yellow English: Toward a Linguistic Anthropology of
Asian Paciﬁc America, New York: Oxford University Press.
Schecter, S. E. and Bayley, R. (2004) ‘Language socialization in theory and practice’, International
Journal of Qualitative Studies in Education 17, 605–25.
Schieﬀelin, B. B. (1990) The Give and Take of Everyday Life, New York: Cambridge University
Press.
Language socialization
301

Schieﬀelin, B. B. and Ochs, E. (1986b) ‘Language socialization’, Annual Review of Anthropology 15:
163–91.
——(1996) ‘The microgenesis of competence’, in D. Slobin, J. Gerhardt, A. Kyratzis, and J. Guo
(eds) Social Interaction, Social Context, and Language, Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum
Associates.
Schieﬀelin, B. B. and Ochs, E. (eds) (1986a) Language Socialization Across Cultures, New York:
Cambridge University Press.
Schumann, J. H. (1978) ‘The acculturation model for second language acquisition’, in R. Gingras
(ed.) Second Language Acquisition and Foreign Language Teaching, Arlington, VA: Center for
Applied Linguistics.
Shin, S. J. (2005) Developing in Two Languages: Korean Children in America, Clevedon: Multilingual
Matters.
Talmy, S. (2008) ‘The cultural productions of the ESL student at Tradewinds High: contingency,
multidirecionality, and identity in L2 socialization’, Applied Linguistics 29(4): 619–44.
Watson-Gegeo, K. A. and Gegeo, D. W. (1986) ‘Calling-out and repeating routines in Kwara’ae
children’s language socialization’, in B. B. Schieﬀelin and E. Ochs (eds) Language Socialization
Across Cultures, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Watson-Gegeo, K. A. and Nielsen, S. (2003) ‘Language socialization in SLA’, in C. J. Doughty
and M. H. Long (eds) The Handbook of Second Language Acquisition, Malden, MA: Blackwell.
Wong Fillmore, L. (1991) ‘When learning a second language means losing the ﬁrst’, Early Childhood
Research Quarterly 6: 323–46.
Wortham, S. (2005) ‘Socialization beyond the speech event’, Journal of Linguistic Anthropology
15(1): 95–112.
Young, R. F. (2009) Discursive Practice in Language Learning and Teaching, Malden MA and
Oxford: Wiley-Blackwell.
Young, R. F. and He, A. W. (eds) (1998) Talking and Testing: Discourse Approaches to the Assessment
of Oral Proﬁciency, Amsterdam and Philadelphia: John Benjamins.
Young, R. F. and Miller, E. R. (2004) ‘Learning as changing participation: discourse roles in ESL
writing conferences’, The Modern Language Journal 88(4): 519–35.
Zentella, A. (1997) Growing up Bilingual, Oxford: Blackwell.
Zuengler, J. and Cole, K. M. (2005) ‘Language socialization and L2 learning’, in E. Hinkel (ed.)
Handbook of Research in Second Language Teaching and Learning, Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence
Erlbaum Associates.
Agnes Weiyun He
302

Part III
Language, culture and identity


21
Language and culture
Claire Kramsch
History of the relationship of language and culture in applied linguistics
Until the 1970s: separate areas of inquiry
Language and culture have not been seen by everyone as inseparable as they might be seen
today by an applied linguist. Indeed, the study of language was since its inception the domain
of linguists, not anthropologists, and language teaching was about the teaching of linguistic
forms, not foreign cultures. There is no better illustration of this than the Cornell model of
teaching foreign languages. At Cornell University in the United States, after World War II, the
study of foreign languages was taken out of departments of foreign language and literature and
clustered together under the purview of linguists who had supported the war eﬀort and taught
languages according to the new audiolingual or Army method (Stern 1983). The prestige
of linguistics and the new technology of the language laboratory encouraged an emphasis on
language as skill, not as cultural understanding.
The foundation of the English Language Institute at the University of Michigan in 1941
and of the School of Applied Linguistics at the University of Edinburgh in 1957 are generally
seen as the beginning of the ﬁeld of applied linguistics. At that time, the study of language was
distinct from the study of both literature (big C Culture) and anthropology (little c culture).
On the one hand, linguists and grammarians, following the path set by Saussure, studied lan-
guage as a closed system of signs shared by all members of a community of ideal native
speakers. On the other hand, cultural anthropologists like Lévi-Strauss studied culture as a
closed system of relational structures shared by homogeneous social groups in exotic primitive
societies. Oddly enough, the legacy of scholars who were both anthropologists and linguists,
like Wilhelm von Humboldt, Bronislaw Malinowski, Edward Sapir, and Benjamin Whorf did
not initially inﬂuence the emerging ﬁeld of applied linguistics. For example, even though
attention was paid early on to the social context of second language acquisition (SLA) and to
acculturation factors in SLA, the Sapir-Whorf hypothesis, that posited the constructivist rela-
tion of language and thought and the mutual dependency of linguistic forms and cultural
worldviews (for a review, see Kramsch 2004), was not taken seriously among psycholinguists,
many of whom had studied under Noam Chomsky (see, for example, Pinker 1994: ch. 3).
305

Culture was to make its way into applied linguistics through the study of language as dis-
course. The fact that applied linguistics was an applied science confronted its researchers with
the need to take into account the social and historical context of language in use. Culture was
another name for context, i.e. the constraints imposed on individual language users by the
forces of tradition, convention, fashion, and ideology. Culture in applied linguistics came to
mean ‘membership in a discourse community that shares a common social space and history,
and common imaginings’ (Kramsch 1998: 10). Such a membership had to be seen as hetero-
geneous, often contested and subject to change, even in seemingly homogeneous societies.
Thus, beyond the standard linguistic system, culture made it necessary to study linguistic and
stylistic variation, socially and historically situated discourse communities, diﬀerent ways of
exercising symbolic power, and struggles for cultural recognition and legitimation.
Because applied linguistics emerged at a time of national ideologies and ethnic conscious-
ness, culture was at ﬁrst essentialized as the patrimony of national or ethnic groups. In the
early twentieth century, the structure of language as a symbolic system (Saussure) had been
mapped on the structure of culture as the principle of organization of primitive societies (Lévi-
Strauss). After World War II, applied linguists tended at ﬁrst to equate one standard national
linguistic system and one national culture. Nowadays, with the global spread of information
technologies and global migrations, culture has lost much of its national moorings. It lives
in the communicative practices of native and non-native speakers. In the teaching of foreign
languages, and even more so in the teaching of English as an international language, culture
has become the contextual foil of language practices in everyday life.
1970s–90s: little c culture of everyday life enters the communicative picture
The social turn in applied linguistics (e.g. for SLA, see Block 2003) brought to the fore a vigorous
interest in the cultural component of language study, based on a variety of research domains
that have to do with the little c culture of language use in everyday life: discourse and con-
versation analysis, cross-cultural pragmatics, intercultural communication and intercultural
learning.
Discourse analysis was hailed in the 1970s as the golden road to understanding language in
use. Culture was to be found not in institutional monuments and artifacts, nor in artistic pro-
ducts, but in the meaning that speakers and listeners, writers and readers gave them through
the discourse of verbal exchanges, newspaper articles or political speeches. To understand
culture, one had to understand both the universal and the culture-speciﬁc constraints on lan-
guage use in discourse: for example, how social actors initiate and end conversations, how they
manage or avoid topics, how they structure an argument and organize information, how they
negotiate meaning, how they relate text to context (e.g. Gumperz 1982; Scollon and Scollon
[1995] 2001; Widdowson 2007).
The ﬁeld of conversation analysis (CA) emerged in the 1970s from the work of ethno-
methodologist Harold Garﬁnkel and sociologist Erving Goﬀman. It attracted scholars like
Emanuel Schegloﬀ, who, having moved from literary studies at Harvard to sociology at UC
Berkeley in the late 1960s, were searching for the very site of construction of the social world.
Sacks, Schegloﬀand Jeﬀerson found it in the systematics of turn-taking in daily conversations
(Sacks et al. 1974). Their detailed analysis of the mechanics of turns-at-talk opened up vistas
on how culture gets produced and reproduced through language. Since then, conversation
analysis has experienced spectacular growth to the point that for some it has become synon-
ymous with discourse analysis. While CA has been traditionally more focused on the here-
and-now sociological aspects of turns-at-talk, conversational sequences and the organization
Claire Kramsch
306

of repairs than on the historical or ideological dimensions of conversation, some conversation
analysts have combined ethnography and conversation analysis in the study of culture in talk
(Moerman 1988), that is, in Elinor Ochs’ phrase, of how one ‘becomes a speaker of culture’
(Ochs 2002).
Another related ﬁeld that studies culture in action is pragmatics, especially cross-cultural
pragmatics (e.g. Blum-Kulka et al. 1989; Kasper 2001). Cross-cultural pragmatics studies the
realization of speech acts like requests and apologies in diﬀerent cultural contexts (Blum-
Kulka et al. 1989), as well as the cultural variations of the Gricean cooperative principle in
conversation (Matsumoto 1989) and of politeness strategies (Lakoﬀ1990). Cross-cultural or
intercultural discourse studies are associated with linguists like Jochen Rehbein (1985) and
Juliane House (House et al. 2003) in Germany; Michael Clyne (1994) in Australia; Srikant
Sarangi and Celia Roberts in the UK (Sarangi and Coulthard 2000); Ron and Suzanne Scol-
lon (Scollon and Scollon [1995] 2001) in the USA (see essential readings in Kiesling and
Paulston 2005). This ﬁeld of research studies the exchanges between interlocutors from various
cultural backgrounds, mostly in professional or institutional contexts, very often with unequal
speaking rights. It has helped professionals in the legal, medical or service industry deal with
the pitfalls of communication across cultural and national contexts. It has helped foreign lan-
guage teachers design authentic communicative tasks and activities in preparation for using
language in real contexts of everyday life. Cross-cultural discourse studies have beneﬁted from
research done in cognitive semantics, and speciﬁcally the exploration of semantic universals
across diﬀerent languages (Wierzbicka 1992). Since the 1980s, cognitive linguistics has helped
us understand how culture relies on shared idealized cognitive models of reality and con-
ceptual metaphors that enable members of a cultural community to make sense of the world
around them (Lakoﬀ1987).
Intercultural communication (IC) has become since the 1980s a broad ﬁeld of research (for
a review see Kramsch 2002b). In applied linguistics, it is related mostly to language education
and professional language use. In language education, the concept of intercultural competence
was deﬁned in Europe by Byram and Zarate (1997) on the basis of research in cultural studies
and cultural anthropology. It has been elaborated as intercultural communicative competence
by Byram (1997, 2003), Byram and Fleming (1998) and Guilherme (2000). In the professional
world, the major contribution of applied linguistics to IC has been the work of Scollon and
Scollon ([1995] 2001).
The ﬁeld of intercultural education manifests itself diﬀerently in Europe and in the USA. In
Europe, two strands of intercultural education are noteworthy. First, a German strand of
applied linguistics (Sprachlehr- und lernforschung) that focuses on interpreting the culturally
foreign Other. This strand of research on the intercultural is the work of German and Austrian
scholars in educational linguistics. It is associated with literature scholars like Lothar Bredella
and Werner Delanoy (Bredella and Delanoy 1999) and applied linguists like Christine
Schwerdtfeger (see Duxa et al. 2005). Drawing on phenomenological and hermeneutic strands
of European continental philosophy, it deals with the cultural identity of language learners,
cultural stereotypes and the dialectic of Self and Other. It considers its goals as promoting
tolerance, empathy, personal transformation and cross-cultural understanding.
Intercultural learning is a second strand of research developed in Europe through the work
of such educational researchers as Ingrid Gogolin (1994), Adelheid Hu (1999), Barbara
Schmenk (2004) and Jörg Roche (2001) in Germany, Michael Byram (1997) in the UK, Karen
Risager (2007) in Denmark, and Hans-Jürgen Krumm in Austria (see Barkowski and Faistauer
2002). It is represented in the electronic journal Zeitschrift für interkulturellen Fremd-
sprachenunterricht edited by Britta Hufeisen and Manfred Prokop (Lorey et al. 2007). The
Language and culture
307

adjective ‘intercultural’ has been applied to competences, speakers, learning, pedagogy, stances.
Coupled with ‘communicative’, as in ‘intercultural communicative pedagogy’, it is ﬁrmly
aimed at facilitating concrete practical encounters within the EU and at improving coopera-
tion across European borders. Intercultural learning, originally anchored in the ﬁeld of British
cultural studies and German social studies, has been the object of public controversy between
education researchers like Adelheid Hu, whose primary concern is the schooling of immigrant
children and their integration in the host society, and linguistic discourse analysts like Juliane
House and Willis Edmondson, whose main concern is adult second language acquisition and
use (see Edmondson and House 1998; Hu 1999). Recently, the growing heterogeneity of
national cultures and the increasing mobility of people across national borders are challenging
simplistic dichotomies of Self and Other and are inviting us to re-think the relation of language
and culture in language education.
In the USA, intercultural competence has often been associated with communication
studies, and cross-cultural psychology, which do not give much attention to language per
se. When the European concept gained interest among American language educators, it lost
the strong moral and political dimension it had in European educational circles (Byram
2003; Neuner 2003; Zarate 2003) and was given an individualistic and instrumental
dimension. If in Europe intercultural competence strives to promote tolerance and citizenship,
in the USA it focuses more on participation and collaboration around common tasks for
the empowerment of the individual (e.g. Pavlenko and Lantolf 2000; Pavlenko and Blackledge
2004; Lantolf and Thorne 2007). In Australia, intercultural learning has become the major
pedagogic objective for foreign language educators (Lo Bianco et al. 1999), with the more
cosmopolitan goal of preparing citizens of the world who can act as a bridge between East
and West.
Finally, the 1990s saw the growth of computer technology to mediate and foster commu-
nication across cultures. Through hypermedia and multimodal technology, it has facilitated
access to the visual and verbal culture of distant others (e.g. Kramsch and Andersen 1999;
Warschauer and Kern 2000). Telecollaboration has encouraged verbal exchanges across
social and cultural contexts (Kern et al. 2004; Ware and Kramsch 2005; Belz and Thorne
2006). However, while the focus on discourse in the 1980s coincided with a constructivist
view of culture as historically contingent and relative to one’s perspective on events, and was
steering the ﬁeld in post-structuralist directions, the binary structure of the computer and
its use as a procedural tool for the transmission of information have encouraged a
structuralist approach to studying language and culture based on objective, measurable
phenomena.
Indeed, there is a noticeable tension between interest in culture and interest in discourse,
between structuralist and emerging post-structuralist/constructivist views of language and cul-
ture. Is language a reﬂection/representation of culture, or does language in discourse actually
construct what we call culture? As the Scollons describe in the second edition of their best-
seller Intercultural Communication (2001), they originally had in mind to write a book about
interdiscursive communication, but the publisher felt that the term ‘intercultural’ would appeal
to a larger readership. The term ‘discourse’ implies a relational, decentered, multiperspectival,
variable approach to culture that oﬀers less certainties to businessmen, politicians and lan-
guage teachers, who prefer to see in ‘culture’ something stable, predictable and controllable. It
has been left to critical discourse analysts and applied linguists like Alastair Pennycook (2001),
Norman Fairclough (1992) and Ruth Wodak (1994), and to post-structuralist sociolinguists
like Jan Blommaert (2005) to draw attention to the decentered, historically contingent, and
conﬂictual nature of discourse across cultures.
Claire Kramsch
308

2000 to the present: culture as portable historicity and subjectivity, constructed in
and through discourse
Some anthropologists are moving away from studying culture to studying historicities and
subjectivities. The spectacular ascendancy of linguistic anthropology following in the footsteps
of Dell Hymes and John Gumperz has transformed the nature of what used to be called ‘culture’.
As linguistic anthropologist William Hanks (1996) demonstrates, language as symbolic prac-
tice constructs the genres, identities, and subjectivities of our daily existence. Through the
pervasive indexicality of discourse and the citationality of speech acts, present utterances are
permeated with prior discourses that irrupt into the present and bring about both the historical
continuity and the discontinuities of culture.
Several developments have made a discourse approach to culture more desirable in recent years.
The increased importance given to symbolic forms of power – global information networks,
round-the-clock media, mass marketing and the communication culture of fast capitalism, has
increased the gap between the realities on the ground and the discourses that give meaning to
these realities. Economic globalization has exacerbated the clash between the discourse of a global
market and the discourse of local traditions and beliefs (Coupland 2010). Given the widespread
migrations and the divergence of interests around the globe, intercultural communication can no
longer be seen as the dispassionate, rational negotiation of meaning between two interlocutors
who come from two diﬀerent national cultures. It has to be seen as a complex system of emergent
multilingual meanings with non-linear and unpredictable outcomes, where interlocutors occupy
various subject positions on various timescales and with various forms of dominance and control
(Lemke 2000; Pennycook 2007; Larsen-Freeman and Cameron 2008). Some have proposed ‘lan-
guage ecology’ as a metaphor for this complexity approach to the study of language as cultural
context (van Lier 2004; Kramsch 2002a; Kramsch and Whiteside 2008). Blommaert (2005) has
suggested the notion of ‘layered simultaneity’ to capture the fact that actions and events occur at
any given time on various temporal and spatial scales, often causing miscommunication. Indeed,
in the era of globalization linguistic and literacy resources that would be functional in one place
become dysfunctional when transplanted to other places, as in the case, for example, of a Con-
golese woman in Belgium accused of shoplifting who was asked by the police to write her version
of the events. Her literacy practices were perfectly appropriate in Africa but failed to achieve their
eﬀect with the Belgian bureaucracy (ibid.: 82).
The Internet and the networking culture on-line, with its blogs, electronic chatrooms and
network sites like Facebook and Twitter, present a challenge to institutional authority and to
established cultures. They oﬀer an a-historical world of connections and relations that replace
quality with quantity, time with space, reality with hyperreality (e.g. Poster 1990; Mitchell
2003). Virtual worlds like Second Life provide imagined spaces and self-designed avatars that
can reconstruct actual cultures without the constraints imposed by history, biology and bio-
graphy. The construction of these virtual worlds is heavily dependent on symbolic systems and
the impact of symbolic form on the emotions and beliefs of computer users. This is an area of
applied linguistics that is in dire need of research, as it is increasingly aﬀecting our sense of
who we are and who we have been, as well as our understanding of our surrounding culture.
Main current issues
In applied linguistic research
In the last two decades applied linguistics has been concerned about its identity as an inter-
disciplinary ﬁeld of research at the intersection of theory and practice. Most of the current
Language and culture
309

issues which applied linguistic research has to grapple with come from the applied and inter-
disciplinary nature of the ﬁeld, and the problems this presents for the study of language and
culture: (1) description vs prescription, (2) description vs prediction, (3) linguistic vs educa-
tional concerns, (4) structuralist vs post-structuralist approaches to research, and (5) who gets
to frame real-world problems: the practitioner or the researcher? I take each one in turn.
The ﬁrst issue that confronts an applied ﬁeld like applied linguistics has to do with the
expectation that the ﬁndings of researchers will lead to immediate prescriptions for the prac-
tice. Businessmen expect from applied linguists prescriptions on how to behave when nego-
tiating deals with partners from other cultures, medical personnel expect to learn how to
improve their bedside manners by tailoring their care to their patients’ ‘culture’, court trans-
lators expect to learn how to interpret and convey the intentions of their clients beyond the
words uttered. The reason the US State Department is currently recruiting anthropologists to
join the battleﬁelds in Iraq and Afghanistan is precisely because the US military needs
to ‘know’ the culture of the enemy and hopes to get from these researchers guidelines on how
to behave in order to befriend (or capture) local nationals. The issue of description vs pre-
scription lies at the core of any applied ﬁeld. It raises questions of ethical responsibility that
emerge also in the second issue, hotly debated in applied linguistics – the role of culture in
language tests.
The cultural bias of language tests has long been a serious concern of applied linguists.
While language tests are supposed to predict future verbal behavior in a variety of social
contexts, very often their cultural content seems to want to predict cultural assimilation, not
merely linguistic ability. Shohamy (2001) demonstrates conclusively how language tests have
been used to discriminate against ethnic groups in immigration situations. McNamara (2005)
shows how tests that purport to test linguistic abilities, in fact, like the biblical shibboleth,
often test cultural allegiance and loyalty. Language tests raise the thorny issue of the relation
of language and thought and how much cultural knowledge gate-keepers are entitled to
require of potential immigrants to industrialized societies. The problem is equally acute in the
other real-world problem which applied linguists are called upon to adjudicate, namely
achievement tests in educational systems. Testing researchers have shown how standard
achievement tests (SATs) are skewed in favor of test takers who are from the same culture as
the test designers (Freedle 2003). Current eﬀorts in Europe to test for intercultural competence
(Hu and Byram 2009) are fraught with dangers of oversimplifying ‘culture’ and the notion of
‘tolerance toward other cultures’.
Some applied linguists even argue that we should do away with the notion of intercultural
learning altogether – a superﬂuous concept, in their view (Edmondson and House 1998).
Doesn’t communicative competence already include the ability to negotiate diﬀerences in
assumptions, worldviews and discourse styles that we call ‘culture’? Why should we speciﬁcally
teach understanding and tolerance of other cultures when communicative language teaching
already entails expressing, interpreting and negotiating meanings that might be very diﬀerent
from one culture to the other? The debate that went on in the ﬁrst years of the twenty-ﬁrst
century was a confrontation between discourse analysts and educationists in Germany around
the notion of culture: culture as discourse vs culture as moral universe. The ﬁrst can be
explained and negotiated rationally, the second requires mature judgment and a certain dose
of humility to not only accept cultural diﬀerence but to acknowledge the power diﬀerential
among cultures, and, ultimately, the fact that all culture is political.
Many applied linguists, especially those who help immigrants deal with ethnic prejudice and
discrimination and facilitate their adjustment in the host country, would agree that applied
linguists are called to play a political role. In courtrooms and classrooms, in hospital wards
Claire Kramsch
310

and health services, in boardrooms and at press conferences, applied linguists are confronted
with political problems in the real world where the language-culture nexus comes into play.
There is currently some debate as to whether to consider this nexus from a structuralist or a
post-structuralist perspective. Post-structuralist thinkers like Weedon (1987) and Cameron
(2000) see culture as constructed in and through discourse and emerging locally from verbal
interactions in historically contingent contexts. Post-structuralism precludes any essentializa-
tion of cultures. Rather than focus on the multiple, changing and even conﬂictual nature of
structures in the social world – males vs females, powerful vs powerless, native vs non-native,
it turns its attention away from the structures themselves and focuses instead on the conditions
of possibility of certain structures rather than others emerging at certain points in time. For
example, using Blommaert’s example (see above), applied linguists in the post-structuralist
vein ask not: how could the Congolese shoplifter write a better letter to persuade the Belgian
authorities of her innocence, but: what conditions of colonization, globalization, ethnic pre-
judice led this woman to move to Belgium in the ﬁrst place and be accused of shoplifting? The
ﬁrst question leads directly to social welfare and domestic political activism. The second does
not lead to a concrete solution to the problem at hand but addresses the more complex and no
less political issue of language, culture, and globalization (e.g. Coupland 2010).
The question, then, lies in the nature of the ‘real-world’ problems that applied linguists are
meant to solve. How should these problems be framed? And who gets to frame them: the
practitioners and politicians or the researchers? A case in point is the current rift between
foreign/second language acquisition research and research on developmental bilingualism in
applied linguistics. The ﬁrst is usually seen as dealing with the development of mature ado-
lescents and young adults learning a foreign/second language in instructional settings. The
second is seen as focusing on children learning two languages at birth, or growing up in
families that speak two languages or belong to two diﬀerent cultures, or children of immi-
grants who don’t speak the language of their ancestors but are familiar with their culture and
now learn their heritage language in school. But the distinction is not as clear as it seems at
ﬁrst blush. Many foreign language learners can be found in elementary or middle schools, at a
time when they are not yet fully socialized in their ﬁrst language. Many bilinguals are mature
adolescents learning their heritage language in instructional settings. Foreign language learners
sometimes already know another foreign language, have grown up in various cultures, and
undergo an equally powerful emotional experience learning the foreign language as bilinguals
do learning the language of their ancestors. But in English-dominant countries where learning
a foreign language is seen as an elite activity reserved for the privileged few, ﬁghting for one’s
rights as a ‘bilingual’ is considered a more urgent matter of social integration and equal
opportunity than choosing to acquire an additional language to enrich one’s education.
Moreover, foreign languages are framed in terms of foreign policy, while bilingual education
and heritage languages are framed in terms of civil rights. Two diﬀerent political cultures
indeed. Some applied linguists are currently questioning the traditional deﬁnition of the real-world
problems at hand in these two cases (Kramsch 2005, 2009).
In applied linguistic practice
In the ﬁeld of language education, whether they are native or non-native speakers of the lan-
guage they teach, language teachers are typically worried that they are not qualiﬁed to teach
‘culture’. Their persisting question: ‘We don’t know what culture is nor do we know how to
teach it’, when so much has been written about it, shows that ‘culture’ is still taken to be a body of
knowledge outside the linguistic system and that teachers might not know how to deﬁne their
Language and culture
311

own culture, let alone a foreign one. Fearful of teaching stereotypes and anxious not to bring
politics into the language classroom, language teachers don’t all agree that they should teach
‘meaning’ beyond the meanings captured by grammars and dictionaries. They don’t feel legit-
imized to teach the living, idiosyncratic cultural meanings given to words by living speakers
who might or might not be native speakers. In the old days when ‘culture’ was synonymous
with literature and the arts, language teachers had no qualms about assessing a student’s
ability to interpret a poem or a painting in the language class. Today the democratization and
popularization of culture and its fragmentation into various sub- and hybrid cultures make
teachers feel inadequate to the task of knowing, let alone interpreting, foreign cultures. In our
days of multiple choice tests, many teachers have lost the ability to evaluate the validity of
arguments explaining cultural events on the basis of historical, literary, social or political
knowledge. Ultimately, they fear not being able to control the transmission of cultural knowl-
edge, if it cannot be standardized or normativized. The link that applied linguistics establishes
between discourse and culture invites language teachers to reﬂect on how their own discourse
and culture have shaped their identity as individuals and as teachers.
In public life, applied linguists’ understanding of the relation between discourse and cultural
identity has served to improve relations between staﬀand customers at hospitals and factories
in Australia, and to improve health services, industrial relations and medical examinations in
the UK (Sarangi and Coulthard 2000). The challenge is how to improve interaction between
doctors and patients, lawyers and clients, corporate managers and consumers in a variety of
cultural contexts, while furthering the interests of the company. These interests might be
channeled by economic or political forces that critical applied linguists are sensitive to.
In the same manner as the notion of culture has often become politicized in the struggle for
the recognition of ethnic identity and minority rights, it has become commodiﬁed in the eco-
nomic sphere by narrow-cast marketing strategies that strive to target an ever more diﬀer-
entiated range of consumers based on their individual tastes and their cultural aﬃliations. The
link between language and culture is not lost on marketing strategists like Frank Luntz (2006),
who consults for political campaign managers and CEOs and sells them the linguistic and
cultural ‘hidden persuaders’ that will make people vote for their candidate or buy their pro-
duct. Applied linguists are concerned about this technologization of culture, especially in the
interactions between global funding agencies and local NGOs in developing countries. The
clashes between the neo-liberal discourse of development and the local discourse of economic
survival are starting to be documented (Coupland 2010, Kramsch and Boner 2010). They oﬀer
as yet the best example of the usefulness of a discourse approach to intercultural communication
in our era of globalization.
Finally, the role of technology has to be mentioned in the creation of a cyberculture that is
increasingly shaping both language and culture and transforming social life. As the computer
transforms the very time/space axes of our existence and redeﬁnes the real, it has generated
feelings of empowerment, of liberation from cultural conventions and constraints; it has
opened up dreams of connectivity and ubiquity of an a-cultural, a-historical kind. But at the
same time, it has ushered in feelings of uncommon vulnerability, uncertainty and uncontroll-
ability. In such periods, ideologies (explicit, highly organized meaning systems, both political
and religious), symbols and rituals tend to shape people’s actions more than conscious,
rational decision making (Swidler 1986). Applied linguists are turning their attention to these
ideologies and rituals (Rampton 2009) as well as to the proliferation of parody, simulation,
and humor that deals with the contradictions of social life (Yurchak and Boyer 2008). In the
teaching of foreign languages, the relentless pressure to use networked computers and multi-
media technology to teach both the language and the culture in attractive ways is calling for
Claire Kramsch
312

more research on the part of applied linguists into the eﬀects of technology on the very nature
of the language and the culture they teach.
Future trajectory and new debates
In applied linguistic research and practice the link between any given language and any given
culture has become controversial. It is evoked by various interest groups for economic or
political gain. Computer technology promises to do away with cultural boundaries altogether,
but it only exacerbates the desire to create new communities of practice that will, in time,
establish their own cultures of inclusion and exclusion, their own gate-keeping conventions for
the use of symbolic systems.
In research
Culture might slowly lose its power to explain human behavior in a multilingual/multicultural
world where people are born in one culture, grow up in another, and end up living and work-
ing in a third. In the multimedia environments of the computer, language itself may change its
value and use. More important than a person’s ‘language’ and ‘culture’ might be the socio-
economic, historical or ideological subject positions that people take and that get expressed
through the multiple symbolic systems they choose to use, be they verbal, visual, musical or
virtual, to represent and act upon the world and others in multiple ecological dimensions.
Culture in action is less a question of stable values, identities or ideologies that cause people to
act in certain ways, than a repertoire of strategies for action that individuals activate diﬀerently
depending on whether they lead ‘settled’ or ‘unsettled’ lives (Swidler 1986).
The debate between structuralist and post-structuralist views on language and culture is
sure to continue in the future. Post-structuralism is a challenge for applied linguistics because
it seems to blur the distinction between the social sciences, with their positivistic, objective,
evidence-based methods of inquiry, and the human sciences with their hermeneutic, subjective
interpretation-based modes of analysis. Given the increasing prestige accorded to the physical
and natural sciences over the humanities, any attempt to make the interpretation of culture
dependent on the subject position of the researcher brings the applied linguist, as Cliﬀord Geertz
would say, ‘rather closer to what a critic does to illumine a poem than what an astronomer
does to account for a star’ (1983: 10).
As always, the applied linguist studying the language-and-culture nexus has to weigh scien-
tiﬁc validity against scientiﬁc reliability, or attempt to redeﬁne altogether the very bases of its
scientiﬁc endeavor.
In practice
For language teachers, the question of culture will become more acute: Which culture to teach
in a multilingual world of diasporas, forced migrations and global communication technolo-
gies? In the USA as in Europe, there is right now a push to de-institutionalize the teaching of
foreign languages and cultures: sending the students abroad, pairing them up with native
speakers, and telecollaboration over the Internet have all transformed language study into skill
training for the real world of the job market. This instrumentalization of FL education is of
great concern to educators in Europe (see Doﬀet al. 2008) as well as in the USA (see MLA
Ad Hoc Committee on Foreign Languages 2007). In the USA, the struggle for attention
between the proponents of bilingual education and education in minority languages on the
Language and culture
313

one hand, and the proponents of foreign language education on the other will continue. Both
face serious challenges. While a xenophobic ideology threatens bilingual and minority educa-
tion, a nationalistic ideology threatens to reduce foreign language study to a weapon in the
ﬁght for US economic superiority and national security. In both cases, the dispassionate research
of applied linguists needs to go beyond the culture wars taking place in American academia.
The global spread of English and of the neo-liberal ideology with which it is often associated
risks fostering a kind of ‘multilingualism lite’ in which other languages are seen as exotic
variations on the common neo-liberal culture of the English-dominant world. It is signiﬁcant
that translation, language awareness and metadiscursive reﬂection are making a comeback in
a ﬁeld still very much dominated by communicative language teaching and its utilitarian view
of human communication. Both in the research and in the practice of applied linguistics, we can
look forward to a greater awareness of and importance given to borders of all kinds, as well as
to the historicities and the subjectivities of those who live on both sides of these borders.
Summary
Culture, deﬁned as membership in a discourse community that shares a common social space
and history, and common imaginings, entered the ﬁeld of applied linguistics through the study
of language in its sociocultural context, i.e. discourse. Discourse, as verbal communicative
practices and habits of thought, embodies a community’s identity and moral values, its
understanding of history and its aspirations for the future. Cross-cultural pragmatics, inter-
cultural communication, and intercultural learning are some of the areas of applied linguistics
that study the link between language and culture. The ﬁeld right now is grappling with the
tension between structuralist and post-structuralist approaches to culture, and with the revo-
lution brought about by computer technology in our experience of time and space, and our
sense of reality. In the future, the attention of applied linguists will shift from stable, national
cultures to portable historicities and subjectivities that people carry in their minds as so many
potential strategies for action.
Related topics
critical discourse analysis; identity; language and teacher education; language learning; lan-
guage socialization; sociocultural theory; technology and language learning
Further reading
Bourdieu, P. (1991) Language and Symbolic Power, J. Thompson (ed.), G. Raymond and M. Adamson
(trans.) Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. (Canonical reading for understanding the
symbolic nature of culture and its social reproduction.)
Gumperz, J. J. and Levinson, S. C. (eds) (1996) Rethinking Linguistic Relativity, Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press. (A collection of papers that represent the latest thinking on the
relation of language and thought.)
Hanks, W. F. (1996) Language and Communicative Practices, Boulder, CO: Westview Press, esp. part 2,
‘Language the nexus of context’. (A comprehensive conceptualization of language as symbolic,
social and cultural practice by one of the leading linguistic anthropologists.)
Kramsch, C. (1993) Context and Culture in Language Teaching, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
(A readable presentation of the relation of discourse and culture for foreign language teachers.)
Poster, M. (1995) The Second Media Age, New York: Blackwell. (A thought-provoking study of the
interrelations between the technology-shaped contexts of urban life and the kind of communication
that these contexts make possible.)
Claire Kramsch
314

References
Barkowski, H. and Faistauer, R. (eds) (2002) Sachen Deutsch als Fremdsprache: Festschrift für
Hans-Jürgen Krumm, Hohengehren, Germany: Schneider Verlag.
Belz, J. A. and Thorne, S. L. (eds) (2006) Internet-mediated Intercultural Foreign Language Educa-
tion and the Intercultural Speaker, Boston, MA: Heinle and Heinle.
Block, D. (2003) The Social Turn in Second Language Acquisition, Edinburgh: Edinburgh Uni-
versity Press.
Blommaert, J. (2005) Discourse: A Critical Introduction, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Blum-Kulka, S., Kasper, G. and House, J. (eds) (1989) Cross-cultural Pragmatics: Requests
and Apologies, vol. XXXI in the series Advances in Discourse Processes, R. O. Freedle (ed.),
Norwood, NJ: Ablex.
Bredella, L. and Delanoy, W. (eds) (1999) Interkultureller Fremdsprachenunterricht, Tübingen:
Gunter Narr.
Byram, M. (1997). Teaching and Assessing Intercultural Communicative Competence, Clevedon:
Multilingual Matters.
Byram, M. (ed.) (2003) Intercultural Competence, Strasbourg: Council of Europe.
Byram, M. and Zarate, G. (eds) (1997) The Sociocultural and Intercultural Dimension of Language
Learning and Teaching, Strasbourg: Council of Europe.
Byram, M. and Fleming, M. (eds) (1998) Language Learning in Intercultural Perspective,
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Cameron, D. (2000) Good to Talk? Living and Working in a Communication Culture, London: Sage.
Clyne, M. (1994) Inter-cultural Communication at Work: Cultural Values in Discourse, Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Coupland, N. (ed.) (2010). The Handbook of Language and Globalization, Oxford and Malden,
MA: Wiley-Blackwell.
Doﬀ, S., Hüllen, W. and Klippel, F. (eds) (2008) Visions of Language in Education, Munich:
Langenscheidt.
Duxa, S., Hu, A. and Schmenk, B. (eds) (2005) Grenzen überschreiten. Menschen, Sprachen,
Kulturen: Festschrift für Inge Christine Schwerdtfeger, Tübingen: Gunter Narr.
Edmondson, W. and House, J. (1998) ‘Interkulturelles lernen: ein überﬂüssiger Begriﬀ’, Zeitschrift
für Fremdsprachenforschung 9(2): 161–88.
Fairclough, N. (1992) Discourse and Social Change, Cambridge: Polity Press.
Freedle, R. O. (2003) ‘Correcting the SAT’s ethnic and social-class bias: a method for reestimating
SAT scores’, Harvard Educational Review, 73(1): 1–43.
Geertz, C. (1983) Local Knowledge: Further Essays in Interpretive Anthropology, New York: Basic
Books.
Gogolin, I. (1994) Der monolinguale Habitus der multilingualen Schule, Münster: Waxman Verlag.
Guilherme, M. (2000) ‘Intercultural competence’, in M. Byram (ed.) Routledge Encyclopedia of
Language Learning and Teaching, London: Routledge.
Gumperz, J. J. (1982) Discourse Strategies, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
House, J., Kasper, G. and Ross, S. (eds) (2003) Misunderstanding in Social Life, London: Longman.
Hu, A. (1999) ‘Interkulturelles Lernen. Eine Auseinandersetzung mit der Kritik an einem umstrit-
tenen Konzept’, Zeitschrift für Fremdsprachenforschung 10(2): 277–303.
Hu, A. and Byram, M. (eds) (2009) Interkulturelle Kompetenz und fremdsprachliches Lernen: Mod-
elle, Empirie, Evaluation / Intercultural Competence and Foreign Language Learning: Models,
Empiricism, Assessment, Tübingen: Narr Francke Attempto Verlag.
Kasper, G. (2001) ‘Four perspectives on L2 pragmatic development’, Applied Linguistics 22(4):
502–38.
Kern, R., Ware, P. and Warschauer, M. (2004) ‘Crossing frontiers: new directions in online peda-
gogy and research’, Annual Review of Applied Linguistics 24: 243–60.
Kiesling, S. F. and Bratt Paulston, C. (eds) (2005) Intercultural Discourse and Communication: The
Essential Readings, Oxford: Blackwell.
Kramsch, C. (1998) Language and Culture, Oxford Introductions to Language Studies, Oxford:
Oxford University Press.
——(2002a) ‘Introduction. How can we tell the dancer from the dance?’, in C. Kramsch (ed.)
Language Acquisition and Language Socialization: Ecological Perspectives, London: Continuum.
Language and culture
315

——(2002b) ‘In search of the intercultural’, Journal of Sociolinguistics 6(2): 275–85 (review article).
——(2004) ‘Language, thought, and culture’, in A. Davies and C. Elder (eds) Handbook of Applied
Linguistics, Oxford and Malden, MA: Wiley-Blackwell.
——(2005) ‘Post 9/11: ‘Foreign languages between knowledge and power’, Applied Linguistics 26(4):
545–67.
——(2009) The Multilingual Subject, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Kramsch, C. and Andersen, R. (1999) ‘Teaching text and context through multimedia’, Language
Learning and Technology 2(2): 31–42.
Kramsch, C. and Boner, E. (2010) ‘Shadows of discourse: intercultural communication in global
contexts’, in N. Coupland (ed.) The Handbook of Language and Globalization, Oxford and
Malden, MA: Wiley-Blackwell.
Kramsch, C. and Whiteside, A. (2008) ‘Language ecology in multilingual settings. Towards a theory
of symbolic competence’, Applied Linguistics 29(4): 645–71.
Lakoﬀ, G. (1987) Women, Fire, and Dangerous Things: What Categories Reveal about the Mind,
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Lakoﬀ, R. (1990) Talking Power: The Politics of Language in our Lives, New York: Basic Books.
Lantolf, J. and Thorne, S. (2007) Sociocultural Theory and the Genesis of Second Language Devel-
opment, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Larsen-Freeman, D. and Cameron, L. (2008) Complex Systems and Applied Linguistics, Oxford:
Oxford University Press.
Lemke, J. (2000) ‘Across the scales of time: artifacts, activities and meanings in ecosocial systems’,
Mind, Culture, and Activity 7(4): 273–90.
Lo Bianco, J., Liddicoat, A. and Crozet, C. (1999) Striving for the Third Place: Intercultural Com-
petence Through Language Education, Melbourne: Language Australia.
Lorey, C., Plews, J. L. and Rieger, C. L. (eds) (2007) Interkulturelle Kompetenzen im Fremd-
sprachenunterricht: Intercultural Literacies and German in the Classroom, Festschrift für Manfred
Prokop, Tübingen: Gunter Narr.
Luntz, F. (2006) Words that Work, New York: Hyperion.
Matsumoto, Y. (1989) ‘Politeness and conversational universals: observations from Japanese’,
Multilingua 8(2–3): 207–21.
McNamara, T. (2005) ‘21st century shibboleth: language tests, identity and intergroup conﬂict’,
Language Policy 4(4): 351–70.
Mitchell, W. J. (2003) Me++: The Cyborg Self and the Networked City, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
MLA Ad Hoc Committee on Foreign Languages (2007) ‘Foreign languages and higher education:
new structures for a changed world’, Profession 2007, 234–45.
Moerman, M. (1988) Talking Culture: Ethnography and Conversation Analysis, Philadelphia:
University of Pennsylvania Press.
Neuner, G. (2003) ‘Sociocultural interim worlds in foreign language teaching and learning’, in
M. Byram (ed.) Intercultural Competence, Strasbourg: Council of Europe.
Ochs, E. (2002) ‘Becoming a speaker of culture’, in C. Kramsch (ed.) Language Acquisition and
Language Socialization: Ecological Perspectives, London: Continuum.
Pavlenko, A. and Blackledge, A. (eds) (2004) Negotiation of Identities in Multilingual Contexts,
Clevedon: Multilingual Matters.
Pavlenko, A. and Lantolf, J. (2000) ‘Second language learning as participation and the (re)con-
struction of selves’, in J. P. Lantolf (ed.) Sociocultural Theory and Second Language Learning,
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Pennycook, A. (2001) Critical Applied Linguistics, Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
——(2007) Global Englishes and Transcultural Flows, London: Routledge.
Pinker, S. (1994) The Language Instinct: How the Mind Creates Language, New York: Harper.
Poster, M. (1990) The Mode of Information: Poststructuralism and Social Context, Chicago:
University of Chicago Press.
Rampton, B. (2009) ‘Interaction ritual and not just artful performance in crossing and stylization’,
Language in Society 38: 149–76.
Rehbein, J. (ed.) (1985) Interkulturelle Kommunikation, Tübingen: Gunter Narr.
Risager, K. (2007) Language and Culture Pedagogy: From a National to a Transnational Paradigm,
Clevedon: Multilingual Matters.
Roche, J. (2001) Interkulturelle Sprachdidaktik: Eine Einführung, Tübingen: Gunter Narr.
Claire Kramsch
316

Sacks, H., Schegloﬀ, E. A. and Jeﬀerson, G. (1974) ‘A simplest systematics for the organization of
turn taking in conversation’, Language 50(4): 696–735.
Sarangi, S. and Coulthard, M. (eds) (2000) Discourse and Social Life, London: Pearson.
Schmenk, B. (2004) ‘Interkulturelles Lernen versus Autonomie?’, in W. Börner and K. Vogel (eds)
Emotion und Kognition im Fremdsprachenunterricht, Tübingen: Gunter Narr.
Scollon, R. and Scollon, S. ([1995] 2001) Intercultural Communication, 2nd edn, Oxford: Blackwell.
Shohamy, E. (2001) The Power of Tests. A Critical Perspective on the Uses of Language Tests,
London: Longman.
Stern, H. H. (1983) Fundamental Concepts of Language Teaching, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Swidler, A. (1986) ‘Culture in action: symbols and strategies’, American Sociological Review 51(2):
273–86.
van Lier, L. (2004) The Ecology and Semiotics of Language Learning: A Sociocultural Perspective,
Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic.
Ware, P. and Kramsch, C. (2005) ‘Toward an intercultural stance: teaching German and English
through telecollaboration’, Modern Language Journal 89(2): 190–205.
Warschauer, M. and Kern, R. (eds) (2000) Network-based Language Teaching: Concepts and Practice,
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Weedon, C. (1987) Feminist Practice and Poststructuralist Theory, Oxford: Blackwell.
Widdowson, H. G. (2007) Discourse Analysis, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Wierzbicka, A. (1992) Semantics, Culture, and Cognition: Universal Human Concepts in Culture-
speciﬁc Conﬁgurations, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Wodak, R. (1994) ‘Critical discourse analysis’, in J. Blommaert (ed.) Handbook of Pragmatics, The
Hague: Mouton
Yurchak, A. and Boyer, D. (2008) ‘Postsocialist studies, cultures of parody and American Stiob’,
Anthropology News November: 9–10.
Zarate, G. (2003) ‘Identities and plurilingualism: preconditions for the recognition of intercultural
competences’, in M. Byram (ed.) Intercultural Competence, Strasbourg: Council of Europe.
Language and culture
317

22
Identity
Bonny Norton
A history of the area
Interest in identity in the ﬁeld of applied linguistics, more broadly, and language education,
more speciﬁcally, is best understood in the context of a shift from a predominantly psycho-
linguistic approach to second language acquisition (SLA) to include a greater focus on sociological
and anthropological dimensions of language learning, particularly with reference to socio-
cultural, post-structural, and critical theory (Block 2003; Morgan 2007, Norton and Toohey
2001; Ricento 2005; Zuengler and Miller 2006). This chapter will focus on this extensive body
of literature, in which researchers are interested not only in linguistic input and output in SLA,
but in the relationship between the language learner and the larger social world. It will
thus pay particular attention to research that has examined the diverse social, historical, and
cultural contexts in which language learning takes place, and how learners negotiate and
sometimes resist the diverse opportunities those contexts oﬀer them.
In the 1970s and 1980s, language education scholars interested in identity tended to draw
distinctions between social identity and cultural identity. While ‘social identity’ was seen to
reference the relationship between the individual language learner and the larger social world,
as mediated through institutions such as families, schools, workplaces, social services, and law
courts (e.g. Gumperz 1982), ‘cultural identity’ referenced the relationship between an indivi-
dual and members of a particular ethnic group (such as Mexican and Japanese) who share a
common history, a common language, and similar ways of understanding the world (e.g.
Valdes 1986). However, as Atkinson (1999) has noted, past theories of cultural identity tended
to essentialize and oversimplify identity in problematic ways. In more recent years, the diﬀer-
ence between social and cultural identity is seen to be theoretically more ﬂuid, and the inter-
sections between social and cultural identities are considered more signiﬁcant than their
diﬀerences (Duﬀand Uchida 1997). In this research, identity is seen as socioculturally con-
structed, and scholars draw on both institutional and community practices to understand the
conditions under which language learners speak, read, and write the target language (see
Kramsch, this volume).
The diverse research covered in journal special issues of Linguistics and Education (Martin-
Jones and Heller 1996), the TESOL Quarterly (Norton 1997), and Language and Education
318

(Sarangi and Baynham 1996), anticipated the wide range of research on identity, characteristic
of the early years of the twenty-ﬁrst century. Many monographs on the topic have also been
published over the past decade (Block 2007; Clarke 2008; Day 2002; Heller 2007; Kanno
2008; Kramsch 2010; Miller 2003; Nelson 2009; Norton 2000; Potowski 2007; Stein 2008;
Toohey 2000); and the establishment in 2002 of the award-winning Journal of Language, Identity,
and Education, edited by Ricento and Wiley, has published an exciting array of research on
language, identity and education.
Main issues
Theories of language
One of the main issues in language education research on identity concerns post-Saussurean
theories of language, which achieved much prominence in the late twentieth century, and are
associated, amongst others, with the work of Bakhtin (1981), Bourdieu (1991), Hall (1997) and
Weedon (1997). These theories build on, but are distinct from, structuralist theories of lan-
guage, associated predominantly with the work of Saussure (1966). For structuralists, the lin-
guistic system guarantees the meaning of signs (the word and its meaning) and each linguistic
community has its own set of signifying practices that give value to the signs in a language.
Post-structuralists have critiqued these theories of language on the grounds that structuralism
cannot account for struggles over the social meanings that can be attributed to signs in a given
language. The signs /success/, /education/, /time/, for example, can have diﬀerent meanings for
diﬀerent people within the same linguistic community. While structuralists conceive of signs as
having idealized meanings, and linguistic communities as being relatively homogeneous and
consensual, post-structuralists take the position that the signifying practices of a society are
sites of struggle, and that linguistic communities are heterogeneous arenas characterized by
conﬂicting claims to truth and power. Thus language is not conceived of as a neutral medium
of communication, but is understood with reference to its social meaning in a frequently
inequitable world.
In post-structuralist theories of language, there is much interest in the way power is
implicated in relationships between individuals, communities, and nations (Janks 2010). Iden-
tity researchers often draw on Foucault (1980) and Bourdieu (1991) to better understand
how power operates within society, constraining or enabling human action. Foucault (1980)
argues, for example, that power is often invisible in that it frequently naturalizes events and
practices in ways that come to be seen as ‘normal’ to members of a community. Bourdieu
(1991), who is particularly interested in language and symbolic power, notes further that the
value ascribed to speech cannot be understood apart from the person who speaks, and the
person who speaks cannot be understood apart from larger networks of social relationships.
Every time we speak, we are negotiating a sense of self in relation to the larger social world,
and reorganizing that relationship across time and space. Our gender, race, class, ethnicity,
sexual orientation, among other characteristics, are all implicated in this negotiation of
identity.
The research of feminist post-structuralists such as Weedon (1997) has been particularly
inﬂuential in helping applied linguists theorize identity, or what feminist post-structuralists
call subjectivity. Three deﬁning characteristics of subjectivity that are of particular interest
to language educators are the multiple, non-unitary nature of the subject; subjectivity as a site
of struggle; and subjectivity as changing over time. In post-structuralist theory, subjectivity
and language are theorized as mutually constitutive. As Weedon (1997) notes, it is through
Identity
319

language that a person negotiates a sense of self within and across a range of sites at diﬀerent
points in time, and it is through language that a person gains access to – or is denied access
to – powerful social networks that give learners the opportunity to speak. From a language
educator’s perspective, the conceptualization of subjectivity as multiple and changing is con-
sistent with the view that pedagogical practices can be transformative. While some identity
positions may limit and constrain opportunities for learners to speak, read, or write, other
identity positions may oﬀer enhanced sets of possibilities for social interaction and human
agency.
Identity categories and social change
While much research on identity explores the multiple and intersecting dimensions of language
learners’ identities, there is a growing body of research that seeks to investigate the ways in
which particular relations of race, gender, class, and sexual orientation may impact the lan-
guage learning process. Innovative research that addresses these issues does not regard such
identity categories as ‘variables’, but rather as sets of relationships that are socially and his-
torically constructed within particular relations of power. Ibrahim’s (1999) research with a
group of French-speaking continental African students in a Franco-Ontarian high school in
Canada explores the impact on language learning of ‘becoming black’. He argues that the
students’ linguistic styles, and in particular their use of Black Stylized English, was a direct
outcome of being imagined and constructed as Black by hegemonic discourses and groups.
His ﬁndings support the view held by Kubota (2004) that a colour-blind conception of multi-
culturalism does not do justice to the challenges faced by language learners of diverse races
and ethnicities.
Similarly, the work of scholars such as Cameron (2006), Pavlenko (2004), and Sunderland
(2004) is particularly insightful with regard to intersections of gender and language (see
Baxter, this volume). Their conception of gender, which extends beyond female-male divides, is
understood to be a system of social relationships and discursive practices that may lead to
systemic inequality among particular groups of learners, including women, older people, dis-
abled people, and minorities. Pavlenko, for example, argues for the need to understand the
intersections between gender and other forms of oppression, noting that both girls and
boys who are silenced in the language classroom are more likely those who are economically
marginalized. A number of these issues are taken up in Norton and Pavlenko (2004),
who document research from diverse regions of the world that addresses the relationship
between gender and language learning with respect to the dominance of the English language
internationally.
In a similar spirit, King (2008), Moﬀatt and Norton (2008), and Nelson (2009) explore the
extent to which sexual orientation might be an important identity category in the language
classroom. Of central interest is the way in which a teacher can create a supportive environ-
ment for learners who might be gay, lesbian, or transgendered. Nelson contrasts a pedagogy of
inquiry, which asks how linguistic and cultural practices naturalize certain sexual identities,
most notably heterosexuality, with a pedagogy of inclusion, which aims to introduce images as
well as experiences of gays and lesbians into curriculum materials. Nelson’s approach can
fruitfully be applied to other issues of marginalization, helping learners to question normative
practices in the target culture into which they have entered.
Interest in identity categories and language learning is gaining momentum. Special issues of
the TESOL Quarterly on ‘Gender and Language Education’ (Davis and Skilton-Sylvester
2004) and ‘Race and TESOL’ (Kubota and Lin 2006) include insightful debates on gender,
Bonny Norton
320

race, and language learning, while recent monographs by May (2008), Heller (2007), and
Rampton (2006) ensure that issues of language, ethnicity, and class remain on the radar in the
ﬁeld. However, while taking race, class, gender, and other structural issues into account in
their analysis, language educators argue that there is a need to leave conceptual room for the
actions and investments of human agents (Menard-Warwick 2006).
Identity and language teaching
The relevance of identity research for classroom teaching is also of much interest to language
educators in diﬀerent parts of the world. As Lee’s (2008) research in a Canadian post-
secondary institution suggests, while many language teachers strive to enhance the range
of possibilities available to their students, there is often a disjuncture between the pedagogy
as conceptualized by the teacher and the practices adopted in the classroom. Despite the
best intentions, classroom practices can recreate subordinate student identities, thereby lim-
iting students’ access not only to language learning opportunities, but to other more pow-
erful identities. Lee’s ﬁndings are consistent with those of Ramanathan (2005), whose
research in India found that teachers’ language practices can reinforce existing inequities
among diverse learners of English. Her research suggests that pedagogical language practices
that are ritualized and allow for little meaning-making on the part of students may limit
the learner’s access to more powerful identities. To promote meaning-making in the learn-
ing process, Wallace (2003) has worked with adult language learners in the United Kingdom
on critical reading courses in which she uses text-focussed activities to address how meaning
and power are encoded in texts. Wallace contrasts her approach with dominant English for-
eign language methodologies that can be seen as ‘domesticating’ for learners, teaching them
only how to ﬁt in with dominant cultures rather than to question and reshape the conditions
of their lives.
Other research projects, which have taken place in diverse regions of the world, are illus-
trative of the ways in which particular pedagogical practices in language classrooms can oﬀer
students opportunities for an expanded range of identities. In Mexico, Clemente and Higgins
(2008) drew on their longitudinal study of pre-service English teachers in Oaxaca to raise
questions about the dominant role that English plays in the globalized political economy, and
to illustrate the ways in which non-native English teachers sought to appropriate and ‘per-
form’ English without sacriﬁcing local identities. In South Africa, Stein (2008) explored the
way in which English language classrooms in under-resourced township schools became
transformative sites in which textual, cultural, and linguistic forms were re-appropriated and
‘re-sourced’, with a view to validating those practices that had been marginalized and under-
valued by the apartheid system. In a similar spirit, scholars have investigated the extent to
which multimodal pedagogies that include drawing, photography, and drama can be incorpo-
rated more systematically into the English curriculum in Uganda, enhancing identity options
for language learners (Kendrick et al. 2006).
In many transformative classrooms that have been discussed in language education litera-
ture, language teachers’ conceptions of ‘language’ and thus ‘language teaching’ are broad in
scope (Norton and Toohey 2004). The teachers conceive of language not only as a linguistic
system, but as a social practice in which experiences are organized and identities negotiated.
There is recognition that if learners are not invested in the language practices of the classroom,
learning outcomes are limited, and educational inequities perpetuated. Further, such teachers
take great care to oﬀer learners multiple identity positions from which to engage in the language
practices of the classroom, the school, and the community.
Identity
321

New debates and future directions
Identity and investment
One of the new debates in language education research on identity concerns the construct of
‘investment’, developed in my work to complement constructs of motivation in the ﬁeld of
SLA (Norton 2000; Norton Peirce 1995). In my research with immigrant women in Canada,
I observed that existing theories of motivation in the ﬁeld of SLA were not consistent with my
ﬁndings, and that theories of motivation did not pay suﬃcient attention to unequal relations of
power between language learners and target language speakers. Most theories at the time
assumed motivation was a character trait of the individual language learner and that learners
who failed to learn the target language were not suﬃciently committed to the learning process
(see, for example, Schumann 1986). My research found that high levels of motivation did not
necessarily translate into good language learning, and that unequal relations of power between
language learners and target language speakers was a common theme in the data.
The construct of investment, inspired by the work of Bourdieu (1991), signals the socially
and historically constructed relationship of learners to the target language and their often
ambivalent desire to learn and practise it. If learners ‘invest’ in the target language, they do so
with the understanding that they will acquire a wider range of symbolic and material resources,
which will in turn increase the value of their cultural capital. Unlike notions of instrumental
motivation, which often conceive of the language learner as having a unitary, ﬁxed, and ahis-
torical ‘personality’, the construct of investment conceives of the language learner as having a
complex identity, changing across time and space, and reproduced in social interaction. Thus
while motivation can be seen as a primarily psychological construct (Dornyei 2001), invest-
ment must be seen within a sociological framework, and seeks to make a meaningful connec-
tion between a learner’s desire and commitment to learn a language, and their changing
identity.
The construct of investment thus provides for a diﬀerent set of questions associated with a
learner’s commitment to learning the target language. Instead of asking, for example, ‘To what
extent is the learner motivated to learn the target language?’ the researcher asks, ‘What is the
learner’s investment in the target language practices of this classroom or community?’ A lear-
ner may be a highly motivated language learner, but may nevertheless have little investment in
the language practices of a given classroom or community, which may, for example, be racist,
sexist, elitist, or homophobic. Thus despite being highly motivated, a learner could be exclu-
ded from the language practices of a classroom, and in time characterized as a ‘poor’ or
unmotivated language learner.
The construct of investment has sparked considerable interest in the ﬁeld of language edu-
cation and applied linguistics (see, for example, Cummins 2006; Haneda 2005; McKay and
Wong 1996; Pittaway 2004; Potowski 2007; Skilton-Sylvester 2002), including a special issue
on the topic in the Journal of Asian Paciﬁc Communication (Arkoudis and Davison 2008).
Indeed, Cummins (2006), who has drawn on the construct of investment to develop the notion
of ‘identity texts’, has argued that investment has emerged as a ‘signiﬁcant explanatory con-
struct’ (2006: 59) in the second language learning literature. As the following projects illustrate,
the contexts in which the construct is used varies considerably: McKay and Wong (1996) have
drawn on the construct to explain the English language development of four Mandarin-
speaking students in grade 7 and 8 in a California school, noting that the needs, desires, and
negotiations of students are integral to their investment in the target language. Skilton-Sylvester
(2002), drawing on her research with four Cambodian women in adult ESL classes in the
Bonny Norton
322

USA, has argued that traditional views of adult motivation and participation do not ade-
quately address the complex lives of adult learners, and that an understanding of a woman’s
domestic and professional identities is necessary to explain their investment in particular
adult ESL programmes. Haneda (2005) has drawn on the construct of investment to under-
stand the engagement of two university students in an advanced Japanese literacy course,
concluding that their multimembership in diﬀering communities may have shaped the way
they invested in writing in Japanese. And Potowski (2007) uses the construct of investment to
explain students’ use of Spanish in a dual Spanish/English immersion programme in the USA,
noting that even if a language programme is well run, a learner’s investment in the target
language must be consistent with the goals of the programme if language learning is to meet
expectations.
Identity and imagined communities
An extension of debates on identity and investment are the imagined communities (Anderson
1991) that language learners aspire to when they learn a new language. In Norton (2001),
I drew on my research with two adult immigrant language learners to argue that while the
learners were initially actively engaged in classroom practices, the realm of their desired com-
munity extended beyond the four walls of the classroom. This imagined community was not
accessible to their respective teachers, who, unwittingly, alienated the two language learners,
who then withdrew from the language classroom. I have drawn on the work of Lave and
Wenger (1991) and Wenger (1998) to argue that in many second language classrooms, all of
the members of the classroom community, apart from the teacher, are newcomers to the language
practices of that community. The question that arises then is: What community practices do
these learners seek to learn? What, indeed, constitutes ‘the community’ for them?
In many language classrooms, the community may be, to some extent, a reconstruction of
past communities and historically constituted relationships, but also a community of the ima-
gination – a desired community that oﬀers possibilities for an enhanced range of identity
options in the future. Such imagined communities can be highly varied, from the imagined
community of the more public professional to that of the more local homemaker. Learners
have diﬀerent investments in particular members of the target language community, and the
people in whom learners have the greatest investment may be the very people who represent or
provide access to the imagined community of a given learner. Of particular interest to the
language educator is the extent to which such investments are productive for learner engage-
ment in both the classroom and the wider target language community. In essence, an imagined
community assumes an imagined identity, and a learner’s investment in the target language
must be understood within this context.
Such issues have been taken up more extensively in publications such as Pavlenko and
Norton (2007) and in a co-edited special issue of the Journal of Language, Identity, and Edu-
cation on ‘Imagined Communities and Educational Possibilities’ (Kanno and Norton 2003) in
which a number of scholars have explored the imagined communities of learners in diverse
regions of the world – some of whom have subsequently followed up this initial research in
more recent publications. In the Japanese context, for example, Kanno (2008) examines the
relationship between school education and inequality of access to bilingualism in ﬁve diﬀerent
Japanese schools promoting bilingual education. Kanno argues that in the schools she resear-
ched, diﬀerent visions of children’s imagined communities called for diﬀerent forms of bilin-
gual education, exacerbating existing inequities between students with unequal access to
resources.
Identity
323

In Canada, Dagenais and her colleagues (2008) have investigated the linguistic landscape in
the vicinity of two elementary schools in Vancouver and Montreal, illustrating the ways in
which the children imagined the language of their neighbourhoods, and constructed their
identities in relation to them. Dagenais et al. describe the innovative ways in which researchers
and students drew on multimodal resources such as digital photography to document the lin-
guistic landscape of these neighbourhoods, and the way children in both cities were encour-
aged to exchange letters, posters, photographs, and videos. Dagenais et al. argue that
documenting the imagined communities of neighbourhoods, as depicted and understood by
children, can provide much information on the children’s understanding of their community,
an important consideration for language educators.
Identity and resistance
Debates on language, identity, and resistance have also become a compelling and fruitful area
of research in applied linguistics. While larger structural constraints and classroom practices
might position learners in undesirable ways, researchers have found that learners, with human
agency, can resist these positions in innovative and unexpected ways. In exploring what he calls
the subversive identities of language learners, Canagarajah (2004a), for example, addresses the
intriguing question of how language learners can maintain membership of their vernacular
communities and cultures while still learning a second language or dialect. He draws on his
research with two very diﬀerent groups, one in the USA and the other in Sri Lanka, to argue
that language learners are sometimes ambivalent about the learning of a second language or
dialect, and that they may resort to clandestine literacy practices to create ‘pedagogical safe
houses’ in the language classroom. In both contexts, the clandestine literacy activities of the
students are seen to be forms of resistance to unfavourable identities imposed on the learners.
At the same time, however, these safe houses serve as sites of identity construction, allowing
students to negotiate the often contradictory tensions they encounter as members of diverse
communities.
Another example of identity and resistance is found in the work of McKinney and van
Pletzen (2004). Working with relatively privileged students at a historically white and Afrikaans
university in South Africa, McKinney and van Pletzen introduced critical reading into their
ﬁrst year English studies course using two curriculum units on South African literature. In
exploring representations of the apartheid past, McKinney and van Pletzen encountered sig-
niﬁcant resistance from students to the ways in which they felt uncomfortably positioned by
the curriculum materials on oﬀer. McKinney and van Pletzen attempted to create discursive
spaces in which both they and the students could explore the many private and political pro-
cesses through which identities are constructed. In doing so, they re-conceptualized students’
resistance more productively as a meaning-making activity which oﬀers powerful teaching
moments.
The research of Talmy (2008) provides a ﬁnal example of new debates on identity and
resistance. Talmy investigated the multiple ways in which English language learners in a
Hawai’i high school resisted being positioned as ‘ESL students’ in their dedicated ESL classes.
While the school-sanctioned ESL student was expected to bring required materials to class,
read assigned ﬁction, do bookwork, meet assigned dates, follow instructions, and work for the
full class session, resistant ESL students engaged in a wide variety of oppositional activities,
including leaving materials ‘at home’, talking with friends, and playing cards. Talmy found
that ESL teachers needed to change their pedagogical practices in response to the resistance of
their students, necessitating a signiﬁcant shift in teacher identity.
Bonny Norton
324

Future directions
With regard to future directions on identity and applied linguistics, one area that is receiving
increasing attention is that of the language teacher and the language teacher educator (see
Clarke 2008; Hawkins and Norton 2009; Pennycook 2004; Varghese et al. 2005). In a com-
pelling narrative, Pennycook (2004) reﬂects on his experience of observing a teacher in a
TESOL practicum in Sydney, Australia. His experience reminds us that a great deal of lan-
guage teaching does not take place in well-funded institutes of education, but in community
programmes, places of worship, and immigrant centres, where funds are limited and time at a
premium. Of central interest in his narrative is a consideration of the way in which teacher
educators can intervene in the process of practicum observation to bring about educational
and social change. To this end, Pennycook argues that ‘critical moments’ in the practicum can
be used to raise larger questions of power and authority in the wider society, and provide an
opportunity for critical discussion and reﬂection.
A second area that has much potential for future research on applied linguistics and
identity concerns growing interest in globalization and language learning (see, for example,
Block and Cameron 2002; Blommaert 2008; Garciá et al. 2006; Lin and Martin 2005; Morgan
and Ramanathan 2005; Pennycook 2007; Prinsloo and Baynham 2008; Rassool 2007). Morgan
and Ramanathan (2005) argue persuasively that the ﬁeld of language education needs to con-
sider ways in which English language teaching can be decolonized, proposing that there is a
need to decenter the authority that Western interests have in the language teaching industry. In
particular, applied linguists need to ﬁnd ways to restore agency to professionals in periphery
communities (Kumaravadivelu 2003) and to give due recognition to local vernacular modes of
learning and teaching (Canagarajah 2004b; Tembe and Norton 2008). In this regard, special
issues of a number of journals are signiﬁcant, including: the TESOL Quarterly on ‘Language in
Development’ (Markee 2002) and ‘Language Policies and TESOL’ (Ramanathan and Morgan
2007); and two recent issues of the AILA Review of the International Association of Applied
Linguistics on ‘Africa and Applied Linguistics’ (Makoni and Meinhof 2003) and ‘World
Applied Linguistics’ (Gass and Makoni 2004).
The inﬂuence of new technology
Much emerging research on identity addresses the impact of literacy practices on relationships
beyond the classroom, much of which is mediated through technology (Andema 2009;
Kramsch and Thorne 2002; Lam 2000; Snyder and Prinsloo 2007; Warschauer 2003; Warriner
2007; White 2007). Lam (2000) for example, who studied the Internet correspondence of a
Chinese immigrant teenager in the USA who entered into transnational communication with a
group of peers, demonstrates how this experience in what she calls ‘textual identity’ related to
the student’s developing identity in the use of English. In another context, White (2007) has
investigated innovation in distance language teaching in the Australian context, arguing that
attention to issues of identity can enhance our understanding of educational innovation. The
research of Kramsch and Thorne (2002) indicates, however, that not all transnational Internet
communication leads to positive identity outcomes. In their study of the synchronous and
asynchronous communication between American learners of French in the USA and French
learners of English in France, they found that students had little understanding of the larger cultural
framework within which each party was operating, leading to problematic digital exchanges.
Signiﬁcantly, as scholars such as Andema (2009), Snyder and Prinsloo (2007) and Warschauer
(2003) note, much of the digital research in applied linguistics has focused on research in
Identity
325

wealthier regions of the world, and there is a great need for research in poorly resourced
communities to impact global debates on digital literacy. With reference to the Ugandan context,
for example, Mutonyi and Norton (2007) note that as digital technology becomes a globali-
zation tool, Ugandan curriculum developers need to interrogate the ways in which local digital
practices may diverge from global expectations. To address this concern, Prinsloo (2005) notes
that digital innovations need to be studied as ‘placed resources’, suggesting that any given
technology, when transplanted, takes on new meanings. The extent to which the resource
oﬀers opportunities for users, and the ways in which it is used, has important implications for
shifts in the identities of both students and teachers.
Summary
This chapter traced the genesis of research on identity and language education from the 1970s
to the present day, focusing on some of the major theoretical inﬂuences on identity research.
A central argument made is that changes in identity research index a shift from a pre-
dominantly psycholinguistic to sociolinguistic model of SLA. The main issues identiﬁed
included the ways in which language is theorized; what identity categories are considered
particularly salient in language learning; and the impact of identity research on classroom
practice. New debates address the relationship between identity, investment, and imagined
communities, with increasing interest in identity and resistance. Research on identity suggests
that the extent to which a learner speaks or is silent, and writes, reads, or resists has much
to do with the extent to which the learner is valued in any given institution or community.
In this regard, social processes marked by inequities of gender, race, class, ethnicity, and
sexual orientation may serve to position learners in ways that silence and exclude. At the same
time, however, learners may resist marginalization through both covert and overt acts of
resistance. Of central interest to researchers of identity is that the very articulation of power,
identity, and resistance is expressed in and through language. Language is thus more than a
system of signs; it is social practice in which experiences are organized and identities nego-
tiated. Exciting areas of future research include the changing identities of language teachers,
and the impact of globalization and technological change on identities of language learners
and teachers.
Related topics
culture; ethnicity; gender; language learning and language education; migration; SLA
Further reading
Block, D. (2007) Second Language Identities, London and New York: Continuum. (In this mono-
graph, David Block insightfully traces research interest in second language identities from the
1960s to the present. He draws on a wide range of social theory, and brings a fresh analysis to
seminal studies of adult migrants, foreign language learners, and study-abroad students.)
Norton, B. (2000) Identity and Language Learning: Gender, Ethnicity, and Educational Change,
Harlow: Pearson Longman. (Drawing on a longitudinal study of immigrant women in Canada,
Bonny Norton draws on post-structuralist theory to argue for a conception of learner identity as
multiple, a site of struggle, and subject to change. She also develops the construct of ‘investment’
to better understand the relationship of language learners to the target language.)
Norton, B. and Toohey, K. (eds) (2004) Critical Pedagogies and Language Learning, Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press. (Identity is a central theme in this collection of articles by leading
researchers in language education. Diverse authors address a wide range of contemporary topics
Bonny Norton
326

on language learning and teaching, including critical multiculturalism, gender, multimodal peda-
gogies, popular culture, and action research.)
Pavlenko, A. and Blackledge, A. (eds) (2003) Negotiation of Identities in Multilingual Contexts,
Clevedon: Multilingual Matters. (The authors in this collection provide insight into the ways in
which identities are negotiated in diverse multilingual settings. They analyse the discourses of
education, autobiography, politics, and youth culture, demonstrating the ways in which languages
may be sites of resistance, empowerment, or discrimination.)
Toohey, K. (2000) Learning English at School: Identity, Social Relations and Classroom Practice,
Clevedon: Multilingual Matters. (Drawing on a longitudinal ethnography of young English language
learners, Kelleen Toohey investigates the ways in which classroom practices are implicated in the
range of identity options available to language learners. She draws on sociocultural and post-
structural theory to better understand the classroom community as a site of identity negotiation.)
References
Andema, S. (2009) ‘Digital Literacy and Teacher Education in East Africa: The Case of Bondo
Primary Teachers’ College, Uganda’, unpublished M.A. thesis, University of British Columbia,
Canada.
Anderson, B. (1991) Imagined Communities: Reﬂections on the Origin and Spread of Nationalism,
revised edn, New York: Verso.
Atkinson, D. (1999) ‘TESOL and culture’, TESOL Quarterly 33(4): 625–54.
Arkoudis, S. and Davison, C. (eds) (2008) ‘Chinese students: perspectives on their social, cognitive,
and linguistic investment in English medium interaction’, Journal of Asian Paciﬁc Communication
18(1), special issue.
Bakhtin, M. M. (1981) The Dialogic Imagination: Four Essays by M. M. Bakhtin, M. Holquist
(ed.), C. Emerson and M. Holquist (trans.), Austin: University of Texas Press.
Block, D. (2003) The Social Turn in Second Language Acquisition, Edinburgh: Edinburgh
University Press.
——(2007) Second Language Identities, London: Continuum.
Block, D. and Cameron, D. (eds) (2002) Globalization and Language Teaching, New York:
Routledge.
Blommaert, J. (2008) Grassroots Literacy: Writing, Identity, and Voice in Central Africa, London
and New York: Routledge.
Bourdieu, P. ([1982] 1991) Language and Symbolic Power, in J. B. Thompson, (ed.), G. Raymond
and M. Adamson (trans.), Cambridge: Polity Press.
Cameron, D. (2006) On Language and Sexual Politics, New York and London: Routledge.
Canagarajah, A. S. (2004a) ‘Subversive identities, pedagogical safe houses, and critical learning’,
in B. Norton and K. Toohey (eds) Critical Pedagogies and Language Learning, New York:
Cambridge University Press.
Canagarajah, A. S. (ed.) (2004b) Reclaiming the Local in Language Policy and Practice, Mahwah,
NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Clarke, M. (2008) Language Teacher Identities: Co-constructing Discourse and Community, Clevedon:
Multilingual Matters.
Clemente, A. and Higgins, M. (2008) Performing English with a Postcolonial Accent: Ethnographic
Narratives from Mexico, London: Tufnell Publishing.
Cummins, J. (2006) ‘Identity texts: the imaginative construction of self through multiliteracies
pedagogy’, in O. García, T. Skutnabb-Kangas and M. E. Torres-Guzmán (eds) Imagining Multilingual
Schools: Language in Education and Glocalization, Clevedon: Multilingual Matters.
Dagenais, D., Moore, D., Lamarre, S., Sabatier, C. and Armand, F. (2008) ‘Linguistic landscape
and language awareness’, in E. Shohamy and D. Gorter (eds) Linguistic Landscape: Expanding
the Scenery, London: Routledge.
Davis, K. and Skilton-Sylvester, E. (eds) (2004) ‘Gender in TESOL’, TESOL Quarterly 38(3), special
issue.
Day, E. M. (2002) Identity and the Young English Language Learner, Clevedon: Multilingual Matters.
Dornyei, Z. (2001) Motivational Strategies in the Language Classroom, Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Identity
327

Duﬀ, P. and Uchida, Y. (1997) ‘The negotiation of teachers’ sociocultural identities and practices in
postsecondary EFL classrooms’, TESOL Quarterly 31: 451–86.
Foucault, M. (1980) Power/Knowledge: Selected Interviews and Other Writings, 1972–1977, in
C. Gordon (ed.), New York: Pantheon Books.
Garciá, O., Skutnabb-Kangas, T. and Torres-Guzmán, M. E. (eds) (2006) Imagining Multilingual
Schools: Languages in Education and Glocalization, Clevedon: Multilingual Matters.
Gass, S. M. and Makoni, S. (eds) (2004) ‘World applied linguistics: a celebration of AILA at 40’,
AILA Review 17, special issue.
Gumperz, J. J. (ed.) (1982) Language and Social Identity, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Hall, S. (1997) Representation: Cultural Representations and Signifying Practices, London: Sage.
Haneda, M. (2005) ‘Investing in foreign-language writing: a study of two multicultural learners’,
Journal of Language, Identity, and Education 4(4): 269–90.
Hawkins, M. and Norton, B. (2009) ‘Critical language teacher education’, in A. Burns
and J. Richards (eds) Cambridge Guide to Second Language Teacher Education, Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Heller, M. (2007) Linguistic Minorities and Modernity: A Sociolinguistic Ethnography, 2nd edn,
London: Continuum.
Ibrahim, A. E. K. M. (1999) ‘Becoming black: rap and hip-hop, race, gender, identity, and the
politics of ESL learning’, TESOL Quarterly 33(3): 349–69.
Janks, H. (2010) Literacy and Power, New York and London: Routledge.
Kanno, Y. (2008) Language and Education in Japan: Unequal Access to Bilingualism, Basingstoke:
Palgrave Macmillan.
Kanno, Y. and Norton, B. (eds) (2003) ‘Imagined communities and educational possibilities’, Journal
of Language, Identity, and Education 2(4), special issue.
Kendrick, M., Jones, S., Mutonyi, H. and Norton, B. (2006) ‘Multimodality and English education
in Ugandan schools’, English Studies in Africa 49(1): 95–114.
King, B. (2008) ‘“Being gay guy, that is the advantage”: queer Korean language learning and
identity construction’, Journal of Language, Identity, and Education 7(3–4): 230–52.
Kramsch, C. (2010) The Multilingual Subject, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Kramsch, C. and Thorne, S. (2002) ‘Foreign language learning as global communicative prac-
tice’, in D. Block and D. Cameron (eds) Globalization and Language Teaching, London:
Routledge.
Kubota, R. (2004) ‘Critical multiculturalism and second language education’, in B. Norton and
K. Toohey (eds) Critical Pedagogies and Language Learning, New York: Cambridge University
Press.
Kubota, R. and Lin, A. (2006) ‘Race and TESOL: introduction to concepts and theories’, TESOL
Quarterly 40(3), special issue.
Kumaravadivelu, B. (2003) Beyond Methods: Macrostrategies for Language Learning, New Haven,
CT: Yale University Press.
Lam, W. S. E. (2000) ‘L2 literacy and the design of the self: a case study of a teenager writing on the
Internet’, TESOL Quarterly 34(3): 457–82.
Lave, J. and Wenger, E. (1991) Situated Learning: Legitimate Peripheral Participation, Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Lee, E. (2008) ‘The “other(ing)” costs of ESL: a Canadian case study’, Journal of Asian Paciﬁc
Communication 18(1): 91–108.
Lin, A. and Martin, P. (2005) Decolonisation, Globalisation: Language-in-education Policy and
Practice, Clevedon: Multilingual Matters.
Luke, A. (2004) ‘Two takes on the critical’, in B. Norton and K. Toohey (eds) Critical Pedagogies
and Language Learning, New York: Cambridge University Press.
Makoni, S. and Meinhof, U. (eds) (2003) ‘Africa and applied linguistics’, AILA Review 16, special issue.
Markee, N. (2002) ‘Language in development’, TESOL Quarterly 36(3), special issue.
Martin-Jones, M. and Heller, M. (1996) ‘Introduction to the special issue on education in multi-
lingual settings: discourse, identities, and power’, Linguistics and Education 8: 3–16.
May, S. (2008) Language and Minority Rights, London and New York: Routledge.
McKay, S. and Wong, S. C. (1996) ‘Multiple discourses, multiple identities: investment and agency
in second language learning among Chinese adolescent immigrant students’, Harvard Educational
Review 66(3): 577–608.
Bonny Norton
328

McKinney, C. and van Pletzen, E. (2004) ‘“ … This apartheid story … we’ve ﬁnished with it”:
student responses to the apartheid past in a South African English studies course’, Teaching in
Higher Education 9(2): 159–70.
Menard-Warwick, J. (2006) ‘Both a ﬁction and an existential fact: theorizing identity in second
language acquisition and literacy studies’, Linguistics and Education 16: 253–74.
Miller, J. (2003) Audible Diﬀerence: ESL and Social Identity in Schools, Clevedon: Multilingual Matters.
Moﬀatt, L. and Norton, B. (2008) ‘Reading gender relations and sexuality: preteens speak out’,
Canadian Journal of Education 31(1): 102–23.
Morgan, B. (2007) ‘Poststructuralism and applied linguistics: complementary approaches to identity
and culture in ELT’, in J. Cummins and C. Davison (eds) International Handbook of English
Language Teaching, New York: Springer.
Morgan, B. and Ramanathan, V. (2005) ‘Critical literacies and language education: global and local
perspectives’, Annual Review of Applied Linguistics 25: 151–69.
Mutonyi, H. and Norton, B. (2007) ‘ICT on the margins: lessons for Ugandan education. Digital
literacy in global contexts’, Language and Education 21(3): 264–70, special issue.
Nelson, C. (2009) Sexual Identities in English Language Education: Classroom Conversations, New
York: Routledge.
Norton, B. (ed.) (1997) ‘Language and identity’, TESOL Quarterly 31(3), special issue.
Norton, B. (2000) Identity and Language Learning: Gender, Ethnicity and Educational Change,
Harlow: Pearson Education.
——(2001) ‘Non-participation, imagined communities, and the language classroom’, in M. Breen
(ed.) Learner Contributions to Language Learning: New Directions in Research, London: Pearson
Education.
Norton, B. and Pavlenko, A. (eds) (2004) Gender and English Language Learners, Alexandria, VA:
Teachers of English to Speakers of Other Languages.
Norton, B. and Toohey, K. (2001) ‘Changing perspectives on good language learners’, TESOL
Quarterly 35(2): 307–22.
Norton, B. and Toohey, K. (eds) (2004) Critical Pedagogies and Language Learning, New York:
Cambridge University Press.
Norton Peirce, B. (1995) ‘Social identity, investment, and language learning’, TESOL Quarterly 29
(1): 9–31.
Pavlenko, A. (2004) ‘Gender and sexuality in foreign and second language education: critical and
feminist approaches’, in B. Norton and K. Toohey (eds) Critical Pedagogies and Language
Learning, New York: Cambridge University Press.
Pavlenko, A. and Norton, B. (2007) ‘Imagined communities, identity, and English language teach-
ing’, in J. Cummins and C. Davison (eds) International Handbook of English Language Teaching,
New York: Springer.
Pennycook, A. (2004) ‘Critical moments in a TESOL praxicum’, in B. Norton and K. Toohey (eds)
Critical Pedagogies and Language Learning, New York: Cambridge University Press, pp. 327–45.
——(2007) Global Englishes and Transcultural Flows, London and New York: Routledge.
Pittaway, D. (2004) ‘Investment and second language acquisition’, Critical Inquiry in Language
Studies 4(1): 203–18.
Potowski, K. (2007) Language and Identity in a Dual Immersion School, Clevedon: Multilingual Matters.
Prinsloo, M. (2005) ‘The new literacies as placed resources’, Perspectives in Education 23(4): 87–98.
Prinsloo, M. and Baynham, M. (eds) (2008) Literacies, Global and Local, Philadelphia, PA: John
Benjamins.
Ramanathan, V. (2005) The English-vernacular Divide: Postcolonial Language Politics and Practice,
Clevedon: Multilingual Matters.
Ramanathan, V. and Morgan, B. (eds) (2007) ‘Language policies and TESOL’, TESOL Quarterly
41(3), special issue.
Rampton, B. (2006) Language in Late Modernity: Interaction in an Urban School, Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Rassool, N. (2007) Global Issues in Language, Education, and Development: Perspectives from
Postcolonial Countries, Clevedon: Multilingual Matters.
Ricento, T. (2005) ‘Considerations of identity in L2 learning’, in E. Hinkel (ed.) Handbook of
Research on Second Language Teaching And Learning, Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum
Associates.
Identity
329

Sarangi, S. and Baynham, M. (eds) (1996) ‘Discursive construction of educational identities’, Lan-
guage and Education 10(2 and 3) (special issue).
de Saussure, F. (1966) Course in General Linguistics, New York: McGraw-Hill.
Schumann, J. (1986) ‘Research on the acculturation model for second language acquisition’, Journal
of Multilingual and Multicultural Development 7(5): 379–92.
Skilton-Sylvester, E. (2002) ‘Should I stay or should I go? Investigating Cambodian women’s parti-
cipation and investment in adult ESL programs’, Adult Education Quarterly 53(1): 9–26.
Snyder, I. and Prinsloo, M. (eds) (2007) ‘The digital literacy practices of young people in marginal
contexts’, Language and Education: An International Journal 21(3), special issue.
Stein, P. (2008) Multimodal Pedagogies in Diverse Classrooms: Representation, Rights and Resources,
London and New York: Routledge.
Sunderland, J. (2004) Gendered Discourses, Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan.
Talmy, S. (2008) ‘The cultural productions of the ESL student at Tradewinds High: contingency,
multidirectionality, and identity in L2 socialization’, Applied Linguistics 29(4): 619–44.
Tembe, J. and Norton, B. (2008) ‘Promoting local languages in Ugandan primary schools: the
community as stakeholder’, Canadian Modern Language Review 65(1): 33–60.
Toohey, K. (2000) Learning English at School: Identity, Social Relations and Classroom Practice,
Clevedon: Multilingual Matters.
Valdes, J. M. (1986) Culture Bound: Bridging the Cultural Gap in Language Teaching, Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Varghese, M., Morgan, B., Johnston, B. and Johnson, K. (2005) ‘Theorizing language teacher
identity: three perspectives and beyond’, Journal of Language, Identity, and Education 4: 21–44.
Wallace, C. (2003) Critical Reading in Language Education, Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan.
Warriner, D. S. (ed.) (2007) ‘Transnational literacies: immigration, language learning, and identity’,
Linguistics and Education 18(3–4): 201–14.
Warschauer, M. (2003) Technology and Social Inclusion: Rethinking the Digital Divide, Boston:
MIT Press.
Weedon, C. (1997) Feminist Practice and Poststructuralist Theory, 2nd edn, Oxford: Blackwell.
Wenger, E. (1998) Communities of Practice: Learning, Meaning, and Identity, New York:
Cambridge University Press.
White, C. (2007) ‘Innovation and identity in distance language learning and teaching’, Innovation in
Language Learning and Teaching 1(1): 97–110.
Zuengler, J. and Miller, E. (2006) ‘Cognitive and sociocultural perspectives: two parallel SLA
worlds?’, TESOL Quarterly 40(1): 35–58.
Bonny Norton
330

23
Gender
Judith Baxter
Introduction
As men
Do walk a mile, women should talk an hour
After supper. ‘Tis their exercise.
(Beaumont and Fletcher, Philaster, 1609)
Silence, the ﬁnal frontier – where no woman has gone before.
(British newspaper headline 2009)
Folk-linguistic evidence has long portrayed the language of women and men to be diﬀerent,
and, as we can see above, this belief lives on in media texts today. Much of this evidence – in
the form of proverbs, sayings, literature, diaries, essays, newspaper headlines, advertising captions
and so on – takes a prescriptive perspective (how women’s language ought to be) rather than a
descriptive view – how it actually is, thus revealing deeply rooted ideological assumptions
about gender.
Language and Gender (also known as ‘Gender and Language’ or ‘Feminist Linguistics’) is
a relatively new ﬁeld within sociolinguistics, usually said to be marked by the publication of
Lakoﬀ’s Language and Woman’s Place in 1975. The ﬁeld has since aroused huge interest
among applied linguists both on ethnographic and ideological grounds. Ethnographically, lin-
guists were keen to gather authentic data to explore and explain folk-linguistic beliefs that
males and females speak and act diﬀerently (e.g. Fishman 1978; Spender 1980). Ideologically,
language and gender scholars aimed to show that language – both in use and as a form of
representation – was a primary means of constructing gender diﬀerences, and at times hier-
archies and inequalities between men and women. Consequently, two aspects emerged in lan-
guage and gender research; ﬁrst, how women and men talked (and by extension, wrote), and
second, how women/men/boys and girls were represented in language – as a code, as discourse,
and in actual texts. Today, ethnographic and ideological quests appear more integrated in a
concern to explore how people’s identities are constructed in gendered ways within localised
‘communities of practice’ (Wenger 2000; also see Norton, this volume), but also in relation to
331

larger gendered discourses (Sunderland 2004). While the feminist agenda has been modiﬁed
since the 1970s in light of developments in women’s status, there is nonetheless a consensus
that gender continues to be highly relevant to the way people interact through language, and
in the way they are positioned and represented by gendered ‘discourses’ or ‘ways of seeing the
world’ (2004: 6).
Within its short history, language and gender scholars have repeatedly contested the terms
‘gender’ and ‘sex’, which are not regarded as interchangeable. ‘Gender’ has now stabilised as
a term to distinguish people in terms of their socio-cultural behaviour, and to signify
masculine and feminine behaviours as scales or continua rather than as a dichotomy
(Holmes 2001). While I use the term ‘sex’ in this chapter to refer to categories distinguished
by biological characteristics (i.e. ‘male’ and ‘female’), it should be noted that a number
of scholars have contested these categories as ‘hetero-normative’, and have suggested that
‘sex’ should also be reconceptualised as a socio-cultural construct (e.g. Butler 1990; Bergvall
et al. 1996).
History of the area
In this chapter I will focus on the two strands of research that have, in my view, contributed
most to the development of the ﬁeld in recent decades: variationist, and more particularly,
‘interactional’ research. The latter is characterised by a range of theoretical perspectives: deﬁ-
ciency, dominance, cultural diﬀerence and social constructionism. I shall consider the social
constructionist perspective in the next section, as it is arguably ‘where we are’, and it encompasses
a number of current issues and debates.
Variationist studies
Most language and gender research on use assumes a ‘sex-preferential’ perspective – a male/
female preference for using diﬀerent forms of the same language. Classic variationist studies
looked for evidence of sex-preferential speech in large-scale English-speaking populations such
as New York, Detroit, Norwich, the Wirral, Belfast and Sydney. Traditional variationist stu-
dies conceptualise ‘sex’ as a ﬁxed and universal variable determining people’s use of language
alongside other equally key categories such as class, age and ethnicity. Landmark studies in
this ﬁeld (e.g. Labov 1966; Trudgill 1974) found that men and women did use diﬀerent forms,
particularly phonologically, and drew the conclusion that within every social class, women
use more standard forms than men. So, for example, Trudgill (1974) found that many more
women than men in Norwich used the standard (iη) rather than the vernacular (in) form at the
end of words like speaking and writing. Indeed, he proposed that women prefer standard forms
because they are more status-conscious, while men prefer the vernacular because it has con-
notations of masculine solidarity such as ‘toughness’. However, Milroy (1980) found in her
Belfast study that the concept of social networks inﬂuenced people’s speech in that context
more than sex/gender, and indeed that the diﬀerences between women were often more
signiﬁcant than their similarities.
Later variationist research thus moved to situate gender within speciﬁc local contexts such
as Gal’s (1979) study of gender and bilingualism in the Hungarian town of Oberwart, and
Eckert’s (1989) study of adolescents in the ‘community of practice’ of a Detroit high school.
Variationist research on gender today can be more aptly described as ‘sociolinguistic’. It has
tended to move away from large-scale, quantitative, correlational methods towards more local,
contextualised and ethnographic approaches that explore gender as intersecting with other
Judith Baxter
332

social identities such as class and sexuality within particular communities of practice (see
Eckert 2008 on ‘third wave variationist theory’).
Interactional studies
The ﬁeld of language and gender is most strongly associated today with a range of ‘interac-
tional’ studies, which focus on the distinctively gendered ways in which people interact in var-
ious social and professional contexts. Three early but still highly inﬂuential theories (deﬁcit,
dominance, diﬀerence) all emphasised the notion of a gender dichotomy. These theories tended
to compare men and women as members of two distinctive and polarised social groups, sup-
porting the popular stereotype that ‘men are from Mars and women are from Venus’ (Gray
1992; for a critique see Cameron 2007), as we shall now consider.
Deﬁcit theory
Lakoﬀ’s (1975) ‘deﬁcit’ theory posited that from an early age, girls are taught how to use a
separate ‘woman’s language’: they are socialised to use language in a ‘ladylike’ way. She sug-
gested that women’s subordinate status in American society in the 1970s was reﬂected and
constructed through a basically deﬁcient version of men’s language. This language was more
tentative, hesitant, indirect, and therefore a more powerless version of men’s, trapping them in
a perpetual double-bind:
a girl is damned if she does and damned if she doesn’t. If she refuses to talk like a lady,
she is ridiculed and subjected to criticism as unfeminine. If she does learn [lady-like lan-
guage], she is ridiculed as unable to think clearly, unable to take part in a serious discus-
sion: in some sense as less than fully human. These two choices which a woman has – to
be less than a woman, or less than a person – are highly painful.
(Lakoﬀ1975: 5)
Lakoﬀargued that this lady-like language was mainly manifested by a range of modiﬁers
(such as hedges and tag questions) that in her opinion diluted the message and signiﬁed an
unconﬁdent and powerless speaker. Her views were later criticised for a variety of reasons, not
least her use of largely ‘introspective’, anecdotal evidence, and her failure to appreciate the
multi-functionality of all language forms. Clearly, being a pioneer carries a penalty!
Dominance theory
Lakoﬀ’s (1975) thesis that women constructed their own subordination through their language
use was a forerunner of ‘dominance’ theory. This had two distinct, parallel branches: language
as social interaction, which considered how gender inequalities were constructed through rou-
tine interactions between men and women, and language as a system focusing on ‘sexism’
within the language.
In terms of language as social interaction, dominance theorists viewed ordinary conversation
as highly instrumental in constructing unequal gender relations. In order to reveal the word-by-
word reproduction of patriarchy, early feminist linguists conducted numerous small-scale,
interactional studies of largely informal conversations which examined the nature and frequency
of talk, silences, questions, interruptions and ‘back-channelling’ (e.g. the woman’s use of
responses while the man is talking). For example, a famous study by Fishman (1978) showed
Gender
333

that men do most of the talking, while women provide the ‘interactional shitwork’ of being
supportive and encouraging listeners. Complementing this, DeFrancisco (1991) showed that
men often respond to the conversation of their female partners with silence rather than with
encouraging responses, with the eﬀect that women often ‘dried up’ or stopped talking. Such
research showed that women were not the talkative sex as stereotyped in folk-linguistics: in
fact, men talked far more.
In terms of language as a system, Spender (1980) argued that language has evolved over the
centuries to serve male needs, to represent male interests, and to express male experiences: in
short, it is ‘man-made’. Spender was concerned with the way that grammars and dictionaries
prescribed the use of masculine terms such as he, man and mankind as false generics to denote
males and females, thus reinforcing an andro-centric (male-centred) view of the world. She
noted three further ways in which the language sustains this andro-centric perspective:

linguistic marking of terms to denote women (e.g. manageress, stewardess),

semantic derogation (the way terms for women like mistress have become ‘derogated’ or
debased over time; also see Schulz 1990),

lexical gaps (the lack of a woman-centred lexis to describe certain female experiences in
positive ways, such as childlessness or remaining a single woman).
The quest for a more inclusive, ‘anti-sexist’ language is now ﬁrmly established within the
institutional practices of schools, universities, publishing, the media, business, government and
the public services, at least in the Western world. What is interesting is the extent to which this
perceived feminist ‘political correctness’ continues to be ridiculed in the media, for example by
the UK satirical magazine, Private Eye. Indeed, even feminist linguists have proposed that this
institutionalised mission to change language should be treated with a degree of irony and
playfulness (Mills 2003).
However, the problem with dominance research was that it appeared to adopt the very
andro-centric perspective that it was criticising (Coates 2004). For example, by proposing that
a male speech style (assertive, direct, competitive, goal-orientated) was more socially ‘powerful’
than a female speech style (supportive, conciliatory, co-operative, process-orientated), dom-
inance theorists were in danger of endorsing the dominant cultural view of female linguistic
inferiority, and of recommending an ‘assertiveness training’ strategy that women should learn
to speak and sound more like men (Cameron 1995a).
Cultural difference theory
Early work on women’s language had labelled it ‘tentative’ or ‘powerless’. More recently
and in reaction to this, there has been a move to value women’s talk more positively, using
terms such as ‘co-operative’.
(Coates 1988: 95)
Coates considered that while dominance theory helped to reveal the apparent tendencies of
males and females for diﬀerent linguistic styles of interaction, it took an unfairly negative view
of women’s talk. Applying the theories of Gumperz (1982) to gender, Maltz and Borker (1982)
argued that women and men constitute diﬀerent ‘sub-cultures’ learnt through friendly inter-
actions as children in single-sex peer groups. So boys learn how to compete with others
for access to ‘the ﬂoor’, to use referential, goal-orientated language, and to say things for
impact and eﬀect. Girls alternatively learn how to build relationships of equality and trust, to
Judith Baxter
334

co-operate with others to get things done, and to express feelings and emotions (Maltz and
Borker 1982: 207). These contrasting conversational goals corresponded to diﬀerently gen-
dered speech ‘styles’, whereby ‘women speak and hear a language of connection and intimacy,
while men speak and hear a language of status and independence’ (Tannen 1990: 42). So in
Tannen’s (ibid.) terms, women learn to use ‘rapport talk’ while men learn to use ‘report talk’.
Given these separate conversational goals, Coates (1988) argued that women’s talk should
be ‘re-valued’ in much more positive ways by feminist linguists as diﬀerent but equal, as
complementary to men’s, not deﬁcient. While Coates’ work oﬀered a vital antidote to the
negativity of the deﬁciency and dominance approaches, she has since been criticised on two
grounds: for her failure to recognise the power dimension which produces negative cultural
evaluations of female language, and for the ways in which diﬀerence theory ‘essentialises’ male
and female language as ﬁxed and monolithic characteristics of a universal condition and
incapable of change (Cameron 1995b).
Main current issues
Since the 1990s, language and gender research has ﬁrmly distanced itself from gender diﬀerence
theories, and is, according to Holmes (2007) ‘engulfed in a wave of social constructionism’
emphasising the diversity of gender rather than diﬀerence. This ‘post-modern turn’ can partly
be explained by the impact of feminism in the West, which has produced profound improve-
ments in the cultural status of women. But Cameron (2005: 483) cautions that ‘diﬀerence’ and
social constructionist approaches are ‘better seen as representing tendencies in feminist thought
which have historically overlapped and co-existed’ rather than as a chronological progression.
While social constructionism now seems established as the dominant approach, it has not been
uniformly perceived as ‘a good thing’ for feminist linguistics, as we shall now consider.
Social constructionism and the ‘post-modern turn’
Women and men are diﬀerent because language positions us diﬀerently. In this view,
subjectivity – our sense of selves – is something constructed, not pre-given and our gender
identities are not ﬁxed. We take up positions in our enactment of discourse practices so
our identities are constructed moment by moment.
(Talbot 1998: 144)
Social constructionist theory (e.g. Bergvall et al. 1996; Butler 1990; Crawford 1995; also see
Norton, this volume) suggests that males and females are not born, or even simply socialised
into a pre-ﬁxed gender identity, but they become gendered through their interactions. Accord-
ing to this view, individuals don’t have gender, they do gender through repeated behavioural
and linguistic interactions. This post-modern perspective argues that males and females do not
have an individual essence, character or ‘core’ (Crawford 1995); there are no intrinsic male or
female characteristics, only ones that are brought into being through repeated bodily or lin-
guistic actions. Any apparent characteristics are the eﬀects we produce by way of particular
things we do. Thus, according to Butler (1990), people’s identities are performative. We learn
to ‘perform’ many aspects of our identity, such as being feminine or masculine, through:
the repeated stylisation of the body, a set of repeated acts within a rigid regulatory frame
which congeal over time to produce the appearance of a substance, of a ‘natural kind of being’.
(Butler 1990: 33)
Gender
335

In this way, gender has constantly to be reaﬃrmed and publicly displayed by repeatedly per-
forming particular acts in accordance with the cultural norms or, in post-structuralist terms,
dominant discourses, of an institution or social group. Butler (1990) adds that routine con-
versations are conducted by people ‘who are striving to constitute themselves as “proper” men
and women’. Language is therefore not just a medium to convey social life and interactions,
but an essential, constitutive factor. So particular uses of language become culturally associated
with masculinity and femininity; they become symbolically gendered or ‘index’ a gendered
identity (Ochs 1992), rather than being the property or attributes of males and females.
According to the social constructionist perspective, gender can therefore be seen as rela-
tional, a process, something that is done, and an important resource for constructing gender
roles and identities. If gender (and indeed sex) are cultural constructs only, they can be chal-
lenged and resisted. Gender has the potential to be reconceptualised in terms of multiple roles
and positions for men and women. There is a range of ways in which people can speak and act,
some of which may be stereotypically coded ‘masculine’ and others ‘feminine’, but they are
potentially available to all. In challenging the monolithic character of beliefs grounded in
naive assumptions around the ‘essential truth’ of gender diﬀerence, social constructionism has
also contested the category of ‘woman’. This category is viewed as highly unstable, in the sense
that it is diﬃcult to generalise about what being a woman is. Just as there are many incon-
sistencies and contradictions within any individual woman, there are always diﬀerences
between women, often governed by their age, class, ethnicity, family background, education,
and so on (Norton and Pavlenko 2004). Overall, the social constructionist approach suggests
that gendered roles and identities are not open to generalisation or easy categorisation. They
are not ﬁxed and static but shifting, fragmentary, multiple, frequently contradictory and constantly
in the process of being negotiated and reconstituted through linguistic interactions.
Gender and sexuality
One issue arising from social constructionist thinking is the mutually constitutive relationship
of gender and sexual identities. Like gender, sexuality is perceived as ﬂuid, multi-faceted and a
form of desire/identity that is constructed and performed through speech and behaviour, and
not simply determined by the sex of people’s bodies at birth or by early socialisation. Indeed,
whether it is even possible to separate the construct of gender from sexuality has itself become
a matter of debate (e.g. Cameron and Kulick 2003). The focus of much recent ‘gender and
sexuality’ research has been upon ‘hetero-normativity’, the system that naturalises and rewards
a particular kind of heterosexuality – complementary, monogamous and reproductive male/
female partnerships – as the basis for a stable society. One line of research has examined how
the hetero-normative principle is achieved through the linguistic performance of heterosexual
identities. In a now classic study, Hall (1995) explored the verbal techniques used by telephone
sex workers (both male and female) in California to create a range of fantasy women of
varying ethnicities and personalities for the beneﬁt of their male, heterosexual clients. In a
second example, Kiesling (2003) looked at the ways in which a group of US college fraternity
brothers ‘played the straight man’ in order to diﬀerentiate themselves from men they perceived
as ‘gay’ and thus to further approved, platonic relationships with other men. Such studies
support the social constructionist contention that gender and sexual identities can be convin-
cingly enacted by a person of any sex, simply by adhering to stereotypical assumptions about
male and female language and behaviour.
Another line of research into gender and sexuality has investigated the linguistic perfor-
mances of people who identify with sexual minorities. These include not only the familiar
Judith Baxter
336

modern Western categories of ‘gay men’ and ‘lesbians’, but also transgendered and transsexual
people who move from one category to another during the course of their lives. These may be
people who alternate between diﬀerently gendered personae, people who refuse to be deﬁned
as either men or women but claim to be something ‘intermediate or indeterminate’ (Cameron
2005: 490). A social constructionist perspective allows theorists to contest the culturally
dominant association of (for example) same-sex preference with gender deviance because it
transgresses the traditional gender dichotomy, and to reframe this as an investigation of
alternative, hybrid, and exploratory identities and practices. For example, Borba and Ostermann
(2007) studied the way southern Brazilian ‘travestis’ (biological males who wish to look, dress
and speak like women), manipulate the Portuguese grammatical gender system in order to
sound at times like men and at other times like women. But if once stable constructs of gender
and sexuality can be contested in these various ways, what does this mean about their salience
as a ﬁeld?
The salience of gender
If we truly believed a radical version of the anti-essentialism that has recently become an
axiom of the ﬁeld, then we would put away our pens, our tape recorders and our notebooks,
and the ﬁeld of language and gender would disappear.
(Holmes and Meyerhoﬀ2003: 10)
Is the logical conclusion of a social constructionist perspective really the demise of language
and gender? In many ways, feminist linguists have successfully accomplished their mission of
raising public awareness about gendered language, while simultaneously debating that gender
is not nearly as signiﬁcant as we all once thought. The move away from theories of a ‘women’s
language’ or separately gendered speech styles, and towards notions of complex social iden-
tities and linguistic diversity has indeed challenged gender as a super-ordinate category. Yet, in
recent years there has been an upsurge of textbooks and monographs in the ﬁeld, increased
submissions to sociolinguistics journals and the founding of a new international journal,
Gender and Language (Equinox 2007), which has responded to a need for ‘a room of our own,
a separate institution, a separate publication’ (McElhinny and Mills 2007: 3). Scholars continue
to be enchanted by the relationship between language and gender as it is enacted in a range
of contexts such as social networks, business, leadership, education, SLA, law, government,
health, entertainment and the media, and in diverse locations around the world. We might
reasonably question why this attraction to the ﬁeld persists, and how this interest can still be
justiﬁed.
There is a radical division of opinion between those social constructionists who argue from
a ‘local’ perspective that gender can be justiﬁed as a category but only on a case-by-case basis,
‘from the ground up’ before it can be legitimately addressed within research, and those who
argue from a more ‘global’ perspective that there is evidence of a wider ‘gender order’. This
order is viewed as ‘a repressive ideology which continues to ensure that deviation from gender
norms (by women or men) entails penalties’ (Holmes 2007: 53).
In the ‘local’ corner, theorists of Conversation Analysis (CA) such as Weatherall (2000)
argue that an epistemological construct such as gender needs to be made explicitly salient by
research participants in order to be considered relevant to any scholarly analysis. In other
words, such participants need to refer to their own or other people’s gender speciﬁcally (for
example, by terms such as ‘women’, ‘ladies’, ‘mothers-in-law’, etc.) within an observed con-
versation as evidence of their orientation to this category. Thus an ethno-methodological focus
Gender
337

is upon ‘how in every day talk and text [participants] constitute the world, themselves and
other people, as recognisably, take-for-grantedly gendered’ (Stokoe 2005: 126). The feminist
conversation analyst Kitzinger (2007) has since argued that terms such as ‘woman’, ‘gentle-
man’, etc., do not necessarily mean that a speaker is orienting to gender, and has asked that
conversation analysts consider other less obvious ways by which language signiﬁes gender
(although it is as yet unclear what those ‘less obvious ways’ would be!). However, Sidnell
(2003: 347) emphasises the ‘local’ case for justifying gender in his claim that ‘many researchers
advance anti-essentialist, theoretical conceptions of gender … but at the same time employ the
very same categories in their analysis’, thus reinforcing Holmes and Meyerhoﬀ’s (2003) insight
above!
In the ‘global’ corner, a number of theorists have challenged the CA premise that unless
participants signal their orientation to the salience of gender within linguistic interactions
there is no evidence that it is relevant. Holmes (2007: 54) argues from a sociolinguistic per-
spective that ‘social and pragmatic meanings may be, and frequently are inferred using con-
textualisation cues’, and that the CA approach doesn’t suﬃciently take into account ‘context
embedded practices of various kinds’. In line with Mills (2003), Holmes suggests that there is
evidence from a range of social contexts that women are still discriminated against and that
this discrimination works at both a local level through people’s interactions, but also less visi-
bly at a structural level through institutional and state practices. She cites the example of
female disadvantage in the workplace where, for example, women are signiﬁcantly under-
represented at senior level worldwide despite years of equal opportunity legislation in many
countries. Taking an expedient view of the issue, she proposes the need for ‘strategic essenti-
alism’ in language and gender scholarship, such as continuing to use labels like ‘women’ and
‘men’. This, she suggests, could be ‘one tactic for regaining the strength which is inevitably
dissipated when the focus is on diﬀerence and diversity than what is shared [between women]’
(Holmes 2007: 56–7).
Nonetheless, this wistfulness for the lost innocence of the feminist cause, once so con-
veniently rationalised by the ‘big stories’ of gender diﬀerence or dominance, has been a
predominant theme in recent feminist linguistics. Cameron (2005: 500) has warned that ‘con-
temporary feminist researchers have become increasingly remote from the common-sense
understandings with which most other people operate’. In an attempt to popularise the
‘diversity’ perspective, she has written the highly readable The Myth of Mars and Venus
(Cameron 2007), to try to bridge that gap between highbrow theorising and popular concep-
tions of language and gender issues, but unfortunately it never made the best-seller lists in the
way that John Gray’s (1992) original volume did. Other linguists of ‘a post-structuralist turn’
have theorised the continuing salience of gender in more abstract terms. For example, Ochs
(1992) used the social semiotic concept of ‘indexing’ (‘pointing to’) to suggest that speakers
have a range of ‘linguistic resources’ available to them in order to signal their gender and other
aspects of their cultural identities. Some linguistic resources index gender very directly (such as
titles like Mr/s or he/she), but others index gender less directly, such as a speaker’s choice of
interactional style. All linguistic resources draw upon cultural expectations of femininity and
masculinity, which inﬂuence our language preferences for interacting. The value of ‘indexing’
is that it links a local linguistic analysis of how someone speaks with a global consideration of
the powerful role gender stereotypes play in governing the language choices women and men
routinely make to adapt to diﬀerent contexts.
In a similar spirit, Baxter (2003) and others draw on a post-structuralist discourse approach
(Foucault 1972: 49; also see Norton, this volume) to suggest that dominant discourses of
‘gender diﬀerentiation’ have become crystallised as routine interactional practices in many
Judith Baxter
338

contexts. The diﬀerence between the concept of ‘indexing’ and a discourse approach is that the
latter is constitutive and not simply indicative: discourses position speakers to speak and act in
given ways, but speakers can negotiate their subject positions and oﬀer resistance within these
discourses. Accordingly, gender diﬀerentiation is a set of dominant cultural practices that
position women (and some men) in limiting and disadvantaged ways. However, speakers can
renegotiate, review and contest their subject positions and adopt alternative ways of ‘doing
gender’. Sunderland (2004: 190) suggests that ‘traces’ of ‘damaging gendered discourses’ (such
as ‘masculinisation’ or ‘compulsory heterosexuality’) can be identiﬁed both through detailed
linguistic and semiotic analysis of texts, but also through longer term, ethnographic observa-
tions of interactional practices. It remains a challenge for post-structuralist theorists to identify
the ‘linguistic traces’ of gendered discourses without the need to justify these on the CA basis
of participants explicitly ‘orienting’ to gender within a given stretch of discourse. Indeed,
Swann has identiﬁed six further ‘warrants’ for gender which provide useful guidance to scho-
lars adopting more global or post-structuralist perspectives in their research (see Swann 2002,
for an overview).
To sum up, a social constructionist approach does not lead logically to the demise of the ﬁeld
if it is extended to consider the construction and representation of gender and sexuality in text
and discourse. Here, the notion of relevance, the idea that gender becomes relevant in some
contexts but less so in others, is an important theme across both local and global perspectives.
Future trajectory and new debates
So what new debates are emerging within language and gender literature, which may shape
the future direction of the ﬁeld? I shall mention three here: the rise of biological essenti-
alism, an extended role for communities of practice, and exploiting the plurality of research
methodologies.
The ﬁrst is the possible challenge posed by a resurgence of biological explanations of
gender, spearheaded by the Darwinist science of evolutionary psychology. Cameron (2007: 16)
has warned scholars that if they fail to take notice of ‘conversations’ about biological essenti-
alism, ‘the result may be to re-marginalise feminist linguistic scholarship’. She suggests that
while social constructionism continues to be ‘the big story’ within language and gender, there
has been a ‘massive assault’ on this position within other, more scientiﬁcally based ﬁelds such
as neuroscience and psychology. One of the discourses of biological essentialism is that women
are ‘hard-wired’ to have more advanced verbal and linguistic abilities whereas men have more
sophisticated spatial and mathematical skills. According to Cameron (2005, 2007), these
apparently sex-diﬀerentiated abilities are used to endorse a Darwinian (and sexist) narrative on
evolution. In contrast to men’s ‘hunter’ role, women’s ‘gatherer’ role in interacting with others
is viewed as a primary reason for facilitating the development of language among our early
ancestors. While this ‘prehistoric division of labour’ appears to oﬀer a positive evaluation of
women’s contribution to the human success story, it has damaging social consequences
because ‘it helps to reproduce arrangements which from a feminist perspective are unjust and
harmful for women’ (Cameron 2007: 22). In short, positive evaluations of women’s talk per-
petuate a restrictive, essentialist, gender diﬀerence perspective. Moreover, she considers that
this type of Darwinian discourse may well be part of a broader reaction to changing gender
relations in aﬄuent Western societies where female success may be perceived as a threat.
However, Cameron urges that language and gender scholars should not simply engage in this
debate on the level of discourse and social practices; it is important to challenge the factual,
scientiﬁc evidence and the epistemological bases on which this is produced.
Gender
339

A second new direction in the ﬁeld is a proposal to extend the well-established concept of
‘communities of practice’ (CofPs; Wenger 2000) within language and gender research in order
to enable an ‘articulation between the local, the extra-local and the global’ (Eckert and
McConnell-Ginet 2007: 28). According to the CofP concept, social practice emphasising the
social signiﬁcance of what people do, goes well beyond simple individual acts or conversations
(as studied by conversation analysis) to socially regulated, repeated and interpreted colla-
borative doings. The authors argue that scholars should aim to analyse how such ‘practices
articulate with the wider world and with wider discourses of gender and sexuality’ (ibid.).
Their proposal is that the CofP concept could be extended to achieve this aim in two ways.
The ﬁrst is comparatively by examining diﬀerent but similar kinds of CofP to move beyond
particular and speciﬁc insights about a community to more general observations about gender
and sexuality. Holmes’ (2006) work is cited as an example of how the interactional style of female
leadership in business settings varies according to the type of community of practice, and how
workplaces, not participants, can be described as ‘gendered’. Baxter’s (2008) work in the same
ﬁeld supplements the CofP thesis by suggesting that there are at least three competing gendered
discourses in most workplaces: male-dominated, gender-diﬀerentiated and gender-multiple, but
one in particular is likely to predominate within a given community of practice.
The second way of extending the CofP concept is relationally, by locating communities of
practice in relation to a world beyond – other communities, social networks, institutions and
more global, imagined communities. This is illustrated by Besnier’s (2007) study of a trans-
gender beauty pageant in Tonga, in which he shows that the use of English helps to construct
an ‘imagined cosmopolitanism’. The study reveals that this marginalised, transgendered com-
munity needs to connect with a wider, more mainstream world, which the contestants do by
using ‘the dominant language of English, the language of globality, modernity, [with its] cos-
mopolitan possibilities, despite the fact that most of them are more comfortable in Tongan
than in English’ (Besnier 2007: 73). Another example of ‘imagined communities’ might be
on-line CofPs that have become important in many people’s lives such as emails, chat rooms,
blogs, game-playing sites, and so on. Within the ﬁeld, there is a growing interest in exploring
the ways in which gender and sexuality are used to construct a range of experimental identities
by means of computer-mediated communication.
While Eckert and McConnell-Ginet (2007: 35) argue that it is unreasonable to expect single
researchers always to link their study of speciﬁc communities of practice to global or ideolo-
gical patterns, they propose that a uniﬁed interdisciplinary research community ‘can keep its
collective eye on those connections’.
On this interdisciplinary note, a third new direction for language and gender concerns the
wide range of research methodologies through which the discipline is currently investigated.
Surely it must be unusual for such a relatively small ﬁeld of study to draw upon methods as
diverse as sociolinguistics, corpus linguistics, conversation analysis, discursive psychology, cri-
tical discourse analysis (CDA) and feminist post-structuralist discourse analysis (FPDA)?
Harrington et al. (2008: 12) argue that the ﬁeld can only beneﬁt from this range and creative
combination of approaches as each method in its own way helps uncover the gender issues at
stake in linguistic interactions. They propose that, rather than asking in competitive spirit
which method is most appropriate for language and gender research, theorists should inquire
what the aﬀordances and limitations are of each method for a particular context or study.
In this sense, research methodologies are not simply instrumental, but are conceptually driven
with speciﬁc theoretical and epistemological imperatives.
While theorists will continue to debate the superior merits of, say, CA over CDA in any
social constructionist discussion of gender (e.g. Schegloﬀ1997; Wetherell 1998), the future for
Judith Baxter
340

language and gender may well move towards a combined or interdisciplinary approach to
study. Complex subject matter may pragmatically require a more nuanced, multi-faceted
approach in order to provide plural perspectives on the linguistic enactment of gender in
contexts where speakers are often ‘positioned’ in diﬀerent ways. For example, a study of the
linguistic reasons why women are under-represented at leadership level may well require the
selection of an approach that puts ‘women back at the centre of language and gender research’
as Holmes (2007: 60) argues. For this reason, Baxter (2010) has drawn on a combination of
approaches in her study of gendered leadership using a mix of CA, interactional socio-
linguistics and FPDA. Kamada (2010) drew upon a combination of discursive psychology and
FPDA in her study of the identities of multi-ethnic girls and boys in Japan. Castañeda-Peña
(2008) used CDA with FPDA in his study of the multiple performances of masculinity and
femininity in a pre-school English as a Foreign Language lesson in Colombia. This combina-
tion of principle, ﬂexibility and pragmatism in the deployment of diﬀerent theoretical and
methodological approaches could well characterise the future of language and gender research.
Summing up
This chapter has traced the short but extraordinary history of language and gender from
Lakoﬀ’s (1975) basic conception of a uniﬁed ‘women’s language’ to today’s elaborate theore-
tical conﬁgurations of a socially constructed gender. The ﬁeld has been driven by a dual mis-
sion both to capture ethnographic evidence to argue that gender makes a diﬀerence within
many linguistic interactions, and to challenge from a feminist standpoint the gendered
inequalities that are routinely enacted through language in many contexts. A powerful issue
that currently divides the ﬁeld is the category of ‘woman’ and by association ‘gender’. Scholars
have asked, what counts as gender? How can we claim that gender is relevant to a given
stretch of talk? What is one’s warrant for using these categories at all? At times, it has seemed
that the ﬁeld was set to destroy itself through the inexorable development of the social construc-
tionist argument. But whether gender is pinned down at the local level of talk-in-interaction,
or whether it is detected on the global level through ‘traces’ of gendered discourses, I would
agree with Holmes (2007: 60) that ‘we need to put women back at the centre of language and
gender research’. However, we should not exclude from our sights the linguistic experiences of
other minorities who are marginalised or discriminated against because of their gender or
sexuality. The availability of a range of new interdisciplinary research methods has made such
a quest more possible. It will be an exciting time ahead.
Related topics
critical discourse analysis; culture; discourse analysis; identity; sociolinguistics
Further reading
Baxter, J. (2003) Positioning Gender in Discourse: A Feminist Methodology, Basingstoke: Palgrave
Macmillan. (This is a useful introduction to social constructionist and post-structuralist approa-
ches to language and gender. It introduces feminist post-structuralist discourse analysis (FPDA)
by means of a classroom and a business case study.)
Harrington, K., Litosseliti, L., Saunston, H. and Sunderland, J. (eds) (2008) Gender and Language
Research Methodologies, Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan. (This is an excellent collection of essays
introducing, applying and evaluating the current range of theoretical and methodological
approaches to language and gender.)
Gender
341

Litosseliti, L. (2006) Gender and Language: Theory and Practice, London: Hodder Arnold. (Prob-
ably one of the best introductions to language and gender, it gives a history of theories in the
ﬁeld, and reviews signiﬁcant studies in three professional contexts: education, the media and the
workplace.)
Sunderland, J. (2004) Gendered Discourses, Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan. (Using a series of case
studies, this book examines gendered ‘ways of seeing the world’ and how our identities may be
constructed through diﬀerent discourses.)
References
Baxter, J. (2003) Positioning Gender in Discourse: A Feminist Methodology, Basingstoke: Palgrave
Macmillan.
——(2008) ‘Is it all tough talking at the top? A feminist post-structuralist analysis of the construc-
tion of gendered speaker identities of British business leaders within interview narratives’, Gender
and Language 2(2): 193–218.
——(2010) The Language of Female Leadership, Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan.
Bergvall, V., Bing, J. M. and Freed, A. F. (1996) Rethinking Language and Gender Research,
London: Longman.
Besnier, N. (2007) ‘Language and gender research at the intersection of the global and the local’,
Gender and Language 1(1): 67–78.
Borba, R. and Ostermann, A. (2007) ‘Do bodies matter? Travestis’ embodiment of (trans)gender
identity through the manipulation of the Brazilian Portuguese grammatical gender system’,
Gender and Language 1(1): 131–47.
Butler, J. (1990) Gender Trouble: Feminism and the Subversion of Identity, New York: Routledge.
Cameron, D. (1995a) Verbal Hygiene, London: Routledge.
——(1995b) ‘Rethinking language and gender studies: some issues for the 1990s’, in S. Mills (ed.)
Language and Gender: Interdisciplinary Perspectives, Harlow: Longman.
——(2005) ‘Language, gender and sexuality: current issues and new directions’, Applied Linguistics
26(4): 482–502.
——(2007a) The Myth of Mars and Venus, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
——(2007b) ‘Unanswered questions and unquestioned assumptions in the study of language and
gender: female verbal superiority’, Gender and Language 1(1): 15–26.
Cameron, D. and Kulick, D. (2003) Language and Sexuality, Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.
Castañeda-Peña, H. (2008) ‘Interwoven and competing gendered discourses in a pre-school lesson’,
in K. Harrington, L. Litosseliti, H. Sauntson and J. Sunderland (eds) Gender and Language
Research Methodologies, Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan.
Coates, J. (1988) ‘Gossip revisited: language in all-female groups’, in J. Coates and D. Cameron
(eds) Women in their Speech Communities, London: Longman.
——(2004) Women, Men and Language, 2nd edn, London: Longman.
Crawford, M. (1995) Talking Diﬀerence: On Gender and Language, London: Sage.
DeFrancisco, V. (1991) ‘The sounds of silence: how men silence women in marital relations’,
Discourse and Society 2(4): 413–23.
Eckert, P. (1989) Jocks and Burnouts: Social Categories and Identity in the High School, New York:
Teachers College Press.
——(2008) ‘Variation and the indexical ﬁeld’, Journal of Sociolinguistics 12: 453–76.
Eckert, P. and McConnell-Ginet, S. (2007) ‘Putting communities of practice in their place’, Gender
and Language 1(1): 27–38.
Fishman, P. (1978) ‘Interaction: the work women do’, Social Problems 25(4): 397–406.
Foucault, M. (1972) The Archeology of Knowledge and the Discourse on Language, New York:
Pantheon.
——(1980) Power/Knowledge: Selected Interviews and Other Writings 1972–1977, C. Gordon (ed.),
Brighton: Harvester Press.
Gal, S. (1979) Language Shift: Social Determinants of Linguistic Change in Bilingual Austria,
New York: Academic Press.
Gray, J. (1992) Men are from Mars and Women from Venus, New York: HarperCollins.
Judith Baxter
342

Gumperz, J. J. (ed.) (1982) Language and Social Identity, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Hall, K. (1995) ‘Lip-service on the fantasy lines’, in K. Hall and M. Bucholtz (eds) Gender Articu-
lated: Language and the Socially Constructed Self, New York: Routledge.
Harrington, K., Litosseliti, L., Sauntson, H. and Sunderland, J. (eds) (2008) Gender and Language
Research Methodologies, Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan.
Holmes, J. (2001) An Introduction to Sociolinguistics, London: Longman.
——(2006) Gendered Talk at Work, Oxford: Blackwell.
——(2007) ‘Social constructionism, postmodernism and feminist sociolinguistics’, Gender and
Language 1(1): 51–6.
Holmes, J. and Meyerhoﬀ, M. (2003) A Handbook of Language and Gender, Oxford: Blackwell.
Jesperson, O. (1922) Language: Its Nature, Development and Origin, London: Allen and Unwin.
Kamada, L. (2010) Hybrid Identities and Adolescent Girls: Being ‘Half’ in Japan, Bristol: Multilingual
Matters.
Kiesling, S. (2003) ‘Playing the straight man: displaying and maintaining male heterosexuality in
discourse’, in K. Campbell, R. Podesva, S. J. Roberts and A. Wong (eds) Language and Sexuality,
Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press.
Kitzinger, C. (2007) ‘Is “woman” always relevantly gendered?’ Gender and Language 1(1): 39–50.
Labov, W. (1966) The Social Stratiﬁcation of English in New York City, Washington, DC: Center
for Applied Linguistics.
Lakoﬀ, R. (1975) Language and Woman’s Place, New York: Harper and Row.
Maltz, D. and Borker, R. (1982) ‘A cultural approach to male-female miscommunication’, in
J. J. Gumperz (ed.) Language and Social Identity, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
McElhinny, B. and Mills, S. (2007) ‘Launching studies of Gender and Language in the early 21st
century’, Gender and Language 1(1): 1–13.
Mills, S. (2003) ‘Third wave feminism and the analysis of sexism’, Discourse Analysis Online, refer-
eed interactive e-journal. Available at: www.shu.ac.uk/daol
Milroy, L. (1980) Language and Social Networks, Oxford: Blackwell.
Mullany, L. (2007) Gendered Discourse in Professional Communication, Basingstoke: Palgrave
Macmillan.
Norton, B. and Pavlenko, A. (eds) (2004) Gender and English Language Learners, London: TESOL
Publications.
Ochs, E. (1992) ‘Indexing gender’, in A. Duranti and C. Goodwin (eds) Rethinking Context:
Language as an Interactive Phenomenon, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Schegloﬀ, E. (1997) ‘Whose text? Whose context?’ Discourse and Society 8(2): 165–87.
Sidnell, J. (2003) ‘Constructing and managing male exclusivity in talk-in-interaction’, in J. Holmes
and M. Meyerhoﬀ(eds) A Handbook of Language and Gender, Oxford: Blackwell.
Schulz, M. R. (1990) ‘The semantic derogation of woman’, in D. Cameron (ed.) The Feminist
Critique of Language: A Reader, London: Routledge.
Spender, D. (1980) Man Made Language, London: Pandora.
Stokoe, E. (2005) ‘Analysing gender and language’, Journal of Sociolinguistics 1(1): 118–33.
Sunderland, J. (2004) Gendered Discourse, Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan.
Swann, J. (2000) ‘Gender and language use’, in R. Mesthrie, J. Swann, A. Deumert and W. L. Leap
(eds) Introducing Sociolinguistics, Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press.
——(2002) ‘Yes, but is it gender?’, in L. Litosseliti and J. Sunderland (eds) Gender Identity and
Discourse Analysis, Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Talbot, M. (1998) Language and Gender, Cambridge: Polity Press.
Tannen, D. (1990) You Just Don’t Understand: Women and Men in Conversation, London: Virago.
Trudgill, P. (1974) The Social Diﬀerentiation of English in Norwich, Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Weatherall, A. (2000) ‘Gender relevance in talk-in-interaction and discourse’, Discourse and Society
11: 290–2.
Wenger, E. (2000) Communities of Practice, New York: Cambridge University Press.
Wetherell, M. (1998) ‘Positioning and interpretative repertoires: conversation analysis and post-
structuralism in dialogue’, Discourse and Society 9(3): 387–412.
Gender
343

24
Ethnicity
Roxy Harris
Introduction
The question of ethnicity in applied linguistics is such a sprawling topic and so potentially
limitless in its scope that a degree of preliminary circumscription is essential. The present text
is limited by:

the angle of vision of a UK-based academic located in London;

a concentration on the importance of the Anglo world in the ﬁeld of applied linguistics and
the hegemonic importance of the English language in the ﬁeld, even in contexts concerning
the workings of other languages;

its focus on an interpretive rather than a comprehensive account.
The following will ﬁrst attempt to present a framework within which ethnicity and its salience
to applied linguistics might be manageably understood; then, second, will support this inter-
pretive perspective with a range of illustrative examples.
Ethnicity and applied linguistics
Curiously, ethnicity has received only muted attention within applied linguistics, judging by
the very slight reference to it in major comprehensive surveys of the ﬁeld (Johnson and John-
son 1999; Kaplan 2002; Davies and Elder 2006; although see Sealey and Carter 2004: 115–24).
However, the question of ethnicity within applied linguistics has been a persistent background
thread in the ﬁeld with respect to issues of authority and ownership. In the post-World War II
period the rise of what has come to be known as applied linguistics has been developed and
led by sources of authority located in what will be called here the white Anglo diaspora (the
USA, UK, Canada, Australia, New Zealand, South Africa). With some exceptions, a central
focus has been the learning of English by those regarded as ethnic and racial ‘others’. In this
context those of the white Anglo world have been positioned as the legitimate owners and
‘native’ speakers of the language; with the predominantly brown and black ‘others’ located on
the subordinate side of a relationship which can readily be depicted as explicitly colonial,
344

postcolonial or imperialist. The teaching and learning of English in these contexts, then,
cannot plausibly be separated from complex and often contentious perspectives involving eth-
nicity and ‘race’. Of course, applied linguistics is not concerned solely with the teaching and
learning of English. However, the ﬁeld has been dominated by circumstances in which, parti-
cularly English, but also other European languages, have played an inﬂuential and often
pivotal role. It is here that questions of ethnicity have been important.
The concept of ‘ethnicity’
According to Hutchinson and Smith (1996), the widespread use of the speciﬁc term ethnicity is
relatively recent, ﬁrst appearing in the English language, in their estimation, in the 1950s. One
source of its propagation has been the endeavour of Anglo majority societies to demarcate
themselves from migrant minorities:
The English and American (White Anglo-Saxon Protestant) tendency to reserve the term
‘nation’ for themselves and ‘ethnic’ for immigrant peoples, as in the frequently used term
‘ethnic minorities’ …
(Hutchinson and Smith 1996: 5)
However, earlier, in the colonial period, ideas of ‘race’ as opposed to ethnicity held sway,
though the two terms have been persistently intertwined and confused. The Concise Oxford
Dictionary, for example, deﬁnes the term ‘ethnic’ as ‘pertaining to race’, and ‘ethnicity’ as
referring to ‘a speciﬁed racial, linguistic, etc., group (usu. a minority)’. Given the complexities,
uncertainties and controversies surrounding ethnicity across a range of disciplines, it is not
surprising that applied linguistics has not supplied a lead in oﬀering its own explicit con-
ceptualization. The following section proposes a framework for encapsulating ethnicity which
can then be used as an interpretive frame for understanding its operations within applied lin-
guistics. This is also a frame which, it will be suggested, has underpinned the relationship
between the Anglo and European world on the one hand, and the global ‘others’ on the other.
An interpretive frame for conceptualizing ethnicity
Stuart Hall, working within the ﬁeld of British cultural studies, has been internationally inﬂuential
for his theoretical work on ethnicities. He has also provided a lucid, concise and comprehen-
sive summary of some key sociological and philosophical understandings of the interrelation-
ships between tradition, modernity, late modernity and culture (Hall 1992). For present purposes
it is worth utilizing, from this work, some basic understandings to assist the construction of an
interpretive frame embracing three dimensions:
(a)
the ‘traditional’ (or ‘pre-modern’) frame associated with the colonized ‘other’;
(b)
the ‘modern’ frame – associated with the Anglo and European nation states, science and
industrialization;
(c)
the ‘late modern’ frame – associated with Anglo and European nation states in con-
temporary globalization operating neo-liberal economies characterized by the rapid global
circulation of capital, goods, people and cultural products.
(Note: In the present text the term ‘late modernity’ is preferred to the widely used ‘post-
modernity’. This is so as to emphasize a perspective that regards tradition, modernity and late
Ethnicity
345

modernity as conceptual and interpretive frames in constant interaction, rather than as
historical epochs succeeding one and other.)
In this schematic rendering there tend to be a couple of key binary contrasts:
(i)
between tradition and modernity;
(ii)
between modernity and late modernity.
In these contrasts it is possible to discern tensions which are consequential for an under-
standing of ethnicity in applied linguistics.
Tensions between tradition and modernity
In the ﬁrst set of tensions the encounter between ‘Western’ modernity and its pre-modern
Others took concrete form which saw the latter described and classiﬁed by the former, espe-
cially in areas of what came to be known as the social sciences; including disciplines such as
sociology, anthropology and linguistics. The contrasts in play can be represented, albeit in
somewhat simpliﬁed graphic form, as follows (Table 24.1).
These binary contrasts work fairly well as a representation of colonial relationships, and at
ﬁrst they worked in a diﬀerent way when mass migration brought formerly colonized people to
the metropolitan centres of the Anglo and European world:
this scheme of oppositions continued to operate when the focus on distant places moved
back home to the Anglo and European world. Exotic ‘tribes’ became ‘ethnic minorities’,
and the preoccupation with diﬀerence was translated into debates about whether and how
modern institutions like schools might become more hospitable to the diversity of puta-
tively ‘non-modern’ others in their midst.
(Harris and Rampton 2003: 4)
Aspects of how this dimension of language and ethnicity has operated within applied linguis-
tics will be explored later, but ﬁrst it is necessary to outline the second major set of tensions.
Tensions between modernity and late modernity
In the second set of tensions the kinds of binary contrast outlined above have, under the
pressures of contemporary globalization, begun to lose their explanatory power and
Table 24.1 Tensions between tradition and modernity
Tradition
Modernity
Rural feudal communities
Industrialized cities
Autocracy
Mass democracy
‘Tribes’, ‘natives’
Citizens of nation states
Kinship, folk customs
Class afﬁliations, reason and science
Locally marked vernaculars
National standard language
Ritual oratory, oral narrative
Mass schooled literacy
Roxy Harris
346

usefulness. Once again this will be illustrated though a simpliﬁed diagrammatic representation
(Table 24.2).
As suggested earlier, the forces at play in the new global migrations from the subordinate
peripheries to the Anglo and European metropolitan centres, have also generated linguistic
consequences, which are partly summarized in the following observation:
the emergence of global cities provides an environment where multilingualism and cul-
tural hybridity are treated as natural and normal, and this also presents a challenge to the
authority of elite cultural canons and national standard languages.
(Harris and Rampton 2003: 4)
Although it is tempting to regard tradition, modernity and late modernity as historical epochs,
it is more helpful to employ them as interpretive frames. That is to say, all of these dimensions
are still in constant interaction with each other, and none has disappeared from the world. It
should also be immediately obvious from the quotations above that questions of language,
ethnicity and ‘race’ are deeply embedded within these characterizations. Before turning directly
to the implications for applied linguistics it is worth concentrating for a moment on some of
the relevant shifts in conceptualizations of ethnicity speciﬁcally, since these shifts have had an
impact on applied linguistics. They have underpinned many of the debates, encounters, con-
ﬂicts and anxieties in the ﬁeld. It is important, then, to recognize that, in relatively recent times
there has been something of a consensus within academic milieus that ‘race’ is a social and
cultural construction rather than a biological-scientiﬁc fact. However,
modernity has been inextricably linked with the setting-up of massive systems of slavery
and colonial domination, and as a crucial element in the ideological maintenance of these
systems, from the late eighteenth century onwards Anglo and European scholars tried to
develop elaborate schemes of racial classiﬁcation, built on biological and genetic founda-
tions, with Europeans invariably placed at the top at the most advanced evolutionary
stage, Africans at the bottom, and a variety of colonized others in between.
(Harris and Rampton 2003: 4)
Historically, linguistic scholars, too, have participated in these classiﬁcatory practices and it is
not diﬃcult to ﬁnd instances where references to ‘primitive’ languages are linked to notions of
‘primitive’ peoples (Jespersen [1922] 1964; Ashcroft 2001). Though scientiﬁc theories of race were
eventually discredited by the Holocaust and the general destruction of World War II, a home
Table 24.2 Tensions between modernity and late modernity
Modernity
Late modernity
Nation state
Transnational collectivities (e.g. the EU)
Allegiances to single nation state
Transnational diasporic allegiances
Nation state authority
Lightly regulated global ﬂows of capital, people, goods and
services
National public broadcasting and national
media
Global digital media
Print literacy
Multimodal literacies
National standard languages
Hybrid linguistic practices
Ethnicity
347

was found for ‘race’ within a reconstituted notion of ethnicity in which peoples were imagined
as being classiﬁable as sharing a common ancestry, a common language, a common religion
and a distinctive physical appearance. But latterly,
Counterposed to this, the most recent contemporary challenge to this way of imagining
race/ethnicity lies in the post-modern shift of interest away from identifying essences and
locating them in classiﬁcation systems, to analysing practices and the social processes of
categorisation themselves.
(Harris and Rampton 2003: 4–5)
To sum up: international relations in the nineteenth and twentieth centuries up to the end of
World War II were signiﬁcantly aﬀected by relations of ‘race’ linked to a contest between
forces of tradition and forces of modernity. In the post-1945 period, with the emergence of
a new set of global relations accompanying movements for decolonization and civil rights,
discourses of ‘race’ gradually gave way to discourses of ‘ethnicity’. Eventually, this shift
began to signal the advent of a new alignment of binary contrasts; this time between per-
spectives inﬂuenced by forces of modernity and those inﬂuenced by forces of late modernity. In
this process the conceptualization of ethnicity itself began to be transformed. The following
sections will oﬀer an interpretation of the eﬀects of these large-scale shifts within applied
linguistics.
Tradition, modernity and ethnicity in applied linguistics
The workings of ‘ethnicity’ within the ﬁeld of applied linguistics is a complicated and often
relatively opaque matter. This ﬁrst section traces some of the ways in which diﬀering per-
spectives on ethnicity, informed by frameworks related to tradition or modernity, have played
out in the ﬁeld.
Ethnicity and the ‘birth’, development and consolidation of applied linguistics
One comprehensive analysis of the origins, development and consolidation of applied linguis-
tics (Howatt and Widdowson 2004) identiﬁes the Anglo world (America and Britain) as its
driving force, deﬁned by ‘a common commitment to the teaching of English worldwide’ (2004:
303). More precisely, for Britain, ‘ELT was given over almost entirely to the teaching of English
as a second language to children in secondary schools in the Empire’ (2004: 294). At the same
time an ethnic focus in applied linguistics in America lay for a long time in the tradition of
‘record[ing] the indigenous Amerindian languages which were in danger of becoming extinct’
(2004: 303). In both of these relationships the location of power and authority was clear.
Authority lay with dominant Anglo institutions and individuals, in their interactions with
subordinate racialized ethnic others. In this colonialist idiom, whether or not intentions were
benign, interactions were framed by an encounter between perspectives relating to tradition
and modernity. On the one hand, centres in the Anglo world sought to bring progress to others
who were not white; these others were assumed to be easily characterized within essential
tribal/ethnic categories involving languages and language practices which needed to be altered
in order to secure modernist progress. On the other hand, subordinated racialized others
struggled to secure advancement in a world they did not control, while holding on to as much
of their traditional linguistic and cultural practices as they could. However, new conﬁgurations
of these relationships emerged in the postcolonial period.
Roxy Harris
348

Ethnicity and postcolonial language planning
As the colonial era drew to a close in the 1950s and 1960s, new processes of modernity
emerged. The construction of new independent nation states out of former colonies, such as
the British ones, initiated a new collaboration between local elites and the former colonial
powers in the name of modernity, development and progress. These new alliances produced
consequences for applied linguistics which have been powerfully theorized and described
(Phillipson 1992; Pennycook 1994). Traditional social arrangements based on tribes or ethnic
groups were replaced by the project of building modern nation states. Typically, the expansion
of the modernist project of schooling entailed the imposition of the former colonial language
(English, French, etc.) as the medium of instruction and sole language for literacy, and sig-
niﬁer of all that was forward looking, modern and progressive. The local ethnically linked
languages became strongly marked as traditional and outdated links with the past, with
‘backwardness’, and as now having limited utility. In the new nations the rising discipline
of language planning exercised an important function in resolving potentially tricky ethnic
problems. Here, these processes will be illustrated with two types of example: (a) the case of
Sub-Saharan Africa, and (b) the case of Singapore.
Sub-Saharan Africa
According to one prominent scholar,
Language policies in African countries (in the post-independence period) are character-
ized by one or more of the following problems: avoidance, vagueness, arbitrariness, ﬂuc-
tuation, and declaration without implementation.
(Bamgbose 1991: 111)
For Bamgbose one consequence of this stance has been that:
In practically all African countries colonized by Britain, English remains an oﬃcial or co-
oﬃcial language. Attempts to promote an African language as a national or oﬃcial lan-
guage have resulted in failure or limited success.
(Bamgbose 2003: 422)
Among the reasons given for such developments, the quest for national unity in the face
of allegedly intractable scenarios involving a multiplicity of competing ethnicities and lan-
guages has often been advanced. Bamgbose, amongst others, casts doubt on what he clearly
regards as unconvincing excuses; nevertheless these behaviours have been apparent all over
Africa.
In a country such as Nigeria, for example, the adoption of English in oﬃcial contexts was
presented as a way of averting potentially serious conﬂict that might arise from the adoption of
the languages associated with three major rival ethnic groupings: Yoruba, Igbo and Hausa.
Elsewhere, in a diﬀerent but striking example, the renowned writer Ngugi wa Thiong’o pro-
vides a vivid exempliﬁcation of the forbidding obstacles placed in the way of an African using
his own ethnically speciﬁc language – Kenya’s Kikuyu language in his case – as a language of
literacy, in a context in which the learning of English is normalized and promoted. His
experience also demonstrates the penalties awaiting those who persist in ﬁghting for the right
to write African languages (wa Thiong’o 1981). Even in post-apartheid South Africa where the
Ethnicity
349

state has made a determined eﬀort to overcome the problem of competing ethnicities, the
outcomes have not varied very much; this despite strong language planning interventions in
parliament, government, broadcasting and education. In the fading years of apartheid a
working group involving linguists explored the post-apartheid language policy options. They
discovered that in Sub-Saharan Africa since independence the overwhelming majority of
countries had adopted a former colonial language (e.g. English, French, Portuguese) as
the medium of instruction for schooling in preference to an indigenous African language
(NEPI 1992). Though the ANC government enshrined the language rights of the country’s
major ethnic groups (e.g. Zulu, Xhosa), in the Constitution and made eﬀorts to extend their
scope as the medium of instruction in schools, there was a marked tendency for parents to opt
for ‘straight for English’ practices for their children in schools. Given that Afrikaans and
English speakers retained their MOI rights, the realities for the black African population
remained closer to those of the populations of other Sub-Saharan countries than might at ﬁrst
appear.
Overall, in an African continent replete with ethnic groups and their associated languages,
the ethnicity which has counted has clearly been either an Anglo or European one. Particu-
larly noteworthy are Mazrui’s observations on the way that this state of aﬀairs persisted in the
funding and support policies of international organizations such as the IMF and World Bank;
even when research produced by these institutions has acknowledged the greater eﬃcacy of
indigenous language medium of instruction policies (Mazrui 1997).
The case of Singapore
Another, quite diﬀerent illustration of ethnicity in the postcolonial nation building process
concerns the Speak Mandarin campaign in Singapore (Bokhorst-Heng 1999). Govern-
mental eﬀorts were made to hold in place an essentialist version of a majority ethnicity. The
majority ethnicity in Singapore was described as Chinese (more than 75 per cent of the
population), with Malays (14 per cent +) and Indians (7 per cent +) the next biggest groups. In
this example, two language planning approaches are worth noting. First, the main ‘ethnic’
languages (Mandarin, Tamil and Malay) were given recognition, but only for purposes ‘of
identity, of ethnicity and of culture’ (Bokhorst-Heng 1999: 240). However, a linguistic homo-
geneity among the ethnically Chinese majority based on Mandarin was imaginary, given
strong allegiances to at least eleven other distinct Chinese dialects. Although the eﬀorts to
construct a uniﬁed Chinese ethnicity through the Speak Mandarin campaign alongside the
encouragement given to Malay and Indian languages corresponded with essentialist ethno-
racial ideologies, in practical matters the English language achieved dominance. According to
Bokhorst-Heng, the language policy for schooling ensured that English language learning
either as a ﬁrst or second language was compulsory for all ethnic groups. The Singapore case
was quite diﬀerent to that of Sub-Saharan Africa in that it made room for non-Anglo lan-
guages in the education system. However, it was similar in promoting English language use as
a neutral device for uniting a nation of competing ethnicities, and as a tool for modernization
and scientiﬁc, technological and economic progress in eﬀorts to ‘catch-up’ with the Western
world.
It could be argued that the English language retained its authority in the newly independent
and emerging nation states due to the ideologies and language planning practices of their
leading politicians. However, this presents only part of the picture. A parallel struggle con-
cerning ethnic authority and authenticity in language matters was also waged within the
applied linguistics academy.
Roxy Harris
350

A struggle over authority and authenticity
In the applied linguistics academic literature a contestation has taken place concerning the
centres of authority and authenticity with regard to English and the teaching of English. This
will be illustrated here by two examples:
(i)
the dispute between Quirk and Kachru;
(ii)
the native speaker intervention by Rampton.
The Quirk-Kachru debate
Quirk (1990) expressed alarm at what he saw as the introduction of practices vis-à-vis the
teaching of English globally, which disputed the idea that authority and authenticity on mat-
ters of English language resided in the Anglo world – especially in Britain. Not only did Kachru’s
work (Kachru 1982) directly acknowledge the legitimacy of diﬀering ethnically rooted stances
and aﬃliations to English, but Kachru’s own origins in the Indian sub-continent meant that
the conﬂicting perspectives between himself and Quirk also carried an underlying ethnic/racial
embodiment. Kachru’s notion of authentic world Englishes as opposed to a single correct and
authentic English was an aﬀront to Quirk’s deeply felt reliance on the hegemonic applied lin-
guistics ideology of the authentic and authoritative ‘native speaker’ – paradigmatically the
English speaker with an authentic and authoritative Anglo ethnicity. However, Rampton’s
(1990) intervention pointed out that both sides in this apparent dispute were operating within
a familiar conceptual frame. As he put it:
a good deal of eﬀort is now being made to show the independent legitimacy of Englishes
worldwide, but when these are described as the other tongue or nativized varieties, the
English of the ethnic Anglos is still there in the background as the central reference point.
(Rampton 1990: 97)
The native speaker intervention
Rampton’s deconstruction of the ideas of the ‘native speaker’ and of ‘mother tongue’ cast
serious doubt on the underlying ethnic and racial certainties which had hitherto been implied
in debates and analyses within applied linguistics. For Rampton:
[‘mother tongue’ and ‘native speaker’ as concepts] spuriously emphasize the biological at
the expense of the social … they [biological factors] are only as important as society
chooses to make them. They mix up language as an instrument of communication with
language as a symbol of social identiﬁcation.
(Rampton 1990: 99)
Rampton’s proposal was that links between people and language are better conceived as mat-
ters of expertise, aﬃliation and inheritance and that each of these are, in practice, to be nego-
tiated. The idea that issues of ethnicity, whether or not they are connected with language, are
negotiated rather than given, foreshadowed late modern as opposed to modern frames of
thought and analysis (see below). Before considering this, it is important now to brieﬂy look at
the new kinds of relations involving applied linguistics and ethnicity that arose when they
Ethnicity
351

began to involve not just matters in the ‘global periphery’ or between the ‘periphery’ and the
‘centre’. The new factor was the migration of signiﬁcant numbers of people from the periphery
to the metropolitan centres in the Anglo and European worlds.
Ethnicity and applied linguistics ‘at home’: majority-minority relations
Post 1945 there was mass migration from poorer areas of the world to the ‘home’ environment
in the metropolitan centres, i.e. to urban areas in Anglo and European settings. These move-
ments very often involved the movement of people from former colonies to the former colo-
nizing countries, for example to the UK from the Caribbean, especially Jamaica, and from
India, Pakistan, and Bangladesh; and to France from the Maghreb countries. In this process a
key problematic has been the question of the learning of the national standard language by the
immigrants in their new environments. The question of language learning has been used as a
proxy for a general discourse of hostility towards the new arrivals centred around their ethni-
city and their racial characteristics. This general phenomenon will be illustrated, here, by
focusing ﬁrst on the UK example and then supplementing this with brief references to another
Anglo-dominated location (the USA). What links these illustrative cases is that they involve
nation states dominated by a degree of majority-minority ethnic tension. The language of
the majority is taken to have naturally legitimate proprietorial rights over the geographical
space which the nation state occupies; conversely the linguistic rights of ethnic minorities are
deemed to be unnecessary or at worst a sign of disloyalty to the nation.
The UK
After 1945 ethnicity and applied linguistics in the UK were dominated by diﬃcult ethnic
relations rendered even more tense by their racially charged nature. For generations before the
1950s signiﬁcant numbers of migrants and their children had arrived in the UK speaking
languages like Polish, Chinese, French, Italian, Yiddish, and so on. However, their presence as
people needing special English language provision provoked little public interest, debate, state
intervention or provision (Bourne 1989). By contrast the peak years (the 1960s and 1970s) saw
an enormous public furore occasioned by a signiﬁcant new pattern of migration of black and
brown people from the former British empire. These new immigrants were principally from the
Indian subcontinent and the Caribbean. Their arrival was greeted with a high degree of racial
hostility, often accompanied by racially motivated violence (Goulbourne 1998). Politicians and
media joined the denunciation of the new arrivals in an atmosphere challenging their right to
be in the country at all. In this context the immigrants’ possession of languages other than
English and their children’s entry into the schools with these languages were received as a kind
of aﬀront. The resultant language policy was guided by explicitly assimilationist principles
(Grosvenor 1997). English language proﬁciency was to be inculcated as rapidly as possible at
the expense of other languages which ideally would disappear – bilingual education was not an
option – even in areas with a strong concentration of a single language other than English.
Dispersal and bussing policies were deployed in order to appease the majority ethnic popula-
tion by diluting the presence of the black and brown minority ethnic immigrant children in
any given sensitive school. The point to note here is that decisions ostensibly concerning lan-
guage learning were formed as a reaction to perceived volatile ethnic relations between
majority and minority communities rather than on the basis of coherent pedagogic principles.
Signiﬁcant sums of government money were made available for additional teachers to work
with immigrant minority ethnic children, but only those from the Commonwealth (i.e. the
Roxy Harris
352

black and brown ones), from the mid-1960s onwards. Yet to date there is no compulsory
requirement for these teachers to have any specialist knowledge of, or qualiﬁcations in, lin-
guistics or language pedagogy. Funding has also been provided for adult minority ethnic
immigrants to learn English. But after 9/11, and especially after the London bombings in
2005, leading politicians have raised the temperature. National unity in the face of terrorist
attacks has now been said to require the compulsory learning of English by all minority ethnic
individuals, and for the ﬁrst time a UK citizenship test has been introduced and contains an
English language requirement (Cooke and Simpson 2008).
The USA
The relationship between ethnicity and applied linguistics in a US context has a complex past
and present. As in the UK, the primary contrast has been between Anglo and other ethni-
cities. Two cases aﬀected by English-only ideology will illustrate this: the case of African
American Vernacular English (AAVE), and that of the Spanish language.
It might appear strange to include the AAVE example in a section which has concentrated
so narrowly on the majority-minority ethnic relationships arising from postcolonial migrations
into highly industrialized nation states. However, the historical relationship between Anglos
and African Americans has been violent and severely unequal. Despite their centuries-long
insider status in the USA, the treatment of African Americans in their relationship with
Anglos (including segregation and lack of civil rights) has been worse than the worst of the
treatment suﬀered by black and brown ex-colonial immigrants to the UK. The unresolved
diﬃculties in this relationship include linguistic issues. African Americans have always claimed
allegiance to English language use. Nevertheless, their particular variant of the language has
been continuously located at a troubled interface with the Anglo world. Mention of two types
of issue will suﬃce: (i) the suggestion that their use of AAVE is implicated in their educational
underachievement; and (ii) the interrelated dispute over whether AAVE should be formally
recognized as a diﬀerent language from the Standard American English with which the Anglo
population is ideologically aﬃliated. Both of these issues induced clariﬁcatory interventions
from the renowned sociolinguist William Labov. In the 1960s AAVE use by the black popu-
lation was blamed for reading and other perceived educational failures. In response, Labov
and colleagues presented detailed sociolinguistic descriptions of the regularity and systemati-
city of AAVE. The key point for present purposes is that apparently purely linguistic con-
siderations served as a proxy masking more salient social and political factors pertaining to
racial and ethnic conﬂict between Anglo and black Americans.
The major conclusion of our research is that reading failure is primarily the result of
political and cultural conﬂict within the classroom … the [linguistic] structural diﬀerences
cited here are quite speciﬁc and easily isolated. If they are not recognized, they can
become the symbolic issues around which other conﬂicts arise.
(Labov 1972: 35)
The sociolinguistic scholarship and authority of Labov and others has never managed to
resolve the festering ethnically charged tension over the provenance of AAVE, which from
time to time has entered a quasi-legal/legislative environment. In the Ann Arbor ‘Black Eng-
lish trial’ in 1979 in Michigan, Judge Joiner ruled that the language spoken by black school
children in the area was a distinctive linguistic code and that they were suﬀering discrimina-
tion in that their predominantly Anglo teachers failed to recognize this. The judgment
Ethnicity
353

instructed the school district to train all teachers in the sociolinguistic properties of AAVE and
to develop a programme for literacy teaching without pathologizing AAVE. Despite this,
almost two decades later an intense controversy erupted when the Oakland School Board in
California passed its Ebonics resolution on a similar basis (Baugh 1998). Labov oﬀered written
evidence in support of AAVE in both the Ann Arbor and Oakland cases, notwithstanding the
aﬃliation of many African Americans to hegemonic common sense ideologies of linguistic
deﬁcit. Nevertheless, the dominant Anglo population in the USA has never been seriously
concerned that AAVE has ever posed any kind of threat to the hegemony of Standard English.
The opposite has been the case in recent times with respect to the Spanish-speaking populations
and Spanish language in the United States.
Turning to the case of the Spanish language, whereas the Anglo vs African American lin-
guistic disputes involved two populations behaving as indigenous actors in the United States,
the framing of the Spanish speaking populations has been more akin to the immigrant posi-
tioning reported earlier with respect to the UK. The entry of these populations to the United
States also took place in the wake of a colonial relationship with the Anglo population.
However, over time their presence and accrued power in the United States came to be seen as
a crucial challenge to Anglo ethnic pre-eminence. One manifestation of this anxiety has been a
strong revitalization of the English-only movement; a movement which instigated legislative
initiatives intended to shore up the inﬂuence and standing of English in the face of a perceived
pressing threat from Spanish. A wealthy Californian computer entrepreneur, Ron Unz, has
been widely credited with being the most eﬀective activist on this issue. His funding, inﬂuence
and enthusiasm helped to stimulate the passing of anti-bilingual education legislation in three
states – Proposition 227 in California (1998), Proposition 203 in Arizona (2000) and Question
2 in Massachusetts (2002), (Garcia 2009: 182–65; Crawford 2000; Lo Bianco 2004). This suc-
cess does not necessarily mean that (a) the inﬂuence of Spanish in the United States has sig-
niﬁcantly declined, (b) that Spanish was ever a serious threat to the dominance of English, or
(c) Spanish speakers were the only linguistic minorities targeted by the legislation. The Spanish
language case provides a distinctive example of the ways in which matters presented in a lin-
guistic guise conceal deeply felt ethnic motivations. For his part, Ron Unz made his profound
racial/ethnic foreboding explicitly clear:
Californians of European ancestry – ‘whites’ – became a minority near the end of the
1980s, and this unprecedented ethnic transformation is probably responsible for the rise of
a series of ethnically-charged political issues such as immigration, aﬃrmative action, and
bilingual education, as seen in Propositions 187, 209, and 227. … Our political leaders
should approach these ethnic issues by reaﬃrming America’s traditional support for
immigration, but couple that with a return to the assimilative policies which America has
emphasized in the past. Otherwise, whites as a group will inevitably begin to display the
same ethnic-minority-group politics as other minority groups, and this could break our
nation. We face the choice of either supporting ‘the New American Melting Pot’ or
accepting ‘the Coming of White Nationalism’.
(Unz 1999)
These two illustrations from the USA close this section on the interfaces between tradition,
modernity and ethnicity in applied linguistics. The complex relationships described have
embraced interactions on language matters between established powerful nation states
and ‘tribal’/ethnic groupings; between established powerful Anglo and European nation states
and newly emerging nation states in the formerly colonized world; and between Anglo and
Roxy Harris
354

European ethnic majorities in their nation states and ‘visible’ immmigrant ethnic minorities
from the economically poorer parts of the world. The next, ﬁnal, section will look at a rela-
tively newly developing conceptualization – the interfaces between modernity, late modernity
and ethnicity in applied linguistics.
Modernity, late modernity and ethnicity in applied linguistics
Hitherto, most of the present discussion (excepting Rampton 1990), has proceeded with a
settled notion of the concept of ethnicity itself. In short, for most of its history, when applied
linguistics has dealt with ethnicity, it has done so assuming that groupings with speciﬁc ethnic
labels are essentially diﬀerent from groupings with other ethnic labels, and that each such
grouping is internally homogeneous. The ﬁeld has been relatively slow in absorbing new con-
ceptualizations of ethnicity drawing on theory from other disciplines relating to contemporary
globalization, post/late modernity and emerging global diasporas (Hall et al. 1992; Cohen
1997). In these new conﬁgurations ethnicity becomes ethnicities, which are ﬂuid, open and
hybrid, and previous certainties about language and nation become destabilized:
an approach in which ethnicity is regarded as something that people can emphasise stra-
tegically in a range of diﬀerent ways, according to their needs and purposes in particular
situations. [And,] in this ‘strategic’ view, ethnicity is viewed more as a relatively ﬂexible
resource that individuals and groups use in the negotiation of social boundaries, aligning
themselves with some people and institutions, dissociating from others, and this is some-
times described as a ‘roUtes’ rather than a ‘roOts’ conception of ethnicity. Compared with
its predecessor, this version gives more credit to free will and active agency.
(Harris and Rampton 2003: 5)
In this spirit of active agency, human social actors seek to transcend the social categories into
which they are born and which they are expected to eternally inhabit. They are not afraid to
participate in ethnic practices which allegedly belong legitimately to others, nor do they shrink
from participating in the construction of ethnic practices regarded as new. The visible products
of these actions include (a) close interethnic friendship groups, and (b) the commercial mar-
keting of minority ethnically marked cultural products, styles and symbols as commodities.
The emphasis in this account has been on a broadly conceived notion of ethnicity, but it is
intended that real-world language use and second language learning – the province of applied
linguistics – be envisaged as being deeply embedded in these everyday processes. In this new
perspective a given ethnicity comes with no guarantees with respect to linguistic and cultural
practices, and theories of ‘hybridity’ and ‘new ethnicities’ begin to emerge. This approach has
been explicit in some work with a sociolinguistic orientation (Rampton 2005; Harris 2006;
Rampton 2006; Harris and Rampton 2009), but has been less easy to perceive within applied
linguistics per se. Leung et al. (1997) and Harris et al. (2002) attempted to bring thinking of
this kind on ethnicity into applied linguistics, using exempliﬁcations drawn from ethno-
graphically informed research in educational contexts in the UK. Heller (1999) in turn used
ethnographic research to demonstrate how modernist language ideologies in Francophone
Canada have been unsettled by the ethnicities and cultural practices of migrant youth with
global diaspora connections in ‘high modernity’. This use of ethnography has played an
important role in opening up the study of ethnicity within applied linguistics, although the
critical ethnography of authors such as Canagarajah (1999) and Norton (2000) is not neces-
sarily as committed to the late modern perspective on ethnicity; its strategic essentialism on
Ethnicity
355

matters of ethnicity primarily focuses on advocacy for social justice. Nevertheless, ethno-
graphic approaches have begun to open the ﬁeld to the myriad particularities and possibilities
of new ethnicities. There are emerging insights revealing ways in which orientations to lan-
guages are connected to other aspects of social life and cultural practice – including popular
cultural practice. This is evident in the work of Heller (ibid.) and Harris et al. (ibid.), but more
emphatically in the emerging work of Pennycook (2007) and Alim et al. (2009) which draws
attention to the global inﬂuence of hip hop. How contemporary youth learns English and
other languages, and which versions they learn, may owe as much to the popular cultural
sphere as to the classroom.
One other slowly emerging dimension of the deconstruction of formerly essential ethnic
categories, relates to a renewed emphasis on the importance of social class in the context of
ethnicity and language. Classic work by Zentella (1997) has all too rarely been followed.
However, Collins and La Santa (2006) and Rampton et al. (2008) have more recently re-
emphasized that ethnicity in applied linguistics in the late modern era is poorly understood
without the inclusion of issues of social class. In the present text, the remit to comment on
ethnicity has crowded out the importance of social class. However, to take the example of the
British colonies, it was commonplace for black and brown bourgeois minorities to master
Standard English with ease as a routine part of a process of schooling (Williams 1969) at the
same time as the majority working class and peasantry of the same societies struggled with
this, and had unequal access to schooling (Devonish 1986). In addition, the mass migrations in
contemporary globalization from peripheries to metropolitan centres have predominantly
involved working-class, rural, underemployed or unemployed people. Crises and problems of
second language learning in the new global cities involve these same populations as they
become an integral element of the urban working classes in their new locations. It is also from
these same sources that emergent hybrid linguistic practices and new ethnicities can be detected.
This is potentially fertile ground for future research in applied linguistics.
Conclusion
This chapter has attempted to discuss, albeit centred on the Anglo experience, the concept of
ethnicity in applied linguistics by exploring how it can be understood within interlocking per-
spectives of tradition, modernity and late modernity. It has then attempted to exemplify this
analysis with a range of illustrative summaries of some of the diﬀerent ways in which ethnicity
has been salient in the ﬁeld over its history. It is important to close by emphasizing that tra-
ditional, modern and late modern modes of thought and practices with respect to ethnicity are
constantly in play and in interaction with each other – generating nuances which await
description and illumination globally by means of ethnographic approaches.
Related topics
language and migration; language policy and planning; linguistic imperialism; world Englishes
Further reading
Alim, H. S., Ibrahim, A. and Pennycook, P. (eds) (2009) Global Linguistic Flows, London:
Routledge. (An important publication presenting a range of inﬂuential global developments in
language and ethnicity outside the classroom, which are highly inﬂuential with young people, and
linked to popular culture.)
Roxy Harris
356

Hall, S., Held, D. and McGrew, T. (eds) (1992) Modernity and its Futures, Cambridge: Polity Press/
Open University. (Provides a comprehensive analytic framework of social and cultural theory
within which diﬀering manifestations of ethnicity can be better understood.)
Harris, R. and Rampton, B. (eds) (2003) The Language, Ethnicity and Race Reader, London: Rou-
tledge. (A collection of texts by noted authors presented in a way designed to generate a multi-
sided debate about the interrelationship between language and ethnicity.)
Heller, M. (ed.) (2007) Bilingualism: A Social Approach, Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan. (A
volume oﬀering rich insights, on a global canvas, into language and ethnicity seen as historically
shaped and socially situated.)
References
Alim, H. S., Ibrahim, A. and Pennycook, A. (eds) (2009) Global Linguistic Flows, New York and
London: Routledge.
Ashcroft, B. (2001) ‘Language and race’, Social Identities 7(3): 311–28.
Bambgbose, A. (1991) Language and the Nation, Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press.
——(2003) ‘A recurring decimal: English in language policy and planning’, World Englishes 22(4):
419–31.
Baugh, J. (1998) ‘Linguistics, education and the law’, in S. Mufwene, J. Rickford, G. Bailey and
J. Baugh (eds) African American English, London: Routledge.
Block, D. (2009) ‘Economizing Globalization and Resuscitating Social Class in Identity Research’,
unpublished MS.
Bokhorst-Heng, W. (1999) ‘Singapore’s Speak Mandarin campaign’, in J. Blommaert (ed.)
Language Ideological Debates, Berlin and New York: Mouton de Gruyter.
Bourne, J. (1989) Moving into the Mainstream, Windsor: NFER-Nelson.
Canagarajah, A. S. (1999) Resisting Linguistic Imperialism in English Teaching, Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Cohen, R. (1997) Global Diasporas, London: UCL Press.
Collins, J. and La Santa, A. (2006) ‘Analyzing class and ethnicity as communicative practices’.
Available at: www.kcl.ac.uk/content/1/c6/01/42/29/paper40.pdf
Cooke, M. and Simpson, J. (2008) ESOL: A Critical Guide, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Crawford, J. (2000) At War with Diversity, Clevedon: Multilingual Matters.
Davies, A. and Elder, C. (eds) (2006) The Handbook of Applied Linguistics, Oxford: Blackwell.
Devonish, H. (1986) Language and Liberation, London: Karia Press.
García, O. (2009) Bilingual Education in the 21st Century: A Global Perspective, Oxford: Wiley-Blackwell.
Goulbourne, H. (1998) Race Relations in Britain Since 1945, Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan.
Grosvenor, I. (1997) Assimilating Identities: Racism and Educational Policy in Post 1945 Britain,
London: Lawrence and Wishart.
Hall, S. (1992) ‘The question of cultural identity’, in S. Hall, D. Held and T. McGrew (eds)
Modernity and its Futures, Cambridge: Polity Press.
Hall, S., Held, D. and McGrew, T. (eds) (1992) Modernity and its Futures, Cambridge: Polity Press/
Open University.
Harris, R. (2006) New Ethincites and Language Use, Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan.
Harris, R., Leung, C. and Rampton, B. (2002) ‘Globalization, diaspora and language education in
England’, in D. Block, and D. Cameron (eds) Globalization and Language Teaching, London:
Routledge.
Harris, R. and Rampton, B. (2009) ‘Ethnicities without guarantees’, in M. Wetherell (ed.) Identity
in the 21st Century, Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan.
Heller, M. (1999) Linguistic Minorities and Modernity, London: Longman.
Howatt, A. P. R. and Widdowson, H. G. (2004) A History of English Language Teaching, 2nd edn,
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Hutchinson, J. and Smith, A. D. (eds) (1996) Ethnicity, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Jespersen, O. ([1922] 1964) ‘The origin of speech’, in Language: Its Nature, Development and Origin,
London: Allen and Unwin.
Johnson, K. and Johnson, H. (eds) (1999) Encyclopedic Dictionary of Applied Linguistics, Oxford:
Blackwell.
Ethnicity
357

Kachru, B. B. (ed.) (1982) The Other Tongue: English across Cultures, Champaign: University of
Illinois Press.
Kaplan, R. B. (ed.) (2002) The Oxford Handbook of Applied Linguistics, Oxford: Oxford University
Press.
Labov, W. (1972) Language in the Inner City, Oxford: Basil Blackwell.
Leung, C., Harris, R. and Rampton, B. (1997) ‘The idealised native speaker, reiﬁed ethnicities, and
classroom realities’, TESOL Quarterly 31: 543–60.
Lo Bianco, J. (2004) ‘Uncle Sam and Mr Unz: language needs, politics, and pressures in the United
States’, English Today 20(3): 16–22.
Mazrui, A. (1997) ‘The World Bank, the language question and the future of African education’,
Race and Class 38(3): 35–48.
NEPI (1992) Language, Oxford and Cape Town: Oxford University Press.
Norton, B. (2000) Identity and Language Learning: Gender, Ethnicity and Educational Change,
Harlow: Pearson Education.
Pennycook, A. (1994) The Cultural Politics of English as an International Language, London:
Longman.
——(2007) Global Englishes and Transcultural Flows, London: Routledge.
Phillipson, R. (1992) Linguistic Imperialism, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Quirk, R. (1990) ‘Language varieties and standard language’, Language Today 21: 3–10.
Rampton, B. (2005) Crossing, London: Longman.
——(2006) Language in Late Modernity: Interaction in an Urban School, Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Rampton, B., Harris, R., Collins, J. and Blommaert, J. (2008) ‘Language, class and education’, in
S. May and N. Hornberger (eds) Encyclopedia of Language and Education, vol. 1, New York:
Springer.
Rampton, M. B. H. (1990) ‘Displacing the “native speaker”: expertise, aﬃliation, and inheritance’,
ELT Journal 44(2): 97–101.
Sealey, A. and Carter, B. (2004) Applied Linguistics as Social Science, London: Continuum.
Unz, R. (1999) ‘California and the end of White America’, Commentary (November). Available at:
www.onenation.org/9911/110199.html (accessed 20 November 2009).
wa Thiong’o, N. (1981) Decolonising the Mind, London: Heinemann.
Williams, E. (1969) Inward Hunger, London: Andre Deutsch.
Zentella, A. (1997) Growing Up Bilingual, Oxford: Blackwell.
Roxy Harris
358

25
Sign languages
Bencie Woll and Rachel Sutton-Spence
Introduction
This chapter explores applied linguistics in relation to sign languages – the term used to
refer to the class of natural human languages which have arisen spontaneously within
Deaf communities. These languages are produced and perceived in the visual modality, and
are unrelated to the spoken languages which surround them. Despite surface diﬀerences
from spoken language, they share at a deeper level the linguistic structure of all human
language, and are used in parallel social and communicative contexts. They are unwrit-
ten languages that occupy minority positions within societies where other languages are
dominant.
The chapter takes as its starting point that the driving thrust of applied linguistics is to
identify and solve problems (both practical and policy-orientated) within a language situation
independent of the modality of the language or languages considered.
The chapter will begin with a brief but comprehensive introduction to the linguistic study of
sign languages and the status of diﬀerent sign languages within their surrounding majority
spoken language communities. The section includes a concise description of phonology, mor-
phology, syntax, pragmatics and discourse. We primarily describe sign languages in Europe
and North America, but consideration will be given to sign languages in other parts of the
world, and to a comparison of urban and village sign languages, and of new and old sign
languages. A discussion of current research priorities in applied linguistics of sign language,
including lexicography and sign language corpus linguistics, follows. This leads into a consideration
of sign languages within a bilingual context, which will cover such topics as access to spoken/
written language and literacy, interpreting and translation, and workplace communication in
mixed Deaf/hearing settings.
The remainder of the chapter discusses a range of issues pertinent to applied linguistics,
grouped around three themes: sign language teaching and learning, sign language politics, and
social and technological change. Description of sign language teaching and learning includes
L1 and L2 acquisition, curriculum design, learner assessment, and classroom practices. Our
exploration of applied linguistics of sign language in relation to language and politics covers
sign language planning, language choice, linguistic correctness, identity and language. The
359

ﬁnal section will look ahead to the potential impact of change on sign language and the Deaf
community, including language variation and change, and new technology.
The linguistic structure of signed languages
Structure and modality
In the last ﬁfty years, there has been substantial research on nearly a hundred diﬀerent sign
languages (see the Hamburg sign language bibliographic Website, www.sign-lang.uni-hamburg.
de/bibWeb, for a comprehensive listing of sign language research), determining that the sign
languages of Deaf communities (lower case ‘Deaf’ is used to refer to deafness in audiological
terms; upper case ‘Deaf’ refers to social, cultural and linguistic identity) throughout the world
are complex natural human languages, distinct from gesture and also from spoken languages.
Early modern research on sign languages emphasised the underlying structural similarities of
spoken and sign languages, but more recent research has moved towards recognition that there
are systematic typological diﬀerences. These arise mainly from the interaction of language
form with modality. Phonological and morphological structures diﬀer because sign languages
have greater correspondence between form and meaning (iconicity or visual motivation) than
spoken languages do. Sign languages also exploit space for grammatical purposes, creating
syntactic structures exhibiting extensive simultaneity, while spoken languages prefer linearity
and aﬃxation processes. Other diﬀerences arise from the properties of the articulators (sign
languages use two primary articulators – the hands – as well as non-manual articulators,
including the torso, head and face, eyes and mouth) and the diﬀering properties of the visual
and auditory perceptual systems. In the light of this, linguistic theory needs to take greater
account of modality (Meier et al. 2003). A further step in our understanding of sign languages
has been to recognise the interrelationship of language and gesture, for example, the presence
of slots in discourse structure where signers can switch to gesturing, such as when they want to
show the roles of characters in a story. Cognitive models are increasingly used to account for
the visual motivation behind the structure and form of sign languages, irrespective of the level
of language analysis (Taub 2001).
Although the social histories of sign languages diﬀer from each other in many respects,
there is greater typological similarity among sign languages than among spoken languages.
Their relative youth (Kegl et al. 1999) and their possible creole status (Fischer 1978) may
account for some of this, but visual motivation as an organising factor in the lexicon and
syntax may also be signiﬁcant. The linear syntax of spoken languages and their independence
from visual motivation may allow greater diﬀerences than spatial, visually motivated syntax
(Woll 1984 and Taub 2001).
Many superﬁcial diﬀerences in sign grammars stem from the inﬂuence of the grammar of
surrounding spoken languages, either through natural processes of borrowing (see below) or
the use in schools of artiﬁcial communication systems such as ‘Signed English’ or ‘Signed
Dutch’. However, the basic similarities in structure of sign languages are suﬃcient for us to
treat them together in a brief review here.
Phonology, morphology and syntax
Since Stokoe’s pioneering work on American Sign Language (1960), linguists have seen signs
as consisting of simultaneous combinations of handshape conﬁguration, a location where the
sign is articulated and movement – either a path through signing space or an internal
Bencie Woll and Rachel Sutton-Spence
360

movement of the joints in the hand. Each is understood to be a part of the phonology, because
changing one of these parameters can create a minimal pair. Thus, in British Sign Language
(BSL) AFTERNOON and ORDER diﬀer only in handshape; AFTERNOON and NAME
diﬀer only in location; and AFTERNOON and TWO-HUNDRED diﬀer only in movement.
There have been considerable modiﬁcations to Stokoe’s framework since 1960, but this model
has remained the basic description of sign language phonology.
Sign language morphology tends to manifest itself in simultaneous combinations of mean-
ingful handshapes, locations and movements. In derivational morphology, for example, hand-
shape can change to reﬂect numbers – for example, N-weeks, N-o’clock and N-years-old are
articulated with conventionalised location and movement while the handshape indicates the
number. Signs referring to objects and actions may also diﬀer only in movement, so the verbs
LOCK, OPEN-A-NEWSPAPER, and EAT are made with a single, large movement, com-
pared to the nouns KEY, NEWSPAPER, and FOOD, which have short, repeated movements.
Inﬂectional morphology is also shown by changes in movement and location. Thus, degree is
shown through size, speed, onset speed and length of hold in a movement, with, for example,
LUCKY having a smaller, smoother movement than VERY-LUCKY. The movement changes
conveying temporal aspect are frequently visually motivated, so that repeated actions or events
are shown through repetition of the sign; duration of an event is paralleled by duration of the
sign (signs for shorter events being articulated for less time than signs for longer events); and
when an event is interrupted suddenly, the movement of the sign is interrupted. Some verbs
show number and person by movement through signing space. The direction of movement of a
verb such as GIVE indicates who gave to whom and to how many. Signs can also change
handshape to indicate how the direct object is handled. So I-HAND-OVER-A-SINGLE-
FLOWER-TO-EACH-OF-SEVERAL-OF-YOU has the same movement as I-HAND-OVER-
AN-ICECREAM-TO-EACH-OF-SEVERAL-OF-YOU but a diﬀerent handshape.
Sign language has relatively free word order, driven extensively by external factors such as
the pragmatics of the signers’ communicative aims and what they believe their audience to
know, as well as what has already been said. Creating a clear, visually motivated image of the
discourse will also inﬂuence order, with the ground signed before the ﬁgure, and the patient or
goal signed before the agent, in order to allow the agent to have something to act upon in a
visual sense. For example, WALL PAINT (put paint on a wall) and PAINT PICTURE (create
a picture by painting) may be preferred orders.
Educators have often compared sign languages unfavourably to spoken (European) lan-
guages, noting that sign languages frequently ‘lack’ certain features seen in European spoken
languages, such as tense, gender, or determiners. In fact, sign languages share many features
with other language groups, especially other head-marking languages such as Navajo, Mayan
and Abkhaz, rather than dependent-marking languages such as many in the Romance,
Germanic and Sino-Tibetan families (Slobin 2005). For example, sign languages share features
with the languages of Micronesia (Nichols 1992), including adjectives operating as intransitive
verbs, distinctions between inclusive and exclusive pronouns, and lack of a copula. Verbs in
languages of this type (both signed and spoken) often use classiﬁers (based on shape or ani-
macy, for example), show direct object incorporation, have rich inﬂection including aspect,
and show little opposition of active and passive voice.
Different types of visually motivated signs
While signed and spoken languages share many grammatical features, the visual-spatial modality
provides structural possibilities unavailable to spoken languages.
Sign languages
361

Spoken languages can incorporate auditory features of referents into the language (as in
onomatopoeia) but there are few opportunities for this since humans perceive the world largely
visually. Signs often represent the visual form of a referent, how it moves, or where it is loca-
ted, although it should be noted that not all signs are visually motivated (for example, WANT,
WHO and SISTER in BSL).
Whether or not a sign is visually motivated, all signs exhibit a conventionalised relationship
between the form and the referent. A sign can be visually motivated but the particular image
selection of the referent for linguistic encoding is arbitrary. For example, the BSL sign TEA
reﬂects the action of ‘drinking from a teacup’, while the ASL sign reﬂects the act of ‘dipping a
teabag in a cup’.
Signed languages can convey spatial relations directly. The linguistic conventions used in
such spatial mapping specify the position of objects in a highly geometric and non-arbitrary
fashion by situating certain sign forms (e.g. classiﬁers) in space such that they maintain the
topographic relations of the world-space being described (Emmorey et al. 1995). Within these
structures, the handshapes in verbs of motion and location in topographic sentences represent
object features or classes (how objects are handled, their size and shape, or their function).
These have been termed ‘classiﬁers’ (Supalla 1986; Engberg-Pedersen 1993), although recently
the use of this term has come into question (see Schembri 2003).
Both spoken and signed languages articulate lexical items sequentially. Spoken languages
can give some linguistic information simultaneously (as in, for example, tone languages), and
prosody adds further grammatical and aﬀective information to the lexemes uttered. Essen-
tially, though, humans have only one vocal apparatus so spoken languages must use sequential
structures. The availability of two hands (and head and face) enables sign languages to use
simultaneously articulated structures (see Vermeerbergen et al. 2007). Two hands can be used
to represent the relative locations of two referents in space, and their spatial and temporal
relationships. In representing, for example, a person reaching for a book while holding a pen,
English conjoins clauses using ‘while’ or ‘as’ to indicate two events happening simultaneously.
In sign languages ‘holding a pen’ can be signed with one hand, while ‘reaching for the book’
can be signed with the other. English uses prepositions such as ‘next to’ or ‘behind’ to repre-
sent relative locations, whereas sign languages can simply place the two signs in the relative
locations of the two referents.
It should be noted, however, that simultaneity is an option exercised diﬀerently by diﬀerent
sign languages. In a comparison of sentences generated from the same picture materials in
Irish Sign Language (ISL) and BSL, ISL signers used simultaneous signs in 20 per cent of
their utterances and BSL signers used them in 80 per cent (Saeed et al. 2000).
Sign languages within a bilingual context
Case studies of ‘non-Western’ Deaf communities
Deafness is statistically uncommon, with about 1 in 1,000 children born Deaf in developed
countries. The bulk of research on sign languages has been on the sign languages of North
America and Europe, where small numbers of relatively well-educated Deaf people are spread
across nations but socialise within local and national Deaf communities and share a common
national sign language. However, there are also small isolated, often rural, communities
around the world where higher rates of genetic deafness create ‘Deaf villages’ which develop
their own sign languages. These include Grand Cayman Island (Washabaugh 1981), the
Urubu-Kaapor of Brazil (Ferreira-Brito 1985), the Yucatan Maya (Johnson 1994), the Enga of
Bencie Woll and Rachel Sutton-Spence
362

New Guinea (Kendon 1980), the people of Desa Kolok on the island of Bali (Branson et al.
1996) and the Al-Sayyid Bedouin in Israel (Kisch 2007, 2008). (Also see Kusters 2010, for a
comprehensive review of research on ‘shared sign languages’.)
In the community in Bali called Desa Kolok by Branson and colleagues, 2 per cent of the
2,000 village residents are Deaf, and marriage between hearing and Deaf villagers is the norm.
Deaf members of the community have equal status in decision-making at local community
level although few are reported to participate. Those who do, use family members to interpret,
since not all village members are ﬂuent in sign language. In earlier times, village Deaf children
received no formal education, although there has been a school for hearing children for over
ﬁfty years. Recent moves to oﬀer specialist Deaf education have resulted in the placing of Deaf
children in a school located outside the village, and this has begun to alter the linguistic and
social dynamics of the community.
Al-Sayyid Bedouin Sign Language is used in a Bedouin tribe of around 3,000 people with
approximately 5 per cent Deaf. Deaf children have had better access to education in the past
than hearing children, since they attended a Deaf school where Hebrew was taught. The Deaf
children therefore developed a degree of literacy in the majority language, which is a key to
employability, and they are fully economically integrated. While all hearing members of the
community have some knowledge of the tribe’s sign language, only hearing people in families
with a high percentage of Deaf members are fully ﬂuent.
Encounters between Deaf and hearing communities
Even when Deaf and hearing people can sign or where there are interpreters available, there
are still instances of conﬂict and misunderstanding arising between the two groups. Much of
the time these arise from their very diﬀerent experiences of life within society. Deaf commu-
nities share life experiences and culture, but these are embedded within the hearing world.
When hearing people do not appreciate Deaf values and the importance of certain behaviours,
friction and even hostility can occur.
Perhaps the area where such conﬂict is greatest is in the area of language. Young et al.
(1998) studied the use of BSL in the workplace (in psychiatric units for Deaf people and in a
school for Deaf children), exploring the role of signers as not only service users but also as
service providers. The signing skills of Deaf staﬀwere far superior to those of their hearing
colleagues. These skills were especially important for communicating with mentally ill Deaf
people or with Deaf children. Despite this, the Deaf staﬀhad lower-grade jobs than the
hearing staﬀalthough the delivery of services depended on Deaf staﬀand their cultural and
linguistic skills. They thus had low status, but high value.
Since only a signed linguistic environment provided Deaf staﬀwith full access to informa-
tion at work, hearing staﬀwere required to sign at all times when a Deaf person was present
or might be present. Deaf and hearing people diﬀered in the way they viewed this policy. For
Deaf staﬀ, signing promoted involvement, making Deaf people feel conﬁdent, valued and
respected, and with a sense of well-being; signing promoted the development of personal and
social relationships between Deaf and hearing people; signing also enabled Deaf staﬀto fulﬁl
their professional roles and responsibilities. In contrast, hearing staﬀreported that signing
caused lack of conﬁdence, and they felt that the pressure to sign was sometimes too great.
When they were tired, distracted, or under pressure, they reverted to English. A clear signing
policy, good training and a supportive environment encouraged hearing people to sign. This
increased recognition of the role of sign language within the workplace for the beneﬁt of both
employees and service users, is a positive step.
Sign languages
363

Bimodal bilingualism
Until recently, studies of bilingualism considered only individuals and communities in which
two spoken languages are used. With the development of research on sign languages, it has
become clear that bilingualism can be bimodal as well as unimodal. Unimodal bilingualism
occurs when either two spoken or two sign languages are used (e.g. Irish and British Sign
Language); bimodal bilingualism occurs when the two languages exist in diﬀerent modalities:
one signed and one spoken/written. Recognition of bimodal bilingualism has led to a re-evaluation
of models of bilingualism.
Bimodal bilingualism diﬀers from unimodal bilingualism with respect to the temporal
sequencing of languages. Hearing people with Deaf parents (in America sometimes called
CODAs – children of Deaf adults) can acquire a sign language as a ﬁrst language. As adults,
they have full access to at least two languages: a visual-manual one (signed language) and an
auditory-vocal one (spoken language). Emmorey et al. (2005) have explored how bimodal
bilingualism works in CODAs, showing code blending in the production of words and signs
where these reﬂect a common conceptual source. Code blending reﬂects the simultaneous use
of sign and word in a single utterance, which is not possible for unimodal bilinguals, who must
sequence the language items in production.
Deaf bimodal bilinguals may not use voice but still produce code-blends as well as code-
mixes (some researchers prefer the term ‘cross-modal’ to indicate that bilingualism in, for
example, BSL and English can be represented in types of code-blends other than speech
accompanied by signing). Cross-modal bilingualism is the norm in those countries where Deaf
children receive education and use sign language. Mastery of both the sign language of the
Deaf community and the spoken/written language of the hearing community is the goal of
Deaf bilingual education, since the bedrock of formal education is literacy.
Recording signs
Sign languages are essentially unwritten and no sign language has a written literature. Written
forms of some sign languages are being actively promoted, for example, ASL, Brazilian Sign
Language and Nicaraguan Sign Language (see www.signwriting.org) but it will be many
years, if at all, before these written forms of sign language attain the status and function of
written forms of spoken language. Since written language is central to so much of applied
linguistics, it is worth considering the implications for teaching and learning, change and
standardisation, as well as for dictionary-making and issues of electronic storage of examples
of language use.
Sign languages are increasingly recorded and transmitted using digital video technology
(Krentz 2006), but the impact of this is diﬀerent from the impact of writing. Wilcox (2003) has
observed that seeing the actual signer (whom many will recognise and whose personality will
be known) is not the same as an anonymous written record. This has great implications for the
creation of linguistic corpora and language surveys, where anonymity can never be guaranteed. It
also has implications for such apparently mundane issues as blind marking in examinations –
there can be no anonymous candidates in a sign language examination.
Dictionaries and standardisation
Sign language dictionaries are usually created to collect and preserve the lexicon of the lan-
guage (such dictionaries have existed for several centuries; for example, Bulwer 1644; Pelissier
Bencie Woll and Rachel Sutton-Spence
364

1856) or to allow others to learn the language. However, most ‘dictionaries’ are more
accurately ‘bilingual word lists’ using a written language and illustrations of signs. They are
not created for ﬂuent users of the language to consult in order to check the meaning, pro-
nunciation or origin of the sign. Signs are rarely deﬁned using the sign language and are more
often deﬁned through the written language. Some specialist bilingual dictionaries oﬀer trans-
lations of words and signs used in speciﬁc trades or scholarly areas (for example, see www.
artsigns.ac.uk).
Recent advances in technology have allowed construction of sign language dictionaries
based on signed corpora. Even the largest sign dictionary databases are only of several hun-
dred thousand signs – minimal compared to most spoken language databases for corpus
work – but they are proving eﬀective, and corpus-based dictionaries are now available, for
example, in German and New Zealand Sign Languages (McKee and Kennedy 2006). Corpora
also allow researchers to identify sign frequencies, so that teaching materials can be better
designed.
Signs that are in dictionaries are more likely to be accorded high status, be considered
‘standard’ and be in more widespread use than those that are omitted. Sign language diction-
aries have relatively little direct impact on native signers because they rarely use them, but
second language learners of sign languages who use these dictionaries often become educators
or interpreters and may ultimately have considerable power within the sign language
community.
There are similarities between the functions of dictionaries created for minority spoken
languages and sign languages. For example, the Jicarilla Apache dictionary (Axelrod et al.
2003) was designed to document the endangered language, be a reference dictionary for
less ﬂuent speakers, be a teaching tool, standardise the language, and ‘celebrate’ the language.
Dictionaries of minority languages often provide ‘a clear and powerful symbolic function
of recognition and empowerment of the language’ (Lucas 2002: 323) but they can also
threaten the language if the making of the dictionary is not carefully controlled (Armstrong
2003).
As an example, van Herreweghe and Vermeerbergen (2004) describe some of the impact of
codiﬁcation on Flemish Sign Language (VGT). Increased oﬃcial recognition of VGT led to
increased demand for educational materials, dictionaries and grammar books. Between 1980
and 1995 a committee of Deaf people worked to standardise VGT across Flanders, creating
signs where there were apparent lexical gaps and choosing the most widely used variant to be
the standard form. Deaf adults rarely used the new codiﬁed form, but its lexicon inﬂuenced
interpreters. When Deaf schools were replaced by the integration of Deaf children in main-
stream schools, reducing their access to each other and especially to Deaf children or teachers
from Deaf families, non-native signer interpreters became language role models.
As well as the use of dictionaries as a tool to create language change, many sign languages
have undergone language planning designed to create changes in grammar, sometimes through
the eﬀorts of Deaf people, but more often because hearing people, especially educators, have
sought to improve what they saw as defective systems. The great sign language enthusiasts of
the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries, such as the Abbé de L’Epée in France, and Thomas
and Edward Gallaudet in America (who were not Deaf) created new morphological markers
to match the structure of the spoken languages of their countries. The changes have not been
as long-lasting as the planners expected. Those who have invented new signs or sign systems
(new manual alphabets or entirely new communication systems such as the Paget Gorman
Sign System or Seeing Essential English [SEE]) have found them for the most part rejected by
Deaf communities.
Sign languages
365

Dialect variation in many sign languages is common, and signers from diﬀerent regions
often use diﬀerent lexical items to refer to the same concept. BSL research in the late 1980s
showed that although there were regionally speciﬁc signs for many concepts, there was fre-
quently one lexical item that was recognised and used across all regions (Woll 1991). At the
time of that study, most Deaf adults had been educated at schools for Deaf children (either
residential or day schools) but by 2000 most children were educated in mainstream schools.
The implications of this change for BSL have been considerable, as children no longer have the
same ready-made circle of signing friends and their sign language role models are now often
non-native signers.
Learning sign language as L1
Since the vast majority of Deaf children are born to hearing parents, their exposure to lan-
guage is very diﬀerent from that of hearing children learning a spoken language. The typical
experience for Deaf children is late and impoverished exposure to a ﬁrst language (Harris
2001; Spencer 1993). If parents communicate only through spoken language, the child may
have greatly reduced access to the linguistic signal; where parents begin to learn a sign lan-
guage when deafness is diagnosed, they often have only limited sign language skills. The 95 per
cent of Deaf children born to hearing parents are therefore often contrasted with the minority
of Deaf and hearing children who grow up with Deaf parents and usually have good sign
language models from birth.
There is general agreement that sign language acquisition parallels that of spoken language
(Newport and Meier 1985; Schick 2003; Mayberry and Squires 2006) when young children
(Deaf or hearing) are exposed to sign language by their Deaf parents.
Visual motivation in signs does not appear to help young children learning a sign language
as an L1. Studies of children acquiring ASL have reported that less than a third of their ﬁrst
signs are closely linked to iconic properties of the referent. Children’s ﬁrst signs are more likely
to be associated with the same sets of semantic categories evident in children’s early speech, for
example signs for people, animals and food (Anderson and Reilly 2002) irrespective of their
iconicity. In a study of ﬁrst language acquisition of BSL from age 1;10–3;0, Morgan et al.
(2008) reported that from 1;10 onwards the majority of signs that were being acquired by the
child were non-iconic. Children who acquire a sign language as their ﬁrst language are una-
ware of the visual motivation behind a sign such as MILK (which represents the action of
milking a cow by hand). The recognition of iconicity depends on increasing world knowledge,
and there is evidence that children may return to the language forms they have learned
previously, reanalyse them and identify iconicity (Morgan 2005).
Sign language and education
Use of sign languages in education varies greatly around the world and even within countries.
An enduring controversy in Deaf education from the early nineteenth century onwards has
polarised educators. The dominant approach to communication for Deaf children from the
late nineteenth to late twentieth century saw no role for sign language in the education of Deaf
children, and the use of sign language in the classroom was actively suppressed. Nevertheless,
until the 1980s Deaf children were usually educated in Deaf schools and sign language was
transmitted from child to child.
Since the 1980s sign languages have been more accepted in schools, but simultaneously
there has been a strong move towards mainstreaming Deaf children. This has produced
Bencie Woll and Rachel Sutton-Spence
366

improvements in educational achievement but has had serious social and linguistic con-
sequences because of the loss of a natural signing community. Some Deaf children informally
learn sign language once they arrive at primary schools but are neither formally taught the
language, nor are exposed to it as a language of instruction. Their access to sign language may
be via school staﬀ(teachers, classroom aides and communication support workers) and other
pupils, who may vary greatly in their signing competence. Deaf teachers provide the best
sign language role models to children but their numbers vary greatly around the world. For
example, in the USA over 20 per cent of teachers of the Deaf are Deaf signers, while in England
fewer than 5 per cent of teachers are Deaf signers, and in Mexico there are none in the
public sector. In contrast, in Scandinavian countries almost all Deaf children receive bilingual
education.
Studies consistently show superior sign language skills in Deaf children from Deaf families
compared with Deaf children from hearing families (Paul and Quigley 2000), as well as
persistent inadequacies in the language environment provided by education systems that report
using sign language (Ramsey 1997; Greenberg and Kusché 1987). Herman and Roy
(2006) found that many Deaf children do not achieve age-appropriate levels of BSL, and
the majority of Deaf children also do not achieve age-appropriate levels of spoken/written
language.
The extensive dialect diﬀerences within many sign languages are generally school-based in
origin. The considerable regional variation in Britain can be attributed to the over forty
schools that were independently established and administered in the nineteenth century.
Schermer (2004) describes ﬁve regional dialects of Sign Language of the Netherlands (SLN)
based on the ﬁve Deaf schools. Vanhecke and de Weerdt (2004) have described the regional
variation of VGT as based on ﬁve main regions of Flanders, each with its own school. Sig-
niﬁcantly, ISL has very little regional variation because there were only two main Deaf schools
in Ireland, both in Dublin. ASL also has surprisingly little regional variation, given the size of
the country and its Deaf population, possibly because of the centralising eﬀects of Gallaudet
University and the original Hartford Asylum, where initially all training of teachers of the
Deaf took place.
Education in many countries has also had a profound eﬀect on national sign languages
because Deaf educators took on methods of teaching and methods of communication used in
other countries. LSF (French Sign Language) has had the greatest impact; its inﬂuence can be
seen clearly in ISL (Burns 1998), ASL (Lane 1984), Russian Sign Language (Mathur and
Rathmann 1998) and on some dialects of BSL inﬂuenced by ISL. Other sign languages have
also had this sort of inﬂuential role. For example, Portuguese signers use the Swedish Sign
Language manual alphabet, because a Swedish educator helped to found a Deaf school in
Portugal. ISL, originally heavily inﬂuenced by LSF, has also had its own considerable impact
on sign languages around the world. Irish nuns and Christian Brothers have taught in Catholic
schools for Deaf children in countries including India, South Africa and Australia, and the
inﬂuence of ISL is noticeable in the sign languages in these countries (Aarons and Akach
1998).
The impact of external language pressures on the world’s sign languages has been immense.
Woodward (1996) has described how Modern Thai SL has been greatly inﬂuenced by American
signs through the education system, although the original sign languages in Thailand have no
inﬂuence from ASL. The sign languages in Vietnam all show strong inﬂuences from LSF,
which was introduced into the ﬁrst school for Deaf children in Vietnam in 1886. Schermer
(2004) noted that the Gröningen dialect of SLN was inﬂuenced by LSF after a Dutch visit to
the Paris Deaf school in 1784.
Sign languages
367

ASL, itself originally inﬂuenced by LSF, has had an increasing impact on sign languages
around the world. Gallaudet University attracts foreign Deaf students who take ASL back to
their own countries. The USA has been especially generous in providing teacher training in
many Third World countries. Andrew Foster, a Deaf African-American, led a movement for
the establishment of schools in African countries where ASL was introduced as the language
of tuition (Lane et al. 1996). In Nigeria today, ASL, taught in schools, is mixing with the
indigenous sign languages (Schmaling 2003).
Learning sign languages as L2
There have been substantial changes in attitudes of the general public to sign language since
the 1980s, particularly in the representation of sign languages in the media, and there has been
an enormous increase in the number of hearing people learning sign language. There are now
signiﬁcantly more hearing people with some knowledge of their national sign language than
members of the Deaf community. Several European countries are planning to oﬀer sign lan-
guages as L2 within the general school population (France announced in July 2009 that it
would introduce LSF into the Baccalaureate system). In many American universities, ASL is
included as part of the modern language requirement for undergraduates (Lamb and Wilcox
1988). The increased interest in learning sign language has implications for teacher training
and language resources.
Interpreters
Until the 1970s, in most countries the ‘go-between’ between hearing and Deaf people was
usually a hearing member of a Deaf person’s family or a ‘missioner’ – a church or voluntary
worker with the Deaf. Deaf people used the missioner as an interpreter and also frequently as
an ally, adviser and advocate. As connections between Deaf communities and the church
weakened, this task was taken on by social workers for the Deaf (Brennan and Brown 1997).
(The BSL sign SOCIAL-WORKER is derived from the old sign MINISTER because of their
similar role in Deaf life.) Social workers for the Deaf and missioners for the Deaf often came
from Deaf families and lived and socialised with members of the Deaf community. Profes-
sional BSL/English interpreting began in the early 1980s, as a step towards empowerment of
Deaf people. These interpreters had undergone formal linguistic and interpreting training and
did not make decisions for Deaf people or advise them, but merely relayed information
between the two languages, comparable to spoken language interpreters. Pollitt (2000) notes
that many Deaf people (especially older Deaf people) see interpreters using this professional
approach as ‘cold’ or ‘unhelpful’ and unacceptably ‘impersonal’.
A shortage of interpreters is also a serious problem, since interpreters enable access to
communication with the hearing world. Laws requiring sign language provision in public set-
tings (such as on television or for health and legal settings) do not take into account the
shortage of qualiﬁed, experienced interpreters. One proposed solution to the shortage is the use
of computer-generated signing avatars, although these are still in early stages of development, and
need much further work.
Problems have also arisen from the way that interpreters are trained. With interpreter
training moving from the community into university settings, many members of the Deaf
community feel that interpreters (now often from hearing families) no longer have in-depth
knowledge of the Deaf communities with whom they work. Subtle language nuances, con-
textual information, complex social relationships and speciﬁc language skills of a Deaf client
Bencie Woll and Rachel Sutton-Spence
368

are only learned through long-term, committed relationships with a community, such as mis-
sioners and social workers had. Interpreters may cover much wider areas of the country and
have far less daily interaction with their clients. Interpreters are now beginning to recognise the
need to adapt other models of interpreting to the speciﬁc needs of the Deaf community today,
with calls for a more ﬂexible approach, incorporating ideas from both the ‘traditional’ and the
‘professional’ approaches.
Deaf interpreters often work as ‘relay’ interpreters in situations where a Deaf person (for
example, in court) may not understand the signing of a hearing interpreter, who in turn may
not understand the Deaf person. In such situations a Deaf relay interpreter may be called
upon to act as an interface between the interpreter and the Deaf client (Brennan and Brown
1997). Increasingly, Deaf interpreters also work in the media, providing sign language
translations of pre-recorded programmes or pre-prepared live programmes.
Conclusions
The twenty years between 1980 and 2000 saw substantial social and technological change for
the Deaf community that might have impacted on sign language. In Britain, for example, there
was no BSL on television until after 1980. Thirty years later, there are several hours of sign
language broadcast daily (mostly in the form of sign language interpretation of mainstream
programming) and an ever-increasing amount of signed video on the Internet, including on
sites such as YouTube. This greater national (and international) media exposure may have an
impact on dialect variation and on access of signers to foreign sign languages. Dialect levelling
can already be seen, and is currently under further investigation as part of a number of sign
language corpus projects (e.g. Schembri et al. 2009).
In 1980, the Deaf club was the focus of the Deaf community, and it could be assumed that
a person who identiﬁed as part of the community would attend the Deaf club on a regular
basis. Today, many Deaf clubs have an increasingly ageing membership and an overall
decreasing membership.
Where next in the study of Deaf people and signed languages? One pressing need is a review
and re-examination of the experiences and achievements of Deaf children. Changes in tech-
nology and new research into language development and the learning of literacy and numer-
acy skills need to feed into such a policy review.
The history of sign languages, like that of many minority languages, cannot be separated
from a study of their relationship with the majority language communities which surround
them. At the beginning of the twenty-ﬁrst century, there are two contrasting futures: on the
one hand, there are pressures, such as the decrease in opportunities for Deaf children to use
sign language with their peers as a result of the shift to mainstream education, and the possi-
ble decrease in the Deaf population as a result of medical intervention and advances in
genetics; on the other hand, increased interest and demand from the hearing community for
courses in sign language, increased use of sign language in public contexts such as television,
baby sign courses, and increased pride of the Deaf community in their distinctive language
and culture. It is to be hoped and expected that sign languages will continue to be living
languages.
Related topics
bilingual education; identity; language and culture; language emergence; language policy and
planning; lexicography; linguistic imperialism; multilingualism; sociolinguistics
Sign languages
369

Further reading
Erting, C. J., Johnson, R. E., Smith, D. L. and Snider, B. D. (eds) (1994) The Deaf Way: Perspec-
tives From the International Conference on Deaf Culture, 1989, Washington, DC: Gallaudet
University Press. (This is a comprehensive collection of papers on sign languages and deaf cul-
ture, drawing on a wide selection of sign languages around the world.)
Meier, R., Cormier, K. and Quinto-Pozos, D. (eds) (2003) Modality and Structure in Signed and
Spoken Languages, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. (This is a useful reference high-
lighting the importance of the visual modality in the structure of signed languages.)
Monaghan, L., Schmaling, C. Nakamura, K. and Turner, G. (eds) (2003) Many Ways to be Deaf:
International Variation in Deaf Communities, Washington, DC: Gallaudet University Press.
(A useful overview of some language and cultural issues in languages around the world.)
Sutton-Spence, R. and Woll, B. (1999) The Linguistics of British Sign Language: An Introduction,
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. (This provides a general overview of the structure and
social and cultural contexts of British Sign Language.)
Young, A., Ackerman, J. and Kyle, J. (1998) Looking On, Bristol: Policy Press. (This book is a clear
exposition of some of the tensions and positive outcomes that occur through use of sign language
in the workplace.)
References
Aarons, D. and Akach, P. (1998) ‘South African Sign Language – one language or many?
A sociolinguistic question’, Stellenbosch Papers in Linguistics 31: 1–28.
Anderson, D. and Reilly, J. (2002) ‘The MacArthur communicative development inventory: nor-
mative data for American Sign Language’, Journal of Deaf Studies and Deaf Education 7(2):
83–119.
Armstrong, D. (2003) ‘Introduction to special issue on dictionaries and lexicography, Part II: the
development of national sign language dictionaries’, Sign Language Studies 3: 378.
Axelrod, M., Gomez, J. and Lachler, J. (2003) ‘The roles of literacy and collaboration in doc-
umenting Native American Languages: a report from the Jicarilla Apache dictionary project’,
Sign Language Studies 3(3): 296–321.
Branson, J., Miller, D., Marsaja, I. G. and Negara, I. W. (1996) ‘Everyone here speaks sign lan-
guage, too: a deaf village in Bali, Indonesia’, in C. Lucas (ed.) Multicultural Aspects of Socio-
linguistics in Deaf Communities, Washington, DC: Gallaudet University Press.
Brennan, M. and Brown, R. (1997) Equality before the Law: Deaf People’s Access to Justice,
Durham: Deaf Studies Research Unit.
Bulwer, J. (1644) Chirologia; or the Natural Language of the Hand, London: R Whitaker.
Burns, S. (1998) ‘Irish Sign Language: Ireland’s second minority language’, in C. Lucas (ed.) Pinky
Extension and Eye Gaze: Language Use in Deaf Communities, Washington, DC: Gallaudet
University Press.
Emmorey, K., Borinstein, H. B. and Thompson, R. (2005) ‘Bimodal bilingualism: code blending
between ASL and spoken English’, in J. Cohen, K. T. McAlister, K. Rolstad and J. MacSwan
(eds) Proceedings of the 4th International Symposium on Bilingualism, Somerville, MA: Cascadilla
Press.
Emmorey, K., Corina, D. and Bellugi, U. (1995) ‘Diﬀerential processing of topographic and refer-
ential functions of space’, in K. Emmorey and J. Reilly (eds) Language, Gesture and Space,
Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Engberg-Pedersen, E. (1993) Space in Danish Sign Language, Hamburg: Signum Press.
Ferreira-Brito, L. (1985) ‘A comparative study of signs for time and space in São Paulo and Urubu-
Kaapor Sign Language’, in W. Stokoe and V. Volterra (eds) SLR ’83. Proceedings of the 3rd
International Symposium on Sign Language Research. Rome, June 22–26 1983, Rome and Silver
Spring, MD: CNR/Linstok Press.
Fischer, S. D. (1978) ‘Sign language and creoles’, in P. Siple (ed.) Understanding Language Through
Sign Language Research, New York: Academic Press.
Greenberg, M. and Kusché, C. (1987) ‘Cognitive, personal, and social development of deaf children
and adolescents’, in M. C. Wang, M. C. Reynolds and H. J. Walberg (eds) Handbook of Special
Education: Research and Practice, vol. 3: Low Incidence Conditions, New York: Pergamon.
Bencie Woll and Rachel Sutton-Spence
370

Harris, M. (2001) ‘It’s all a matter of timing: sign visibility and sign reference in deaf and
hearing mothers of 18-month-old children’, Journal of Deaf Studies and Deaf Education 6(3):
177–85.
Herman, R. and Roy, P. (2006) ‘Evidence from the extended use of the BSL receptive skills test’,
Deafness and Education International 8(1): 33–47.
Johnson, R. E. (1994) ‘Sign language and the concept of deafness in a traditional Yucatec Mayan
village’, in C. J. Erting, R. E. Johnson, D. L. Smith and B. D. Snider (eds) The Deaf Way: Per-
spectives from the International Conference on Deaf Culture, 1989. Washington, DC: Gallaudet
University Press.
Kegl, J. A., Senghas, A. and Coppola, M. (1999) ‘Creation through contact: sign language emergence
and sign language change in Nicaragua’, in M. DeGraﬀ(ed.) Comparative Grammatical Change:
The Intersection of Language Acquisition, Creole Genesis, and Diachronic Syntax, Cambridge,
MA: MIT Press.
Kendon, A. (1980) ‘A description of a deaf-mute sign language from the Enga Province of Papua
New Guinea with some comparative discussion: Parts I, II, III’, Semiotica 32: 1–34; 81–117,
245–313.
Kisch, S. (2007) ‘Disablement, gender and deafhood among the Negev Arab-Bedouin’, Disability
Studies Quarterly 27: 4. Available at: www.dsqsds.org/article/view/45/45 (accessed December 2009).
——(2008) ‘“Deaf discourse”: the social construction of deafness in a Bedouin community’, Medical
Anthropology 27(3): 283–313.
Krentz, C. (2006) ‘The camera as printing press: how ﬁlm has inﬂuenced ASL literature’, in
H. Dirksen Bauman, J. Nelson and H. Rose (eds) Signing the Body Poetic, Berkeley: University
of California Press.
Kusters, A. (2010) ‘Deaf Utopias? Reviewing the sociocultural literature on the world’s “Martha’s
Vineyard Situations”’, Journal of Deaf Studies and Deaf Education 15(1): 3–16.
Lamb, L. and Wilcox, P. (1988) ‘Acceptance of American Sign Language at the University of
New Mexico: the history of a process’, Sign Language Studies 17(59): 213–20.
Lane, H. (1984) When the Mind Hears: A History of the Deaf, New York: Random House.
Lane, H., Hoﬀmeister, R. and Bahan, B. (1996) A Journey into the Deaf World, San Diego, CA:
Dawn Sign Press.
Lucas, C. (2002) ‘The role of variation in lexicography’, Sign Language Studies 3: 322–40.
Mathur, G. and Rathmann, C. (1998) ‘Why not “GIVE-US”: an articulatory constraint in signed
languages’, in V. Dively, M. Metzger, S. Taub and A.-M. Baer (eds) Signed Languages: Dis-
coveries from International Research, Washington, DC: Gallaudet University Press.
Mayberry, R. I. and Squires, B. (2006). ‘Sign language acquisition’, in E. Lieven (ed.) Language
Acquisition, Encyclopedia of Language and Linguistics, vol. 11, 2nd edn, Oxford: Elsevier.
McKee, D. and Kennedy, G. (2006) ‘The distribution of signs in New Zealand Sign Language’, Sign
Language Studies 6(4): 372–90.
Meier, R., Cormier, K. and Quinto-Pozos, D. (2003) Modality and Structure in Signed and Spoken
Languages, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Morgan, G. (2005) ‘The development of narrative skills in British Sign Language’, in B. Schick,
M. Marschark and P. Spencer (eds) Advances in the Sign Language Development of Deaf and
Hard-of-Hearing Children, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Morgan, G., Herman, R., Barrière, I. and Woll, B. (2008) ‘The onset and mastery of spatial lan-
guage in children acquiring British Sign Language’, Cognitive Development 23: 1–19.
Newport, E. L. and Meier, R. P. (1985) ‘The acquisition of American Sign Language’, in D. I. Slobin
(ed.) The Crosslinguistic Study of Language Acquisition, vol. 1: The Data, Hillsdale, NJ: Lawr-
ence Erlbaum Associates.
Nichols, J. (1992) Linguistic Diversity in Space and Time, Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Paul, P. V. and Quigley, S. P. (2000) Language and Deafness, 3rd edn, San Diego, CA: Singular
Publishing Group.
Pelissier, M. (1856) Des Sourds-Muets, Paris: Paul Dupont.
Pollitt, K. (2000) ‘On babies, bathwater and approaches to interpreting’, Deaf Worlds 16: 60–4.
Ramsey, C. (1997) Deaf Children in Public Schools: Placement, Context and Consequences,
Washington, DC: Gallaudet University Press.
Saeed, J., Sutton-Spence, R. and Leeson, L. (2000) ‘Constituent structure in declarative sentences in
Irish Sign Language and British Sign Language: a preliminary examination’. Poster Presented at
Sign languages
371

the 7th International Conference on Theoretical Issues in Sign Language Research, 23–27 July
2000, Amsterdam.
Schembri, A. (2003) ‘Rethinking “classiﬁers” in signed languages’, in K. Emmorey (ed.) Perspec-
tives on Classiﬁer Constructions in Sign Languages, Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Schembri, A., McKee, D., McKee, R., Pivac, S., Johnston, T. and Goswell, D. (2009) ‘Phonological
variation and change in Australian and New Zealand Sign Languages: the location variable’,
Language Variation and Change 21: 193–231.
Schermer, G. (2004) ‘Lexical variation in sign language of the Netherlands’, in M. van Herreweghe
and M. Vermeerbergen (eds) To the Lexicon and Beyond: Sociolinguistics in European Deaf
Communities, Washington, DC: Gallaudet University Press.
Schick, B. (2003) ‘The development of ASL and manually-coded English systems’, in M. Marschark
and P. E. Spencer (eds) Oxford Handbook of Deaf Studies, Language, and Education, New York:
Oxford University Press.
Schmaling, C. (2003) ‘A for apple: the impact of Western education and ASL on the deaf commu-
nity in Kano State, Northern Nigeria’, in L. Monaghan, C. Schmaling, K. Nakamura and
G. Turner (eds) Many Ways to be Deaf: International Variation in Deaf Communities, Washington,
DC: Gallaudet University Press.
Slobin, D. (2005) ‘Issues of linguistic typology in the study of sign language development of deaf
children’, in B. Schick, M. Marschark and P. Spencer (eds) Sign Language Development of Deaf
and Hard-of-hearing Children: Where Have We Been, and Where Are We Going? Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Spencer, P. E. (1993) ‘The expressive communication of hearing mothers and deaf infants’, American
Annals of the Deaf 138: 275–83.
Stokoe, W. C. ([1960] 1978) Sign Language Structure: The First Linguistic Analysis Of American
Sign Language, Silver Spring, MD:Linstok Press.
Supalla, T. (1986) ‘The classiﬁer system in American Sign Language’, in C. Craig (ed.) Noun Clas-
ses and Categorization (Typological Sudies in Language 7), Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Taub, S. (2001) Language from the Body: Iconicity and Metaphor in American Sign Language,
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
van Herreweghe, M. and Vermeerbergen, M. (2004) ‘Flemish sign language: some risks of codiﬁ-
cation’, in M. van Herreweghe and M. Vermeerbergen (eds) To the Lexicon and Beyond. Socio-
linguistics in European Deaf Communities, Washington, DC: Gallaudet University Press.
Vanhecke, E. and De Weerdt, K. (2004) ‘Regional variation in Flemish Sign Language’, in M. van
Herreweghe and M. Vermeerbergen (eds) To the Lexicon and Beyond. Sociolinguistics in
European Deaf Communities, Washington, DC: Gallaudet University Press.
Vermeerbergen, M., Leeson, L. and Crasborn, O. (eds) (2007) Simultaneity in Signed Languages,
Amsterdam and Philadelphia: John Benjamins.
Washabaugh, W. (1981) ‘The Deaf of Grand Cayman, British West Indies’, Sign Language Studies
31: 117–33.
Wilcox, S. (2003) ‘The multimedia dictionary of American Sign Language: learning lessons about
language, technology and business’, Sign Language Studies 3: 379–92.
Woll, B. (1984) ‘Comparing sign languages’, in F. Loncke, P. Boyes-Braem and Y. Lebrun (eds)
Recent Research on European Sign Languages, Lisse: Swets and Zeitlinger.
——(1991) Variation and Recent Change in British Sign Language. Project ﬁnal report to Economic
and Social Research Council.
Woodward, J. (1996) ‘Modern standard Thai Sign Language, inﬂuence from ASL, and its relationship
to original Thai sign varieties’, Sign Language Studies 25: 225–52.
Young, A., Ackerman, J. and Kyle, J. (1998) Looking On, Bristol: Policy Press.
Bencie Woll and Rachel Sutton-Spence
372

26
World Englishes
Andy Kirkpatrick and David Deterding
Introduction
This chapter begins by contextualizing the development of World Englishes as a relatively new
ﬁeld of study. First, in showing that there are many Englishes, not just one, the work of Braj
Kachru is reviewed and the importance of his contributions are summarized. Next, debates
concerning the motivations for language change in New Englishes are reviewed and examples
of a few innovative linguistic features in those varieties are provided. Then we consider the
developmental stages in the emergence of New Englishes. Finally, we discuss recent develop-
ments, including the role of English as a Lingua Franca (ELF) and the inﬂuence of new
technology.
Models of World Englishes
There have been many models that represent the nature of Englishes around the world. These
are summarized in McArthur (1998), where McArthur’s own ‘Circle of World Englishes’ is
also described (1998: 97). Perhaps the most inﬂuential model is Kachru’s Three Circles of
English. It also uses a circle analogy, placing each country in one of three circles as follows
(with examples added in italicized brackets):
The current sociolinguistic proﬁle of English may be viewed in terms of three concentric
circles … The Inner Circle refers to the traditional cultural and linguistic bases of English
[e.g. Britain, USA, Australia]. The Outer Circle represents the institutionalized non-native
varieties (ESL) in the regions that have passed through extended periods of colonization
[e.g. Singapore, India, Nigeria] … The Expanding Circle includes the regions where the
performance varieties of the language are used essentially in EFL contexts [e.g. China,
Japan, Egypt].
(Kachru 1992c: 356–7)
The terms ESL (English as a Second Language) and EFL (English as a Foreign Language) in
this extract refer to the traditional classiﬁcation which Kachru challenged. His great
373

contribution to the ﬁeld lay in recognizing the development of many diﬀerent varieties of
English, so the language should not be seen in terms of a single monolithic standard. Instead,
as there are a multitude of diﬀerent Englishes, variation is the norm. And just as there are
many varieties of British English, there are also many New Englishes, which in turn have sub-
varieties, so, for example, Indian English consists of a range of varieties.
Some scholars have criticized aspects of the Three Circles model, particularly: it is histori-
cally and geographically based; it deals with countries rather than societies or individuals; and
it fails to accommodate some places (such as Denmark and Argentina) that seem to be
moving from Expanding-Circle to Outer-Circle status even though they have no colonial links
with England or the United States (Jenkins 2009: 20–1). Furthermore, Kachru’s model does
not allow for the possibility of the increasing number of speakers with English as their ﬁrst
language in places such as Singapore and India.
However, as Bolton (2005) has noted, Kachru’s Three Circles model was formulated
in response to the single-standard orthodoxy of the time, and ‘the strength of the World
Englishes paradigm has lain and continues to lie in its consistent pluralism and inclusivity’
(2005: 78).
Here, we survey linguistic studies of World Englishes and provide examples of features from
a range of Englishes. Then we consider the stages through which New Englishes progress as
they develop into mature varieties.
Linguistic motivations
A fundamental principle in the study of World Englishes is that variation and change are
natural and inevitable (Kirkpatrick 2007a). As a consequence, linguistic features which diﬀer
from Standard English are not necessarily errors but may instead represent components of a
New English.
Linguistic variation is, of course, nothing new, and Inner-Circle Englishes as well as New
Englishes are characterized by variation, not just in pronunciation and vocabulary, but gram-
mar as well. For example, historically, all Englishes had a rich set of present tense inﬂections
on verbs. Now, however, the dialects of England generally have substantially reduced inﬂec-
tions, and they are not the same in all varieties. In modern Standard English, for present tense
verbs, there is only the -s ending for the third person singular. The dialect of East Anglia,
however, generally has no present tense inﬂections at all, so ‘he make them’ and ‘farmers make
them’ are grammatical in this variety (though Britain (2007: 87) suggests it may be moving
towards the standard in this respect). In contrast, Yorkshire English has an additional present tense
inﬂection, with ‘thou hast’ for second person singular. Furthermore, the Northern subject rule,
originating from Scotland, but attested over several centuries in many vernaculars of the
North and North Midlands (McCaﬀerty 2003), requires the use of -s on verbs with plural
subjects unless the verb is adjacent to a pronoun (Ihalainen 1994: 228). Following this rule,
‘Birds ﬂies’, ‘They ﬂy’ and ‘They ﬂy and swoops’ are all grammatical.
Variation in present tense marking is also seen in American dialects. ‘Folks sings’ is gram-
matical in the English of the American South (Bailey 1997: 259–60), and the following extract
of African American Vernacular English shows variation in the use of -s on verbs:
What’s her, what’s her name that cooks them? She a real young girl. She bring ‘em in
every morning. An’ they, an’ they sells ‘em, an’ they sells them for that girl there in that
store.
(Cukor-Avila 2003: 98)
Andy Kirkpatrick and David Deterding
374

Given such variation in Inner Circle Englishes, it is not surprising to ﬁnd similar variation in
New Englishes, as well as ELF. In Kortmann et al. (2004), half of the forty-six varieties of
English surveyed frequently do not mark the third person singular -s.
Is it possible to explain which varieties of English are characterized by features such as this?
Let us consider motivations for change.
Mesthrie and Bhatt (2008) compare a selection of New Englishes and identify grammatical
features which occur in many varieties but not in Standard English. They propose that New
Englishes can be classiﬁed as either ‘deleters’ or ‘preservers’ (2008: 90–2). Deleters are varieties
whose speakers commonly leave out grammatical elements, while preservers are those in which
deletion is less common, with Singapore English oﬀered as an example of a deleting variety
and Black South African English as a preserver. Their explanation for this distinction between
deleters and preservers is inﬂuence from other languages, as it is ‘usually dependent on the
characteristic syntax of the substrate languages’ (2008: 90).
However, while Kortmann (2010) agrees that language contact and thus geography are
important factors inﬂuencing language change and development, he argues that variety type
is a better predictor of morphosyntactic change. He concludes that whether it is a high-
or low-contact Inner-Circle variety, an indigenized Outer-Circle variety, a pidgin or a creole
is a better predictor of its morphosyntactic features than the part of the world where it is
spoken.
Although language contact has always been a key stimulus for linguistic change, not just
with New Englishes but also in the historical development of English in Britain through con-
tact with Scandinavian languages and French (Crystal 2004), a surprising number of shared
features have been identiﬁed, both in New Englishes and in ELF. In fact, the large number of
non-standard forms which are shared by many new varieties has led some scholars to propose
that a number of vernacular universals (VUs) exist, as these cannot be solely due to inﬂuence
from the speakers’ ﬁrst languages (see Filpulla et al. 2009 for a review).
Assuming that language contacts are a factor to be reckoned with when dealing with
VUs, the question is: what exactly is the relationship between language contact phenom-
ena and vernacular universals, and to what extent can we distinguish them from each
other?
(Filpulla et al. 2009: 8)
In the next section, we provide a sample of linguistic features from a range of New Englishes.
Linguistic features: some examples
Many features of New Englishes have been extensively described (e.g. Kortmann et al. 2004;
Schneider et al. 2004). Here, we will not attempt a comprehensive description of their char-
acteristics. Instead, we discuss a small selection of features, focusing particularly on a few that
are shared widely among New Englishes. In addition, we consider which of these features also
occur in Inner-Circle varieties, and the extent to which they might be inﬂuencing the evolution
of English.
We start with some phonological features that seem to occur in a range of New Englishes:
avoidance of dental fricatives, reduction of ﬁnal consonant clusters, and use of syllable-based
rhythm. Then we consider some grammatical features: absence of past tense marking, and
regularization of the count/noncount distinction on nouns. Finally, we discuss some discourse
issues: use of the invariant is it tag and topic fronting.
World Englishes
375

Of course, there are also many features that are special to one or more varieties, such as the
borrowed word kiasu (‘fear of losing out’) in Singapore (Deterding 2007: 75) or the conﬂation
of /v/ and /w/ in India (Kachru 2005: 49) and Pakistan (Mahboob and Ahmar 2004). In this
way, each New English represents a mixture of global features and its own idiosyncratic
innovations.
Dental fricatives
One of the most common features of New Englishes is the tendency to avoid using /θ/ and /ð/.
However, the sounds that are used in place of these dental fricatives vary. For example, in
place of initial /θ/ in a word such as three, [t] tends to occur in places such as Singapore
(Deterding 2007: 13–16), the Philippines (Tayao 2004), Brunei (Mossop 1996), Ghana (Huber
2004), the Bahamas (Childs and Wolfram 2004) and India (Kachru 2005: 44–6), while [f]
occurs in Hong Kong English (Deterding et al. 2008), and Gut (2004) reports that, in Nigerian
English, Hausa speakers tend to use [s] but Yoruba and Igbo speakers use [t]. The avoidance of
dental fricatives also occurs in some Inner-Circle Englishes. In place of /θ/, many speakers in
London use [f], while those in Ireland and also New York may use [t] (Wells 1982: 328, 428,
515). However, although it is true that avoidance of dental fricatives is found in Inner-Circle
varieties, this phenomenon is almost certainly currently more widespread in New Englishes.
Jenkins (2000: 159) excludes dental fricatives from her Lingua Franca Core (LFC), the
features that she suggests are vital for the intelligibility of English as an international language.
In fact, they are the only consonants from the full inventory of consonants found in Inner-
Circle Englishes that are excluded from the LFC. One might hypothesize that, in the future,
the absence of dental fricatives may become increasingly accepted in Standard Englishes. The
majority of speakers of English around the world nowadays probably do not customarily use
dental fricatives, even if most Inner-Circle speakers do currently use them.
Final consonant clusters
Word-ﬁnal consonant clusters are commonly simpliﬁed in New Englishes, often involving the
omission of the ﬁnal consonant, especially if it is a plosive. For example, in Singapore English,
ﬁrst, world, ask and think may all be pronounced with the ﬁnal consonant omitted even when
the next word begins with a vowel (Deterding 2007: 18).
Sometimes, this process is reinforced by the phonological shape of words that are borrowed
from English into the local language. For instance, Standard Malay has borrowed many words
from English in which a ﬁnal plosive is dropped if the word ends with a consonant cluster.
Examples include lif (‘lift’), pos (‘post’), hos (‘host’), kos (‘cost’), arkitek (‘architect’), saintis
(‘scientist’), setem (‘stamp’) and kem (‘camp’) (Collins 2002), and it is not surprising that this
ﬁnal consonant is also often omitted when the same words are pronounced in English. Indeed
ﬁnal consonant cluster reduction is common in Malaysian English (Baskaran 2004a) and also
Brunei English (Mossop 1996).
Final consonant cluster reduction is similarly reported for many other New Englishes,
including those of Hong Kong (Deterding et al. 2008), Nigeria (Gut 2004), Ghana (Huber
2004) and East Africa (Schmied 2004).
The omission of plosives from the end of word-ﬁnal consonant clusters is also frequent in
Inner-Circle varieties. Cruttenden (2008: 303–4) oﬀers a long list of phrases in RP (the variety
of British English that is usually adopted as the standard) from which /t/ or /d/ at the end of
the ﬁrst word is omitted, including next day, raced back, last chance, ﬁrst light, old man and
Andy Kirkpatrick and David Deterding
376

loved ﬂowers, and Guy (1980) shows that the phenomenon is particularly common among
speakers of vernacular Black English in the USA. Perhaps the biggest diﬀerence is that in New
Englishes the omission of the ﬁnal consonant tends to persist even when the next word begins
with a vowel, an environment in which the consonant is more likely to be used for linking in
Inner-Circle varieties.
Schreier (2005: 27) suggests that consonant cluster reduction may be a universal property of
all varieties of spoken English, and furthermore that this natural tendency towards simpliﬁ-
cation characterizes the historical development of English. It seems, then, that New Englishes
may be leading the way in reducing the complexity of ﬁnal consonant clusters in English.
Rhythm
While stress-based rhythm is often claimed to be the basis of English speech timing in most
Inner-Circle varieties, use of syllable-based rhythm is widely reported for New Englishes.
Although nowadays few people adhere to the view of Abercrombie (1967: 97) that all lan-
guages can be neatly classiﬁed as either stress-timed or syllable-timed, and indeed some scho-
lars have questioned the entire existence of this fundamental rhythmic dichotomy (Cauldwell
2002), it is often still asserted that languages may be placed along a continuum of stress-/syllable-
timing (Dauer 1983). Indeed, measurements that compare the duration of the vowels in
neighbouring syllables conﬁrm that a clear acoustic diﬀerence can be shown between the
rhythm of Singapore and British English (Low et al. 2000).
In addition to Singapore English, other new varieties that have been observed to have a
syllable-based rhythm include those of the Philippines (Tayao 2004), India (Kachru 2005: 46),
Nigeria (Gut 2006), East Africa (Schmied 2004), and Jamaica (Trudgill and Hannah 2008: 117).
However, British English can also sometimes have variable rhythm. For example, Crystal
(1995a) observes that syllable-based rhythm can be found in a range of speech styles, including
baby talk, sarcastic utterances, many types of popular music, and some television commer-
cials, and Crystal (2003: 171) speculates that this kind of rhythm might one day become the
norm for all varieties of English. It seems, then, that this is another candidate for a feature
where New Englishes may be leading the way for the future evolution of English.
Absence of tense marking
As discussed above, absence of the present tense -s inﬂection is reported in many Englishes. In
addition, many speakers of New Englishes see no need to mark the past tense of verbs once the
time frame of an event has been established. For Singapore English, Deterding (2007: 46) sug-
gests that use of the present tense in narrating an event is particularly common when dealing
with something that may still be true. For example, in the following extract, the speaker
switches to the present tense, even though the story is located in the past, possibly because she
believes that the funfair is still running at the time she is speaking:
then later on in the evening … er went to the UK funfair … at Jurong East … mmm … it
was, it was interesting, but very expensive … erm the fun, the entrance fee is cheap, it’s
only two dollars … I guess that’s cheap enough, but then the … the games and the rides
are all very expensive.
Another factor that may inﬂuence the use of tenses in Singapore English is the nature of the
verb, as Ho and Platt (1993: 86) show that past tense marking is most common for punctual
World Englishes
377

verbs (i.e. verbs such as hit, speak, or give that describe an action rather than a situation, such
as like, know or want).
Similarly, in the English of Brunei, the simple present form of the verb is often used in
narrating an event. Cane (1996: 210–11) gives the following examples:
It was quite a new experience for us since it’s our ﬁrst experience overseas.
This song reminds me of the old days when I’m with the group ‘The Mixtures’.
Could absence of tense marking for narrating an event become widely accepted as part of
standard English? In fact, the historic present is already sometimes used for narrating past
events in order to create a sense of immediacy. Carter and McCarthy (2006: 625) give the
following example from their corpus of spoken British English, where the speaker is talking
about a laser show:
In the beginning there was darkness, and we hear this scraping sound, and you see this
little coloured pattern, the coloured pattern gets bigger and bigger.
So, in fact use of the present tense when narrating a story is actually already a common
strategy in many varieties of English, both Inner-Circle and new varieties.
Count/noncount nouns
Some distinctions between count and noncount nouns in Inner-Circle Englishes are rather
idiosyncratic. For example, furniture and luggage are treated as mass nouns, but there really
does not seem to be any logical reason why we should not count items of furniture or pieces of
luggage. And indeed, not surprisingly such words tend to be treated as countable in many New
Englishes. For example, we ﬁnd furnitures, stuﬀs, clothings and ﬁctions in Singapore English
(Deterding 2007: 42–3), and Mesthrie and Bhatt (2008: 53) observe that nearly every study of
English varieties in Africa and Asia reports examples like furnitures, equipments, staﬀs, fruits,
and accommodations.
Does this occur in Inner-Circle Englishes? We might note that mail is usually noncount, but
email now is generally used as a countable noun, and this seems to be a modern development
(if only because email has only been around for a short while). The widespread occurrence of
furnitures and similar words therefore seems a classic case where New Englishes may be hastening
the process of regularizing the language.
Invariant tags
Invariant tags, particularly is it and isn’t it, are reported in Singapore English (Deterding 2007:
56), such as with the following extract from a blog:
he think I want to listen to his story is it?
Similarly, for Nigerian English, Alo and Mesthrie (2004: 817) oﬀer the following example:
You like that, isn’t it?
Andy Kirkpatrick and David Deterding
378

Comparable use of invariant tags is found in Malaysia (Baskaran 2004b), Hong Kong (Cheng
and Warren 2001), India (Kachru 2005: 49) and Pakistan (Mahboob 2004).
But invariant tags also occur in various Inner-Circle Englishes, including that of Wales
(Trudgill and Hannah 2008: 38), and the occurrence of innit is almost a deﬁning characteristic
of the style of English originating in London and sometimes termed Estuary English (Crystal
1995b: 327). Similarly, Anderwald (2004: 191) notes that it is a typical feature of adolescent
London speech. Clearly, use of invariant tags is a common simpliﬁcation strategy that is being
adopted in a wide range of diﬀerent places.
Topic prominence
In many New Englishes, the topic tends to be placed clearly out at the front of the sentence.
For example, in Singapore English, the recording in Deterding (2007: 63) includes the follow-
ing utterances:
So the whole process I need to break down for the diﬀerent operators.
Australia, I’ve been to Sydney and Perth.
For Indian English, Bhatt (2004: 1023) oﬀers:
Those people, I telephoned yesterday only.
and Sailaja (2009: 54) gives:
This book, I will return tomorrow.
Sometimes, topic fronting is followed by a resumptive pronoun, as in the following example
(Deterding 2007: 65):
Then, er, two of my sisters, they’re already married.
Similarly, in East African English, Bokamba (1992: 131) notes the following example:
The boys they like to play outside even if it is cold.
Examples of topic fronting are also noted for Ghanaian English (Huber and Dako 2004) and
Indian South African English (Mesthrie 2004: 988).
What about Inner-Circle varieties? Carter and McCarthy (2006: 192) suggest that fronting is
common in spoken language, and they give the following examples (2006: 193):
That leather coat, it looks really nice on you.
The white house on the corner, is that where she lives?
So perhaps the use of fronted topics, often with a resumptive pronoun, is actually a universal
feature of all Englishes. Furthermore, maybe the frequency of topic fronting in Inner-Circle
World Englishes
379

Englishes was underestimated when traditional grammars were based so much on formal,
written texts. Now that grammars are increasingly being based on corpora of informal, spoken
data, it is possible that future descriptions of Inner-Circle English will reﬂect the common
occurrence of this feature.
While topic fronting is not an example of simpliﬁcation like the previous features discussed
here, it seems to be a natural process in human language, and perhaps its widespread occur-
rence in New Englishes may have a substantial inﬂuence on the discourse structures that
become increasingly favoured and accepted as mainstream in World Englishes.
General trends in linguistic features
As we have seen, one characteristic of many shared features is that they tend to simplify and/
or regularize English. For example, many speakers ﬁnd dental fricatives hard to pronounce, so
their avoidance makes things easier; and use of plurals for logically plural nouns makes the
grammar more regular. Simplifying and regularizing innovations are ones that have a good
chance of becoming adopted as standard when a language evolves, and we suggest that New
Englishes may be leading the way in this respect.
In Figure 26.1, showing a sign written in Singapore, close is used rather than the standard
closed. At ﬁrst glance, one is tempted to classify this as an error, as a suﬃx has not been added to
the verb close to convert it into an adjective. But we might note that open can function perfectly
well as both a verb and an adjective, and ‘we are open’ would be ﬁne. So why not ‘we are close’?
In fact, we can regard this use of close rather than closed as illustrating both simpliﬁcation
(it is easier to say, as the word-ﬁnal consonant cluster is avoided) and also regularization (it is
consistent with the use of open). And this is just the kind of change that we might expect to
ﬁnd adopted in Standard English one day. Perhaps this Singaporean signwriter is ahead of
their time. And maybe many of the trends that have been noted for New Englishes indicate the
future direction of Global English.
In an analogy with the recent evolution of global hip-hop, Pennycook (2007) similarly
argues that New Englishes are at the forefront of the current evolution of the language. He
Figure 26.1 Sign on the door of a shop in Singapore
Source: Picture by Ludwig Tan.
Andy Kirkpatrick and David Deterding
380

observes that hip-hop originated in the inner cities of the United States, but as it has evolved
and matured in recent years, indigenized varieties have emerged that no longer make constant
reference to American hip-hop, and these new varieties serve to maintain the pace of devel-
opment of the genre throughout the world. It seems likely that New Englishes are following a
similar path, accelerating the development of English quite independently of the traditional
roots of the language in Inner-Circle countries.
Stages in the development of New Englishes
So far we have summarized some linguistic features in New Englishes. We now consider the
stages that a variety of English goes through on its way to becoming accepted as the standard
variety in a society. Kachru (1992b: 56) suggested that New Englishes pass through three
stages. The ﬁrst is marked by non-acceptance of the emerging variety, with locals preferring
the colonial or relevant Inner-Circle variety. The second stage sees local and imported varieties
existing side-by-side. Finally, the local variety becomes accepted as the standard.
Schneider (2003, 2007) has reﬁned and extended this in his model of the evolution of Eng-
lishes, agreeing with Mufwene (2001) that post-colonial varieties of English often follow the
same basic developmental path, slowly establishing their own identities through a series of
stages till they become independent varieties in their own right. He identiﬁes ﬁve stages in the
developmental cycle (Schneider 2007: 56):

Foundation: English ﬁrst arrives in the area.

Exonormative Stabilization: standards are provided by the colonial variety. British English
originally provided the norms in many colonies.

Nativization: bilingual and multilingual speakers create a new local variety of English
which is inﬂuenced by the linguistic systems and cultural norms of the speakers’ ﬁrst lan-
guages. During this stage, the new variety is usually considered deﬁcient, so norms are still
provided by the colonial variety, especially in the classroom.

Endonormative Stabilization: the new variety becomes socially accepted and provides the
classroom model. In Kachru’s terms, this is when Outer-Circle varieties become ‘norm
providing’ rather than ‘norm dependent’.

Diﬀerentiation: the new variety itself develops sub-varieties.
While more research is needed on the development of individual varieties, Schneider’s model
appears fundamentally sound. However, the extent to which the local educated variety is
accepted as the classroom model remains the topic of debate, with many Asian countries still
insisting on an Inner-Circle variety as the preferred model. It would appear, therefore, that
varieties of English can reach Schneider’s ﬁnal stage of diﬀerentiation linguistically, but socio-
linguistically they remain at an earlier stage when language planners are not prepared to
accept local varieties as classroom models.
In discussing the development of New Englishes, a distinction is often made between the
spoken and the written codes, and it is sometimes suggested that, while spoken codes allow
signiﬁcant variation, the written code is more uniform. This, however, is only partly true. Lit-
erature written in New Englishes and the expression of popular culture are just two examples
where creativity and variation are given full play, and there are many Asian and African wri-
ters who now use local varieties of English to represent their cultures. The Pakistani novelist
Sidhwa writes:
World Englishes
381

We have to stretch the language to adapt it to alien thoughts and values which have no
precedent of expression in English, subject the language to a pressure that distorts, or if
you like, enlarges its scope and changes its shape …
(Sidhwa 1996: 240)
An excellent example of this is Ken Saro-Wiwa’s (1985) novel Sozaboy: A Novel in Rotten
English. The author’s note explains that Sozaboy (soldier boy) was the result of his fascination
with how English could be adapted to reﬂect the language of Nigerians.
The way a New English is transplanted and adapted by its new users is nicely captured in
Indian English, which is characterized by its bookishness and use of metaphor:
Years ago, a slender sapling from a foreign ﬁeld was grafted by ‘pale hands’ on the mighty
and many-branched Indian banyan tree. It has kept growing vigorously and is now an
organic part of its parent tree, it has spread its own probing roots into the brown soil
below. Its young leaves rustle energetically in the strong winds that blow from the western
horizon, but the sunshine that warms it and the rain that cools it are from Indian skies;
and it continues to draw its vital sap from ‘this earth, this realm,’ this India.
(Naik and Narayan 2004: 253)
Recent developments
Today, English acts as a lingua franca throughout the world, and recent debate concerns the
validity of ELF as an object of linguistic study and also its relationship to World Englishes
(Kirkpatrick 2008).
A lingua franca can be deﬁned as ‘a language that is used for communication between dif-
ferent groups of people, each speaking a diﬀerent language’ (Richards et al. 1985: 214). While
it is true that this describes the function rather than a speciﬁc variety, recent research into ELF
has shown a remarkable number of features shared by ELF speakers and New Englishes. This
is quite surprising, as one would expect substantial variation, depending on the ﬁrst languages
of the speakers, and the degree of shared features justiﬁes research into the linguistic nature
of ELF.
ELF is now the most common use of English in the world (Jenkins 2007), so a study of its
linguistic features and the ways it allows people to achieve successful intercultural commu-
nication oﬀers insights about international communication and also guidelines for English
language teaching. Thus, the work of scholars such as Barbara Seidlhofer (2001, 2004) and her
team at the University of Vienna who have collected the VOICE corpus of ELF (VOICE n.d.)
and Anna Mauranen and her team at the universities of Helsinki and Tampere who have
assembled a corpus of academic ELF (ELFA n.d.) not only sheds light on the linguistic fea-
tures of ELF but also oﬀers important observations on how language is actually used in
intercultural communication.
Although ELF shares some grammatical and phonological features with New Englishes
(Deterding and Kirkpatrick 2006), ELF speakers generally avoid the use of local lexis and
idioms (Kirkpatrick 2007b). This is a key distinction between World Englishes and ELF, as
one fundamental role of World Englishes lies in their ability to reﬂect local phenomena and
cultural values, often through the use of borrowings from local languages. In contrast, this is
avoided in ELF communication, where the fundamental role is to facilitate cross-cultural
communication.
Andy Kirkpatrick and David Deterding
382

The debate about the place of ELF in World Englishes is one reﬂection of the continuing
debate about the role of linguistic imperialism (Phillipson 1992, 2009) in the spread of English
as an international language. We do not deal with this in depth here, as it is the subject of a
separate chapter (Canagarajah and Ben Said, this volume). However, we propose that the
world has moved beyond the post-colonial stage and has now entered a post-Anglophone
stage (Clayton 2006). Taking the situation in Cambodia as an example, Clayton shows that
English is essential for most jobs with foreign agencies, and even French-run non-govern-
mental organizations (NGOs) now require English. This post-Anglophone role of English is
reﬂected in the following quote from a Cambodian ministry oﬃcial: ‘You know, when we use
English, we don’t think about the United States or England. We only think about the need to
communicate’ (2006: 233).
ELF clearly has a major role to play in the modern world, and the choice of English is
often seen as natural. For example, the ten countries comprising the Association of Southeast
Asian Nations (ASEAN) agreed to adopt English as the sole working language of ASEAN
when they signed the ASEAN Charter in February 2009.
While the choice of English may seem natural and the demand for it ever increasing, one
key question is the extent to which the need for English will lead to equality or perpetuate
further inequality (Pennycook 2010). Graddol (2006), however, envisages that it is those who
only have English who may be disadvantaged in future.
The inﬂuence of new technology
New technology has had a big inﬂuence on the development of worldwide varieties of
English. For example, words for parts of the car diﬀer quite substantially between Britain and
America (e.g. windscreen/windshield; bonnet/hood; boot/trunk), but words for parts of
the computer tend not to vary so much (e.g. keyboard; mouse; hard disk). One reason for
this is that communication across the Atlantic was rather easier in the 1980s, when computers
were developed, than in the earlier part of the twentieth century, when cars were ﬁrst
produced.
In the modern world, we similarly ﬁnd that facilities for communicating over a long dis-
tance, for recording data, and for sharing information via the Internet are having a profound
impact on the evolution of World Englishes, as new words and ways of expressing oneself that
arise in one society can easily spread elsewhere. However, at the same time, each variety of
English can develop its own idiosyncratic forms of expression, and new media such as email,
electronic discussion forums, and blogging can facilitate the establishment of these local fea-
tures within a society. New technology therefore helps maintain a balance between global and
local features in the development of World Englishes (Pennycook 2007).
To illustrate this mixture of global and local in one variety of World English, let us consider
an extract from a blog written by a student in Brunei (Hiro 2009):
Well. … will be busy working, doing assignments and (the hell) presentation. Gila~-
sometimes they think we are super people ka? So much to do … we have a life too you
know!! Lol. X3 Ja. [To the people who read this blog and think I’m crazy now … yes I
am.The stress levels are building up. XD.] And to everyone who gave me full support
when I was down.Thanks so much.U now who u all are!
In this extract, there are various features common in worldwide blogs, including abbreviations
(‘u’ for you; ‘lol’ for laughing out loud), but there are also a few local words (gila, Malay for
World Englishes
383

‘crazy’; ka, the Malay question particle). This mixture of global and local innovations char-
acterizes new modes of electronic communication in many diﬀerent societies (Crystal 2008).
One other aspect of new technology relevant for research into World Englishes is electronic
corpora. In particular the International Corpus of English (ICE 2009; Nelson et al. 2002) has
components from a range of places including Hong Kong, East Africa, India, the Philippines,
and Singapore; and the VOICE and ELFA corpora referred to earlier oﬀer researchers the
opportunity to investigate English usage in Continental Europe.
Summary
In this chapter, we outlined how the insights of Braj Kachru and other scholars into New
Englishes have created fresh ﬁelds of study under the term World Englishes, and furthermore,
we now see Englishes occurring as a plural term. We showed that variation is normal and
inevitable both within and between varieties of English and considered some of the motiva-
tions for this. At the same time, we noted the remarkable number of linguistic features shared
by New Englishes and how this phenomenon has given rise to a theory of vernacular uni-
versals. We also suggested that New Englishes go though comparable stages of development,
and argued that English in its role as a lingua franca should be studied as part of the World
Englishes paradigm. Finally, we noted that emerging technologies enable new varieties to
combine global and local features.
Related topics
culture; language policy and planning; language testing; linguistic imperialism; multi-
lingualism; sociolinguistics
Further reading
Jenkins, J. (2009) World Englishes: A Resource Book for Students, 2nd edn, London: Routledge.
(A useful introduction to the issues.)
Kachru, B. B., Kachru, Y. and Nelson, C. (2009) Handbook of World Englishes, Malden, MA:
Blackwell. (A comprehensive survey of the ﬁeld.)
Kirkpatrick, A. (2007) World Englishes: Implications for International Communication and English
Language Teaching, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. (An accessible introduction with a
focus on variation and implications for ELT with an accompanying CD illustrating a selection of
varieties.)
Kirkpatrick, A. (ed.) (2010) Handbook of World Englishes, London: Routledge. (An overall survey
of the ﬁeld with a focus on applications.)
References
Abercrombie, D. (1967) Elements of General Phonetics, Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press.
Alo, M. A. and Mesthrie, R. (2004) ‘Nigerian English: morphology and syntax’, in B. Kortmann,
K. Burridge, R. Mesthrie, E. W. Schneider and C. Upton (eds) A Handbook of Varieties of English,
vol. 2: Morphology and Syntax, Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter.
Anderwald, L. (2004) ‘English in the southeast of England: morphology and syntax’, in B. Kortmann,
K. Burridge, R. Mesthrie, E. W. Schneider and C. Upton (eds) A Handbook of Varieties of English,
vol. 2: Morphology and Syntax, Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter.
Bailey, G. (1997) ‘When did Southern American English begin?’, in E. W. Schneider (ed.) Englishes
Around the World: Studies in Honour of Manfred Görlach, Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Andy Kirkpatrick and David Deterding
384

Baskaran, L. (2004a) ‘Malaysian English: phonology’, in E. W. Schneider, K. Burridge, B. Kortmann,
R. Mesthrie and C. Upton (eds) A Handbook of Varieties of English, vol. 1: Phonology, Berlin:
Mouton de Gruyter.
——(2004b) ‘Malaysian English: morphology and syntax’, in B. Kortmann, K. Burridge, R. Mesthrie,
E. W. Schneider and C. Upton (eds) A Handbook of Varieties of English, vol. 2: Morphology and
Syntax, Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter.
Bhatt, R. M. (2004) ‘Indian English: syntax’, in B. Kortmann, K. Burridge, R. Mesthrie,
E. W. Schneider and C. Upton (eds) A Handbook of Varieties of English, vol. 2: Morphology and
Syntax, Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter.
Bokamba, E. G. (1992) ‘The Africanization of English’, in B. B. Kachru (ed.) The Other Tongue:
English Across Cultures, 2nd edn, Urbana and Chicago: University of Illinois Press.
Bolton, K. (2005) ‘Where WE stands: approaches, issues and debate in World Englishes’, World
Englishes 24(1): 69–83.
Britain, D. (2007) ‘Grammatical variation in England’, in D. Britain (ed.) Language in the British
Isles, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Cane, G. (1996) ‘Syntactic simpliﬁcation and creativity in spoken Brunei English’, in P. W. Martin,
C. Oz.óg and G. Poedjosoedarmo (eds) Language Use and Language Change in Brunei Darussalam,
Athens, OH: Ohio University Center for International Studies.
Carter, R. and McCarthy, M. (2006) Cambridge Grammar of English: A Comprehensive Guide,
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Cauldwell, R. (2002) ‘The functional irrhythmicality of spontaneous speech: a discourse view of
speech rhythms’, Apples: Applied Language Studies 2(1). Available at: www.solki.jyu.ﬁ/apples/
(accessed 7 April 2009).
Cheng, M. and Warren, M. (2001) ‘She knows more about Hong Kong than you do, isn’t it: tags in
Hong Kong conversational English’, Journal of Pragmatics 33: 1419–39.
Childs, B. and Wolfram, W. (2004) ‘Bahamian English: phonology’, in E. W. Schneider, K. Burridge,
B. Kortmann, R. Mesthrie and C. Upton (eds) A Handbook of Varieties of English, vol. 1:
Phonology, Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter.
Clayton, T. (2006) Language Choice in a Nation Under Transition: English Language Spread in
Cambodia, Boston, MA: Springer.
Collins (2002) Bilingual Dictionary: English–Malay, Malay–English, Selangor, Malaysia: Harper-
Collins.
Cruttenden, A. (2008) Gimson’s Pronunciation of English, 7th edn, London: Hodder Education.
Crystal, D. (1995a) ‘Documenting rhythmical change’, in J. Windsor Lewis (ed.) Studies in General
and English Phonetics: Essays in Honour of Professor J. D. O’Connor, London: Routledge.
——(1995b) The Cambridge Encyclopedia of the English Language, Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
——(2003) English as a Global Language, 2nd edn, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
——(2004) The Stories of English, London: Allen Lane.
——(2008) Txting: The gr8 db8, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Cukor-Avila, P. (2003) ‘The complex grammatical history of African-American and white verna-
culars in the South’, in S. J. Nagle and S. L. Sanders (eds) English in the Southern United States,
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Dauer, R. M. (1983) ‘Stress-timing and syllable-timing reanalyzed’, Journal of Phonetics 11: 51–62.
Deterding, D. (2007) Singapore English, Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press.
Deterding, D. and Kirkpatrick, A. (2006) ‘Intelligibility and an emerging ASEAN English lingua
franca’, World Englishes 25(3): 391–409.
Deterding, D., Wong, J. and Kirkpatrick, A. (2008) ‘The pronunciation of Hong Kong English’,
English World-Wide 29: 148–75.
ELFA (n.d.) ‘Welcome to the ELFA Corpus project homepage’, Available at: http://uta.ﬁ/laitokset/
kielet/engf/research/elfa/index.htm (accessed 23 June 2009).
Filpulla, M., Klemola, F. and Paulasto, H. (eds) (2009) Vernacular Universals and Language
Contacts: Evidence from Varieties of English and Beyond, London: Routledge.
Graddol, D. (2006) English Next, London: The British Council.
Gut, U. (2004) ‘Nigerian English: phonology’, in E. W. Schneider, K. Burridge, B. Kortmann,
R. Mesthrie and C. Upton (eds) A Handbook of Varieties of English, vol. 1: Phonology, Berlin:
Mouton de Gruyter.
World Englishes
385

——(2006) ‘Nigerian English prosody’, English World-Wide 26: 153–77.
Guy, G. R. (1980) ‘Variation in the group and the individual: the case of ﬁnal stop deletion’, in
W. Labov (ed.) Locating Language in Time and Space, New York: Academic Press.
Hiro (2009) ‘Random curiosity: contains anything that comes across my mind’ (blog of 15 March
2009). Available at: http://randomcuriosityalongthesidelines.blogspot.com/ (accessed 12 April 2009).
Ho, M. L. and Platt, J. (1993) Dynamics of a Contact Continuum: Singapore English, Oxford:
Clarendon Press.
Huber, M. (2004) ‘Ghanaian English: phonology’, in E. W. Schneider, K. Burridge, B. Kortmann,
R. Mesthrie and C. Upton (eds) A Handbook of Varieties of English, vol. 1: Phonology, Berlin:
Mouton de Gruyter.
Huber, M. and Dako, K. (2004) ‘Ghanaian English: morphology and syntax’, in B. Kortmann,
K. Burridge, R. Mesthrie, E. W. Schneider and C. Upton (eds) A Handbook of Varieties of English,
vol. 2: Morphology and Syntax, Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter.
ICE (2009) ‘International corpus of English’. Available at: www.ucl.ac.uk/english-usage/ice/index.
htm (accessed 13 April 2009).
Ihalainen, O. (1994) ‘The dialects of England since 1776’, in R. Burchﬁeld (ed.) Cambridge History
of the English Language, vol. 5: English in Britain and Overseas. Origins and Development,
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Jenkins, J. (2000) Phonology of English as an International Language, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
——(2007) English as a Lingua Franca: Attitude and Identity, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
——(2009) World Englishes: A Resource Book for Students, 2nd edn, London: Routledge.
Kachru, B. B. (1992b) ‘Models for non-native Englishes’, in B. B. Kachru (ed.) The Other Tongue:
English across Cultures, 2nd edn, Urbana and Chicago: University of Illinois Press.
——(1992c) ‘Teaching world Englishes’, in B. B. Kachru (ed.) The Other Tongue: English across
Cultures, 2nd edn, Urbana and Chicago: University of Illinois Press.
——(2005) Asian Englishes: Beyond the Canon, Hong Kong: Hong Kong University Press.
Kachru, B. B. (ed.) (1992a) The Other Tongue: English across Cultures, 2nd edn, Urbana and
Chicago: University of Illinois Press.
Kirkpatrick, A. (2007a) World Englishes: Implications for International Communication and English
Language Teaching, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
——(2007b) ‘The communicative strategies of ASEAN speakers of English as a lingua franca’, in
D. Prescott (ed.) English in Southeast Asia: Literacies, Literatures and Varieties, Newcastle upon
Tyne: Cambridge Scholars Publishing.
——(2008) ‘English as the oﬃcial working language of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations
(ASEAN): features and strategies’, English Today 24(2): 37–44.
Kirkpatrick, A. (ed.) (2010) Handbook of World Englishes, London: Routledge.
Kortmann, B. (2010) ‘Variation across Englishes: syntax’, in A. Kirkpatrick (ed.) Handbook of
World Englishes, London: Routledge.
Kortmann, B., Burridge, K., Mesthrie, R., Schneider, E. W. and Upton, C. (eds) (2004) A Handbook
of Varieties of English, vol. 2: Morphology and Syntax, Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter.
Low, E. L., Grabe, E. and Nolan, F. (2000) ‘Quantitative characterizations of speech rhythm:
syllable-timing in Singapore English’, Journal of Phonetics 29: 217–30.
McArthur, T. (1998) The English Languages, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
——(2002) The Oxford Guide to World Englishes, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
McCaﬀerty, K. (2003) ‘The Northern subject rule in Ulster: how Scots, how English?’ Language
Variation and Change 15: 105–39.
Mahboob, A. (2004) ‘Pakistani English: morphology and syntax’, in B. Kortmann, K. Burridge,
R. Mesthrie, E. W. Schneider and C. Upton (eds) A Handbook of Varieties of English, vol. 2:
Morphology and Syntax, Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter.
Mahboob, A. and Ahmar, N. H. (2004) ‘Pakistani English: phonology’, in E. W. Schneider,
K. Burridge, B. Kortmann, R. Mesthrie and C. Upton (eds) A Handbook of Varieties of English,
vol. 1: Phonology, Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter.
Martin, P. W., Oz.óg, C. and Poedjosoedarmo, G. (eds) (1996) Language Use and Language Change
in Brunei Darussalam, Athens, OH: Ohio University Center for International Studies.
Mesthrie, R. (2004) ‘Indian South African English: morphology and syntax’, in B. Kortmann,
K. Burridge, R. Mesthrie, E. W. Schneider and C. Upton (eds) A Handbook of Varieties of English,
vol. 2: Morphology and Syntax, Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter.
Andy Kirkpatrick and David Deterding
386

Mesthrie, R. and Bhatt, R. M. (2008) World Englishes: The Study of New Linguistic Varieties,
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Mossop, J. (1996) ‘Some phonological features of Brunei English’, in P. W. Martin, C. Oz.óg and
G. Poedjosoedarmo (eds) Language Use and Language Change in Brunei Darussalam, Athens,
OH: Ohio University Center for International Studies.
Mufwene, S. (2001) The Ecology of Language Evolution, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Naik, M. K. and Narayan, S. A. (2004) Indian English Literature 1980–2000: A Critical Survey,
New Delhi: Pencraft International.
Nelson, G., Wallis, S. and Aarts, B. (2002) Exploring Natural Language: Working with the British
Component of the International Corpus of English, Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Pennycook, A. (2007) Global Englishes and Transcultural Flows, London: Routledge.
——(2010) ‘The future of Englishes: one, many or none?’, in A. Kirkpatrick (ed.) Handbook of
World Englishes, London: Routledge.
Phillipson, R. (1992) Linguistic Imperialism, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
——(2009) Linguistic Imperialism Continued, London: Routledge.
Richards, J. C., Platt, J. and Platt, H. (1985) Longman Dictionary of Language Teaching and
Applied Linguistics, Harlow: Longman.
Sailaja, P. (2009) Indian English, Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press.
Saro-Wiwa, K. (1985) Sozaboy: A Novel in Rotten English, Port Harcourt, Nigeria: Saros International.
Schmied, J. (2004) ‘East African English (Kenya, Uganda, Tanzania): phonology’, in E. W. Schneider,
K. Burridge, B. Kortmann, R. Mesthrie and C. Upton (eds) A Handbook of Varieties of English,
vol. 1: Phonology, Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter.
Schneider, E. W. (2003) ‘The dynamics of new Englishes: from identity construction to dialect
rebirth’, Language 79: 233–81.
——(2007) Postcolonial Englishes: Varieties Around the World, Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.
Schneider, E. W., Burridge, K., Kortmann, B., Mesthrie, R. and Upton, C. (eds) (2004) A Handbook
of Varieties of English, vol. 1: Phonology, Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter.
Schreier, D. (2005) Consonant Change in English Worldwide, Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan.
Seidlhofer, B. (2001) ‘Closing a conceptual gap: the case for a description of English as a lingua
franca’, International Journal of Applied Linguistics 11: 133–58
——(2004) ‘Research perspectives in teaching English as a lingua franca’, Annual Review of Applied
Linguistics 24: 209–39.
Sidhwa, B. (1996) ‘Creative processes in Pakistani English ﬁction’, in R. Baumgardner (ed.) South
Asian English: Structure, Use and Users, Chicago: University of Illinois Press.
Tayao, M. L. G. (2004) ‘Philippine English: phonology’, in E. W. Schneider, K. Burridge, B. Kortmann,
R. Mesthrie and C. Upton (eds) A Handbook of Varieties of English, vol. 1: Phonology, Berlin:
Mouton de Gruyter.
Trudgill, P. and Hannah, J. (2008) International English: A Guide to Varieties of Standard English,
5th edn, London: Hodder Education.
VOICE (n.d.) ‘The Vienna-Oxford international corpus of English’. Available at: www.univie.ac.at/
voice/page/index.php (accessed 13 April 2009).
Wells, J. C. (1982) Accents of English, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
World Englishes
387

27
Linguistic imperialism
Suresh Canagarajah and Selim Ben Said
Introduction
Linguistic imperialism (LI) refers to the imposition of a language on other languages and
communities. As in other cases of imperialism, this is an exercise of power at the transnational
level with geopolitical implications. Though imperialism through economic, cultural, political,
and military means has been discussed widely, the realization that language can serve imperi-
alistic purposes has begun to be theorized in its own right only recently. Scholars engaged in
this area of research are open to the possibility that language doesn’t have to serve a sub-
sidiary role to other material and political factors in the exercise of power; language can play a
more central role in enabling the hegemony of a community. For example, some might argue
that after decolonization, it is the English language that primarily sustains the power of the
United States and Britain in many parts of the world today, facilitating other forms of cultural,
educational, and political hegemony (see wa Thiong’o 1986).
In this chapter, we ﬁrst provide a historical orientation to the study of LI. Next, we review
some theoretical constructs that help us understand the manifestations of LI. We illustrate
these constructs in relation to educational contexts. We then move on to the controversies and
debates surrounding the study of LI. Finally, we explore some new social and theoretical
developments that complicate language-based hegemony. We outline the ways in which these
new developments call for further study and theorization. This chapter primarily explores LI
as it ﬁnds expression through the English language.
History
The term LI was ﬁrst introduced in scholarly circles by Phillipson. He initially used the term
to refer exclusively to the global status and role of English and applied the term primarily to
English language teaching. For Phillipson, LI is a situation in which ‘the dominance of English
is asserted and maintained by the establishment and continuous reconstitution of structural
and cultural inequalities between English and other languages’ (1992: 47). Several terms in this
deﬁnition need unpacking. LI is not a stable condition. As social conditions change, the
dominance of English is asserted through new means. LI will take new forms and realizations
388

in diﬀerent contexts. Phillipson also sees this dominance as a conscious process, exerted by
agents and institutions. He would argue against the notion that the power of English is an
impersonal eﬀect of historical conditions. The dominance of English is sustained by both cul-
tural and structural means. In other words, LI is attributable not only to attitudes, assump-
tions, and values of speakers of English. Geopolitical, social, and educational structures play
an important role as well.
Though English is the foremost language that displays imperialistic tendencies worldwide in
present times, the notion of LI is not restricted to English. LI can be explored in relation to
other languages in other historical periods and regions. Latin hegemony in the Roman Empire
around the ﬁrst to the fourth century, Arabic hegemony over Europe around the eighth to the
thirteenth century, and Japanese hegemony in the East Asian region in late nineteenth and
early twentieth century are examples of LI by other languages. However, there is a good case
to be made that LI by English is diﬀerent in degree and kind. Though English was ﬁrst spread
in many countries in South Asia, Africa, and the Caribbean by the British empire, English
received a new lease on life after decolonization when the United States gained ascendance
after the Second World War. The types of economic, cultural, and political power the USA
wields in the world today further the currency and status of English. In some ways, the power
of English is not dependent on a speciﬁc country anymore. It is sustained by transnational
processes and institutions. English enables the contemporary forms of ﬁnancial, production,
media, and educational relations across borders. English-based cultural institutions, such as
mass media, cinema, and music, also enjoy global status. These sources have spread English
far beyond the former British Empire. English expands its reach today through technological,
infrastructural, and material resources that other imperialistic languages didn’t enjoy in pre-
vious periods in history. Given these reasons, we can understand why scholars like Crystal
(2004) believe that the global power of English is here to stay.
Central constructs
It is important to deﬁne the terms that come up in discussions related to LI before we discuss
its manifestations.
Ideologies are ideas, assumptions, attitudes, and values that explain the unequal status of
individuals and communities in society. Ideologies are not always conscious. They could be
unconsciously internalized through one’s social practices and historical experiences. Moreover,
ideologies don’t always serve a repressive and distorting function. While ideologies can make
inequalities appear natural and acceptable, they can also illuminate them to facilitate social
change. When ideologies ﬁnd expression in language, we call them discourses. Discourses are
genres of thinking and communicating that have social and political functions. Though lan-
guages may be treated as a neutral system at the abstract grammatical level, when they play
social and ideological functions at the level of communicative practice, they acquire the
properties of discourses. Hegemony is exercised when the ideologies and discourses of a pow-
erful community are internalized by other social groups, to the extent that they willingly par-
ticipate in the leadership of that community. For example, the discourse that English is a
superior language with the capacity to express complex philosophical, scientiﬁc, and technical
information gains ideological implications when multilingual communities believe this dis-
course and learn English at the cost of proﬁciency in their own languages. When they inter-
nalize this discourse and buy into the forms of knowledge, values, and identities that come
with English, they become unwitting participants in the power enjoyed by English and
Anglophone countries.
Linguistic imperialism
389

We have to consider suitable labels for distinguishing between countries that have unequal
relationships based on their language identity. Phillipson (1992) used the terms center and
periphery, borrowing them from political economists of the world systems perspective (Frank
1969; Wallerstein 1991). The terminology has the advantage of connecting language inequality
to other forms of economic and political inequalities. However, many now see these terms as
reductive and failing to capture the new geopolitical relationships based on a more complex
international ﬂow of resources and production. Also, linguistic and material forms of
inequality are not isomorphic. For example, Anglophone countries are not always dominant in
all domains of ﬁnance, production, and technology. Another set of terms refers more speciﬁ-
cally to the historical spread, functional diﬀerences, and unequal statuses of English in diﬀer-
ent countries. Kachru (1986) introduced the terms expanding circle (where English is used as a
foreign language for contact purposes with outsiders – i.e. Vietnam or Angola, which were not
former British colonies), outer circle (where English is a second language with its own well-
established varieties since colonial times – i.e. India, Nigeria), and the inner circle (where
ownership of English and native speakerhood have been traditionally claimed – i.e. the UK,
the USA, Canada, Australia). Kachru classiﬁed these communities as norm-dependent, norm-
developing, and norm-providing, respectively, to indicate their relative status in relation to
grammatial standards. However, the developments in recent forms of globalization have raised
doubts about the validity of these distinctions, as we will demonstrate below. Though terms
like center/periphery and inner/outer/expanding circles are inadequate, we will use the former
set to refer to geopolitical distinctions and the latter set for linguistic distinctions, as we don’t
have good alternatives at present.
We now turn to constructs directly related to LI.
Linguicism
Linguicism refers to ‘Ideologies, structures, and practices which are used to legitimate, eﬀec-
tuate, and reproduce an unequal division of power and resources (both material and imma-
terial) between groups which are deﬁned on the basis of language’ (Phillipson 1992: 47, see
also Skutnabb-Kangas and Phillipson 1995, 1996; Phillipson 2000). The term is analogous to
racism and sexism, and refers to a discriminatory attitude towards language that is played out
in social practices and sustained by social institutions. For example, the lack of policy
emphasis and funding for teaching languages other than English in the USA can be con-
sidered an institutionalized form of linguicism (see Horner and Trimbur 2002). Policies such as
the No Child Left Behind Act don’t treat proﬁciency in other languages as a resource (Harper
et al. 2007, 2008).
Linguicism leads to the promotion of certain languages and language varieties and the
stigmatization of others, as the prestigious language becomes the norm by which other lan-
guages derive their status. As argued by van Dijk (2000: 73), linguicism has repercussions for
the way people use languages and may lead to an inability to use one’s own languages or to an
exclusion from certain communicative events. Linguicism may be at play in gate keeping
situations where only one language or variety is recognized while others are excluded. Also,
attitudes regarding the knowledgeableness, friendliness, and superior status of people based on
the language they speak is a psychological manifestation of linguicism. The implications of
linguicism for LI – and for the LI of English in particular – is that English is equated with
prestige, while failure to use English or even using other languages may connote lack of status.
Oda (2000) demonstrates that those who are not proﬁcient in English are treated as lower
Suresh Canagarajah and Selim Ben Said
390

in status in Japanese universities. In addition, in English teaching, varieties deemed more
‘native-like’ are promoted as more prestigious for learners while other ‘localized’ varieties are
stigmatized and suppressed (see Heller and Martin-Jones 2001). For example, in many post-
colonial countries like Sri Lanka, Hong Kong, and India, schools insist on teaching British or
American English. The varieties used in everyday life, such as Sri Lankan, Chinese, or Indian
English are censored from classroom use.
Native speakerism
The discourse of native speakerism is made of the following assumptions: that ‘native’ speakers
are the authorities on the language and enjoy superior competence; that those who use it as an
additional language have to treat ‘native’ speaker competence as the target; and that ‘native’
speakers are the best qualiﬁed to teach that language. Among those who justify the inherent
superiority of ‘native’ speakers, one can mention Prator (1968) and Quirk (1990). They treat
the varieties spoken by multilingual speakers as interlanguages attempting to approximate the
‘native’ speaker norm. However, other scholars argue against native speakerism (see Valdes
1986; Kachru 1991; Braine 1999; Canagarajah 1999a). They point out that the superiority of
the ‘native’ speaker is linguistically anachronistic as it goes against the relativistic tradition in
linguistics that postulates that there are no status diﬀerences between languages in purely lin-
guistic terms (though there are extra-linguistic reasons for such inequality). Furthermore,
languages in situations of contact will always undergo modes of appropriation and, eventually,
localization. Language change or diversiﬁcation cannot be stopped by attempts at puriﬁcation.
Contextually relevant variants of the language have to be used in diﬀerent situations of com-
munication. In this sense, the English varieties of multilingual speakers are not deﬁcient, but
diﬀerent. Similarly, the treatment of ‘native’ speaker teachers as superior ignores the view that
language learning is a creative cognitive and social process that has its own trajectory, and is
not fully dependent on the teacher (much less the teacher’s accent).
In fact, many scholars consider the term ‘native’ speaker as itself questionable. The term
doesn’t suit the language reality in many communities. With the existence of localized varieties
of English developed in postcolonial communities, many multilinguals would consider themselves
‘native’ speakers of these Englishes. Some in postcolonial communities acquire English simul-
taneously with one or more local languages to develop multilingual competence. These
speakers would consider themselves ﬁrst language speakers of English as well as of one or
more local languages. They would be hard pressed to identify themselves as a ‘native’ speaker
of any single language. The competence of these multilingual speakers needs to be deﬁned in
more complex terms. Rather than treating their competence in relation to purported ‘native’
speakers, or measuring their competence in English in isolation from other languages, Vivian
Cook (1999) argues that we should treat multilinguals as endowed with a multicompetence that
is qualitatively diﬀerent from the competence of monolingual speakers of English. Cook the-
orizes the ways in which a multilingual speaker simultaneously works with diverse languages
even as he/she communicates in only one of them. Furthermore, this competence is more than
the sum of its parts, going beyond the resources provided by the individual languages. Such
developments call for new ways of classifying language identities. Rampton (1990) has argued
for categorizing linguistic identities not in terms of birth, but in terms of a more diverse set of
categories such as expertise, aﬃliation, and inheritance. We don’t have good alternatives to
make distinctions between the types of speakers relevant for this chapter. Therefore we use the
term ‘native’ within quotation marks. For ‘non-native’ speakers, we use the term ‘multilingual’
speakers.
Linguistic imperialism
391

Monolingualism
Another discourse that facilitates LI is monolingualism. This discourse has implications for
many subﬁelds in applied linguistics. In second language acquisition, processes of learning
treat monolingual acquisition as the model; in language planning, multilingualism is treated as
a problem for social progress; in sociolinguistics, identities and communities are deﬁned in
terms of homogeneity (see Blommaert and Verschueren 1998; Canagarajah 2007). To focus
more closely on teaching, according to this discourse English is best taught monolingually
(Phillipson 1992: 185–93). This discourse takes as its model the pedagogical norms used in
countries where English is the primary language, and assumes that speaking English to the
exclusion of other languages (including the mother tongue) is the best way to optimize the
learning of this language in second language contexts. Other languages are considered to
negatively interfere with the acquisition and internalization of English. This discourse gains
strength in the light of a reaction against grammar translation methods, a shift in emphasis in
language pedagogy from writing to speaking, and a belief in ‘natural’ L2 language acquisition.
‘English only’ is institutionalized in many states of the USA, such as Arizona, where other
languages are not permitted to be used in classrooms. In colonized countries, local people may
themselves desire to be taught in the English language in order to reach a better economic
status or because this language represents a valued cultural and economic capital (Bourdieu
1986). As a consequence, the monolingualist discourse is internalized by the local population
and motivates them to ‘mimicry’ (Memmi 2003) aimed at emulating the colonizer.
However, there are several factors that make the monolingualist discourse a fallacy. Phillipson
(1992) argues that ‘when the mother tongue is banned from the classroom, the teaching leads
to the alienation of the learners, deprives them of their cultural identity, and leads to accul-
turation rather than increased intercultural communicative competence’ (1992: 193). Rather
than acculturating to English one-sidedly, multilinguals should be encouraged to develop a
multicultural identity, with English as one more resource in their linguistic repertoire. Fur-
thermore, the use of ﬁrst language (L1) can help students bridge home knowledge and school
knowledge more eﬀectively (see Faltis and Hudelson 1994). Tove Skutnabb-Kangas (Skutnabb-
Kangas and Phillipson 1995) goes to the extent of arguing that the provision of mother tongue
in the educational process (including the L2 classes) is a fundamental ‘linguistic human right’
of the minority language groups. Other scholars argue for the positive functions of ﬁrst lan-
guages in the acquisition of English. Asserting that ‘relations of power and their aﬀective
consequences are integral to language acquisition’, Auerbach has pointed out that the use of
students’ ﬁrst language can increase their openness to learning English by reducing the degree
of language and culture shock (1993: 16). If Auerbach’s justiﬁcation is socio-political, Cummins’
(1991) is cognitive. His linguistic interdependence principle explains that proﬁciency in L1 can
enable better proﬁciency in L2 by activating a common underlying proﬁciency that enables
cognitive/academic and literacy-related skills to transfer across languages. Despite these
research ﬁndings, the monolingualist discourse continues to hold sway.
Controversies and debates
Ambiguities and ironies in the spread of English
The hegemony of English is not always clear and straightforward. Pennycook’s Cultural Poli-
tics of English as an International Language (1994) grapples with the paradoxes and ironies in
the status and functions of English in the periphery. He goes beyond the dichotomies and
Suresh Canagarajah and Selim Ben Said
392

stereotypes in this historiography to acknowledge greater tension in the roles of English and
the vernacular. He captures what he calls the ‘critical ambivalences’ in which English is caught
up, embodying conﬂicting attitudes and values (1994: 74). Surveying the role of English in the
colonial period under the discourses of Orientalism (i.e. made up of ‘policies in favor of edu-
cation in local languages for both the colonized and the colonizers’) and Anglicism (i.e. made
up of ‘policies in favor of education in English’), Pennycook explores the complex ways in
which both policies existed side by side to serve the interests of the colonial agenda in the
periphery (1994: 74–5). He thereby corrects the stereotypical view that Anglicism blatantly
triumphed over Orientalism (a position which other scholars, including Phillipson 1992, seem to
adopt). Pennycook theorizes the complementary relation of Orientalism and Anglicism thus:
First, both Anglicism and Orientalism operated alongside each other; second, Orientalism
was as much a part of colonialism as was Anglicism; third, English was withheld as much
as it was promoted; fourth, colonized people demanded access to English; and ﬁnally, the
power of English was not so much in its widespread imposition but in its operating as the
eye of the colonial panopticon.
(Pennycook 1994: 103)
Pennycook’s treatment of the postcolonial status of English, especially in Singapore and
Malaysia, goes beyond stereotypes to show the manner in which Anglicism thrives in the local
communities at a period of intense nationalism. He surveys discourses such as pragmatism,
meritocratism, and internationalism that motivate local people to still ‘desire’ English. Some
features of this positive valuation of English sit side by side with oppositional perspectives.
However, Pennycook sees such mixed attitudes of local people as still facilitating the hegemony of
English as they fail to develop a critical attitude towards language.
Linguistic resistance and appropriation
Canagarajah (1999b) takes Pennycook’s analysis further to show how local people appropriate
English to suit their interests and values. This activity constitutes a form of resistance. The
resistance perspective diﬀers from the assumptions informing LI. LI holds that subjects
are passive and lack agency to manage their linguistic and ideological conﬂicts to their
advantage; that the sole function of language is to spread and sustain the interests of the
dominant groups; that languages are monolithic, abstract structures that come with a homo-
geneous set of ideologies that serve the interests of a single community. Canagarajah considers
this a deterministic perspective on power and labels it reproduction orientation. This perspec-
tive has had considerable inﬂuence in linguistics, discourse analysis, social sciences, and edu-
cation (see Bourdieu and Passeron 1977). The alternative response of engaging creatively with
languages assumes a diﬀerent set of values: namely, that subjects have the agency to think
critically and work out ideological alternatives that favor their empowerment; that although
language may suppress people, it also has the liberatory potential of facilitating critical
thinking, and enabling subjects to rise above domination; that each language is heterogeneous
enough to accommodate diverse interests that may be tapped by marginalized groups to serve
their own purposes. The resistance perspective provides for the possibility that the powerless
may negotiate, alter, and oppose political structures in their everyday life through many
untheorized ways.
Canagarajah goes on to suggest that the new varieties of English in postcolonial contexts
might be a way for local communities to bring in their own values, discourses, and interests
Linguistic imperialism
393

into the English language. Therefore, these new varieties have ideological implications. They
democratize the language by accommodating values from diverse communities, indicating
ownership over the language by those outside the center. However, Tove Skutnabb-Kangas
(2004) argues that the appropriation of English doesn’t address the prospect of language death
for many indigenous languages. Even though local speakers may appropriate English in crea-
tive and critical terms, many also ignore proﬁciency in their own languages in favor of English.
She argues that resistance theory should not look at English in isolation, but in relation to
other languages in the local ecology.
Linguistic accommodation and multilingualism
Bisong (1995) has brought out the complexity of a multilingual repertoire within which English
is accommodated by outer circle members. Focusing on Nigeria, he argues that for local
people who are proﬁcient in diverse languages, and enjoy a culture of plurilingualism, learning
and using one more language – English in this case – doesn’t pose any problems. English
became accommodated into their repertoire of codes spoken in the local context during colo-
nization. In fact, multilinguals may develop ‘third positions’ in culture, ideology, and world-
view, that go beyond essentialized identities (see Kramsch and Lam 1999). Third positions are
hybrid linguistic or cultural systems that merge competing languages and cultures. These
speakers sidestep the deterministic discourse informing LI – i.e. that the speakers of English
are conditioned by English to fall prey to its ideology and also lose proﬁciency in their ver-
nacular codes and cultures. However, a complicating issue is that not all languages are always
equal in social life. Local people have to negotiate the power of English with alertness and
critical agency. Phillipson (2003) also brings out the paradoxical case in the European Union
that in the name of multilingualism, it is English that is gaining more power at the cost of
other languages. He argues that the claim of egalitarian multilingualism turns out to be
deceptive, because people ﬁnd the power wielded by English too tempting. As a result, English
is on the ascendance in Europe. Also, House points out that ‘the lip-service paid to the ideal of
a multiplicity of languages’ is not matched in reality, and that translating documents into the
diﬀerent languages found in Europe is an expensive and burdensome enterprise (2003: 561).
Future directions
We now discuss the recent geopolitical and communicative developments which complicate the
premise of LI.
Transnational ﬂows
The shift from modernist globalization to postmodern globalization ushers in new relations for
languages and communities. The modernist globalization that accompanied colonization was
motivated by the desire of the dominant Western European communities to spread their values
everywhere. It was believed that the values of Enlightenment progress were relevant for all
communities (see Mignolo 2000). This movement set up a geopolitical relationship that was
centrifugal and hierarchical, involving a unilateral ﬂow of power from the center to the per-
iphery. In addition to shaping social life, this mode of globalization had its eﬀects on language
relationships. In many cases, the modernist project involved suppressing or obliterating any
traces of local culture or language. In some cases, a hierarchical relationship was set up
between the center and the periphery, with the local treating the global as the norm and
Suresh Canagarajah and Selim Ben Said
394

modeling itself after it. English was imposed on other languages and communities in a similar
fashion during colonization.
There are technological, social, and geopolitical factors that account for the shift from
modernist globalization (King 1997; Jameson and Miyoshi 1998). In fact, the very success of
modernist globalization laid the groundwork for a revision in the patterns of globalization. As
all the communities were gradually integrated into a tightly networked system, the local was
not suppressed, but received increased visibility. The local propagated itself beyond its narrow
bounds through more advanced forms of travel, production relations, business enterprises, and
media communication. According to Stuart Hall (1997), these changes forced dominant com-
munities to drop the idea of suppressing the local and attempt to work with it to carry out
their interests. For Hall, these altered relationships between the local and the global char-
acterize postmodern globalization.
To understand postmodern globalization, Arjun Appadurai (1996) oﬀers a model of
‘transcultural ﬂows’. He tries to capture the new reality of geopolitical relationships not fol-
lowing the unilateral ﬂow from center to periphery. The relationship is more multilateral and
ﬂuid. He theorizes these new relationships in relation to the following domains:
ethnoscapes
ﬂow of persons
mediascapes
ﬂow of information
technoscapes ﬂow of technology
ﬁnancescapes ﬂow of ﬁnance
ideoscapes
ﬂow of ideology/ideas
English plays a key role in enabling these global ﬂows today. English also gets aﬀected by
these ﬂows, undergoing diﬀerences in its structure and ethos as it performs these new social
functions. Among other things, postmodern globalization has generated the condition for
English to work with other languages and carry out the functions of a transnational commu-
nity. Through the type of ﬂuid interaction we see between languages in various domains,
English is also getting more hybridized than ever before. The new geopolitical relationship
between languages Canagarajah (2007) calls ‘linguascapes’ (consistent with the terminology
Appadurai coins for the other transcultural ﬂows). The implication of these new linguascapes
is that English is getting deterritorialized. It is losing its identity as belonging to certain tra-
ditional ‘homes’ (the UK or USA, for example). More importantly, it is losing its identity as a
language belonging to the inner circle.
We need more research on other features of these transnational ﬂows. There is a burgeoning
study of hip-hop and the way it ﬂows across borders and speech communities. Researchers also
show how participants in this art form from countries as diverse as Nigeria, Japan, and Sri
Lanka mix their own languages and English creatively in their music (see Ibrahim 1999;
Mitchell 2001; Pennycook 2003b, 2003c, 2007). This music then travels back to the center,
carrying new idioms and values. An interesting feature is that the valued form of English in
this music is Black English, not the ‘Queen’s English’.
Internet
A powerful medium for transnational ﬂows is the new digital technology and the emergent
conventions of communication on the Internet. They have created new resources for multi-
linguals to engage with each other and to negotiate their diﬀerences in English. Through such
process of negotiation, some users can go on to create new hybrid discourses. For example,
Linguistic imperialism
395

Lam (2004) documents the socialization of two bilingual immigrant Chinese girls in a chat
room in which participants develop a hybrid language variety that distinguishes them from
both their English-only peers and their Cantonese-only peers. Similarly, Bloch (2004) shows
how Chinese learners of English drew on the Chinese rhetorical tradition when communicat-
ing in a Usenet group in English, thereby creating a hybrid form of English for that particular
context. These discourses resemble the textual strategies of appropriation that we discussed
earlier.
English as a lingua franca (ELF)
The English that is used in multilingual contexts in postmodern globalization needs to be
distinguished from the varieties spoken by inner circle speakers. ELF is deﬁned as a culture-
neutral variety that is commonly owned by multilinguals (Seidlhofer 2002; House 2003; Jenkins
2006a). It is assumed that while speakers may use their own local varieties in their intra-
community contexts (whether Britain or India), everyone will switch to ELF in international
contexts. Seidlhofer (2002) uses corpus data from her VOICE (Vienna-Oxford International
Corpus of English) project to describe the grammar of ELF (www.univie.ac.at/voice/page/
index.php). She and Jenkins (2006b) are also interested in developing pedagogical tools by
identifying the lingua franca core, whether in grammatical, phonological, or semantic senses.
Rather than teaching ‘native’ forms of English, they ﬁnd it more proﬁtable to teach the lingua
franca core that perhaps wouldn’t raise the same animosity or identity conﬂicts for local
people.
More speciﬁcally, House (2003: 560) deﬁnes ELF as a language not for identiﬁcation but for
communication. English for identiﬁcation means using a language for purposes of aﬃliation
but also for ‘aﬀective’ and ‘identiﬁcatory’ ends. The use of English for communication, on the
other hand, does not represent a threat to multilingualism nor to the identities of users as
English. For House, English in this case is perceived as an auxiliary language and does not
have implications for values or identities. It is used for ‘transactional’ or ‘instrumental’ pur-
poses only. For such reasons, House argues that English is a commonly owned language and
cannot be perceived as hegemonizing any more. However, it is diﬃcult to separate commu-
nication and identiﬁcation in ELF. Any language, whatever the status of the speaker or their
objectives in using the language, can raise issues of identiﬁcation and representation in relative
degrees.
Globalization from below
Another development that complicates LI is that diﬀerent social groups are making eﬀorts at
the local level to acquire/use English to suit their own interests and identities, by mixing it with
local languages. Blommaert (2006) shows that while the state in Tanzania forms policies
favoring Swahili, the poor and marginalized see the need for English. However, they appro-
priate English in their own fashion, as they don’t have access to the educated varieties. The
codemixed forms of English that youth use in hip-hop and that salespeople use for attracting
buyers are treated by Blommaert as the local interpenetration of the global. In this fashion,
local people develop hybrid codes and identities to reconcile their conﬂicting language alle-
giances. In the context of schools, students and teachers have been developing similar strate-
gies to manage local values and identities in the face of competing policy discourses. In
classrooms in Eritrea (Wright 2001), India (Annamalai 2005), South Africa (Probyn 2005),
Tanzania (Brock-Utne 2005), Kenya (Bunyi 2005), Brunei (Martin 2005), and Hong Kong
Suresh Canagarajah and Selim Ben Said
396

(Luk 2005), to mention just a few, local languages are mixed with English in many subtle ways
to negotiate desired values, identities, and interests. Therefore, many scholars are challenging
the stigmatized status given to mixed varieties of English, proposing that they be given a
place in education and other institutional contexts and acknowledged in scholarly literature
(see Pennycook 2003a; Blommaert 2006; Canagarajah 2009). Blommaert (2006) calls these
emergent varieties of English an example of ‘globalization from below’, which he considers a
diﬀerent form of resistance to the power of English. These varieties show a class-based resis-
tance. While the model of World Englishes describes the educated and middle-class varieties of
indigenized English, and boosts the status of the local elite, the mixed varieties represent the
interests and values of the less educated (see for further discussion of this point, Parakrama
1995; Canagarajah 2009).
Spread and decline of the English language
In the context of the new geopolitical relationships, new technology, and new communicative
media, more diverse languages are gaining prominence. Graddol (2006) cites impressive sta-
tistics to suggest the decline of English in various social domains. For example, the number of
Internet users for whom English is a ﬁrst language is quickly declining. English is being over-
taken by the Chinese language in terms of number of speakers. A similar decline of English is
projected in the domain of news media. Other world languages are adopted more by the
mainstream press. The dominance of international news by English language providers such as
Associated Press, Reuters, the BBC or CNN is being increasingly challenged by networks in
other languages. Recent trends diversify both the viewpoints available in international news
in English, and the languages in which global news is provided. Stations like Al-Jazeera and
Al-Arabiya provide an independent source of news about events in the Middle East. They have
turned to Arabic as an important medium for world news. The Spanish-language rival to
CNN, Telesur, which began broadcasting from Caracas in 2005, enjoys popularity in Latin
American countries. Graddol also cites other evidence to demonstrate the decline of English
vis-à-vis other world languages. He observes that in many Asian countries, Europe and the
USA, Mandarin has emerged as the coveted language. He argues that ‘An estimated 30 million
people are already studying Mandarin worldwide and the Chinese government expects this to
rise to around 100 million in the next few years’ (2006: 63). Will these developments make a
dent in the linguistic imperialism of English?
Conclusion
It is clear from our review that social conditions have changed a lot since colonial times when
English was imposed on other communities. To some extent, the values and relationships that
English helped internalize among communities still have some power over multilingual people
in the periphery. However, LI doesn’t take the form it did then. It takes new forms through
postmodern globalization, and new technologies and media. The new forms of globalization
and social relationships in postmodern times have created favorable conditions for negotia-
bility for other communities and languages. In certain domains (as suggested by Graddol),
some other languages have gained more prominence, at times changing English from within,
constructing hybrid codes and discourses. Such developments don’t mean that we live in a
more democratic linguistic environment now. Issues of power are still relevant. However, it is
in the nature of power to be contested. Other languages and communities will always resist,
modify, and reconﬁgure the power of English. The struggle for power between languages will
Linguistic imperialism
397

go on indeﬁnitely, taking new forms and ramiﬁcations. The notion of LI reminds us that we
must not ignore the role of power in language relationships. It alerts communities and policy
makers to negotiate the relationship between languages in creative and critical ways.
Related topics
language policy and planning; multilingualism; world Englishes
Further reading
Canagarajah, A. S. (ed.) (2005) Reclaiming the Local in Language Policy and Practice, Mahwah,
NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates. (The authors adopt a multilingual orientation to show how
they negotiate the power of English in domains as diverse as teaching, planning, literacy practices,
community relations, and identity.)
Edge, J. (ed.) (2006) (Re-)Locating TESOL in an Age of Empire, London: Palgrave Macmillan.
(This book explores the subtle ways in which English language teaching furthers imperialistic
agendas in contemporary times, such as missionary activity and the war on terrorism.)
Pennycook, A. (2007) Global Englishes and Transcultural Flows, London: Routledge. (The author
focuses on popular culture, especially hip-hop, to show how English gains new norms and iden-
tities through its transnational spread and reproduction.)
Prendergast, C. (2008) Buying into English: Language and Investment in the New Capitalist World,
Pittsburgh, PA: University of Pittsburgh Press. (Studying post-communist Czechoslovakia, the
author analyzes the ways in which English has acquired the status of a marketable commodity.)
References
Annamalai, E. (2005) ‘Nation building in a globalized world: language choice and education in
India’, in A. Lin and P. Martin (eds) Decolonisation, Globalisation: Language-in-Education Policy
and Practice, Clevedon: Multilingual Matters.
Appadurai, A. (1996) Modernity at Large: Cultural Dimensions of Globalization, Minneapolis:
University of Minnesota Press.
Auerbach, E. (1993) ‘Reexamining English only in the ESL classroom’, TESOL Quarterly 27: 1–19.
Bisong, J. (1995) ‘Language choice and cultural imperialism: a Nigerian perspective’, ELT Journal
49(2): 122–32.
Bloch, J. (2004) ‘Second language cyber rhetoric: a study of Chinese L2 writers in an online Usenet
group’, Language Learning and Technology 8(3): 66–82.
Blommaert, J. (2006) Discourse: A Critical Introduction, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Blommaert, J. and Verschueren, J. (1998) Debating Diversity: Analysing the Discourse of Tolerance,
London: Routledge.
Bourdieu, P. (1986) ‘The forms of capital’, in J. G. Richardson (ed.) Handbook of Theory and
Research for the Sociology of Education, New York: Greenwood Press.
Bourdieu, P. and Passeron, J.-C. (1977) Reproduction in Education, Society and Culture, London:
Sage.
Braine, G. (1999) Non-native Educators in English Language Teaching, Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence
Erlbaum Associates.
Brock-Utne, B. (ed.) (2005) Language-in-Education Policies and Practices in Africa With a Special
Focus on Tanzania and South Africa: Insight from Research in Progress, Clevedon: Multilingual
Matters.
Bunyi, G. (ed.) (2005) Language Classroom Practices in Kenya, Clevedon: Multilingual Matters.
Canagarajah, A. S. (1999a) Interrogating the ‘Native Speaker Fallacy’: Non-Linguistic Roots, Non-
Pedagogical Results, Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
——(1999b) Resisting Linguistic Imperialism in English Teaching, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
——(2007) ‘From Babel to Pentecost: postmodern glottoscapes and the globalization of English’, in
L. Anglada, M. Barrios and J. Williams (eds) Towards the Knowledge Society: Making EFL
Education Relevant, Argentina: British Council.
Suresh Canagarajah and Selim Ben Said
398

——(2009) ‘The plurilingual tradition and English language in south Asia’, AILA Review 22: 5–22.
Cook, V. (1999) ‘Going beyond the native speaker in language teaching’, TESOL Quarterly 33:
185–209.
Crystal, D. (2004) The Language Revolution, Cambridge: Polity Press.
Cummins, J. (1991) ‘Interdependence of ﬁrst- and second-language proﬁciency in bilingual children’,
in E. Bialystok (ed.) Language Processing in Bilingual Children, Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Faltis, C. and Hudelson, S. (1994) ‘Learning English as an additional language in K-12 schools’,
TESOL Quarterly 28(3): 457–68.
Frank, A. G. (1969) Latin America: Underdevelopment or Revolution, New York: Monthly Review Press.
Graddol, D. (2006) English Next: Why Global English May Mean the End of ‘English as a Foreign
Language’,
British
Council.
Available
at:
www.britishcouncil.org/ﬁles/documents/learning-
research-english-next.pdf (accessed 1 January 2010).
Hall, S. (ed.) (1997) The Local and the Global: Globalization and Ethnicity, Minneapolis: University
of Minnesota Press.
Harper, C., Platt, E., Naranjo, C. and Boynton, S. (2007) ‘Marching in unison: Florida ESL tea-
chers and No Child Left Behind’, TESOL Quarterly 41(3): 642–51.
Harper, C., de Jong, E. J. and Platt, E. (2008) ‘Marginalizing English as a second language teacher
expertise: the exclusionary consequence of No Child Left Behind’, Language Policy 7(3): 267–84.
Heller, M. and Martin-Jones, M. (2001) ‘Voices of authority: education and linguistic diﬀerence’, in
M. Heller and M. Martin-Jones (eds) Contemporary Studies in Linguistics and Education,
London: Ablex.
Horner, B. and Trimbur, J. (2002) ‘English only and U.S. college composition’, College Composition
and Communication 53: 594–630.
House, J. (2003) ‘English as a lingua franca: a threat to multilingualism?’, Journal of Sociolinguistics
7: 556–78.
Ibrahim, A. E. K. M. (1999) ‘Becoming black: rap and hip-hop, race, gender, identity, and the
politics of ESL learning’, TESOL Quarterly 33: 349–70.
Jameson, F. and Miyoshi, M. (eds) (1998) The Cultures of Globalization, Durham, NC: Duke Uni-
versity Press.
Jenkins, J. (2006a) ‘Current perspectives on teaching World Englishes and English as a lingua
franca’, TESOL Quarterly 40(1): 157–81.
——(2006b) ‘The spread of English as an international language: a testing time for testers’, ELT
Journal 60(1): 51–60.
Kachru, B. B. (1986) The Alchemy of English: The Spread, Functions and Models of Non-native
Englishes, Oxford: Pergamon.
——(1991) ‘Liberation linguistics and the Quirk concern’, English Today 25: 3–13.
King, A. D. (1997) Culture, Globalization and the World System: Contemporary Conditions for the
Representation of Identity, Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.
Kramsch, K. and Lam, W. S. E. (1999) ‘Textual identities: the importance of being non-native’, in
G. Braine (ed.) Non-Native Educators in English Language Teaching, Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence
Erlbaum Associates.
Lam, W. S. E. (2004) ‘Second language socialization in a bilingual chatroom: global and local
considerations’, Language Learning and Technology 8(3): 44–65.
Luk, J. C. M. (2005) ‘Voicing the “self” through an “other” language: exploring communicative
language teaching for global communication’, in A. S. Canagarajah (ed.) Reclaiming the Local in
Language Policy and Practice, Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Martin, P. W. (2005) ‘Talking knowledge into being in an upriver primary school in Brunei’, in A. S.
Canagarajah (ed.) Local Knowledge, Globalization and Language Teaching, Mahwah, NJ: Lawr-
ence Erlbaum.
Memmi, A. (2003) The Colonizer and the Colonized, London: Earthscan.
Mignolo, W. (2000) Local Histories/Global Designs: Coloniality, Subaltern Knowledges, and Border
Thinking, Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Mitchell, T. (2001) Global Noise: Rap and Hip-hop Outside the USA, Middletown, CT: Wesleyan
University Press.
wa Thiong’o, N. (1986) Decolonizing the Mind: The Politics of Language in African Literature,
London: James Currey.
Linguistic imperialism
399

Oda, M. (2000) ‘Linguicism in action: language and power in academic institutions’, in R. Phillipson
(ed.) Rights to Language: Equity, Power, and Education, Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Parakrama, A. (1995) De-hegemonizing Language Standards: Learning from (Post)Colonial
Englishes about ‘English’, Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan.
Pennycook, A. (1994) The Cultural Politics of English as an International Language, London:
Longman.
——(2003a) ‘Beyond homogeny and heterogeny: English as a global and worldly language’, in
C. Mair (ed.) The Cultural Politics of English, Amsterdam: Rodopi.
——(2003b) ‘Global Englishes, rip slyme and performativity’, Journal of Sociolinguistics 7(4):
513–33.
——(2003c) ‘Global noise and global Englishes’, Cultural Studies Review 9: 192–200.
——(2007) Global Englishes and Transcultural Flows, London: Routledge.
Phillipson, R. (1992) Linguistic Imperialism, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
——(ed.) (2000) Rights to Language: Equity, Power, and Education, Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence
Erlbaum Associates.
——(2003) English Only Europe? Challenging Language Policy, London: Routledge.
Prator, C. H. (1968) ‘The British heresy in TEFL’, in J. A. Fishman, C. A. Ferguson, and J. Das
Gupta (eds) Language Problems of Developing Nations, New York: Wiley.
Probyn, M. J. (2005) ‘Learning science through two languages in South Africa’, in J. Cohen, K. T.
McAlister, K. Rostlad and J. Macswan (eds) Proceedings of the 4th International Symposium on
Bilingualism, Somerville, MA: Cascadilla Press.
Quirk, R. (1990) ‘Language varieties and standard language’, English Today 21: 3–10.
Rampton, B. (1990) ‘Displacing the “native speaker”: expertise, aﬃliation, and inheritance’, ELT
Journal 44(2): 97–101.
Seidlhofer, B. (2002) The Shape of Things to Come? Some Basic Questions about English as a Lingua
Franca, Frankfurt: Peter Lang.
Selfe, C. and Selfe, R. J. (1994) ‘The politics of the interface: power and its exercise in the electronic
contact zone’, College Composition and Communication 45(4): 480–504.
Skutnabb-Kangas, T. (2004) ‘Do not cut my tongue: let me live and die with my language: a com-
ment on English and other language in relation to linguistic human rights’, Journal of Language,
Identity, and Education 3(2): 127–34.
Skutnabb-Kangas, T. and Phillipson, R. (1995) ‘Linguistic human rights, past and present’, in
T. Skutnabb-Kangas and R. Phillipson (eds) Linguistic Human Rights: Overcoming Linguistic
Discrimination, Berlin and New York: Mouton de Gruyter.
——(1996) ‘Linguicide and linguicism’, in G. Hans, P. H. Nelde, Z. Stary and W. Wölck (eds)
Kontaktlinguistic/Contact Linguistics/Linguistique de contact, vol. 1, Berlin and New York:
Mouton de Gruyter.
Valdes, J. M. (1986) Culture Bound: Bridging the Cultural Gap in Language Teaching, Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
van Dijk, T. A. (2000) ‘Discourse and access’, in R. Phillipson (ed.) Rights to Language: Equity,
Power, and Education, Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Wallerstein, I. (1991) Geopolitics and Geoculture, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Wright, M. W. (2001) ‘More than just chanting: multilingual literacies, ideology and teaching
methodologies in rural Eritrea’, in B. V. Street (ed.) Literacy and Development: Ethnographic
Perspectives, London: Routledge.
Suresh Canagarajah and Selim Ben Said
400

28
Multilingualism
Jasone Cenoz and Durk Gorter
Introduction
Multilingualism can be understood as an individual or a social phenomenon. It can refer to
the acquisition, knowledge or use of several languages by individuals or by language commu-
nities in a speciﬁc geographical area. What is the relationship between multilingualism and
applied linguistics? Research in applied linguistics deals with real-world problems related to
language. As Auer and Li (2007) point out, multilingualism is not a problem in itself but a
traditional monolingual view has seen multilingualism as a problem. In this chapter we con-
sider that multilingualism is a powerful resource for individuals and societies. Multilingualism
is not a new phenomenon because there has always been contact between speakers of diﬀerent
languages related to commerce, wars, or immigration. Multilingual individuals, such as Cardinal
Giuseppe Caspar Mezzofanti (1774–1849) who spoke almost forty languages, are admired,
and speaking languages has traditionally been associated with a high level of education.
Nowadays, globalization has spread the use of English all over the world to a greater extent
than any other language in the past, and English is increasingly used as a lingua franca, along
with many other languages. At the same time, in many parts of the world there is a growing
interest in maintaining and developing other languages such as Quechua or Aymara in South
America or Basque, Welsh or Frisian in Europe. As Franceschini (2009) points out, the study
of multilingualism, a term which is increasingly used to address diﬀerent forms of language
acquisition and language use, has had an important development in the last two decades.
Multilingualism is related to many areas of applied linguistics and therefore to many other
chapters in this volume. This chapter will focus on diﬀerent aspects of multilingualism,
including cognitive issues such as the outcomes of multilingualism, language processing in
multilinguals, multilingualism and age, and the acquisition of additional languages. It also
includes socioeducational issues such as language planning and education, multilingual identities,
multilingual practices, multilingualism in the linguistic landscape and multimodality.
Perspectives on multilingualism
The term ‘multilingualism’ is increasingly used in applied linguistics but not always in the
same way. The diﬀerent ways ‘multilingualism’ is used are linked at least to three sources of
401

variability: the individual versus social dimension, the number of languages involved and the
level of proﬁciency in the diﬀerent languages.
Multilingualism has an individual and a social dimension. This broad scope is recognized in
some deﬁnitions such as that of the European Commission: ‘the ability of societies, institu-
tions, groups and individuals to engage, on a regular basis, with more than one language in
their day-to-day lives’ (European Commission 2007: 6). The term ‘plurilingualism’ is used in
some cases to refer to individual multilingualism but the most common term is multi-
lingualism, both for the individual and social dimensions. Individual and societal multi-
lingualism are widespread in the world because the number of existing languages is much larger
than the number of independent states. Individuals and whole communities need to speak
more than one language for diﬀerent reasons. In some cases, they are speakers of an autoch-
thonous minority language such as Navajo in the USA, Maori in New Zealand or Welsh in
the UK, and need to learn the dominant state language. In other cases, multilingualism is
related to immigration because immigrants speak their ﬁrst language(s) as well as the language(s)
of their host countries. In some cases, languages are learned because they are spread inter-
nationally and it is considered that they open doors for better economic and social opportu-
nities. This is the case of English nowadays, which is the most widely spread language and is
very common as a school subject and as a language of instruction in schools and universities
all over the world.
Regarding the number of languages involved, the term multilingualism implies ‘multiple’
languages and it usually refers to two or more languages. The term ‘bilingualism’ means the
capacity to use ‘two languages’ (Greek preﬁx ‘bi’ = two) and is widely spread because many
studies have focused on two languages. As a result of this tradition ‘bilingualism’ is also
sometimes used instead of ‘multilingualism’ to include more languages. Nowadays, there is
a stronger trend to use multilingualism when two or more languages are involved and some-
times a term like ‘bi-/multilingualism’ is used (see Skutnabb-Kangas and McCarthy 2008). In
this chapter, in accordance with the deﬁnition given by the European Commission ‘multi-
lingualism’ will be used as a cover term including bilingualism as a variation of multilingualism.
The term ‘bilingualism’ will be used when referring speciﬁcally to two languages.
The term ‘second language acquisition’ (SLA) includes the word ‘second’ that clearly refers
to a second language and not to a third or fourth, but it is used by some researchers as a cover
term for the acquisition of languages other than the ﬁrst (see Ortega, this volume). This is the
way Saville-Troike uses the term: ‘The additional language is called a second language (L2),
even though it may actually be the third, fourth or tenth to be acquired’ (2006: 2). This use can
sometimes be problematic because it does not take into account the speciﬁc characteristics of
the ‘acquisition of additional languages’. In this chapter we will make a distinction between
‘second language acquisition’ to refer to the ‘second’ language and the term ‘acquisition of
additional languages’ for all the other languages (third, fourth, ﬁfth, etc.).
Apart from the terminological distinctions, an important question when discussing multi-
lingualism is what we understand by being multilingual. As Baker (2006) points out, there are
many diﬀerent interacting and overlapping dimensions that make the deﬁnition ‘elusive and
ultimately impossible’ (2006: 16). One of the most important dimensions is proﬁciency in the
diﬀerent languages. The idea of ‘native control of two languages’ suggested by Bloomﬁeld
(1933) when referring to bilingualism is extremely demanding and very uncommon when more
than two languages are involved. As we have already seen, the deﬁnition given by the
European Commission does not establish a speciﬁc level of proﬁciency in each of the lan-
guages to be multilingual but refers to the use of the languages on a regular basis. Edwards
(2004) highlights the need to relate the speciﬁc ability to use the languages to the context in
Jasone Cenoz and Durk Gorter
402

which the languages are used. To be ‘communicatively competent’ in one language involves a
number of diﬀerent components, such as linguistic, sociolinguistic, pragmatic, discourse, and
strategic competence. Furthermore these dimensions interact with other dimensions such as
formal versus informal contexts, oral versus written language or productive versus receptive
multilingualism. The idea of balanced multilingualism at the level of an ‘educated ideal native
speaker’ in several languages is utopian. As it has been pointed out, the term bi-/multi-
lingualism ‘does not always imply an equally high level of proﬁciency in all the relevant
languages’ (Skutnabb-Kangas and McCarthy 2008: 5).
An interesting dimension of multilingualism is the distinction between productive and
receptive abilities. Receptive multilingualism is based on language distance and it ‘refers to the
constellation in which interlocutors use their respective mother tongue while speaking to each
other’ (Zeevaert and ten Thije 2007: 1). Receptive multilingualism has a strong tradition in
Scandinavia where speakers of languages such as Swedish, Danish or Norwegian use their
respective ﬁrst languages when communicating with each other because they can understand
the languages used by their interlocutors. Receptive multilingualism is not a new phenomenon,
but it has become one of the areas of research in the study of multilingualism and has the
support of the European Commision (see ten Thije and Zeevaert 2007). The Euro-Com centre
(www.eurocomcenter.de) aims at ‘EuroComprehension’ on the basis that within Romance,
Germanic and Slavonic languages it is possible to develop receptive competence. In order to
teach transfer-based deduction strategies to enable receptive multilingualism, Euro-Com oﬀers
on-line courses for acquiring receptive competence in diﬀerent languages. When reading a text
in one of the on-line courses, a speciﬁc word can be related to other languages. For example,
the word seguridad in Spanish in the sentence below is related to French sécurité and English
security and also to Spanish seguro (sure) French sûr, Italian sicuro, Catalan segur, Portuguese
seguro, Romanian sigur and to words with the same suﬃx -dad in Spanish and other Romance
languages (www.kom.tu-darmstadt.de/eurocom):
Por razones de seguridad y para evitar posibles problemas …
An important distinction at the social and educational levels is that between additive and
subtractive multilingualism. In the case of additive multilingualism a language is added to the
linguistic repertoire of the speaker while the ﬁrst language continues to be developed. In con-
trast, subtractive multilingualism refers to situations in which a new language is learned and
replaces the ﬁrst language. An example of additive multilingualism can be immersion pro-
grammes aimed at speakers of the majority language in diﬀerent parts of the world. In these
programmes, a second language such as French for English L1 speakers in Canada, Catalan
for Spanish L1 speakers in Catalonia or Welsh for English L1 speakers in Wales is used as a
language of instruction at no cost for the ﬁrst language. Subtractive multilingualism is often
associated with situations of immigration. A typical example would be that of Spanish speak-
ers in the USA when they receive education only through the medium of English without
having the opportunity to develop their home language.
The study of multilingualism has been approached from diﬀerent perspectives such as psy-
cholinguistics, sociolinguistics and education. Diﬀerent aspects of multilingualism receive
more or less attention depending on the discipline. In psycholinguistics the basic topics are the
cognitive outcomes of bilingualism, the study of the way diﬀerent linguistic systems co-exist
and interact or the way diﬀerent languages are acquired simultaneously or consecutively
(see also Li 2008). Sociolinguistic studies on multilingualism have focused on the use of dif-
ferent languages and their interaction in speciﬁc contexts, the relationship between language
Multilingualism
403

use and identity, and the status and vitality of diﬀerent languages as related to power rela-
tionships. Research on education has focused on the use of minority languages as languages
of instruction, the development of multiliteracy and the learning of second and additional
languages in school contexts (see Cenoz 2009). In this chapter we will focus mainly on
psycholinguistic and sociolinguistic dimensions but will also include some developments in
education.
Main research areas in multilingualism
In this section we focus on some of the issues that have been researched in the study of mul-
tilingualism. These issues are not only relevant for multilingualism because they involve many
other areas of applied linguistics such as language learning, language in education and
language in society.
The outcomes of bilingualism and multilingualism
Up to the 1960s multilingualism was generally associated with negative results in cognitive
ability (see Baker 2006, for a review). Multilingual schoolchildren scored lower than mono-
linguals, particularly in verbal intelligence, but these tests often had serious methodological
problems. As Baker (2006) points out, the deﬁnition and measurement of intelligence is
complex and simple tests that only measured some aspects of intelligence were used and very
often in the bilinguals’ weaker language. The multilingual children tested in these studies were
in subtractive contexts because their ﬁrst language was regarded as inferior in society, it was
not developed at school and multilingual children often came from lower socioeconomic
backgrounds.
This idea of associating multilingualism with detrimental eﬀects in cognitive ability changed
in the following decades. A very inﬂuential study was published by Peal and Lambert in 1962.
This study proved that bilingual children scored higher on several verbal and non-verbal tests
of cognitive ability. Although some methodological aspects of this study have been criticized, it
triggered oﬀa large number of methodologically stronger studies on the eﬀects of bilingual-
ism. In contrast to the studies conducted between the 1920s and the 1960s, studies carried
out in recent decades have generally associated bilingualism with cognitive advantages in
metalinguistic awareness and third language acquisition.
Metalinguistic awareness refers to the ability to reﬂect on language and to manipulate it.
Bilinguals have advantages over monolinguals in some dimensions of metalinguistic awareness
that demand high levels of control of attention (Bialystok 2001; see also Jessner 2006).
Bialystok et al. (2004) also found that lifelong bilingualism could possibly slow down the
process of cognitive decline (see also de Bot and van der Hoeven, this volume).
Bilingualism and multilingualism have been associated with possible advantages in the
acquisition of additional languages (see Cenoz 2009 for a review). The basic idea is that
monolinguals and multilinguals are not on equal footing when facing the task of acquiring an
additional language. Multilinguals already have access to at least two linguistic systems with
their lexicons, syntax, phonetics, pragmatic and discourse properties. Moreover, with the
exception of early bi-/multilinguals, multilingual learners already have the experience of
acquiring a second or third language and have developed strategies that can inﬂuence the
acquisition of additional languages. Communication practices are also diﬀerent when com-
paring monolinguals and multilinguals because the latter need to switch between languages
according to the situation or the interlocutor. The positive eﬀect of bilingualism on the
Jasone Cenoz and Durk Gorter
404

acquisition of additional languages is not so obvious in the case of immigrants when the ﬁrst
language is not taught and valued at school or in society. In these cases, learners can be in
situations of subtractive multilingualism without the opportunity to develop their ﬁrst lan-
guage at school and to beneﬁt from the enhanced metalinguistic skills associated with multi-
lingualism. Furthermore, in many cases immigrant children come from weaker socioeconomic
and socioeducational backgrounds which are usually associated with poorer achievement.
Language processing in multilinguals
When trying to identify the characteristics of language processing in multilinguals the area
that has received most attention has been the organization of the multilingual lexicon (see also
Barcroft et al., this volume). Are words from diﬀerent languages activated at the same time or
is there a mechanism to block access to the languages that are not used? Studies on multi-
lingual lexical access seem to indicate that the languages that are not used are not blocked and
that there is competition between words in diﬀerent languages (see, for example, Dijkstra 2007;
van Heuven et al. 2008). However, not all languages have an equal chance of being selected.
Other factors that can aﬀect activation are phonological similarity, active use of the languages,
task demands or input/output modality (see also de Bot 2004).
Singleton (2003) analyzes the separation and integration of the operations of the mental
lexicon and concludes that there is a ‘high degree of connectivity and dynamic interplay
between the L1 mental lexicon and additional mental lexicons’ (Singleton 2003: 169). This
connectivity is clearly seen in studies on cross-linguistic inﬂuence. These studies have tried to
identify the conditions in which multilingual speakers transfer terms from the other languages
they know. Speakers tend to transfer words from languages that are typologically closer (for
example from French to Spanish or from German to Dutch rather than from Japanese to
French). However, as Ringbom (2007) points out, there is a large number of factors that can
determine cross-linguistic inﬂuence from the ﬁrst language or from other languages known by
the speaker. In fact, the level of proﬁciency in the source and the target language, the level of
formality, the order of acquisition of the language or the speciﬁc context of the interaction can
inﬂuence the amount of transfer. Other researchers refer to the ‘foreign language eﬀect’, that
is, the use of languages other than the L1 as a source language of cross-linguistic inﬂuence (see,
for example, De Angelis 2007).
Multilingualism and age
The eﬀect of age on second language acquisition is a controversial area that has received much
attention in SLA research (Singleton and Ryan 2004; DeKeyser and Larson-Hall 2005).
Research studies conducted in naturalistic language environments tend to support the idea of
‘the earlier the better’, meaning that an earlier contact with the target languages results
in higher levels of proﬁciency in the language. The study of the age factor in multilingualism
is a complex issue because there is a great diversity in the process of acquiring several
languages and a large number of individual diﬀerences are involved. The distinction between
naturalistic and more formal contexts of language acquisition is one of these factors, and most
research supporting sensitive periods has taken place in naturalistic contexts where extensive
natural exposure to the language is combined with formal learning. Research studies
conducted in formal contexts of acquisition in which exposure to the target languages is lim-
ited to the classroom have reported advantages on the part of older learners (Muñoz 2006;
Cenoz 2009).
Multilingualism
405

Neuroimaging techniques are giving the opportunity to analyze diﬀerent aspects of bilin-
gual processing with more accuracy and from diﬀerent angles (see also Ahlsén, this volume).
However as Paradis (2005) points out, it is necessary to be cautious when interpreting the
results of neuroimaging studies because in many cases they are not theoretically grounded. It is
also important to take into account that the results of psycholinguistic studies using very
limited stimuli do not necessarily reﬂect the use of languages in real communication.
Multilingualism, language planning and education
Language planning is understood as a type of intervention into the corpus of a language, its
status and acquisition (see also Wee, this volume). The institution of education can be regar-
ded as a crucial tool of language planning (see also Gogolin, this volume). Schools can have
an important inﬂuence on language learning but also on the status and values associated with
diﬀerent languages. In fact, schools have been regarded as spaces where ‘speciﬁc languages and
speciﬁc linguistic practices come to be inculcated with legitimacy and authority’ (Martin-Jones
2007: 172).
Some European minority languages such as Basque, Catalan or Welsh are good examples of
the eﬀect of language planning (Cenoz and Gorter 2008a). These languages were neglected, or
even forbidden to be used in educational contexts, but over the last decades rather elaborate
systems have developed for the teaching of the minority language from the earliest stages of
education until university and adult education. Nowadays, not only home or ﬁrst language
(L1) speakers of a minority language have it as the language of instruction but also speakers of
the majority language learn through the minority language at school. In some schools, such as
those in the Basque Country, there is a shift from bilingualism to multilingualism and English
is being increasingly used as an additional language of instruction. Nowadays, Basque, the
minority language, is the main language of instruction and English is an additional language
of instruction in some schools.
Multilingual education not only implies the teaching of two or more languages but also that
education aims at multilingualism and multiliteracy as an outcome. There are diﬀerent types
of bilingual and multilingual education depending not only on school variables (teachers,
curriculum, etc.) but also on the sociolinguistic context in which the schools are located and
the language policy of that society (see Cenoz 2009). The values associated with diﬀerent lan-
guages and their prestige in society is closely related to multilingual education. For example,
the strong language policy to protect Basque in the Basque Country is not only aimed at
schools but also at the use of Basque in government agencies, town halls, private companies or
in the linguistic landscape. This situation is completely diﬀerent from that of immigrant lan-
guages in the Basque Country or elsewhere. Immigrant languages such as Turkish, Punjabi or
Ukranian, are usually excluded from the school curriculum in Western Europe and school-
children can only attend complementary schools or extra classes outside the school timetable
(Blackledge and Creese 2009).
Multilingual identities and multilingual practices
Some trends in the study of multilingualism suggest a more sociolinguistic perspective. This
perspective can be also considered ‘ecological’ because it analyzes languages in their context as
related to each other, to speakers and to the social structures of society (Creese and Martin
2003; Blackledge 2008). This approach, based on anthropological, social and cultural studies,
critically examines communicative practices and explains them as related to the ideologies
Jasone Cenoz and Durk Gorter
406

developed in a speciﬁc social, political and historical context. Some of these studies have taken
place in education; they have analyzed discourse practices critically and identiﬁed the socio-
political implications of the use of diﬀerent languages in the curriculum and in the school
context (see, for example, Heller and Martin-Jones 2001; Creese and Martin 2003; Heller
2007). As Lo Bianco (2008: 47) points out, multilingual education is linked to the socio-
political context in which it is located. Research in social psychology has traditionally asso-
ciated language practices in education and other contexts with identity, but this ﬁxed
relationship has been challenged. A poststructuralist view considers identities as multiple and
dynamic and subject to negotiation (see Pavlenko and Blackledge 2004; Norton, this volume).
New trends in the study of multilingualism
In this section we will focus on two new areas of development in research on multilingualism:
the acquisition of additional languages and the linguistic landscape.
The acquisition of additional languages
One area of recent development in research is the acquisition and use of three or more lan-
guages. Even though the acquisition of additional languages is common in many parts of the
world, its study has received very little attention until recently. There is now a growing body of
research into multilingualism and the acquisition of additional languages which is reﬂected in
a number of recent publications in this area, a speciﬁc journal (the International Journal of
Multilingualism), international conferences and an increasing number of publications on the
topic. This research responds to the need to identify the speciﬁc characteristics that distinguish
third language acquisition and multilingualism from second language acquisition and bilin-
gualism, and covers psycholinguistic, sociolinguistic and educational issues.
The early acquisition of three languages from birth is not common but can sometimes be
found when parents are native speakers of diﬀerent languages that are not spoken in the
community and they use the strategy of one parent–one language. The child is exposed to a
third language by other carers. Studies on early trilingualism have focused on code-mixing and
code-switching (see, for example, Maneva 2004), language choice and interactional strategies
(see, for example, Quay 2008). Some studies on early trilingualism point in the direction that
multilingual children follow the same route in language acquisition as monolingual children.
For example, Barnes (2006) analyzed the questions produced in English by a trilingual child
(Basque, English and Spanish) and observed that the acquisition of diﬀerent types of questions
was similar to the process described in the case of monolingual and bilingual children.
Other situations involving the acquisition of three or more languages are linked to foreign
language learning at school and multilingual education. As we have already seen, research has
focused mainly on psycholinguistic aspects of language processing when more than two lan-
guages are involved. Research on the acquisition of additional languages has been inﬂuenced
by proposals that bilinguals and multilinguals should be regarded as diﬀerent from mono-
linguals and that their whole linguistic repertoire should be taken into account (Cook 1995;
Grosjean 2008). In fact, multilinguals seldom have balanced proﬁciency in the diﬀerent lan-
guages because language acquisition and language use are dynamic processes and they depend
on many factors including language use. Some theoretical proposals on the acquisition of
several languages such as the ‘Dynamic Model of Multilingualism’ (Herdina and Jessner 2002)
adopt a holistic view and emphasize the fact that multilingual competence is dynamic rather
than static. A more sociolinguistic and educational approach that can beneﬁt from this holistic
Multilingualism
407

approach to multilingualism focuses on literacy practices in the diﬀerent languages, both in
school settings and outside of school (see also Martin-Jones 2007).
Linguistic landscape
The study of the linguistic landscape in its own right is a relatively recent development in
applied linguistics and sociolinguistics, although there is a long tradition of the analysis of the
meaning of signs in semiotics. The study of the linguistic landscape, also called the ‘multi-
lingual cityscape’ can be a way to increase our understanding of diﬀerent aspects of multi-
lingualism (Gorter 2006). The linguistic landscape refers to signs of diﬀerent types (billboards,
road signs, commercial signs, graﬃti, etc.) that can be found in the public space.
Studies on the linguistic landscape conducted in various settings show the cultural and lin-
guistic diversity in the use of diﬀerent languages. For example, Ben Rafael et al. (2006) com-
pared Jewish, Palestinian Israeli and non-Israeli Palestinian settings in Israel. They reported on
the use of Hebrew, Arabic and English in Jewish and non-Israeli Palestinian locations. The use
of diﬀerent languages on the signs is also reported in other studies conducted in Bangkok
(Huebner 2006, 2009), Tokyo (Backhaus 2007) and Taiwan (Curtin 2009). Apart from multi-
lingualism, another trend observed in these studies is the spread of English in the linguistic
landscape. In some cases, the use of English in commercial signs could be interpreted as
informative when it is aimed at foreign visitors in non-English speaking countries, but at
the same time it is clear that English has a strong symbolic function for the local population.
The use of English has been associated with values such as international orientation, future
orientation, success, sophistication or fun orientation (see Piller 2001).
The linguistic landscape is closely linked to language policy. Cenoz and Gorter (2006)
compared two European bilingual cities, Donostia-San Sebastian in the Basque Country
(Spain) and Ljouwert-Leeuwarden in Friesland (the Netherlands). The oﬃcial languages are
Basque and Spanish in the Basque Country and Frisian and Dutch in Friesland. Basque and
Frisian are minority languages but the institutional support for Basque is much stronger than
for Frisian and the linguistic landscape is one of the areas where Basque is promoted to a
larger extent than Frisian. Cenoz and Gorter (2006) found that this policy had an important
impact on the linguistic landscape, and Basque was a common language in the linguistic
landscape while Frisian was exceptional. In both cities, English was also present in many
commercial signs.
The study of the linguistic landscape can contribute to the study of multilingualism in dif-
ferent ways. Language signs are indicators of the languages used in a speciﬁc setting and their
status, and they can also be an additional source of input in language acquisition (Cenoz and
Gorter 2008b). Another future possibility of research is the analysis of the linguistic landscape
inside schools as related to language teaching and school multilingualism.
Multimodality in the study of multilingualism
In the previous sections we have focused on some of the main trends in research on multi-
lingualism from a psycholinguistic and sociolinguistic perspective and some of the new trends
in the study of multilingualism. Research on multilingualism has gone in many other direc-
tions in recent years. An interesting direction is the study of multilingualism and emotions
(see, for example, Pavlenko and Dewaele 2004; Pavlenko 2005, 2006) or more insider ‘emic’
perspectives in the study of multilingualism (see, for example, Todeva and Cenoz 2009).
Jasone Cenoz and Durk Gorter
408

Another development has evolved in educational research in the study of literacy as social
practice. The term ‘multiliteracies’ was coined by the New London Group (1996) to refer to
cultural and linguistic diversity and to the use of new technologies and visual texts in school
and out-of-school literacies. A basic characteristic of this approach to literacy is multimodality
(see also Cope and Kalantzis 2000; Kalantzis and Cope 2008; van Leeuwen, this volume). The
development of multimedia technology, communication channels and media has encouraged
multimodal literacy which is based on the aﬀordances provided by gesture, sound, visuals and
other semiotic symbols including language but not limited to language. For example, texts
used in chatting or texting messages include diﬀerent colours, diﬀerent types of fonts and icons
next to the actual language (see also Crystal 2008). In many cases, these texts are not linear
because they include Internet links that the reader is supposed to click so as to navigate
between diﬀerent screens. The traditional borders between speech and writing, and between
languages, are also blurred. Multilinguals usually establish soft boundaries between languages
in oral communication because they can use their languages as a resource, but nowadays that
practice is very extensive and has developed even further in written languages. In a multimodal
approach to literacy, full communication is not possible through the means of language only.
Shohamy (2006: 172) considers that multilingual competence is derived from hybrids of dif-
ferent languages and the use of multiple codes, including not only printed texts but also visuals
and a variety of symbols. This new form of communication has created new literacy practices
that are dynamic and multilingual (Kress and Street 2006; Magnan 2008).
Summary
The study of multilingualism both from an individual and social perspective has blossomed in
recent years. Research on the inﬂuence of bilingualism on the cognitive development and the
acquisition of additional languages shows the beneﬁts of being bilingual and multilingual.
From a cognitive perspective, new technical developments have contributed to the study of
language processing in multilinguals, particularly at the lexical level. From a social perspective,
the sociopolitical implications of multilingualism both in educational settings and in society in
general have been analyzed. Nowadays, there are new trends in the study of multilingualism
such as the acquisition of additional languages, the linguistic landscape and multimodality.
Related topics
bilingual education; identity; language and aging; language policy and planning; lexis; multi-
modalility; SLA
Further reading
Aronin, L. and Hufeisen, B. (eds) (2009) The Exploration of Multilingualism, Amsterdam: John
Benjamins. (This volume focuses on the speciﬁc characteristics of third language acquisition and
multilingualism. The perspective is mainly psycholinguistic.)
Baker, C. (2006) Foundations of Bilingual Education and Bilingualism, 4th edn, Clevedon: Multi-
lingual Matters. (This volume is probably the most comprehensive overview of the characteristics,
types and outcomes of bilingualism and bilingual education.)
Cenoz, J. (2009) Towards Multilingual Education, Bristol: Multilingual Matters. (This volume dis-
cusses multilingual education in the Basque Country from an international perspective and covers
issues such as the diﬀerent types of multilingual schools, the age factor, multilingual identities and
the outcomes of multilingualism.)
Multilingualism
409

Gorter, D. (ed.) (2006) Linguistic Landscape: A New Approach to Multilingualism, Bristol: Multi-
lingual Matters (also published in International Journal of Multilingualism, 3(1)). (This is a
collection of articles that looks at the use of languages in signs in the public space and shows the
spread of English and multilingualism and the importance of language policy in the promotion of
minority languages.)
Li, Wei and Moyer, M. (eds) (2008) Blackwell Guide to Research Methods in Bilingualism and
Multilingualism, London: Blackwell. (This edited volume addresses methodological issues in the
study of bilingualism and multilingualism. It discusses research topics, key concepts and approaches,
and the methods and tools for collecting and analysing data.)
References
Auer, P. and Li, W. (2007) ‘Introduction: multilingualism as a problem? Monolingualism as a pro-
blem?’, in P. Auer and W. Li (eds) Handbook of Multilingualism and Multilingual Communication,
Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter.
Backhaus, P. (2007) Linguistic Landscapes. A Comparative Study of Urban Multilingualism in
Tokyo, Clevedon: Multilingual Matters.
Baker, C. (2006) Foundations of Bilingual Education and Bilingualism, Clevedon: Multilingual
Matters.
Barnes, J. (2006) Early Trilingualism: A Focus on Questions, Clevedon: Multilingual Matters.
Ben-Rafael, E., Shohamy, E., Amara, M. H. and Trumper-Hecht, N. (2006) ‘Linguistic landscape
as symbolic construction of the public space: the case of Israel’, International Journal of Multi-
lingualism 3(1): 7–30.
Bialystok, E. (2001) Bilingualism in Development: Language, Literacy and Cognition, Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Bialystok, E., Craik, F. I., Klein, R. and Viswanathan, M. (2004) ‘Bilingualism, aging, and cogni-
tive control: evidence from the Simon task’, Psychology and Aging 19(2): 290–303.
Blackledge, A. J. (2008) ‘Language ecology and language ideology’, in A. Creese and P. Martin
(eds) The Encyclopedia of Language and Education, vol. 9: Ecology of Language, Berlin and New
York: Springer.
Blackledge, A. and Creese, A. (2009) Multilingualism: A Critical Perspective, London: Continuum.
Bloomﬁeld, L. (1933) Language, New York: Holt.
Cenoz, J. (2009) Towards Multilingual Education, Bristol: Multilingual Matters.
Cenoz, J. and Gorter, D. (2006) ‘Linguistic landscape and minority languages’, International Journal
of Multilingualism 3: 67–80.
——(eds) (2008a) ‘Applied linguistics and the use of minority languages in education’, Association
Internationale de Linguistique Appliquée, special issue, AILA Review 21.
——(2008b) ‘The linguistic landscape as an additional source of input in second language acquisi-
tion’, International Review of Applied Linguistics 46: 267–87.
Creese, A. and Martin, P. (eds) (2003) Multilingual Classroom Ecologies, Clevedon: Multilingual Matters.
Cook, V. (1995) ‘Multi-competence and the learning of many languages’, Language, Culture and
Curriculum 8: 93–8.
Cope, B. and Kalantzis, M. (eds) (2000) Multiliteracies: Literacy Learning and the Design of Social
Futures, London and New York: Routledge.
Crystal, D. (2008) Txtng, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Curtin, M. L. (2009) ‘Languages on display: indexical signs, identities and the linguistic landscape
in Taipei’, in E. Shohamy and D. Gorter (eds) Linguistic Landscape: Expanding the Scenery, New
York: Routledge.
De Angelis, G. (2007) Third or Additional Language Learning, Clevedon: Multilingual Matters.
de Bot, K. (2004) ‘The multilingual lexicon: modelling selection and control’, International Journal
of Multilingualism 1(1): 17–32.
DeKeyser, R. and Larson-Hall, J. (2005) ‘What does the critical period really mean?’, in J. F. Kroll
and A. M. B. de Groot (eds) Handbook of Bilingualism: Psycholinguistic Approaches, Oxford:
Oxford University Press.
Dijkstra, A. (2007) ‘The multilingual lexicon’, in G. Gaskell (ed.) Handbook of Psycholinguistics,
Oxford University Press.
Jasone Cenoz and Durk Gorter
410

Edwards, J. (2004) ‘Foundations of bilingualism’, in T. K. Bhatia and W. C. Ritchie (eds) Handbook
of Bilingualism, London: Blackwell.
European Commission (2007) ‘Final report. High level group on multilingualism’. Available at:
http://ec.europa.eu/education/policies/lang/doc/multireport_en.pdf
Franceschini, R. (2009) ‘The genesis and development of research in multilingualism: perspectives
for future research’, in L. Aronin and B. Hufeisen (eds) The Exploration of Multilingualism,
Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Gorter, D. (ed.) (2006) ‘Linguistic landscape: a new approach to multilingualism’, special issue,
International Journal of Multilingualism 3(1).
Grosjean, F. (2008) Studying Bilinguals, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Heller, M. (ed.) (2007) Bilingualism: A Social Approach, Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan.
Heller, M. and Martin-Jones, M. (eds) (2001) Voices of Authority: Education and Linguistic Diﬀer-
ence, Westport, CT: Ablex.
Herdina, P. and Jessner, U. (2002) A Dynamic Model of Multilingualism, Clevedon: Multilingual Matters.
Huebner, T. (2006) ‘Bangkok’s linguistic landscapes: environmental print, code mixing, and lan-
guage change’, International Journal of Multilingualism 3: 31–51.
——(2009) ‘Framework for the linguistic analysis of linguistic landscapes’, in E. Shohamy and
D. Gorter (eds) Linguistic Landscape: Expanding the Scenery, New York: Routledge.
Jessner, U. (2006) Linguistic Awareness in Multilinguals: English as a Third Language, Edinburgh:
Edinburgh University Press.
Kalantzis, M. and Cope, B. (2008) ‘Language education and multiliteracies’, in S. May and
N. H. Hornberger (eds) Encyclopedia of Language and Education, vol 1: Language Policy and
Political Issues in Education, New York: Springer.
Kress, G. and Street, B. (2006) ‘Multi-modality and literacy practices’, in K. Pahl and J. Rowsell
(eds) Travel Notes from the New Literacy Studies: Instances of Practice, Clevedon: Multilingual
Matters.
Li, W. (2008) ‘Research perspectives on bilingualism and bilingual education’, in A. King and N. H.
Hornberger (eds) Encyclopedia of Language and Education, vol. 10: Research Methods in Lan-
guage and Education, Berlin: Springer.
Lo Bianco, J. (2008) ‘Bilingual education and socio-political issues’, in J. Cummins and
N. H. Hornberger (eds) Encyclopedia of Language and Education, vol. 5: Bilingual Education,
New York: Springer.
Magnan, S. (ed.) (2008) Mediating on-line Discourse, Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Maneva, B. (2004) ‘Maman, je suis polyglotte!: a case study of multilingual language acquisition
from 0–5 years’, International Journal of Multilingualism 1: 109–22.
Martin-Jones, M. (2007) ‘Bilingualism, education and the regulation of access to language resources’,
in M. Heller (ed.) Bilingualism: A Social Approach, Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan.
Muñoz, C. (ed.) (2006) Age and the Rate of Foreign Language Learning, Clevedon: Multilingual
Matters.
New London Group (1996) ‘A pedagogy of multiliteracies: designing social futures’, Harvard
Educational Review 66: 60–92.
Paradis, M. (2005) ‘Introduction to part IV: aspects and implications of bilingualism’, in J. F. Kroll
and A. M. B. de Groot (eds) Handbook of Bilingualism: Psycholinguistic Approaches, Oxford:
Oxford University Press.
Pavlenko, A. (2005) Emotions and Multilingualism, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Pavlenko, A. (ed.) (2006) Bilingual Minds: Emotional Experience, Expression, and Representation,
Clevedon: Multilingual Matters.
Pavlenko, A. and Blackledge, A. (2004) ‘New theoretical approaches to the study of negotiation
of identities in multilingual contexts’, in A. Pavlenko and A. Blackledge (eds) Negotiation of
Identities in Multilingual Contexts, Clevedon: Multilingual Matters.
Pavlenko, A. and Dewaele, J. M. (eds) (2004) ‘Languages and emotions: a crosslinguistic perspec-
tive’, special issue, Journal of Multilingual and Multicultural Development 25(2–3).
Peal, E. and Lambert, W. E. (1962) ‘The relationship of bilingualism to intelligence’, Psychological
Monographs 76: 1–23.
Piller, I. (2001) ‘Identity constructions in multilingual advertising’, Language in Society 30: 153–86.
Quay, S. (2008) ‘Dinner conversations with a trilingual two-year-old: language socialization in a
multilingual context’, First Language 28: 5–33.
Multilingualism
411

Ringbom, H. (2007) Cross-linguistic Similarity in Foreign Language Learning, Clevedon: Multilingual
Matters.
Saville-Troike, M. (2006) Introducing Second Language Acquisition, Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Shohamy, E. (2006) ‘Imagined multilingual schools: how come we don’t deliver?’, in O. García,
T. Skutnabb-Kangas and M. E. Torres-Guzmán (eds) Imagining Multilingual Schools: Language
in Education and Globalization, Clevedon: Multilingual Matters.
Singleton, D. (2003) ‘Perspectives on the multilingual lexicon: a critical synthesis’, in J. Cenoz,
U. Jessner and B. Hufeisen, The Multilingual Lexicon, Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic, pp. 167–76.
Singleton, D. and Ryan, L. (2004) Language Acquisition: The Age Factor, Clevedon: Multilingual
Matters.
Skutnabb-Kangas, T. and McCarthy, T. L. (2008) ‘Key concepts in bilingual education: ideological,
historical, epistemological, and empirical foundations’, in J. Cummins and N. H. Hornberger
(eds) Encyclopedia of Language and Education, vol. 5: Bilingual Education, Berlin: Springer.
ten Thije, J. D. and Zeevaert, L. (eds) (2007) Receptive Multilingualism, Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Todeva, E. and Cenoz, J. (eds) (2009) The Multiple Realities of Multilingualism, Berlin: Mouton de
Gruyter.
van Heuven, W. J. B., Schriefers, H., Dijkstra, T. and Hagoort, P. (2008) ‘Language conﬂict in the
bilingual brain’, Cerebral Cortex 18: 2706–16.
Zeevaert, L. and ten Thije, J. D. (2007) ‘Introduction’, in J. D. ten Thije and L. Zeevaert (eds)
Receptive Multilingualism, Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Jasone Cenoz and Durk Gorter
412

29
Language and migration
Mike Baynham
Introduction
Migrations are acts of settlement and of habitation in a world where the divide between
origin and destination is no longer a divide of Otherness, a world in which borders no
longer separate human realities.
(Sassen 1999: 6)
The multilingual landscapes of the twenty-ﬁrst century are a product of continuing transna-
tional and translocal mobility and exchange of people, information and products across phy-
sical and virtual boundaries. Knowledge of local and global/international languages is
necessary in order to gain access to a society of information, for the exchange of material
goods and to be able to communicate with the people in our immediate social space and
beyond (Castells 2000). Languages themselves migrate or are re-made through migration.
Within this context of linguistic hyper- or super-diversity (Vertovec 2006), language plays a
key role in the constitution of public and private institutions, but is also crucial for the actors
who come into contact with these institutions (Heller 2003) wishing thereby to gain access to
material and symbolic resources.
In the context of these multilingual landscapes of mobility and exchange, both transnational
and translocal, public discourses, particularly in the media, increasingly view migration
through the lenses of nationalist and racist rhetoric (Reisigl and Wodak 2001), creating
atmospheres of social panic in which immigrants and refugees are seen as threatening
the stable borders of national identities. Applied linguistic research aims to increase our
understanding of the linguistic dimensions of migration and the subtle ways that language
ideologies and practices contribute to social processes of ‘othering’ and exclusion in crucial
institutional contexts. This applied linguistic research investigates such processes ‘from
the inside and from the perspective of language’, while remaining attuned to large-scale social
processes (political, policy-oriented and institutional), providing analyses capable of oﬀering
an ‘emic’ perspective and of illustrating the subjective construction of these movements
of human beings, rather than their objectivist ‘othering’ in nationalist or racist mainstream
discourses.
413

Applied linguistic research into language and migration is thus based on two simple, inter-
related, but far-reaching propositions: (i) that for migrants in a new society, access to the
crucial material and symbolic resources that enable survival and integration is mediated
through repeated face-to-face interactions with institutions; (ii) that these face-to-face interac-
tions are signiﬁcantly shaped by changing policy environments and institutional arrangements
as well as sometimes volatile national political and media attitudes towards diversity, integra-
tion, citizenship, and accompanying ideologies concerning who should have access to what
resources and how. These face-to-face institutional encounters are typically realized through
diﬀerent sets of language practices: monolingual where migrants struggle with using the
majority language; multilingual and mediated by formal or informal interpreting involving
code-switching and mixes of various languages; and lingua franca where both sides use a
lingua franca (frequently English). It is these face-to-face encounters, typically characterized
by asymmetries of power between participants, which are the empirical focus of the applied
linguistic study of language and migration, along with representations of them in media,
political and popular discourses.
An applied linguistic research agenda on language and migration seeks to understand how
language practices in domains such as health, education, the law and work are shaped both by
the dynamics of face-to-face encounters and the constraints of the political, policy and insti-
tutional environment: what linguistic factors enable and constrain access for migrants to
health services and education, what languages and forms of communication get used, when,
why and where and what are the consequences for the migrant? Institutions can organize and
deploy multilingual resources by using diﬀerent modes (oral and written modes) and mod-
alities (visual, with mediators or interpreters, using written language). Not all such multi-
lingual practice is the same, and the way it gets organized (or not) in a given institution has
consequences for migrants seeking access to services and resources.
Development of the ﬁeld of language and migration studies
Language and migration research in applied linguistics has been inﬂuenced by understandings
of migration in terms of the dynamics of globalization and the new economy: emerging
sociolinguistic agendas, rather than focusing on the sociolinguistic description of settled com-
munities, a concept memorably critiqued by Mary Louise Pratt (Pratt 1987: 56), have devel-
oped in the context of globalization a sociolinguistics of movement and ﬂows and also what
Pratt terms ‘contact zones’:
Imagine, then, a linguistics that decentred community, that placed as its centre the
operation of language across lines of social diﬀerentiation, a linguistics that focused on
modes and zones of contact between dominant and dominated groups, between persons
of diﬀerent and multiple identities, speakers of diﬀerent languages, that focused on how
such speakers constitute each other relationally and in diﬀerence, how they enact diﬀer-
ences in language.
(Pratt 1987: 60)
Of course, the notion of migration and movement has always been associated, even if inex-
plicitly, with the study of the sociolinguistics of settled communities: language varieties are
formed historically by population movements and ﬂows. So language and migration studies
involve a re-centring of population movement and ﬂows in a globalized world as a key
theme in sociolinguistics. This is rather analogous to earlier insights which established
Mike Baynham
414

bi/multilingualism rather than monolingualism as the default sociolinguistic reality. Under-
pinning the emergence of multilingual environments, however, are processes of population
movement, acutely so in the context of the accelerating time-space compression which
theorists such as Giddens (1990) and Harvey (1989) have identiﬁed as characteristic of mod-
ernity and late modernity. So in one sense the renewed focus on movement and ﬂow in socio-
linguistics is a re-introduction of the diachronic dimension of time and history into the
synchronic linguistic description. (For a fuller discussion of these issues see Collins et al. 2009.)
Another inﬂuence on language and migration studies has been work on institutional dis-
course (Sarangi and Slembrouck 1996). Migration trajectories have been characterized as
repeated series of institutional encounters, mediated through talk, which can gatekeep access
to resources, forming powerful means of exclusion and othering. Such research points to
deeply embedded inequalities in power/knowledge, played out in daily encounters with tea-
chers, social workers, migration lawyers and others. The work of Maryns (Maryns 2005, 2006)
on the asylum hearing is a case in point of such research, as is work on legal processes and
migration, for example Haviland (2003) on the impact of language ideologies on court cases
involving Latino migrant workers, and the work of Trinch (2003) on Latina narratives in the
disclosure of domestic violence.
As suggested above, the default sociolinguistic context for language and migration studies is
multilingualism, even in contexts where powerful social forces equate migration with giving up
a language in favour of the language of the country of settlement. This is not of course to deny
the signiﬁcance of such linguistic ideological issues, currently brought to the fore in debates
around citizenship (cf. Milani 2008; Cooke and Simpson 2009). Indeed, as we shall see below,
another applied linguistic strength, the analysis of media and policy discourse, can be brought
to bear to investigate the discursive constructions of migration in the media and public policy.
So if the inﬂuences in language and migration studies have been largely sociolinguistic, how
can we characterize the applied linguistic agendas that have emerged? Many of them, such as
language learning and teaching, interpreting and translation, doctor-patient encounters, job
interviews and other institutional encounters, are not exactly new in themselves, while emer-
ging themes, such as the impact of new policies on citizenship and exclusion, also claim the
attention of applied linguists (Milani 2006, 2008; Cooke and Simpson 2009. What is new is the
bringing together of these disparate topics into a coherent theme, that permits their interlinking
and articulation as part of general processes of migration and population ﬂow.
To give one example: classroom-based language learning has been a major topic of applied
linguistics. Underpinning all language learning is an assumption of actual or potential mobi-
lity, particularly so in migration contexts. Yet classroom-based research is curiously insulated
from the other contexts and domains of social life. Researchers gain ever deeper insights into
what constitutes classroom discourse and language learning, while ignoring for analytical
purposes the location of the classroom in an educational institution, an educational institution
in a state or national education system, the national education system and its policies in the
globalized markets of knowledge and resources. Conventional categories of applied linguistic
research have the eﬀect of dislocating research eﬀorts. Another example: Schumann’s classic
study of the migrant worker Alberto (1978) focuses on the emergence of a restricted, ‘pidginized’
variety of English and correlates this with various social and motivational factors. Yet what
do we know about the other domains and arenas of Alberto’s life as a migrant in California:
what is the linguistic economy of his workplace, what are his preferred ways of socializing, how
does he maintain contact with friends and family in his home country, are there signiﬁcant
others who translate and mediate for him on occasions? Schumann shines a bright analytical
light on structural linguistic issues, leaving these other aspects of language use in context in the
Language and migration
415

penumbra. Other studies at about this time, such as the pan-European Ecology of Adult
Language Acquisition project, attempted to address this, but instead of gathering data sys-
tematically across a range of contexts, relied mainly on interview and role play (Perdue 1993).
This was perhaps in large part to do with the technical limitations of the time on recording
equipment. The present day researcher has many more sophisticated and less obtrusive options
for recording interaction.
Language and migration provides a powerful integrating theme for applied linguistic
research, bringing together ﬁelds of research (such as language teaching, interpreting and
translation, doctor-patient encounters, job interviews) which have typically been treated sepa-
rately and developed in a piecemeal way. In this chapter, having identiﬁed such a framework
for applied linguistic research into language and migration, I go on to present some examples
of such research and identify directions for future work.
A framework for applied linguistic research into language and migration
As has been suggested above, this is an emergent ﬁeld of inquiry, so there is room for some
programmatic statement of scope. An applied linguistic research agenda on language and
migration might therefore have the following dimensions:

investigations of the linguistic ideological inﬂuences on migration policies at global, regio-
nal (i.e. the EU), national and local levels;

investigations of the discursive construction of migration processes and migrants in the
media and in art production;

mapping the linguistic aspects of migration trajectories and the opening up of diasporic spaces;

analysis of the dominant and popular discourses on migration as well as the investigation
of migration processes ‘from the inside’, for example through narrative and life history;

analysis of key ‘sites of institutional encounter’, related to work, education, social welfare,
health, law, both ethnographically and using tools for the analysis of spoken language
interaction (including mediated interaction of diﬀerent kinds), and document analysis
drawn from linguistic ethnography, CA, CDA and literacy studies;

concern with the social processes leading through categorization to exclusion and the
operation of power in institutional encounters;

concern with the role of new media in reshaping diasporic space through the compression
of time-space.
While retaining its linguistic focus, such a research agenda would be alert to the work on
migration in ﬁelds such as sociology, anthropology, cultural geography and political economy
as theoretical sources for the description of large-scale phenomena that shape and inﬂuence
migration ﬂows and diasporic settlements. To be sure, speciﬁc research projects would focus on
more than one of these dimensions: it would be hard to consider language educational issues
without bringing in larger scale concerns such as national policy and the global linguistic
economy. The following section reviews research that is ongoing in relation to these themes,
pointing out directions for future work.
Public policy and language ideology
Language issues, particularly those concerning migration, have rarely had an explicit place in
public policy at national level, with notable exceptions such as Australia (cf. Lo Bianco and
Mike Baynham
416

Wickert 2001), though moments of perceived crisis may trigger this focus on language. Post-
war assimilationism gave way in the 1970s and 1980s to policies which emphasized to varying
degrees cultural and linguistic diversity and inclusion. The 1987 Australian National Policy on
Languages, for example, emphasized both ‘English for all’, support for linguistic diversity and
the provision of services such as interpreting and translation in the languages of migration (for
a historical overview of this aspect see Ozolins 2001). However, progressive refocusing of
national policy in the neo-liberal political context in Australia (as elsewhere) through the
1990s shifted the emphasis away from linguistic diversity onto the mobilization of human
capital through literacy and the acquisition of ﬂuency in English at the expense of diasporic
linguistic diversity, apart from those languages which could be linked with economic beneﬁts.
There has been, however, in the last decade a profound shift away from policies informed
primarily by diversity and inclusion to those which highlight citizenship and settlement in the
context of social cohesion. As Cooke and Simpson point out, referring to the UK:
The relationship between national security, immigration, integration, social cohesion and
language is becoming progressively tighter. In most government reports and in very much
political and media discourse, a great deal of attention is paid to English as the greatest
shared resource and the need for everyone to speak it to integrate fully in their communities.
(Cooke and Simpson 2008: 10)
Arising out of this has been a strand of research which examines the linguistic ideologies
which inform policies such as language testing for citizenship (Piller 2001; Hansen-Thomas
2007; Blackledge 2008; Milani 2008). Piller looks at the interrelationship of ideologies of
national and linguistic identity in Germany and their impact on ideologies of citizenship
(Piller 2001: 259) using the case of the introduction of language tests for naturalization in the
early 2000s. Her arguments show how at policy level the linguistic issues posed by migration
and diaspora challenge basic political and moral assumptions of the nation-state. Milani
(2008) similarly addresses the impact of language testing on the citizenship process in Sweden,
examining debates around the proposed introduction of language testing for citizenship,
showing how arguments are mobilized that language testing is a way of diminishing dis-
crimination, while implicitly, Milani argues, testing contributes to social diﬀerentiation and
exclusion. In relation to the UK, Blackledge (2008) shows how debates on language testing
and citizenship create discursive links between speaking ‘other’ languages and lack of ﬂuency
in English and threats to social stability, underachievement in school, ghettoization: threats, as
Rings and Ife put it, ‘to democracy, citizenship and nationhood’ (Rings and Ife 2008: 9).
This strand of research draws on the notion of linguistic or language ideology (Schieﬀelin
et al. 1998; Blommaert 1999; Irvine and Gal 2000) using tools of linguistic analysis to uncover
the Web of explicit and tacit assumptions about the role of language in the construction and
maintenance of the social order. Anxieties concerning migration are, it seems, a special case
which triggers explicit formulation of language-related policy, making explicit what have pre-
viously perhaps been tacit though widely held assumptions linking national language(s) with
the nation-state.
Language, migration and media discourse
Another strand of the language and migration research agenda concerns the discursive con-
struction of representations of migrants and migration processes in the media and other forms
of public discourse. An early example of this approach is van Dijk (1991). The language
Language and migration
417

ideology work on citizenship described above also draws on media texts as one of its data
sources. Typical research approaches to media texts employ critical discourse analysis (CDA),
as for example van Leeuwen and Wodak (1999), Wodak and van Dijk (2000), and Reisigl and
Wodak (2001), although more recently combinations of CDA and corpus linguistics have been
advocated (for example, Baker et al. 2008; Gabrielatos and Baker 2008). In a relatively large-
scale study (reported in Baker et al. 2008; KhosraviNik 2008), media texts are sampled from
periods when issues of migration and asylum reached a high proﬁle in the media (similar
perhaps to the trigger moments of public anxiety discussed above), for example the NATO
invasion of Kosovo in 1999; September 2001, with the 9/11 terrorist attacks, but also attention
on asylum seekers in the UK and ‘boat people’ in Australia.
The researchers (Baker et al. 2008: 295) propose a sequence of research interventions com-
bining CDA and corpus linguistics. Corpus linguistics is able to track the distribution of lex-
ical items and collocates (i.e. ‘looming’ + ‘inﬂux’ below) in such media texts as, for example:
BRITAIN was warned last night it faces a massive beneﬁts bill to pay for the looming
inﬂux of immigrants, including gypsies, from eastern Europe.
(Daily Express, 9 February 2004, cited in Baker et al. 2008: 286)
CDA, with its focus on text structure, is able to track the discursive patterns of othering that
occur in reporting of immigrants and asylum seekers, through identifying textual and inter-
textual chains of linguistic strategies such as referring and predicating, argumentation, dis-
course representation, intensiﬁcation/mitigation and linking the micro textual detail (which
can tell us that there is something negative about the collocation of ‘looming’ + ‘inﬂux’) to
ideological macro structures of exclusion.
Insider perspectives on migration (migration narratives)
While language ideology and discourse analysis have been used to investigate the representa-
tions of migrants and migration in public discourse, narrative and live history methods have
been used to investigate ‘from the inside’ the discursive construction of the experience of
migration (de Fina 2003; Baynham and de Fina 2005; McElhinny et al. 2007). Themes in this
research include issues of migration and space-time orientation in narrative (cf. Baynham
2003; de Fina 2003) and identity (cf. chapters in de Fina et al. 2006), migration and agency
(Baynham 2005; Relaño Pastor and de Fina 2005). The Filipino Canadian Life History Group
at the University of Toronto (McElhinny et al. 2007), for example, investigates the life stories
of Filipino professionals settled in Canada, uncovering issues of agency and life choice, con-
structions of fate and fatality in migration narratives. Relaño Pastor and de Fina (2005)
investigate the narratives of Mexican migrant women in California, focusing on narratives of
engagement with school, healthcare and work, place, displacement and identity. Their research
illustrates the interaction between the diﬀerent dimensions of the language and migration
research agenda identiﬁed above: language ideology and policy is clearly seen as constructing
the life experiences of the narrators, as are their encounters with the institutions of work,
schooling and healthcare; constructions of migration ‘from the inside’ are overwhelmingly
narratives of encounters with the institutions of the ‘receiving’ country. The sharpness of these
encounters is best demonstrated in the narratives that make up the institutional encounters
themselves, as Maryns (2005, 2006) demonstrates.
Migration doesn’t always involve migration across national borders, as the research of
McCormick (2005) on forced migration due to the internal restrictions on black people in
Mike Baynham
418

apartheid South Africa demonstrates. Here, forcible segregation pulled apart and relocated
existing communities in ways that are painfully remembered in the oral history interviews that
documented this displacement. The linguistic consequences of internal migration in China is a
theme in Dong and Blommaert (2009). Liebscher and Dailey-O’Cain (2005) document through
narrative the West–East migration movements in the post-1989 reuniﬁed Germany. Narratives
also document migratory mobility in geopolitical units larger than the nation-state, such as in
the expanded European Union, in the work of Galasinska and Koslowska (2009). Changes to
EU legislation, leading to increased internal mobility, have emphasized narratives of short-
term migration and return. Meinhof (2009) draws on life history narrative to examine the
ﬂows and movements in the migration patterns of Malagasy musicians both within Madagascar
and between Madagascar and Europe.
Key themes in this research are the discursive construction of the complex orientations and
reorientations that are involved in migration processes, the spatial and temporal dislocations
involved. These narratives can be of disempowerment but also of agency and empowerment,
of ﬁnding a voice as well as losing it. We see clearly the ways that large-scale political and
social phenomena shape the interactional worlds of the migrant narrators, of the signiﬁcance
of institutional encounters in opening up or closing down opportunities, which will be
addressed in more detail in later sections. While contributing substantively to understanding of
migration processes, this research has also contributed to the development of narrative theory,
most notably in the way that migration narratives foreground and problematize space in
narrative, echoing de Certeau’s claim that ‘every story is a travel story – a spatial practice’
(1988: 115).
Diasporic spaces
Inﬂuences from writers such as de Certeau (1988), Harvey (1989), from cultural geography
and indeed the tradition of neighbourhood studies in urban sociolinguistics, have placed a
research emphasis on how urban spaces are appropriated and made over by migration and
diaspora. This can involve the successive making over and appropriation of neighbourhood
spaces by successive migrations, as Gregory and Williams (2000: ch. 1) show in their ethno-
graphy of literacy lives in the Spitalﬁelds area of east London. They describe a neighbourhood
that has been appropriated and made over by successive migrations: Huguenots in the seven-
teenth and eighteenth centuries, Irish in the early nineteenth century, Jewish in the nineteenth
and early twentieth centuries, and in the mid-twentieth century, post-Second World War, a
migration from what is now Bangladesh. A caption to a photograph of a mosque illustrates
this layering of occupancy and appropriation:
The London Jamme Masjid on the corner of Fournier Street and Brick Lane. Built in
1743 as a Huguenot church, it became a Methodist chapel in the early 1800s and the
Machzike Hadas Synagogue in 1898. In 1975 it opened as the largest mosque in the
East End.
(Gregory and Williams 2000: 31)
In a study of the streetscapes of multilingual neighbourhoods in Ghent as part of a larger
multi-sited ethnography of language contact in urban neighbourhoods, Blommaert, Slem-
brouck, and Collins (Blommaert et al. 2005; Collins and Slembrouck 2007) have examined the
constitutive indexical role of multilingual shop signs in creating these interpretative spaces or
‘linguistic landscapes’ (cf. Shohamy and Gorter 2009), involving novel cultural syntheses and
Language and migration
419

blends (businesses that might combine real estate, insurance, accounting and loans, with more
generalized cultural brokering). In a sociolinguistic environment characterized more by Pratt’s
contact zones than by discrete speech communities, these signs attract diﬀerent readerships
and interpretations, ranging from the local Belgian, who might read this signage as evidence of
an ethnic neighbourhood takeover, buying up houses and property, to the locally settled
bilingual who sees in the linguistic choices a creative adaption to settlement processes, to the
educated visitor from back home who can see traces of sociolinguistic diversity (urban/rural)
in the language chosen and variable literacy, bespeaking diﬀerent amounts of cultural capital,
in both languages.
These diasporic spaces have also been explored by Keating (2009) in her study of the lit-
eracy practices of immigrant Portuguese women in London, one who migrated in the late
1960s/early 1970s, the other in the late 1980s. Keating contrasts the migration trajectories of
Dina, towards hospital work, union activism and community involvement in London and that
of Zelia towards work as a legal interpreter based in a driving school business, which mirrored
those found by Blommaert et al. in Ghent: ‘The driving school was a family-based hybrid
setting serving as school, travel agency and community advice centre’ (Keating 2009: 241). It is
from this base that Zelia engages in her work of cultural brokering and interpreting. Vigouroux
(2009) in her study of an Internet café in Cape Town as a focal site for the communicative
practices of Congolese migrants, identiﬁes a similar multifunctional space, investigating
the impact of interacting time-spaces of diﬀerent scale on the semiotic artefacts and language
practices which are characteristic of the Internet café and its various topographical spaces as
well as the indexical relationships produced through these interactions.
Jie Dong’s ﬁeldwork in China (Dong and Blommaert 2009) shows how a centre/periphery
metropolitan/urban/rural dynamic is played out in service encounters in Beijing, where the
capacity to speak Putonghua has a high value attached. Jie Dong interviews Xiao Xu, a street
seller of breakfast dumplings:
there are several layers to Xiao Xu’s multi-identities displayed in the conversation: when
he speaks about the shrimps from his hometown he switches to a marked provincial
accent which indexes his identity of coming from that particular place. … During his
metapragmatic talk about his Putonghua, he shifts to near-Putonghua accent which
enacts his identity of high social mobility and hence an elite identity. But this identity is
not stable: … identity does not easily travel across spaces, and therefore he is in a process
of seeking ratiﬁcation of his identity in a new and up-scale space.
(Dong and Blommaert 2009: 56–7)
There are complex indexical relations between social spaces and linguistic forms.
Work and enterprise
A number of the diasporic spaces described in the preceding section involved some kind of
work: the delivery of services in small business contexts, Xiao Xu selling breakfast dumplings
on a Beijing street, Zelia in her driving school, in the multifunctional enterprises of Ghent and
Cape Town. This introduces another signiﬁcant theme in language and migration research,
that of work and enterprise. Martin-Jones (2000) takes up the notion of ‘enterprising women’
in an ethnographic study of the multilingual literacy practices of Gujerati women in Leicester,
women for whom the process of migration has opened up possibilities that they have grasped.
The Portuguese women in London that Keating studied were also enterprising women in this
Mike Baynham
420

sense. Dina, the other subject of Keating (2009), has another employment trajectory, in the
unionized public sector workforce. Current work by Vigouroux on Congolese migrants in
Cape Town examines linguistic diﬀerentiation in the informal economy.
Research into diasporic spaces has tended to see the linguistic dimension of these spaces in
terms of multilingual literacy practices, or oral communicative practices such as language
choice, code switching or shifting. Dina’s case raises the issue of the linguistic demands of the
mainstream public sector workplace, in particular issues of access via the dominant language
and gatekeeping. The research of Roberts and Campbell (Roberts and Campbell 2005;
Campbell and Roberts 2007) examines employment interviews as gatekeeping devices for
migrant applicants, whose education and work experience has been largely out of the UK,
identifying a ‘linguistic penalty’ for migrant applicants, weighing against them if their educa-
tion, training and work experience has been in their country of origin. Campbell and Roberts
(2007) additionally show how the interview requires an artful presentation of worker and
personal identities expressed in narratives told in response to interviewer questions. Failure to
succeed in interviews for jobs for which their training and work experience would ﬁt them
leads such applicants on a downward spiral of de-professionalization.
In recent work Beatriz Lorente has described the role of the Phillipines as a sending country
of migrant labour in trying to form the migrant workforce prior to migration, pointing out
that the major focus in language and migration research to date has been on issues arising in
the country of destination.
Health
Applied linguistic research in the area of health relevant to migration has focused over-
whelmingly on issues of intercultural communication (for an overview see Candlin and
Candlin 2003) and mediation through interpreting, formal and informal, and cultural broker-
ing (Valdes and Angelelli 2003). The most characteristic research focus, unsurprisingly, has
been on the medical consultation, with Davidson (2000) discussing his research into Spanish-
English medical interpreting in a Californian public hospital emphasizing the role of the
interpreter as institutional gatekeeper as well as active partner with the physician in the diag-
nostic process. Micro-analysis of interpreted interactions show how the voice of the patient
often disappears from the interaction due to selective interpreting and the interpreter’s align-
ment with and recruitment into the communicative purposes of the physician. As such, the
interpreted medical consultation is a very salient example of the gatekeeping institutional
encounters referred to above (Sarangi and Roberts 1999). The role of interpreter can be
understood both in terms of the distinction between discourse role and social role of Sarangi
and Slembrouck (1996) and the potential of the interpreter to align with the communicative
purposes of diﬀerent participants. From an interactional perspective, the apparently marginal
and neutral ﬁgure of the interpreter can thus be seen as a powerful broker of access to medical
treatment. Applied linguistic issues raised here concern the professionalization of interpreters,
the reliance on informal interpreting and cultural brokering, the interactional dynamics of the
interpreted interaction, and the stance of the interpreter (Inghilleri 2005).
Another strategy for medical encounters is to try and optimize the communication possibi-
lities between doctors and patients in contexts where interpreting is not available and
communication is in the dominant language. The PLEDGE (Patients with Limited English
and Doctors in General Practice) project of Roberts et al. (2004) is an example of this, with a
focus on oral interaction The research identiﬁes contrasting interactional frameworks
between patients speaking local varieties of English and Standard English and patients from
Language and migration
421

non-English speaking backgrounds, with implications for the sensitization of the healthcare
professional in diﬀerences in conversational interaction in intercultural settings. Collins and
Slembrouck (2006) supply a linguistic ethnography of an inner city health clinic where, in
contrast, such issues are addressed by the planning and implementation of a manual for doc-
tors designed to facilitate communication. The researchers describe a variety of organizational
responses to migrant multilingualism in the health clinic, ranging from reliance on informal
interpreting, with a family member or friend accompanying the patient, to the use of profes-
sional interpreters, including phone interpreting, multilingual leaﬂets and the manual, called
in Dutch ‘Ijsbreker’ with connotations both of ‘breaking the ice’ and successful communica-
tion (Collins and Slembrouck 2006: 254).The manual is presented in Dutch, Russian, Slovakian
and Albanian and is constructed round a ﬂow chart which models the stages of the medical
consultation. For a variety of reasons, the manual turns out rather predictably to be a some-
what inﬂexible approach to the communication problems of intercultural cross-linguistic medical
encounters, inﬂuenced as it is, Slembrouck and Collins suggest, by an anxiety about the
uncertainties of the oral interpreting situation and the dynamics of intercultural communica-
tion more generally on the part of the professionals involved, exempliﬁed in the quote used as
the title of the paper ‘You don’t know what they translate’.
Education and training
Historically, this has been the most sustained area of focus for applied linguistic work on the
language needs of migrants. Within it we can distinguish (i) education and training provision
for adult migrants, either on arrival or ongoing (see Cooke and Simpson 2008), the latter
including workplace language training with a history going back to workplace language
training in the 1970s (Roberts et al. 1992), recent work reported in Sandwall (2010 forth-
coming); and (ii) the language issues involved in the education of the children of migrants,
both in mainstream schooling (for an overview see Baker 2003) and in complementary
schooling (Blackledge and Creese 2009). Issues in relation to (i) include language learning and
access to it through policy (Cooke and Simpson 2008; Baynham and Simpson forthcoming),
particularly the current impact of citizenship on ESOL pedagogy (Cooke 2006; Griswold
forthcoming); issues of adult language learning pedagogy (for example, Baynham 2006); the
learning trajectories of ESOL learners (de Costa 2010); and indeed the learning identities of
bilingual learners (Kanno and Norton 2003; Relaño Pastor and de Fina 2005). Issues in rela-
tion to (ii) include the impact of policy, linguistic barriers to access to curriculum achievement
in the dominant language, and also opportunities to maintain and develop bilingual skills.
Linking to our emphasis on institutional encounters, such encounters would include sustained
engagement with education and training, but also occasions both where access to these is gate-
kept by interviews and selection processes and where signiﬁcant others, such as parents in
relation to their children’s schooling, become involved (or not) in interactions with teachers
and other school representatives. While the typical interaction in the healthcare context is
focused on the medical consultation, interactions with school are more diﬀuse and textually
mediated.
In relation to the education of children from migrant communities, important studies look
across from home to school and back again. Both using an ethnographic approach, Gregory
and Williams examine the home-school environments of Bangladeshi children in east London,
UK (Gregory and Williams 2000), and Cruickshank the language situation of teenage students
of Lebanese background in Sydney, Australia (Cruickshank 2006). Such studies reﬂect a more
holistic perspective on research into language, migration and settlement, emphasizing the
Mike Baynham
422

interaction between diﬀerent domains typically investigated separately. Increased attention
is currently being paid to the role and functions of complementary schooling in supporting
the bilingualism and cultural identity of children from migrant families (Blackledge and
Creese 2009).
At the policy level, the education and training of adult migrants is increasingly linked to a
human capital agenda, with language training for work and economic beneﬁt predominating,
although current anxieties about integration and social cohesion, strengthening the border and
boundaries of the nation-state, is also, as suggested above, a powerful inﬂuence.
Transnationalism and virtual space
As suggested at the beginning of this chapter, migration has arguably always been a transna-
tional project of trajectories and ﬂows, but this has been increasingly highlighted by rapid
change in both the speed and possibility of travel and the exponential increase in virtual means
for creating connectedness between people separated by distance, shrinking and compressing
space-time and enabling migrants to be in virtual and face-to-face contact with family and
networks back home in regular, sometimes instantaneous ways. As Low and Lawrence-Zuñiga
(2003) put it: ‘This process of cultural globalization creates new translocal spaces and forms of
public culture embedded in the imaginings of people that dissolves notions of state-based ter-
ritoriality’ (2003: 25). Developments on the Web have enabled the accelerated creation and
sharing of transnational virtual spaces, in ways that go well beyond the traditional boundaries
of nation-states. The impact of this on language and migration is increasingly coming into the
research agenda, for example in the theme issue of Linguistics and Education on transnational
literacies, edited by Warriner (2007). Young people from Colombia, India and Israel in
McGinnis et al. (2007) use blogs and Facebook to create transnational, multilingual identities.
Similarly, American Chinese teenagers in Lam (2004) use a bilingual on-line chatroom, an envir-
onment where global, transnational uses of English intersect with the local, as an opportunity
for language socialization. Lam (2006) and Warschauer (2009) point out how the translocal
varieties produced in these contexts often involve multilingual mixes and blends, with switches
to Arabic or Chinese incorporated using English orthography.
Such changes, combined with the speed and availability of means of transport, suggest a
blurring of the sharp distinction between ‘being here’ and ‘being there’, when the migrant may
be able to simultaneously maintain a virtual presence in his/her country of origin through
electronic means, giving an added sharpness to the point made by Sassen in the epigraph to
this chapter. Its consequences for the emergence of linguistic varieties is just beginning to be
investigated.
Future directions
What is perhaps certain is that issues of language and migration, however conceived, are not
set to disappear from the applied linguistics agenda. However, how we conceive of migration is
liable to develop and change. On the one hand we are unlikely to see a lessening of the desire
of states for control of their borders in a period of uncertainty, and there are disturbing signs
of the stratiﬁcation of labour markets mapping on to particular kinds of language competence,
powerfully expressed in recent contributions by Piller and Lorente, in another kind of policy-driven
transnationalism, driven by the push-pull of economic activity and necessity. Lorente has
powerfully investigated this impact on the Filipino migrant domestic workforce, both from the
perspective of the ‘sending’ as well as the ‘receiving’ countries. On the other hand, changes in the
Language and migration
423

electronic communication landscape will contribute to shape virtual spaces and their aﬀor-
dances that will work against the strengthening of national and ideological boundaries, ten-
sions with which are currently in evidence in struggles over restrictions over Google in China
and various kinds of Internet connectedness in the Gulf states. It is possible that we are
working with an oversimpliﬁed and restricted notion of the migration process itself, which
must be expanded to include other types of more short-term migration/mobility such as sea-
sonal working, serial migration, migration ‘sans papiers’, return migration, migration asso-
ciated with the collapse of the nation-state (as documented by Vigouroux [2009] in relation to
the Congo), and the consequent needs of refugees and asylum seekers. There is a tendency for
such changes and disruptions to problematize language in some way, and if applied linguists
are alert to these problematizations, applied linguistic insights and expertise can be drawn into
the search for viable solutions. Finally, there is a tendency to emphasize through sociological
pessimism the negative aspects of migration and related linguistic issues. While recognizing the
powerful exploitative forces at work in the economically driven push-pull of international
migration ﬂows, we have also to learn to see it in a more upbeat and positive light, as oﬀering
opportunities for agency, change and enterprise, the linguistic imagination and hybridity pro-
duced potentially contributing to new forms of language and social activity, which could not
have been envisaged if everyone had stayed at home.
Related topics
institutional discourse; language policy and planning; multilingualism; translation and
interpreting
Further reading
Baynham, M. and de Fina, A. (eds) (2005) Dislocations/Relocations: Narratives of Displacement,
Manchester: St Jerome Publishing. (Papers from a series of seminars held in the early 2000s on
migration narratives.)
Collins, J., Slembrouck, S. and Baynham, M. (eds) (2009) Globalization and Language in Contact,
London: Continuum. (Papers from the ﬁrst AILA Language and Migration network seminars.)
de Fina, A. (2003) Identity in Narrative: A Study of Immigrant Discourse, Amsterdam: Benjamins.
(A monograph on migration narratives of Mexican migrants to the USA.)
Maryns, K. (2006) The Asylum Speaker: Language in the Belgian Asylum Procedure, Manchester:
St Jerome Publishing. (Linguistic ethnographic analysis of the asylum process in Belgium.)
References
Baker, C. (2003) ‘Education as a site of language contact’, Annual Review of Applied Linguistics:
Language Contact and Change 23: 95–112.
Baker, P., Gabrielatos, C., KhosraviNik, M., Krzyzanowski, M., McEnery, T. and Wodak, R.
(2008) ‘A useful methodological synergy? Combining critical discourse analysis and corpus lin-
guistics to examine discourses of refugees and asylum seekers in the UK press’, Discourse and
Society 19(3): 273–306.
Baynham, M. (2003) ‘Narrative in space and time: beyond “backdrop” accounts of narrative
orientation’, Narrative Inquiry 13(2): 347–66.
——(2005) ‘Network and agency in the migration stories of Moroccan women’, in M. Baynham
and A. de Fina (eds) Dislocations/Relocations: Narratives of Displacement, Manchester:
St Jerome Publishing.
——(2006) ‘Agency and contingency in the language learning of refugees and asylum seekers’,
Linguistics and Education 17(1): 24–39.
Mike Baynham
424

Baynham, M. and de Fina, A. (eds.) (2005) Dislocations/Relocations: Narratives of Displacement,
Manchester: St Jerome Publishing.
Baynham, M. and Simpson, J. (forthcoming) ‘Onwards and upwards: space, placement, and limin-
ality in adult ESOL classes’, TESOL Quarterly 44(3): 420–40.
Blackledge, A. (2008) ‘Liberalism, discrimination and the law: language testing for citizenship in
Britain’, in G. Rings and A. Ife (eds) Neo-colonial Mentalities in Contemporary Europe? Language
and Discourse in the Construction of Identities, Cambridge: Cambridge Scholars Publishing.
Blackledge, A. and Creese, A. (2009) ‘“Because tumi Bangali”: inventing and disinventing the
national in multilingual communities in the UK’, Ethnicities 9(4): 451–76.
Blommaert, J. (ed.) (1999) Language Ideological Debates, Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter.
Blommaert, J., Collins, J. and Slembrouck, S. (2005) ‘Spaces of multilingualism’, Language and
Communication 25(3): 197–216.
Campbell, S. and Roberts, C. (2007) ‘Migration, ethnicity and competing discourses in the job
interview: synthesizing the institutional and personal’, Discourse and Society 18(3): 243–71.
Candlin, C. and Candlin, S. (2003) ‘Healthcare communication: a problematic site for applied
linguistics research’, Annual Review of Applied Linguistics 23: 134–54.
Castells, M. (2000) End of Millennium, Malden, MA: Blackwell.
Collins, J. and Slembrouck, S. (2006) ‘“You don’t know what they translate”: language contacts,
institutional procedure and literacy practice in neighbourhood health clinics in urban Flanders’,
Journal of Linguistic Anthropology 16(2): 249–68.
——(2007) ‘Reading shop windows in globalised neighbourhoods: multingual literacy practices and
indexicality’, Journal of Literacy Research 39(3): 335–59.
Collins, J., Slembrouck, S. and Baynham, M. (eds.) (2009) Globalization and Language in Contact,
London: Continuum.
Cooke, M. (2006) ‘“When I wake up I dream of electricity”: the lives, aspirations and “needs” of
Adult ESOL learners’, Linguistics and Education 17(1): 56–73.
Cooke, M. and Simpson, J. (2008) ESOL: A Critical Guide, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Cooke, M. and Simpson, J. (2009) ‘Challenging agendas in ESOL: skills, employability and social
cohesion’, Language Issues 20(1): 19–31.
Cruickshank, K. (2006) Teenagers, Literacy and School: Researching in Multilingual Contexts,
London: Routledge.
Davidson, B. (2000) ‘The interpreter as institutional gatekeeper: the social-linguistic role of interpreters
in Spanish-English medical discourse’, Journal of Sociolinguistics 4(3): 379–405.
de Certeau, M. (1988) The Practice of Everyday Life, Berkeley: University of California Press.
de Costa, P. (2010) ‘From refugee to reformer: a Bourdieusian take on a Hmong learner’s trajectory’,
TESOL Quarterly 44(3): 517–41.
de Fina, A. (2003) Identity in Narrative: A Study of Immigrant Discourse, Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
de Fina, A., Schiﬀrin, D. and Bamberg, M. (2006) Discourse and Identity, Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Dong, J. and Blommaert, J. (2009) ‘Space, scale and accents: constructing migrant identity in Beij-
ing’, in J. Collins, S. Slembrouck and M. Baynham (eds) Globalization and Language in Contact,
London: Continuum.
Gabrielatos, C. and Baker, P. (2008) ‘Fleeing, sneaking, ﬂooding: a corpus analysis of discursive
constructions of refugees and asylum seekers in the U.K. press: 1996–2005’, Journal of English
Linguistics 36(1): 5–38.
Galasinska, A. and Koslowska, O. (2009) ‘Either and “both”: the changing concept of living space
among Polish post-communist migrants to the United Kingdom’, in J. Collins, S. Slembrouck,
and M. Baynham (eds) Globalization and Language in Contact, London: Continuum.
Goldstein, T. (1996) Two Languages at Work: Bilingual Life on the Production Floor, New York:
Mouton de Gruyter.
Gregory, E. and Williams, A. (2000) City Literacies, London: Routledge.
Griswold, O. (2010) ‘Narrating America in adult ESL/citizenship classes’, TESOL Quarterly 44(3):
488–516.
Hansen-Thomas, H. (2007) ‘Language ideology, citizenship and identity: the case of modern
Germany’, Journal of Language and Politics 6(7): 249–64.
Harvey, D. (1989) The Condition of Postmodernity: An Enquiry into the Origins of Cultural Change,
Oxford: Blackwell.
Language and migration
425

Haviland, J. (2003) ‘Ideologies of language: some reﬂections on language and U.S. law’, American
Anthropologist 105(4): 764–74.
Heller, M. (2003) Globalization, the new economy and the commodiﬁcation of language and
identity, Journal of Sociolinguistics 7(4): 473–92.
Inghilleri, M. (ed.) (2005) ‘Special issue on Bourdieu and the sociology of translating and
interpreting’, The Translator 11(2).
Irvine, J. T. and Gal, S. (2000) ‘Language ideology and linguistic diﬀerentiation’, in P. V. Kroskrity (ed.)
Regimes of Language: Ideologies, Politics and Identities, Santa Fe, NM: School of American Research.
Kanno, Y. and Norton, B. (eds) (2003) ‘Imagined communities and educational possibilities: intro-
duction’, Journal of Language, Identity, and Education 2(4), 241–9.
Keating, C. (2009) ‘Changing participation in changing practice: uses of language and literacy
among Portuguese migrant women in the United Kingdom’, in J. Collins, S. Slembrouck and
M. Baynham (eds) Globalization and Language in Contact, London: Continuum.
KhosraviNik, M. (2008) ‘British newspapers and the representation of refugees, asylum seekers and
immigrants between 1996 and 2006’, Centre for Language in Social Life, working papers,
Lancaster University.
——(2010) ‘The representation of refugees, asylum seekers and immigrants in British newspapers: a
critical discourse analysis’, Journal of Language and Politics 9(1): 1–28.
Lam, W. S. E. (2004) ‘Second language socialization in a bilingual chatroom: global and local
considerations’, Language Learning and Technology 8(3): 44–65.
——(2006) ‘Re-envisioning language, literacy and the immigrant subject’, New Mediascapes, Peda-
gogies: An International Journal 1(3): 171–95.
Liebscher, G. and Dailey-O’Cain, J. (2005) ‘West Germans moving east: place, political space, and
positioning in conversational narratives’, in M. Baynham and A. de Fina (eds) Dislocations/
Relocations: Narratives of Displacement, Manchester: St Jerome Publishing.
Lo Bianco, J. and Wickert, R. (eds) (2001) Australian Policy Activism in Language and Literacy,
Melbourne: Language Australia.
Low, S. and Lawrence-Zuñiga, D. (2003) The Anthropology of Space and Place: Locating Culture,
Oxford: Blackwell.
McCormick, K. (2005) ‘Working with Webs: narrative constructions of forced removal and reloca-
tion’, in M. Baynham and A. de Fina (eds) Dislocations/Relocations: Narratives of Displacement,
Manchester: St Jerome Publishing.
McElhinny, B., Yeung, S., Damasco, V., DeOcampo, A., Febria, M., Collantes, C. and Salonga, J.
(2007) ‘“Talk about luck”: coherence, contingency, character and class in the life stories of Fili-
pino Canadians in Toronto’, in A. Lo and A. Reyes (eds) Beyond Yellow English: Toward a
Linguistic Anthropology of Asian Paciﬁc America, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
McGinnis, T., Goodstein-Stolzenberg, A. and Costa-Saliani, E. (2007) ‘“Indnpride”: online spaces
of transnational youth as sites of creative and sophisticated literacy and identity work’, Linguis-
tics and Education 18(3–4): 283–304.
Martin-Jones, M. (2000) ‘Enterprising women: multilingual literacies in the constructing of new
identities’, in M. Martin-Jones and K. Jones (eds) Multilingual Literacies, Amsterdam: John
Benjamins.
Maryns, K. (2005) ‘Displacement in asylum seekers’ narratives’, in M. Baynham and A. de Fina
(eds) Dislocations/Relocations: Narratives of Displacement, Manchester: St Jerome Publishing.
——(2006) The Asylum Speaker: Language in the Belgian Asylum Procedure, Manchester: St Jerome
Publishing.
Meinhof, U. (2009) ‘Transnational ﬂows, networks and “transcultural capital”: reﬂections on
researching migrant networks through linguistic ethnography’, in J. Collins, S. Slembrouck and
M. Baynham (eds) Globalization and Language in Contact, London: Continuum.
Milani, T. M. (2008) ‘Language testing and citizenship: a language ideological debate in Sweden’,
Language in Society 37(1): 27–59.
Milani, T. M. (2006) ‘Discourse and power in a multilingual world’, Journal of Sociolinguistics 10(3):
402–6.
Norton, B. (2000) Identity and Language Learning, London: Longman.
Ozolins, U. (2001) ‘Inventiveness and regression: interpreting/translating and the vicissitudes of
Australian language policy’, in J. Lo Bianco and R. Wickert (eds) Australian Policy Activism in
Language and Literacy, Melbourne: Language Australia.
Mike Baynham
426

Perdue, C. (ed.) (1993) Adult Language Acquisition: Cross-linguistic, Perspectives, vols. I and II,
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Piller, I. (2001) ‘Naturalization language testing and its basis in ideologies of national identity and
citizenship’, International Journal of Bilingualism 5(3): 259–78.
Pratt, M. L. (1987) ‘Arts of the contact zone’, in N. Fabb, D. Attridge, A. Durant and C. MacCabe
(eds) The Linguistics of Writing: Arguments Between Linguistics and Literature, Manchester:
Manchester University Press.
Reisigl, M. and Wodak, R. (2001) Discourse and Discrimination: Rhetorics of Racism and
Anti-semitism, London: Routledge.
Relaño Pastor, M. and de Fina, A. (2005) ‘Contesting social place: narratives of language conﬂict’,
in M. Baynham and A. de Fina (eds) Dislocations/Relocations: Narratives of Displacement,
Manchester: St Jerome Publishing.
Rings, G. and Ife, A. (eds) (2008) Neo-colonial Mentalities in Contemporary Europe? Language and
Discourse in the Construction of Identities, Cambridge: Cambridge Scholars Publishing.
Roberts, C. and Campbell, S. (2005) ‘Fitting stories into boxes: rhetorical and textual constraints on
candidates’ performances in British job interviews’, Journal of Applied Linguistics 2(1): 45–73.
Roberts, C., Davies, E. and Jupp, T. (1992) Language and Discrimination, London: Longman.
Roberts, C., Moss, B., Wass, V., Sarangi, S. and Jones, R. (2005) ‘Misunderstandings: a qualitative
study of primary care consultations in multilingual settings, and educational implications’, Medical
Education 39(5): 465–75.
Roberts, C., Sarangi, S. and Moss, B. (2004) ‘Presentation of self and symptoms in primary care
consultations involving patients from non-English speaking backgrounds’, Communication and
Medicine 1(2): 159–69.
Sandwall, K. (2010) ‘“I learn more at school”: ecological perspectives on work placement for second
language learning’, TESOL Quarterly, 44(3): 542–74.
Sarangi, S. and Roberts, C. (1999) Talk, Work, and Institutional Order: Discourse in Medical,
Mediation and Management Settings, Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter.
Sarangi, S. and Slembrouck, S. (1996) Language, Bureaucracy and Social Control, London:
Longman.
Sassen, S. (1999) Guests and Aliens, New York: New Press.
Schieﬀelin, B., Woolard, K. and Kroskrity, P. (eds) (1998) Language Ideologies: Practice and
Theory, New York: Cambridge University Press.
Schumann, J. (1978) The Pidginization Process: A Model for Second Language Acquisition, Rowley,
MA: Newbury House.
Shohamy, E. and Gorter, D. (2009) Linguistic Landscape: Expanding the Scenery, Abingdon:
Routledge.
Trinch, S. (2003) Latinas Narratives of Domestic Abuse: Discrepant Versions of Violence, Amsterdam:
John Benjamins.
Valdes, G. and Angelelli, C. (2003) ‘Interpreters, interpreting and the study of bilingualism’, Annual
Review of Applied Linguistics 23: 58–78.
van Dijk, T. A. (1991) Racism and the Press: Critical Studies in Racism and Migration, London:
Routledge.
van Leeuwen, T. and Wodak, R. (1999) ‘Legitimizing immigration control: a discourse-historical
analysis’, Discourse Studies 1(1): 83–118.
Vertovec, S. (2006) ‘The emergence of super-diversity in Britain’, Working Paper 25, Centre on
Migration, Policy and Society, University of Oxford.
Vigouroux, C. (2009) ‘A relational understanding of language practice: interacting timespaces in a
single ethnographic site’, in J. Collins, S. Slembrouck and M. Baynham (eds) Globalization and
Language in Contact, London: Continuum.
Warriner, D. S. (ed.) (2007) ‘Transnational literacies: immigration, language learning, and identity’,
Linguistics and Education 18(3–4): 201–338.
Warschauer, M. (2009) ‘Digital literacy studies’, in M. Baynham and M. Prinsloo (eds) The Future
of Literacy Studies, Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan.
Wodak, R. and van Dijk, T. (eds) (2000) Racism at the Top: Parliamentary Discourses on Ethnic
Issues in Six European States, Klagenfurt, Austria: Drava.
Language and migration
427


Part IV
Perspectives on language in use


30
Discourse analysis
Guy Cook
Introduction
Applied linguistics (AL) interest in discourse analysis (DA) originated in an awareness of the
inability of formal linguistics to account for how participants in communication achieve
meaning. As such DA has been a major impetus in ending an early narrow conception of AL
as a subsidiary discipline which merely applies insights from linguistics to language-related
problems (Widdowson 1984: 21–8), and moving it towards the broader independent enterprise
it is today. Although there are many diverse approaches to discourse in AL, there are also
common principles and themes. Discourse can be deﬁned as a stretch of language in use, of
any length and in any mode, which achieves meaning and coherence for those involved. Dis-
course analysis can be deﬁned as the use and development of theories and methods which
elucidate how this meaning and coherence is achieved.
This quest makes DA inevitably concerned not only with language, but with all elements
and processes which contribute to communication. Consequently, AL discourse analysts have
espoused and also developed a wide range of approaches to language beyond linguistics. These
have included pragmatics, schema theory, conversation analysis, ethnography, semiotics, mul-
timodal analysis, literary theory, rhetoric, genre analysis, and social theory. This widening
purview has led to encounters with many diﬀerent disciplines and deﬁnitions of discourse. One
major inﬂuence, which changed the direction of DA in AL, has been social theory, especially
the ideas of Foucault, for whom discourses (used in the plural) are conceived as distinct ways
of using language which express institutionalised values and ideology, delimiting and deﬁning
what can be said and how: for example, sexist discourse, medical discourse, legal discourse, etc.
Rather than simply adding yet another dimension to understanding, for many AL discourse
analysts this approach fundamentally changed the original conception of DA in AL as merely
an extension of linguistic analysis. Yet while this Foucauldian tradition emphasises the key
importance of language use in ideology, it has not in practice paid close attention to linguistic
detail in the same way as the AL tradition. While DA in AL has absorbed this Foucauldian
tradition, and subsequently other social theoretical approaches such as that of Bourdieu, it has
431

often used these social theories to supplement rather than replace close linguistic and textual
analysis. It has thus merged two traditions, one from linguistics, the other from social and
critical theory, using the two in a complementary manner. At its best, the AL DA tradition
thus currently combines the strengths of linguistics and non-linguistic perspectives, making it
the most powerful and rigorous tool for the analysis of language in use. Consequently, it has a
great deal to oﬀer to social theory and sociology on the one hand, and to linguistics on the
other.
With this power and breadth, however, comes a problem of scope. AL DA embraces all
aspects of language in use, eclectically deploying insights from a variety of traditions to arrive
at a rounded and rich interpretation of language in use. It is in this sense open to criticism for
being a ‘study of everything’, concerned with such a wide variety of phenomena that it has no
distinct identity of its own. It is certainly true and frequently remarked that the terms ‘dis-
course’ and ‘discourse analysis’ are very variously deﬁned and often loosely used. Many
approaches to DA proceed down their own paths without mentioning or even showing
awareness of others. Nor is it clear in many cases whether particular DA studies belong to AL
or some other discipline. The broadening of scope has thus made it harder to deﬁne and
describe DA than when it ﬁrst emerged in the 1970s. Recent years have, however, seen some
successful attempts to provide inclusive structured overviews of the ﬁeld (Gee 1999; Johnstone
2002; Paltridge 2006; Widdowson 2007; Bhatia et al. 2008; Slembrouck 2009).
An issue for this chapter is how to distinguish DA from the other approaches to language
use included elsewhere in this volume. The study of ESP, EAP, institutions, medical commu-
nication, the media, and classrooms all involve the practice of DA, while conversation analy-
sis, corpus linguistics, critical discourse analysis, linguistic ethnography, multimodal analysis,
and stylistics are all among its tools. Each such area of study is in its own ﬁeld or in its own
way concerned with the achievement of meaning in actual communication, making each a
constituent of DA as much as of AL. As such, each could validly appear in the contents of a
‘handbook of discourse analysis’ as easily as in a ‘handbook of applied linguistics’. For both
DA and AL, like the areas listed above, distinguish themselves from formal linguistics by their
resolute focus upon attested language use in actual social contexts, and their lack of concern
with invented or decontextualised models of language as an idealised abstraction. How then is
DA to be distinguished from AL on the one hand, or from the many branches of study which
address speciﬁc aspects of language use on the other? And how can a summary of DA do
more than brieﬂy allude to several other areas of AL, with a vague implication that these
approaches, taken together but not separately, constitute DA? How can the description of DA
here be more than a composite, giving summaries of approaches which are dealt with more
fully elsewhere? These are diﬃcult problems for the contemporary discourse analyst – not only
within the covers of this handbook, but in the study of language in general. They were not
perhaps so problematic in the past, for reasons which will become apparent. I shall return
to the problem at the end of this chapter, having in the meantime done exactly what I have
just cast doubt upon: summarised a number of diﬀerent developments as constituent of an
overarching DA.
Early AL DA
In the 1950s DA was understood in theoretical structural linguistics as the potential extension
of language analysis beyond the level of single sentences to discover distributional principles
between sentences as well as within them (Harris 1952). In descriptive linguistics in the
Firthian tradition, it was concerned with describing stages of interaction as communicative
Guy Cook
432

acts in context (Mitchell 1957). Both enterprises acknowledged the impossibility of accounting
for structure above sentence level without reference to non-linguistic factors, although for
theoretical linguists this was seen as a reason not to include DA in their enquiries (Harris
1952). For those linguists who did pursue DA (or the closely related ﬁeld of text linguistics)
elaborate attempts to construct ‘text grammars’ (e.g. van Dijk 1972; Werlich 1976) in which
sentences would combine in accordance with quasi-linguistic rules proved limited in explana-
tory power. More successful was work on inter-sentential cohesion in a functionalist linguistic
paradigm (Halliday and Hasan 1976) which did reveal structures above sentence level in texts.
Yet while important and inﬂuential in extending the scope of linguistic description, analyses of
cohesion could not fully account for coherence – the perceived quality of meaning and unity
which characterises actual linguistic communication – as it is possible for a sentence sequence
to be coherent without cohesion, or cohesive without apparent coherence. (Casualties are high.
The president has resigned. vs Charles has a spoon. He drives it.). More generally however,
Halliday’s concerns with language function (e.g. 1973) and the use of language as a social
semiotic (e.g. 1978), were key inﬂuences from linguistics which helped move DA in AL beyond
an interest in merely extending linguistic analysis. Another such inﬂuence was Hymes’ (1972a)
depiction of communicative competence as involving social and psychological factors beyond
what is linguistically possible.
In response to theoretical stimuli, the 1970s and 1980s saw a number of major works on DA
emerging from an AL perspective (Widdowson 1973; Sinclair and Coulthard 1975; Brown and
Yule 1983; Stubbs 1983; Coulthard 1985) or useful to it (van Dijk 1977; de Beaugrande and
Dressler 1981). In keeping with the dominant concern of AL with language teaching at that
time, there were also a number of treatments of DA in relation to language teaching and
learning (Widdowson 1979: 89–153, 1984: 37–137; Riley 1987; Cook 1989; McCarthy 1991;
Hatch 1992). DA was and remains fundamental to the guiding principle of communicative
language teaching and its later developments such as task-based language teaching,
namely that successful language learning involves much more than acquiring a static formal
knowledge of the new language, but must also entail an ability to achieve meaning in
communication. A good deal of DA has thus emerged from, or in conjunction with, the
investigation of eﬀective language teaching and learning – and I shall refer to this as the lan-
guage learning approach to DA. The leading ﬁgure of this movement, whose own early
work (1973) predates more general approaches to DA in descriptive linguistics, was H. G.
Widdowson.
At this point in its history, DA was fairly readily deﬁned as an extension of formal linguis-
tics, or a refutation of it, depending on one’s point of view. However, as AL has moved away
from a conception of itself as an extension of linguistics, and acquired a more complex dis-
ciplinary identity, encountering other deﬁnitions of discourse in the process, this deﬁnition has
become problematic. There are many varieties of DA, none of which is in itself coterminous
with DA as a whole, yet there is also no ‘pure’ version of DA which is not one of these vari-
eties, or an amalgam of several.
Text, context, and discourse
Much early DA work in AL saw text (the linguistic element in communication) as essentially
distinct from context (the non-linguistic elements) and discourse as the two in interaction
to create meaning. Context itself was further treated as having a series of components, with
diﬀerent approaches to DA tending to emphasise the role of one or another. Thus, context
variously included consideration of such factors as:
Discourse analysis
433


the situation or immediate environment of communication;

the participants and their intentions, knowledge, beliefs, attitudes, aﬃliations and feelings,
as well as their roles, relations, and status;

the cultural and ideological norms and assumptions against which a given communication
occurs;

language which precedes or follows that under analysis, sometimes referred to as ‘co-text’
(Halliday et al. 1964);

other texts evoked for the participants and aﬀecting their interpretation – sometimes
referred to as ‘intertext’ (Kristeva 1986);

non-linguistic meaningful communicative behaviour, i.e. paralanguage, such as voice quality,
gestures, and facial expressions (in face-to-face spoken interaction), and choice of typeface
and letter sizes (in writing);

use of other modes of communication accompanying the use of language, such as music
and pictures;

the physical medium of communication, such as speech, writing, print, telephone, computer.
This binary opposition of text and context, however, and the itemisation of contextual com-
ponents, has come to be seen as problematic. If context and text are separate, then the status
of text itself becomes precarious. If considered as linguistic forms, temporarily and artiﬁcially
separated from context for the purposes of analysis, text ceases to have any actual existence,
and seems at odds with the aim of DA to deal with the realities of language in use rather than
linguistic abstractions. While the consideration of linguistic forms may be an idealisation
which is useful in linguistics, it may be less so for DA, as in actual communication language is
inextricably bound to all other elements in communication. There is no use of language which
does not also have a situation, participants, co-text, paralanguage, etc. Much recent DA work,
sometimes evoking the earlier theories of Bakhtin in its support (e.g. Bakhtin 1986; Volosinov
1988), has thus preferred a less dichotomous view, and eschewed consideration of isolated
elements, whether linguistic or non-linguistic, preferring instead a more holistic approach,
which regards discourse as irreducible, rather than as a simple addition of context and text. In
this sense contemporary DA often positions itself in opposition to the tradition of idealisations
and binary distinctions (langue vs parole, form vs meaning, competence vs. performance)
which have characterised linguistics from Saussure to Chomsky.
Early DA did, however, often work with this binary text/context distinction. This was
understandable. For the applied linguists of that time, trained as they were in more traditional
linguistics, DA was indeed experienced as the addition of a new dimension (i.e. context) to
their existing object of study (i.e. text). Better to understand this new dimension, DA turned to
a variety of approaches to communication from outside linguistics. This gave rise to a number
of traditions of DA within AL to which we shall now turn. Though many of these traditions
have their origins in the 1960s and 1970s, they continue to be developed and reﬁned today.
Pragmatics
Interest in the role of context led initially to the classic texts of pragmatics (Austin 1962;
Searle 1969, 1975; Grice 1975) and attention to how discourse is structured by what speakers
are trying to do with their words, and how their intentions are recognised by their inter-
locutors. Explication of pragmatic principles became and has remained standard fare in
introductions to DA, which typically explain to students the basic tenets of speech act theory,
the cooperative principle, and politeness principles. This is despite the fact that early classic
Guy Cook
434

pragmatics deals only with brief invented examples without reference to many signiﬁcant
aspects of context.
Despite this limitation, pragmatics was put to good to use in discourse analysis of real-
world extended communication. In a landmark work analysing the discourse of primary
school lessons, Sinclair and Coulthard (1975) used the pragmatic notion of the act as a fun-
damental unit of analysis, showing how acts combine to form higher units (which they called
moves, exchanges and transactions) in an attempt to formulate rules analogous to those in
structural grammars. The approach, known as the Birmingham School of Discourse Analysis
(Birch 1982), provided an important impetus to further work (e.g. Coulthard and Mon-
tgomery 1981), but remained tightly focused upon language in isolation from other modes of
communication, and, working from transcriptions after the event, tended to treat discourse as
a product rather than a process.
Schema theory
Another approach to context derived from psychology and artiﬁcial intelligence were the
related notions of schemata (Bartlett 1932) and scripts (Schank and Abelson 1977). These are
posited mental constructs of expected sequences of events or combinations of elements which
discourse participants use to interpret what is said or written (Cook 1994: 9–23; Semino 2002).
Schema theory is a powerful tool in DA as it can help to explain both high level aspects of
understanding such as coherence, and low level linguistic phenomena such as article choice.
For example, the sequence The taxi was late. The driver couldn’t ﬁnd our house. appears
coherent and uses the deﬁnite article appropriately because a ‘taxi schema’ speciﬁes that taxis
have drivers and pick people up from houses. However, the sequence The taxi was late. The
sailor couldn’t ﬁnd our house. appears incoherent and its deﬁnite article inappropriate, as taxis
are not expected to be driven by sailors. In the binary conception of discourse as text + context
a schema can be classed as context, as it is a kind of knowledge, derived from experience of
the world, in whose light each new text is interpreted. The relation of text and schema is,
however, dynamic, with schemata being deployed to interpret texts, but also being changed by
them (Cook 1994).
Both pragmatics and schema theory have remained salient in many approaches to DA. But
their focus is very much on understanding as a product, explained after the event, rather than
a process. Their representations of how communication works can seem removed from the
actual development of discourse as it appears for participants.
Conversation analysis
One powerful inﬂuence on DA from outside linguistics which did, however, focus studiously
on process and participant perspectives rather than product and analytic constructs was con-
versation analysis (CA) (Liddicoat 2007). Developed from the late 1960s onwards following
seminal work by Garﬁnkel (1967) and Sacks et al. (1974), CA’s primary interest is in the social
act (Seedhouse 2004: 3) and it ‘is only marginally interested in language as such’ (Hutchby and
Wooﬃft 1998: 14). Working from the premise, consistently denied in Chomskyan linguistics,
that talk in interaction, including casual conversation, is fundamentally ordered, CA made use
of newly available recording technology to transcribe and closely analyse actually occurring
conversation, seeking to understand how participants ‘make sense of, ﬁnd their way about in,
and act on the circumstances in which they ﬁnd themselves’ (Heritage 1984: 4) and through
this close analysis to understand the patterns of social life (Bhatia et al. 2008: 4) as realised in
Discourse analysis
435

talk. Its enterprise diﬀers fundamentally from linguistics in that order, patterns and principles
are sought not in the language being used itself, nor through the top-down deployment of
explanatory theories, but in the common-sense conventional ways in which participants
themselves orient to, and locally manage what is happening. In this sense CA was a branch of
ethnomethodology and is determinedly and uncompromisingly emic (taking the participants’
perspective) rather than etic (taking the outsider’s/theorists’ perspective). The idea is to estab-
lish patterns of behaviour, and to attribute signiﬁcance to everything that happens, whether it
follows expectations or departs from them. To give a simple example, one greeting being
answered by another is an expected norm (e.g. Speaker A: Good morning. Speaker B: Good
morning.). If there is no such reciprocation from Speaker B, that absence is signiﬁcant.
Although initially concerned with conversation, later CA work has moved on to study talk
in a variety of contexts, for instance workplace interaction (e.g. Nevile 2008), classroom
interaction (Seedhouse 2004; see Tsui, this volume), and computer mediated interaction. Yet
while it has been an important impetus in the development of DA, and is still widely used
within it, CA when strictly deﬁned is diﬀerent in kind from DA. This is not only for the
superﬁcial reason that its subject matter is talk in interaction rather than language use in
general. There is a more fundamental reason too. Unlike DA, it conﬁnes itself, in the interests
of methodological rigour, to the analysis of the immediate mechanisms of talk, avoiding
speculation about the mental states these mechanisms reﬂect and create, or the larger social
realities and histories which they both constitute and reﬂect.
Ethnography, language ecology, linguistic ethnography
Another source of insight for DA has been ethnography (Hammersley and Atkinson 2007).
Like CA, it is ﬁrmly committed to seeking signiﬁcance in the details and apparent disorder of
everyday communication, and understanding participants’ own perspectives on the meaning
and dynamics of what is happening. It too rejects the idealisations and generalisations of
formal linguistics. Its scope, however, is much broader than CA, or indeed of DA. Ethno-
graphy seeks an understanding of culture through an analysis of all details of everyday life in a
given context, and does not therefore conﬁne itself to spoken face-to-face interaction as CA
does, or to communication involving language as DA does. Yet though broader in scope and
method, it is in harmony with the overall aim of DA, and has much to oﬀer to it. One parti-
cular ethnographic notion from which DA can beneﬁt is that of the irreducibility of experi-
ence – that there are aspects of any act of communication that are particular to it and cannot
be generalised. Another is the ethnographer’s preoccupation with the relationship between
researcher and participants, and how ﬁndings may be skewed by the former’s identity and
preconceptions. This is of particular value to DA, where the inevitable subjective involvement
of the discourse analyst in anything s/he reads or hears poses a similar problem to that
encountered by ethnographers.
Ethnography has, however, been criticised for being too locked into the particular to be able
to make signiﬁcant large-scale generalisations (Hammersley 1992: 85–95), and from a DA
point of view it is not concerned enough with the details of language use. There is, therefore, a
potential for two-way interaction in which linguistic and ethnographic analysis contribute to
each other as DA. Early attempts to eﬀect such a union can be found in Hymes’ ethnography
of communication (1972b) and Gumperz’s interactional sociolinguistics (1986). A more recent
attempt to synthesise the two, and to strengthen the power of both, is to be found in the lin-
guistic ethnography (LE) movement (Rampton et al. 2004; Creese 2008; see Maybin and
Tusting, this volume). Arguing that close linguistic analysis is always a sound entry point into
Guy Cook
436

cultural understanding, linguistic ethnographers draw upon a number of precedent inﬂuences,
such as new literacy studies (Street 1984; Barton et al. 2000), interactional sociolinguistics
(Gumperz 1986), and critical discourse analysis (see below), as well as the mainstream applied
linguistics language learning approach to DA (see above). LE seeks simultaneously to ‘tie
ethnography down’ and ‘to open linguistics up’ making it highly relevant resource for DA, if
not in many ways – and problematically for deﬁnitions of both – synonymous with it.
Closely related to linguistic ethnography, though with a diﬀerence of emphasis, is language
ecology (van Lier 2000, 2004; Kramsch 2002; Kramsch and Whiteside 2008). Often applying
its insights to the ﬁeld of language teaching and learning, it seeks to relate language use to its
physical and social environment, and the aﬀordances this environment provides. It sees lan-
guage as a historically contingent phenomenon negotiated in daily interactions, and pays par-
ticular attention to the dynamic relation of language and cultural change, historical expansion,
displacement (e.g. by migration), continuity, and transformation. A similar approach is taken
by Blommaert (2005) who argues for a more sociolinguistically and historically informed DA
suited to an analysis of the contemporary globalised contexts.
Semiotics, paralanguage and multimodality
Despite their very diﬀerent origins and approaches, the approaches described so far have
worked with brief invented dialogues or transcripts of recorded actually occurring talk. None,
however, makes more than a limited and unsystematic reference to communicative channels
other than language. There is some reference to pupils’ raised hands eﬀecting the act of bid-
ding in Sinclair and Coulthard 1975; there is laughter and timing built into CA transcription
systems; there are notes about signiﬁcant non-linguistic elements of communication in lin-
guistic ethnography. They are nevertheless all essentially transcript-based methodologies, in
which the words are central and other aspects of communication added as optional supple-
ments, despite the fact that such elements are an integral and indispensible aspect of how
meaning and coherence are achieved.
Consequently, if DA is to fulﬁl its goal of accounting for how people make sense of lan-
guage use in real contexts and in real time, it must take stock of much more than the bare
words which are spoken and treat other communicative phenomena as more than just an
occasional explanatory gloss on their meaning. In talk, a host of paralinguistic phenomena
not only carry meaning in parallel to the words (as the term ‘paralanguage’ suggests), but can
be essential to understanding of the words, or even contradict them. (An interpersonal claim
such as I like you a lot is unlikely to be believed if the accompanying ‘body language’ com-
municates the opposite.) Nor can paralanguage be ignored in DA as it is never absent or
insigniﬁcant. The notion of language without paralanguage is indeed one of the idealisations
of linguistics against which DA deﬁnes itself. Every spoken utterance has a volume, speed,
pitch and intonation in addition to its linguistic form, propositional content and pragmatic
force, and these paralinguistic elements convey key information about the speaker’s identity,
attitude, and commitment. This is so even in telephone conversations when participants do not
see each other. When participants do see each other, there are in addition a host of para-
linguistic visual phenomena such as gesture, facial expressions, eye movements and contact (or
lack of it) and a rich semiotics of such factors as dress, proximity, position, and touch. Dis-
course analysts have long shown awareness of the need to incorporate such phenomena into
their analyses, but also of the diﬃculty of doing so systematically. The issue of how para-
language can be transcribed and analysed raises considerable problems as paralinguistic phe-
nomena are of their nature graded, irreducible and often ambiguous, and transcriptions of
Discourse analysis
437

them necessarily a selection and an interpretation (Ochs 1979; Cook 1995; Norris 2004; Swann
2010). Technology is also a factor here. Early spoken-discourse analysts had only tape recor-
ders, and this accounts in part for their disproportionate devotion to the transcript as the
object of analysis, despite the fact that it freezes interaction, making living speech into a
written document and excluding most paralanguage from consideration. More recent compu-
ter technology, however, allows complex on-screen cross-reference between transcripts,
sound recordings and video, and work relating these elements (e.g. Hosoda 2006; Carter and
Adolphs 2008; Rizza 2009; Stokoe forthcoming) is an expanding and important enterprise in
contemporary DA.
The exploitation of paralanguage in spoken communication is an instance of multimodality
as it involves visual, non-linguistic sound, and other sensory stimuli. Closely related to the
increased attention to paralanguage in discourse analysis of talk, therefore, are recent advan-
ces in the analysis of multimodal communication in general, and the growing awareness that
language cannot for DA purposes be analysed in isolation from other communicative elements
(Kress and van Leeuwen 2001; Scollon and Wong-Scollon 2003; Norris 2004; Adolphs and
Carter 2007; Kress 2010; see van Leeuwen, this volume). Yet while the complex interactions of
language and paralanguage in speech are ancient and universal aspects of human commu-
nication (Finnegan 2002), and in this sense the phenomenon is nothing new, the term ‘multi-
modality’ is mostly associated with written communication. Multimodal analysis concerns
itself largely with the multiple dimensions of meaning made possible by modern printing,
computer and mobile technologies, paying attention to the signiﬁcance of the presentation of
the written words themselves (Walker 2001), in diﬀerent fonts, colours, sizes, arrangements,
animations, etc., and to the many communicative modes with which they co-occur, such as still
and moving pictures, music, diagrams, tables, etc. Particular attention has been paid to multi-
modality in the media (e.g. O’Keefe 2006; Talbot 2007), in advertising (Myers 1999; Cook 2001;
Johnson 2008), in educational resources, and in computer mediated communication (e.
g. Herring 2004). The ‘mediated discourse analysis’ initiated by Scollon (1998, 2001; Scollon
and Wong-Scollon 2003) concentrates on the ‘sites of engagement’, actions, practices and
objects with which language use always occurs.
Multimodal meaning, whether in speech or writing, should then be an essential element of
any DA, as it plays a major part in human linguistic communication. Yet while there is now
general consensus that this is so, there is still little agreement as to quite how multimodality
can be captured and related to linguistic communication for DA purposes. Multimodal ele-
ments in communication, because they are graded rather than discrete signs, cannot be simply
reduced to linguistic terms as they were in early semiotics (Barthes 1977; Kress and van
Leeuwen 1996). They signify by being more or less rather than either/or. Eye contact may be
constant or instantaneous or anything in-between, a colour brighter or dimmer along a con-
tinuum. Two words on the other hand, such as bat and pat, are distinguished by a binary
contrast (Saussure 1974) – even though in use they may also have graded paralinguistic fea-
tures such as pitch or volume too. It is perhaps, however, precisely the uncertainty, and the
sense of things yet to be done and discovered, combined with the self-evident importance of
multimodality in contemporary discourse, which makes the ﬁeld so exciting and the work on it
so stimulating.
Larger structures
Despite their diﬀerences, all of the approaches discussed so far have an important element
in common. Though they may aim for, and obtain, far reaching conclusions about
Guy Cook
438

communication, culture and society, they take as a starting point a ﬁne-grained analysis of
language in use, assembling evidence of what happens in instances of communication, before
making generalisations. Other approaches, however, take the opposite approach, beginning
with larger structures and working top-down from these – though they may also deploy
detailed analysis to validate these posited structures.
Genre analysis
One such approach is genre analysis, which seeks to understand any communicative event as
an instance of a genre, deﬁned as ‘a class of communicative events which share some set of
communicative purposes’ (Swales 1990: 58). Examples of genres are such events as academic
articles, news bulletins, advertisements, prayers, operas, menus. Genre analysis then seeks,
through ﬁne-grained analysis, to identify the conventions which characterise these diﬀerent
genres:
These purposes … constitute the rationale for the genre. This rationale shapes the sche-
matic structure of the discourse and inﬂuences and constrains choice of content and
style. … In addition to purpose, exemplars of a genre exhibit various patterns of similarity
in terms of structure, style, content and intended audience.
(Swales 1990: 58)
Genre analysis was developed by Swales and colleagues in connection with the teaching of
English for Speciﬁc Purposes and is thus closely linked to the language learning approach to
DA. Another school of genre analysis has drawn upon systemic functional linguistics (Martin
1985, 1992; see Young, this volume), relating it to the Hallidayan notion of register and
drawing heavily on Halliday’s functional grammar. In both manifestations genre analysis has
both an identity of its own and has drawn upon other traditions including CDA, corpus lin-
guistics, multimodal analysis, etc. for the purposes of the micro analysis necessary to discover,
categorise and validate posited genres. Here again then we face the problem of disentangling
diﬀerent approaches to discourse analysis, establishing what if anything they have to make
them distinct and independent from each other or from DA as a whole.
Critical discourse analysis (CDA)
An extremely inﬂuential approach to DA, which like genre analysis begins with larger con-
cepts and structures, is Critical Discourse Analysis (CDA) (Fairclough 1989; van Dijk 1993;
Fairclough and Wodak 1997; see O’Halloran, this volume). Drawing on the Foucauldian
notion of discourses as institutionalised ways of using language, CDA is concerned with
ideology, power relations and social injustices, and how these are represented and repro-
duced through language. Its political allegiances are explicit, and it claims that discourse
analysis cannot avoid taking a political stance. Within this overall framework various
approaches have diﬀerent emphases. They may focus primarily upon discourse practices and
ideologies, or seek to link discourse and social structures, or to situate speciﬁc discourses such
as those of racism within a broader historical perspective. While CDA has attracted wide-
spread support it has also been subjected to criticism for bias and partiality (Widdowson 1995,
1998), lack of rigour and circularity (Stubbs 1998), and confusion and inconsistency in its
cognitive and linguistic theoretical bases (Stubbs 1998; O’Halloran 2003) or methodology
(Hammersley 1997).
Discourse analysis
439

Back to detail and forward to generalisation: corpus linguistics
As approaches to DA have developed and accumulated, and as factors deemed relevant to
analysis have multiplied, there has been a tendency to move away from the close attention to
linguistic detail which characterised DA’s early days. In addition, the desire for thick descrip-
tion has led actual analyses to focus of necessity upon one or a few communicative events at a
time. There are frequently attempts to relate speciﬁc instances to general trends in language
use, but these have tended to be speculative rather than systematic. The advent of corpus
analysis, however (see Adolphs and Lin, this volume) has enabled DA partially to redress these
shortcomings, and to add a quantitative dimension to research. With its power to place any
particular instance of language in the context of its use across a wide range of comparable
texts or the language as a whole, corpus comparisons have enabled discourse analysts to talk
with conﬁdence about the typicality of any text under consideration. Corpus analysis has thus
given a major boost to DA in recent years (Baker 2006), with some of the most impressive
work being done in corpus stylistics, i.e. in the discourse analysis of literary texts (Stubbs 2002:
123–44, 2005; O’Halloran 2007a, 2007b; see Semino, this volume). This fertile link of DA with
stylistics has indeed a long history – and literary stylistics, which links literary language to its
eﬀect, can be regarded as a form of DA.
The greater attention to textual features enabled by corpus linguistics and the beneﬁts it has
brought to DA should not, however, be taken to mean that a corpus analysis and a discourse
analysis are the same thing. Corpus linguistics, like other forms of linguistic analysis before it,
is an invaluable tool for DA. Yet in its quest for understanding of how participants in com-
munication achieve meaning, DA cannot limit itself to textual analysis alone, any more than it
can limit itself to the cultural and psychological context of language use without attention to
actual text. In any act of communication there is someone talking, someone they are talking
to, and something they say – sender, receiver and text – and a full discourse analysis must
describe analyse and relate each corner of this ‘triangle of communication’ (Widdowson 1975:
47–70, 91–99; Cook 2004: 4–5; Widdowson 2004). A good deal of DA has emphasised one
corner at the expense of the other two, but the full range of approaches described in this
chapter provides a formidable resource for the contemporary discourse analyst, who can select
and eclectically combine techniques to gain a rich and nuanced understanding of what happens
when human beings communicate through language.
Final word
The question touched upon earlier, however remains, and becomes more acute as the resources
available multiply: whether discourse analysis still has any identity separate from the many
traditions on which it has drawn. While it may be commendable to draw eclectically upon the
strengths of many research traditions to gain a rich insight into communication, there is a
valid case for saying that there is no longer a single theory or method of analysis which can be
clearly labelled as discourse analysis. It has become a superordinate term for a wide range of
traditions for the analysis of language in use, so general and all-inclusive that it is hardly worth
using. Perhaps the term discourse analysis has had its day. It is now so built into the fabric of
applied linguistics that any analysis of language in use is discourse analysis of some kind.
Related topics
corpus linguistics; critical discourse analysis; linguistic ethnography; multimodality; stylistics
Guy Cook
440

Further reading
Blommaert, J. (2005) Discourse: A Critical Introduction, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
(A version of DA suited to the analysis of identity and power relations in contemporary globalised
contexts.)
Cook, G. (1989) Discourse, Oxford: Oxford University Press. (An introduction to the basic principles
of early DA and its relevance to language teachers.)
Gee, J. P. (1999) An Introduction to Discourse Analysis: Theory and Method, London: Routledge.
(A view of DA as process and interaction.)
Paltridge, B. (2006) Discourse Analysis: An Introduction, London: Continuum. (A clear, balanced
and comprehensive introduction to the ﬁeld.)
Widdowson, H. G. (2007) Discourse Analysis, Oxford: Oxford University Press. (A brief and
accessible overview of key concepts in DA.)
References
Adolphs, S. and Carter, R. (2007) ‘Beyond the word: new challenges in analysing corpora of spoken
English’, European Journal of English Studies 11(2): 133–46.
Austin, J. L. (1962) How To Do Things with Words, Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Baker, P. (2006) Using Corpora in Discourse Analysis, London: Continuum.
Bakhtin, M. M. (1986) Speech Genres and other Late Essays, V. McGee (trans.), Austin: University
of Texas.
Barthes, R. (1977) ‘The rhetoric of the image’, in R. Barthes (ed.), S. Heath (trans.), Image, Music,
Text, London: Fontana.
Bartlett, F. C. (1932) Remembering, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Barton, D., Hamilton, M. and Ivanic, R. (2000) Situated Literacies: Reading and Writing in Con-
text, London: Routledge.
Bhatia, V. K., Flowerdew, J. and Jones, R. (eds) (2008) Advances in Discourse Studies, London: Routledge.
Birch, D. (1982) ‘The Birmingham school of discourse analysis and communicative approaches to
language teaching’, RELC Journal 13(2): 98–110.
Blommaert, J. (2005) Discourse: A Critical Introduction, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Brown, G. and Yule, G. (1983) Discourse Analysis, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Carter, R. and Adolphs, S. (2008) ‘Linking the verbal and visual: new directions for corpus
linguistics’, Language and Computers 64: 275–91.
Cook, G. (1989) Discourse, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
——(1994) Discourse and Literature: The Interplay of Form and Mind, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
——(1995) ‘Theoretical issues: transcribing the untranscribable’, in G. Leech, G. Myers and
J. Thomas (eds) Spoken English on Computer: Transcription, Mark-up and Applications, London:
Longman.
——(2001) The Discourse of Advertising, London: Routledge.
——(2004) Genetically Modiﬁed Language, London: Routledge
Coulthard, M. (1985) Introduction to Discourse Analysis, London: Longman.
Coulthard, M. and Montgomery, M. (eds) (1981) Studies in Discourse Analysis, London: Routledge
and Kegan Paul.
Creese, A. (2008) ‘Linguistic ethnography’, in K. A. King and N. H. Hornberger (eds) Encyclopedia
of Language and Education, 2nd edn, vol. 10: Research Methods in Language and Education, New
York: Springer.
de Beaugrande, R. and Dressler, W. (1981) Introduction to Text Linguistics, London: Longman.
Fairclough, N. (1989) Language and Power, London: Longman.
Fairclough, N. and Wodak, R. (1997) ‘Critical discourse analysis’, in T. A. van Dijk (ed.) Discourse
as Social Interaction, London: Sage.
Finnegan, R. (2002) Communicating: The Multiple Modes of Human Interconnection, London and
New York: Routledge.
Garﬁnkel, H. (1967) Studies in Ethnomethodology, Englewood Cliﬀs, NJ: Prentice Hall.
Gee, J. P. (1999) An Introduction to Discourse Analysis: Theory and Method, London: Routledge.
Grice, H. P. (1975) ‘Logic and conversation’, in P. Cole and J. L. Morgan (eds) Syntax and
Semantics, vol. 3: Speech Acts, New York: Academic Press.
Discourse analysis
441

Gumperz, J. J. (1986). ‘Interactional sociolinguistics in the study of schooling’, in J. Cook-Gumperz
(ed.) The Social Construction of Literacy, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Halliday, M. A. K. (1973) Explorations in the Function of Language, London: Edward Arnold.
——(1978) Language as a Social Semiotic, London: Arnold.
Halliday, M. A. K. and Hasan, R. (1976) Cohesion in English, London: Longman.
Halliday, M. A. K., McIntosh, A. and Strevens, P. (1964) The Linguistic Sciences and Language
Teaching, London: Longman.
Hammersley, M. (1992) What’s Wrong with Ethnography?, London: Routledge.
——(1997) ‘On the foundations of critical discourse analysis’, Language and Communication 17(3):
237–48.
Hammersley, M. and Atkinson, P. (2007) Ethnography: Principles in Practice, London: Routledge.
Harris, Z. (1952) ‘Discourse analysis’, Language 28: 1–30.
Hatch, E. (1992) Discourse and Language Education, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Heritage, J. (1984) Garﬁnkel and Ethnomethodology, Cambridge and New York: Polity Press.
Herring, S. C. (2004) ‘Computer-mediated discourse analysis: an approach to researching online
behavior’, in S. A. Barab, R. Kling and J. H. Gray (eds) Designing for Virtual Communities in the
Service of Learning, New York: Cambridge University Press.
Hosoda, Y. (2006) ‘Repair and relevance of diﬀerential language expertise in second language
conversations’, Applied Linguistics 27(1): 25–51.
Hutchby, I. and Wooﬃtt, R. (1998) Conversation Analysis, Cambridge: Polity Press.
Hymes, D. (1972a) ‘On communicative competence’, in J. B. Pride and J. Holmes (eds) Socio-
linguistics: Selected Readings, Harmondsworth: Penguin.
——(1972b) ‘Models of the interaction of language and social life’, in J. J. Gumperz and D. Hymes
(eds) Directions in Sociolinguistics: The Ethnography of Communication, Oxford: Blackwell.
Johnson, F. L. (2008) Imaging in Advertising: Verbal and Visual Codes of Commerce, London:
Routledge.
Johnstone, B. (2002) Discourse Analysis, Oxford: Blackwell.
Kramsch, C. and Whiteside, A. (2008) ‘Language ecology in multilingual settings: towards a theory
of symbolic competence’, Applied Linguistics 29(4): 645–72.
Kramsch, C. (ed.) (2002) Language Acquisition and Language Socialization: Ecological Perspectives,
London: Continuum.
Kress, G. (2010) Multimodality: A Social Semiotic Approach to Contemporary Communication,
London: Routledge.
Kress, G. and van Leeuwen, T. (1996) Reading Images: The Grammar of Visual Design, London:
Routledge.
——(2001) Multimodal Discourse: The Modes and Media of Contemporary Communication,
London: Edward Arnold.
Kristeva, J. (1986) ‘Word, dialogue and novel’, in T. Moi (ed.) The Kristeva Reader, Oxford:
Blackwell, pp. 34–61.
Liddicoat, A. J. (2007) An Introduction to Conversation Analysis, London: Continuum.
Martin, J. R. (1985) Factual Writing: Exploring and Challenging Social Reality, Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
——(1992) English Text: System and Structure, Philadelphia, PA and Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
McCarthy, M. (1991) Discourse Analysis for Language Teachers, Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.
Mitchell, T. F. (1957) ‘The language of buying and selling in Cyrenaica: a situational statement’,
Principles of Firthian Linguistics, Hesperis 44: 31–71. Reprinted in T. F. Mitchell (ed.) Principles
of Firthian Linguistics, London: Longman.
Myers, G. (1999) Ad Worlds: Brands, Media, Audience, London: Arnold.
Nevile, M. (2008) ‘Being out of order: overlapping talk as evidence of trouble in airplane pilots’
work’, in V. K. Bhatia, J. Flowerdew and R. Jones (eds) Advances in Discourse Studies, London:
Routledge.
Norris, S. (2004) Analyzing Multimodal Interaction: A Methodological Framework, London: Routledge.
Ochs, E. (1979) ‘Transcription as theory’, in E. Ochs and B. B. Schieﬀelin (eds) Developmental
Pragmatics, New York: Academic Press.
O’Halloran, K. A. (2003) Critical Discourse Analysis and Language Cognition, Edinburgh: Edinburgh
University Press.
Guy Cook
442

——(2007a) ‘Corpus-assisted literary evaluation’, Corpora 2(1): 33–63.
——(2007b) ‘The subconscious in James Joyce’s “Eveline”: a corpus stylistic analysis which chews
on the “Fish hook”’, Language and Literature 16(3): 227–44.
O’Keefe, A. (2006) Investigating Media Discourse, London: Routledge.
Paltridge, B. (2006) Discourse Analysis: An Introduction, London: Continuum.
Rampton, B., Tusting, K., Maybin, J., Barwell, R., Creese, A. and Lytra, V. (2004) ‘UK linguistic
ethnography: a discussion paper’. Available at: www.lancs.ac.uk/fss/organisations/lingethn/docum
ents/discussion_paper_jan_05.pdf (accessed 13 January 2010).
Riley, P. (1987) Discourse and Learning, London: Longman.
Rizza, C. (2009) ‘Semantically redundant language: a case study’, Applied Linguistics 30(2): 276–94.
Sacks, H., Schegloﬀ, E. A. and Jeﬀerson, G. (1974) ‘A simplest systematics for the organization of
turn-taking for conversation’, Language 50(4): 696–735.
de Saussure, F. (1974) Course in General Linguistics, W. Baskin (trans.), London: Fontana/Collins.
Schank, R. C. and Abelson, R. P. (1977) Scripts, Plans, Goals and Understanding: An Inquiry into
Human Knowledge, Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Scollon, R. (1998) Mediated Discourse as Social Interaction: A Study of News Discourse, London:
Longman.
——(2001) Mediated Discourse: The Nexus of Practice, London: Routledge.
Scollon, R. and Wong-Scollon, S. (2003) Discourses in Place: Language in the Material World,
London: Routledge.
Searle, J. R. (1969) Speech Acts: An Essay in the Philosophy of Language, Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
——(1975) ‘A taxonomy of illocutionary acts’, in K. Gunderson (ed.) Language, Mind and Knowl-
edge, Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.
Seedhouse, P. (2004) The Interactional Architecture of the Language Classroom: A Conversation
Analysis Perspective, Malden, MA: Blackwell.
Semino, E. (2002) ‘A cognitive stylistic approach to mind style in narrative ﬁction’, in E. Semino,
and J. Culpeper (eds) Cognitive Stylistics: Language and Cognition in Text Analysis, Amsterdam:
John Benjamins.
Sinclair, J. and Coulthard, M. (1975) Towards an Analysis of Discourse: The English used by Tea-
chers and Pupils, London: Oxford University Press.
Slembrouck, S. (2009) ‘Discourse analysis’, in K. Malmkjær (ed.) The Routledge Linguistics Ency-
clopaedia, London: Routledge, pp. 133–7.
Stokoe, E. (forthcoming) Talking Relationships: Analyzing Speed-dating Conversations, Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Street, B. (1984) Literacy in Theory and Practice, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Stubbs, M. (1983) Discourse Analysis, Oxford: Blackwell.
——(2002) Words and Phrases, Oxford: Blackwell.
——(2005) ‘Conrad in the computer: examples of quantitative stylistic methods’, Language and
Literature 14(1): 5–24. Reprinted in R. Carter and P. Stockwell (eds) (2008) The Language and
Literature Reader, London: Routledge.
——(1998) ‘Whorf’s children: critical comments on critical discourse analysis’, in A. Ryan and
A. Wray (eds) Evolving Models of Language: British Studies in Applied Linguistics 12, Clevedon:
BAAL/Multilingual Matters.
Swales, J. (1990) Genre Analysis, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
——(2010) ‘Transcribing spoken interaction’, in S. Hunston and D. Oakey (eds) Introducing Applied
Linguistics: Key Concepts and Skills, London: Routledge.
Swann, J. (2010) ‘Transcribing spoken interaction’, in S. Hunston and D. Oakey (eds.) Introducing
Applied Linguistics: Key Concepts and Skills, London: Routledge.
Talbot, M. (2007) Media Discourse: Representation and Interaction, Edinburgh: Edinburgh University
Press.
van Dijk, T. (1972) Some Aspects of Text Grammars, The Hague: Mouton.
——(1977) Text and Context, London: Longman.
——(1993) ‘Principles of critical discourse analysis’, Discourse and Society 4(2): 249–83.
van Lier, L. (2000) ‘From input to aﬀordance: social-interactive learning in an ecological perspec-
tive’, in J. P. Lantolf (ed.), Sociocultural Theory and Language Learning, Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Discourse analysis
443

——(2004) The Ecology and Semiotics of Language Learning: A Sociocultural Perspective,
Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic.
Vološinov, V. N. (1988) Marxism and the Philosophy of Language, L. Matejka and R. Titunik
(trans.), Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Walker, S. (2001) Typography and Language in Everyday Life: Prescriptions and Practices, Harlow:
Longman Pearson.
Werlich, E. (1976) A Text Grammar of English, Heidelberg: Quelle und Meyer.
Widdowson, H. G. (1973) ‘An Applied Linguistic Approach to Discourse Analysis’, unpublished
Ph.D. Thesis, Department of Linguistics, University of Edinburgh.
——(1975) Stylistics and the Teaching of Literature, London: Longman.
——(1979) Explorations in Applied Linguistics, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
——(1984) Explorations in Applied Linguistics 2, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
——(1995) ‘Review of Fairclough’s discourse and social change’, Applied Linguistics 16(4): 510–16.
——(1998) ‘The theory and practice of critical discourse analysis’, Applied Linguistics 19(1):
136–51.
——(2004) Text, Context, Pretext: Critical Issues in Discourse Analysis, Oxford: Blackwell.
——(2007) Discourse Analysis, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Guy Cook
444

31
Critical discourse analysis
Kieran O’Halloran
Introduction
Critical discourse analysis (CDA) investigates how language use may be aﬃrming and indeed
reproducing the perspectives, values and ways of talking of the powerful, which may not be in
the interests of the less powerful. The relationship between language, power and ideology is a
crucial focal point. CDA consists of an interdisciplinary set of approaches which attempt to
describe, interpret and explain this relationship. Among its principal architects are Paul
Chilton, Norman Fairclough, Teun van Dijk and Ruth Wodak.
In this chapter, I shall set out what ‘critical’, ‘discourse’ and ‘analysis’ mean in CDA, out-
line a number of key approaches within it, and then demonstrate a critical discourse analysis.
Critical
In CDA, ‘critical’ is usually taken to mean studying and taking issue with how dominance and
inequality are reproduced through language use:
Analysis, description and theory formation play a role especially in as far as they allow
better understanding and critique of social inequality, based on gender, ethnicity, class,
origin, religion, language, sexual orientation and other criteria that deﬁne diﬀerences
between people. Their ultimate goal is not only scientiﬁc, but also social and political,
namely change. In that case, social discourse analysis takes the form of a critical discourse
analysis.
(van Dijk 1997: 22–3)
CDA is critical of how unequal language use can do ideological work. Ideologies are repre-
sentations of aspects of the world which contribute to establishing and maintaining relations of
power, domination and exploitation. When language use reﬂects inequality (e.g. ‘man and
wife’ as opposed to ‘husband and wife’), CDA argues that sustained use of such unequal
representations does ideological work because it tacitly aﬃrms inequitable social processes. A
key assumption in this argument is that there is a ‘dialectical’ or ‘bi-directional’ relationship
445

between social processes and language use. With such a focus on the ideological eﬀects of
unequal language use, CDA is especially drawn to texts where the marginal and relatively
powerless are (mis)represented by the powerful. The take on ‘critical’ as described has its roots
in the twentieth century in the work of the social theorist and philosopher, Jürgen Habermas,
and further back to Frankfurt school theorists such as Max Horkheimer. Furthermore, given
the signiﬁcance of the dialecticalism between language use and social processes in its ontology,
CDA has a more thorough-going social-historical perspective on context than many other
types of discourse analysis (see Cook, this volume):
A fully ‘critical’ account of discourse would … require a theorization and description of
both the social processes and structures which give rise to the production of a text, and of
the social structures and processes within which individuals or groups as social historical
subjects create meanings in their interaction with texts.
(Wodak 2001: 2–3)
Of course, one does not need to have the appellation of ‘critical discourse analyst’ to be critical
of how language use can be bound up with (ab)use of power. However, where a critical dis-
course analysis diﬀers from ‘lay’ critique is in its ‘systematic approaches to inherent meanings’,
its reliance on ‘scientiﬁc procedures’ and the necessity as it sees it to include the ‘self-reﬂection
of the researchers themselves’ (Fairclough and Wodak 1997: 279). Another feature which dis-
tinguishes CDA from other branches of discourse analysis is that CDA is ‘committed’, with
analysts often being actively involved in challenging the phenomena they study. Indeed, for
critical discourse analysts, there can only ever be committed discourse analysis and so their
political persuasion (usually left-liberal) is often evident in their reﬂection and interpretation.
CDA is, in the words of one of its major proponents, ‘discourse analysis “with an attitude”’
(van Dijk 2001: 96).
Discourse
Usually in CDA, the concept of discourse has two diﬀerent but related senses (Fairclough
2003: 3–4). The ﬁrst is ‘language in use’. Let me refer to this type as discourse 1. The discourse
1 of a conversation refers to the meanings made in interaction with those features of context
which are deemed relevant, e.g. tone of voice of participants, facial movements, hand-gestures.
If the conversation is recorded, its ‘text’ would be the transcription of the conversation. Dis-
course 1 refers to meanings made in reading too, that is, those meanings we derive from the
text in line with the knowledge we possess, the amount of eﬀort we invest, our values, how we
have been educated and socialised, our gender, etc.
A second meaning of discourse in CDA is associated with the work of the French social
theorist/philosopher, Michel Foucault. Foucault (1972) describes discourses as ways of talking
about the world which are tightly connected to ways of seeing and comprehending it. For
Foucault, discourses place limits on the possibilities of articulation (and by extension, what to
do or not to do) with respect to the area of concern of a particular institution, political pro-
gramme, etc. For example, diﬀerent religions promote their own discourses which frame
explanation of natural behaviour. Roman Catholicism now approves of ‘the big bang’ theory
of the universe’s birth (scientiﬁc discourse) but that its genesis was by divine means (religious
discourse). Let me refer to this second meaning as discourse 2. Importantly, for Foucault and
for CDA, it is the powerful who ultimately control discourse 2 and have the means to regenerate it
(e.g. newspaper moguls). (See also the deﬁnition of discourse in Cook, this volume.)
Kieran O’Halloran
446

Analysis
Probably the most widely used analytical framework in CDA is Fairclough’s (see, for example,
Fairclough 2001). It consists of three stages: description, interpretation and explanation. In the
ﬁrst stage, description, the text should be described as rigorously and as comprehensively as
possible relative to the analytical focus. A key descriptive tool used in CDA is systemic functional
linguistics (SFL) (see Young, this volume).
Systematicity in the description stage is important since this helps ground interpretation of
how the text might lead to diﬀerent discourses 1 for diﬀerent readers in diﬀerent discourse
practices or the situations of language use, e.g. a political speech, a chat between strangers at a bus
stop, a debate on Twitter. The focus in the interpretation stage is concerned with conjecturing
the cognition of readers/listeners, how they might mentally interact with the text. Fairclough
refers to this as ‘processing analysis’ (see Figure 31.1). Critique in the interpretation stage
means pointing to a misrepresentation or a cognitive problem (Chouliaraki and Fairclough
1999: 33). This might mean that some signiﬁcant information is absent from a particular text,
which leads to the reader either being misled or not being fully apprised of the most relevant
facts. This stage also seeks to show how wider social and cultural contexts and power relations
within them (discourse 2) might shape the interpretation (discourse 1) of a text.
In explanation, CDA critically explains connections between texts and discourse(s) 2 circu-
lating in the wider social and cultural context, the ‘sociocultural practice’. Critique here
Figure 31.1 The scope and foci of critical discourse analysis
Source: Adapted from Fairclough 1995a: 98.
Critical discourse analysis
447

involves showing how the ‘ideological function of the misrepresentation or unmet need’ helps
‘in sustaining existing social arrangements’ (Chouliaraki and Fairclough 1999: 33).
Approaches
CDA is multidisciplinary, encompassing a number of diﬀerent but related approaches which
may be combined in description, interpretation and explanation. Some salient approaches are
featured below.
Critical linguistics aims to reveal the biases, or the ‘angles of representation’, in seemingly
‘transparent’ language use (Fowler 1991; Fowler et al. 1979; Kress and Hodge 1979) and to
show how these biases can mystify the actual nature of the events in reporting. One key focus
of critical linguistics is how agency for an action is represented. Trew (1979), regarded as a
classic in CDA, highlights in a report from the British newspaper, The Times, how responsi-
bility for a police action in Rhodesia in 1975 is downplayed. To do so, Trew uses systemic
functional categories, that is, categories which track the relationship between grammar and
meaning in a clause. Here is an extract from The Times and Trew’s analysis:
Eleven Africans were shot dead and 15 wounded when Rhodesian police opened ﬁre on a
rioting crowd of about 2,000.
-
shoot dead
eleven Africans
(when) Rhodesian police opened ﬁre on a
rioting crowd of about 2,000
ACTOR
PROCESS
GOAL
CIRCUMSTANCE
PASSIVE
The functional analysis helps to reveal the following: because of the use of the passive voice,
there is an absence of explicit connection between the Actor (or the doer in the clause) and the
process ‘shoot dead’. As a result, agency for the shooting has to be inferred from the Cir-
cumstance, i.e. information which supplements ‘eleven Africans’, the Goal (or the ‘done to’ in
the clause) and ‘shoot dead’, the process. From this functional analysis, Trew argues that in
The Times ‘the eﬀects of the linguistic facts pointed out are a tendency to shift the focus away
from those who did the shooting and onto the victims’ (Trew 1979: 99).
Another linguistic concept that critical linguists are vigilant of is nominalisation, the repre-
sentation of a process by a noun form rather than by a verb. Using nominalisation, informa-
tion about an Actor in a clause, and thus responsibility for an action, can be removed. For
example, the sentence ‘the shooting of 11 demonstrators yesterday caused widespread outrage’
includes the nominalisation ‘shooting’ and not the agent of the shooting. Given what I have
outlined, it should be clear that critical linguistics describes texts so as to perform critical
discourse 1 analysis, i.e. make an interpretation that signiﬁcant information is absent from a
reader’s discourse 1. Synergy between SFL and CDA is still current (e.g. Coﬃn and O’Halloran
2006; White 2004; Young and Harrison 2004).
The critical linguistic work completed at the University of East Anglia in the 1970s, for example
Fowler et al. (1979) and Kress and Hodge (1979), is often referenced as a precursor of CDA.
While the social theoretical base of CDA has become much more complex and varied than the
non-Foucauldian critical linguistics of the 1970s, the perspective in critical linguistics on how
language can be used to mystify responsibility for social action is still a ﬁxture of CDA. This is
not to say there are no problems with this approach. Critical linguistics makes a number of
Kieran O’Halloran
448

tacit assumptions about the relationship between mystiﬁcation and cognition which are con-
nected to cognitive paradigms of the 1970s. These implicit premises are problematised by
contemporary cognitive paradigms. O’Halloran (2003) underwrites mystiﬁcation analysis in
CDA by basing it in a synthesis of contemporary cognitive paradigms.
Socio-cognitive analysis focuses on the dialectical relationships between social structure,
discourse 2 and cognition in discourse 1. The extent to which cognitive theory is employed in
socio-cognitive analysis ﬂuctuates. Fairclough (2001), for example, uses a limited number of
cognitive concepts, e.g. member’s resources – the socio-politicised knowledge people bring to
texts and from which they make inferences in reading. Consider Fairclough’s (2001: 44–5)
socio-cognitive analysis of the following newspaper text at the time of the Falklands/Malvinas
conﬂict:
The wife of the new Commanding Oﬃcer of the 2nd Parachute Battalion spoke last night
of her fears for her husband’s safety.
As she played in the sunshine with her four children, Jenny Keeble said she hoped her
husband would not have to go into battle again.
She said: ‘I pray he and his men have done enough. But if they do go on I know that he
is a man who will do his job to the best of his ability and I am certain he and the 2nd
Parachute Battalion will succeed … ’
(Daily Mail, 1 June 1982)
For Fairclough, the text positions the reader to infer Jenny Keeble is a ‘good wife or an
admirable person’ (this evaluation is not made explicit in the text). This is because the text
positions the reader to draw on a member’s resource of sexist discourse 2 (should they possess
this). And should the reader not oppose the reading position being set up, Fairclough argues
that this inference leads to a sexist reading (discourse 1). Moreover, because of its assumption
of a dialectical relationship between language use/cognition and social structure, CDA would
hold that such a reading can do ideological work in reproducing inequitable discourse 2 and
social structure. It should be highlighted that van Dijk has been more consistently explicit than
Fairclough or Wodak that discussion of the relationship between discourse and social structure
should take place with due consideration to an individual’s cognition (e.g. van Dijk 1998). As
such, van Dijk oﬀers a more thorough-going theoretical base for socio-cognitive analysis (e.g.
van Dijk 2001).
The discourse-historical approach is associated with Ruth Wodak. It places importance on
the contextualising and historicising of texts. To foster critical analysis, this approach system-
atically synthesises available background information in the analysis and interpretation of a
written or spoken text. Wodak has advanced a detailed, concentrically circular, model of
context:
The smallest circle is the discourse unit itself and the micro-analysis of the text. The next
circle consists of the speakers and audience, of the interactants with their various per-
sonality features, biographies and social roles. The next context level involves the ‘objec-
tive setting’, the location in times and space, the description of the situation. Then, the
next circle signiﬁes the institution in which the event takes place. And we could naturally
expand to the society in which the institution is integrated, its function in society and its
history. … The interaction of all these context levels would then lead to an analysis of
discourse as social practice.
(Wodak 1996: 21)
Critical discourse analysis
449

Much of the discourse-historical approach was cultivated in an interdisciplinary study of post-
war anti-Semitism in Austria (Wodak et al. 2009). Anti-Semitism and racist prejudice gen-
erally are often tacit, which can make it problematic for the writer/speaker to be indicted for
bigotry. Via motion between diﬀerent levels of context, the discourse-historical approach
facilitates revelation of implicitly prejudiced discourse 1. Furthermore, this movement fosters
the identiﬁcation of the codes and allusions which reproduce prejudiced discourse 2. More
generally speaking, the discourse-historical approach seeks to comprehend how discourse 2
helps to generate and reinforce ideas such as ‘race’, ‘nation’ and ‘ethnicity’ (Wodak and Reisgl
2001: 385).
Fairclough’s socio-cultural change approach trains its focus generally on how socio-cultural
change, the globalisation of capitalism and modiﬁcation in discourse are related. He observes
how the border shift between public and private discourse in the late twentieth/early twenty-
ﬁrst century is revealed in texts where subjects are positioned in a more informal, chatty
manner (e.g. in advertising). For this shift in discourse 2, he uses the term conversationalisa-
tion. As public institutions have come more and more within the purview of the ideology of
consumer capitalism, Fairclough notes how the texts of public institutions (e.g. university
Websites) have become more and more conversational, this being more conducive to the sales-pitch
discourse of late twentieth/early twenty-ﬁrst century life (e.g. Fairclough 1995b).
For Fairclough, then, texts are barometers of changes in contemporary capitalism, or what
is also referred to as ‘late modernity’. He contends that ‘late modernity’ is reﬂected in textual
hybridity – the mixing together of diﬀerent genres, styles and discourses:
Late modernity entails a radical unsettling of the boundaries of social life – between
economy and culture, between global and local, and so forth – one aspect of which is an
unsettling of the boundaries between diﬀerent domains of social use of language.
(Chouliaraki and Fairclough 1999: 83)
In tracing textual hybridity as a reﬂex of late modernity, Fairclough more expressly employs
SFL than Wodak or van Dijk (see, for example, Fairclough 2003). Emblematic of his work is
an interest in traversing social theory, which tends not to analyse texts in a detailed linguistic
fashion, and work in text/discourse analysis, which has not traditionally sought to engage with
social theoretical issues. Fairclough’s engagement with critical realism, the social theoretical
approach of Roy Bhaskar, is one such instance (e.g. Fairclough et al. 2002).
I ﬁnish this section by mentioning brieﬂy some other approaches within CDA. Feminist
critical discourse analysis aims to analyse the relationships between gender, language use and
power (see, for example, Lazar 2005; Litosseliti 2006). Sexism and the construction of gender
identity, as well as the appreciation of gender as a dynamic construct, are key foci. Other work
within CDA takes account of the relationship between text and image (or what is known as
multimodal studies, see van Leeuwen, this volume) e.g. Lassen et al. (2006), Kress and van
Leeuven (2006) (which also draws upon SFL).
Aside from van Dijk, there are other scholars working in CDA who saliently draw on/adapt
cognitive theory, particularly the conceptual metaphor theory associated with the work of
George Lakoﬀ(e.g. Lakoﬀ1987; Lakoﬀand Johnson 1980); see, for example, Chilton (1985),
Charteris-Black (2004), Goatly (2007), Koller (2004), Wodak (2006). Hart and Lukeš (2007) is
an anthology which draws together diﬀerent uses of cognitive theory in CDA. Evolutionary
psychology is also drawn upon in more recent CDA (Chilton 2004; 2005; Goatly 2007;
O’Halloran 2005). Chilton (2004) is a key work in CDA which draws on both cognitive theory
and evolutionary theory.
Kieran O’Halloran
450

A counterpoint perspective to CDA is ‘positive discourse analysis’ (e.g. Bartlett 2009;
Martin 2004). The focus here is on understanding and promoting discourse which inspires and
uplifts (e.g. writing by Mandela and Tutu) as well as discourse which is eﬀective in mediation,
diplomacy and promoting reconciliation, peace and happiness. Toolan (1997) calls for a dif-
ferent kind of positive discourse analysis in arguing that it is not enough in CDA to criticise
manipulative representations in texts; CDA should also be explicit about showing what non-
manipulative texts would look like. Finally, inﬂuenced largely by the pioneering work of
Michael Stubbs, there is a host of new scholarship in CDA which uses methods of analysis
from corpus linguistics (see ‘Empirically-driven CDA’ below).
A critical discourse analysis
Let me demonstrate a critical discourse analysis by looking at a short news text which appeared
in the British popular tabloid, the Mirror on 13 August 2007; I have numbered all sentences:
1
Air protesters target travellers
2
Police are on a war footing at the UK’s biggest airport as they wait for 2,000 protesters
determined to cause chaos for three million travellers.
3
The organisers of a week-long Camp for Climate Action are hell-bent on bringing Hea-
throw to a halt in ‘mass direct action’ that could cost tens of millions of pounds.
4
Last night 150 people turned up at a camp on the site of the proposed third runway, the
first of 100 camps expected to be set up around the airport.
5
An 800-strong police force already on terror alert at Heathrow will be joined by up to
1,800 extra officers.
6
Leaked memos sent to airport managers by Heathrow owner BAA reveal what is expected
during the campaign, which starts tomorrow.
7
One said: ‘The means in which campaigners are aiming to achieve their protests will
vary … Blocking roads and railways into Heathrow is a common practice and this was
used last year at the 2006 Drax Climate Camp and at G8 protests in Rostock, Germany.’
8
BAA last week won a High Court injunction banning members of the protest group Plane
Stupid from the airport.
9
But it did not include the Camp for Climate Action.
10
BAA expects demonstrators to pose as passengers to infiltrate the four terminals where it
is feared they will set up fake ticket booths so innocent travellers miss flights.
11
Police are bracing themselves for ‘life-threatening acts’ such as climbing perimeter fences,
blocking runways and disrupting nearby roads, including the M25.
12
Protesters are also expected to try to storm and occupy offices belonging to airport-related
firms and take direct action to disrupt the supply of food for passengers.
13
Huge banners will be dropped in awkward spots around Heathrow to cause traffic chaos
and maximum embarrassment.
14
Also expected are disruption to meetings and seminars.
15
Bosses of major airport firms have been warned to expect ‘custard pie attacks’ and protests
at their homes.
16
BAA has told workers: ‘Remain calm, do not physically touch or engage in discussion with
protesters.’
17
Do not follow a protester into a dangerous situation.
18
BAA warned that three million people could face disruption during the campaign, which
starts tomorrow and runs for a week.
Critical discourse analysis
451

19
Managing Director Mark Bullock said: ‘BAA has always respected people’s democratic
right to protest lawfully.’
20
‘However, we do not believe our passengers and staff should be harassed or obstructed by
any unlawful direct action.’
21
The Camp for Climate Action is an umbrella organisation bringing together environ-
mental protest groups.
22
It is demonstrating against the fifth terminal already being built and the proposed third
runway.
23
68,000 is the number of people employed by Heathrow, including 4,500 BAA staff.
24
It contributes £5bn to UK economy.
25
There are 1.54 Tonnes of CO2 emissions as a result of a return flight to New York,
according to climatecare.org.
(Stephen Moyes; © Mirror Syndication International)
When examining a text for bias, it is worth reﬂecting on how political and cultural attitudes,
for instance, can aﬀect what we regard as bias. Just because we view aspects of a text as
objectionable (politically, culturally, etc.), this does not necessarily mean the text is inherently
biased. It is important, then, to try to separate out our political/cultural, etc. attitudes, and
how they can direct what we regard as bias, from bias which is in a text irrespective of these
attitudes. This is where employing linguistic analysis can help, by allowing us to describe a
text’s meanings systematically. In so doing, it enables us to establish the inherent bias of a text
in a rigorous way while reducing the chance of identifying bits of a text as biased because they
refer to things we ﬁnd undesirable.
One must, however, take care with the term ‘bias’. This is because all texts carry bias in one
way or another. There is no neutral text; bias is a matter of degree. For this reason, many
critical discourse analysts often prefer instead to employ an expression used above – ‘angle of
representation’ – in case by ‘bias’ the impression is given that they are subscribing to the pos-
sibility of a neutral text. However, as long as it is understood that there is no such thing as a
neutral text, my use of ‘bias’ in this chapter is synonymous with ‘angle of representation’.
In the Approaches section above, under ‘Critical linguistics’, you saw reference to a process,
‘shoot dead’. This process is known as a material process in SFL; material processes relate to
the world of matter. There are other processes in SFL (see Halliday and Matthiessen 2004) which
are useful in appreciating a text’s angle of representation. Let me ﬂag two of them, since they will
be useful in critical analysis of the Mirror text: mental processes and verbal processes. These are
concerned respectively with the workings of the mind (e.g. know, believe) and communication
(e.g. speak, inform). To indicate how grammatical subjects, objects, etc. can function diﬀerently
in a clause, SFL assigns various participant roles around diﬀerent process types. Material pro-
cesses are accompanied by Actor (who or what is the ‘doing’ participant) and Goal (who or
what is the ‘done to’ participant). In mental processes, the participant performing the mental
behaviour is termed a Senser. So ‘She’ is a Senser in ‘She believed in God’; ‘God’, i.e. what is
being ‘sensed’, is termed a Phenomenon. In the verbal process, ‘She shouted out “help”’, ‘She’
is termed a Sayer and what is being communicated, ‘help’, is referred to as Verbiage.
Description
An SFL description of the Mirror text’s angle of representation – of its material, mental and
verbal processes and associated participant roles – can be found in the appendix. Let me
summarise the results of this analysis: when protesters are described, it is mostly via material
Kieran O’Halloran
452

processes in which they (or their campaign) are realised as Actor (twenty-six times) and act on
people or things, e.g. in sentence 1:
Air protesters
target
travellers
ACTOR
PROCESS
GOAL
On only three occasions, protesters are realised as Goal, e.g. in sentence 16:
Do not touch
protestors
PROCESS
GOAL
Protesters are not realised as Sayer or Senser.
In contrast, non-protesters are represented not only as Actor (twelve times), e.g. in sentence 8:
High Court injunction
banning
members of the protest group Plane
Stupid
ACTOR
PROCESS
GOAL
but as Senser (eight times), e.g. in sentence 10:
BAA
expects
demonstrators to pose as passengers … miss ﬂights
SENSER
PROCESS
PHENOMENON
and Sayer (six times), e.g. in sentence 18:
BAA
warned
that three million people could face dis-
ruption … week
SAYER
PROCESS
VERBIAGE
The distribution of the participant roles of Actor, Senser and Sayer is more equal for non-
protesters than protesters.
I will move on to an interpretation of these quantitative patterns shortly. Before doing so, I
describe another aspect of the text’s make-up – its stance. This is how a text indicates how
certain the author is about what is being conveyed, that is whether it is certain, probable or
possible. The ﬁrst three sentences, as well as sentences 7 and 13, signal with a stance of
certainty what the protesters intend to/will do, e.g. sentence 2:
Police are on a war footing at the UK’s biggest airport as they wait for 2,000 protesters
determined to cause chaos for three million travellers.
In contrast, there are six sentences which signal a stance of probability about protesters’ action
via the verb ‘expect’, e.g. sentence 10:
Critical discourse analysis
453

BAA
expects
demonstrators
to
pose
as
passengers
to
inﬁltrate
the
four
terminals …
and two sentences which signal a stance of possibility using ‘could’, e.g. sentence 18:
BAA warned that three million people could face disruption during the campaign, which
starts tomorrow and runs for a week.
Now that we have a reasonably sound description of the text, we are in a good place to
interpret and explain it.
Interpretation
Having a quantitative perspective on participant roles is useful because it enables us to see
inconsistencies in their realisation. There is no space given to the protesters as Sayer to
warn, for example, of the ecological eﬀects of increased airplane travel. Neither is there space
given over to protesters as Senser to signal reﬂection on these eﬀects, nor to signal what
protesters believe, and what they hope to achieve, i.e. to prevent huge CO2 emissions which a
new runway and new terminal are likely to bring through increased air traﬃc. Given that
the dominant pattern in the angle of representation is Actor Process Goal, readers may just
view the protestors in terms of the damage they allegedly wish to achieve (cognitive
problem 1).
‘Life-threatening acts’ (sentence 11) is a noun phrase. Since this is nominal, and not clausal,
there is no Actor or Goal. In turn, this leads to an ambiguity: ‘life-threatening’ could be
referring to passengers whose lives are potentially threatened. But it might actually just be
referring to protesters who threaten only their own lives and are therefore of little danger to
the public. The ambiguity of ‘life-threatening acts’ means it may sound more alarmist to the
reader than what actually occurred (cognitive problem 2).
‘Embarrassment’ (sentence 13) is also nominal rather than clausal, so we do not know who
the alleged target of the embarrassment is. As such, ‘embarrassment’ can be seen as strategi-
cally vague (cognitive problem 3).
‘Disruption’ (sentence 18) is a nominalisation and so again one can read this as strategic
vagueness. Is disruption a serious delay to a ﬂight, a delay in supply of food to passengers or
merely a restriction on shopping in an airport mall? (cognitive problem 4).
Lastly, compare sentence 2 with sentence 18. Sentence 2, which immediately follows the
headline ‘Air protesters target travellers’ suggests through its strong stance that the protesters
are intensely set on aﬀecting passengers. The sensationalist lexis of ‘war-footing’ and ‘chaos’
reinforces this. But much later in the news article, in sentence 18, we ﬁnd that the information
in sentence 2 is only based on a BAA prediction. There is no longer the strong stance
(as evidenced by use of ‘could’), and the sensationalist chaos has been toned down to
‘disruption’. There is, then, a tension, if not a contradiction, between sentences 2 and 18
(cognitive problem 5).
Explanation
The text does ideological work by promoting the advantage to a country’s economy of
an airport (e.g. sentence 24), and implicitly over detrimental eﬀects to the environment.
Climate change/global warming has been exacerbated by the globalisation of capitalism, in
Kieran O’Halloran
454

which the leisure/holiday industry forms an important part. This form of econo-politics
brings beneﬁts to many people, but in its augmenting of the exercising of consumer rights
(in this case the right to purchase air tickets), it inadvertently marginalises a discourse 2 of
social duty (in this case, not to travel by plane so as to reduce CO2 emissions). The
discourse
of consumer rights (e.g. ‘I have a right to purchase air travel which shouldn’t be
disrupted’) could well be cued by the text since the dominant angle of representation pattern
of the text is how protesters will negatively aﬀect passengers. As a result of this dominant
pattern, the chances of a discourse 2 of social duty being cued in relation to reducing
CO2 emissions is not so high. While sentence 25 hints at this discourse, is it likely to be eﬀec-
tive in cueing it? There does not seem to be a reason why only a return ﬂight to New York
is focused on when Heathrow airport is a hub for so many global destinations; this sentence
is largely irrelevant anyway since it is not grounded in predictions of CO2 yield as a result of
the extra runway or ﬁfth terminal. It is also the last sentence and so, one might argue, its
salience is diminished since impact in hard news texts is usually in headlines and opening
paragraphs.
Empirically driven CDA
As I said earlier with reference to the description stage, it is important to be as rigorous and
comprehensive as possible (although for reasons of space the above analysis lacks an ideal
level of comprehensiveness). This is because when critical discourse analysts have not used
linguistic analysis rigorously, consistently or as comprehensively as possible given their parti-
cular focus, they have been vulnerable to the following: charges that their analyses of texts are
subjective because they are inﬂuenced by their own political commitments and thus that they
‘cherry-pick’ facets of text to focus on which ﬁt a pre-ﬁgured interpretation. This is a critique
of CDA made in Widdowson (2004). (See also criticisms by Billig (2003); Blommaert (2005);
Hammersley (1997); Stubbs (1997); Toolan (1997) as well as those referred to in Cook, this
volume).
When there is empirically based investigation which can illuminate audience response or the
aspects of a text that the audience is likely to notice, CDA is in a better place to defend its
analyses against accusations of: (i) arbitrariness of analysis; (ii) circularity from analysis to
interpretation and back to analysis. See, for example, Murata (2007) who uses reader-response
data in her critical discourse analysis and Bartlett (2004) who combines ethnographic data
with SFL. Wodak’s discourse-historical approach has often involved ethnographic investiga-
tion (see Maybin and Tusting, this volume) of how subjects engage with texts which, in turn,
helps to reduce analyst subjectivity in textual interpretation. Moreover, the recent use of large
reference corpora (see Adolphs and Lin, this volume) in CDA for purposes of comparison
with the text(s) under investigation helps to reduce arbitrariness, and thus analyst sub-
jectivity, in the choice of salient textual features (for examples of corpus-based CDA, see
Baker et al. (2008); Charteris-Black (2004); Hidalgo Tenorio (2009); Koller and Davidson
(2008); Krishnamurthy (1996); Mautner (2009); O’Halloran (2007, 2009); Stubbs (1996, 2001).
Indeed, the linkage between the qualitative text analysis of CDA and the statistically based
quantitative analysis of corpus linguistics is proving not only to enhance rigour but also
insight in the description, interpretation and explanation of language use. Having said this,
ultimately the most comprehensive and satisfactory CDA, like any form of discourse analysis,
cannot limit itself to text/corpus analysis; it would also need to include a detailed qualitative
and quantitative empirical investigation of text production and/or its reception in particular
discourse practices.
Critical discourse analysis
455

Appendix
Table 31.1 SFL description of The Mirror text’s angle of representation
Protesters as Actor
Material processes
Goal
1. Air protesters
target
travellers
2. 2,000 protesters
to cause
chaos
3. The organisers…Action
bringing to a halt
Heathrow
4. 150 people
turned up
4. [Protesters]
to be set up
100 camps
6. The campaign
starts
7. Campaigners
are aiming to achieve
their protests
7. The means…protests
will vary
7. [Protesters]
blocking
roads and railways
7. [Protesters]
was used
blocking roads and railways
10. Demonstrators
to pose
10. Demonstrators
to inﬁltrate
the four terminals
10. They [Demonstrators]
will set up
fake ticket booths
11. [Demonstrators]
climbing
11. [Demonstrators]
blocking
runways
11. [Demonstrators]
disrupting
nearby roads
12. Protesters
to try to storm/to occupy
ofﬁces belonging…ﬁrms
12. [Protesters]
take
direct action
12. [Protesters]
to disrupt
the supply of food
13. [Protesters]
will be dropped
huge banners
13. [Huge banners]
to cause
trafﬁc chaos; maximum
embarrassment
18. campaign
starts
18. campaign
runs
20. any unlawful action
should be harassed/
obstructed
our passengers and staff
21. The Camp for Climate
Action
bringing together
environmental protest groups
22. The Camp for Climate
Action
is demonstrating against
the ﬁfth terminal…runway
Protesters as Goal
Material processes
Actor
16. protesters
not touch
16. protesters
not engage
17. a protester
not follow
Non-protesters as Actor
Material processes
Goal
2. Police
wait
5. by up to 1,800 extra
ofﬁcers
will be joined
An 800-strong police force…
6. Heathrow owner BAA
sent
leaked memos
8. BAA
won
a High Court injunction
8. High Court injunction
banning
members of…Plane Stupid
10. Innocent travellers
miss
ﬂights
Kieran O’Halloran
456

Related topics
corpus linguistics; discourse analysis; linguistic ethnography; multimodality; stylistics; systemic
functional linguistics
Further reading
Chilton, P. (2004) Analysing Political Discourse, London: Routledge. (An important cognitive
perspective in CDA.)
Fairclough, N. (2001) Language and Power, 2nd edn, Harlow: Longman. (A key work in CDA
which contains the most commonly used framework for analysis.)
O’Halloran, K. A. (2003) Critical Discourse Analysis and Language Cognition, London: Routledge.
(Questions cognitive assumptions within critical linguistics.)
Widdowson, H. G. (2004) Text, Context, Pretext: Critical Issues in Discourse Analysis, Oxford:
Blackwell. (Contains lucid and illuminating critical engagements with analyses in CDA.)
Wodak, R., de Cillia, R., Reisigl, M. and Liebhart, K. (2009) The Discursive Construction of
National Identity, 2nd edn, Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press. (An intellectually rich and
signiﬁcant milestone work in CDA.)
Table 31.1 (continued)
Protesters as Actor
Material processes
Goal
11. Police
are bracing
themselves
18. three million people
could face
disruption
19. BAA
has respected
people’s…lawfully
19. people
to protest
22.
being built
ﬁfth terminal
23. Heathrow
employed
68,000 people
24. Heathrow
contributes
£5bn
Non-protesters as Senser
Mental processes
Phenomenon (or projected clause)
4. [BAA]
expected
100 camps to be set up
6. [BAA]
is expected
[to happen] during the campaign
10. BAA
expects
Demonstrators…four terminals
10. [BAA]
is feared
[demonstrators] will set up…miss
ﬂights
12. [BAA and Police]
are expected
to try to storm … passengers.
14. [BAA and Police]
are expected
disruption to meetings and seminars
15. Bosses of major airport
ﬁrms
to expect
‘custard pie attacks’…homes
20. BAA
do not believe
our passengers…direct action
Non-protesters as Sayer
Verbal processes
Verbiage
6. leaked memos…BAA
reveal
what is expected during the campaign
7. One [Leaked memo]
said
‘The means…Rostock, Germany’
15. [BAA]
have been warned
to expect…homes.
16-17. BAA
has told
‘Remain calm…situation.’
18. BAA
warned
that three million people could…a
week.
19. Managing Director Mark
Bullock
said
‘BAA has always…lawfully’
Critical discourse analysis
457

References
Baker, P., Gabrielatos, C., KhosraviNik, M., Krzyzanowski, M., McEnery, T. and Wodak, R.
(2008) ‘A useful methodological synergy? Combining critical discourse analysis and corpus lin-
guistics to examine discourses of refugees and asylum seekers in the UK press’, Discourse and
Society 19(3): 273–306.
Bartlett, T. (2004) ‘Mapping distinction: towards a systemic representation of power in language’, in
L. Young and C. Harrison (eds) Systemic Functional Linguistics and Critical Discourse Analysis:
Studies in Social Change, London: Continuum.
——(2009) ‘Towards intervention in positive discourse analysis’, in C. Coﬃn, T. Lillis and
K. A. O’Halloran (eds) Applied Linguistics Methods: A Reader, London: Routledge.
Billig, M. (2003) ‘Critical discourse analysis and the rhetoric of critique’, in G. Weiss and R. Wodak (eds)
Critical Discourse Analysis: Theory and Interdisciplinarity, Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan.
Blommaert, J. (2005) Discourse: A Critical Introduction, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Charteris-Black, J. (2004) Corpus Approaches to Critical Metaphor Analysis, Basingstoke: Palgrave
Macmillan.
Chilton, P. (1985) ‘Words, discourse and metaphors: the meanings of deter, deterrent and deter-
rence’, in P. Chilton (ed.) Language and the Nuclear Arms Debate, London: Pinter.
——(2004) Analysing Political Discourse, London: Routledge.
——(2005) ‘Missing links in mainstream CDA: modules, blends and the critical instinct’, in
R. Wodak and P. Chilton (eds) A New Agenda in (Critical) Discourse Analysis, Amsterdam: John
Benjamins.
Chouliaraki, L. and Fairclough, N. (1999) Discourse in Late Modernity: Rethinking Critical Dis-
course Analysis, Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press.
Coﬃn, C. and O’Halloran, K. A. (2006) ‘The role of appraisal and corpora in detecting covert
evaluation’, Functions of Language 13(1): 77–110.
Fairclough, N. (1995a) Critical Discourse Analysis: The Critical Study of Language, London: Longman.
——(1995b) Media Discourse, London: Edward Arnold.
——(2001) Language and Power, 2nd edn, Harlow: Longman.
——(2003) Analysing Discourse: Textual Analysis for Social Research, London: Routledge.
Fairclough, N., Jessop, R. and Sayer, A. (2002) ‘Critical realism and semiosis’, Journal of Critical
Realism 5(1): 2–10.
Fairclough, N. and Wodak, R. (1997) ‘Critical discourse analysis’, in T. A. van Dijk (ed.) Discourse as
Social Interaction, London: Sage.
Foucault, M. (1972) The Order of Things, London: Tavistock.
Fowler, R. (1991) Language in the News: Discourse and Ideology in the Press, London: Routledge.
Fowler, R., Hodge, R., Kress, G. and Trew, T. (1979) Language and Control, London: Routledge/
Kegan Paul.
Goatly, A. (2007) Washing the Brain: Metaphor and Hidden Ideology, Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Halliday, M. A. K. and Matthiessen, C. M. I. M. (2004) An Introduction to Functional Grammar,
3rd edn, London: Hodder Arnold.
Hammersley, M. (1997) ‘On the foundations of critical discourse analysis’, Language and Commu-
nication 17(3): 237–48.
Hart, C. and Lukeš, D. (eds) (2007) Cognitive Linguistics in Critical Discourse Studies, Cambridge:
Cambridge Scholars Press.
Hidalgo Tenorio, E. (2009) ‘The metaphorical construction of Ireland’, in K. Ahrens (ed.) Politics,
Gender and Conceptual Metaphors, Basingstoke and New York: Palgrave Macmillan.
Koller, V. (2004) Metaphor and Gender in Business Media Discourse: A Critical Cognitive Study,
Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan.
Koller, V. and Davidson, P. (2008) ‘Social exclusion as conceptual and grammatical metaphor: a
cross-genre study of British policy-making’, Discourse and Society 19(3): 307–31.
Kress, G. and Hodge, R. (1979) Language as Ideology, London: Routledge.
Kress, G. and van Leeuwen, T. (eds) (2006) Reading Images: The Grammar of Visual Design, 2nd
edn, London: Routledge.
Krishnamurthy, R. (1996) ‘Ethnic, racial and tribal: the language of racism?’, in C. Caldas-Coulthard
and C. Coulthard (eds) Texts and Practices: Readings in Critical Discourse Analysis, London:
Routledge.
Kieran O’Halloran
458

Lakoﬀ, G. (1987) Women, Fire, and Dangerous Things: What Categories Reveal about the Mind,
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Lakoﬀ, G. and Johnson, M. (1980) Metaphors We Live By, Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Lassen, I., Strunck, J. and Verstergaard, T. (eds) (2006) Mediating Ideology in Text and Image,
Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Lazar, M. (ed.) (2005) Feminist Critical Discourse Analysis: Gender, Power and Ideology in Discourse,
Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan.
Litosseliti, L. (2006) Gender and Language: Theory and Practice, London: Hodder Arnold.
Martin, J. (2004) ‘Positive discourse analysis: power, solidarity and change’, Revista Canaria de
Estudios Ingleses 49: 179–200.
Mautner, G. (2009) ‘Checks and balances: how corpus linguistics can contribute to CDA’, in
R. Wodak and M. Meyer (eds) Methods of Critical Discourse Analysis, 2nd edn, London: Sage.
Murata, K. (2007) ‘Unanswered questions: cultural assumptions in text interpretation’, International
Journal of Applied Linguistics 17(1): 38–59.
O’Halloran, K. A. (2003) Critical Discourse Analysis and Language Cognition, Edinburgh: Edinburgh
University Press.
——(2005) ‘Mystiﬁcation and social agent absences: a critical discourse analysis using evolutionary
psychology’, Journal of Pragmatics 37(12): 1945–64.
——(2007) ‘Critical discourse analysis and the corpus-informed interpretation of metaphor at the
register level’, Applied Linguistics 28(1): 1–24.
——(2009) ‘Inferencing and cultural reproduction: a corpus-based critical discourse analysis’, Text
and Talk 29(1): 21–51.
Stubbs, M. (1996) Text and Corpus Analysis: Computer-assisted Studies of Language and Culture,
Oxford: Blackwell.
——(1997) ‘Whorf’s children: critical comments on critical discourse analysis’ in A. Ryan and
A. Wray (eds) Evolving Models of Language: British Studies in Applied Linguistics 12, Clevedon:
BAAL/Multilingual Matters.
——(2001) Words and Phrases: Corpus Studies of Lexical Semantics, Oxford: Blackwell.
Toolan, M. J. (1997), ‘What is critical discourse analysis and why are people saying such terrible
things about it?’, Language and Literature 6(2): 83–103.
Trew, T. (1979), ‘Theory and ideology at work’, in R. Fowler, R. Hodge, G. Kress, and T. Trew,
Language and Control, London: Routledge/Kegan Paul.
van Dijk, T. A. (1991) Racism and the Press: Critical Studies in Racism and Migration, London:
Routledge.
——(1997) ‘The study of discourse’, in T. A. van Dijk (ed.) Discourse as Structure and Process,
London: Sage.
——(1998) Ideology: A Multidisciplinary Approach, London: Sage.
——(2001) ‘Multidisciplinary CDA: a plea for diversity’, in R. Wodak and M. Meyer (eds) Methods
of Critical Discourse Analysis, London: Sage.
White, P. R. R. (2004) ‘Subjectivity, evaluation and point of view in media discourse’, in C. Coﬃn,
A. Hewings and K. A. O’Halloran (eds) Applying English Grammar: Functional and Corpus
Approaches, London: Hodder Arnold.
Widdowson, H. G. (2004) Text, Context, Pretext: Critical Issues in Discourse Analysis, Oxford:
Blackwell.
Wodak, R. (1996) Disorders of Discourse, London: Longman.
——(2001) ‘What CDA is about: a summary of its history, important concepts and its developments’,
in R. Wodak, and M. Meyer (eds) Methods of Critical Discourse Analysis, London: Sage.
——(2006) ‘Mediation between discourse and society: assessing cognitive approaches in CDA’,
Discourse Studies 8(1): 179–90.
Wodak, R., de Cillia, R., Reisigl, M. and Liebhart, K. (2009) The Discursive Construction of
National Identity, 2nd edn, Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press.
Wodak, R. and Reisgl, M. (2001) ‘Discourse and racism’, in D. Schiﬀren, D. Tannen and
H. E. Hamilton (eds) The Handbook of Discourse Analysis, Oxford: Blackwell.
Young, L. and Harrison, C. (eds) (2004) Systemic Functional Linguistics and Critical Discourse
Analysis: Studies in Social Change, London: Continuum.
Critical discourse analysis
459

32
Neurolinguistics
Elisabeth Ahlsén
Introduction: what is neurolinguistics?
The broad deﬁnition of neurolinguistics is that it is the study of language in relation to the
brain. This makes it truly interdisciplinary, involving, for example, neuroscience, psychology,
linguistics, speech pathology and biology. It also involves the use of a multitude of research
methods, such as experimental research, neuroimaging, simulation of brain processes and
video recording of spoken interaction. Traditionally, the study of people with brain damage,
especially acquired brain damage, which causes a language disorder, has dominated the ﬁeld.
Neurolinguistics can, however, also be about how the brain and human language and com-
munication developed during evolution and how they develop in children and adults; it can
also be about making computer simulations of linguistic processing by the brain; and it can be
about localizing activity in parts of the brain involved in language processing by using neuro-
imaging methods. Neurolinguists can be focused on any of these aspects or on combinations of
them. This overview will begin with some of the historical developments of neurolinguistics; it
will then give examples of how research in diﬀerent areas of neurolinguistics is pursued.
Methods in neurolinguistics will be described and research dealing with diﬀerent aspects of
linguistics – phonology, morphology, syntax, semantics, pragmatics, multilingualism and reading
and writing processes – will be presented. Finally, current trends and future trajectories in
neurolinguistics are outlined.
A historical overview
Although the term ‘neurolinguistics’ was not introduced until the late 1970s, in a series of
volumes called Studies in Neurolinguistics edited by Whitaker et al. (1976–9), the interest in
studying language in relation to the brain dates far back, probably even as far as Egypt over
5,000 years ago, when trepanation, i.e. drilling holes in the skull bone, was practised as a way
to release evil spirits that made people ‘quiet from sadness’. Many observations of brain
damage and language problems were made, often as case studies. In ancient Greece, Plato
thought of the brain as controlling thought and action, whereas Aristotle thought of the heart
as the site of the human soul and the brain as regulating temperature by controlling cooling
460

ﬂuids. In general, there was for a long time a focus on the liquid in the ventricles (holes) of the
brain, perhaps also because it was noticed early that consciousness was lost when there was a
deep brain lesion aﬀecting the ventricles. It also seemed natural to connect a dynamic ﬂow
with the ﬂow of thoughts. Language was therefore, for example, seen as placed in the fourth
ventricle, and a loss of speech could be connected to phlegm making the ﬂow of liquid in the
fourth ventricle slow down. In the seventeenth century, there was a strong wish to connect the
soul, and thereby thought and language, to a unitary centre in the brain. Candidate structures
were the pineal gland, which is central in the brain and which Descartes saw as the centre of
the soul, and the corpus callosum, which is also central and connects the two hemispheres of
the brain and was suggested by Willis. There was a long conﬂict between the view supported
by the church, that the human soul had to be one, and thus have one organ as its site, and
researchers who tried to locate diﬀerent abilities or faculties in diﬀerent areas of the brain.
Already in the Roman era, the importance of the cortex, i.e. the surface layer of the two
hemispheres, was recognized. In the nineteenth century, there was a renewed interest in loca-
lizing brain functions in diﬀerent cortical areas, starting with Gall, who outlined the location
of twenty-six human faculties, which he identiﬁed from a study of biographies, in a map of the
surface on the cortex (Gall and Spurzheim 1810–19). His method of crainoscopy, i.e. studying
the size of diﬀerent areas of the skull to identify faculties, later fell into disrepute. He did,
however, have supporters in the French Anthropological Society, who set out to prove that
Gall’s assumptions about speech and memory for words being placed in the frontal lobe. Thus,
Bouillaud and Auburtin tried to demonstrate that this was true, for example, by referring to
cases that could support the claim. Paul Broca, who is often claimed to be the father of neuro-
linguistics, also demonstrated to the Society the brain of his patient Leborgne, usually referred
to as Tan (because that was all he said) in 1861. He had predicted that the brain would have a
lesion in the left frontal lobe and this turned out to be true, when the brain was dissected as a
demonstration to the Society. He also identiﬁed the area for speech production as situated in
the left frontal lobe in 1865. Shortly thereafter, Carl Wernicke discovered another cortical area,
more posterior in the temporal and to some extent parietal lobes, which was connected to the
ability to understand language; he started to sketch a model of language processing by the
brain, which covered perception and production by repetition of words. This model was later
extended by Lichtheim, who added a not clearly localized ‘concept center’ for the under-
standing and generation of speech. The ﬁndings by Broca and Wernicke relating descriptions
and demonstrations of brain damage to certain areas of the cortex related to speech produc-
tion and speech comprehension respectively (Broca 1861, 1865; Wernicke 1874) are often
considered the starting point of what today is called neurolinguistics. Following their descrip-
tions, localism and associationism, i.e. trying to ﬁnd speciﬁc areas in the brain for speciﬁc
language functions and trying to make models based also on the connections between such
areas and the role of these connections, continued. In parallel, there was also a more
‘holistic’ and evolutionary development started by J. H. Jackson in 1874 and emphasizing the
interplay between evolutionary primary and deep (subcortical) brain structures and more recently
developed cortical areas in language functions (i.e. more automatized versus more consciously
planned language). There were also, during the nineteenth and twentieth centuries, theories
inspired by, for example, gestalt psychology searching for an underlying important cognitive
ability, such as intelligence, abstraction or the ability to use symbols, as the crucial ability
being damaged in aphasia (e.g. Marie, Glodstein, Head). In 1965, the model designed by
Wernicke and Lichtheim was revived by Geschwind in his book Disconnection Syndromes
in Animals and Man and became the basis of the most widely used classiﬁcation of aphasic
syndromes (see below).
Neurolinguistics
461

Some classical frameworks in neurolinguistics
Three main classical inﬂuencing frameworks in neurolinguistics are

The classical view building on Broca, Wernicke, Geschwind and co-workers from the Boston
Aphasia Research Center (e.g. Goodglass and Kaplan 1973), which mainly identiﬁes cortical
centres and connections between centres, where lesions can cause diﬀerent types of aphasia.

The view of Alexander Luria (e.g. 1976) where dynamic functional systems consisting of
several sub-functions in diﬀerent brain areas handle language functions and can be disrupted
or reorganized by lesions in these areas.

The more evolution-based, hierarchical (sometimes called more holistic) view of language
processes ‘repeating evolution’ by activation from the older and deeper parts of the brain to
the later developed and more specialized cortical areas. This view was proposed by John
Hughlings Jackson (1932) and further developed by Jason Brown (1977, 1988) in his theory
of ‘microgenesis’.
Although none of the three frameworks provides the whole truth about brain and language, they
have framed the thinking of researchers in neurolinguistics, who have used the terminology
and models they developed. Today, there are no comprehensive frameworks to take their place
and it is probably fair to say that they all contribute parts of our available information, but that we
now have many more ﬁndings that have to be clariﬁed and which can only partly be explained
using the three frameworks. Many researchers, however, still build on parts or combinations of them.
Although many of the classical views and frameworks listed above are still to some extent
adequate, current theories as well as data point to far more complex interactions between
many diﬀerent parts of the brain in language processing. There is less focus on the left hemi-
sphere than before, although it is still considered crucial for the sequencing and rhythm of
syntax and phonology. The right hemisphere, with its possibly more holistic and spatial focus,
including parts of semantic and pragmatic processing, as well as subcortical structures, such as
the limbic system, the thalamus and the cerebellum, have come much more into focus. This is
connected to neuroimaging ﬁndings of activation and to the increased interest in emotion and
volition raised by evolutionary studies. It is also connected to the development in linguistics,
with its increased interest in semantics and especially pragmatics and with the focus on
embodiment, which means that multimodal communication is included. Due to these devel-
opments, the delimitation of what is neurolinguistics has changed in terms of what parts of the
brain and what parts of language and communication should be studied. Patterns and circuits
of activation related to diﬀerent language processing tasks are the main target of most neuro-
linguistic studies using measurement and imaging of brain activation. The role of diﬀerent
systems of transmittor substances aﬀecting the activation patterns of cells and cell assemblies
is, on a more micro level, also intensively studied.
Research areas in neurolinguistics
After this general introduction, it is time to turn to some of the main research areas in
neurolinguistics.
Brain damage and language disorders
This has been by far the most central area with a long tradition of aphasiology studying dif-
ferent aspects of language after brain lesions with diﬀerent localizations and using this to
Elisabeth Ahlsén
462

design, inspire, conﬁrm, challenge and further develop psycholinguistic models of linguistic
processing. A further aim has been to use models and ﬁndings in developing more reﬁned
methods for investigating and treating various types or aspects of aphasia. Diﬀerent approa-
ches have been used, depending on the focus of the studies. One tradition, mainly originating
from British studies, is to use psycholinguistic models and only indirectly refer to brain loca-
lizations (clinical neuropsychology, e.g. Kay et al. 1992). Another tradition is to build on a
traditional neurolinguistic model and try to extend parts of it to directly relate areas of the
brain to speciﬁc linguistic symptoms of people with aphasia. By using this approach, neuro-
linguistics has developed more extended typologies of aphasia syndromes, speciﬁc process
modelling of linguistic production and perception of spoken and written language, and further
linkage of brain areas to speciﬁc functions involved in sub-processes of language functions.
Localization of language function
Currently, the most common ways of studying the relationship between speciﬁc brain areas and
language functions are brain activation studies using neuroimaging techniques. The expansion
of possibilities to study brain activation during language processing during the last twenty
years has been revolutionary for neurolinguistics. It provides the possibility of testing hypoth-
eses by performing reliable group experiments involving linguistic tasks with registrations of
brain activity in subjects without brain damage. This has led to a number of creative approa-
ches, which are continuously coming up with new ﬁndings and hypotheses. There has not,
however, been a corresponding updating of frameworks for description and explanation, so the
current state of the art is characterized by a number of ﬁndings about language and brain
activation, but no comprehensive and coherent theory or framework.
The evolution of language and brain
Part of the fascination with many of the studies of brain activation performed today stems
from the ﬁnding of mirror neurons in macaques, which was made by Rizzolatti and coworkers
in 1996 using single cell electrodes for registration. Mirror neurons are single neurons activated
both by action and perception, for example both by performing and by watching the hand
movement of grasping an object. Findings of ‘mirroring functions’ of brain areas as located by
functional magnetic resonance imaging have given rise to new ideas about action-perception
relations, also in language. The fact that Broca’s area developed on top of the area where
mirror neurons were found in macaques has given rise to hypotheses about the evolution of
language from grasping movements via gestures to language production in ‘verb-object’ con-
structions (Arbib 2005). This has also lead to a renewed interest in the motor theory of speech
perception (Lieberman 1998).
There are a number of related areas that are also studied by neurolinguists, e.g. the devel-
opment of language and brain in children, and artiﬁcial intelligence simulation of language
and communication. Two areas that will be presented below are reading and writing disorders,
especially dyslexia, and multilingualism.
In all of the above areas, diﬀerent views of what language is in relation to cognitive func-
tions are set against each other. How much of our linguistic ability is hard-wired and con-
genital versus how much is learned from external stimuli? To what extent is language a
separate ability emanating from a mutation and present only in humans, versus how much is it
the result of more gradual evolution and to some extent present also in other primates? The
ﬁrst alternatives in these two questions have been proposed by Chomsky (1992), Pinker (1994)
Neurolinguistics
463

and others, who claim that ‘linguistic ability’ (which in their terminology stands for syntax,
morphology and phonology) is speciﬁc, unique to humans and to a large extent pre-wired.
Other, more functionalist oriented researchers, such as Bates (Bates et al. 1998) and Tomasello
(2008) claim that external stimuli and imitation are crucial and that more general cognitive
abilities provide the prerequisites for language development. This is the view associated with
research on embodied cognition and communication.
Methods and technology in neurolinguistic research
Methods for measuring and visualizing brain activity
As mentioned in the introduction, many and vastly diﬀerent methods can be used for the study
of brain and language. In early case studies, disturbance of some aspect of language processing
was related to areas of the brain which could be identiﬁed only by post mortem dissection.
Later, computed tomography (CT), a radiographic method showing X-ray attenuation and
thus density variations in brain tissue, and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), measurement
of magnetic activity of hydrogen, made it possible to get a ‘picture’ of the brain lesion. Today,
most studies in neurolinguistics are based on dynamic measurement of brain activation.
Such methods are functional MRI (fMRI) and positron emission tomography (PET). In
fMRI, magnetic resonance imaging detects changes in regional blood-oxygen levels (Blood
Oxygen Level Dependent signal – BOLD), associated with neural activity and thus identiﬁes
dynamic activation patterns, for example, when performing a language task. PET traces
injected radioactive positron isotopes tagged with water molecules or glucose. Neural
patterns of activation can then be identiﬁed from emitted gamma rays. SPECT (single photon
emission tomography) measures cerebral blood ﬂow (rCBF) from a single gamma ray.
Dynamic measurements are also made by using electroencephalography (EEG), showing the
electrical activity (brain waves) from brain cells by ﬁxing electrodes to the scalp. EEG mea-
surements can be used with repeated stimuli, where the resulting recurring potential can be
identiﬁed by an average change over numerous events. This technique is called event related
potentials (ERP) and has proven very useful in neurolinguistic studies. Magnetoencephalo-
graphy (MEG) measures electrical activity related to neural transmission. It is a fairly direct
type of measurement, which does not require averaging and can, thus, be used in single case
studies.
Using TMS (transcranial magnetic stimulation) by applying magnetic impulses to a speciﬁc
region, it is also possible to disturb the function of this region and in this way simulate brain
damage and study the temporary eﬀects of this.
Methods for simulating language functions and language loss using ANN
There are two main types of modelling: symbol processing (based on traditional box-and-
arrow models) and artiﬁcial neural network (ANN) modelling. Hybrid models also exist.
ANN modelling is, for example, described by Franklin (1999) and Murre and Goebel (1996).
Basically, an ANN model builds on simpliﬁed principles from real neural networks and con-
sists of layers of nodes with interconnections. The nodes function as model ‘neurons’ which
ﬁre if the sum of activation hitting them exceeds a threshold value. Activations can be modi-
ﬁed and the network can learn by matching a repeated input to a desired output. It is possible
to model lesions in the network by, for example, removing nodes or distorting the ﬂow of
activation between the nodes. If diﬀerent linguistic ‘layers’ are modelled, it is thus possible to
Elisabeth Ahlsén
464

simulate the symptoms of a particular person with an acquired language disorder, by adapting
the network to the behaviour of that person.
Methods for studying linguistic behaviour in neurolinguistics
The methods used for studying linguistic behaviour in neurolinguistics overlaps with methods
used in psycholinguistics, pragmatics and conversation analysis (see also Field, this volume;
Cook, this volume). There is a heavy emphasis on oﬀ-line and especially on-line experimental
designs and testing, supplemented by questionnaires and interviews and, in the pragmatic
tradition, video recording or keystroke logging and analysis of naturalistic communication.
The main characteristic of neurolinguistics is the clear and explicit link to the brain, in one of
two ways: (i) by studying people with brain damage, and (ii) by measuring brain activation
more or less directly, e.g. by imaging techniques or by measuring reaction times and relating
them to processing models.
Methods and technologies in clinical and other applications
Neurolinguistics has a strong tradition of direct links to treatment of language disorders after
acquired brain injury (aphasia). Many studies are performed by clinicians and studies of
treatment eﬀects are common. The main traditional neurolinguistic frameworks of the Boston
group and Luria are still widely applied in diagnosing aphasia by identifying aphasia types or
syndromes, for example by using the Boston Diagnostic Aphasia Examination (BDAE)
(Goodglass and Kaplan 1973) or Luria’s neuropsychological investigation (Christensen 1974).
Psycholinguistic process models of the symbol manipulation type are used as a basis for
interpreting disruptions of linguistic processing in the PALPA (Psycholinguistic Assessment of
Language Processing in Aphasia) (Kay et al. 1992). Pragmatics-based studies of conversation
phenomena, the use of gestures and other strategies, including repair, have inspired many
speech and language therapists and have promoted the introduction of training of conversation
strategies for patients, medical staﬀand family members. There is, however, a considerable
time lag between neurolinguistic research and clinical application of its results in most cases,
due to the fairly time-consuming development of clinically useful methods. The most recent
trends in research are therefore not always directly reﬂected in therapy.
Neurolinguistics and aspects of language
A closer look at some neurolinguistic studies of particular phenomena or systems of language
will hopefully give a more concrete picture of what neurolinguists can typically do. This will be
illustrated by selected examples. (The diﬀerent aspects of language per se are described in
chapters of this volume on phonetics and phonology, grammar, lexis and discourse and also
on multimodality and multilingualism.)
Phonology
In phonology, a recurring question is whether there is a particular basic processing unit and
what that unit might be. Candidates have been phonemes (the smallest meaning-distinguishing
units between words), phonological features, such as voicing, place or manner of articulation.
The syllable is another candidate which has proven very useful in the study of language dis-
orders. For example, the sonority of a syllable rises to the peak of the syllable – a vowel – and
Neurolinguistics
465

then recedes. Sonority is important for patients with phonological problems and this aﬀects
which consonant in a consonant cluster is preserved and which is omitted. It also causes
vowel-insertions between the consonants in a cluster, which then makes more, but less com-
plex, syllables. By referring to sonority it is thus possible to explain why certain phonological
structures appear in phonological errors and others do not.
Grammar
In the study of grammar of people with language disorders, mainly agrammatism (i.e. a lim-
ited ‘telegram style’ grammar, with omissions and substitutions of grammatical morphemes),
diﬀerent hypotheses about grammatical processing have been proposed. One is the mapping
hypothesis, which claims that it is the mapping between the semantic roles (such as agent and
patient) of a sentence and parts of speech that is disturbed. A consequence of this hypothesis
would be that other strategies are overused, for example, that the ﬁrst noun represents the
agent or that the noun that represents the semantically most likely agent is assigned the agent
role, in comprehension. A second hypothesis, the adaptation hypothesis, assumes that agram-
matism is an adaptation to a restricted time for processing which does not allow for complex
or elaborated sentence structures. This leads to the use of a restricted register with short and
simple structures that can be processed fast. According to a third hypothesis, the trace deletion
hypothesis, traces of moved elements in syntactic tree structures (according to Chomskyan
theories of syntax) are deleted in agrammatism, leaving certain structures remaining. In the
framework of embodied communication and mirror neuron-based hypotheses, grammar, which
relates to Broca’s area, is in focus when relating basic actions, especially a grasping hand
movement, to verb-object structures in grammar through an evolutionary process where
actions and gestures develop into language (cf. Arbib 2005).
In descriptions of agrammatism, the relatively limited grammatical morphology has been the
target of many studies. Cross-linguistic comparisons of agrammatic speech have led to a
description of agrammatic morphology as not only loss, but also substitution of grammatical
morphemes, especially free morphemes (more than preﬁxes and suﬃxes) and problems also
with main verbs.
Lexical semantics
Since word ﬁnding and object naming problems, so-called anomia, is a cardinal feature of
aphasia and semantically based word substitutions often occur, lexical semantic theories have
come into use in trying to describe and explain what happens in the word processing of people
with these symptoms. Descriptions have used semantic features as potential units to be mod-
iﬁed, for example gender in the case of substituting girl for boy. Semantic networks have also
been used. In the example, girl and boy would be close to each other in such a network and
have many connections to other words in common. A third way of describing lexical semantic
disorders in aphasia is to use prototype theory, where a typical exemplar is central in a pro-
totype ﬁeld with less typical items more in the periphery of the ﬁeld. A typical dog could, for
example, be a terrier with more exotic dog types like Great Danes and Chihuahuas more
peripherally represented. The words for more prototypical items would be easier to ﬁnd. For
example, it has been shown that word training for more peripheral items results in better
naming of more central items, whereas the opposite course of action does not show these
results for more periheral items (Kiran et al. 2005). Although many studies of naming have
focused on nouns, comparisons with naming of actions by verbs have attracted increasing
Elisabeth Ahlsén
466

interest, and the question of how verbs and nouns are encoded and retrieved is the focus of
many studies. Here, of course, the role of the verb for the grammatical structure of sentences is
central, although many utterances in fact consist of nouns only (cf. Allwood 2001). Activation
of pre-motor areas involved in programming movements of diﬀerent body parts has been
shown in relation to the words for actions involving the same body parts (Pulvermüller 2005).
Motor areas are, thus, suggested to be involved in the acquisition and retrieval of motion
verbs. In fact, motor areas as well as sensory areas (the sensory-motor region) are now
assumed, at least by some researchers (e.g. Gallese and Lakoﬀ2005), to be responsible for a
great part or even all of lexical semantics. This assumption is one of the extensions of mirror
neuron-based theories. So-called category speciﬁc anomias have also attracted some attention
in neurolinguistics. These can, for example, be anomias selectively aﬀecting only nouns or
verbs or only words for natural items or artefacts. Is the encoding of the diﬀerent types of
words relying more on certain types of features, e.g. types of visual forms or motor actions,
etc., or is there some other category speciﬁc to semantic encoding and organization of the
‘mental lexicon’? These types of questions are being asked in this research.
Semantics, pragmatics and multimodal communication
It is now fairly generally accepted that semantics and pragmatics are interdependent aspects
which are diﬃcult to treat separately. An example of this is the use and meaning of deictic
expressions, such as here, now, I, etc., which all depend on context for their interpretation of
meaning. Also, the meaning of most words as well as constructions of several words is most
often fully speciﬁed only in relation to the particular context. An important aspect of prag-
matics is the study of communication in informal conversation and in other everyday life
situations by using video recording and analyzing features of interaction and multimodal
communication, including also gesture and other actions. The question of how interrelated and
interdependent the production of words and gestures are is controversial and related to the
question of gesture use as a possible compensatory strategy for people with aphasia. It seems
clear that compensatory gesturing occurs and is successful in some patients (Ahlsén 1990;
Feyereisen 1991; Lott 1999) and this causes some diﬃculty for theories claiming very strong
interdependence (e.g. McNeill 2000). The close relation of gestures to speech and the possibi-
lity that gestures are sometimes more ‘robust’ in relation to aphasia can both be supported by
the embodiment and mirror neuron-based approach to the evolution of language.
Reading and writing
One of the research areas in neurolinguistics is the relation between speech and writing, both
concerning comprehension and production. Similar symptoms have often been assumed for
writing as for speech in people with aphasia. Diﬃculties in executing writing for many people
with aphasia, accompanied by apraxia (a disorder aﬀecting the execution of intended move-
ments and actions) and/or right sided hemiplegia aﬀecting the right hand, have made studies
of the often slow and strenuous writing of people with aphasia rare. Since partly diﬀerent areas
of the brain are used for sub-processes of speech and writing, and since diﬀerent time con-
straints apply to the two modes of communication, it is not surprising that there are actually
diﬀerences. In studies of text writing by people with aphasia, both based on the produced texts
and the on-line production process (as shown by time logging of keystrokes) some diﬀerences
in relation to their speech output can be noted. The texts produced by many people with
aphasia were good, involving correct sentences, an adequate and often well-structured
Neurolinguistics
467

beginning, plot and end and, surprisingly, spelling and grammar errors (in relation to what
was expected on the basis of their speech). An analysis of the logged keystrokes showed that
the text production had been extremely slow and time-consuming and that almost every word
had been changed, often several times (Ahlsén 2006; Behrns et al. 2008).
In the study of acquired dyslexias and in the application of the same perspective to devel-
opmental dyslexias and other reading diﬃculties, two main routes of processing, whole word
reading versus grapheme-phoneme conversion, have mostly been assumed (the dual route
model of reading) (Coltheart et al. 1993), although ANN alternatives have also been suggested.
Two main types of reading disorder in relation to brain damage are, according to this model,
surface dyslexia, which involves problems ‘sounding out words’, i.e. new and long words that
are diﬃcult to read, and phonological dyslexia, which involves problems using whole word
reading, seen in the inability to read irregular words and sometimes in semantic errors. Deep
dyslexia is a third form which combines features from both of the other types, giving rise to,
for example, visual and semantic errors in reading. The causes of dyslexia in children are not
entirely known, although dyslexia is often associated with a language disorder which also
aﬀects speech. The FOX P2 gene is one suggestion of a critical factor. The diﬀerent types of
dyslexia found with acquired brain damage also occur in developmental dyslexia.
Multilingualism
Another question in neurolinguistics which attracts attention is how the diﬀerent languages are
organized or processed by the brains of multilingual people. There have been many sugges-
tions of diﬀerent areas of the brain being active for the two languages and this seems to some
extent to be the case. The interpretation is, however, not generally agreed on. The right hemi-
sphere seems to be more active when a person uses a second or third language than when the
ﬁrst language is used. Paradis (2004) provides a likely explanation for this in that much more
eﬀort is spent on pragmatic strategies when using a language that one is less proﬁcient in.
Cases of bilingual people with diﬀerent retrieval patterns for the two languages have attracted
some interest, for example, that only one of the languages is recovered; one language is
recovered ﬁrst, then fades away when the second is recovered and the two languages recover to
diﬀerent degrees and with diﬀerent speed. However, the most common pattern of recovery is
parallel for the two languages. Code switching between languages is another area of interest
which is compared to the switching between diﬀerent registers/genres/activity languages that
people use in one language. As multilingualism and code switching are becoming increasingly
dominant for many people, this area will continue to be important.
Current trends and developments
One important trend in neurolinguistic research is the development and use of more varied
and reﬁned ways of measuring brain activity in relation to language and communication.
Further development of methods such as fMRI, PET, SPECT, MEG and TMS is taking place,
but many other methods have also been introduced that can reﬂect new aspects and give more
reﬁned information.
Another trend in neurolinguistics is the development and use of more varied and reﬁned
ways of measuring and analyzing behaviour, for example, multimodal registration of interac-
tion patterns. The development and use of dynamic measures, such as eye movement record-
ings, automatic recognition and tracing of faces, speakers, magnitude of body movements,
head movements, arm movements, etc., as well as phonetic analysis of voice and prosody
Elisabeth Ahlsén
468

features, identity, interaction patterns, attitudes and emotions, information structure, etc., can
give us a much more multifaceted and complete picture of linguistic communicative behaviour.
In combination, the strong and speedy development of analysis techniques and methods in
both neuroscience and language and communication studies provides substantial possibilities
for interdisciplinary studies in neurolinguistics in the near future, but challenges arise when it
comes to combining new methods from the two ﬁelds and relating them to theoretical
frameworks.
The further development of simulation of brain and language using artiﬁcial neural net-
works (ANN) is a third line of development, which is promising for neurolinguistics and can
be linked to the other two. Network models of many diﬀerent types exist and have been used,
for example, to simulate children’s acquisition of grammatical forms and syndromes in apha-
sia. A challenge for this area is to develop network models further and exploit them to pursue
simulation based on mirror neuron theories of interactive communication. The widening scope
of neurolinguistics will provide more phenomena to simulate. How to link diﬀerent ‘levels’ of
processing – basic units and means of processing, thereby linking neurophysiology to diﬀerent
aspects of neurolinguistics – is a task for ANN modelling.
Future trajectories
Widening the scope of neurolinguistics
Some of the most active research areas in neurolinguistics are studies of the role of emotions,
multimodality, body movements and actions, all examples of the widening of scope and topics
for neurolinguistic research. As described above and seen in the increasing number of methods
and phenomena of analysis, the focus of what is included in neurolinguistics has widened
considerably. Pragmatics, multimodality, action-movement-language and context are in focus
and many new ﬁndings enhance the need for new and more developed models of interpretation
(see Ahlsén 2008).
The evolutionary trend and the embodiment trend – the study of mirror functions (imitation
and simulation) as a basis for language and communication represent a very strong current
development. This also involves a revival of the motor theory of speech perception (Galantucci
and Fowler 2006). The link between evolution, ontogeny/acquisition and loss of language is
being further explored. If mirroring and imitation are basic functions behind linguistic com-
munication, is there a possible relation of impairment and autism (Frith et al. 2000; Frith and
Wolpert 2004)? If the grasping hand movement is assumed to be central for the development
of grammar, what is the relation between aphasia and apraxia (cf. Goldenberg 2003; Ahlsén
2008)?
Some examples that illustrate this trend are the following recent studies and claims:

A paper by Corballis adopting the idea that gestures, via pantomime and conventionaliza-
tion, developed into spoken language, claiming that the addition of voice and vocal fea-
tures was the cause of left hemsiphere dominance and stating that grammaticalization was
part of this conventionalization, caused by the evolution of episodic memory and ‘mental
time travel’ (Corballis 2010).

A paper arguing for maps of coordinated actions rather than continuous maps of the body
as the pattern behind our motor repertoires (Fernadino and Iacoboni 2010).

A paper arguing that linguistic areas, through top-down mechanisms, stimulate a semantic
content-speciﬁc reactivation of modal simulations (Ghio and Tettamanti 2010).
Neurolinguistics
469


A paper discussing data from measurements of voice parameters and arm kinematics, in
terms of the possibility that gestures and words are integrated so that social intention to
interact with the interlocutor is transferred from gesture to word (Barbieri et al. 2009).
Summary
Neurolinguistics is a research area which is in a phase of considerable dynamic development
and expansion. This is due to new theories, methods and techniques in linguistics and neuro-
science, based on mirroring functions, embodiment, pragmatics, neuroimaging and simulation
techniques. These developments make possible the study of many new aspects of the brain and
of language processing. More and more ﬁndings are being gathered, and the challenge of
combining frameworks from diﬀerent disciplines and developing theories is enormous. No
doubt it is also inspiring and essential in the quest for answers to some of the most intriguing
questions we have regarding a better understanding of language functions and language disorders.
Related topics
clinical linguistics; cognitive linguistics; discourse analysis; multimodality; psycholinguistics
Further reading
Ahlsén, E. (2006) Introduction to Neurolinguistics, Amsterdam: John Benjamins. (A basic introduc-
tion to the ﬁeld of neurolinguistics which gives a good overview for beginners.)
Ingram, J. (2007) Neurolinguistics: An Introduction to Spoken Language Processing and its Dis-
orders, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. (Ingram provides an introduction to neuro-
linguistics with an overview of language processing and disorders.)
Stemmer, B. and Whitaker, H. (2008) Handbook of the Neuroscience of Language, New York:
Academic Press. (Stemmer and Whitaker’s updated version of the earlier Handbook of Neuro-
linguistics is a comprehensive work covering most aspects of current neurolinguistics.)
References
Ahlsén, E. (1990) ‘Body communication and speech in a Wernicke’s aphasic: a longitudinal study’,
Journal of Communication Disorders 24: 1–12.
——(2006) ‘Comparing corpora of spoken and written narrations produced by persons with apha-
sia’, in J. Toivanen and P. J. Henrichsen (eds) Current Trends in Research on Spoken Language in
the Nordic Countries, Oulu: Oulu University Press.
——(2008) ‘Embodied communication: aphasia, apraxia and the possible role of mirroring and
imitation’, Clinical Linguistics and Phonetics 22(4–5): 1–5.
Allwood, J. (2001) ‘Capturing diﬀerences between social activities in spoken language’, in I. Kenesei
and R. M. Harnish (eds) Perspectives on Semantics, Pragmatics and Discourse, Amsterdam: John
Benjamins.
Arbib, M. A. (2005) ‘From monkey-like action recognition to human language: an evolutionary
framework for neurolinguistics’, Brain and Behavioral Sciences 28: 105–24.
Barbieri, F., Buonocore, A., Dalla Volta, R. and Gentilucci, M. (2009) ‘How symbolic gestures and
words interact with each other’, Brain and Language 110(1): 1–11.
Bates, E., Elman, J., Johnson, M., Karmiloﬀ-Smith, A., Parisi, D. and Plunkett, K. (1998)
‘Innateness and emergentism’, in W. Bechtel and G. Graham (eds) A Companion to Cognitive
Science, Oxford: Basil Blackwell.
Behrns, I., Ahlsén, E. and Wengelin, Å. (2008) ‘Aphasia and the process of revision in writing a
text’, Clinical Linguistics and Phonetics 22: 95–110.
Broca, P. (1861) ‘Perte de la parole’, Bulletin de la Sociéte d’Anthropologie de Paris 2: 219–37.
——(1865) ‘Remarques sur la siège de la faculté du langage articulé’, Bulletin de la Société
d’Anthropologie de Paris 6: 330–57.
Elisabeth Ahlsén
470

Brown, J. (1977) Mind, Brain and Consciousness, New York: Academic Press.
——(1988) Life of the Mind, Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Chomsky, N. (1992) ‘A minimalist program for linguistic theory’, MIT Working Papers in Linguis-
tics, 1, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Christensen, A.-L. (1974) Luria’s Neuropsychological Investigation, Copenhagen: Munksgaard.
Coltheart, M., Curtis, B., Atkins, P. and Haller, M. (1993) ‘Models of reading aloud: dual-route and
parallel-distributed-processing approaches’, Psychological Review 100: 589–608.
Corballis, M. (2010) ‘Mirror neurons and the evolution of language’, Brain and Language 112(1):
25–35.
Fernandino, L. and Iacoboni, M. (2010) ‘Are cortical motor maps based on body parts or coordi-
nated actions? Implications for embodied semantic’, Brain and Language 112(1): 44–53.
Feyereisen, P. (1991) ‘Communicative behaviour in aphasia’, Aphasiology 5: 323–33.
Franklin, S. (1999) Artiﬁcial Minds, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Frith, C., Blakemore, S. and Wolpert, D. (2000) ‘Abnormalities in the awareness and control of
action’, Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B, Biological Sciences 355: 1771–88.
Frith, C. and Wolpert, D. (2004) The Neuroscience of Social Interaction, Oxford: Oxford University
Press.
Galantucci, B. and Fowler, C. (2006) ‘The motor theory of speech perception reviewed’, Psycho-
nomic Bulletin and Review 13(3): 361–77.
Gall, F. and Spurzheim, G. (1810–19) Anatomie et physiologie du système nerveus en général et du
cerveau en particulier, Paris: Schoel.
Gallese, V. and Lakoﬀ, G. (2005) ‘The brain’s concepts: the role of the sensory-motor system in
conceptual knowledge’, Cognitive Neuropsychology 21: 455–79.
Geschwind, N. (1965) ‘Disconnection syndromes in animals and man’, Brain 88: 237–94 and
585–644.
Ghio, M. and Tettamanti, M. (2010) ‘Semantic domain-speciﬁc functional integration for action-
related vs. abstract concepts’, Brain and Language 112(3): 223–32.
Goldenberg, G. (2003) ‘Language shares neural prerequisites with non-verbal capacities’, Behavioral
Brain Science 26: 679–80.
Goodglass, H. and Kaplan, E. (1973) The Boston Diagnostic Aphasia Examination, Philadelphia:
Lea and Febiger.
Jackson, J. H. (1932) Selected Writings, in J. Taylor (ed.), London: Hodder & Stoughton.
Kay, J., Lesser, R. and Coltheart, M. (1992) PALPA: Psycholinguistic Assessments of Language
Processing in Aphasia, Hove: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Kiran, S., Ntourou, K., Eubanks, M. and Shamapant, S. (2005) ‘Typicality of inanimate category
exemplars in aphasia: further evidence for the semantic complexity eﬀect’, Brain and Language
95: 178–80.
Lieberman, P. (1998) Eve Spoke: Human Language and Human Evolution, London: W. W. Norton.
Lott, P. (1999) Gesture and Aphasia, Bern: Peter Lang.
Luria, A. R. (1976) Basic Problems in Neurolinguistics, The Hague: Mouton.
McNeill, D. (ed.) (2000) Language and Gesture, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Murre, J. and Goebel, R. (1996) ‘Connectionist modeling’, in T. Dijkstra and K. de Smedt (eds)
Computational Psycholinguistics, London: Taylor & Francis.
Paradis, M. (2004) A Neurolinguistic Theory of Bilingualism, Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Pinker, S. (1994) The Language Instinct: How the Mind Creates Language, New York: William
Morrow.
Pulvermüller, F. (2005) ‘Brain mechanisms linking language and action’, Nature 6: 576–82.
Rizzolatti, G. and Arbib, M. A. (1998) ‘Language within our grasp’, Trends in the Neurosciences 21:
188–94.
Rizzolatti, G. and Craighero, L. (2004) ‘The mirror neuron system’, Annual Review of Neuroscience
27: 169–92.
Rizzolatti, G., Faciga, L., Gallese, V. and Fogassi, L. (1996) ‘Premotor cortex and the recognition
of motor actions’, Cognitive Brain Research 3: 131–41.
Tomasello, M. (2008) Origins of Human Communication, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Wernicke, C. (1874) Der aphasische Symptomencomplex, Breslau: Cohn and Weigert.
Whitaker, H. and coeditors (1976–79) Studies in Neurolinguistics, New York: Academic Press.
Neurolinguistics
471

33
Psycholinguistics
John Field
Introduction
Psycholinguistics as a ﬁeld of study
Psycholinguistics is the study of how the mind equips human beings to handle language. Its
central concern is with the cognitive processes that underlie the storage, use and acquisition
of language, and their correlates in observable neural activity in the brain. In addition, psy-
cholinguists use their understanding of the mind to shed light on certain long-standing ques-
tions concerning language as a phenomenon. They include how language evolved, whether
and why it is restricted to the human race, what the precise relationship is between language
and thought and whether language shares functions with general cognition or operates
independently of it.
Psycholinguistics is a relatively new area of study, though interest in the mind-language
relationship has a long history. Over the centuries, there has been frequent discussion of lan-
guage acquisition and of the origins of language – notably in the writings of Aristotle and in
the Enlightenment debate between rationalist followers of Descartes, who believed that much
human knowledge was innate, and empiricists such as Hume and Locke, who asserted that it
was entirely acquired. A parallel interest in the psychology of adult language developed during
the nineteenth century, with initiatives such as Broca’s work on the location of language in the
brain and Galton’s on word association.
However, in the ﬁrst half of the twentieth century, progress in all areas of cognitive science
was discouraged by the dominant behaviourist view that the human mind is unknowable. The
term ‘psycholinguistics’ was probably ﬁrst coined in the 1930s but the ﬁeld did not emerge as a
discipline in its own right until the mid-1950s, when George Miller mapped out possible areas
of inquiry in a series of essays (reprinted as Miller 1968). About the same time, researchers at
Haskins Laboratories began their pioneering work into the perception of phonemes. A further
landmark was Chomsky’s 1959 rebuttal of the behaviourist assumptions of Skinner’s book
Verbal Behavior. Chomsky concluded that language is a genetically acquired faculty; this
nativist stance triggered a new, and more scientiﬁc, interest in ﬁrst language acquisition, and
began a controversy that continues to the present day.
472

Much early inquiry into how adults assemble and understand language was closely allied to
linguistic theory, on the assumption that Chomsky’s early transformational-generative gram-
mar (1965) represented psychological reality – i.e. provided a model of the operations of the
mind as well as a linguistic account of grammatical structure. Attempts were made to investi-
gate the Derivational Theory of Complexity, which hypothesised a correlation between the
number of transformations that a given sentence demanded in TG theory and the diﬃculty of
processing the sentence. There was particular interest in passive and negative structures. The
ﬁndings were mainly negative or inconclusive, and at this point the paths of linguistics and
psycholinguistics began to diverge.
Today, psycholinguistics is a multi-disciplinary ﬁeld, drawing upon cognitive psychology,
theoretical linguistics, speech science, phonetics, computer modelling, neurolinguistics, clinical
linguistics, discourse analysis and pragmatics. One can identify two distinct traditions. The
dominant one applies principles and research methods from cognitive science, and is strongly
evidence-led. Typically, researchers study small-scale eﬀects with a view to building a compo-
site account of the language operation under investigation. Research methods include obser-
vation of natural language, controlled experiments that tap in to a speciﬁc process, concurrent
and retrospective verbal reports and the imaging of the brains of individuals performing a
particular language function The second tradition continues to assume that the accounts of
language proposed by linguists correspond closely to the way in which the mind actually per-
forms. Researchers employ a theoretical framework, often a Chomskyan one, in order to
interpret samples of language. Because their concern is with competence rather than perfor-
mance, they often rely upon indirect methods, such as grammaticality judgements, for eliciting
information.
What both traditions share is a concern with cognition – with the types of mental process,
some highly automatic, some more intentional, that language users employ. It is this that
separates psycholinguistics from cognitive linguistics, whose roots lie in semantic theory rather
than cognitive psychology. Similarly, while psycholinguists do not ignore personal variables
such as aﬀect or contextual variables such as interlocutor relationships, they tend to leave
research in these areas to social psychologists and discourse analysts, who have very diﬀerent
research traditions.
Research assumptions
Much psycholinguistic research is normative, tracing shared patterns of behaviour in language
users, but there is no implicit assumption that all users behave identically. Individuals clearly
vary in their vocabulary range and in their powers of self-expression. Their performance also
varies from situation to situation according to interlocutor, to level of formality, to genre of
discourse and to transient factors such as tiredness, level of noise or the eﬀects of alcohol.
That said, behind these local diﬀerences, there are patterns of physical and mental beha-
viour that reﬂect the demands of the language task being undertaken. Thus, all readers have to
move their eyes across a page or screen and have to link groups of graphic symbols to stored
mental representations. While the performance of an individual is indeed aﬀected by con-
textual and personal factors, the chief concern of psycholinguistics is with the fundamental
processes that enable us to communicate at all. Here, account may need to be taken of the
language or the writing system being employed. The processes adopted by a reader of a logo-
graphic script such as the Chinese one obviously diﬀer in important respects from those
adopted by a reader of an alphabetic script. The study of the mental operations underlying
language use thus has to allow for cross-linguistic comparison.
Psycholinguistics
473

The present chapter
It will be clear from this brief proﬁle that psycholinguistics is a very diverse ﬁeld, though
interfaces between its various areas and a common interest in cognition provide it with a
degree of coherence. The present account focuses upon the three main areas identiﬁed at the
outset, namely language storage, use and acquisition. They clearly fall within applied linguis-
tics viewed as the study of language in performance, but they are also relevant to those who
associate applied linguistics more closely with language learning, since they provide insights
into the cognitive challenges that attend the use of a second language (L2). Space does not
permit discussion of the wider ‘What is language?’ issues.
Language storage and retrieval
Memory and the nature of knowledge
An early model of the role of human memory in language use (Atkinson and Shiﬀrin
1968) represented it as consisting of three stores: a sensory store in which a reader or
listener very brieﬂy retains a trace of the linguistic input; a temporary store in which spoken/
written input is analysed or output is assembled; and a more permanent store holding
both linguistic and world knowledge. Current models refer to the short-term store as
working memory (WM) and the durable one as long term memory (LTM). The former holds
not only the words of the current utterance but also linguistic information retrieved tempora-
rily from LTM for the purpose of assembling or analysing them. In the most well-
known account of memory (Baddeley 1990), a central executive (functioning not unlike a
control tower in an airport) directs operations. It also determines the level of attention within
WM that a language user needs to accord (a higher level, for example, for a listener in
conditions of noise or a speaker giving a formal speech); and how attention is to be
distributed if there are twin demands upon it (for example, when listening and writing notes in
a lecture).
The chief characteristic of WM is its limited capacity. Language users overcome this con-
straint by developing form-meaning connections which are automatic (Shiﬀrin and Schneider
1977) and thus make minimal demands upon attention. In addition, WM contains an articu-
latory/phonological loop (Gathercole and Baddeley 1993) which enables a language user to
rehearse a piece of language so that it can be held in the mind for longer without decaying.
Psycholinguistic accounts of storage explore the nature of the linguistic knowledge in LTM
which enables the language user to command phonology, to retrieve lexical items and to pro-
duce utterances that are grammatically correct. Alongside the question of representation (the
precise form in which this information is stored), one also needs to consider how language
users manage to access the information when they have need of it. This demands highly
automatic processes, of which the user is largely unaware.
A recent shift in thinking has led many commentators to favour an exemplar view of how
linguistic knowledge is stored. It challenges traditional notions of language as rule-governed
behaviour or as reliant upon ‘ideal’ templates of words or phonemes. Instead, the premise is
that linguistic knowledge is constructed on the basis of traces of multiple encounters with the
features in question, which have been stored in LTM (Bybee and Hopper 2001). Thus, if one
hears an [a:] that diverges markedly from one’s own value or a dialectal variant of a syntactic
pattern, one does not compare it to a standard version or to an internalised rule, but to the
memory of a similar form heard in the past. Exemplar models lead to a view of language
John Field
474

acquisition (whether in L1 or L2) as emergent, in the sense that it is a process driven by
accumulating random samples of language in use and generalising across them.
Phonology
The exemplar view has particular relevance when considering phonological representation.
Speech scientists have long struggled to account for the variability of the phoneme, which has
no simple one-to-one relationship with acoustic cues in the input and varies greatly according
to the phonemes that adjoin it. One way of dealing with the issue is to conclude that the syl-
lable rather than the phoneme forms the smallest unit of analysis for the listener or speaker;
and that we are only capable of separating words into phonemes because literacy and rhyming
games have taught us how to. In contrast, the exemplar position rejects the long-standing
assumption that there are idealised phonological representations in the mind against which
variants can be matched. By assuming instead that language users store many diﬀerent ver-
sions of a single phoneme (Bybee 2001), one accounts for the way in which listeners adjust
gradually to an unfamiliar variety through multiple encounters with speakers of that variety.
Each speaker leaves a trace, enabling the listener to build up an increasingly detailed record of
how this particular group realises phonemes or words.
Lexis
Lexical representation forms a major area of psycholinguistic enquiry (see Aitchison 2003). A
language user is said to possess a vocabulary store in the mind: a mental lexicon. Content
words are stored there in the form of lexical entries, which contain suﬃcient information about
each word to enable its use in speech or writing. There is a degree of controversy as to whether
productive derivational aﬃxes such as un-have their own entries or whether a word like
unhappy is stored as a whole.
Levelt (1989) represents a lexical entry as consisting of two parts, one relating to form and
one to meaning. The ﬁrst includes mental representations of the phonological and ortho-
graphic forms of an item together with inﬂectional information. The second (the lemma)
represents the range of possible senses associated with the item. It also includes information on
syntactic structure (for example, the valency of a verb).
Producing and receiving language make diﬀerent demands upon the lexicon. The point of
departure for a speaker or writer is a meaning which he/she needs to map on to the most
appropriate form; while that of a listener or reader consists of a form (auditory or visual) that
has to be mapped on to a meaning. Early research on lexical retrieval focused on speech pro-
duction and sought evidence in slips of the tongue (Fromkin 1980). The rationale was that, by
comparing an incorrectly selected word with the target, one might identify the characteristics
of the word that were driving the search. Semantic links between chosen word and target were
to be expected, but it was noted that speakers also seem to be guided by formal information
about the word being sought, including its number of syllables, its ﬁrst syllable, its stressed
syllable and its rhythm. Producers of language thus seem to possess an awareness that a sought
word exists and certain prior intimations as to the form it takes.
In terms of reception, current accounts of how words are identiﬁed by a listener or reader
do not assume a simple one-to-one match between input and word. Competition models
(Rastle 2007: 72) postulate that a listener or reader balances cues at many levels in order to
achieve word recognition: a reader might take account of letters, digraphs, sub-letter features,
letter order, syllables and whole word forms. Potential word matches are accorded diﬀerent
Psycholinguistics
475

levels of conﬁdence, according to how closely they ﬁt the evidence on the page and according
to criteria such as frequency – until one of these candidates wins out over the others. The term
activation is often used to describe this process.
Lexical retrieval in both production and reception is assisted by the way in which entries are
stored in the mind. Current models envisage them as linked by a complex network of inter-
connections. A word such as CHAIR has links to others in the lexical set of furniture. But, for
listeners, it also has links to words such as CARE that resemble it phonologically and, for
readers, links to words such as CHAIN which resemble it orthographically. Other associations
are based upon frequency of co-occurrence (CHAIR-TABLE, CHAIR-MEETING) and upon
sense relations such as synonymy, antonymy and hyponymy. The connections between words
diﬀer in strength, with CHAIR-TABLE much stronger than CHAIR-BED. Connectionist
computer programs have simulated the way in which strengths of connection are said to
evolve. They do so by means of a mechanism which strengthens a connection that occurs
frequently and allows infrequent ones to atrophy.
Listeners and readers are assisted by a process of spreading activation. On encountering a
word such as doctor, they automatically activate closely linked words such as nurse or patient,
and thus recognise them more readily if and when they occur. Researchers investigate lexical
connections of this kind by means of a method known as priming, which measures how much
faster words are identiﬁed when preceded by a word that appears to be associated with them.
A further important line of lexical research addresses the question of how language users
succeed in classifying real-world objects by reference to categories such as BIRD or FURNI-
TURE. Rosch (1975) premised that users base their categories upon a highly typical example
(in the case of BIRD, a robin). They ascertain whether a newly encountered object ﬁts the
category by considering how closely it resembles this ideal. Rosch’s Prototype Theory has been
much challenged. Recent commentators have preferred an exemplar view, with the category
constituted by the user’s ability to recall many diﬀerent instances of items that belong to it.
Grammar
The fact that speech is assembled successfully under tight pressures of time raises questions
about the traditional notion of a syntax based upon applying elaborate rules which license
permissible combinations of words and exclude others. An alternative, psycholinguistic
account (Wray 2002) holds that our capacity to produce speech rapidly is dependent upon
frequently occurring groups of words being stored in the mind as pre-assembled chunks. Thus,
one does not have to assemble afresh a sequence such as I wish I knew … or What would you
say if … each time one utters it, but can draw on a unit which is, in eﬀect, part of the lexicon.
Similarly, one can recognise it as a ﬁxed formulaic utterance when it occurs in connected
speech, without having to parse its parts.
Language use
We now turn to the processes that are employed when a language user engages in speaking,
writing, reading and listening. Psycholinguistic models of these skills are heavily inﬂuenced by
an information processing approach, which tracks a given piece of information through a
number of stages, at each of which it is transformed. A listener, for example, might be repre-
sented as constantly reshaping the form of the message being received: proceeding from
acoustic input to a phonological representation and then from phonemes to syllables and on to
words, to clauses and to an ‘idea unit’.
John Field
476

The progression can be shown in ﬂow-chart form, but it does not tell the whole tale. Evi-
dence suggests that, in producing or analysing language, the human mind is capable of oper-
ating at several diﬀerent levels in parallel. The listener is capable of detecting an emerging
syntactic pattern while at the same time extracting word meanings, identifying words and
detecting phonemes. In addition, a language user is more ﬂexible than a sequential model
might suggest. If a disparity is noted, he/she can loop back at any point to reverse a decision.
This kind of regression is especially seen in writers, who sometimes change part of a text while
actually producing it, as well as in a ﬁnal editing phase.
As already remarked, the productive and receptive skills follow opposite directions of pro-
cessing. The former take a meaning to be expressed and map it on to a form of words, while
the latter take a form of words and map it on to a meaning. All four skills draw heavily on
non-linguistic as well as linguistic knowledge, but they do so at diﬀerent stages of the opera-
tion. Thus, what is often broadly termed ‘context’ (world knowledge, knowledge of the indi-
vidual being communicated with, perception of the user’s own goals) aﬀects the initial
planning in speaking and writing but contributes to interpreting the signal in the case of
listening and reading.
An important distinction can also be made in repect of modality. Writers normally have
time to plan their ideas and to polish the words that give expression to them. Similarly, readers
can vary their speed and the level of attention that they bring to their task. By contrast, most
speech (especially in interactional situations) has to be assembled under pressures of time,
while a listener has little control over the speech rate of the interlocutor and thus over the pace
at which the input is received.
Speaking
As noted, the planning of speech takes place under enormous pressures of time. A degree of
thinking ahead occurs while the speaker is actually articulating, but brief pauses of 0.2 to 1.0
seconds are necessary for planning the form of the next utterance. Juncture pauses of this type
occur mainly at syntactic boundaries; the clause seems to form an important unit of planning.
By contrast, hesitation pauses (ﬁlled and unﬁlled) can occur anywhere within an utterance and
even within words. They might result from a failure to retrieve a word or from a failure of
planning: i.e. a plan that is revised, is not adequately formulated or is lost during articulation.
Early speech production research examined slips of the tongue involving syntax and mor-
phology. The evidence suggested that a syntactic frame is prepared by a speaker and that lexical
items are then slotted into it (hence an error like He found a wife for his job). Morphological
markings are added at quite a late stage (hence She come backs tomorrow).
Drawing upon this and other evidence, a number of researchers have proposed models that
represent the stages through which a speaker proceeds when assembling an utterance. The
most comprehensive and authoritative account is oﬀered by Levelt (1989). Levelt’s original
1989 model features four major stages (conceptualisation, formulation, articulation and self-
monitoring); however, an updated version (1999) subdivides the second and third of them as
follows:
Conceptualisation:
generating an idea or set of ideas for expression and planning how to
express them;
Grammatical encoding:
constructing a syntactic frame for the next utterance and identifying
the lexical items to be slotted into it;
Phonological encoding:
converting the abstract plan into a string of words in phonological form;
Psycholinguistics
477

Phonetic encoding:
adjusting the phonological sequence to make articulation easier;
linking each of the syllables to a set of neural instructions to the
articulators; storing the instructions temporarily in the mind;
Articulation:
producing the utterance;
Self-monitoring:
focusing attention on the message just before or while it is uttered in
order to check for accuracy, clarity and appropriateness.
Writing
The path adopted by a writer follows that of a speaker in terms of conceptualising an idea,
converting it to linguistic form and checking the accuracy, clarity and appropriacy of the end-
product. Accounts of writing (e.g. Kellogg 1996) have therefore tended to follow Levelt’s
model of speaking quite closely. However, there are major diﬀerences in the greater opportu-
nity allowed for planning and self-monitoring, the substitution of orthography for phonology
and the fact that neural signals are sent to the ﬁngers, not the articulators. To this, one can add
that the product of writing is typically expected to be more precise, concise and polished than
that of speaking – emphasising the importance of the planning and monitoring phases.
Unsurprisingly, there has been much discussion of the role of planning. An inﬂuential
model by Hayes and Flower (1980) deﬁnes the environment within which the writer operates
and takes account of rhetorical considerations relating to the writer’s own goals as well as to
target readership, topic and genre. Scardamalia and Bereiter (1987) distinguish the knowledge
telling of less skilled writers, a largely linear approach to the generation, linking and pre-
sentation of ideas, from the knowledge transforming of more skilled ones, based on planning,
structuring and revision. The same commentators (Bereiter and Scardamalia 1987) analyse the
challenges that children face in holding writing plans in their minds while carrying out the
mechanics of forming letters.
There has also been research interest in the execution stage of writing (equivalent to Levelt’s
‘articulation’). Early studies of slips of the pen and keyboard (Hotopf 1983) demonstrated that
writers give reduced attention to function words and that incorrect keyboard sequences of
letters (THE ! teh) can become highly automatic and diﬃcult to reverse. Evidence suggested
that the writer’s plan for the text that is currently being produced is held in the mind in some
kind of phonological form (explaining why the intention to write ‘20A’ might result in 28).
Listening
In accounts of the receptive skills, a distinction is usually made between a perceptual phase in
which the input is analysed into linguistic units and a conceptual phrase when a meaning-
based representation is constructed. The former, often referred to as decoding, requires the
detection of lexical and syntactic forms in the input. Like a reader, a listener weighs multiple
cues when establishing the identity of a word: matching phoneme, syllable and contextual
information against a stored record of the diﬀerent forms that the word can take.
Matters are complicated in listening by the fact that pauses between words in connected speech
are irregular and infrequent. The listener thus has to engage in a process of lexical segmenta-
tion, determining where word boundaries are most likely to fall. The decisions made are often
supported by prosodic features of the language being heard: among them, lexical stress and
syllable structure. The main segmentation strategy in English appears to exploit the fact that
90 per cent of content words in running speech begin with a stressed syllable – making it
relatively fail-safe to assume that each stressed syllable initiates a new word (Cutler 1990).
John Field
478

A further headache for listening researchers lies in the highly variable nature of the signal. It
is not simply phonemes that vary. Words are subject to great variation because of the pressures
of the intonation group, which aﬀect their duration and the precision with which they are
articulated. They also vary in the extent to which they are assimilated to the word that follows
them. It has to be assumed that the oral forms of words are represented in the listener’s lexicon
in a way that allows considerable deviation from the citation form – or, again, that users store
separate examples of the many variations they have encountered.
In addition, speakers diﬀer enormously in terms of voice pitch, speech rate, hesitancy, pro-
sody and accent. Traditional accounts envisaged listeners as normalising to these features:
editing them out in order to focus on the message being conveyed. However, recent research
(Johnson and Mullenix 1997) suggests that they may actually be processed alongside the
message and retained in memory.
Accounts of how listeners handle syntax (a process known as parsing) have to come to
terms with evidence that listeners start analysing what they hear at a delay behind the speaker
of about the length of a syllable (Marslen-Wilson and Tyler 1980), rather than waiting until
the end of a clause. They rely upon probability, word order, intonation and factors such as
animacy in order to anticipate the syntactic structure of a piece of incoming speech before it is
complete (van Gompel and Pickering 2007). It seems that listening, even in one’s ﬁrst lan-
guage, is a highly tentative process, with hypotheses constantly being formed and revised. For
an accessible account, see Field 2008.
Reading
Eye tracking equipment has taught researchers a great deal about the physical process of
reading (Rayner and Pollatsek 1989). The reader’s eye moves across the page in short sweeps
known as saccades. It rests on most content words, though around 60 per cent of function
words are read peripherally. In many alphabetic languages, a ﬁxation point occurs every 7 to 9
characters. Fixation by a skilled reader lasts on average for about a quarter of a second, but is
extended where there are longer or unfamiliar words. Readers regress from time to time: with
skilled readers this tends be to check understanding; with less skilled readers it is often to
check the accuracy of word identiﬁcation. An important consideration is that a major com-
ponent of reading skill is the ability to adjust one’s reading style (length of saccade and length
of ﬁxation) to the type of text being read and to the reader’s own goals.
As with listening, it is necessary for readers to hold decoded words in their minds until the
end of a clause or sentence is reached and a syntactic pattern can be imposed on them.
There is evidence that the words are stored in some kind of phonological form (Perfetti
1985) – hence the fact that readers sometimes report a ‘voice in the head’. This may be a relic
of how reading is acquired, but it seems more likely that it serves to separate recall of the
earlier part of a sentence from the visual processing of the current word.
An understanding of reading processes is especially useful for shedding light on con-
troversies over how to teach the skill. There has long been disagreement between those who
argue for the importance of phonics based upon sound–spelling relationships and those who
argue that a whole-word approach is more suitable to a language like English with a relatively
opaque orthography. However, a dual-route model of reading (Coltheart 2005), based upon
evidence from dyslexia, indicates that in decoding words a reader has need of both routes – a
faster (lexical) one that identiﬁes whole words and a slower (sub-lexical) one that applies gra-
pheme-phoneme correspondence (GPC) rules to achieve word recognition. An adult reader still
requires the latter route in order to deal with unfamiliar names, to match words never seen
Psycholinguistics
479

before in print to words known orally or to work out how to pronounce words only encountered
in writing.
A second controversy was triggered by Goodman’s (1967) claim that good readers employ
context and co-text to predict what is to come, in order to avoid having to decode every word
they encounter. This led to a whole language approach in which early readers were encouraged
to read for pleasure, guessing the meaning of text that they could not decode. Goodman’s
assertion has been widely discredited (see Gough and Wren 1999). It is by no means as easy to
predict upcoming words as he suggested. In addition, a skilled reader is capable of decoding
words highly automatically and matching them to their meanings; there is thus no beneﬁt in
falling back upon prediction, which (unlike decoding) makes major demands upon working
memory. In fact, it is weak readers who use context in this way, because they ﬁnd word
recognition too demanding. Competent readers do indeed make use of context, but do so in
order to enrich their interpretation of what they have read, understand the writer’s
intentions, etc.
Meaning construction
The output of decoding in both listening and reading is said to be an abstract and decontex-
tualised ‘idea unit’. Two further phases of processing are then necessary. In the ﬁrst, the lis-
tener or reader invokes world knowledge, knowledge of the speaker or writer and knowledge
of the immediate situation, in order to achieve a semantically enriched interpretation of the
raw proposition. It may be necessary to employ inference (Brown and Yule 1983), recognising
connections that have only been made implicitly. Understanding a sequence like Bill lay on the
ﬂoor. A knife lay by the body. requires the reader to infer that Bill is dead and that the knife
may have been a murder weapon.
In a further phase, a listener/reader has to make decisions concerning the information
derived from the input. If it is trivial, it can be allowed to decay. If not, it is added to the
mental representation of the discourse so far. This entails recognising a logical link between
each new item of information and the one that immediately preceded it. It also entails mon-
itoring to ensure that the new item is consistent with what has been heard or read already, or
whether any misunderstanding has occurred.
Finally, in constructing a wider discourse representation, macro-information has to be dis-
tinguished from micro-information and a hierarchical model has to be built of the overall line
of argument. Skilled comprehenders build more complex representations because they are
more able to determine when to initiate a new conceptual structure and when not (Gernsbacher
1990). Weak comprehenders operate linearly, repeatedly starting new structures instead of
elaborating existing ones.
Language acquisition
Nativist theory
The agenda in language acquisition studies was set by Noam Chomsky’s assertion (1965) that
language is an innately acquired faculty. Chomsky’s arguments were based upon aspects of
acquisition which are diﬃcult to account for unless genetic transmission gives the child a head
start. They include: the short period of time within which a child achieves grammatical com-
petence; the lack of correction or explicit teaching by adults; the ‘poverty of the stimulus’
available to the child in the form of natural speech with its hesitations, false starts and
John Field
480

syntactic errors; and the fact that all normally developing children acquire full competence,
regardless of diﬀerences in their intellectual capacity.
Any nativist account has to deal with the fact that human beings acquire not simply
language but a speciﬁc tongue. Chomsky’s current theory (Chomsky and Lasnik 1993) posits
that the innate universal grammar (UG) which enables the acquisition of a ﬁrst language
has two components. The ﬁrst is a set of principles, which enable the infant to recognise fea-
tures that are common to most or all of the world’s languages. The second is a set of binary
parameters, which can be set to accord with the language to which the child is exposed. Thus,
an infant exposed to a language such as Italian, where a subject pronoun can be omitted,
adopts the so-called pro-drop setting; while one exposed to English recognises a situation
where such a pronoun is obligatorily employed in all circumstances and sets the parameter
against pro-drop.
Often associated with nativist accounts is the notion that there is a critical period for the
acquisition of a ﬁrst language, possibly determined by the way in which UG functions. It
originated in a theory that the two hemispheres of the brain might be ‘plastic’ at birth,
with the left hemisphere gradually becoming the dominant one for language during the ﬁrst
ﬁve years of life. The evidence was that children who suﬀered left hemisphere brain damage
before the age of ﬁve were more likely to end up as right hemisphere dominant. In fact, this
ﬁnding was not corroborated by recent studies; and inconsistency was introduced when
commentators extended the cut-oﬀpoint to adolescence. There is considerable evidence
(Skuse 1993) that children who are denied exposure to language early in life acquire vocabu-
lary but master syntax only imperfectly. However, in such cases, it is often diﬃcult to rule out
the possible eﬀects of neglect, delayed cognitive development and even brain damage from
abuse.
Alternative theories
A number of alternatives to the nativist view emphasise the role of the linguistic environment
to which the child is exposed. Some of them can be broadly deﬁned as cognitive. They include
the view of Jean Piaget (Piatelli-Palmerini 1980) that language acquisition is driven by cognitive
development as the child succeeds in making sense of the world around it. On this analysis, a
sense of object permanence (the continued existence of objects when they are out of sight)
might be a prerequisite for an utterance such as cup gone. Other cognitive accounts assume
that the human mind is structured in a way that permits it to trace patterns in real-world
phenomena, including speech, without the need for a special language-related device. It is
possible (Deacon 1997) that language took advantage of cognitive operations that served other
purposes and that the brain then gradually evolved to accommodate it.
Much quoted in recent years as signalling a return to empiricism (even behaviourism) have
been simulations of language acquisition based upon computer modelling. A connectionist
computer program employed a learning mechanism that strengthened past tense connections
that were correct (e.g. SEE linked to past form SAW) and weakened those that were not (SEE
linked to the rule-governed form SEED). The program was shown to be capable of ‘acquiring’
accurate past tense links (Rumelhart and McClelland 1986). No abstract rule was employed;
performance was purely based upon generalisation across examples and upon identifying cases
that did not ﬁt the norm. However, the extent to which programs such as this can be said to
reproduce the real-life acquisition of inﬂections is open to challenge. They rely upon standar-
dised input from programmers; the input focuses on only one inﬂection type; and the learning
process requires many passes before the links are established.
Psycholinguistics
481

Child language development
Chomsky’s theories triggered a wave of research into ﬁrst language acquisition, much of it
focusing on empirical data and neutral on whether language is innate. Many studies, some
experimental, some longitudinal, have investigated the syntax, morphology, lexis, and pho-
nology of the developing child. A consistent ﬁnding has been that the rate and timing of lan-
guage development vary greatly from one infant to another. Instead of age, mean length of
utterance (Brown 1973) is often used as an indicator of development, since there is an obvious
correlation between how many words (or morphemes) an infant can produce and the
complexity of the syntactic patterns (SVO, SVOA, etc.) that the infant can command.
A further mark of the child’s growing mastery of syntax is the range of verbs used and the
complexity of the valencies associated with them (PUT, for example, requires the speciﬁcation
of both the object and the location where it is put). Other indicators are found in the emer-
gence of features that are lacking or inconsistent in early speech. They include sentence sub-
jects, correct form of the subject pronoun, the verb to be (both copula and auxiliary), and
function words generally. Progress can also be traced in the acquisition of syntactic patterns
such as the correct ordering of questions and negatives, where there is evidence of a common
developmental path.
In morphology, thinking has been shaped by Berko’s early (1958) demonstration that infants
appear to move from holistic forms of words (e.g. dogs acquired as a single unit) to generalised
rules that enable them to attach the relevant inﬂection to an unfamiliar word (WUG+s). The
process follows a pattern of U-shaped development in which infants ﬁrst show signs of (e.g.)
having acquired an irregular past tense form (made), then resort temporarily to the overgeneralised
use of a regular inﬂection (maked) before reverting again to the correct form. Contradictory
evidence has led some researchers to question how widespread and consistent this phenom-
enon is. Another early research question, inspired by nativist theories, was whether inﬂections
are acquired by a child in a ﬁxed order. The early work of Brown (1973) is sometimes quoted
as demonstrating such an order, but the ‘bound morphemes’ investigated were very mixed, and
the sequence was by no means clear-cut.
Research into the acquisition of lexis has suggested that an early vocabulary of 50–100
words in which nouns predominate, is followed by a vocabulary spurt (Clark 1993) where there
is a sudden and rapid increase in the number of words, including verbs, that are acquired each
day. The spurt is believed to coincide with a naming insight, a recognition by the child of the
symbolic nature of language. However, not all children follow the standard pattern; some
appear to acquire vocabulary more steadily, perhaps because they are oriented towards syntactic
as well as lexical features.
A second area of lexical acquisition research explores the way in which infants succeed in
associating meanings with words. One line of enquiry concerns the way in which categories
such as DOG or FURNITURE are formed. A much-quoted theory (see ‘Lexical storage’
above) proposed that a child identiﬁes a prototype, a highly typical member of a category, and
then determines whether a newly encountered creature or object belongs to the category by its
‘closeness of ﬁt’ to the prototype. More recently, an exemplar account has been favoured, with
(taking DOG as an example) the child storing in the mind traces of many diﬀerent instances
of creatures that have had the label DOG attached to them (Hintzman 1986). Membership of
the group is then determined not by a single prototypical breed but by a whole range of dogs
that can be called up in memory.
Attention has also been given to the various possible meanings that could in theory be
attached to a word. How does the child determine that the word DOG refers to the whole
John Field
482

creature rather than (say) its tail or the fact that it is eating a bone? Markman (1990), Clark
(1987) and other commentators have identiﬁed a number of assumptions which a child appears
to bring to the acquisition of lexis. They include: that a noun refers to a whole object rather
than part of it; that there is a one-to-one match between a word and a type of object; and that
the ﬁrst word encountered in a given area is likely to be at basic level (not a superordinate such
as ANIMAL or a subordinate such as SPANIEL).
In phonological development, the child faces the important challenges of establishing articu-
latory settings and of co-ordinating the movement of the articulators from one setting to
another. Certain phonemes are acquired earlier than others, with plosives and nasals preceding
fricatives. The child compensates for an incomplete phonological repertoire by substituting a
mastered phoneme for a more problematic one (Smith 1973). This seems to reﬂect diﬃculties
of production rather than of perception, since children have proved capable of distinguishing
the diﬀerence between their own realisation of a word and an adult’s. There is evidence
(Werker and Tees 1984) that children can distinguish between a wide range of speech sounds at
a very early age, but that their phoneme categories gradually become more restricted to
conform to the contrasts made by the target language.
Child directed speech
Chomsky’s assertions that adult speech is ‘degenerate’ and that adults do not correct children’s
language have been subjected to considerable scrutiny. The way in which adults address
children appears to be informed by an instinct for how much the child comprehends rather
than attempting to emulate the child’s own speech, and is ﬁnely attuned to the child’s devel-
opment. Child directed speech (once referred to as motherese or baby talk) has been found to
be largely correct grammatically and to contain a number of features (for example, stress and
intonation patterns) which potentially assist the acquisition process. Adults also employ fea-
tures such as tag questions that draw the child into communication. The view that adults
correct content rather than language has been conﬁrmed, but there is extensive evidence in
adult-child discourse of back-channelling and conﬁrmation checks that recast the child’s
productions in a correct form. A caveat here is that most studies of interaction relate to
Western societies; there has been discussion on the extent to which CDS is culturally
determined.
Future trends
Psycholinguists rely increasingly upon brain imaging to conﬁrm and reﬁne assumptions about
language storage and use that are derived from experimental studies. The use of neurolinguis-
tic data is sure to expand as the technology becomes more widely available. Modern scanning
techniques such as fMRI permit, not just a one-oﬀsnapshot of the parts of the brain engaged
in a particular linguistic process, but a sequence of images of how the brain reacts over time.
Similarly, electrodes attached to the scalp can be used to track small variations in electrical
activity in the brain known as event related potentials. Especially promising is the recent use of
this technology with pre-linguistic infants, to investigate the extent to which they respond to
diﬀerent features of phonetic and lexical input.
The eye-tracking equipment employed in reading studies is now being put to other uses,
such as tracking a language user’s gaze across pictures to establish how rapidly semantic rela-
tionships are processed. A parallel trend in writing is the development of computer programs
that log both the keystrokes and the timing of writers. In studies of speech perception,
Psycholinguistics
483

increasing use is being made of synthetic speech, which can be manipulated to heighten
particular features, to reduce audibility or to change speech rate.
A number of unresolved issues identiﬁed in this chapter are likely to feature prominently
over the next few years. They include competition in lexical retrieval; the part played by for-
mulaic language in the assembly of speech; the role of phonology in reading and writing; and
how listeners normalise to voices and accents. Exemplar accounts of language storage and
acquisition will be widely discussed, as will the emergentist view of language which they foster.
The notion of the grammar rule is likely to be further questioned and conventional views of
lexical and phonological categories may be overturned.
Final remarks
Psycholinguistics is a fast-growing ﬁeld of study which has contributed enormously over the
past ﬁfty years to our understanding of language as a phenomenon. However, there are two
causes for regret in relation to its present status. The ﬁrst is the fragmented nature of the ﬁeld,
even within academic institutions: psycholinguists can be found in departments of psychology,
applied linguistics, education, clinical linguistics and speech science, often with limited cross-
departmental links. The second is the failure of psycholinguists to disseminate their ﬁndings
adequately to a wider audience (including within applied linguistics). There is a tendency for
cognitive psychologists to present their results in jargon-heavy prose, intended solely for the
eyes of close colleagues, and not to transmit important insights to others who might beneﬁt
from them. The result is that psycholinguistics is sometimes regarded by the applied linguistics
community as esoteric or unnecessarily complex. Psycholinguists need to do more to build
contacts with those who share their preoccupation with language in use.
Related topics
clinical linguistics; the emergence of language as a complex adaptive system; neurolinguistics;
second language acquisition; sign language
Further reading
Aitchison, J. (2003) Words in the Mind, 3rd edn, Oxford: Blackwell. (An accessible overview of
lexical storage and retrieval.)
Clark, E. V. (2003) First Language Acquisition, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. (Compre-
hensive outline of ﬁndings by a leading name in the ﬁeld.)
Field, J. (2004) Psycholinguistics: The Key Concepts, Abingdon: Routledge. (Reference work aimed
at applied linguists, providing concise outlines of terms and concepts in the ﬁeld.)
Gaskell, M. G. (ed.) (2007) The Oxford Handbook of Psycholinguistics, Oxford: Oxford University
Press. (Comprehensive set of papers by specialists, each reviewing current thinking in one area.)
Oakhill, J. and Garnham, A. (1988) Becoming a Skilled Reader, Oxford: Blackwell. (Extensive
review of both decoding and comprehension in reading.)
Whitney, P. (1998) The Psychology of Language, Boston: Houghton Miﬄin. (Introductory book,
strong on detail and user-friendly for non-psychologists.)
References
Aitchison, J. (2003) Words in the Mind, 3rd edn, Oxford: Blackwell.
Atkinson, R. C. and Shiﬀrin, R. M. (1968) ‘Human memory: a proposed system and its control
processes’, in K. W. Spence and J. T. Spence (eds) The Psychology of Learning and Motivation,
vol. 2, London: Academic Press.
John Field
484

Baddeley, A. D. (1990) Human Memory, Hove: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Bereiter, C. and Scardamalia, M. (1987) The Psychology of Written Composition, Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence
Erlbaum Associates.
Berko, J. (1958) ‘The child’s learning of English morphology’, Word 14: 150–77.
Brown, G. and Yule, G. (1983) Discourse Analysis, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Brown, R. (1973) A First Language: The Early Stages, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Bybee, J. (2001) Phonology and Language Use, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Bybee, J. L. and Hopper, P. (eds) (2001) Frequency and the Emergence of Language Structure,
Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Chomsky, N. (1959) ‘Review of Skinner’s “Verbal Behavior”’, Language 35: 26–58.
——(1965) Aspects of the Theory of Syntax, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Chomsky, N. and Lasnik, H. (1993) ‘The theory of principles and parameters’, in J. Jacobs, W. von
Stechow, W. Sternfeld and T. Vennemann (eds) Syntax: An International Handbook of
Contemporary Research, vol. 1. Berlin: Walter de Gruyter.
Clark, E. V. (1987) ‘The principle of contrast: a constraint on language acquisition’, in B. MacWhinney
(ed.) Mechanisms of Language Acquisition, Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
——(1993) The Lexicon in Acquisition, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Coltheart, M. (2005) ‘Modeling reading: the dual-route approach’, in M. J. Snowling and C. Hulme
(eds) The Science of Reading: A Handbook, Malden, MA: Blackwell.
Cutler, A. (1990) ‘Exploiting prosodic possibilities’, in G. Altmann (ed.) Cognitive Models of Speech
Processing: Psycholinguistic and Computational Perspectives, Cambridge, MA: MIT.
Deacon, T. (1997) The Symbolic Species, London: Penguin.
Field, J. (2008) Listening in the Language Classroom, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Fromkin, V. (ed.) (1980) Errors in Linguistic Performance: Slips of the Tongue, Ear, Pen and Hand,
New York: Academic Press.
Gathercole, S. and Baddeley, A. (1993) Working Memory and Language, Hove: Lawrence Erlbaum
Associates.
Gernsbacher, M. A. (1990) Language Comprehension as Structure Building, Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence
Erlbaum Associates.
Goodman, K. S. (1967) ‘Reading: a psycholinguistic guessing game’, Journal of the Reading
Specialist 6: 126–35.
Gough, P. B. and Wren, S. (1999) ‘Constructing meaning: the role of decoding’, in J. Oakhill and
R. Beard (eds) Reading Development and the Teaching of Reading, Oxford: Blackwell.
Hayes, J. R. and Flower, L. S. (1980) ‘Identifying the organization of writing processes’, in
L. W. Gregg and E. R. Steinberg (eds) Cognitive Processes in Writing, Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence
Erlbaum Associates.
Hintzman, D. L. (1986) ‘Schema abstraction in a multiple-trace memory model’, Psychological
Review 93: 411–28.
Hotopf, W. N. (1983) ‘Lexical slips of the pen and tongue: what they tell us about language pro-
duction’, in B. Butterworth (ed.) Language Production, vol. II: Development, Writing and Other
Language Processes, London: Academic Press.
Johnson, K. and Mullenix, J. W. (1997) ‘Talker Variability in Speech Processing’, San Diego, CA:
Academic Press.
Kellogg, R. T. (1996): ‘A model of working memory in writing’, in C. M. Levy and S. Ransdell, The
Science of Writing, Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Levelt, W. J. M. (1989) Speaking, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
——(1999) ‘Language production: a blueprint of the speaker’, in C. Brown and P. Hagoort (eds)
Neurocognition of Language, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Markman, E. M. (1990) ‘Constraints children place on word meanings’, Cognitive Science 14: 57–77.
Marslen-Wilson, W. and Tyler, L. K. (1980) ‘The temporal structure of spoken language under-
standing’, Cognition 88: 1–71.
Miller, G. (1968) The Psychology of Communication: Seven Essays, London: Penguin.
Perfetti, C. (1985) Reading Ability, New York: Oxford University Press.
Piatelli-Palmarini, M. (1980) Language and Learning: The Debate between Chomsky and Piaget,
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Rastle, K. (2007) ‘Visual word recognition’, in M. G. Gaskell (ed.) The Oxford Handbook of
Psycholinguistics, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Psycholinguistics
485

Rayner, K. and Pollatsek, A. (1989) The Psychology of Reading, Englewood Cliﬀs, NJ: Prentice Hall.
Rosch, E. (1975) ‘Cognitive representations of semantic categories’, Journal of Experimental
Psychology: General 104: 192–233.
Rumelhart, D. E. and McClelland, J. L. (1986) ‘On learning the past tense of English verbs’, in
D. E. Rumelhart, J. L. McClelland and the PDP Research Group (eds) Parallel Distributed
Processing, vol. 1, Cambridge, MA: MIT.
Scardamalia, M. and Bereiter, C. (1987) ‘Knowledge telling and knowledge transforming in written
composition’, in S. Rosenberg (ed.) Advances in Applied Psycholinguistics, vol. 2, Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Shiﬀrin, R. M. and Schneider, W. (1977) ‘Controlled and automatic human information processing:
II’, Psychological Review 84: 127–90.
Skuse, D. H. (1993) ‘Extreme deprivation in early childhood’, in D. Bishop and K. Mogford (eds)
Language Development in Exceptional Circumstances, Hove: Psychology Press.
Smith, N. V. (1973) The Acquisition of Phonology: A Case Study, Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.
van Gompel, R. P. G. and Pickering, M. J. (2007) ‘Syntactic parsing’, in M. G. Gaskell (ed.) The
Oxford Handbook of Psycholinguistics, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Werker, J. F. and Tees, R. C. (1984) ‘Cross-language speech perception: evidence for perceptual
reorganization during the ﬁrst year of life’, Infant Behavior and Development 7: 49–63.
Wray, A. (2002) Formulaic Language and the Lexicon, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
John Field
486

34
Sociocultural and cultural-historical
theories of language development
Steven L. Thorne and Thomas Tasker
Introduction
This chapter describes closely related theories of human development that are rooted in the
writings of the early twentieth-century Russian psychologist, L. S. Vygotsky. Within this approach,
learning and development are seen to occur from the outside in; that is, in contrast to theories
that presume the environment to be a mere trigger for genomic expression, or which posit linear
stage development that is largely a function of biological maturation, Vygotskian sociocultural
theory argues that human mental development is fundamentally constructed through engage-
ment with cultural practices, artifacts, and milieus. In this way, sociocultural/cultural-historical
approaches emphasize the dialectical relationship between ontogenesis (an individual’s devel-
opment across the life span) and the social and material conditions of everyday life, including
those comprising formal instructional settings.
This chapter begins with a discussion of contemporary theories associated with Vygotsky’s ideas
and the core constructs and perspectives that are central to them, namely mediation, internaliza-
tion, the relationship between biology and culture, and the Zone of Proximal Development.
This is followed by a discussion of the contemporary application of sociocultural theories to
second language learning and educationally related research and pedagogy.
Sociocultural and cultural-historical theories
The use of the plural marker with the term sociocultural ‘theories’ has to do with the diﬀerent
labels applied to developmental research directly associated with, or signiﬁcantly inﬂuenced by,
the Vygotskian lineage. The term ‘sociocultural theory’ (SCT) is often used in applied lin-
guistics research, which follows from the early work of James Wertsch, who sought to diﬀer-
entiate Vygotskian theory as it was coming to be developed in the West from what he
perceived as some problematic elements within the Russian tradition (see Wertsch et al. 1995).
Researchers in education, computer science and informatics, workplace studies, cognitive sci-
ence, and other ﬁelds, often produce research under the title cultural-historical activity theory
(or CHAT), with references to A. R. Luria and speciﬁcally A. N. Leont’ev, both of whom
were contemporaries of Vygotsky and who continued and elaborated Vygotsky’s research after
487

his death. In practice, the terms SCT and CHAT have been used interchangeably and even in
collocated form (‘sociocultural/cultural-historical’), since they refer to a common intellectual
tradition and core set of principles. However, the use of CHAT tends to refer speciﬁcally to the
post-Vygotskian framework initiated by A. N. Leont’ev (e.g. 1978, 1981).
One of the more prominent researchers within the Vygotskian tradition, Yrjö Engeström
(2001), helps to clarify the relationship between sociocultural/cultural-historical theories by
describing their historical development over three generations. The ﬁrst generation centers on
Vygotsky and his concept of mediation via ‘auxiliary means’, arguing that cultural tools
enable, and are necessary for, speciﬁcally human forms of cognitive and material functions.
The second generation begins with A. N. Leont’ev (e.g. 1981), who accepted the importance of
cultural mediation but emphasized participation in practical life activity as the principle that
dialectically relates external forms of social life to individual and collective psychology.
Activity in this sense refers to social relations and rules of conduct that are governed by cultural,
political, and economic institutions (Ratner 2002). Engeström describes the third generation’s
on-going task as that of developing conceptual tools to address dialogue, a multiplicity of
perspectives, and the interrelations between deﬁned systems of culturally organized activity (2001).
As part of this eﬀort, what has become known as CHAT has continued to develop as a network
of contemporary conceptual and methodological inﬂuences that incorporate insights from
hybridity scholarship, actor network theory, distributed cognition, and social practice theory,
among others.
For the remainder of this chapter, reference to the broad tradition of sociocultural and
cultural-historical approaches will be designated by SCT, while the use of CHAT will refer
speciﬁcally to cultural-historical activity theory as outlined by post-Vygotskian theorists such
as Leont’ev and Engeström.
Background: the sociogenesis of mind, sociocultural theories, and method
The intellectual roots of sociocultural theories of human development extend back to eight-
eenth- and nineteenth-century German philosophy (particularly Hegel), the sociological and
economic writings of Marx and Engels (speciﬁcally Theses on Feuerbach and The German
Ideology) and most directly to the research of Vygotsky and his colleagues Luria and Leont’ev
(see Valsiner and van der Veer 2000). Despite the fact that Vygotsky suﬀered an early and
untimely death in 1934 at only 38 years of age, he had a tremendously productive career that
was deeply inﬂuenced by the fact that he came of age during the Russian Revolution. In
his work, Vygotsky attempted to formulate ‘a psychology grounded in Marxism’ (Wertsch
1995: 7), which emphasized locating individual development within material, social, and his-
torical conditions. Wertsch (1985: 199) has suggested that Vygotsky’s developmental research
was inspired by three essential principles of Marxist theory: (1) the idea that human con-
sciousness is fundamentally social, rather than biological, in origin; (2) that human activity is
mediated by material artifacts (e.g. computers, hammers) and psychological and symbolic
tools/signs (e.g. language, literacy, numeracy, concepts); and (3) that units of analysis for
understanding human activity and development should be holistic in nature.
These Marxian inﬂuences, coupled with Vygotsky’s insights into method and theory, created
a new ontology of human development, one that shifts away from long entrenched dual-
isms of individual-social and biology-culture and toward a dialectical understanding of biology
and culture as uniﬁed processes that interweave with one another. In an attempt to overcome
the mind-body-society dichotomies that dominated psychology and philosophy early in the
twentieth century (and still today), Vygotsky proposed four mutually inﬂuencing ‘genetic’
Steven L. Thorne and Thomas Tasker
488

(or historical time frame) domains in application to the study of human development. The ﬁrst
is the phylogenesis of humans as a species, which focuses on the approximately two-million-year
co-evolution of human biology in relation to the appearance of language, material tools, and
increasingly complex symbolic and cultural practices. Two examples of the co-evolutionary inter-
play of biology and culture include the evolution of the human hand and oppositional thumb
(providing greater manual dexterity), which is isomorphic with the archaeological record
showing an increasing complexity of material artifacts and implements, and the enlargement
of the frontal cortex of the human brain in tandem with the emergence of language and complex
communication (see Cole 1996; Deacon 1997; Tomasello 1999; Evans and Levinson 2009).
The second time frame is the sociocultural domain, which focuses on the multi-generational
development of human cultures over historical time, with the implication that humans are
born into an existing environment that provides powerful conceptual and material resources
for communication, thinking, problem solving, and acting on the world through the use of
symbolic tools and material implements. Tomasello (1999: 37) coined the term ‘ratchet eﬀect’
to describe the preservation and creative modiﬁcation of both material and symbolic forms of
culture from generation to generation.
The third domain examines the ontogenesis of individuals over the life span. Here Vygotsky
recognized two lines of development: biological maturation through chronological aging, and
the internalization of cultural forms of cognition and behavior beginning in infancy and con-
tinuing across the life span. Ontogenesis can be described as the merger point or nexus of the
phylogenetic and sociocultural domains during which the individual develops out of the
interaction between biological and cultural inheritances (Lantolf and Thorne 2006: 45).
The fourth domain is labeled microgenesis, which describes the particular mental functions,
abilities, and processes that develop over shorter periods of time. The latter two domains
are the most relevant and utilized time frames for applied linguistics and second language (L2)
research, though studies focusing on the phylogenetic domain (Tomasello 1999) and the socio-
cultural domain (Scribner and Cole 1981; Cole 1996) have been highly productive in illumi-
nating the relationships between human cultures and the universal and heterogeneous qualities
of higher-order, which is to say socioculturally informed and internalized, mental functions.
The principle contructs of sociocultural/cultural-historical theories
Internalization, mediation, and regulation
In relation to psychological theory in the early twentieth century, Vygotsky (1981) stated that
the challenge to psychology was to ‘show how the individual response emerges from the forms
of collective life [and] in contrast to Piaget, we hypothesize that development does not proceed
toward socialization, but toward the conversion of social relations into mental functions’
(1981: 165). Drawing from earlier theorists such as Janet (see Valsiner and van der Veer 2000),
Vygotsky termed this process of internalization the ‘genetic law of cultural development’ and
described it as follows:
Any function in the child’s cultural development appears twice, or on two planes. First it
appears on the social plane, and then on the psychological plane. First it appears between
people as an interpsychological category, and then within the child as an intrapsycholo-
gical category. This is equally true with regard to voluntary attention, logical memory, the
formation of concepts, and the development of volition.
(Vygotsky 1981: 163)
Sociocultural theories
489

As this quotation makes clear, higher order cognitive functions, which in addition to those
mentioned above include planning, categorization, interpretive strategies, and forms of
rationality, are internalized and made available as cognitive resources. This process of creative
appropriation occurs through participation in informal social interaction and formal school-
ing, and more generally through exposure to, and use of, semiotic systems such as languages,
textual (and now digital) literacies, numeracy and mathematics, and other historically accu-
mulated cultural practices. In this sense, internalization describes the developmental process
whereby humans gain the capacity to perform complex cognitive and physical-motor functions
with progressively decreasing reliance on overt external assistance, or mediation.
In practical terms, human-created tools and artifacts such as language, explicit and implicit
rules for appropriate conduct, and alarm clocks (to take a few diverse examples) mediate
everyday cognition and interaction in the world, and subsequently, aﬀord humans the capacity
to better control their biological and behavioral activity (Frawley 1997). SCT researchers
describe a developmentally sequenced shift in the locus of control of human activity as object-,
other-, and self-regulation. Object-regulation describes instances when artifacts in the envir-
onment aﬀord or make possible cognition/activity, such as the use of a dictionary to look up
unknown words while reading or writing, the use of PowerPoint or an outline when making an
oral presentation, or pen and paper for making a to-do list or working out mathematical
problems. Other-regulation describes mediation by people and could include explicit or impli-
cit feedback on grammatical form, editorial comments on a manuscript, or guidance from an
expert. Self-regulation, as the label implies, refers to individuals for whom object- or other-
regulation is unnecessary because originally external forms of mediation have been inter-
nalized and are therefore no longer needed for the execution or completion of a task. In this
way, development can be described as the process of gaining greater voluntary control over
one’s capacity to think and act either by becoming more proﬁcient in the use of meditational
resources, or through a lessening of reliance on external meditational means.
Culture, language, cognition, and biology
‘Culture’ in the sense intended by Vygotsky and subsequent sociocultural theorists includes,
but extends far beyond, ‘high culture’ phenomena such as literature, architecture, works of art,
and the like. In a more signiﬁcant way, culture refers to the historical accretion of all of human
life, including the everyday rituals of interpersonal communication, family structure, institu-
tional and group identities, creation and use of material artifacts and technologies, approaches to
problem solving, literacy and numeracy practices, and most fundamentally, to the lexicalization
and grammaticalization patterns speciﬁc to language (or languages).
Thus, the sociocultural tradition argues that human mental functioning is fundamentally a
mediated process that is organized by cultural tools and activities, the primary of which
involve language. The key that links thinking to social and communicative activity resides in
the double function of the linguistic sign, which simultaneously points in two directions –
outwardly, ‘as a unit of social interaction (i.e. a unit of behavior)’, and inwardly, ‘as a unit of
thinking (i.e. as a unit of mind)’ (Prawat 1999: 268, italics in original). The inward or self-
directed use of language as a symbolic tool for cognitive regulation is called ‘private speech’
(see McCaﬀerty 1992; Lantolf 2003). Private speech is deﬁned as an individual’s use of lan-
guage for purposes of maintaining or regaining self-regulation, i.e. to aid in focusing attention,
problem solving, orienting oneself to a task, and to facilitate internalization of novel or diﬃ-
cult information (e.g. language forms) (Frawley 1997; Ohta 2001). The use of initially social
forms of talk to regulate one’s mental activity illustrates the interpenetration between an
Steven L. Thorne and Thomas Tasker
490

individual’s psychology and the sociocultural world. In this sense, language is argued to serve
as the primary tool through which humans construe the world (discussed below), and through
the process of learning a language and using it for cognitive regulation, biologically endowed
capacities for perception and cognition are reshaped into culturally and conceptually speciﬁc
forms of perception and thinking (Lantolf and Thorne 2007).
From within the sociocultural tradition, Vološinov describes the relationship between signs/
language and consciousness as follows:
Consciousness takes shape and being in the material of signs created by an organized
group in the process of its social intercourse. The individual consciousness is nurtured on
signs; it derives growth from them; it reﬂects their logic and laws. The logic of con-
sciousness is the logic of ideological communication, of the semiotic interaction of a
social group.
(Vološinov 1973: 13)
This view of language-as-culture and language as a building block for consciousness and per-
ception is supported by current linguistic, anthropological, and neuroscience research asso-
ciated with the Sapir-Whorf hypothesis of linguistic relativity (e.g. Whorf 1956; Gumperz and
Levinson 1996; Slobin 1996; Gentner and Goldin-Meadow 2003). Linguistic relativity is the
notion that the organization of language and its conventions carries forward historically
developed systems of meaning – what can be termed more simply as culture – into the here-
and-now of activity in the present (for a review, see Lucy 1996). Indeed, the diversity of obli-
gatory semantic distinctions that characterize all languages has been demonstrated to corre-
spond to habitual and speech-community speciﬁc forms of thought in the areas of spatial
cognition (Bowerman and Choi 2003; Levinson 2003a) and categorization (Lakoﬀ1987).
Levinson (2003b) sums up the cognition-language-culture connections of this position as
follows:
(1) languages vary in their semantics just as they do in their form, (2) semantic diﬀerences
are bound to engender cognitive diﬀerences, (3) these cognitive correlates of semantic
diﬀerences can be empirically found on a widespread basis.
(Levinson 2003b: 41–2)
Sociocultural theory places great emphasis on the linguistic means people employ in the
service of everyday activity, whether oriented toward multiparty communication or to regulate
one’s own cognitive activity. This has resulted in aﬃnities between sociocultural theories of
development and systemic functional linguistics (see Wells 1999), as well as a proposal to
selectively recover key insights from early research on semiotics and communication (as out-
lined by Peirce, Wittgenstein, Garﬁnkel, and others), and to bring these traditions into contact
with contemporary scholarship drawing upon corpus-informed theories of language structure
and usage-based models of language acquisition (e.g. Hopper 1998; Tomasello 2003; Thorne
and Lantolf 2007). Language in the sense deﬁned by sociocultural theory is not concerned
with rule-governed, a priori, or prescriptivist conceptions of grammar, but instead focuses on
communicative resources, such as semiosis and gesture, that are formed and reformed in the
very activity in which they are used – in situated and goal-directed communicative and
cognitive activity.
This view of language is very much aligned with recent research emerging from cognitive-
functional linguistics and usage-based approaches to language development, which emphasize
Sociocultural theories
491

that language structure emerges from, rather than precedes, language use (see Hopper 1998).
A principle contributor to usage-based approaches is the evolutionary anthropologist and lin-
guist Michael Tomasello, who describes the integration of child language learning with the
more general cognitive and social skills of intention-reading and pattern recognition. He notes
that these skills are ‘evolutionarily fairly old, probably possessed in some form by all primates’
(2003: 4), and hence, like other Vygotskian developmental psychologists, such as Luria (1976)
and Cole (1996), Tomasello acknowledges the contribution of evolutionarily developed cogni-
tive adaptations that make language learning possible. However, in sharp contrast to propo-
nents of biologically driven models of language acquisition, Tomasello’s empirical research
supports a dual inheritance theory: humans inherit both genes and sociocultural environments.
Tomasello argues that ‘children begin to acquire language when they do because the learning
process depends crucially on the more fundamental skills of joint attention, intention-reading,
and cultural learning – which emerge near the end of the ﬁrst year of life’ (2003: 21). From
this perspective, language learning occurs through the imitative process of cultural learning,
and the biological capacity supporting language learning is not speciﬁc to language per se, but
involves the broader ability to share attentional frames and to culturally attune to, and to imitate,
the intentional actions, gesture and gaze orientations, and conceptual perspectives exhibited by
people in one’s environment. Tomasello emphasizes that homo sapiens has evolved the capa-
city for cultural learning in particular, which is supported by more general (non-language
speciﬁc) cognitive skills such as schematization, categorization, pattern ﬁnding, and analogy-
making. Usage-based models of language acquisition have been recently incorporated into
sociocultural theorizations of second language development, notably by Lantolf and Thorne
(2006) and Thorne and Lantolf (2007), and more broadly, have come to inform a variety of
cognitive and computational approaches to second language and applied linguistics research
(e.g. N. Ellis 2008; Zykik 2009).
The zone of proximal development and dynamic assessment
Among Vygotsky’s numerous contributions to developmental psychology, the zone of proximal
development (ZPD) has had arguably the greatest impact (Chaiklin 2003; related to L2
research, see Kinginger 2002). According to Chaiklin’s (2003) exhaustive search of Vygotsky’s
available published works, there are a total of eight that mention the ZPD. Though the ZPD
concept is often assumed to have originated with Vygtosky, Vygotsky himself credits American
psychologists, particularly Meumann and McCarthy, with establishing the ‘double-level
approach’ of attempting to understand not only what a child can do at a given point in time,
but also what his or her future potential might be.
The most frequently referenced deﬁnition of the ZPD is ‘the distance between the actual
developmental level as determined by independent problem solving and the level of potential
development as determined through problem solving under adult guidance or in collaboration
with more capable peers’ (Vygotsky 1978: 86). With greater speciﬁcity, Vygotsky describes the
ZPD as follows:
The [ZPD] deﬁnes those functions that have not yet matured but are in the process of
maturation, functions that will mature tomorrow but are currently in an embryonic state.
These functions could be termed ‘buds’ or ‘ﬂowers’ of development rather than the ‘fruits’
of development. The actual developmental level characterizes mental development retro-
spectively, while the [ZPD] characterizes mental development prospectively. … the [ZPD]
permits us to delineate the child’s immediate future and his dynamic developmental state,
Steven L. Thorne and Thomas Tasker
492

allowing not only for what already has been achieved developmentally but also for what is
in the course of maturing.
(Vygotsky 1978: 86–7)
Thus, the deﬁning aspect of the ZPD concept is that, in contrast to traditional assessment
measures that indicate the level of development that has been already attained, the ZPD is
forward-looking through its assertion that mediated performance, and importantly the dis-
covery of the qualities of assistance necessary for an individual to perform particular compe-
tencies, are indicative of the readiness for independent functioning in the future. Vygotsky was
particularly interested in the eﬀects of formal schooling on cognitive development.
One of Vygotsky’s most important ﬁndings is that learning collaboratively with others,
particularly in instructional settings, precedes and shapes development. The relationship
between learning and development is not directly causal, but intentionally designed learning
environments (e.g. instructed L2 settings) can stimulate qualitative developmental changes. In
this sense, the ZPD is not only a model of the developmental process, but also a conceptual
tool that educators can use to understand aspects of students’ emerging capacities that are in
early stages of maturation. When used proactively, teachers using the ZPD as a diagnostic
have the potential to create conditions for learning that may give rise to speciﬁc forms of
development in the future. This point leads to a topic discussed later in this chapter – assess-
ment practices rooted in the ZPD.
Within applied linguistics and language educational research, the diverse adoptions and
adaptations of the ZPD concept may not always align with doctrinal interpretations of
Vygotskian theory (see Chaiklin 2003; Donato 2004). The ZPD concept has proliferated to the
point that it now encompasses research and pedagogical innovation that includes parent–child
interaction, teacher–student interaction, and peer interaction dynamics. The ZPD has been
applied primarily in regard to individual development, but it has also been proposed as a
model of whole class teaching (Guk and Kellogg 2007). It is clear that the ZPD concept is
divergently understood, and this is the case not only for casual adopters, but also is evident
among researchers working primarily or exclusively within cultural-historical psychology itself.
In a review of research in applied linguistics and second language research, Kinginger
(2002) has identiﬁed three uses of the ZPD, each of which diﬀer from, or signiﬁcantly extend,
Vygotsky’s core emphasis on the learner and emerging capacities: (1) a ‘skills’ interpretation,
(2) a ‘scaﬀolding’ interpretation, and (3) a ‘metalinguistic’ interpretation. Within what she
considers to be the most problematic category, the ‘skills’ interpretation, Kinginger identiﬁes
uses of the ZPD concept that illustrate:
a process of reduction and simpliﬁcation such that [use of the ZPD] can serve to justify
extant institutionalized practices and reinforce traditional views of the language class-
room as a locus of skill acquisition in the service of standardized education. Stripped of
its original meanings, the ZPD is inserted into a conventional descriptive scheme and
provides no new object for reﬂection on theory or practice.
(Kinginger 2002: 253)
For its part, the ‘scaﬀolding interpretation’ involves an interesting reciprocal formulation of
the ZPD, where ostensibly the focus is on the learner, but in actual fact, and certainly as an
entailment of the scaﬀolding metaphor, power is located primarily in the teacher or expert who
is providing the ‘scaﬀold’ or assistance. In most descriptions of scaﬀolding, the adult (or tea-
cher) ‘controls’ the elements that are beyond the child’s capacity, allowing the child to focus on
Sociocultural theories
493

‘only those elements that are within his range of competence’ (Wood et al. 1976). It is this
element of scaﬀolding that has been explicitly linked to the ZPD (see Rogoﬀand Wertsch
1984; Bruner 1986), and in some cases, seems to have erroneously become synonymous with it
(see Stone 1993, for a discussion). In summarizing the ‘skills’ and ‘scaﬀolding’ variants of the
ZPD, Kinginger (2002) notes that in the skills case, the ZPD concept is uncritically appro-
priated and used to describe what are essentially transmission models of teaching (see Moll
1989), and while the scaﬀolding interpretation productively acknowledges contingently
provided assistance, as the name would suggest, there is an implicit shift in focus from
development (ZPD) to instruction (scaﬀolding).
Kinginger describes a third, and in her (and our) assessment, a highly productive exten-
sion of the ZPD which emphasizes metalinguistic functions of language use and learner dis-
cussion about their own language production. In this vein, Swain and colleagues (Swain 2000;
Swain et al. 2009) describe ‘collaborative dialogue’ and ‘languaging’ as uses of language that
help to problem solve, share and build knowledge, and complete thoughts. Swain et al. (2009:
5) deﬁne languaging as ‘a form of verbalization used to mediate the solution(s) to complex
problems and tasks’ and the use of language to shape knowledge and experience. The meta-
linguistic function of language is critical to the learning processes as it externalizes current
thinking and ideas, which in turn become objects for individual and collaborative reﬂection
and transformative action.
Within applied linguistics, there have been a number of elaborations and proposals for the
broadening of the ZPD concept. Wells (1999) has suggested that the ZPD need not be char-
acterized as a ﬁxed or stable attribute of an individual or environment, but rather as an
unpredictable nexus of people and tools in joint activity, which together create conditions for
transformation and development. In a number of publications, Mercer (2000, 2002) describes
what he terms the Intermental Development Zone (IDZ), which draws elements from both the
ZPD and scaﬀolding. The IDZ is deﬁned as a ‘contextualizing framework for joint activity,
whose eﬀectiveness is likely to depend on how well a teacher can create and maintain con-
nections between the curriculum-based goals of activity and a learner’s existing knowledge,
capabilities, and motivations’ (Mercer 2002: 143). In an insightful revision of the ZPD,
Negueruela (2008) has proposed the Zone of Potential Development (ZPOD) as a ZPD-
informed approach that is more attuned to second language acquisition and adult L2 learning.
Negueruela argues that development follows diverse trajectories. Thus, by replacing ‘proximal’
with ‘potential’, he removes the telos of a ‘proximal’ next stage of development, and acknowl-
edges situational contingency and the necessity of a learner’s agency in realizing his or her
developmental path. In particular, Negueruela stresses the importance of concepts as ‘psy-
chological mediators’ and the importance of ‘devising pedagogical sequences that allow learners
to create their own conceptualizations through guided imitation’ (2008: 2001).
The ZPD has also come to inform a proposal for the dialectical union of assessment and
learning called Dynamic Assessment (DA). DA is a procedure that uniﬁes the goals of assessing a
learner’s developmental potential through structured sets of interactions that also are meant to
foster learning. DA methods of assessment involve mediating an examinee’s performance by
providing a scaled continuum of learner-contingent prompts, leading questions, and more
direct assistance during the assessment intervention itself. Its primary goal is to fuse assess-
ment procedures with interactive opportunities for learning, and in so doing, to produce a
more nuanced understanding of an examinee’s current level of development and future
potential. Though further discussion is beyond the scope of this chapter, Lantolf and Poehner
(2004) provide an in-depth description of DA use in education broadly, and also suggest
guidelines for its use in second- and foreign-language contexts. Additionally, Poehner (2008)
Steven L. Thorne and Thomas Tasker
494

describes DA in use with learners of French as a foreign language and extends its principles to
formative assessment and foreign language classroom practice.
SCT and CHAT: applied research and pedagogy
Vygotsky was inspired by Marxist notions of social justice and spent much of his career
committed to research and pedagogical interventions that he hoped would positively inﬂuence
public education, a project that was nascent in Russia (and the world) at that time and which
he hoped would serve a socially progressive function (Prawat 2000).
In principle, SCT investigations aim to aﬀord analyses that will lead to the development of
material and symbolic-conceptual tools necessary to enact positive interventions. Though SCT
is also used descriptively and analytically as a diagnostic framework, its essence is to take a
situation or condition and transform it in an eﬀort to create something qualitatively new. In
this sense, SCT, and in particular CHAT, have been used equally as research frameworks and
heuristics supporting innovation in a wide array of contexts, including education (Engeström
1987; Prior 1998; Daniels 2001; Sawchuk et al. 2007), human-computer interaction (Kaptelinin
and Nardi 2006) and uses of new media (Thorne 2003, 2009), and second- and foreign lan-
guage learning (Kramsch 2000; Lantolf 2000; Thorne 2000, 2005; Swain and Lapkin 2002;
Robbins 2003; van Lier 2004).
To conclude with speciﬁc examples of SCT-informed applied linguistics research, two con-
texts and approaches will be brieﬂy reviewed: concept-based teaching and the use of CHAT in
teacher professional development and school restructuring projects.
Concept-based teaching, also referred to as Systemic-Theoretical Instruction (STI), is an
approach that is closely associated with the work of Gal’perin (1992). In this approach peda-
gogical materials are conceived of as cognitive tools. Gal’perin emphasized the importance of
orienting students to the conceptual structuring of complex domains of knowledge and/or
action, or the ‘orienting basis’ for action, which he argued must precede guided practice
(Arievitch and Stetsenko 2000: 86). Gal’perin’s model proposes that without a conceptually
coherent orientation, learning is not optimized and instead occurs on a hit-or-miss basis.
Within foreign language education, Negueruela (2003, 2008: 203) outlines four essential prin-
ciples and processes of this model: (1) the minimal unit of L2 instruction is the concept;
(2) concepts must be materialized – for example, in the form of diagrams and ﬂow charts, so as
to help learners understand the semantic, structural and functional properties of the target
concepts; (3) learners verbalize the processes and linguistic choices represented in concept-
based materializations; and (4) the concepts and/or categories of meaning represented by the
materializations must be systematically connected to other relevant concepts. Areas of L2
grammar instruction that have been addressed using concept-based instruction include the
organization of tense, aspect, and mood in a university-level Spanish foreign language course
(Negueruela 2003, 2008); the formation of the passive voice by L2 learners of German
(Kabanova 1985); the grammatical concept of voice in L2 French (Swain et al. 2009); and
deontic and directive language use for advanced learners of English in preparation for taking
on instructional roles as teaching assistants (Thorne et al. 2008).
A CHAT-informed approach called Developmental Work Research (DWR) (Engeström
1999, 2007) has been used to assist people in addressing the contradictions and problems they
face in the workplace. DWR methodology involves creating a space for participants and
interventionist-researchers to explore the past and current practices of the group. The partici-
pants are then introduced to CHAT as a conceptual tool that they can use to identify, make
sense of, and potentially use to overcome the workplace contradictions they face. Engeström
Sociocultural theories
495

(2007) states that DWR methodology aligns with Vygotsky’s (1978) ‘method of double stimu-
lation’ in that the participants are presented with a problem or contradiction that they them-
selves have identiﬁed (the ﬁrst stimulus), and then are guided by mediational means introduced
by the researcher (the second stimulus) with the goal of developing new understandings and
potential solutions.
Daniels et al. (2007) explored the professional development of educators engaged in forging
a partnership between schools and agencies with the goal of promoting creativity. In a series of
meetings and workshops, the participants explored the divergent goals of the groups involved
and eventually developed the tools they needed to form a productive partnership. In related
research, V. Ellis (2008) has applied DWR methodology to investigate the trajectory of teacher
professional development. Ellis examined the transformation of school–university activity
systems through a program aimed at remediating relationships between pre-service and mentor
teachers. Implementing collaborative planning led to changes in the way some of the mentor
teachers conceptualized professional learning and increased the opportunities for dialogue
with novice teachers. In these studies, DWR methodology with CHAT provided the means for
educators to explore novel solutions to entrenched contradictions in the workplace that resulted
in new understandings of professional practice and new systems of professional activity.
Summary
This chapter has described the intellectual foundation of sociocultural/cultural-historical per-
spectives on human development and their relevance to applied linguistics research and peda-
gogy. At the core of this approach is mediation, the principle that humans do not act directly
on the world – rather their cognitive and material activities are mediated by cultural tools,
artifacts and technologies. The concept of internalization describes the processes through
which interpersonal and person–environment interactions form, and transform, one’s internal
mental functions. This developmental process occurs within the ZPD, which is deﬁned as the
diﬀerence between the level of development already obtained and that which may only be
possible, and visible, in joint activity. In this sense, the ZPD is a model of developmental
processes, and through related methods such as dynamic assessment, can provide insight into
students’ emerging capacities that are in early stages of maturation.
Because of its emphasis on praxis, SCT is both a powerful analytic research framework and
also an approach with deep roots in emancipatory traditions of activist engagement. In other
words, SCT, and particularly CHAT, encourage engaged critical analysis that supports the
development of material and symbolic tools necessary to enact positive change. In this sense,
the value of the theory resides not just in the analytical lens it provides for understanding
human development, but in its capacity to directly impact that development.
Related topics
language and culture; language emergence; language learning and language education; SLA
Further reading
Lantolf, J. P. (ed.) (2000) Sociocultural Theory and Second Language Learning, Oxford: Oxford
University Press. (Lantolf includes a diverse range of chapters by leading scholars in second lan-
guage acquisition and pedagogy, addressing primarily L2 classroom research focused on issues of
mediation, the ZPD, identity, teacher development, and the relation of SCT to other theories of
language, learning, and social practice.)
Steven L. Thorne and Thomas Tasker
496

Lantolf, J. P. and Thorne, S. L. (2006) Sociocultural Theory and the Genesis of Second Language
Development, Oxford: Oxford University Press. (Lantolf and Thorne present a close exegesis of
fundamental tenets of SCT and CHAT and provide a comprehensive review of existing L2
research and pedagogical projects.)
Lantolf, J. P. and Poehner, M. E. (2008). Sociocultural Theory and the Teaching of Second Lan-
guages, London: Equinox. (Lantolf and Poehner, focusing exclusively on issues of L2 teaching
and pedagogy, have published an edited volume that includes chapters addressing concept-based
teaching, dynamic assessment, and instructional initiatives framed by the ZPD and related constructs.)
Lantolf, J. P. and Beckett, T. (2009) ‘Sociocultural theory and second language acquisition’, Lan-
guage Teaching 42(4): 459–75. (Lantolf and Beckett (2009: 1) provide a ‘research timeline’ of L2
SCT studies that includes synopses of forty-eight ‘notable publications, all of which in some way
implicate the basic claim … that all mental activity is symbolically mediated’.)
van Lier, L. (2004) The Ecology and Semiotics of Language Learning: A Sociocultural Perspective,
Boston: Kluwer Academic. (Van Lier insightfully combines Vygotskian theory with detailed
discussions of semiotics and ecological approaches to language and L2 development.)
References
Arievitch, I. and Stetsenko, A. (2000) ‘The quality of cultural tools and cognitive development:
Gal’perin’s perspective and its implications’, Human Development 43: 69–92.
Bowerman, M. and Choi, S. (2003) ‘Space under construction: language-speciﬁc spatial categor-
ization in ﬁrst language acquisition’, in D. Gentner and S. Goldin-Meadow (eds) Language in
Mind, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Bruner, J. S. (1986) Actual Minds, Possible Worlds, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Chaiklin, S. (2003) ‘The zone of proximal development in Vygotsky’s analysis of learning and
instruction’, in A. Kozulin, B. Gidnis, V. S. Ageyev and S. Miller (eds) Vygotsky’s Educational
Theory in Cultural Context, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Cole, M. (1996) Cultural Psychology: A Once and Future Discipline, Cambridge, MA: Belknap Press.
Daniels, H. (2001) Vygotsky and Pedagogy, London: RoutledgeFalmer.
Daniels, H., Leadbetter, J., Soares, A. and MacNab, N. (2007) ‘Learning in and for cross-school
working’, Oxford Review of Education 33: 125–42.
Deacon, T. (1997) The Symbolic Species: The Co-evolution of Language and the Brain, New York:
W. W. Norton & Company.
Donato, R. (2004) ‘Aspects of collaboration in pedagogical discourse’, Annual Review of Applied
Linguistics 24: 284–302.
Ellis, N. C. (2008) ‘Usage-based and form-focused language acquisition: the associative learning of
constructions, learned-attention, and the limited L2 endstate’, in P. Robinson and N. C. Ellis
(eds) Handbook of Cognitive Linguistics and Second Language Acquisition, London: Routledge.
Ellis, V. (2008) ‘Exploring the contradictions in learning to teach: the potential of Developmental
Work Research’, Changing English: Studies in Culture and Education 16(1): 53–63.
Engeström, Y. (1987) Learning by Expanding: An Activity Theoretical Approach to Developmental
Research, Helsinki: Orienta-Konsultit.
——(1999) ‘Innovative learning in work teams: analysing cycles of knowledge creation in practice’,
in Y. Engeström, R. Miettinen and R.-L. Punamäki (eds) Perspectives on Activity Theory,
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
——(2001) ‘Expansive learning at work: toward an activity theoretical reconceptualization’, Journal
of Education and Work 14: 133–56.
——(2007) ‘Putting Vygotsky to work: the change laboratory as an application of double stimula-
tion’, in H. Wells, M. Cole and J. V. Wertsch (eds) The Cambridge Companion to Vygotsky, New
York: Cambridge University Press.
Evans, N. and Levinson, S. C. (2009) ‘The myth of language universals: language diversity and its
importance for cognitive science’, Behavioral and Brain Sciences 32(5): 429–92.
Frawley, W. (1997) Vygotsky and Cognitive Science. Language and the Uniﬁcation of the Social and
Computational Mind, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Gal’perin, P. (1992) ‘Linguistic consciousness and some questions of the relationships between lan-
guage and thought’, Journal of Russian and East European Psychology 30(4): 28–49.
Sociocultural theories
497

Gentner, D. and Goldin-Meadow, S. (eds) (2003) Language in Mind, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Guk, I. and Kellogg, D. (2007) ‘The ZPD and whole class teaching: teacher-led and student-led
interactional mediation of tasks’, Language Teaching Research 11(3): 281–99.
Gumperz, J. J. and Levinson, S. C. (1996) Rethinking Linguistic Relativity, Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Hopper, P. (1998) ‘Emergent grammar’, in M. Tomasello (ed.) The New Psychology of Language:
Cognitive and Functional Approaches to Language Study, London: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Kabanova, O. Ya. (1985) ‘The teaching of foreign languages’, Instructional Science 14: 1–47.
Kaptelinin, V. and Nardi, B. (2006) Acting with Technology: Activity Theory and Interaction Design,
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Kinginger, C. (2002) ‘Deﬁning the zone of proximal development in US foreign language educa-
tion’, Applied Linguistics 23: 240–61.
Kramsch, C. (2000) ‘Social discursive constructions of self in L2 learning’, in J. P. Lantolf (ed.)
Sociocultural Theory and Second Language Learning, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Lakoﬀ, G. (1987) Women, Fire, and Dangerous Things: What Categories Reveal about the Mind,
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Lantolf, J. P. (2000) ‘Second language learning as a mediated process’, Language Teaching 33: 79–96.
——(2003) ‘Intrapersonal communication and internalization in the second language classroom’, in
A. Kozulin, V. S. Ageev, S. Miller and B. Gindis (eds) Vygotsky’s Theory of Education in Cultural
Context, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Lantolf, J. P. and Poehner, M. E. (2004) ‘Dynamic assessment: bringing the past into the future’,
Journal of Applied Linguistics 1: 49–74.
Lantolf, J. and Thorne, S. L. (2006) Sociocultural Theory and the Genesis of Second Language
Development, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
——(2007) ‘Sociocultural theory and second language acquisition’, in B. van Patten and J. Williams
(eds) Explaining Second Language Acquisition, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Leont’ev, A. N. (1978) Activity, Consciousness, and Personality, Englewood Cliﬀs, NJ: Prentice Hall.
——(1981) ‘The problem of activity in psychology’, in J. V. Wertsch (ed.) The Concept of Activity in
Soviet Psychology, Armonk, NY: M. E. Sharpe.
Levinson, S. (2003a) Space in Language and Cognition, New York: Cambridge.
——(2003b) ‘Language and mind’, in D. Gentner and S. Goldin-Meadow (eds) Language in Mind,
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Lucy, J. A. (1996) ‘The scope of linguistic relativity: an analysis and review of empirical research’, in
J. J. Gumperz and S. C. Levinson (eds) Rethinking Linguistic Relativity, New York: Cambridge
University Press.
Luria, A. R. (1976) Cognitive Development: Its Cultural and Social Foundations, Cambridge, MA:
Harvard University Press.
McCaﬀerty, S. (1992) ‘The use of private speech by adult second language learners: a cross-cultural
study’, Modern Language Journal 78: 179–89.
Mercer, N. (2000) Words and Minds: How We Use Language to Think Together, London:
Routledge.
——(2002) ‘Developing dialogues’, in G. Wells and G. Claxton (eds) Learning for Life in the 21st
Century: Sociocultural Perspectives on the Future of Education, Oxford: Blackwell.
Moll, L. (1989) ‘Teaching second language students: a Vygotskian perspective’, in D. M. Johnson
and D. H. Oren (eds) Richness in Writing: Empowering ESL Students, New York: Longman.
Negueruela, E. (2003) ‘A Sociocultural Approach to the Teaching and Learning of Second Languages:
Systemic-theoretical Instruction and L2 Development’, Ph.D. Dissertation, Pennsylvania State
University.
——(2008) ‘Revolutionary pedagogies: learning that leads (to) second language development’, in
J. P. Lantolf and M. E. Poehner (eds) Sociocultural Theory and the Teaching of Second Lan-
guages, London: Equinox.
Ohta, A. S. (2001) Second Language Acquisition Processes in the Classroom: Learning Japanese,
Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Poehner, M. E. (2008) Dynamic Assessment: A Vygotskian Approach to Understanding and Pro-
moting Second Language Development, Berlin: Springer.
Prawat, R. (1999) ‘Social constructivism and the process-content distinction as viewed by Vygotsky
and the Pragmatists’, Mind, Culture, and Activity, 6: 255–73.
Steven L. Thorne and Thomas Tasker
498

——(2000) ‘Dewey meets the “Mozart of psychology” in Moscow: the untold story’, American
Education Research Journal 37: 663–96.
Prior, P. A. (1998). Writing/Disciplinarity: A Sociohistorical Account of Literate Activity in the
Academy, Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Ratner, C. (2002) Cultural Psychology: Theory and Method, New York: Kluwer Academic/Plenum
Publishers.
Robbins, D. (2003) Vygotsky’s and A. A. Leontiev’s Semiotics and Psycholinguistics: Applications for
Education, Second Language Acquisition, and Theories of Language, Westport, CT: Praeger.
Rogoﬀ, B. and Wertsch, J. V. (eds) (1984) Children’s Learning in the ‘Zone of Proximal Develop-
ment’, San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
Sawchuk, P., Duarte, N. and Elhammoumi, M. (2007) Critical Perspectives on Activity, New York:
Cambridge.
Scribner, S. and Cole, M. (1981) The Psychology of Literacy, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Slobin, D. (1996) ‘From “thought and language” to “thinking for speaking”’, in J. J. Gumperz and
S. C. Levinson (eds) Rethinking Linguistic Relativity, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Stone, C. A. (1993) ‘What’s missing in the metaphor of scaﬀolding?’, in E. A. Forman, N. Minick
and C. A. Stone (eds) Contexts of Learning: Sociocultural Dynamics of Children’s Development,
New York: Oxford University Press.
Swain, M. (2000) ‘The output hypothesis and beyond: mediating acquisition through collaborative
dialogue’, in J. P. Lantolf (ed.) Sociocultural Theory and Second Language Acquisition, Oxford:
Oxford University Press.
Swain, M. and Lapkin, S. (2002) ‘Talking it through: two French immersion learners’ response to
reformulation’, International Journal of Educational Research 37: 285–304.
Swain, M., Lapkin, S., Knouzzi, I., Suzuki, W. and Brooks, L. (2009) ‘Languaging: university stu-
dents learn the grammatical concept of voice in French’, The Modern Language Journal 93: 5–27.
Thorne, S. L. (2000) ‘Second language acquisition and the truths about relativity’, in J. P. Lantolf
(ed.) Sociocultural Theory and Second Language Acquisition, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
——(2003) ‘Artifacts and cultures-of-use in intercultural communication’, Language Learning and
Technology 7(2): 38–67.
——(2005) ‘Epistemology, politics, and ethics in sociocultural theory’, The Modern Language Journal
89: 393–409.
——(2009) ‘“Community”, semiotic ﬂows, and mediated contribution to activity’, Language Teaching
42(1): 81–94.
Thorne, S. L. and Lantolf, J. P. (2007) ‘A linguistics of communicative activity’, in S. Makoni and
A. Pennycook (eds.) Disinventing and Reconstituting Languages, Clevedon: Multilingual Matters.
Thorne, S. L., Reinhardt, J. and Golombek, P. (2008) ‘Mediation as objectiﬁcation in the develop-
ment of professional discourse: a corpus-informed curricular innovation’, in J. P. Lantolf and
M. E. Poehner (eds) Sociocultural Theory and the Teaching of Second Languages, London:
Equinox.
Tomasello, M. (1999) The Cultural Origins of Human Cognition, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University
Press.
——(2003) Constructing Language: A Usage-based Theory of Language Acquisition, Cambridge,
MA: Harvard University Press.
Valsiner, J. and van der Veer, R. (2000) The Social Mind: Construction of the Idea, Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
van der Veer, R. and Valsiner, J. (1993) Understanding Vygotsky: A Quest for Synthesis, Cambridge,
MA and Oxford: Blackwell.
van Lier, L. (2004) The Ecology and Semiotics of Language Learning: A Sociocultural Perspective,
Boston, MA: Kluwer Academic.
Vološinov, V. N. (1973) Marxism and the Philosophy of Language, New York: Seminar Press.
Vygotsky, L. S. (1978) Mind in Society: The Development of Higher Psychological Processes, in
M. Cole, V. John-Steiner, S. Scribner and E. Souberman (eds), Cambridge, MA: Harvard University
Press.
——(1981) ‘The genesis of higher mental functions’, in J. V. Wertsch (ed.) The Concept of Activity
in Soviet Psychology, Armonk, NY: M. E. Sharpe.
Wells, G. (1999) Dialogic Inquiry: Toward a Sociocultural Practice and Theory of Education, New
York: Cambridge University Press.
Sociocultural theories
499

Wertsch, J. V. (1985) Vygotsky and the Social Formation of Mind, Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press.
——(1995) ‘The need for action in sociocultural research’, in J. V. Wertsch, P. del Río and
A. Alvarez (eds) Sociocultural Studies of Mind, New York: Cambridge University Press.
Wertsch, J. V. del Río, P. and Alvarez, A. (eds) (1995) Sociocultural Studies of Mind, Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Whorf, B. (1956) ‘The relation of habitual thought and behavior to language’, in J. B. Carroll (ed.)
Language, Thought and Reality: Selected Writings of Benjamin Lee Whorf, Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press.
Wood, D., Bruner, J. and Ross, G. (1976) ‘The role of tutoring in problem-solving’, Journal of Child
Psychology and Psychiatry 17: 89–100.
Zykik, E. (2009) ‘The role of input revisited: nativist versus usage-based models’, L2 Journal 1(1):
42–61.
Steven L. Thorne and Thomas Tasker
500

35
Sociolinguistics
Carmen Llamas
Introduction
Sociolinguistics as a ﬁeld is extremely wide-ranging and includes a multitude of models,
methods and theoretical frameworks. Dealing, as it does, with language use in social contexts,
research in the area of sociolinguistics concerns itself primarily with how language is actually
used by speakers: how it varies, how it changes, how meaning is signalled and interpreted in social
interaction. As such, as well as allowing a better understanding of the structure of language and of
the structure of society, sociolinguistic ﬁndings also have immediate and signiﬁcant applied value.
Surveys which document the facts of linguistic variation over geographical space, and stu-
dies which describe structured variation in the speech of a socially stratiﬁed sample of speakers
provide much-needed knowledge and points of reference for all manner of people who are
responsible for taking language-related decisions in the real world. For the forensic phoneti-
cian in a court of law assessing a case involving disputed utterances or speaker identiﬁcation,
being in possession of detailed knowledge of regional and social varieties of a language will
clearly be necessary. For the speech and language therapist responsible for assessing the needs
and problems of the late developing child, understanding the nature of and processes involved
in the emergence of structured variation will undoubtedly be advantageous. And for the lan-
guage planner developing the policies involved in maintaining a minority language and raising
its status in the community, knowledge of the relevant language attitudes and the functions of
code-switching in the multilingual community will have obvious beneﬁts. Countless other
contexts involving real-life language-related issues and problems are aided by knowledge and
insights gained through research that is undertaken within the sociolinguistic ﬁeld of enquiry.
By providing a level of understanding of how language is used to signal who we are and how
we ﬁt into the world, sociolinguistic research is immediately relevant to questions involving
language users in real world contexts. Indeed, it could be argued that sociolinguists have a
particular responsibility to take an ethically involved position and to use the knowledge they
gain to inﬂuence the direction of government language policies, educational practices and so
on (see, for example, Wolfram 1998).
Within the ﬁeld, it is naturally occurring speech data, rather than intuitions about how
language is structured, which constitute the basis for much of what can be described as
501

sociolinguistic research. Variation in language use, which is inherent and ubiquitous, is centrally
important in sociolinguistics. The structured variability in language, which is systematic
and socially conditioned, is not dismissed as free or random, nor (being diﬃcult to model
elegantly) of little consequence to mainstream linguistic theory. Analysis of this structured
variation, and of the linguistic and social constraints on it, allow us to better understand how
and why language changes. And knowledge of how and why language varies across time, space,
place, topic, audience, style and so on is of direct beneﬁt to those who make language-related
decisions.
For some, variationist sociolinguistics/sociophonetics – associated with the work of William
Labov – lies at the heart of sociolinguistics as a discipline, and the statistical correlation of
structured variation in production patterns with global social variables such as socio-economic
class and gender is considered the core area of research in the ﬁeld. Indeed, Cameron (1990:
82) argues that ‘the rise and rise of the quantitative paradigm’ has led to the marginalisation
of other methods and models which can sit comfortably underneath the umbrella term of
sociolinguistics to the extent that:
for most people in the ﬁeld (and especially most linguists in the ﬁeld) ‘sociolinguistics’
does indeed mean primarily if not exclusively ‘Labovian quantitative sociolinguistics’.
Others take a broader view, and for them the ﬁeld of sociolinguistics subsumes both varia-
tionist sociolinguistics and interactional sociolinguistics, as well as ﬁelds such as the sociology
of language and linguistic anthropology, among others.
Interactional sociolinguistics is linked to the names of the sociologist Erving Goﬀman, and
the anthropological linguist John Gumperz. Much of the early work (for example, Gumperz
1982) was concerned with the mechanisms of miscommunication in intercultural interaction,
as interaction depends not only on the content of what is said, but also on the processes of
evaluation and perception of signalling mechanisms. In broad terms, research in interactional
sociolinguistics examines meaning-making processes in contextualised language use and ways
in which speakers signal and interpret meaning in social interaction. Work in the area is pri-
marily done through an ethnographic research design which examines the local complexities of
particular contexts. This allows a detailed view of a speciﬁc use of language rather than a
generalisation about broad linguistic tendencies. Discourse and conversational analysis tech-
niques are used in this type of research, and detailed transcriptions are produced which may
involve non-verbal aspects of the interaction, such as gestures or spatial alignment of speakers,
as well as details of pausing, overlap, etc. Use of these contextualisation cues can mark dif-
ferent types of speech events and diﬀerent alignments between interactants. All such features
may have an inﬂuence on how meaning is made and perceived. The ﬁeld encompasses a broad
variety of contexts (for example, clinical interaction, courtroom interaction, workplace
settings) and focuses (for example, politeness, discourse strategies, reported speech), and
more detail on this side of sociolinguistics can be obtained through various chapters in this
volume, for example those on Medical Communication, Language and Ageing, Linguistic
Ethnography, Institutional Discourse, Classroom Discourse, among others.
Less detail on variationist sociolinguistics is provided in other chapters in the volume, so for
this reason we focus our attention in this chapter on the variationist side of the sociolinguistic
coin. We begin by brieﬂy outlining the history of the discipline of variationist sociolinguistics
and consider some of the more prominent research methods associated with the ﬁeld. Discus-
sion of some of the main current issues will then be outlined before consideration is given to
future directions and areas of developing interest.
Carmen Llamas
502

Background
Variationist sociolinguistics, as we would recognise it today, really begins with the seminal
work of William Labov in his Martha’s Vineyard (MV) (1963) and his Lower East Side, New
York (LES, NY) (1966) studies. Many of the techniques and methods pioneered in these early
studies are still used today, and insights gained from this research have formed part of the
foundations of the majority of variationist work since.
Prior to Labov’s early work in the USA, the belief that sound change was too slow to
observe was widely held (see, for example, Hockett 1958) and earlier works on urban varieties
of American English maintained that variation was random and singularly without pattern
(Hubbell 1950). Labov’s early studies were not only able to reveal the structured heterogeneity
in language, but were able to demonstrate that by using the apparent time construct (that is, by
hypothesising that the individual’s phonological system remains stable throughout adulthood)
and comparing the speech of older and younger speakers, evidence strongly suggestive of lin-
guistic change in progress could be found. Also, by examining the social characteristics of the
informants, speaker-based explanations for why language may vary and change could be
oﬀered. Labov’s earlier MV study, which explored the relationship between the use of linguis-
tic forms (in this case the centralisation of the ﬁrst elements of the diphthongs /ay/ and /aw/)
with orientation to local place and practices, has come to be hugely inﬂuential. However, it
was his later LES, NY project in which global categories, such as socio-economic class and
sex, were correlated with linguistic variables in a broad demographic survey study, which had
the initial and immediate inﬂuence on the developing ﬁeld. Studies which replicated the
methodological procedures used in the LES, NY study were undertaken throughout the late
1960s and 1970s (see, for example, Wolfram 1969; Cedergren 1973; Trudgill 1974; among
others) and many of the concepts and techniques became established and are still used as
standard today.
This early work in sociolinguistics saw the development of the tool of the linguistic vari-
able – a linguistic unit with two or more variants involved in covariation with other social and/
or linguistic variation – which allowed variation in speech production to be correlated with
social variables. By using the linguistic variable and the principle of accountability (Labov
1982) which states that the analyst must account for all occurrences of a variant of a variable
and all non-occurrences, the new techniques allowed examination of the frequency of usage of
a particular form, rather than simply indicating its presence/absence, which had been standard
practice in traditional dialectological surveys. The new techniques allowed quantiﬁcation and
statistical testing of production patterns and enabled the correlation of linguistic variation with
social variation, primarily in the form of socio-economic class diﬀerences, but also sex, age
and ethnic background.
As well as patterns of inter-speaker diﬀerence, these early studies also investigated intra-
speaker variation, and manipulations of the elicitation task adjusted the attention paid to
speech which in turn aﬀected the frequency of the use of forms. The direction of the shift in
frequency was thought to reveal much about the prestige/stigma carried by linguistic forms
and also, therefore, the norms of the speech community, as well as indicating some of the
social characteristics of the speakers at the vanguard of change. For example, in Labov’s LES,
NY ﬁndings, use of coda /r/ increases steadily and consistently as the socio-economic grouping
of speakers moves from working class to middle class (nine socio-economic groups were used
in the study, ranked from lower working class, 0, to upper middle class, 9). Usage of coda /r/
also increases steadily and consistently as the formality of the speech style increases (ﬁve
speech styles were placed on a continuum of formality ranging from casual speech in which
Sociolinguistics
503

the least attention was paid to speech to the reading of minimal pairs in which the most
attention was paid). Thus, as the attention to speech increases, the speakers produce a level of
use of coda /r/ which approaches that used by the socio-economic cohort directly above them
in the previous speech style, producing a pattern of very tightly structured variation (see below,
Figure 35.1).
One exception to the very consistent and sharp stratiﬁcation in this pattern is found in the
speech of the lower middle-class cohort (SEC 6–8) who tend to overshoot the target when the
style shifts to word list and minimal pair reading. This demonstrates a crossover pattern
which, according to Labov (1972), is indicative of hypercorrection possibly due to the linguis-
tic insecurity of this particular socio-economic cohort, thus revealing one of the potential
causes of linguistic change.
As this pattern is consistent, the evaluative norms of the speech community are thought
to be revealed in the overt prestige given to the form (in this case, that carried by coda /r/).
Studies of this kind almost invariably establish a regular and replicable pattern of stratiﬁ-
cation in which the use of localised or non-standard forms correlates inversely with socio-
economic class. Additionally, localised or non-standard forms are found to be more frequently
Figure 35.1 Rhoticity across socio-economic class (SEC) in various speech styles
Source: Adapted from Labov 1966.
Carmen Llamas
504

used by male speakers as opposed to female speakers of the same socio-economic group
in studies of this kind. The uniformity of these patterns across the class hierarchy and the
direction of style shifting suggest a consensual view of the assignment of overt prestige to
forms associated with the standard variety and speech associated with higher socio-economic
classes.
Eckert (2005) has described the methodological developments in quantitative socio-
linguistics in terms of a series of waves. Although these waves are not necessarily chronological
and all approaches are in use today, the diﬀerences in approach allow for a useful demarcation
of the progress of the ﬁeld. The ﬁrst wave comprises the broad demographic surveys, such as
Labov’s LES, NY study outlined above, which typically look for statistically signiﬁcant corre-
lations of global social categories, such as socio-economic class and sex, with variants of lin-
guistic variables. Early studies such as Labov (1966) and Trudgill (1974), and more recent
studies (for example, Docherty et al. 1997) which follow a ﬁrst wave approach use pre-
determined social categories and tend to view variables as markers of these global categories.
With the second wave of studies, the level of abstraction between the social context and the
social structures used to represent the situation is lessened, however, and the local dynamics
which may give meaning to the broad global categories and the evaluation of linguistic forms
become the focus of interest. This type of research more closely replicates Labov’s earlier
MV study which analysed the use of centralised diphthongs in the context of the local
speakers’ orientation to the island of Martha’s Vineyard (an island oﬀthe coast of Massa-
chusetts) in the face of resistance to but dependence on the incursions of the summer
residents from the mainland. The variable use of the centralised forms of the diphthongs
was interpreted in terms of the social meaning of the phonetic forms as being representa-
tive of an authentic member of that particular speech community – a ‘Vineyarder’ in other
words – in opposition to the holidaying mainlanders. Labov’s account, therefore, locates the
meaning of linguistic variation not in abstract global social categories of class and sex but
within concrete forms of social participation and engagement located in the context of wider
social interaction.
Through second wave studies, more detail of the potential social meaning of linguistic
features, as well as the mechanisms and processes involved in language change, became
accessible. By using ethnography, the relevance of the local setting such as the neighbourhood
(see, for example, the Milroys’ study of Belfast [Milroy 1987]) or the peer group (for example,
Cheshire’s [1982] Reading study) became observable. The social network model, as used by the
Milroys, measures the strength of the speakers’ social networks, calculated by classifying whe-
ther networks are ‘dense’ or ‘loose’ and whether they are ‘uniplex’ or ‘multiplex’. Dense and
multiplex networks tend to act as norm-enforcing mechanisms and are implicated in the
maintenance of traditional linguistic forms, whereas those speakers with looser networks are
able to act as innovators of change and diﬀuse new forms into the community. Though social
class and gender are implicated in the make-up of these diﬀering network models, the relations
between people are crucial and the groupings used by the analysts have a reality for the
speakers which is absent in ﬁrst wave studies.
This attention to analysis of the pre-existing social group has been reﬁned further in work
by Eckert, among others, who models the individual’s connection to the group through use of
the communities of practice construct. A community of practice is an aggregate of people who
come together to engage in practices, or ways of doing things, on a regular basis. This can
mean any manner of things from a sports team to a profession. Practices involve the devel-
opment and negotiation of shared orientations to the world around the members of the
community, and use of language constitutes one of these practices.
Sociolinguistics
505

Eckert’s (2000) ethnographic work in a suburban Detroit high school examines the nature of
socio-economic class stratiﬁcation among adolescents – the life stage believed to be at the
forefront of sound change. Using the communities of practice model, Eckert investigated the
adolescents’ orientation to the categories of Jocks and Burnouts through which class is
articulated (the Jocks constitute a middle-class culture, while the Burnouts represent the
working class, broadly speaking). Correlations of linguistic use with social category aﬃliation
were found to be more signiﬁcant than correlations with parents’ socio-economic status. And
the Burnouts were found to make greater use of the changes associated with the Northern
Cities Shift in the USA (a rotation of the low and mid vowels), than the Jocks. Thus the
variables can be seen as indexing locally deﬁned categories which link to demographics, and
we are able to see connections between the big picture of the correlation of broad global
categories with linguistic variation and local dynamics.
First and second wave studies are similar in that the approach to linguistic meaning they
adopt is as a reﬂection of social meaning. With both approaches the speakers are presented as
members of social categories and groups, whether pre-existing or not, and the social meaning
attached to linguistic forms reﬂects the speakers who use them. These groups are still abstract
organising structures to some extent, however, and the social meaning of linguistic forms
remains analyst-imposed. The third wave of sociolinguistic studies shifts focus to consider
more closely the use and meaning of stylistic variation. How speakers combine linguistic fea-
tures to produce distinctive ways of speaking is examined in third wave studies rather than
how they adjust frequencies of individual variables through manipulations made to the degree
of perceived formality, for example.
Third wave studies (for example, Zhang 2008) examine social practice in order to account
for the relationship between language and the social world, as the meaning of language is
emergent in context as part of the process of social diﬀerentiation. If we think again of the
opposed categories of Jocks and Burnouts, for example, the social meaning of variation atta-
ches to the categories indirectly via the practices and ideologies that constitute the categories.
Third wave studies are concerned with stylistic practice and stance. The Burnouts, for example,
in keeping with their anti-school stance, make more use of a variable such as negative concord.
And the ‘burned-out Burnout’ girls, those whose stance is seriously anti-authority and anti-
establishment, lead the school in their use of negative concord (Eckert 2000). Another example
can be found in Podesva’s (2007) analysis of the speech of homosexual men across multiple
contexts. He demonstrates how phonetic detail is used to construct social meaning through
analysis of the duration and intensity of /t/ release and the phonetic properties of falsetto voice
quality. Diﬀerent personae are adopted in the diﬀering contexts and the variation in produc-
tion is interpreted in light of the characteristics the speakers are intending to convey, for
example intelligence and preciseness in keeping with the medical context that one speaker is in
versus prissiness in keeping with the ‘bitchy diva’ persona performed by the same speaker in
the social barbecue context with friends.
Third wave studies, then, focus on stylistic practice and style as persona construction.
Linguistic variation indexes stances and social characteristics, and third wave studies look to
the meanings that motivate particular variable usage rather than assigning the social meaning
of linguistic variation to the speakers who use the forms under investigation.
Methods
Although we can discern diﬀerences in approach as outlined in the ﬁrst, second and third
waves of studies, the methods used in sociolinguistics are many and varied and they don’t
Carmen Llamas
506

necessarily coincide neatly with the demarcated waves. Rather, ﬁeld methods can overlap and
vary depending on the theoretical underpinnings and the larger objectives of the individual study.
In terms of data collection, diﬀerent speaker sampling methods are used according to the
approach taken to how the individual connects to the group and the nature of the social
variables in the study. Few studies use random sampling techniques wherein a sampling frame,
such as an electoral register, is used to select informants in a random and unbiased way from a
population in which everyone theoretically has the same chance of being selected (see Houck
1968 for an example). Instead, most studies use judgement or quota sampling so informants
are selected to fulﬁl predetermined social criteria. Individuals can then be combined into
cohorts by virtue of their social characteristics with linguistic behaviour expressed generally as
mean cohort scores only (as in ﬁrst wave studies – see, for example, Trudgill 1974), or pre-
existing groups of individuals can be examined (as in second and third wave studies – see, for
example, Moore 2010) with both individual and group mean results examined.
As well as speaker sampling, speech sampling is also approached diﬀerently depending on
the model of intra-speaker variation utilised. The attention to speech model (as noted in dis-
cussion of Labov’s LES, NY study) adjusts the formality of the speech produced by manip-
ulating the attention the speaker pays to speech through tasks such as reading, interview and
casual conversation. The speech in which the least amount of attention is paid to production,
the vernacular, is what is of interest primarily to the analyst. Manipulations of task, by and
large, result in an increase in use of forms carrying overt prestige – those associated with
standard varieties – as the amount of attention to speech is increased. However, the adjust-
ment in attention to speech does not automatically initiate a shift to a more standard form, as
speakers are able to increase their use of forms carrying covert prestige, or those associated
with local or stigmatised varieties, as they become more aware of their production.
How much attention is drawn to speech is not the only factor that speakers respond to, and
another inﬂuential model, the audience design model (see further Bell 1984), holds that
speakers adjust their speech – converging or diverging – depending on the perceived identities
of their interlocutors and of unseen audience members. Examples of style shifting towards the
audience can be seen in Coupland’s (1984) study of a Cardiﬀtravel agent and her capacity to
approximate the rates of non-standard forms used by her clients, and Rickford and McNair-
Knox’s (1994) examination of the shifting of an African-American teenager across diﬀerent
interviews and diﬀerent topics. The speaker design model takes the view that speakers are not
simply reactive, but they are also continually constructing and performing personae through
proactive exploitation of the linguistic repertoire at their disposal.
As noted earlier, rather than indicating whether a linguistic feature is present or absent in
speech, the tool of the linguistic variable allows the examination of the frequency of usage of a
particular form. The linguistic variable can demonstrate how an utterance can be proposi-
tionally the same, but socially diﬀerent, indexing social information about the geographical
origins or social characteristics of the speaker, which is interpreted by the listener alongside
the propositional meaning of the utterance. For phonological variables, this analysis is usually
at the level of the segment, but we can look at much more ﬁne-grained phonetic detail in the
utterance, such as formant values, duration, etc., and ﬁnd structured patterns across socially
stratiﬁed samples of speakers which, while highly systematic, may actually be very diﬃcult to
perceive auditorily. Similarly, we can examine the pitch, rhythm, voice quality, intonational
contour and other suprasegmental features which can also provide information on the speaker’s
social characteristics as well as emotional intent, pragmatic meaning and negotiation of con-
versation. Through quantiﬁcation and statistical testing the correlation of linguistic variation
with social variation is possible. Due to questions of linguistic equivalence, the tool of the
Sociolinguistics
507

linguistic variable is less readily applicable to morpho-syntactic, lexical or discoursal levels,
and it is perhaps for this reason that the majority of variationist sociolinguistic work to date
has concentrated on phonological or systematic phonetic variation and change. A good body
of work does exist on the morpho-syntactic level, however (for example, analysis of negative
concord, was/were variation, copula deletion and so on; see, for example, Tagliamonte 1998),
and an amount of work exists on the discoursal level (for example, work on discourse markers,
sentence tags, minimal responses etc.; see, for example, Macaulay 2002), but the approach to
such analyses, which take function into account alongside form, is becoming increasingly more
qualitative than quantitative. Work on lexical variation is less common still from the point of
view of a variationist perspective.
Other techniques exist for the analysis of attitudes, perceptions and evaluations of varieties
as a whole. For example, perceptual dialectological studies use mapping techniques to elicit
how language varieties are delimited geographically and evaluated by informants (see Preston’s
[1989] work on US varieties); and the technique of accessing implicit attitudes, the matched-
guise technique (for example, Lambert 1967) where recordings of speakers using diﬀerent
languages or varieties are presented to listeners who evaluate them on a number of social and
personal dimensions concerned with authority and social attractiveness, for example, using
semantic diﬀerential scales.
Which data elicitation and analysis techniques are used depends upon the larger objectives
of the individual study, and these objectives and theoretical underpinnings depend on the
current issues and research questions the study aims to explore.
Current issues
Language change
Although consideration of the processes involved in language change is not a new issue in the
ﬁeld (see early discussion by Weinreich et al. 1968), this topic is so germane to sociolinguistic
enquiry that it remains as current an issue as it ever was. Although certain types of individuals
have been identiﬁed as being likely to act as innovators or early adopters of changes, for
example, adolescents, language missionaries, etc., why a particular change begins in a parti-
cular language at a particular time, but not in other languages with the same feature, or in the
same language at other times – the actuation problem in other words – is still not well
understood. Instead, discussion of language change generally centres on the processes and
causes involved once a change is quite far advanced.
In the context of British English, many recent studies have investigated the process of
levelling of localised forms in urban varieties (see, for example, Kerswill 2003; Britain 2010).
Levelling is a process during which localised or traditional forms are eradicated in favour of
forms with a wider geographical spread. However, unlike in ﬁndings from early studies in
which variation predominantly aligned with a standard/non-standard opposition, the spread-
ing forms need not necessarily be forms associated with the standard variety, and the majority
of the current changes in British English are best viewed as aligning with a local/supra-local
continuum (an example can be seen in Watt and Milroy’s [1999] work on the Tyneside vowel
system in the northeast of England). Investigation of regional dialect levelling in British English
combines with research into the processes of diﬀusion of non-standard consonantal features,
such as TH-fronting, labiodental (r), among other forms, which are spreading rapidly
throughout the British Isles, mostly from a southeastern epicentre (see, for example, Williams
and Kerswill 1999; Torgersen et al. 2006).
Carmen Llamas
508

Regarding North American English, much analysis has been devoted to chain shifts – the
co-ordinated movement of vowels to maintain phonological contrast following the spread of
one vowel’s area of dispersion into that of another’s (see further Docherty and Watt 2001). In
particular, the Northern Cities Shift, as mentioned earlier, which constitutes a rotation of the
low and mid vowels in urban varieties of the north and central USA, has been the subject of
much examination (for example, Gordon 2000). As well as the processes involved in language
change, much discussion and debate concerns which speakers participate in on-going changes
and which speakers resist or reject them.
Certain factors have been identiﬁed as facilitating or accelerating the spread of change. The
social and geographical mobility that people experience in the modern world, at least from a
Western perspective, are often looked to as major causes of change. These can entail large
scale social changes such as urbanisation, counter-urbanisation, globalisation and so on. Such
processes are thought to have eﬀects on how we live our lives and therefore on how language
varies and changes (see also Baynham, this volume, on language and migration). The pro-
cesses of accommodation and maintenance/divergence are implicated in mobility, and it is
thought that small instances of accommodation in face-to-face contact can lead to long term
change. However, the automaticity of accommodation has been the subject of recent experi-
mental work (see, for example, Kraljic et al. 2008), and the extent of speaker agency involved
in such processes is a topic for which much ﬁner understanding is necessary (see further
Deumert 2003; Watt 2009).
Other potential sources of inﬂuence on how language changes are education and the media,
the ﬁrst of which is believed to have a standardising inﬂuence, while the latter is thought
potentially to be instrumental in the spread of non-standard forms. Beyond the peer inﬂuence
which exerts pressure at school by virtue of the fact of it being where adolescents meet, the
standardising inﬂuence of the experience of education appears uncontested. However, there is
much debate about whether and to what extent the media, particularly television, can eﬀect
change. Because linguistic variation, and therefore potentially change, is thought to be pri-
marily aﬀected by face-to-face interaction, a role for television in language change has been
customarily denied as no face-to-face interaction is present in the act of passively watching
television (Trudgill 1986). The extent of the inﬂuence of television has been argued to lie in its
potential to increase awareness of linguistic variation and innovations (Milroy and Milroy
1985) and may possibly, through engendering favourable attitudes, have a ‘softening-up’ eﬀect
which can inﬂuence the speed of change (Trudgill 1988: 44). However, recent research on the
spread of ostensibly southern English features (TH-fronting, L-vocalisation, etc.) into the
speech of young, non-mobile, working-class speakers in Glasgow suggests that there is a
role for exposure to and engagement with television in that subtle phonetic alterations are
found to take place after watching television (see further Stuart-Smith 2007a). The precise
nature of television as a factor remains somewhat unclear, however, and there is much
variation at the level of the individual speaker/viewer.
Language variation
As all change in language is the product of variation, the external, social sources of variation
have always been a major interest in sociolinguistics, and remain central to work in the ﬁeld.
Among the social sources of language variation, the global categories of gender, socio-
economic class, age, ethnicity, region, among others, have been examined in relation to ways in
which they correlate with variation in speech production since the beginnings of research in
the ﬁeld, and they remain current issues. Understanding of the nature of these social variables
Sociolinguistics
509

has become increasingly sophisticated and, importantly, awareness of how these variables
interact and how they interact with other socio-psychological correlates or factors associated
with the local setting advances continually. Most of these broad social categories are dealt with
in other chapters (for example Baxter, this volume, on gender; de Bot and van der Hoeven,
this volume, on language and ageing; Harris, this volume, on ethnicity), so detailed discussion
will not be presented here.
Variation across region remains an area of investigation, though the ambitious geographical
coverage of dialectological surveys is no longer attempted. However, rather than approaching
geographical location uncritically as a given entity, a considerable amount of recent work has
concerned itself with how place is constructed and how space is perceived. These more com-
plex notions of space and place deal with the ways in which ‘distance’ between places is social
and psychological, not merely geographical (see, for example, Britain’s [2005] work on the
Fens), and also how place as a construct can be viewed diﬀerently by inhabitants of the same
community (see work on Middlesbrough by Llamas [2007], for example).
Social meaning of variability
Although it is widely accepted that social variables such as gender, ethnicity, socio-economic
class, region, etc. are important inﬂuences on speech, as Johnstone and Bean (1997: 236) point
out, such factors do not determine how people speak. Rather, the individual is able to
exploit the rich resource of structured variation in order to achieve communicative goals and
project personae which are emergent in context. As well as the investigation of the social
meaning of variation of varieties as a whole (as undertaken through perceptual dialectology
and implicit attitudinal tests), the social meaning of particular linguistic forms and how such
meanings can become attached to ways of speaking is an area of much current interest. Fur-
thermore, exploration of the ideological aspects of linguistic diﬀerentiation and the identity
work done via the socio-indexicality inherent in language are increasingly becoming fundamental
parts of variationist studies (see, for example, Dyer 2002).
How language forms index speakers’ social identities can be viewed as being ranked into
diﬀerent orders of generality (see further Silverstein 2003). First-order indexicality involves an
association or correlation of a linguistic form with some socially meaningful category. These
correlations may be observed by analysts and the associations are often assumed in socio-
linguistic work, but they may not be noticed by speakers. As such, ﬁrst-order indexicals are
analogous to what Labov (1972: 178–80) terms ‘indicators’ in his taxonomy of the kinds of
social meaning linguistic forms can carry. Second-order indexicality occurs when speakers use
ﬁrst-order correlations to ‘do social work’ which can be interpretive or performative (John-
stone et al. 2006: 83). This can involve overt or covert awareness of basic ﬁrst-order indexi-
cality, and ideology can become visible in style shifting in careful speech and so on. Features
that begin to be noticed by speakers and that begin to have social meaning associated with
them – concerning, for example, region or class – can be seen as corresponding to ‘markers’ in
Labov’s categorisation. How variable linguistic behaviour is linked to the negotiation and
performance of identities is considered through such indexicality and is a major area of
current research.
New methods and debates
As the ﬁeld matures, the methods used in sociolinguistic research are becoming increasingly
sophisticated. New technologies allow for ever more advanced methods of data analysis, data
Carmen Llamas
510

collection, statistical testing and so on. Similarly, approaches to both linguistic variables and
social variables are ever more nuanced and comprehensive, as ﬁne-grained variation is
uncovered and examined.
Acoustic phonetic analysis has been used for investigation of vowel variables for a con-
siderable amount of time, with the frequencies of the ﬁrst and second formants of vowels
customarily measured from their midpoints in order to position them in a two-dimensional
vowel space plotted on an x–y scattergram. This enables the capture of ﬁne-grained diﬀerences
between diﬀerent speakers and contexts and allows for examination of, for example, mergers in
progress.
However, acoustic analysis is increasingly being used to examine ﬁne-grained variation in
consonantal features, which is found to correlate with the social characteristics of the speakers
beyond those attributable to physiological diﬀerences of vocal tract length and so on. For
example, acoustic analysis of [s] in Glasgow English has been carried out (Stuart-Smith 2007b)
and investigation of realisations of voiceless stops have been undertaken (see, for example,
Docherty and Foulkes 1999, Jones and Llamas 2008), among other variables.
Statistical analysis is also advancing as along with the Varbrul program (Rand and Sankoﬀ
1990), which has been used routinely by sociolinguists to identify variable patterns, more use
of regression analysis, cluster analysis and analysis of variance is to be found. Furthermore,
recent advances in mixed eﬀects models which distinguish between ﬁxed eﬀects and random
eﬀects (see the Rbrul program, Johnson 2009) overcome some of the limitations of Varbrul
(for example, Varbrul’s restriction to use with categorical data, which is inappropriate for
many phonetic variants positioned along a multi-dimensional continuum).
Although sociolinguistic research has, for the most part, concerned itself with production
patterns and the extent to which linguistic variation can be seen to correlate with social vari-
ables, much greater emphasis is being placed on examining the nature of the socio-indexical
meaning that attaches to linguistic forms, as noted, and the processes involved in the devel-
opment of such associations. With the study of the inﬂuence of perception and memory on
language variation and change (see current interest in the episodic memory-based Exemplar
Theory), as well as the relations between speech perception and other modalities (for example,
visual perception), this looks set to develop further. And understanding speakers’ perceptions
and evaluations of linguistic features is becoming more of a priority in recent and on-going
sociolinguistic research.
As social meaning is attached to linguistic forms, it stands to reason that listeners will make
judgements about speakers based on the linguistic information they receive. What is perhaps
more surprising in recent studies is that sociolinguistic expectations may inﬂuence speech per-
ception. For example, in experiments by Niedzielski (1999) the decisions of listeners to choose
exemplars from a set of synthesised vowels that were most appropriate to the variety they
had heard diﬀered according to whether they had been exposed to voice samples they were
told were either Canadian or Michigan English. It is anticipated that work will continue in
this area.
Current research seeks to connect the production and perception of variability in a sys-
tematic way, by using a triangulation of methods which analyse structured variation in
production patterns in conjunction with evidence from perceptual experiments examining
which forms cue which type of social category or meaning in the local setting. Additionally,
these production and perception data can be combined with cognitive and aﬀective attitudinal
information from speakers with regard to their orientations towards relevant social categories
and oppositional identities collected either through ethnographic observation or through
targeted elicitation. More defensible interpretations of the motivating factors underlying
Sociolinguistics
511

speakers’ variable linguistic behaviour can be obtained from such an approach (an example
can be seen in Llamas 2010).
More insight into what linguistic forms signal for the speakers who use them will allow us
to better understand how variation in language reﬂects and is caused by social change more
generally, and also the extent to which speakers have agency in and awareness of exploiting
their linguistic repertoires for socio-indexical purposes. Furthermore, by approaching social
categories as multi-layered and more nuanced than the global categorisations of ﬁrst wave
studies, a more detailed and sophisticated understanding of the social world of speakers, their
identities and orientations is achieved, which allows us to better understand the social meaning
of the language variation they exploit.
Summary
Writing in the early 1970s, Labov (1972: xiii) stated that he had resisted the term ‘socio-
linguistics’ for many years since ‘it implies that there can be a successful linguistic theory or
practice which is not social’. The ﬁeld has come a long way in its short history and the impact
it has had on mainstream linguistic theory is increasingly felt. Additionally, sociolinguistics
borrows from and in turn oﬀers insights for other ﬁelds such as sociology, social theory,
anthropology, education, social psychology and more. Through the various approaches,
methods and models used in sociolinguistics, our understanding of how language reﬂects and
creates how the individual ﬁts into the world has increased enormously.
Understanding and identifying which features listeners use to index which social informa-
tion is of clear value in advancing theories of language change, but it is also of immediate and
obvious beneﬁt in applied contexts. Similarly, understanding attitudinal and evaluative
responses to linguistic variation is important for assessing the structured heterogeneity in lan-
guage, but it also relates to more concrete concerns in the real world, such as the likelihood
that a jury will convict, or success in the job market. Findings from sociolinguistics have
implications for speech and language therapy, forensic phonetics and linguistics, speech tech-
nology, and education, to name but a few ﬁelds. The messy variation, which is everywhere in
language use, is not simply noise, but it signals, in minute ways, who we are, how we feel and
how we respond to the world around us. The implications of understanding this are as
wide-ranging as they are disparate.
Related topics
ethnicity; gender; language and ageing; language and migration
Further reading
Chambers, J. K. (2003) Sociolinguistic Theory: Linguistic Variation and its Social Signiﬁcance, 2nd
edn, Oxford: Blackwell. (This book oﬀers a comprehensive overview of key concepts and theories
in variationist sociolinguistics.)
Coupland, N. and Jaworski, A. (eds) (2009) The New Sociolinguistics Reader, Basingstoke: Palgrave
Macmillan. (This volume provides a collection of key readings in the ﬁeld.)
Llamas, C., Mullany, L. and Stockwell, P. (eds) (2007) The Routledge Companion to Sociolinguistics,
London: Routledge. (This volume oﬀers abroad overview of the ﬁeld in terms of theories and methods.)
Meyerhoﬀ, M. (2006) Introducing Sociolinguistics, London and New York: Routledge. (This book is
a useful introduction to the ﬁeld.)
Milroy, L. and Gordon, M. (2003) Sociolinguistics: Method and Interpretation, Oxford: Blackwell.
(This book is an invaluable guide to the methodological side of the ﬁeld.)
Carmen Llamas
512

References
Bell, A. (1984) ‘Language style as audience design’, Language in Society 13(2): 145–204.
Britain, D. (2005) ‘Innovation diﬀusion, “Estuary English” and local dialect diﬀerentiation: the
survival of Fenland Englishes’, Linguistics 43(5): 995–1022.
——(2010) ‘Supralocal regional dialect levelling’, in C. Llamas and D. Watt (eds) Language and
Identities, Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press.
Cameron, D. (1990) ‘Demythologizing sociolinguistics: why language does not reﬂect society’,
in J. E. Joseph and T. J. Taylor (eds) Ideologies of Language, London and New York: Routledge.
Cedergren, H. (1973) ‘The Interplay of Social and Linguistic Factors in Panama’, Ph.D. dissertation,
Cornell University.
Cheshire, J. (1982) Variation in an English Dialect: A Sociolinguistic Study, Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Coupland, N. (1984) ‘Accommodation at work: some phonological data and their applications’,
International Journal of the Sociology of Language 46: 49–70.
Deumert, A. (2003) ‘Bringing the speakers back in? Epistemological reﬂections on speaker-oriented
explanations of language change’, Language Sciences 25: 15–76.
Docherty, G. J. and Foulkes, P. (1999) ‘Derby and Newcastle: instrumental phonetics and varia-
tionist studies’, in P. Foulkes and G. J. Docherty (eds) Urban Voices: Accent Studies in the British
Isles, London: Hodder Arnold.
Docherty, G. J., Foulkes, P., Milroy, J., Milroy, L. and Walshaw, D. (1997) ‘Descriptive adequacy in
phonology: a variationist perspective’, Journal of Linguistics 33: 275–31.
Docherty, G. J. and Watt, D. (2001) ‘Chain shifts’, in R. Mesthrie (ed.) The Concise Encyclopedia of
Sociolinguistics, Amsterdam: Pergamon (Elsevier Science).
Dyer, J. (2002) ‘“We all speak the same round here”: dialect levelling in a Scottish English com-
munity’, Journal of Sociolinguistics 6(2): 99–116.
Eckert, P. (2000) Linguistic Variation as Social Practice: The Linguistic Construction of Identity in
Belten High, Oxford: Blackwell.
——(2005) ‘Variation, convention and social meaning’, Paper Presented at the Annual Meeting of
the Linguistic Society of America. Oakland, CA.
Gordon, M. J. (2000) ‘Small-town values and big-city vowels: a study of the Northern Cities Shift in
Michigan’, American Speech 84(1): 1–39.
Gumperz, J. J. (1982) Discourse Strategies, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Hockett, C. F. (1958) A Course in Modern Linguistics, New York: Macmillan.
Houck, C. L. (1968) ‘Methodology of an urban speech survey’, in Leeds Studies in English, Leeds:
University of Leeds.
Hubbell, A. F. (1950) The Pronunciation of English in New York City, New York: Columbia University
Press.
Johnson, D. (2009) ‘Getting oﬀthe GoldVarb standard: introducing Rbrul for mixed-eﬀects vari-
able rule analysis’, Language and Linguistics Compass 3(1): 359–83.
Johnstone, B., Andrus, J. and Danielson, A. E. (2006) ‘Mobility, indexicality, and the enregister-
ment of “Pittsburghese”’, Journal of English Linguistics 34(2): 77–104.
Johnstone, B. and Bean, M. (1997) ‘Self-expression and linguistic variation’, Language in Society
26: 221–46.
Jones, M. and Llamas, C. (2008) ‘Fricated realisations of /t/ in Dublin and Middlesborough English:
an acoustic analysis of plosive frication and surface fricative contrasts’, English Language and
Linguistics 12(3): 419–43.
Kerswill, P. (2003) ‘Dialect levelling and geographical diﬀusion in British English’, in D. Britain
and J. Cheshire (eds) Social Dialectology: In Honour of Peter Trudgill, Amsterdam: Benjamins.
Kraljic, T., Brennan, S. E. and Samuel, A. G. (2008) ‘Accommodating variation: dialects, idiolects,
and speech processing’, Cognition 107(1): 51–81.
Labov, W. (1963) ‘The social motivation of a sound change’, Word 19: 273–309.
——(1966) The Social Stratiﬁcation of English in New York City, Washington, DC: Center for
Applied Linguistics.
——(1972) Sociolinguistic Patterns, Philadelphia, PA: University of Philadelphia Press.
——(1982) ‘Building on empirical foundations’, in W. P. Lehmann and Y. Malkiel (eds) Perspectives
on Historical Linguistics, Amsterdam and Philadelphia: Benjamins.
Sociolinguistics
513

Lambert, W. E. (1967) ‘A social psychology of bilingualism’, Journal of Social Issues 23: 91–108.
Llamas, C. (2007) ‘“A place between places”: language and identities in a border town’, Language
in Society 36(4): 579–604.
——(2010) ‘Convergence and divergence across a national border’, in C. Llamas and D. Watt (eds)
Language and Identities, Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press.
Macaulay, R. K. S. (2002) ‘You know, it depends’, Journal of Pragmatics 34(6): 749–67.
Milroy, J. and Milroy, L. (1985) Authority in Language, London: Routledge.
Milroy, L. (1987) Language and Social Networks, 2nd edn, Oxford: Blackwell.
Moore, E. (2010) ‘Communities of practice and peripherality’, in C. Llamas and D. Watt (eds)
Language and Identities, Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press, pp. 123–33.
Niedzielski, N. (1999) ‘The eﬀect of social information on the perception of sociolinguistic
variables’, Journal of Language and Social Psychology 18(1): 62–85.
Podesva, R. J. (2007) ‘Phonation type as a stylistic variable: the use of falsetto in constructing a
persona’, Journal of Sociolinguistics 11(4): 478–504.
Preston, D. R. (1989) Perceptual Dialectology: Nonlinguists’ Views of Areal Linguistics, Dordrecht: Foris.
Rand, D. and Sankoﬀ, D. (1990) Goldvarb 2.1: A Variable Rule Application for the Macintosh,
Montreal: Centre de Recherches Mathématiques, University of Montreal.
Rickford, J. R. and McNair-Knox, F. (1994) ‘Addressee- and topic-inﬂuenced styleshift: a quanti-
tative sociolinguistic study’, in D. Biber and E. Finegan (eds) Sociolinguistic Perspectives on
Register, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Silverstein, M. (2003) ‘Indexical order and the dialectics of social life’, Language and Communica-
tion 23: 193–229.
Stuart-Smith, J. (2007a) ‘The inﬂuence of the media on language’, in C. Llamas, L. Mullany and
P. Stockwell (eds) The Routledge Companion to Sociolinguistics, London: Routledge.
——(2007b) ‘Empirical evidence for gendered speech production: /s/ in Glaswegian’, in J. Cole and
J. Hualde (eds) Change in Phonology, Laboratory Phonology 9, Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter.
Tagliamonte, S. (1998) ‘“Was/were” variation across the generations: view from the city of York’,
Language Variation and Change 10(2): 153–92.
Torgersen, E., Kerswill, P. and Fox, S. (2006) ‘Ethnicity as a source of changes in the London vowel
system’, in F. Hinskens (ed.) Language Variation – European Perspectives: Selected Papers from
the Third International Conference on Language Variation in Europe (ICLaVE3), Amsterdam:
Benjamins.
Trudgill, P. (1974) The Social Diﬀerentiation of English in Norwich, Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
——(1986) Dialects in Contact, Oxford: Blackwell.
——(1988) ‘Norwich revisited: recent linguistic changes in an English urban dialect’, English
World-Wide 9: 33–49.
Watt, D. (2009) ‘Rethinking the role of speaker agency’, Keynote Paper Presented at UK Language
Variation and Change 5, University of Newcastle.
Watt, D. and Milroy, L. (1999) ‘Patterns of variation and change in three Tyneside vowels: is this
dialect levelling?’, in P. Foulkes and G. J. Docherty (eds) Urban Voices: Accent Studies in the
British Isles, London: Hodder Arnold.
Weinreich, U., Labov, W. and Herzog, M. I. (1968) ‘A theory of language change’, in W. P. Lehmann
and Y. Malkiel (eds) Directions for Historical Linguistics: A Symposium, Austin: University of
Texas Press.
Williams, A. and Kerswill, P. (1999) ‘Dialect levelling: change and continuity in Milton Keynes,
Reading and Hull’, in P. Foulkes and G. J. Docherty (eds) Urban Voices: Accent Studies in the
British Isles, London: Hodder Arnold.
Wolfram, W. (1969) A Sociolinguistic Description of Detroit Negro Speech, Washington, DC: Centre
for Applied Linguistics.
——(1998) ‘Language ideology and dialect: understanding the Oaklands Ebonics controversy’,
Journal of English Linguistics 26(2): 108–21.
Zhang, Q. (2008) ‘Rhotacization and the “Beijing smooth operator”: the social meaning of a linguistic
variable’, Journal of Sociolinguistics 12: 201–22.
Carmen Llamas
514

36
Linguistic ethnography
Janet Maybin and Karin Tusting
Introduction
‘Linguistic ethnography’ combines ethnographic and linguistic methodologies to study lan-
guage use in a range of social settings. The term describes a broad area of shared interests
rather than a distinctly bounded ﬁeld. It refers to a body of research by scholars with over-
lapping interests and connections who share an orientation towards using ethnographic
approaches to address linguistic and social questions. This chapter will explore the disciplinary
antecedents of linguistic ethnography, and of linguistic anthropology in the USA, and review
more recent developments in these closely related areas of work. It will move on to describe
work which can be located under the broad umbrella of the term, identifying current productive
tensions in the ﬁeld, and exploring possible developments and emerging areas.
History
Linguistic anthropology
The term ‘linguistic anthropology’ was ﬁrst used in the 1880s in north America when Franz
Boas and his students Alfred Kroeber and Edward Sapir established linguistics as an impor-
tant tool for the analysis of culture (e.g. Boas 1940). During this period, linguistic anthro-
pologists were principally focused on documenting and describing the indigenous languages of
the fast disappearing North American aboriginal societies, and their encoding of diﬀerent
world views (linguistic relativity). Duranti (1997, 2003) oﬀers a useful and comprehensive
overview of the historical development of linguistic anthropology. He claims that this focus on
American Indian languages can be seen as the ﬁrst of three paradigms co-existing in the ﬁeld.
Duranti identiﬁes the second wave or paradigm, which emerged in the 1960s and 1970s, as a
more socially constituted linguistic anthropology, part of the reaction against the formalism of
structural linguistics and Chomskian cognitivism. Deﬁned by Hymes as ‘the study of language
within the context of anthropology’ (1964: xxiii), linguistic anthropology, as conceived in the
mid-twentieth century, foregrounds language use rather than the language system (although
knowledge of the system is still important for the analyst), emphasising the situated and
culturally constituted experience of language users in diverse communities.
515

Hymes proposed an approach he called the ‘ethnography of speaking’. He developed the
well-known mnemonic ‘SPEAKING’ (1974: 53–62) to list the eight dimensions of language in
use that research should address, to specify what speakers needed to know in order to function
in a particular context (their ‘communicative competence’). This was expanded into the ‘eth-
nography of communication’ through Hymes’ collaboration with Gumperz, a sociolinguist
who used ethnographic methods to study language contact and multilingualism (Duranti
1997). Hymes’ mapping out of this methodological approach emphasises the shift of focus
from the language system to its situated use. His insistence on the need to analyse language
use in relation to participants’ perspectives, in ‘contexts of situation’, has been a seminal
reference point for the work of scholars in this area, who have since developed more interac-
tional conceptions of the relationship between language and context and a more dynamic
understanding of culture itself (see, for example, Gumperz 1982; Duranti and Goodwin 1992;
Street 1993; Kramsch, this volume).
Duranti recounts the strengthening of this second paradigm from the 1970s onwards, par-
ticularly through linguistic anthropological work on language performance (e.g. Bauman 1986;
Bauman and Briggs 1990) and on primary and secondary language socialisation (e.g. Ochs
and Schieﬀelin 1984; He, this volume). It was additionally consolidated, he suggests, in work
on indexicality which drew on semiotics (e.g. Silverstein 1976; Silverstein and Urban 1996) and
in research on ‘participation’ (Philips 1983; Goodwin 1990). This last strand of work draws on
Goﬀman’s notion of participation framework, the conﬁguration of participation statuses
(author, animator, principal, hearer, over-hearer and bystander) which are activated in talk by
the use of a particular linguistic form (Goﬀman 1981). It is also inﬂuenced by Bakhtin’s work
on reported speech (Vološinov [1929] 1973; Bakhtin [1935] 1981).
The third theoretical and methodological paradigm identiﬁed by Duranti arose through a
combination of intellectual developments. The growing inﬂuence of social constructionism in
the 1980s and 1990s, coupled with increasing interest across the social sciences in post-
structuralist social theories, highlighted how authoritative knowledge, diﬀerent subjectivities
and power relationships are encoded within various levels of discursive practice. In linguistic
anthropology, this stimulated the development of an approach which is distinctly diﬀerent
from the ethnography of communication of the 1960s and 1970s. It is concerned with issues
such as construction of meanings, texts, narratives, and language ideologies; multiple voices
and identities; and relationships between the micro-level of interaction and the macro-levels of
culture and society. Within this paradigm, language is viewed as an interactional achievement,
saturated with indexical, ideological values. Researchers working within this third paradigm
use linguistic practices to ‘document and analyse the reproduction and transformation of per-
sons, institutions and communities across space and time’ (Duranti 2003: 333). Data is col-
lected via sociohistorical analysis and audiovisual documentation of human encounters. The
research focus is on social constructs such as hierarchy, prestige and taste, and social processes
such as formation of self, speech community and nationhood. Duranti suggests that linguistic
anthropology provides a culturally delicate approach, particularly attractive to postmodernist
sensibilities, for examining the constitutive role of language in establishing gender, ethnic and
class identities (e.g. Gal 2001; Trechter and Bucholtz 2001; Rampton 2006; Baxter, this volume;
Harris, this volume; Norton, this volume).
One distinctive area of work within the latter two paradigms in US linguistic anthropology
is research in educational contexts. Wortham (2008) argues that the focus of linguistic
anthropology on ‘how language use both presupposes and creates social relations in cultural
contexts’ (2008: 38) has particular relevance for understanding how social, linguistic and cul-
tural processes are dynamically conﬁgured in educational practices. In particular, linguistic
Janet Maybin and Karin Tusting
516

anthropologists have used Silverstein’s work on language ideology and metapragmatics (e.g.
Silverstein and Urban 1996) to examine how societal beliefs about language as a symbol of
nationalism, a marker of diﬀerence, or a tool of assimilation are reproduced and sometimes
challenged by individuals within schools (see, for example, Wortham and Rymes 2003).
Linguistic ethnography
While work in linguistic ethnography, primarily in Britain and other parts of Europe, has also
been strongly inﬂuenced by Hymes’ legacy (Rampton 2007), and has developed in close con-
nection with US work in the two latter paradigms Duranti describes, it is theoretically inﬂec-
ted by a diﬀerent tradition. With some exceptions, language and linguistics have not been an
important interest in British anthropology. The links between language, culture and society
have been explored instead within applied linguistics. For example, while the British anthro-
pologist Malinowski’s notion of ‘context of situation’ was an important inﬂuence on Hymes’
work in North America, in Britain itself Malinowski’s interest in meaning and functionalism
was taken up and developed not within anthropology, but in the rather diﬀerent disciplinary
trajectory of Firthian linguistics (e.g. Firth 1957; Hasan 1985). More recently, a number of
scholars and researchers have developed a strand of related work which has been termed
‘linguistic ethnography’ (Rampton et al. 2004; Creese 2008).
Linguistic ethnographers tend to draw not on anthropology for their disciplinary frame-
work, but on linguistics and sociolinguistics, broadly conceived to include the ethnography of
communication. In methodological terms, ‘the commitment within ethnography to particular-
ity and participation, holistic accounts of social practice and openness to reinterpretations
over time’, is combined with ‘a more formalist framework from linguistics, with its powerfully
precise procedures and terminology for describing patterns within communication’ (Rampton
et al. 2004). This combination is seen, on the one hand, as having the capacity to ‘tie ethno-
graphy down’ through pushing for more precise, falsiﬁable analyses of local language pro-
cesses. On the other hand, it can also ‘open linguistics up’ through stressing the importance of
reﬂexive sensitivity in the production of linguistic claims, foregrounding issues of context and
highlighting the primacy of direct ﬁeld experience in establishing interpretative validity.
‘Ethnography’ in this context does not necessarily imply the sort of immersion in a distant,
culturally strange context which has been typical of anthropological work. Researchers are
more likely to follow the methodological approach outlined by the British sociologist Ham-
mersley (e.g. 1994). Hammersley deﬁnes ethnography as social research gathering empirical
data from real world contexts, often focusing on relatively small-scale social groups, via a range
of unstructured methods including participant observation. He suggests that data analysis
should focus on interpreting the meanings and functions of human actions. Analysis often
takes the form of verbal descriptions and explanations, with quantiﬁcation and statistical
analysis playing, at most, a minor role. The essence of ethnographic analysis, for Hammersley
(2007), is a tension between trying to understand participants’ perspectives (the emic perspec-
tive), while also viewing them and their behaviour through a more distant analytic framework
constructed by the researcher (the etic perspective). In the case of linguistic ethnographers, this
analytic framework is grounded in a socially inﬂected linguistics.
In the UK context, a number of distinct lines of research have fed into linguistic ethno-
graphy (Rampton 2007). In interactional sociolinguistics, linguists used Gumperz’s synthesis of
dialectology, pragmatics, conversation analysis, ethnography and Goﬀmanian interaction
analysis to address issues of language, ethnicity and inequality. Researchers in New Literacy
Studies drew on Hymes’ ethnography of communication, mediated through reconceptualisations
Linguistic ethnography
517

of literacy from Heath and Street, to research literacy practices in everyday life. Both of these
will be presented in more detail below.
Three other lines of research, while not involving ethnographic methodology, have
inﬂuenced theoretical directions in current work. Marxist-oriented critical discourse analysis
drew attention to the relevance of social theorists such as Foucault, Habermas and Hall
for questions about language in society, and advocated critical language study. Neo-Vygotskian
sociocultural research provided important insights into processes of knowledge construction in
classroom dialogue. And the frame of interpretative linguistics, applied to English language
teaching in the 1980s, provided both an early critique of autonomous linguistics and a
developing recognition of the dependence of knowledge production on the social positioning
of researcher and researched. Interpretative approaches in linguistic ethnography have also
been inﬂuenced by the ‘turn to discourse’ in the social sciences, informed particularly by
Bourdieu’s practice theory, Bakhtin and Vološinov’s dialogism and Foucault’s work on dis-
course, knowledge and power (e.g. Foucault 1980). More recent work in linguistic ethno-
graphy, as in the third linguistic anthropology paradigm described in the previous section,
includes work focusing on the construction of meanings, texts, narratives, identities and
ideologies.
Areas of focus
We will now describe in more detail a range of areas which combine linguistics with ethno-
graphy. As we have already acknowledged, the distinction between ‘linguistic anthropology’
and ‘linguistic ethnography’ is not clear-cut. We have selected research which has been of
particular interest to applied linguists involved in developing linguistic ethnography, although
some of this work (e.g. Heller; Eckert; Hornberger and Chick) could be located in either
tradition.
Linguistic ethnography in educational settings
Education has been one key site for linguistic ethnographic research. Researchers in educa-
tional settings have focused in particular on three overlapping areas of inquiry. First, they have
studied how language in classrooms provides indications of societal patterns and beliefs about
language. Second, they have sought to produce more contextually sensitive accounts of lan-
guage and learning, informed by ethnographic study of students’ language experience in and
outside of school. Third, they have focused on student voice.
An example of the ﬁrst area of work is Heller (1999), who analyses the tensions between a
Canadian French monolingual school’s promotion of standard Parisian French and the vary-
ing language proﬁciencies, cultural experience and educational aspirations of its students from
diﬀerent language and cultural backgrounds. Heller uses ethnographic data on language
choice and turn-taking in classroom dialogue to trace how the school constructs particular
kinds of language use as ‘legitimate’ (Bourdieu 1990). She argues that bilingual education is
not only about learning or maintaining a language, but also about constructing the value of
diﬀerent languages and deﬁning who has the right to use them in which circumstances. In a
similar way, Jaﬀe (1999) explores the school as a site of struggle in the revitalisation of the
Corsican language.
Studies from a range of international contexts in Heller and Martin-Jones (2001) draw on
Bourdieu’s social theory, together with ethnographic research in schools, to trace how rela-
tionships of power and inequality in society (often related to colonial histories) are reproduced
Janet Maybin and Karin Tusting
518

and sustained through activities and relationships in classrooms. Hornberger and Chick ana-
lyse societal pressures and local contingencies in Peru and South Africa, where teachers and
students use a former colonial language (Spanish or English) to produce ritualised, vacuous
‘safetalk’. Martin-Jones and Saxena describe how bilingual teaching assistants in multilingual
primary schools in north England are marginalised from the main action of the classroom
by monolingual English-speaking class teachers. (See also Creese 2005 on teacher talk in
multilingual classrooms.)
A number of studies have focused on the re-creation of ideological social categories in
young people’s talk and interaction. Rampton (1995), using recordings of informal talk from
teenagers of Indian, Pakistani and Anglo descent in secondary schools and youth clubs, ana-
lyses how they challenge dominant notions of ethnicity through strategic use of each other’s
languages, a process he terms ‘language crossing’. Rampton combines ethnography with
Gumperzian sociolinguistics and Goﬀman’s work on interaction. Eckert (2000) combines eth-
nography with a quantitative analysis of sociolinguistic variation to study the recreation and
conﬁguration of class identities among US high school students. She demonstrates how stu-
dents orienting towards the subcultural categories of ‘Jock’ and ‘Burnout’ used distinctly dif-
ferent kinds of voice pitch, accent and dialect. She argues that these teenagers were re-creating
the class divisions of their parents’ world through their diﬀerent combinations of speech,
clothing and activity style (Jock = middle class and Burnout = working class), but that they
also appropriated and recombined speciﬁc aspects of existing styles in a unique personal bri-
colage. Other work combining ethnography with variationist sociolinguistics includes Alim
(2004) on style shifting by black youth, and Mendoza-Denton (2007) on identiﬁcation in
Latina youth gangs.
In relation to the second area of enquiry, interaction between in-school and out-of-school
cultures (e.g. Pahl 2007) has been a key area of interest for researchers aiming to provide
sensitive accounts of language and learning in culturally diverse classrooms. Early research in
the ethnography of communication tradition often highlighted mismatches between home and
school language use for students from minority ethnolinguistic groups, and the resulting mis-
understandings and inequities (e.g. Michaels 1981; Philips 1983). From this perspective, read-
ing and writing in school are viewed as intrinsically social rather than individual processes. A
focus on literacy events can foreground how teachers and students act and react in complex
and ambiguous ways, inﬂuenced by and shaping social identity, power relations and broader
cultural processes (Bloome et al. 2005).
Recently, researchers have addressed how information about students’ language experience
outside school could inform the educational curriculum, for instance through creating a ‘third
space’ where teachers and students can bring everyday and school knowledge together in
cooperative dialogue and problem-solving (Gutierrez et al. 2000); through drawing on sibling
teaching in home/school partnerships (Gregory and Williams 2000); or through building on
multilingual children’s experience in complementary schools (Creese et al. 2008). Educational
researchers have combined linguistic ethnography with a neo-Vygotskian framework to explore
ways of bringing in ‘funds of knowledge’ from outside school, to build bridges between
communities and classrooms (e.g. Moll et al. 1992).
A third area of work focuses more speciﬁcally on student voice. Rampton’s ﬁne-grained
analysis of the heteroglossic ‘language crossing’ (1995) and use of ‘posh and Cockney’ (2006)
in teenagers’ talk involves both linguistic and interactive conceptions of voice, with a focus on
double voicing (Bakhtin [1935] 1981) and styling. His more recent study also includes an
analysis of student references to popular culture, used in classroom talk to exclude teachers
and undermine their authority, which contributes to a more general disintegration of the
Linguistic ethnography
519

traditional structure of classroom discourse. Linguistic ethnographers have also been interested
in the eﬀects of students ‘voicing’ popular culture in student/student interaction. Lytra (2007)
traces how Turkish minority students in an Athens school use references to mainstream pop-
ular culture in oﬀ-task talk to claim a shared bicultural identity with Greek peers. From
another perspective, the voicing of popular texts by students has been seen as a potentially
valuable educational resource, producing hybrid learning practices which enable teachers and
students to fuse authoritative and inwardly persuasive discourses (Kamberelis 2001). Finally,
Maybin (2006) uses a Bakhtinian analysis of voicing in 10–11-year-olds’ talk across the school
day to illustrate how they try out and convey judgments about people, relationships and events
and negotiate entry into institutional practices, through the orchestration of reproduced voices
in talk among themselves.
Linguistic ethnography in the workplace and community
Relationships between local language use and broader patterns of inequality have also been
addressed beyond the school context. One key site for this has been research in workplaces. An
early precursor to this work came from the pioneering Industrial Language Training Service
(ILTS) in the 1970s. This organisation aimed to improve communication in multilingual
workplaces, both by responding to the English language needs of migrant workers, and by
heightening awareness of language issues for their co-workers (Roberts et al. 1992). The ILTS
worked with the American linguistic anthropologist Gumperz to produce a BBC ﬁlm and
accompanying book, Crosstalk (Gumperz et al. 1979), which explored common workplace
miscommunications. By identifying systematic cultural and linguistic diﬀerences underlying
misunderstandings, the programme challenged negative stereotypical assumptions. While not
identifying itself as ‘linguistic ethnography’, the sociolinguistic research carried out by the
ILTS shared many of the characteristics outlined above, analysing communication in real set-
tings within frameworks from anthropology and conversation analysis (Gumperz 1978, 1982).
More recently, a range of ethnographic research has focused speciﬁcally on workplace literacy
practices and changing social processes (Hull 1997; Belﬁore et al. 2004; Farrell 2006; Tusting
2010).
Sociolinguistic and linguistic anthropological perspectives have also been brought toge-
ther to explore complex urban social settings shaped by ﬂows of migration. Blommaert,
Collins, and Slembrouck have described patterns of interaction in neighbourhoods in Ghent
characterised by ‘densely layered patterns of multilingualism’ (Blommaert et al. 2005a;
Collins and Slembrouck 2006). They argue that semiotic and material processes oﬀer a sensi-
tive indicator of globalisation processes ‘on the ground’. For instance, they show how inter-
actional regimes in diﬀerent centres in the area shape diﬀering expectations about patterns
of behaviour. This work is characteristic of linguistic ethnography: drawing on detailed,
ﬁne-grained sociolinguistic ﬁeldwork to give insight into much broader social processes,
paying particular attention to issues of inequality and the workings of power (Blommaert
et al. 2005b).
Ethnographically grounded studies of language competence have been carried out in many
multilingual settings. Collins and Slembrouck (2005) include research from Belgium, the
Netherlands, Italy and South Africa, exploring the production of space through language
practices shaped by language ideologies. This work interrogates and challenges established
sociolinguistic concepts, as globalisation processes force us to ‘reshuﬄe’ existing ideas – one
good example of ethnography ‘opening linguistics up’. (See also chapters by Harris, this
volume, and Baynham, this volume.)
Janet Maybin and Karin Tusting
520

New literacy studies
Literacy studies is another area in which linguistic ethnography has moved beyond the edu-
cational setting. There are various approaches to studying literacy in applied linguistics (see
Warriner, this volume, for a fuller discussion). In its insistence on seeing literacy as a social
practice and using an ethnographic approach, the approach known as the ‘new literacy studies’
(e.g. Barton 2007) has been closely associated with the development of linguistic ethnography
in the UK.
This approach is often traced back to works by Street, Heath, and Scribner and Cole.
Scribner and Cole (1981) studied the literacy practices of the Vai in Liberia. By drawing on
observations and interviews, they were able to explain conﬂicting results from psychological
testing, by showing that diﬀerent literacies were associated with diﬀerent domains of life. This
raised questions about unitary conceptions of literacy as a single skill. In her long-term eth-
nographic and sociolinguistic work in US Appalachian communities, Heath (1983) explored
continuities and disjunctures between home and school literacy practices, giving new insight
into patterns of educational inequalities. Street (1984) studied writing practices in a village in
Iran. By using anthropological methods, approaching reading and writing as practices rather
than as skills, he developed an ‘ideological’ understanding of literacy as being rooted in and
shaped by the practices of people’s lives, in contrast to the dominant ‘autonomous’ model
which saw literacy purely as a cognitive ability. This view of literacy as ideologically shaped
language practice, and the intrinsically social view of language it entailed, challenged – and
continues to challenge – dominant skills-focused approaches.
Ethnographic methods have been employed to study literacy practices in many sites,
including minority language communities (Martin-Jones and Jones 2000), across diﬀerent
cultures (Gregory and Williams 2000), and in local and community settings (Barton and
Hamilton 1998; Barton et al. 2007). Ethnographically informed literacies research is pushing
forward our understandings of reading and writing practices in a social world in which textually
mediated organisation is increasingly signiﬁcant (Smith 1990). In turn, literacies research is
developing theory and practice in linguistic ethnography (see, for example, Lillis 2008).
Productive tensions
The broad focus of interest of linguistic ethnography has enabled a wide range of questions to
be addressed, developing new approaches to the study of language and culture and new com-
binations of theoretical paradigms. However, the very eclecticism of the approach generates
some productive tensions.
Realist and constructionist epistemologies
Linguistic ethnography seeks to address questions about language, society, and the relationship
between the two. Many of the studies cited above have been exploring social questions, such as
the impact of globalisation on multilingual communities, or how class and ethnicity aﬀect
learning in schools. Exploring these questions is challenging, because it entails bringing toge-
ther phenomena at diﬀerent ‘levels of reality’: local interaction and social processes. As is clear
from the examples above, linguistic ethnography is, by deﬁnition, seeking to explain phenomena
at these diﬀerent levels.
The challenges of bringing together linguistic and social theoretical frameworks of expla-
nation are formidable. Social interaction can be directly observed. But social inequalities, class
Linguistic ethnography
521

structures and ethnic identities cannot simply be ‘read oﬀ’ linguistic data. Broader patterns of
language use can be inferred from social interactions – but does this mean that they ‘exist’, in
any meaningful sense, or are they just an analytic construct? Similarly, to explore class, eth-
nicity, or globalisation requires theories about broader forces in the social world. But do such
things really ‘exist’, or are they merely theoretical constructs we use to talk about data?
Researchers need to think through the complexities of these relationships, and the mechanisms
by means of which these diﬀerent levels of reality can inﬂuence one another. The underlying
understanding of how reality works and how we can know about it, that is, the ontological
and epistemological framings of the research, shape how these relationships and mechanisms
are understood.
Such questions have been framed in linguistic ethnography in terms of a tension between
social constructionist and realist perspectives. Interactional sociolinguistics (along with some
other approaches to linguistic analysis, e.g. ethnomethodologically-inﬂuenced conversation
analysis) has tended to stress that social reality is produced in interaction, and to shy away
from explanatory categories which are not observable in the way participants orient to one
another. Others (e.g. Sealey and Carter 2004) have argued that applied linguistics could beneﬁt
from the insights of ‘realist’ philosophers. They claim that real structures and processes exist
beyond immediate social interactions, independently of our descriptions of and orientations
towards them, and that these can therefore be studied as entities in themselves by social
scientists, albeit indirectly.
The validity of the statements made by linguistic ethnographic work rests on understandings
of the interrelationship between language and social processes that often remain implicit.
Making these ontological assumptions explicit, and working through the possibilities and
limitations that follow from them, can only strengthen the ﬁeld.
The role and focus of the researcher
The researcher’s role in producing truth claims in ethnographic work needs serious considera-
tion. The tension identiﬁed by Hammersley (2007) between participants’ and analysts’ per-
spectives makes ethnographic work distinctly diﬀerent from a grounded approach, which
would claim that theory generation should be based solely on data collected in the ﬁeld. An
ethnographic approach involves not only the accumulation of data generated by various qua-
litative methods employed to capture insider or emic understandings of social phenomena. It
also requires that these understandings be re-visioned and re-articulated within the conceptual
frameworks of social sciences disciplines which inform the researcher’s outsider or etic orien-
tations (Heath and Street 2008). There is thus a tension between the goal of making truth
claims on the basis of the data (which may include recordings, transcripts, ﬁeldnotes, photo-
graphs, etc.), and the recognition of the role of the researcher’s positioning, interpretative
capacities and theoretical framings in shaping research ﬁndings.
In addition, tensions persist between the detailed micro-level analysis of interaction (which,
it could be argued, provides direct evidence of participant behaviour and orientations) and the
desire to identify longer term evolving patterns which constitute identities, institutions and
communities. Understandably, many researchers tend to focus on manageable chunks of data:
a few minutes of interaction, rather than continuous stretches over days and weeks. While
patterns of language use can be productively identiﬁed and compared across these chunks of
data, it is more diﬃcult to map long-term processes of situated meaning-making.
There is also a tension between the ﬁne-grained analysis of texts (spoken, written or visual)
and the interpretation of the sociohistorical context. Unlike conversation analysts, who limit
Janet Maybin and Karin Tusting
522

their accounts of context solely to that which can be grounded in references made by speakers,
ethnographers use their knowledge of the wider cultural context to interpret speciﬁc instances
of dialogue, guided by theoretical concepts and observational insights. A number of media-
tional concepts have been developed which help to bridge between text and context (see Lillis
2008, in relation to academic writing). For instance, the concept of indexicality (e.g. Silverstein
1976; Bauman and Briggs 1990; Blommaert 2005) refers to how particular uses of language
point to diﬀerent dimensions of context, from past, present or future, at a local or more gen-
eral scale. The term ‘style’ (Eckert 2000; Rampton 2006) links linguistic choices to other
dimensions of behaviour and to social constructs and processes. Concepts like these create a
synergy between linguistic and ethnographic analyses, describing the mutual shaping of lan-
guage and social life to provide insights into, for example, identity, ideology, or institutional
processes.
Emerging areas of focus
Online and digital research
New technologies oﬀer intriguing possibilities for exploring changing language practices. A
precursor in this ﬁeld is Cherny (1999), who draws on linguistics and ethnography in her par-
ticipant observation study of the register of chat in online text-based gaming communities or
multi-user domains (MUDs).
As well as oﬀering new tools for carrying out research, online ethnography raises new ques-
tions about the constitution of social groups, the nature and signiﬁcance of context, and approa-
ches to participant observation. Androutsopoulos’ (2008) ‘discourse-centred online ethnography’
combines systematic observation of postings on various Internet sites with interviews with
individuals about their practices. Ethnographically inﬂuenced in his approach to real-life data,
and his attempts to map the ﬁeld holistically, engage with people over a period of time, and
take a responsive approach to interviewing, his approach is positioned further towards the
‘observation’ end of the participant-observation spectrum than Cherny’s.
Davies (2006) illustrates a more participatory approach in her insider account of new lit-
eracy practices associated with the photosharing Website Flickr, as does her account with
Merchant of academic blogging, drawing on their own experiences (Davies and Merchant
2007). Research in virtual worlds, such as Gillen’s (2009) ‘virtual literacy ethnography’ of the
Schome Park project in Second Life, oﬀers possibilities for a diﬀerent approach. Gillen drew
on a mixture of methods to collect data about the diverse literacy practices young people
developed in this virtual world, keeping ethnographic ﬁeld notes, and recording many exam-
ples of the diﬀerent forms of written communication participants engaged in. Participation as
an avatar in the virtual world enabled her to approach the ‘hanging around’ often associated
with ‘real-life’ (non-virtual) participant-observation.
Multimodality research
Another area where technologies have provided new methodological possibilities is in the use
of digital video technology to capture multimodal dimensions of communication. In Britain,
multimodal analysis has been inﬂuenced by Hallidayan functional linguistics. Researchers have
looked at the aﬀordances of diﬀerent modes (e.g. speech, writing, image, body movement,
gesture or gaze) in terms of their limitations and potential for meaning-making in particular
communicative contexts, and how these are brought together to create ensembles of meaning.
Linguistic ethnography
523

Combining observations and detailed video analysis with social theory, researchers have stu-
died how modal conﬁgurations contribute to meaning and learning in classrooms, and to the
construction of particular disciplinary subjects (Kress et al. 2001, 2004).
Other examples include Goodwin (2006), who analyses video data of pre-adolescent girls’
interactions in North American school playgrounds. She draws on ethnographic observations
and informal interviews, together with an expanded version of conversation analysis, to
explore the articulation of body language and movement with talk. She describes how dis-
agreement, insult, comparisons and stories are used to construct hierarchy, opposition, alliance
and friendship in ways which challenge popular dualistic thinking about gendered behaviour.
Finally, Flewitt (2005) uses video ethnography to track the integration of diﬀerent modes in
three-year-olds’ communication at home and in the nursery.
Future trajectory and new debates
Linguistic ethnography as a ﬁeld of study is still at an early stage of development, although its
antecedents stretch back to the nineteenth century. As this chapter has demonstrated, the term
has been used for a range of work which combines linguistics and ethnography in diﬀerent
ways, researching educational, work and community settings. This research addresses broad
and complex social questions in areas as diverse as learning, inequality, globalisation, and
identity construction, often with a strong orientation towards intervention (e.g. Roberts et al.
2000; Ivanicˇ et al. 2009), and always drawing attention to the complex interdependencies of
language use and social process (Blommaert 2006). Researchers in this developing area have
formed the UK Linguistic Ethnography Forum (www.uklef.net), a Special Interest Group of
the British Association for Applied Linguistics, which organises events and makes linguistic
ethnographic resources more widely available. A number of training programmes, for instance
the Lancaster Literacy Research Centre summer school series and the ESRC Ethnography,
Language and Communication Researcher Development Initiative (www.rdi-elc.org.uk), have
provided opportunities to reﬁne methodological tools and extend linguistic ethnographic work
in new constituencies.
The various tensions identiﬁed above underlie not only linguistic ethnography but also
much social science research, and are unlikely to be easily resolved. Other challenges include
the diﬃculty of obtaining funding for linguistic ethnographic research, which is expensive in
researchers’ time and tends to focus in depth rather than oﬀer policy-friendly generalisations.
Nevertheless, awareness and ongoing discussion of theoretical and methodological challenges
are driving expansion of the ﬁeld. New mediational concepts continue to be developed, and
existing ones reﬁned, as new researchers come into this area of work, enriching it with their
intellectual histories and positionalities. New technologies open up possibilities both for
researching changing practices, and for developing new techniques for data collection, analysis
and communication of research. The deﬁnition of ‘linguistic’ is being challenged by work
which insists on the multimodality and complex contextuality of communicative practices.
And the methodological capacity of ethnography is being enhanced by linguistic procedures
and terminology which facilitate a more precise understanding of how culture and social life
are mediated through language.
Related topics
ethnicity; gender; identity; language and culture; language and migration; language socializa-
tion; literacy; multimodality; sociolinguistics
Janet Maybin and Karin Tusting
524

Further reading
Creese, A. (2008) ‘Linguistic ethnography’, in K. A. King and N. H. Hornberger (eds) Encyclopedia
of Language and Education, 2nd edn, vol. 10: Research Methods in Language and Education, New
York: Springer. (An introduction and overview.)
Duranti, A. (1997) Linguistic Anthropology, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. (An author-
itative overview of the ﬁeld of linguistic anthropology.)
Duranti, A. (ed.) (2009) Linguistic Anthropology: A Reader, 2nd edn, Malden, MA: Wiley-Blackwell.
(A comprehensive collection of readings in linguistic anthropology.)
Rampton, B. (2006) Language in Late Modernity: Interaction in an Urban School, Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press. (A thorough and complex example of contemporary linguistic eth-
nography, combining detailed language analysis with theoretically informed social analysis to
address class and ethnicity in young people’s lives.)
Rampton, B., Maybin, J. and Tusting, K. (eds) (2007) Journal of Sociolinguistics 11(5). (A special
issue on linguistic ethnography, which includes articles reﬂecting on diﬀerent aspects of the ﬁeld.)
References
Alim, H. S. (2004) ‘You know my steez: an ethnographic and sociolinguistic study of style shifting
in a Black American speech community’, Publications of the American Dialect Society 89,
Durham, NC: Duke University Press.
Androutsopoulos, J. (2008) ‘Potentials and limitations of discourse-centered online ethnography’,
Language@Internet 5: 8. Available at: www.languageatInternet.de/articles/2008/1610/index_html
(accessed 2 October 2009).
Bakhtin, M. ([1935] 1981) ‘Discourse in the novel’, in M. Holquist (ed.) The Dialogic Imagination:
Four Essays by M. M. Bakhtin, C. Emerson and M. Holquist (trans.), Austin: University of Texas
Press, pp. 259–422.
Barton, D. (2007) Literacy: An Introduction to the Ecology of Written Language, 2nd edn, Oxford:
Blackwell.
Barton, D. and Hamilton, M. (1998) Local Literacies: Reading and Writing in One Community,
London and New York: Routledge.
Barton, D., Ivanicˇ, R., Appleby, Y., Hodge, R. and Tusting, K. (2007) Literacy, Lives and Learning,
London and New York: Routledge.
Bauman, R. (1986) Story, Performance and Event, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Bauman, R. and Briggs, C. (1990) ‘Poetics and performance as critical perspectives on language and
social life’, Annual Review of Anthropology 19: 59–88.
Belﬁore, M. E., Defoe, T. A., Folinsbee, S., Hunter, J. and Jackson, N. (2004) Reading Work: Lit-
eracies in the New Workplace, Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Blommaert, J. (2005) Discourse: A Critical Introduction, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
——(2006) ‘Ethnography as counter-hegemony: remarks on epistemology and method’, Working
Papers in Urban Language and Literacies no. 34, London: Kings College. Available at: www.kcl.
ac.uk/content/1/c6/01/42/29/paper34.pdf (accessed 2 October 2009).
Blommaert, J., Collins, J. and Slembrouck, S. (2005a) ‘Polycentricity and interactional regimes in
“global neighbourhoods”’, Ethnography 6: 205–35.
——(2005b) ‘Spaces of multilingualism’, Language and Communication 25(3): 197–216.
Bloome, D., Carter, S. P., Christian, B. M., Otto, S. and Shuart-Faris, N. (2005) Discourse Analysis
and the Study of Classroom Language and Literacy Events: A Microethnographic Perspective,
London: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Boas, F. (1940) Race, Language and Culture, New York: The Free Press.
Bourdieu, P. (1990) The Logic of Practice, Cambridge: Polity Press.
Cherny, L. (1999) Conversation and Community: Chat in a Virtual World, Stanford, CA: CSLI
Publications.
Collins, J. and Slembrouck, S. (2006) ‘You don’t know what they translate: language contact, insti-
tutional procedure, and literacy practice in neighborhood health clinics in urban Flanders’,
Journal of Linguistic Anthropology 16(2): 249–68.
——(eds) (2005) ‘Multilingualism and diasporic populations: spatializing practices, institutional
processes, and social hierarchies’, special issue, Language and Communication 25(3): 189–334.
Linguistic ethnography
525

Creese, A. (2005) Teacher Collaboration and Talk in Multilingual Classrooms, Clevedon:
Multilingual Matters.
——(2008) ‘Linguistic ethnography’, in K. A. King and N. H. Hornberger (eds) Encyclopedia of
Language and Education, 2nd edn, vol. 10: Research Methods in Language and Education, New
York: Springer.
Creese, A., Baraç, T., Bhatt, A., Blackledge, A., Hamid, S., Wei, L., Lytra, V., Martin, P., Wu, C.
and Yagcioglu-Ali, D. (2008) ‘Investigating multilingualism in complementary schools in four
communities (RES–000–023–1180): ﬁnal report’, Birmingham: Birmingham University.
Davies, J. (2006) ‘Aﬃnities and beyond! Developing ways of seeing in online spaces’, e-learning 3.
Available at: www.wwwords.co.uk/pdf/freetoview.asp?j=elea&vol=3&issue=2&year=2006&article=
8_davies_elea_3_2_Web, (accessed 2 October 2009).
Davies, J. and Merchant, G. (2007) ‘Looking from the inside out: academic blogging as new lit-
eracy’, in C. Lankshear and M. Knobel (eds) A New Literacies Sampler, New York: Peter Lang.
Duranti, A. (1997) Linguistic Anthropology, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
——(2003) ‘Language as culture in US anthropology: three paradigms’, Current Anthropology 44:
323–47.
Duranti, A. and Goodwin, C. (1992) Rethinking Context: Language as an Interactive Phenomenon,
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Eckert, P. (2000) Linguistic Variation as Social Practice, Oxford: Blackwell.
Farrell, L. (2006) Making Knowledge Common: Literacy and Knowledge at Work, New York: Peter
Lang.
Firth, J. R. (1957) ‘Ethnographic analysis and language with reference to Malinowski’s views’, in
R. Firth (ed.) Man and Culture: An Evaluation of the Work of Malinowski, London, Boston and
Henley: Routledge. Also in F. R. Palmer (ed.) (1968) Selected Papers of J. R. Firth 1952–59,
London: Longman.
Flewitt, R. (2005) ‘Is every child’s voice heard? Researching the diﬀerent ways three year-old chil-
dren communicate and make meaning at home and in a pre-school playgroup’, Early Years 25(3):
207–22.
Foucault, M. (1980) Power/Knowledge: Selected Interviews and Other Writings 1972–1977, in
C. Gordon (ed.), London: Harvester Press.
Gal, S. (2001) ‘Language, gender, and power: an anthropological review’, in A. Duranti (ed.) Lin-
guistic Anthropology: A Reader, Malden, MA: Blackwell.
Gillen, J. (2009) ‘Literacy practices in Schome Park: a virtual literacy ethnography’, Journal of
Research in Reading 32(1): 57–74.
Goﬀman, E. (1981) ‘Footing’, in Forms of Talk, Oxford: Basil Blackwell.
Goodwin, M. H. (1990) He-Said-She-Said: Talk as Social Organization Among Black Children,
Bloomington: Indiana University Press.
——(2006) The Hidden Life of Girls: Games of Stance, Status and Exclusion, Oxford: Blackwell.
Gregory, E. and Williams, A. (2000) City Literacies: Learning to Read Across Generations and
Cultures, London: Routledge.
Gumperz, J. J. (1978), ‘The conversational analysis of interethnic communication’, in E. L. Ross
(ed.) Interethnic Communication, Athens, GA: University of Georgia Press.
——(1982) Discourse Strategies, New York: Cambridge University Press.
Gumperz, J., Roberts, C. and Jupp, T. C. (1979) Crosstalk: A Study of Cross-cultural Communica-
tion. Background Material and Notes to Accompany the BBC Film, Southall: NCILT.
Gutierrez, K. D., Baquedano-Lopez, P. and Tejeda, C. (2000) ‘Rethinking diversity: hybridity and
hybrid language practices in the third space’, Mind, Culture and Activity 6(4): 286–303.
Hammersley, M. (2007) ‘Reﬂections on linguistic ethnography’, Journal of Sociolinguistics 11(5):
689–95.
Hammersley, M. and Atkinson, M. (1994) Ethnography: Principles in Practice, 2nd Rev. edn,
London: Routledge.
Hasan, R. (1985) ‘Meaning, context, text: ﬁfty years after Malinowski’, in J. D. Benson and
W. S. Greaves (eds) Systemic Perspectives on Discourse, vol. 15: Advances in Discourse Processes,
Norwood, NJ: Ablex.
Heath, S. B. (1983) Ways with Words, New York: Cambridge University Press.
Heath, S. B. and Street, B. V. (2008) Ethnography: Approaches to Language and Literacy Research,
New York and London: Teachers College Press/Routledge.
Janet Maybin and Karin Tusting
526

Heller, M. (1999) Linguistic Minorities and Modernity: A Sociolinguistic Ethnography, London:
Longman.
Heller, M. and Martin-Jones, M. (eds) (2001) Voices of Authority: Education and Linguistic Diﬀer-
ence, London: Ablex.
Hull, G. (1997) Changing Work, Changing Workers: Critical Perspectives on Language, Literacy
and Skills, Albany, NY: State University of New York Press.
Hymes, D. (1964) ‘General introduction’, in D. Hymes (ed.) Language in Culture and Society: A
Reader in Linguistics and Anthropology, New York: Harper and Row.
——(1974) Foundations in Sociolinguistics: An Ethnographic Approach, Philadelphia: University of
Pennsylvania Press.
Ivanicˇ, R., Edwards, R., Barton, D., Fowler, Z., Mannion, G., Miller, K., Satchwell, C. and
Smith, J. (2009) Improving Learning in College: Rethinking Literacies Across the Curriculum,
London and New York: Routledge.
Jaﬀe, A. (1999) Ideologies in Action: Language Politics on Corsica, Berlin: Mouton, Walter de Gruyter.
Kamberelis, G. (2001) ‘Producing heteroglossic classroom (micro)cultures through hybrid discourse
practice’, Linguistics and Education 12(1): 85–125.
Kress, G., Jewitt, C., Bourne, G., Franks, A., Jones, K. and Reid, E. (2004) English in Urban
Classrooms: A Multimodal Perspective on Teaching and Learning, London: Routledge.
Kress, G., Jewitt, C., Ogborn, J. and Tsatsarelis, T. (2001) Multimodal Teaching and Learning: The
Rhetorics of The Science Classroom, London: Continuum.
Lillis, T. (2008) ‘Ethnography as method, methodology and “deep theorising”: closing the gap
between text and context in academic writing research’, Written Communication 25(3): 353–88.
Lytra, V. (2007) Play Frames and Social Identities, Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Martin-Jones, M. and Jones, K. (eds) (2000) Multilingual Literacies: Reading and Writing Diﬀerent
Worlds, Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Maybin, J. (2006) Children’s Voices: Talk, Knowledge and Identity, Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan.
Mendoza-Denton, N. (2007) Homegirls: Language and Cultural Practices Among Latina Youth
Gangs, Maldon, MA: Blackwell.
Michaels, S. (1981) ‘“Sharing time”: children’s narrative styles and diﬀerential access to literacy’,
Language in Society 10: 423–42.
Moll, L., Amanti, C., Neﬀ, D. and Gonzalez, N. (1992) ‘Funds of knowledge for teaching: using a
qualitative approach to connect homes and classrooms’, Theory into Practice 31(2): 132–41.
Ochs, E. and Schieﬀelin, B. (1984) ‘Language acquisition and socialization: three developmental
stories and their implications’, in R. Schweder and R. Levine (eds) Culture Theory: Mind, Self
and Emotion, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Pahl, K. (2007) ‘Timescales and ethnography: understanding a child’s meaning-making across three
sites: a home, a classroom and an adult literacy class’, Ethnography and Education 2(2): 175–90.
Philips, S. U. (1983) The Invisible Culture, New York: Longman.
Rampton, B. (1995) Crossing: Language and Ethnicity Among Adolescents, London: Longman.
——(2006) Language in Late Modernity: Interaction in an Urban School, Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
——(2007) ‘Neo-Hymesian linguistic ethnography in the United Kingdom’, Journal of Socio-
linguistics 11(5): 584–607.
Rampton, B., Tusting, K., Maybin, J., Barwell, R., Creese, A. and Lytra, V. (2004) ‘UK Linguistic
ethnography: a
discussion
paper’.
Available at:
www.ling-ethnog.org.uk/documents/papers/
ramptonetal2004.pdf (accessed 7 June 2009).
Roberts, C., Jupp, T. and Davies, E. (1992) Language and Discrimination: A Study of Communication
in Multi-ethnic Workplaces, London and New York: Longman.
Roberts, C., Sarangi, S., Southgate, L., Wakeford, R. and Vass, W. (2000) ‘Oral examination: equal
opportunities, ethnicity and fairness in the MRCGP’, British Medical Journal 320: 370–4.
Scribner, S. and Cole, M. (1981) The Psychology of Literacy, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Sealey, A. and Carter, B. (2004) Applied Linguistics as Social Science: Advances in Applied Linguistics,
London: Continuum.
Silverstein, M. (1976) ‘Shifters, linguistic categories, and cultural description’, in K. Basso and
H. Selby (eds) Meaning in Anthropology, Albuquerque: University of New Mexico Press.
Silverstein, M. and Urban, G. (eds) (1996) The Natural History of Discourse, Chicago: University of
Chicago Press.
Linguistic ethnography
527

Smith, D. (1990) ‘Textually mediated social organization’, in Texts, Facts and Femininity: Exploring
the Relations of Ruling, London: Taylor & Francis.
Street, B. (1984) Literacy in Theory and Practice, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
——(1993) ‘Culture is a verb: anthropological aspects of language and cultural process’, in
D. Graddol, L. Thompson and M. Byram (eds) Language and Culture: British Studies in Applied
Linguistics 7, Clevedon: Multilingual Matters.
Trechter, S. and Bucholtz, M. (2001) ‘White noise: bringing language into whiteness studies’, Jour-
nal of Linguistic Anthropology 11(1): 3–21.
Tusting, K. (2010) ‘Eruptions of interruptions: managing tensions between writing and other tasks
in a textualized childcare workplace’, in D. Barton and U. Papen (eds) Anthropology of Writing:
Understanding Textually Mediated Worlds, London and New York: Continuum.
Vološinov, V. N. ([1929] 1973) Marxism and the Philosophy of Language, L. Matejka and
I. R. Titunik (trans.), Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Wortham, S. (2008) ‘Linguistic anthropology of education’, Annual Review of Anthropology 37:
37–51.
Wortham, S. and Rymes, B. (2003) (eds) Linguistic Anthropology of Education, Westport, CT:
Praeger.
Janet Maybin and Karin Tusting
528

37
Literacy
Doris S. Warriner
Introduction
While deﬁning the scope and purview of applied linguistics, Cook (2003) noted that applied
linguists investigate ‘problems’ (educational and social) in which language is implicated, and
he divided the diﬀerent kinds of ‘problems’ that are systematically examined in the ﬁeld into
three broad categories: language and education; language, work and law; and language,
information and eﬀect (2003: 7–8). While Cook’s account depicts central concerns of the ﬁeld,
it does not represent some of the more recent shifts that have moved away from an emphasis
on so-called ‘problems’ and towards an understanding that all language and literacy practices
are situated within particular social, historical, political contexts and are therefore potential
resources which might be diﬀerentially valued and supported depending on situation, place,
audience, and goals.
The purpose of this chapter is to explore questions such as what does literacy have to do
with applied linguistics? And what does a view of literacy as a social-cultural-historical practice
contribute to the ﬁeld? I argue it is important to consider ‘the relation of knowledge about
language to decision-making in the real world’ (Cook 2003: 5) through a ‘theoretical and
empirical investigation of real-world problems in which language is a central issue’ (Brumﬁt
1995: 27). I further argue that it is necessary to understand the dynamic ways that literacy and
literacies (including multilingual literacies and digital literacies) inﬂuence processes and prac-
tices that are of growing concern in current and emerging applied linguistics research.
Although language teaching and learning remain dominant areas of inquiry, the ﬁeld has
branched out into new areas, and this branching out has required new methodologies and
theories.
According to Widdowson (2003: 14), applied linguistics ‘does not impose a way of thinking
but points out things which might be worth thinking about’. With this in mind, I consider the
position of literacy studies within the ﬁeld of applied linguistics by revisiting their shared
concerns, shared priorities, and shared questions. Before getting to that, however, it is neces-
sary to provide a brief account of how particular views of literacy emerged, the context in
which they emerged, and the lasting consequences of new theories and approaches to the study
of literacy and literacies.
529

History
For many decades, and across a wide range of contexts, the term literacy has been commonly
used to capture a very speciﬁc kind of phenomenon: the skills involved in reading and writing,
or decoding and producing texts. In this framework, the term ‘literate’ indicates an ability to read or
write letters or symbols in a way that allows meaning-making and comprehension to ensue.
The deﬁnition emphasizes the importance of learning phonics (sound-symbol relationships),
individual literacy levels, individual achievement, and the role of cognitive processes. The
assumption is that increased levels of literacy result in greater social participation; it is taken for
granted that those who can read and write will ultimately have more and better opportu-
nities – academically, economically, socially, and politically. In this view, great attention is
given to what the individual learner is able to do and little attention is given to issues of social con-
text, cultural inﬂuences, ideological factors, or relations of power. Unfortunately, this remains
the dominant view of literacy in both developed and under-developed contexts, around the world.
While most still agree that such common-sense understandings provide a useful starting
point for discussions of what it means to ‘be literate’ or ‘have literacy’, most literacy scholars
now argue that a more accurate understanding and depiction of literacy would include but go
beyond these conventional understandings of the term. In the 1980s, researchers (e.g. Collins
1986; Heath 1983; Street 1984) began to problematize the many assumptions that had been
made about what ‘counts’ as literacy, for whom, and in what contexts. They advocated an
expanded view of literacy that would recognize the many factors that inﬂuence reading and
writing as well as the fact that many diﬀerent kinds of literacies are taught, learned, valued
and privileged depending on purpose, situation, actors involved, and contexts (social, cultural
and ideological). Increasingly, literacy scholars began to ask critical questions about what
kinds of literacy practices are promoted/required in what contexts and for what purposes.
Literacy, in other words, came to be viewed as a social practice located in and inﬂuenced by a wide
range of factors rather than a set of skills possessed by individuals and yielded in neutral ways.
Noteworthy critiques of those ‘common sense’ assumptions that drove limited views of lit-
eracy moved the ﬁeld in new and important directions. Taking on the claims of Walter Ong
(that there is a great divide between orality and literacy, and that literacy is far superior to
orality), Street argued that ‘Ong’s account of “literate society” turns out on examination to be
an account of the particular literate practices of a subculture within his own society, speciﬁ-
cally the academic subculture of which he himself is a part’ (1995: 150). Rather than focus on
the distinctions and disconnects between the two (which Street argues have been manufactured
and overstated), it is far more accurate (and productive) to consider the interactions between
orality and literacy. This represents a fundamental shift in how we view literacy, and orality,
that continues to be evident in current literacy research. As Street points out, it is not neces-
sary to ‘deny the signiﬁcance of technical aspects of reading and writing, such as decoding,
sound/shape correspondence and reading “diﬃculties”’; but it is important to recognize the
many ways in which those aspects are ‘embedded in particular social practices’ (1995: 151).
But such myths about literacy are persistent and consequential, as Collins so eloquently
states:
The central claims of the [literacy] thesis are that writing is a technology and transforms
human thinking, relations to language, and representations of tradition, a technology that
also enables a coordination of social action in unprecedented precision and scale, thus
enabling the development of unique social and institutional complexity.
(Collins and Blot 2003: 17)
Doris S. Warriner
530

Writing against this rationale, Collins, Street, Gee and many others have persuasively argued
that it is critical that literacy scholarship not only recognize and name the myths but also
identify what/whose agendas such myths serve. Describing the disconnect between the claims
evident in the literacy myth and what actually happens to real people, Gee identiﬁes how lit-
eracy myths have throughout history served the political goals of a small but powerful
minority, usually to increase their power and control:
The most striking continuity in the history of literacy is the way in which literacy has
been used, in age after age, to solidify the social hierarchy, empower elites, and ensure that
people lower on the hierarchy accept the values, norms, and beliefs of the elites, even
when it is not in their self-interest or group interest to do so.
(Gee 1996: 36)
Arguing against these myths (and the cognitive consequences of literacy that they assume), a
number of literacy scholars have analyzed the social, material, and ideological consequences of
literacy in order to show empirically how diﬀerent things are in reality and on the ground (e.g.
Bartlett 2007; Farrell 2009; Luke 2004; Martin-Jones et al. 2009; Street and Lefstein 2007;
Warriner 2007b; Warschauer 2009).
Advances in the study of literacy and literacies
The idea that literacy should be considered a social-cultural-historical practice emerged in the
1980s out of work that took an anthropological perspective and utilized ethnographic
approaches in the study of literacy across cultural contexts (e.g. Collins 1986, 1988; Heath
1983; Scribner and Cole 1981; Street 1984). This work collectively challenged the assumptions
that had been made in decades of research by cultural anthropologists and literacy scholars,
including the notion that literacy was best deﬁned as a neutral set of skills (e.g. those involved
with decoding, comprehending, and writing texts) that are not only distinct from orality and
associated with modernity but, also, the property of individuals (rather than communities,
societies, or institutional-level actors). According to Scribner and Cole (1981), a careful
examination of the letter-writing practices of the Vai in Liberia revealed that literacy is best
understood as a set of ‘socially organized practices which made use of a symbolic system
as well as a technology for producing and disseminating it’ (Baynham and Prinsloo 2009: 3).
This view of literacy as more than the process of decoding texts by attaching sounds to sym-
bols was aﬃrmed by Brian Street during his work in Iran. Street (1984) found that the literacy
practices that existed in an Iranian village not only varied but also reﬂected a range of diﬀer-
ent religious, economic, and educational goals and priorities. In other words, one’s access to
certain literacy practices was greatly inﬂuenced by one’s access to the community of practice
that engaged in those practices; and what is valued in one context is not necessary of value in
another.
Building on this argument that the contexts, purposes, audiences, ideologies, and sponsors of
literacy are as important to examine as the actual processes involved in reading and writing, a
group of New Literacy Studies scholars (e.g. Collins 1986, 1988; Gee 1996; Heath 1983; New
London Group 1996; Street 1984, 1995) began asking questions that explicitly focused on the
contexts in which literacy was deﬁned, taught, and learned. In contrast to what was called
autonomous or universalist approaches to literacy (as described above), New Literacy Studies
scholars (and those they inﬂuenced) adopted a more ideological perspective on literacy. In part
inﬂuenced by the ‘social turn’ occurring in the social sciences more generally, and in part
Literacy
531

inﬂuenced by the ﬁndings of the ethnographic work described above, literacy scholarship
moved from viewing literacy as a neutral set of skills possessed by an individual to the idea
that questions about literacy are always also questions about the social, cultural, material,
institutional, and ideological contexts of literacy.
As part of a larger attempt to re-envision literacy as a socially situated, ideologically inﬂu-
enced set of practices, New Literacy Studies scholars questioned the often-made juxtapositions
and assumed contrasts made between literacy and orality often referred to as the ‘great divide’
(Goody 1977; Ong 1982). In addition, they examined how participation is deﬁned in particular
communities of practice, the role of language and literacy in levels of participation, and the
educational, social and material consequences of exclusion from certain communities of prac-
tices. In this framework, diﬀerent questions emerged as the guideposts, including: What
‘counts’ as literacy?; Who is doing the deﬁning?; Who beneﬁts from such deﬁnitions?; What
practices are excluded from those deﬁnitions of what ‘counts’?; and What are the ideological
or political agendas of this deﬁnitional/ideological work?
Two theoretical (and methodological) contributions came out of this early work – the
notion of literacy event (Heath 1983) and the notion of literacy practice (Street 1984) – and
both constructs continue to inﬂuence the ways in which we investigate literacy today. A lit-
eracy event is any event that involves reading or writing, or any ‘occasion in which written
language is intergral to the nature of participants’ interactions and their interpretive processes
and strategies’ (Heath 1983: 319). Building on Heath’s work and his own anthropological work
in Iran, Street distinguished literacy events from literacy practices. Looking back on decades of
his work and others’, he deﬁned literacy practices as ‘social practices and conceptions of
reading and writing’ as well as ‘the social models of literacy that participants bring to bear
upon those events and that give meaning to them’, or the ‘particular ways of thinking about
and doing reading and writing in cultural contexts’ (Street 2000: 20–2). By emphasizing con-
ceptions, social models, ways of thinking about literacy, and the cultural dimensions of those
experiences, the notion of literacy practices continues to shape the issues and questions that
drive the ﬁeld today.
Such approaches inﬂuenced the investigation of literacy as a social practice in a number of
ways. First, a great deal of literacy studies scholarship continues to adopt an anthropological
lens and utilize ethnographic methods while exploring (across cultures, contexts, situations,
and interactions) what gives meaning to particular literacy events and links those events with
the practices identiﬁed and documented. This work contributes to our understanding of the
nuances, complexities and historical inﬂuences that give rise to particular literacy practices and
events in particular moments and spaces (Collins and Blot 2003). In addition, current work
continues to critique the dichotomous views of orality and literacy that were dominant in the
ﬁeld for so many years. Finally, most recent work on literacy shares an understanding that all
views of literacy are constructs of the viewer/researcher (and not necessarily an accurate por-
trayal of reality across cultures). It has become clear that a decontextualized model of learning
or development does not adequately account for culturally diverse ways of acquiring knowledge,
language, or literacy.
Current issues and ongoing debates
From all the new literacy scholarship that has been conducted across a range of diﬀerent cul-
tural contexts (including in a range of informal learning contexts), some very large but
important research agendas have emerged, including how language and literacy mediate both
learning and identity simultaneously, and how new technologies might inﬂuence learning,
Doris S. Warriner
532

literacy, and identity. One particularly interesting but challenging aspect of the New Literacy
Studies research agenda has been the explicit attention paid to questions about how to culti-
vate a long and broad view of learning that focuses on questions such as ‘how can we con-
struct pedagogy and curriculum that support students to construct and hold on to enduring
literate identities and to become powerful speakers, readers, and writers while they are in
school and beyond?’ (Hull and Schultz 2002: 50). The growing interest in how literacy events
and practices are embedded within sociocultural contexts continues to take researchers outside
of formal educational contexts to identify and document literacy events, literacy practices, and
the relationship between events or practices and the trajectories of individuals and their com-
munities (e.g. Barton 2001; Black 2007, 2009; Gee 1996; Hull and Nelson 2005; Lam 2000,
2006, 2009; Schultz 2001; Schultz and Hull 2002, Warriner 2004, 2007a, 2007b, Yi 2007,
2008). By going outside schools and classrooms, literacy scholars have gained insights about
the range and variation of literacy practices in use, the function of those practices, and the
beliefs or views held by members of communities engaged in them.
The systematic but qualitative investigation of out-of-school literacies prompted educational
researchers and practitioners alike to reconceptualize what might be possible in more formal
educational contexts (e.g. schools) while opening up new ground conceptually. Within the area
now known as the New Literacy Studies, researchers have built on the contributions of this
early work by asking questions such as: What is the value of ethnographic methods for
understanding literacy as a social practice that is both situated in speciﬁc local contexts and
inﬂuenced by global and transnational processes? For understanding biliteracy and multi-
literacy? For understanding the role of power in access to education, social goods (e.g. credentials),
material resources?
As Schultz and Hull note, literacy scholars examine not just processes of decoding and
meaning making but also ‘its social, cultural, historical, economic, and politics contexts both
in school and out’ (2002: 23). In addition, it is very common to see a microanalysis of lan-
guage and literacy combined with a macroanalysis of discourse and power. Inﬂuenced by these
theoretical frames and methodological approaches, broad questions emerged about the rela-
tionship between in-school and out-of-school literacies. For instance, we now routinely ask
questions such as: When there are so many diﬀerent types of literacy practices, why is it that
school literacy has come to be seen as the deﬁning form of reading and writing? (Hull and
Schultz 2002: 27). In addition, the language and theoretical constructs used by literacy studies
scholars have been used in a variety of ways to identify and analyze the many close connections
that exist between literacy practices and social identities.
Building on the ﬁndings and insights gleaned from this work, the study of literacy as a
social practice has started to ‘return to questions of schooling’ (Baynham 2004; Baynham and
Prinsloo 2009) in critical and productive ways. In addition, key contributions in the ﬁeld ask
very fundamental questions about the relationship between literacy as a social practice
(Barton 2001); the ideological inﬂuences on the ways in which we think, talk, and write about
literacy (Street 2004); and the very consequential ‘material consequences of literacy’ (Luke
2004) for both individuals and communities. In the work described here, it is clear that
researchers in the ﬁeld of New Literacy Studies are now looking across a range of sites and
groups in order to understand the many diﬀerent kinds of factors (e.g. cognitive, interactional,
ideological, cultural, and institutional) that might inﬂuence how learners engage with and
think about literacy practices in their diﬀerent life worlds (in and out of the formal education
system).
Inspired by the social turn in literacy studies and reﬂecting the literacy-as-social-cultural-
historical-practice perspective, a number of diﬀerent research agendas have emerged within the
Literacy
533

ﬁeld in recent years, including academic literacies (e.g. Canagarajah 2004; Curry and Lillis
2004); adolescent literacies (Lam 2000; 2009; Lam and Rosario-Ramos 2009; Yi 2008, 2009);
multilingual literacies (e.g. Martin-Jones and Jones 2000; Martin-Jones et al. 2009; Warriner
2007a, 2007b); and transnational literacies (Bartlett 2007; Black 2007, 2009; Lam 2006, 2009;
Warriner 2007a, 2007b; Yi 2007, 2008, 2009). By simultaneously foregrounding an explicit
interest in the situated and sociocultural nature of the varied literacy practices involved in
language learning processes and re-prioritizing questions of schooling in relation to what’s
going on outside the classroom, work from the ﬁeld of literacy studies continues to inﬂuence
the research agendas of applied linguists from around the world.
In addition, insights from Bartlett and Holland (2002) and Bartlett (2007, 2008) have illu-
minated the relationship between the diﬀerent worlds that might be occupied by individuals
and communities (e.g. life worlds and literacy worlds, or linguistic worlds) and their under-
standings of what literacy is and does in speciﬁc contexts and situations (Bartlett 2008). In
local eﬀorts to preserve or modify conventional notions of literacy, power or – more precisely,
asymmetrical relations of power – comes to inﬂuence how literacy is deﬁned, by whom, for
what purposes, and with what kinds of consequences. Bartlett and Holland’s (2002) eﬀorts to
theorize ‘the space of literacy practices’ has yielded important conceptual and empirical
insights while highlighting the complicated ways that culture is always and everywhere a
dynamic, emergent, situated set of practices.
Current work on literacy as a social practice also focuses on the many ways that literacy
practices might be inﬂuenced by local contexts while providing opportunities for transcending
the limitations of that context. Inﬂuenced by the insights and recommendations of Brandt and
Clinton (2002), Hull and Schultz (2002), and Bartlett and Holland (2002), many posit that
looking beyond the particulars of local contexts illuminates the speciﬁc nature of situated
social practice. In addition, current work endeavors to address how time and space inﬂuence
the processes, events, and practices involved with reading and writing in a twenty-ﬁrst century
world. While many literacy scholars have continued to use a literacy-as-social-practice lens to
investigate questions about reading and writing (and multimodal practices), these views are
now accompanied by an interest in theorizing the role of time and space in such processes, while also
returning to questions of schooling. For more than a decade, the ﬁeld has worked to address
the processes, relationships, and inﬂuences involved with reading and writing across formal
and informal learning contexts in ways that build on but extend the insights of earlier work. As
Hull and Schultz (2002) mentioned, certain questions about literacy remain central, including:
How can we construct a pedagogy and curriculum that support students to construct and
hold on to enduring literate identities and to become powerful speakers, readers, and
writers while they are in school and beyond?
How are time and space organized in adolescents’ lives while they are in school in such
a way as to allow them to develop identities as writers? Is the personal writing students
engage in connected to a particular time in their lives? If so, will these students hold on to
the knowledge that writing was important to them at one time and return to it later on?
How can educators re-conceptualize classroom practices to account for the writing
students engage in outside of school, and how can practitioners teach in such a way that
adolescents acquire and hold onto literate identities past their time in classrooms?
(Hull and Schultz 2002: 50)
As part of this eﬀort to understand and learn from what learners are doing outside of school
contexts, there has been growing interest in the language learning and literacy development of
Doris S. Warriner
534

bilingual or multilingual learners (immigrants and refugees). Martin-Jones (Martin-Jones
and Jones 2000) has identiﬁed a couple of common threads in the research on multilingual
literacies. First, because multilingual literacies are, by deﬁnition, multiple and complex,
research on this topic requires a unique set of conceptual and methodological approaches.
Recognizing that ‘there are multiple paths to the acquisition of the spoken and written lan-
guages within the group repertoire and people have varying degrees of expertise in these lan-
guages and literacies’ (2000: 6) is an important ﬁrst step. Another emphasis is on the ‘the
multiple ways in which people draw on and combine the codes in their communicative reper-
toire when they speak and write’ such that the contrasts themselves become meaning-making
resources (2000: 7).
Extending the insights and priorities of the aforementioned scholars, recent work on trans-
national literacies (see, for example, Warriner 2007a) actively works to break down often-
invoked binaries and bridge previously unconnected intellectual inquiries by coupling the
examination of transnationalism with the investigation of speciﬁc and local literacy practices.
Moving beyond a purely theoretical discussion of ‘the-local-vs.-the-global’ to a more nuanced
account of the speciﬁc ways that individual actors experience transnationalism ‘day-in-day-out’,
this work compliments the insights of both the transnational literature and our understanding
of literacy as a social-historical-political practice. Bartlett (2007), for instance, examines how
a Dominican transmigrant student’s bilingual literacies and educational trajectory might be
shaped by social interactions across classroom contexts and how these processes and practices
might simultaneously create and break down the boundaries between diﬀerent moments in
time. Other work (e.g. Richardson Bruna 2007; Sánchez 2007) illuminates how the sustained
transnational movement between the USA and Mexico provides particular linguistic and
cultural resources for US immigrant children as well as the creative use of multimodal literacy
practices by immigrant youth in the construction and performance of identity in local con-
texts. This work draws needed attention to informal literacy practices that are often relegated
to our ‘peripheral vision’ but, also, ‘provides an interactional ethnographic account of the
informal literacy practices newcomer Mexican youth employ to reﬂect and reproduce their
transnational identities’ (Richardson Bruna 2007: 53). In my ethnographic work (Warriner
2007b), I have described how the ‘ideological consequences of literacy’ are realized both
locally and globally through the widespread use of standardized assessment policies and
practices that devalue meaningful and eﬀective approaches to language teaching and learning.
The analysis of data collected from an adult ESL program demonstrates that testing, as a
bureaucratic mechanism, receives, sorts, arranges, and classiﬁes students in ways that foster
identities desired by the new global economy. Together, such work has implications for how we
might reconceptualize theories of language learning and language teaching in communities
across the developed world, particularly when economic conditions are driven by rapid tech-
nological advancements, the continued movement of goods and people across borders, and
growing distinctions between the rich and poor.
New directions in literacy studies
The recent ‘spatial turn’ (Leander and Sheehy 2004) in literacy research has helped provide a
set of theories and methods for examining how digital technologies (including information and
communication technologies) inﬂuence our notions of what counts as literacy, how/whether/
when individuals learn to participate in particular (online) communities of practice, and the
material consequences (Luke 2004) of the opportunities and constraints provided by digital
technologies. Also called the ‘social semiotic multimodal perspective on learning’, this work
Literacy
535

helps literacy studies as a ﬁeld reconsider and envision a new set of conceptual and metho-
dological tools as well as a new set of guiding questions. Greater attention is now being given
to issues such as the relationship between modes of representation and issues of content; how
learners and learning might be inﬂuenced by diﬀerences in mode; whether ‘learning’ happens
diﬀerently or in the same way when we engage with the world primarily through image rather
than through speech or writing; and what is accomplished (e.g. aesthetically, materially, or
symbolically) when images supplement or replace writing.
Within this growing body of research, a growing number of studies have contributed
important insights about the situated ways that digital literacy practices intersect with and
support the language learning eﬀorts of recently arrived immigrants in the US context.
Whether analyzing how teenagers use the Internet to position themselves in particular ways
in and through writing (Lam 2000; McGinnis et al. 2007), how fanﬁction promotes lan-
guage learning and literacy development by engaging adolescents in meaningful activities
(Black 2007, 2009), or the ‘biliterate composing practices’ of high school students from
immigrant families (Yi 2007, 2008, 2009), this work continues to raise questions about how
literacy is deﬁned, by whom, and with what consequences of learning and identity for immi-
grant youth. Such research has also opened up spaces for identifying, documenting, and ana-
lyzing how new immigrants combine multiple semiotic resources in order to learn English,
maintain connections with people and practices from their ‘homeland’, and establish new sets
of practices valued in the communities of practice they wish to join. This recent work on
the digitial literacy practices of immigrant youth contributes valuable insights and raises
important questions about the intersections between second language learning processes,
social identities, and multilingual literacies. It also gives much-needed attention to the dynamic
and complicated intersections between learning, language, and literacy for individuals
often overlooked in the ﬁeld of literacy studies. As such, this work illustrates eﬀectively
and powerfully the many common interests and concerns that literacy studies and applied
linguistics have. Future research on the digital literacy practices of multilingual, multinational
individuals and communities living in a variety of contexts promises to yield exciting and
consequential ﬁndings that are certain to inﬂuence many diﬀerent subﬁelds of applied
linguistics.
Similarly, a collection of chapters by scholars ‘actively involved in shaping the ﬁeld of lit-
eracy studies’ (Baynham and Prinsloo 2009) – entitled The Future of Literacy Studies –
demonstrates that literacy studies scholarship is now concerned with identifying, documenting
and analyzing the kinds of literacies, multilingual literacies, and digital literacies that are
associated with new technologies, forces of globalization and individual or community eﬀorts
to maintain aﬃliations with multiple communities of practice. Contributions highlight not
only the value of a social practice lens (Barton 2009; Kell 2009; Street 2009; Warriner 2009)
but, also, the advances made in digital literacy studies (Warschauer 2009), the aesthetic turn in
our investigations of new media (Hull and Nelson 2009), the implications of these advances
for teaching and learning in formal educational contexts (Ivanic 2009; Snyder 2009), and the
economic consequences of valuing new literacies in workplace settings (Farrell 2009). This
volume demonstrates powerfully the many ways that
literacy goings-on are always and already embedded in particular forms of activity; that
one cannot deﬁne literacy or its uses in a vacuum; that reading and writing are studied in
the context of social (cultural, historical, political and economic) practices of which they
are a part and which operate in particular social spaces.
(Baynham and Prinsloo 2009: 2)
Doris S. Warriner
536

Summary
Literacy occupies a central role in processes that interest applied linguists the most, including
language learning and language. The ﬁeld of applied linguistics beneﬁts from examining the
socially situated but ideologically and institutionally inﬂuenced ways in which literacy is
deﬁned, conceptualized, and examined. Similarly, the study of literacy as a social practice is
enhanced when the theories and tools of applied linguistics are applied. Increasingly, applied
linguists are paying attention to the social, cultural, ideological, and material dimensions of
literacy events and practices, and many are focused on ‘the education of children, the rights of
the disadvantaged, the changing balance of cultures and languages, the eﬀects of technology
on communication’ (Cook 2003: 78). In such ways, it is clear that a systematic examination of
literacy practices supports many of the current and emerging research agendas in the ﬁeld of
applied linguistics.
Moving from a dichotomous distinction between orality and literacy to the notion that, like
all social practices, literacies are situated and multiple, literacy studies scholarship has become
a ﬁeld of inquiry that intersects with a number of other intellectual pursuits, including
the pursuits of applied linguistics but also those of the social sciences more generally. Situated
at the boundaries between diﬀerent ﬁelds of inquiry, literacy studies scholarship remains both
a conceptual undertaking and a systematic examination of empirical data. Sometimes focused
on what is going on outside of formal educational contexts, and sometimes returning to
questions of schooling and pedagogy (Baynham 2004), literacy studies scholarship remains
focused on the pursuit of literacy as a set of social-cultural-historical practices that are simul-
taneously local and global. Whether we are examining reading, writing, digitial literacies, or
multilingual literacies, literacy studies scholars are increasingly aware of need to also examine
the role of time and space – within and across contexts, within and across communities, and
within and across practices.
Related topics
identity; language and migration; language socialization; multilingualism; multimodality
Further reading
Barton, D. and Hamilton, M. (1998) Local Literacies: Reading and Writing in One Community,
New York: Routledge. (A detailed ethnographic study of one community in Britain; demonstrates
how ethnography might be utilized to capture what happens in ‘everyday reading and writing’.)
Barton, D., Hamilton, M. and Ivanic, R. (2000) Situated Literacies: Reading and Writing in Con-
text, New York: Routledge. (An edited volume that brings together scholars that have greatly
inﬂuenced literacy studies; addresses the material consequences of literacy, the relationship
between text and practices, the concepts of time and space, and the functions of literacies.)
Baynham, M. and Prinsloo, M. (2009) The Future of Literacy Studies, New York: Palgrave
Macmillan. (Provides recent accounts of theoretical and methodological advances in literacy
studies; recommends examining the nature of ‘transcontextual ﬂows’ and digital literacies in the
future study of literacy and literacy practices.)
Gee, J. P (1996) Social Linguistics and Literacies: Ideology in Discourses. Bristol, PA: Taylor &
Francis. (Provides useful historical context on current debates and discussions on literacy;
describes and illustrates a sociocultural approach to literacy.)
Heath, S. B. (1983) Ways with Words: Language, Life and Work in Communities and Classrooms,
New York: Cambridge University Press. (Reports on an ethnographic study of the language and
literacy practices of families living in three communities in the Piedmont Carolinas; introduces
the notion of ‘literacy event’ and demonstrates the value of using this as a unit of analysis.)
Literacy
537

Street, B. (1995) Social Literacies: Critical Approaches to Literacy in Development, Ethnography and
Education, New York: Longman. (Introduces Street’s anthropological, social, and critical
approach to the study of literacy practices; debunks the myth of the ‘great divide’ between orality
and literacy; describes the uses of literacy and anthropology in Iran.)
References
Bartlett, L. (2007) ‘Bilingual literacies, social identiﬁcation, and educational trajectories’, Linguistics
and Education 18: 215–31.
——(2008) ‘Literacy’s verb: exploring what literacy is and what literacy does’, International Journal
of Economic Development 28(6): 737–53.
Bartlett, L. and Holland, D. (2002) ‘Theorizing the space of literacy practices’, Ways of Knowing
Journal 2(1): 10–22.
Barton, D. (2001) ‘Directions for literacy research: analysing language and social practices in a
textually mediated world’, Language and Education 15(2–3): 92–104.
——(2009) ‘Understanding textual practices in a changing world’, in M. Baynham and M. Prinsloo
(eds) The Future of Literacy Studies, New York: Palgrave Macmillan.
Baynham, M. (2004) ‘Ethnographies of literacy: an introduction’, Language and Education 18(4):
285–90.
Baynham, M. and Prinsloo, M. (2009) ‘Introduction: the future of literacy studies’, in M. Baynham
and M. Prinsloo (eds) The Future of Literacy Studies, New York: Palgrave Macmillan.
Black, R. (2007) ‘Digital design: English language learners and reader reviews in online ﬁction’, in
M. Knobel and C. Lankshear (eds) A New Literacies Sampler, New York: Peter Lang.
——(2009) ‘Online fan ﬁction, global identities, and imagination’, Research in the Teaching of
English 43(4): 397–425.
Brandt, D. (2009) ‘Writing over reading: new directions in mass literacy’, in M. Baynham and
M. Prinsloo (eds) The Future of Literacy Studies, New York: Palgrave Macmillan.
Brandt, D. and Clinton, K. (2002) ‘Limits of the local: expanding perspectives on literacy as social
practice’, Journal of Literacy Research 34(3): 337–56.
Brumﬁt, C. J. (1995) ‘Teacher professionalism and research’, in G. Cook and B. Seidlhofer (eds)
Principals and Practice in Applied Linguistics, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Canagarajah, S. (2004) ‘Multilingual writers and the struggle for voice in academic discourse’, in
A. Pavlenko and A. Blackledge (eds) Negotiation of Identities in Multilingual Contexts, Buﬀalo,
NY: Multilingual Matters.
Collins, J. (1986) ‘Diﬀerentiated instruction in reading groups’, in J. Cook-Gumperz (ed.) The Social
Construction of Literacy, New York: Cambridge University Press.
——(1988) ‘Language and class in minority education’, Anthropology and Education Quarterly
19(4): 299–326.
Collins, J. and Blot, R. (2003) Literacy and Literacies: Texts, Power, and Identity, New York:
Cambridge University Press.
Cook, G. (2003) Applied Linguistics, New York: Oxford University Press.
Curry, M. J. and Lillis, T. (2004) ‘Multilingual scholars and the imperative to publish in English:
negotiating interests, demands, and rewards’, TESOL Quarterly 38(4): 663–88.
Farrell, L. (2009) ‘Texting the future: work, literacies, and economies’, in M. Baynham and
M. Prinsloo (eds) The Future of Literacy Studies, New York: Palgrave Macmillan.
Gee, J. P. ([1990] 1996) Social Linguistics and Literacies: Ideology in Discourse, 2nd edn, Bristol, PA:
Taylor & Francis.
González, N. and Arnot-Hopﬀer, E. (2003) ‘Voices of the children: language and literacy ideologies
in a dual language immersion program’, in S. Wortham and B. Rymes (eds) Linguistic Anthro-
pology of Education, Westport, CT: Praeger.
Goody, J. (1977) Domestication of the Savage Mind, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Goody, J. and Watt, I. (1963) ‘The consequences of literacy’, in J. Goody and I. Watt (eds) Literacy
in Traditional Societies, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Heath, S. B. (1983) Ways with Words: Language, Life and Work in Communities and Classrooms,
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Hornberger, N. H. (1989) ‘Continua of biliteracy’, Review of Educational Research 59(3): 271–96.
Doris S. Warriner
538

——(2003) ‘Multilingual language policies and the continua of biliteracy: an ecological approach’,
in N. H. Hornberger (ed.) Continua of Biliteracy: An Ecological Framework for Educational
Policy, Research, and Practice in Multilingual Settings, Clevedon: Multilingual Matters.
Hull, G. and Nelson, M. (2005) ‘Locating the semiotic power of multimodality’, Written Commu-
nication 22(2): 224–61.
——(2009) ‘Literacy, media, and morality: making the case for an aesthetic turn’, in M. Baynham
and M. Prinsloo (eds) The Future of Literacy Studies, New York: Palgrave Macmillan.
Hull, G. and Schultz, K. (2002) ‘Connecting schools with out-of-school worlds: insights from recent
research on literacy in non-school settings’, in G. Hull and K. Schultz (eds) School’s Out: Brid-
ging Out-of-school Literacies with Classroom Practice, New York: Teachers College Press.
Ivanic, R. (2009) ‘Bringing literacy studies into research on learning across the curriculum’, in
M. Baynham and M. Prinsloo (eds) The Future of Literacy Studies, New York: Palgrave
Macmillan.
Kell, C. (2009) ‘Literacy practices, text/s and meaning making across time and space’, in
M. Baynham and M. Prinsloo (eds) The Future of Literacy Studies, New York: Palgrave
Macmillan.
Lam, W. S. E. (2000) ‘Literacy and the design of the self: a case study of a teenager writing on the
Internet’, TESOL Quarterly 34: 457–82.
——(2006) ‘Re-envisioning language, literacy, and the immigrant subject in new mediascapes’,
Pedagogies: An International Journal 1(3): 171–95.
——(2009) ‘Multiliteracies on instant messaging in negotiating local, translocal, and transnational
aﬃliations: a case of an adolescent immigrant’, Reading Research Quarterly 44(4): 377–97.
Lam, W. S. E. and Rosario-Ramos, E. (2009) ‘Multilingual literacies in transnational digitally-
mediated contexts: an exploratory study of immigrant teens in the U.S.’, Language and Education
23(2): 171–90.
Leander, K. M. and Sheehy, M. (eds) (2004) Spatializing Literacy Research and Practice (New
Literacies and Digital Epistemologies, vol. 15), New York: Peter Lang.
Luke, A. (2004) ‘On the material consequences of literacy’, Language and Education 18(4): 331–5.
McCarty, T. L. (2005) ‘Introduction: the continuing power of the “great divide”’, in Language,
Literacy, and Power in Schooling, Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
McGinnis, T., Goodstein-Stolzenberg, A. and Costa Saliani, E. (2007) ‘“indnpride”: online spaces
of transnational youth as sites of creative and sophisticated literacy and identity work’, Linguistics
and Education 18(3–4): 283–304.
Martin-Jones, M., Hughes, B. and Williams, A. (2009) ‘Bilingual literacy in and on working lives on
the land: case studies of young Welsh speakers in North Wales’, International Journal of the
Sociology of Language 195(1): 39–62.
Martin-Jones, M. and Jones, K. (2000) ‘Introduction: multilingual literacies’, in M. Martin-Jones
and K. Jones (eds) Multilingual Literacies, Philadelphia: John Benjamins.
Martinez-Roldan, C. M. and Franquiz, M. (2009) ‘Latino/a youth literacies: hidden funds of
knowledge’, in Handbook of Adolescent Literacy, New York: Guilford Press.
New London Group (1996) ‘A pedagogy of multiliteracies: designing social futures’, Harvard Edu-
cational Review 66(1): 60–92.
Ong, W. J. 1982. Orality and Literacy: The Technologizing of the Word, London: Methuen.
Orellana, M. F. and Reynolds, J. F. (2008) ‘Cultural modeling: levering bilingual skills for school
paraphrasing tasks’, Reading Research Quarterly 43(1): 48–65.
Orellana, M. F., Reynolds, J. F., Dorner, L. and Meza, M. (2003) ‘“In other words”: translating or
“para-phrasing” as a family literacy practice in immigrant households’, Reading Research Quarterly
38(1): 12–34.
Pahl, K and Rowsell, J. (eds) (2006) Travel Notes from the New Literacy Studies: Instances of
Practice, Clevedon: Multilingual Matters.
Prinsloo, M. and Baynham, M. (eds) (2008) Literacies, Global and Local, Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Reyes, I. and Azuara, P. (2008) ‘Emergent biliteracy in young Mexican immigrant children’, Read-
ing Research Quarterly 43(4): 374–98.
Reyes, I. and Moll, L. (2008) ‘Bilingual and biliterate practices at home and school’, in B. Spolsky
and F. Hult (eds) The Handbook of Educational Linguistics, Malden, MA: Blackwell.
Richardson Bruna, K. (2007) ‘Traveling tags: the informal literacies of Mexican newcomers in and
out of the classroom’, Linguistics and Education 18(3–4): 232–57.
Literacy
539

Rubenstein-Avila, E. (2007) ‘From the Dominican Republic to Drew High: what counts as literacy
for Yanira Lara?’, Reading Research Quarterly 42(4): 568–89.
Sánchez, P. (2007) ‘Cultural authenticity and transnational Latina youth: constructing a meta-narrative
across borders’, Linguistics and Education 18(3–4): 258–82.
Schultz, K. (2001) ‘Looking across space and time: reconceptualizing literacy learning in and out of
school’, Research in the Teaching of English 36(3): 356–90.
Schultz, K. and Hull, G. (2002) ‘Locating literacy theory in out-of-school contexts’, in G. Hull and
K. Schultz (eds) School’s Out: Bridging Out-of-school Literacies with Classroom Practice, New
York: Teachers College Press.
Scribner, S. and Cole, M. (1981) The Psychology of Literacy, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University
Press.
Snyder, I. (2009) ‘Shuﬄing towards the future: the enduring dominance of book culture in literacy
education’, in M. Baynham and M. Prinsloo (eds) The Future of Literacy Studies, New York:
Palgrave Macmillan.
Street, B. (1984) Literacy in Theory and Practice, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
——(1995) Social Literacies: Critical Approaches to Literacy in Development, Ethnography and
Education, New York: Longman.
——(2000) ‘Literacy events and literacy practices: theory and practice in the new literacy studies’,
in M. Martin-Jones and K. Jones (eds) Multilingual Literacies, Philadelphia, PA: John Benjamins.
——(2004) ‘Futures of the ethnography of literacy?’, Language and Education 18(4): 326–30.
——(2009) ‘The future of “social literacies”’, in M. Baynham and M. Prinsloo (eds) The Future of
Literacy Studies, New York: Palgrave Macmillan.
Street, B. and Lefstein, A. (2007) Literacy: An Advanced Resource Book, Applied Linguistics Series,
New York: Routledge.
Vasudevan, L. (2006) ‘Looking for angels: knowing adolescents by engaging with their multimodal
literacy practices’, Journal of Adolescent and Adult Literacy 50(4): 252–8.
Warriner, D. S. (2004) ‘Multiple literacies and identities: the experiences of two women refugees’,
Women’s Studies Quarterly 32(1–2): 179–95.
——(2007a) ‘Introduction: transnational literacies: immigration, language learning and identity’,
Linguistics and Education 18(3–4): 201–14.
——(2007b) ‘“It’s just the nature of the beast”: re-imagining the literacies of schooling’, Linguistics
and Education 18(3–4): 305–24.
——(2009) ‘Transnational literacies: examining global ﬂows through the lens of social practice’, in
M. Baynham and M. Prinsloo (eds) The Future of Literacy Studies, New York: Palgrave
Macmillan.
Warschauer, M. (2009) ‘Digital literacy studies: progress and prospects’, in M. Baynham and
M. Prinsloo (eds) The Future of Literacy Studies, New York: Palgrave Macmillan.
Watahomigie, J. and McCarty, T. L. (1996) ‘Literacy for what? Hualapai literacy and language
maintenance’, in N. H. Hornberger (ed.) Indigenous Literacies in the Americas: Language Plan-
ning from the Bottom Up, Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter.
Widdowson, H. G. (2003) Deﬁning Issues in English Langauge Teaching, Oxford: Oxford University
Press.
Yi, Y. (2007) ‘Engaging literacy: a biliterate student’s composing practices beyond school’, Journal
of Second Language Writing 16: 23–39.
——(2008) ‘Relay writing in an online adolescent online community’, Journal of Adolescent and
Adult Literacy 51: 670–80.
——(2009) ‘Adolescent literacy and identity construction among 1.5 generation students: from a
transnational perspective’, Journal of Asian Paciﬁc Communication 19(1): 100–29.
——(2010) ‘Identity matters: theories that help explore adolescent multilingual writers and their
identities’, in M. Cox, J. Jordan, C. Ortmeier-Hooper and G. Schwartz (eds) Inventing Identities
in Second Language, Urbana Champaign, IL: National Council of Teachers of English.
Doris S. Warriner
540

38
Stylistics
Elena Semino
Introduction: stylistics and style
In its broadest sense, stylistics is concerned with the description and interpretation of dis-
tinctive linguistic choices and patterns in texts. ‘Style’ in language is generally deﬁned as the
result of patterns of choice at diﬀerent linguistic levels that may be characteristic of a text, the
oeuvre of an author, a genre, etc. The notion of style is thus fundamentally comparative: dif-
ferent styles in language arise from the possibility of speaking or writing in diﬀerent ways, and
the style of any text or group of texts can only be described in contrast with that of a diﬀerent
text or group of texts, or in contrast with dominant patterns in the relevant language as a
whole.
This view of style in language as depending on both choice and diﬀerence raises two issues.
The ﬁrst issue is whether only some types of linguistic choices are relevant to style, or whether
all choices result in stylistic diﬀerences. The former view relies on a distinction between ‘form’
on the one hand and ‘meaning’ or ‘content’ on the other, so that it is possible to express the
same meaning via diﬀerent formal choices. Within this view, selecting the noun ‘steed’ as
opposed to ‘horse’ in a narrative is a stylistic choice, as both nouns can refer to the same
equine participant in a story. In contrast, selecting ‘zebra’ as opposed to ‘horse’ is not a sty-
listic choice, as the nouns evoke diﬀerent animals, and involve diﬀerences in the content of the
story rather than its style. In contrast, the opposing view emphasises that any variation in
form has implications for meaning (e.g. ‘steed’ and ‘horse’ have diﬀerent connotations and
may evoke diﬀerent equine images), so that no distinction can be made between choices of
content and choice of form. Hence, all linguistic choices have implications for both style and
meaning. These diﬀerent views of the relationship between choice and style are sometimes
referred to as, respectively, ‘dualism’ and ‘monism’ (see Wales 2001). Leech and Short (1981:
10–40) attempt to resolve this opposition by distinguishing between two notions of style,
namely: a broader notion of style as ‘linguistic choice in general’, and a more restricted notion
of style within which ‘[s]tylistic choice is limited to those aspects of linguistic choice which
concern alternative ways of rendering the same subject matter’ (Leech and Short 1981: 31, ita-
lics in original). Even within this more restricted deﬁnition, however, stylistic choices are
meaningful in that they contribute to the reader’s or listener’s interpretation of the text.
541

The second issue that arises from deﬁning style in terms of choice and diﬀerence relates to
how diﬀerence, or distinctiveness, can be determined. In an early and inﬂuential discussion of
this issue, Enkvist (1973: 21–6) argued that the style of a text can only be accounted for by
comparing the text with a larger group of texts that functions as a contextually relevant
‘norm’:
The norm may be chosen from a wide ﬁeld. One portion of a text may be matched against
other portions or the whole of the same text. One text may be compared to other texts. Or
the text may be set against an imaginary norm that only exists in a critic’s mind.
(Enkvist 1973: 26)
Enkvist suggests that the comparison will lead to the identiﬁcation of ‘style markers’, namely
‘[f]eatures whose densities are signiﬁcantly diﬀerent in the text and in the norm’ (1973: 25). I will
return below to the diﬀerent methods that have been developed in stylistics for identifying
what Enkvist calls ‘style markers’.
A history of stylistics
While it is diﬃcult to establish clear boundaries for what counts as ‘stylistics’, the term is
primarily associated with a line of research that can be traced back to the studies of style in
language conducted in continental Europe by Bally (1909) and Spitzer (1948) in the ﬁrst half
of the twentieth century. The second half of the twentieth century saw the rise of an Anglo-
American tradition, initially under the inﬂuence of Russian and Prague Formalism and Prac-
tical Criticism, and subsequently beneﬁting from advances in linguistics more generally.
Stylistics is now an international and diverse ﬁeld of study. This chapter is, however, limited to
work published in English since the 1960s.
An initial distinction needs to be made between what have been called ‘general stylistics’
and ‘literary stylistics’ (see Wales 2001). General stylistics is concerned with the relationship
between language and context of use, and involves the study of the styles associated with dif-
ferent genres. It is closely related to other areas of linguistics that are concerned with language
variation, such as sociolinguistics (e.g. Coupland 2007). Literary stylistics is primarily con-
cerned with the relationship between the language of literary texts and their meanings and
eﬀects, broadly conceived.
General stylistics
The terms ‘style’ and ‘stylistics’ feature in the titles of two landmark studies which were pub-
lished in the late 1960s and early 1970s, while linguistics was becoming established as the new
‘science of language’: Crystal and Davy’s (1969) Investigating English Style and Enkvist’s
(1973) Linguistic Stylistics. Enkvist’s approach to the study of style was brieﬂy mentioned
above. Crystal and Davy (1969) similarly see the goal of stylistics as the systematic study of
how and why language varies depending on the context of use. They outline a method of lin-
guistic analysis involving ﬁve ‘levels’ of language (phonetic/graphetic, phonological/grapholo-
gical, grammatical, lexical, semantic), and describe extra-linguistic situations in terms of
several diﬀerent ‘dimensions of situational constraint’ (including, for example, dialect, time,
speech vs writing, type of activity, social relations, etc.). This approach is applied to the iden-
tiﬁcation of what Crystal and Davy call ‘stylistically signiﬁcant’ or ‘stylistically distinctive’
features in a range of diﬀerent types of language use, including informal conversation,
Elena Semino
542

newspaper reporting, and the language of religion (see also Leech 1966 for an early study of
the language of advertising). Crystal and Davy (1969: 12–13) also explicitly discuss the issue of
‘objectivity’ in stylistic analysis, which, as shown in more detail below, has vexed the ﬁeld since
its origins. They suggest that the initial selection of the linguistic features that might be sty-
listically signiﬁcant can only be based on the analyst’s intuitions, which are ‘informed’ but
inevitably subjective. The subsequent analysis of these features, which involves both classiﬁ-
cation and explanation, is in contrast described as ‘objective’, as it is based on the application
of relevant theoretical frameworks and on a systematic understanding of patterns of variation
in language use.
Studies such as Enkvist’s and Crystal and Davy’s were not immediately followed by further
work in general stylistics. In the late 1980s, Carter, for example, points out that ‘no single
study has emerged in the 1970s or 1980s which builds systematically on work on non-literary
style and language variation by Crystal and Davy (1969)’ (Carter 1989: 13). Since the early
1990s, however, some important work in general stylistics has been conducted, thanks to
theoretical and methodological developments in linguistics more generally. First, the rise of
pragmatics and (critical) discourse analysis has made it possible to explain more systematically
why particular patterns of choice are made in particular contexts of use. Carter and
Nash (1990) point out the political and ideological implications of style: they argue that
writers fashion their texts in order to facilitate particular ‘ways of seeing (and believing)’, and
to suppress others. Hence, the analysis of style requires an understanding of asymmetries in
power relations between writers and readers, and can reveal the ways in which dominant
ideologies are textually constructed, maintained and reinforced (see also Toolan 1992;
Simpson 1993).
Second, the application of the methods of corpus linguistics to text analysis has made it
possible to place the selection and description of stylistically signiﬁcant features on a ﬁrmer
empirical footing. For example, a text or group of texts can be automatically compared with
another text or (usually larger) body of texts in terms of the frequencies of words or multi-
word strings, grammatical categories and semantic ﬁelds (see Adolphs’s [2006] notion of ‘inter-
textual’ electronic analysis). This provides lists of potential style markers (in Enkvist’s sense)
independently of the analyst’s decisions, although the further interpretation and analysis of
such lists inevitably relies on the analyst’s intuitions and knowledge of the data. In addition,
individual texts or groups of texts can be investigated electronically via concordances (lists of
particular expressions obtained automatically) and collocations (statistically signiﬁcant pat-
terns of co-occurrence in the use of words) (see Adolphs’s [2006] notion of ‘intra-textual’
electronic analysis). Stubbs (1996), for example, combines an ‘inter-textual’ and an ‘intra-textual’
computer-aided approach in order to compare Baden-Powell’s last messages to the Boy Scouts
and the Girl Guides. He shows the sexist implications of the diﬀerent uses of ‘happy’ and
‘happiness’ in the two texts, by analysing concordances of these two words in both texts and in
two larger corpora of English.
Language corpora can also be used to investigate variation across text-types, both syn-
chronically and diachronically. Biber (1988), for example, uses multivariate analysis to arrive
at a systematic account of the clusters of linguistic features that characterise diﬀerent modes of
speaking and writing in a large corpus of English. In addition, it is possible to enrich corpora
by adding further information, either manually or electronically. This process, known as
annotation, enables analysts to carry out computer-aided analyses of textual phenomena that
cannot be studied by searching for particular words or groups of words. For example, Semino
and Short (2004) annotated a corpus for diﬀerent categories of speech, writing and thought
presentation (e.g. direct speech, free indirect thought), and then used the corpus to investigate
Stylistics
543

the forms, functions and patterning of diﬀerent modes of presentation in ﬁctional and
non-ﬁctional narratives.
Literary stylistics
Literary stylistics is concerned more speciﬁcally with the relationship between form and
meaning in literary texts. In introducing a book on the linguistic analysis of poetry, prose
ﬁction and drama, Short (1996) deﬁnes stylistic analysis as follows:
stylistic analysis is a method of linking linguistic form, via reader inference, to inter-
pretation in a detailed way and thereby providing as much explicit evidence as possible for
and against particular interpretations of texts.
(Short 1996: 27)
This approach to stylistic analysis ﬁrst developed in Britain in the 1960s under the inﬂuence of
practical criticism, Russian formalism, and the Prague Linguistic Circle. Practical criticism,
which was developed at Cambridge University in the 1930s, advocated close attention to the
language and structure of texts, in contrast with a concern for the social, cultural and histor-
ical context that was prevalent in literary criticism more generally (e.g. Richards 1929). The
group of scholars known as the Russian Formalists operated in Moscow and St Petersburg in
the early twentieth century, and similarly regarded texts as the main object of study. They were
particularly concerned with the formal and functional features that distinguish literary from
‘non-literary’ language. They argued that the function of art generally, and of verbal art in
particular, is to deautomatise or defamiliarise our routine perceptions of experience and rea-
lity. According to Shklovsky, this is achieved by ‘mak[ing] objects “unfamiliar”’, ‘mak[ing]
forms diﬃcult’, and ‘increas[ing] the diﬃculty and length of perception because the process of
perception is an aesthetic end in itself and must be prolonged’ (Shklovsky 1965: 12). The
Prague Linguistic Circle was inﬂuenced by the Russian Formalists, especially via the work of
Roman Jakobson, who moved from Moscow to Prague in the 1920s. The members of this
group combined the insights of the Russian Formalists with greater attention for language.
Mukarˇovský (1964) argued that poetry is characterised by the systematic deviation from the
norms of ‘standard’ language, which foregrounds the language itself and leads to defamiliar-
ising eﬀects. Jakobson’s (1960) multi-functional approach to communication includes what he
calls the ‘poetic’ function, which involves a focus on the text for its own sake, and manifests
itself in the presence of linguistic patterns, or parallelism.
Jakobson is often credited with having launched the linguistic approach to literature that
characterises literary stylistics by stating that:
a linguist deaf to the poetic function of language and a literary scholar indiﬀerent to
linguistic problems and unconversant with linguistic methods are equally ﬂagrant
anachronisms.
(Jakobson 1960: 377)
The early applications of linguistic analysis to literary texts by Jakobson himself (e.g. Jakobson
and Lévi-Strauss 1962) involved painstaking inventories of linguistic choices (phonetic, gram-
matical and lexical), with no consideration for degrees of salience and interpretative sig-
niﬁcance. This reﬂected a deliberate attempt to separate description from evaluation in the
linguistic study of literature. In contrast, other linguists strove to connect linguistic description
Elena Semino
544

with the interpretative issues that are the traditional concerns of literary criticism. Leech
(1969), for example, developed some of the central notions from the formalist tradition into
powerful tools for the stylistic analysis of poetry. He suggests that foregrounding eﬀects can be
achieved both via deviation (unexpected irregularity) and parallelism (unexpected regularity),
and argues that the patterning of foregrounding devices is central to the overall signiﬁcance of
(poetic) texts.
The rise and development of literary stylistics since the 1960s can best be explained with
reference to the growth of linguistics generally, as stylisticians have tended to exploit relevant
advances in linguistics for the purposes of literary text analysis. As the concerns of linguists
broadened from sentential to textual, pragmatic and discoursal phenomena, stylistic analysis
came to be applied not just to poetry, but also to prose ﬁction (e.g. Leech and Short 1981;
Fowler 1986) and drama (e.g. Herman 1995; Culpeper et al. 1998). In addition, stylistics has
been inﬂuenced by advances in narratology (notably on the study of plot and point of view),
and by some aspects of literary theory (e.g. reader response criticism). These multiple inﬂu-
ences and interactions have led to a proliferation of labels for diﬀerent branches of stylistics,
such as ‘aﬀective stylistics’ (Fish 1970), ‘pragmastylistics’ (Hickey 1989), ‘discourse stylistics’
(Carter and Simpson 1989), ‘critical stylistics’ (Weber 1992), ‘feminist stylistics’ (Mills 1995)
‘cognitive stylistics’ (Semino and Culpeper 2002), ‘corpus stylistics’ (Semino and Short 2004),
and so on (see also Weber 1996). The rest of this section focuses on a selection of key studies
in literary stylistics since the 1960s, which give an overview of the historical development of
the ﬁeld, and of its variety.
The rise of Chomsky’s generative grammar in the 1960s and 1970s was reﬂected in a series
of studies that described the styles of particular texts or authors in terms of the application of
particular sets of syntactic rules or transformations. Thorne (1965), for example, treats each of
a series of poems as a sample of a diﬀerent language, which can be accounted for by con-
structing a speciﬁc grammar. In present-day stylistics, the inﬂuence of the Chomskyan tradi-
tion in stylistics is limited to some inﬂuential work on poetic metre, which is treated as a
separate module operating independently of phonology and syntax (Fabb and Halle 2008).
Since the 1970s, Halliday’s systemic-functional approach to language, and grammar in parti-
cular (e.g. Halliday 1978), has had a more long-lasting inﬂuence on stylistics. Halliday himself
applied his approach to transitivity to a literary text in a seminal analysis of William Golding’s
The Inheritors (Halliday 1971). Halliday showed how diﬀerent patterns of choices in the
system of transitivity are used to contrast the world view of the novel’s protagonist, Lok
(a member of ‘the people’ – a group of early humans usually described by the critics as
Neanderthals), with that of the members of a more advanced group (referred to as ‘the new
people’ in the novel, and usually identiﬁed as homo sapiens). The part of the novel that reﬂects
Lok’s point of view is characterised by a high frequency of intransitive structures and inani-
mate entities functioning as grammatical subjects. So, for example, the sentence ‘The stick
began to grow shorter at both ends’ is used to describe Lok’s perception of an action that
readers are likely to identify as someone drawing a bow. Similarly, Lok’s perception of the
noise caused by an arrow hitting a tree is conveyed by the following description ‘The dead tree
by Lok’s ear acquired a voice. “Clop!”’ These patterns, Halliday concludes, suggest that Lok
has a poor understanding of agency and cause-eﬀect relationships. This limited understanding
in turn explains the demise of his group when faced with ‘the new people’, who appear to have
a more sophisticated understanding of the world.
Halliday’s model of language is part of the analytical frameworks adopted in some land-
mark later works in stylistics (e.g. Leech and Short 1981; Fowler 1986). More speciﬁcally,
Halliday’s analysis of The Inheritors has inspired further studies of the role of transitivity in
Stylistics
545

conveying unusual world views, or ‘mind styles’ (Fowler 1977). Both Leech and Short (1981:
202–7) and Fowler (1986: 133–4), for example, discuss the section of William Faulkner’s The
Sound and the Fury that is narrated by Benjy, a cognitively impaired 33-year-old man. Both
studies point out the lexical and grammatical simplicity of Benjy’s narrative, as well as some
transitivity patterns that, as in Lok’s case, suggest a limited understanding of human actions
and intentions: a high frequency of intransitive structures, and a tendency to use transitive
verbs without direct objects (e.g. the verb ‘hit’ is used intransitively to describe the actions of
people who, readers are likely to infer, are engaged in a game of golf).
The analysis of transitivity patterns also plays a central role in those applications of stylis-
tics that are concerned with the relationship between linguistic patterns in literary texts on the
one hand, and power relations, discrimination and ideologies on the other. Indeed, Halliday’s
systemic-functional grammar has also often been adopted within critical discourse analysis,
which has inﬂuenced, and overlaps with, some inﬂuential work in literary stylistics. Burton
(1982) for example, applies an adapted version of Halliday’s model of transitivity to an extract
from Sylvia Plath’s semi-autobiographical novel The Bell Jar, in which the narrator/protagonist
undergoes electroshock treatment aimed at alleviating her depression. Burton’s analysis of the
realisation of participants and processes in the extract shows how the other two characters in
the scene (a female nurse and a male doctor) are consistently presented as in control, and as
acting on the protagonist or the equipment in the treatment room. In contrast, the protagonist
does not act to aﬀect others or her environment, but is solely aﬀected by others’ actions.
Burton argues that Plath’s linguistic choices ‘disenable’ the protagonist, and thus result in a
representation of the female protagonist as passive and helpless. This representation is con-
sistent with dominant tendencies in the representation of women, both in ﬁction and else-
where, which are potentially detrimental to women’s self-image. Burton’s goal is to provide an
example of what, in her view, stylistics should aim to achieve:
stylistic analysis is not just a question of discussing ‘eﬀects’ in language and text, but a
powerful method for understanding the ways in which all sorts of ‘realities’ are
constructed through language.
(Burton 1982: 230)
In Burton’s view, therefore, stylistics both cannot and should not be politically neutral, but
should contribute to the promotion of human rights, especially in relation to sexism (see also
Weber 1992; Mills 1995).
The study of ﬁctional interactions, in both prose ﬁction and drama, began in the 1980s
following the rise of pragmatics and conversation analysis. In spite of the diﬀerences between real-
life conversations and ﬁctional conversations (see, for example, Short 1996: 172–86), stylisticians
have shown how the theories and analytical frameworks developed by linguists interested in
interaction can explain the ways in which readers or audiences perceive characters and infer
‘meanings between the lines’ in interpreting ﬁctional interactions. Widdowson (1982), for
example, argues that Othello’s tendency to confuse ﬁrst- and third-person pronominal refer-
ences in Shakespeare’s play reﬂects his inability to distinguish semblance from reality, and
makes him vulnerable to Iago’s strategic manipulation of language. Short (1989a) discusses
characterisation and the creation of absurdist eﬀects in drama by means of an analytical fra-
mework that includes notions such as speech acts, presupposition, and conversational impli-
cature (see also Herman 1995; Culpeper et al. 1998; Black 2006). The notions of ‘face’,
politeness and impoliteness have also been applied to the analysis of ﬁctional interactions,
especially in order to explain the attribution of goals to characters, and the perception of their
Elena Semino
546

mutual relationships (e.g. Leech 1992; Culpeper 1998). A recent development in this area is the
study of interactions in ﬁlms, which requires the development of a multimodal form of stylistic
analysis (e.g. McIntyre 2007).
Since the earliest developments of the stylistics tradition described in this section, stylisti-
cians have been interested in the pedagogical applications of stylistic analysis, both in mother-
tongue and second/foreign-language contexts (see Widdowson 1975, 1992; Short 1989b;
Watson and Zyngier 2007). The use of stylistics in the classroom is seen as a way of bringing
together the teaching of language with the teaching of literature, and as an alternative to the
more traditional literary critical approach that tends to dominate literature classrooms around
the world.
Literary stylistics in the twenty-ﬁrst century: directions and challenges
Two main approaches to stylistics have been particularly productive in the ﬁrst few years of the
twenty-ﬁrst century: corpus-based or computer-aided stylistics, and cognitive stylistics. Both
approaches have their roots in earlier work in stylistics, but both have gained considerable
impetus from recent developments in, respectively, corpus linguistics and cognitive science.
Corpus-based or computer-aided stylistics
Quantiﬁcation, broadly conceived, is relevant to both general and literary stylistics. The claim
that the style of a particular text or groups of texts is distinctive in some way ideally involves
evidence that some linguistic features are more (or less) frequent in those texts than elsewhere.
Similarly, the claim that particular linguistic choices are foregrounded in a text requires evi-
dence that those linguistic choices are indeed deviant or unusual as compared with language
use generally. Manual quantiﬁcation has often been used in stylistics analysis (e.g. Leech and
Short 1981: 74ﬀ.), and there is a long tradition of statistical approaches to literary style (e.g.
Milic 1967). In the last two decades, however, the increasing availability, ﬂexibility and user-
friendliness of language corpora and computer-aided methods has increasingly been exploited
in literary (as well as general) stylistics. More speciﬁcally, computer-aided methods have been
used in order to investigate the language of individual texts and the oeuvres of particular
authors (for overviews of the area, see Adolphs 2006; Archer 2007).
Louw (1997), for example, investigates the ‘semantic prosody’ of a particular word (the
adverb ‘utterly’) in the Bank of English corpus in order to account for the use and potential
eﬀects of that word in a poem by Philip Larkin. Hoover (1999) uses a corpus of British and
American novels in order to carry out a systematic quantitative analysis of the language of
Golding’s The Inheritors, thus building on and extending Halliday’s (1971) earlier ‘manual’
analysis of the novel. Culpeper (2002) employs the automatic analysis of ‘key words’ in order
to investigate the linguistic features that characterise the language of the main characters in
Shakespeare’s Romeo and Juliet. Following in a venerable tradition of computer-aided
approaches to authorial style (e.g. Burrows 1987), Mahlberg (2007) shows how the automatic
retrieval of multi-word sequences or ‘clusters’ can reveal some distinctive aspects of Dickens’s
style and characterisation techniques. Hoover (2002) demonstrates a corpus-based technique
for attributing novels to authors by considering the distribution of the most frequent words
and word clusters.
It needs to be acknowledged that corpus-based and computer-aided methods have inevitable
limitations, both in terms of what can be investigated and how. Hence, these methods cannot
replace the more traditional, intensive, approach to stylistic analysis, nor do away with the role
Stylistics
547

of the analyst’s intuitions (which are, for example, involved in the interpretation of the output
of software tools). Nonetheless, these methods are an invaluable addition to the methodologies
available to stylisticians, as they enable scholars to test out empirically their intuitions about
texts, and to study patterns that could not be realistically investigated manually.
Cognitive stylistics
The second area of study I mentioned earlier, cognitive stylistics, also has its roots in earlier
work within literary stylistics. Although stylistic analysis is primarily focused on texts, its
concern for interpretative eﬀects inevitably involves readers. Traditionally, however, stylisticians
have used general notions such as inference, but without adopting particular models of cog-
nition or text processing. Between the end of the twentieth century and the beginning of the
twenty-ﬁrst century, some linguistic approaches to literary text analysis began to draw more
explicitly and systematically from work in psychology and cognitive science. Cook (1994), for
example, exploits and extends schema theory in order to propose a theory of literariness that
reformulates the central tenets of the formalist approach to literary language. Semino (1997)
adapts Cook’s approach in a study of how text worlds are imagined by readers of poetry in
their interactions with texts. Culpeper (2001) combines some insights from social psychology
with well-established techniques in the stylistic analysis of drama in order to develop a model
of characterisation in plays. Werth (1999) and Emmott (1997) consider both linguistic choices
and mental representations in order to account for how readers imagine the worlds of narra-
tive texts (see also Gavins 2007). Other cognitively oriented approaches to literature have
built on relevance theory (e.g. Pilkington 2000) and some relevant advances in brain science
(Tsur 1992).
Since the 1990s, a large body of work has been inﬂuenced by the growth of cognitive lin-
guistics, and particularly conceptual metaphor theory (Lakoﬀand Johnson 1980). This work
has been subsumed under the labels ‘cognitive stylistics’ (Semino and Culpeper 2002) or ‘cog-
nitive poetics’ (Stockwell 2002). In a series of inﬂuential studies, Freeman (1993, 1995) has
applied conceptual metaphor theory to the analysis of Shakespeare’s plays, and argued that the
dominant source domains in each play account for each text’s thematic unity, characterisation,
and plot development, as well as for the interpretations that have been proposed by critics.
Similarly, Popova (2002) investigates the dominant metaphorical patterns in Henry James’s
The Figure in the Carpet, and suggests that the ﬁndings of her analysis can explain the literary
critical debate over the interpretation of the novel. Blending theory (Fauconnier and Turner
2002) has also been applied to the analysis of literary texts, in order to account for phenomena
as diverse as rhyming patterns (Sweetser 2006) and point of view (Dancygier 2005).
It could be argued that cognitively oriented approaches to the language of literature repre-
sent the fastest-growing area within stylistics at the end of the ﬁrst decade of the twenty-ﬁrst
century. In the collection Contemporary Stylistics (Lambrou and Stockwell 2007), for example,
at least half of the chapters explicitly involve a ‘cognitive’ element. This is in fact consistent
with the rise of cognitive approaches to narratology, both in Europe and the USA (e.g.
Herman 2003; Palmer 2004). On the other hand, however, cognitive stylistics/poetics is rather
controversial, and has been at the centre of several debates. Its practitioners (especially those
working within the tradition of cognitive linguistics) have been accused of overstating the
validity and implications of their analyses, ignoring the ideological dimension of text produc-
tion and reception, and of simply introducing a new set of unnecessary descriptive terms for
familiar phenomena (e.g. Hall 2002; Weber 2004). While it is debatable whether all of these
criticisms are equally justiﬁed, they do point at some important challenges for practitioners of
Elena Semino
548

cognitive stylistics/poetics. The ﬁrst challenge is to attempt to clarify the diﬀerent ways in
which the term ‘cognitive’ is used when analysing the language of literature; the second chal-
lenge is to do greater justice to phenomena that rightly preoccupy literary scholars of various
persuasions, such as the emotional aspects of interpretation and the social, cultural and ideo-
logical dimensions of literary communication; the third challenge is to take into account the
ﬁndings of recent groundbreaking work in neuroscience, and its implications for the role of
ﬁction and literature in human development and experience (e.g. Ramachandran 2004: 40–59);
a further challenge is to strive to provide greater empirical evidence for their work by
generating hypotheses that can be tested in experiments involving real readers.
With respect to the last point above, it should be mentioned that stylistics has, over the
decades, intersected with an area of study that has come to be known as the Empirical Study
of Literature (e.g. Zwaan 1993). More speciﬁcally, some stylisticians have tested out the
validity of their linguistic analyses via informant-based work. For example, van Peer (1986)
conducted a series of experiments aimed at verifying the validity of the predictions he made
about the sections within a series of poems that readers would perceive to be foregrounded (see
also the papers in Language and Literature, 16(2), 2007). His ﬁndings broadly conﬁrmed his
hypotheses, and showed more speciﬁcally that greater consensus about foregrounding eﬀects
was reached in relation to stretches of text that contained several foregrounding devices.
Further work of this kind has led to considerable insights into literary reading, but further
research will be needed in future to test out the robustness of more recent approaches within
stylistics (e.g. see Emmott et al. 2006). Some recent developments suggest that future work will
not be limited to relatively artiﬁcial reading experiments, but will involve the study of a range
of ‘natural’ reading practices, such as reading groups and mass reading events (see papers in
Language and Literature, 18(3), 2009).
Long-standing debates and future challenges
The strengthening of the connection between stylistics and the study of ‘real’ readers would have
the advantage of avoiding the repetition of debates between stylisticians and other literary
scholars that have re-occurred cyclically since the 1960s (see, for example, Fowler 1971; Fish
1980; Mackay 1996; Toolan 1996; Short et al. 1998). Within such debates, stylisticians have
mainly been accused of claiming a degree of objectivity in their work that does not properly
apply, both in relation to the selection of linguistic features for analysis and to the inter-
pretative implications of the ﬁndings of their analyses. While some mutual stereotyping tends
to occur in such debates, it is probably fair to acknowledge that the conﬁdent tone of some
work in stylistics may be mistaken for the belief that linguistic analysis enables one to arrive at
the ‘true’ or ‘best’ interpretation of a text. Most stylisticians seem to agree that they do not
aim for some general (and indeed suspect) notion of objectivity, but rather that their goal is to
produce textual analyses that are explicit, rigorous, systematic and replicable (e.g. Wales 2001:
373; Simpson 2004: 4). Nonetheless, stylisticians fundamentally diﬀer from some of their crit-
ics due to their belief that language matters, namely that the linguistic choices made in texts
aﬀect readers’ interpretations, so that stylistic analysis can be used to explain how particular
interpretations came about. Simpson puts it as follows:
While linguistic features do not of themselves constitute a text’s ‘meaning’, an account of
linguistic features nonetheless serves to ground a stylistic interpretation and to help
explain why, for the analyst, certain types of meaning are possible.
(Simpson 2004: 2)
Stylistics
549

As mentioned above, new computer-aided methods in text analysis can, in some cases, be used
to select distinctive linguistic features independently of the analyst’s intuitions. Similarly, a
greater consideration for real readers’ interpretations can make stylistic analysis less vulnerable
to the accusation that the analysis is arbitrarily used to prove the validity and superiority of
the analyst’s own interpretation of a text.
Another long-standing debate which is likely to re-occur in future concerns the status of
‘literature’ or ‘literary language’ as opposed to other bodies of texts or uses of language. As
mentioned earlier, within the formalist tradition, ‘poetic language’ was deﬁned in terms of
both formal characteristics (deviation, parallelism) and function (defamiliarisation, a focus on
the text for its own sake). Such deﬁnitions were subsequently found to be inadequate when
considering the variety of the texts that are called ‘literary’, and the creativity of the texts that
are called ‘non-literary’, but they remained inﬂuential when the issue was reformulated in
diﬀerent terms. As mentioned earlier, Cook (1994) restates the formalists’ insights in terms of
subsequent developments in linguistics and artiﬁcial intelligence when he deﬁnes literary dis-
course in terms of what he calls ‘discourse deviation’ – the phenomenon whereby linguistic
deviation and patterns result in the refreshment of the readers’ pre-existing schemata. In other
words, Cook deﬁnes literary discourse in terms of a particular kind of interaction between
textual features and readers’ background knowledge that is likely to result in some change in
the readers’ pre-existing assumptions. Carter and Nash (1990) deﬁne ‘literariness’ as a bundle
of properties that include textual phenomena (e.g. linguistic patterns across a whole text), the
communicative situation (e.g. a spatial and temporal detachment between the producer and
the receivers of a text), and particular goals and dispositions in both writers and readers
(e.g. the intention to defamiliarise the reader’s world view).
Stylisticians do not always state explicitly their position in relation to the status of literary
language. When they do, it is usually to point out that no clear-cut distinction can be made
between the language of literature and the language associated with other types of activities,
and that texts come to be regarded as ‘literary’ for a variety of complex historical, cultural and
ideological reasons (e.g. Carter 2004). The debate as to what, if anything, makes literary texts
‘special’ is likely to continue, however.
Summary
Stylistics is the study of the relationship between language choice, contexts and eﬀects.
‘General’ stylistics is concerned with the description and explanation of language variation
across diﬀerent genres and contexts of use. ‘Literary’ stylistics is concerned with how linguistic
choices and patterns in texts contribute to particular interpretations. Stylistics has developed in
close connection with other areas of linguistics, and currently shares with other branches of
linguistics a concern for ideology and cognition. It is also beneﬁting from developments in
corpus linguistics. Literary stylistics remains controversial due to its position at the interface
between linguistics and literary criticism.
Related topics
cognitive linguistics; corpus linguistics; critical discourse analysis; systemic functional linguistics
Further reading
Lambrou, M. and Stockwell, P. (eds) (2007) Contemporary Stylistics, London: Routledge. (A col-
lection of papers by new scholars in the ﬁeld, written in an accessible style.)
Elena Semino
550

Leech, G. N. and Short, M. H. (2007) Style in Fiction, 2nd edn, London: Longman. (The second
edition of one of the landmarks volumes in stylistics, with two new chapters.)
Toolan, M. (1998) Language in Literature: An Introduction to Stylistics, London: Hodder Arnold.
(An accessible introduction to stylistics.)
Verdonk, P. (2002) Stylistics, Oxford: Oxford University Press. (A concise and accessible introduc-
tion to stylistics.)
Weber, J.-J. (ed.) (1996) The Stylistics Reader: From Roman Jakobson to the Present, London:
Hodder Arnold. (A collection of classic papers on stylistics.)
References
Adolphs, S. (2006) Introducing Electronic Text Analysis: A Practical Guide for Language and Literary
Studies, Abingdon and New York: Routledge.
Archer, D. (2007) ‘Computer-assisted literary stylistics’, in M. Lambrou and P. Stockwell (eds)
Contemporary Stylistics, London: Routledge.
Bally, C. (1909) Traité de stylistique française, Heidelberg: Carl Winters.
Biber, D. (1988) Variation Across Speech and Writing, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Black, E. (2006) Pragmatic Stylistics, Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press.
Burrows, J. (1987) Computation into Criticism: A Study of Jane Austen’s Novels, and An Experiment
in Method, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Burton, D. (1982) ‘Through glass darkly: through dark glasses’, in R. Carter (ed.) Language and
Literature, London: Allen and Unwin.
Carter, R. A. (1989) ‘Directions in the teaching and study of English Stylistics’, in M. Short (ed)
Reading, Analysing and Teaching Literature. London: Longman.
Carter, R. (2004). Language and Creativity: The Art of Common Talk, London: Routledge.
Carter, R. and Nash, W. (1990) Seeing Through Language, Oxford: Blackwell.
Carter, R. and Simpson, P. (eds) (1989) Language, Discourse and Literature, London: Unwin
Hyman.
Cook, G. (1994) Discourse and Literature: The Interplay of Form and Mind, Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Coupland, N. (2007) Style: Language Variation and Identity, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Crystal, D. and Davy, D. (1969) Investigating English Style, London: Longman.
Culpeper, J. (1998) ‘(Im)politeness in drama’, in J. Culpeper, M. Short, and P. Verdonk (eds)
Studying Drama: From Text to Context, London: Routledge.
——(2001) Language and Characterisation: People in Plays and Other Texts, London: Longman.
——(2002) ‘Computers, language and characterisation: an analysis of six characters in Romeo and
Juliet’, in U. Melander-Marttala, C. Ostman and M. Kytö (eds) Conversation in Life and in Lit-
erature: Papers from the ASLA Symposium, Association Suedoise de Linguistique Appliquee
(ASLA), 15. Universitetstryckeriet: Uppsala.
Culpeper, J., Short, M. and Verdonk, P. (eds) (1998) Exploring the Language of Drama: From Text
to Context, London: Routledge.
Dancygier, B. (2005) ‘Blending and narrative viewpoint: Jonathan Raban’s travels through mental
spaces’, Language and Literature 14: 99–127.
Emmott, C. (1997) Narrative Comprehension: A Discourse Perspective, Oxford: Oxford University
Press.
Emmott, C., Sanford, A. J. and Morrow, L. I. (2006) ‘Capturing the attention of readers? Stylistic
and psychological perspectives on the use and eﬀect of text fragmentation in narratives’, Journal
of Literary Semantics 35: 1–30.
Enkvist, N. E. (1973) Linguistic Stylistics, The Hague: Mouton.
Fabb, N. and Halle, M. (2008) Metre in Poetry: A New Theory, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Fauconnier, G. and Turner, M. (2002) The Way We Think: Conceptual Blending and the Mind’s
Hidden Complexities, New York: Basic Books.
Fish, S. (1970) ‘Literature in the reader: aﬀective stylistics’, New Literary History 2: 123–62.
——(1980) Is there a Text in this Class?, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Fowler, R. (1971) The Languages of Literature, London: Routledge.
——(1977) Linguistics and the Novel, London: Methuen.
——(1986) Linguistic Criticism, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Stylistics
551

Freeman, D. C. (1993) ‘“According to my bond”: King Lear and recognition’, Language and Literature
2: 1–18.
——(1995) ‘“Catch[ing] the nearest way”: Macbeth and cognitive metaphor’, Journal of Pragmatics
24: 689–708.
Gavins, J. (2007) Text World Theory: An Introduction, Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press.
Hall, G. (2002) ‘The year’s work in stylistics: 2002’, Language and Literature 12: 353–70.
Halliday, M. A. K. (1971) ‘Linguistic function and literary style: an inquiry into the language of
William Golding’s The Inheritors’, in S. Chatman (ed.) Literary Style: A Symposium, Oxford:
Oxford University Press.
——(1978) Language as Social Semiotic: The Social Interpretation of Language and Meaning,
London: Edward Arnold.
Herman, V. (1995) Dramatic Discourse, London: Routledge.
Herman, D. (ed.) (2003) Narrative Theory and the Cognitive Sciences, Stanford, CA: Center for the
Study of Language and Information.
Hickey, L. (ed.) (1989) The Pragmatics of Style, London: Routledge.
Hoover, D. L. (1999) Language and Style in The Inheritors, Lanham, MD: University Press of America.
——(2002) ‘Frequent word sequences and statistical analysis’, Literary and Linguistic Computing
17: 157–80.
Jakobson, R. (1960) ‘Closing statement: linguistics and poetics’, in T. A. Sebeok (ed.) Style in
Language, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Jakobson, R. and Lévi-Strauss, C. (1962) ‘“Les chats” de Baudelaire’, L’Homme 2: 5–21.
Lakoﬀ, G. and Johnson, M. (1980) Metaphors We Live By, Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Lambrou, M. and Stockwell, P. (eds) (2007) Contemporary Stylistics, London: Routledge.
Leech, G. N. (1966). English in Advertising: A Linguistic Study of Advertising in Great Britain,
London: Longman.
——(1969) A Linguistic Guide to English Poetry, London: Longman.
——(1992) ‘Pragmatic principles in Shaw’s “You never can tell”’, in M. Toolan (ed.) Language,
Text and Context, London: Routledge.
Leech, G. N. and Short, M. H. (1981) Style in Fiction, London: Longman.
Louw, B. (1997) ‘The role of corpora in critical literary appreciation’, in A. Wichmann, S. Fligelstone,
A. McEnery and G. Knowles (eds) Teaching and Language Corpora, London: Longman.
McIntyre, D. (2007) ‘Integrating multimodal analysis and the stylistics of drama: a multimodal
perspective on Ian McKellen’s Richard III’, Language and Literature 17: 309–34.
Mackay, R. (1996) ‘Mything the point: a critique of objective stylistics’, Language and Commu-
nication 16: 81–93.
Mahlberg, M. (2007) ‘A corpus stylistic perspective on Dickens’s Great Expectations’, in M. Lambrou
and P. Stockwell (eds) Contemporary Stylistics, London: Routledge.
Milic, L. T. (1967) A Quantitative Approach to the Style of Jonathan Swift, Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter.
Mills, S. (1995) Feminist Stylistics, London: Routledge.
Mukarˇovský, J. (1964) ‘Standard language and poetic language’, in P. L. Garvin (ed.) A Prague School
Reader on Aesthetics, Literary Structure and Style, Washington, DC: Georgetown University Press.
Palmer, A. (2004) Fictional Minds, Lincoln, NE and London: University of Nebraska Press.
Pilkington, A. (2000) Poetic Eﬀects: A Relevance Theory Perspective, Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Popova, Y. (2002) ‘The ﬁgure in the carpet: discovery or re-cognition’, in E. Semino and J. Culpeper
(eds) Cognitive Stylistics: Language and Cognition in Text Analysis, Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Ramachandran, V. S. (2004) A Brief Tour of Human Consciousness: From Impostor Poodles to
Purple Numbers, New York: Proﬁle Books.
Richards, I. A. (1929) Practical Criticism, London: Kegan Paul.
Semino, E. (1997) Language and World Creation in Poems and Other Texts, London: Longman.
Semino, E. and Culpeper, J. (eds) (2002) Cognitive Stylistics: Language and Cognition in Text
Analysis, Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Semino, E. and Short, M. (2004) Corpus Stylistics: Speech, Writing and Thought Presentation in a
Corpus of English Writing, London: Routledge.
Shklovsky, V. (1965) ‘Art as technique’, in L. Lemon and M. J. Reis (eds) Russian Formalist Criti-
cism, Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press.
Short, M. (1989a) ‘Discourse analysis and the analysis of drama’, in R. Carter and P. Simpson (eds)
Language, Discourse and Literature, London: Unwin Hyman.
Elena Semino
552

——(1996) Exploring the Language of Poems, Plays and Prose, London: Longman.
Short, M. (ed.) (1989b) Reading, Analysing and Teaching Literature, London: Longman.
Short, M., Freeman, D. C., van Peer, W. and Simpson, P. (1998) ‘Stylistics, criticism and myth
representation again: squaring the circle with Ray Mackay’s subjective solution to all problems’,
Language and Literature 7: 39–50.
Simpson, P. (1993) Language, Ideology and Point of View, London: Routledge.
——(2004) Stylistics: A Resource Book for Students, London: Routledge.
Spitzer, L. (1948) Linguistics and Literary History, Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Stockwell, P. (2002) Cognitive Poetics: An Introduction, London: Routledge.
Stubbs, M. (1996) Text and Corpus Analysis: Computer-assisted Studies of Language and Culture,
Oxford: Blackwell.
Sweetser, E. (2006) ‘Whose rhyme is whose reason? Sound and sense in Cyrano de Bergerac’,
Language and Literature 15: 29–54.
Thorne, J. P. (1965) ‘Stylistics and generative grammars’, Journal of Linguistics 1: 49–59.
Toolan, M. (1996) ‘Stylistics and its discontents; or, getting oﬀthe Fish “hook”’, in J.-J. Weber (ed.)
The Stylistics Reader: From Roman Jakobson to the Present, London: Hodder Arnold.
Toolan, M. (ed.) (1992) Language, Text and Context, London: Routledge.
Tsur, R. (1992) Toward a Theory of Cognitive Poetics, Amsterdam: Elsevier.
van Peer, W. (1986) Stylistics and Psychology, London: Croom Helm.
Wales, K. (2001) A Dictionary of Stylistics, 2nd edn, London: Longman.
Watson, G. and Zyngier, S. (eds) (2007) Literature and Stylistics for Language Learners: Theory and
Practice, Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan.
Weber, J.-J. (1992) Critical Analysis of Fiction, Amsterdam: Rodopi.
——(2004) ‘A new paradigm for literary studies, or: the teething troubles of cognitive poetics’, Style
38(4): 515–23.
Werth, P. (1999) Text Worlds: Representing Conceptual Space in Discourse, London: Longman.
Widdowson, H. G. (1975) Stylistics and the Teaching of Literature, London: Longman.
——(1982) ‘Othello in person’, in R. Carter (ed.) Language and Literature: An Introductory Reader
in Stylistics. London: Allen and Unwin.
——(1992) Practical Stylistics, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Zwaan, R. A. (1993) Aspects of Literary Comprehension, Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Stylistics
553


Part V
Descriptions of language for
applied linguistics


39
Grammar
Michael Swan
Introduction
This chapter deals with grammar in the narrower sense; that is to say, it refers not to all lin-
guistic systems, but speciﬁcally to syntax and morphology. Narrow or not, this is a vast sub-
ject, relevant to very many topics which come under the heading of ‘applied linguistics’. I have
shaped what follows partly in order to avoid excessive overlap with other chapters in this
volume, and have therefore said relatively little about some matters which are dealt with in
detail elsewhere. I begin by discussing brieﬂy what grammar is, why languages need it and how
they use it. This is followed by a word on the remarkable proliferation of grammatical models
in present-day linguistic theory, and a note on the relationship, such as it is, between these
models and applications of linguistics. I then look brieﬂy at applied linguistics at its most
ambitious: the period when it was believed that investigating the nature of language would
inform us about the world; and at later oﬀshoots of this line of thought. A short note on the
language-mind-brain relationship is followed by two more extensive sections, on grammar in
mother tongue education and foreign language teaching, respectively.
What is grammar?
Not all meanings can be conveyed by simply stringing words together in an unstructured way.
For one thing, unsupported vocabulary cannot specify the direction of causal and other rela-
tionships. Putting together the words man, dog and bite, or ﬂoorboards, water and under, for
instance, leaves important questions unanswered. A second limitation is to do with modality:
no string of words on its own can indicate whether it is intended as a statement, a question, an
expression of uncertainty, a negation or some other type of communication. And ﬁnally, words
are mostly labels for classes of things, qualities, processes and so on, whereas we most often
talk about particular members of these classes. So in order to construct references to parti-
culars, we need to group words: while the words my, old and dog, for example, taken sepa-
rately, can each refer to millions of entities, the phrase my old dog pins down one speciﬁc
individual. In more complex communications, grouping may not be transparent, so that we
need ways of showing what goes with what.
557

Languages solve these problems essentially by the devices that we call ‘syntax’ and ‘mor-
phology’, supplementing purely lexical information by establishing ordering and movement
conventions, changing the forms of words, and using function words (like English may or not).
These devices – grammar – make it possible to distinguish, for example, dog bites man from
man bites dog or (the Latin equivalents) canis hominem mordet from canem homo mordet. They
permit the expression of modality, distinguishing for instance ﬂoorboards are under water from
are ﬂoorboards under water, ﬂoorboards may be under water and ﬂoorboards are not under
water. And they facilitate grouping, showing where necessary which words go together (small
man bites big dog as against big man bites small dog).
Simple in principle, grammar generates considerable complexity in practice. Given a way of
grouping words, you can group groups of words, and group groups of groups of words, and so
on upwards. Grammatical mechanisms also give rise to, and operate diﬀerentially on, distinct
word classes. And ordering and movement conventions can be applied in complicated ways to
whole assemblies of language. In addition, once grammar is in place it turns out to be useful
for many purposes beyond those identiﬁed above. The world’s languages put time relations,
number distinctions, evidentiality, social relationships and any number of other meanings into
their grammars – notions that can be handled by vocabulary, but for which grammar seems to
be a convenient vehicle. All of this is somewhat analogous to the elaboration that characterizes
computer programs, so simple in their basic mechanism – sequences of 0 and 1 – and so
complex and multi-functional in their applications.
The conventional syntax-morphology distinction – like that between grammar and lexis – is
not always clear-cut, and varies somewhat in scope from one language to another. Also,
languages seem to balance oﬀtheir use of the diﬀerent devices to a certain extent, with some
relying largely on morphology while others put a heavier load on syntax. There is an old belief
that all languages are pretty well equally complex, with simplicity in one area being counter-
balanced by complexity in another. There is, however, no good evidence for this, and it may be
that some languages just are simpler than others. Certainly there are languages in which
morphology, in particular, reaches baroque levels of complication – gender-marking in the
West African language Fula (McWhorter 2001: 188–9) is a striking example. However that
may be, some aspects of complexity seem to be limited in all languages in the interests of
processing eﬃciency, so as to facilitate production and comprehension (Hawkins 2004).
Models of grammar: a bewildering variety
Grammarians attempt to establish categories of linguistic elements and operations which
can capture accurately and economically the nature of particular languages. They may also
wish to go further, setting up theoretical models at a level of abstraction which will
accommodate the multifarious structural features of all possible human languages, and thus
illuminate the nature of language in general. In addition, some linguists are concerned to show
how the structure of language enables children to perform the astonishing feat of learning
their mother tongues. Because the grammatical systems of languages are so complex, and
diﬀer so greatly, there is room for substantial disagreement about what kind of generalized
model can best account for the facts. It is in fact remarkable how much controversy there is
about the analysis of a phenomenon, language, for which we have so much data – at least
as much as many physical scientists have for the subjects of their investigations. A glance at
the index of a linguistics encyclopaedia will direct the reader to a daunting range of
diﬀerent ‘grammars’: transformational, phrase structure, dependency, word, functional, sys-
temic, construction, cognitive and dozens of others. (For accounts of some of these, see the
Michael Swan
558

chapters on generative grammar, systemic functional linguistics, and cognitive linguistics in
this volume.)
These diﬀerences partly reﬂect researchers’ choice of focus. Linguistic structures can
be investigated primarily in terms of their internal characteristics, or on the basis of the func-
tions they perform. This formal-functional divide can also bring with it important diﬀerences
of opinion. Formally oriented grammarians tend to account for shared features of languages –
universals – in the belief that these reﬂect features of the language faculty in the human mind.
Proponents of this view may postulate innate knowledge of what deﬁnes the range of possible
grammars – so-called ‘Universal Grammar’ (UG) – on the grounds that we allegedly know
things about our language for which the input provides inadequate evidence (the ‘poverty of
the stimulus’ argument). A commonly used example concerns ‘island constraints’. In an
English complex sentence, a word like who or what can be used in a main clause to question an
element in a dependent clause in some structures, but not others. For example:
You said that this nut goes on the wing mirror.
! What did you say that this nut goes on?
John thinks this nut goes on the wing mirror.
! What does John think this nut goes on?
You asked Paul whether this nut goes on the wing mirror.
! *What did you ask Paul whether this nut goes on?
It is not a straightforward matter to establish a reliable innate rule which will account for the
complex range of such constraints, generating correct structures like the ﬁrst two examples
above and disallowing incorrect structures, and which will work for the equivalent constraints
in all languages (since UG, if it exists, is necessarily language-independent). Models which
assume innate knowledge of grammar therefore tend to operate at a very high and, in the view
of some critics, implausible level of abstraction and complexity. The diﬃculty of the enterprise
is strikingly demonstrated by the remarkable changes of course of one prominent approach –
Chomskyan generative grammar – over the last half century, with one key idea after another
(e.g. transformations, government and binding, principles and parameters) being modiﬁed out
of recognition or ﬁnally abandoned.
Functionally oriented grammarians, in contrast, regard language universals primarily as reﬂect-
ing the structural features that languages need to have in order to do what they do. Language
acquisition and use, for many grammarians of this persuasion, can be accounted for on the
basis of general principles of cognition rather than any wired-in knowledge unique to language.
‘Usage-based associative learning’ models attribute to the child learner a powerful unconscious
capacity to detect regularities in the input, and to abstract patterns at increasing levels of generality
(N. Ellis 2003, and this volume). Knowledge of constraints like those illustrated above, in this
view, is perhaps explicable simply on the grounds that sentences like the incorrect ones have never
occurred in the input, and have therefore never been registered as possible by the child’s inbuilt
monitor. While most grammatical models have little to say about how the proposed structures and
operations might be instantiated in the brain, associative learning or ‘connectionist’ models
incorporate hypotheses, in principle testable, concerning the possible functioning of neural networks.
Grammar and the world: models and applications
For a model of language to support investigation of a real-world problem, two things are
necessary. The model must give reliable linguistic information, and it must do so in terms
Grammar
559

which can be applied eﬀectively to the problem in question, as Crystal (2001) makes clear in
relation to a case in clinical linguistics:
In the ﬁeld of grammar, it is easy to spot such morphological errors as mouses or tooked;
far less easy to work out what is going on when there are problems with sentence struc-
ture. One six-year-old boy was able to say such sentences as That car is red and My car is
in the garage, but could not be persuaded to say That’s a red car or My red car. Asked ‘Is
that a red car or a yellow car?’ he would become non-ﬂuent and produce such strings as A
car – a red, losing control of the clause structure as a whole. The problem turned out to
be a diﬃculty in simultaneously using a developed noun phrase within a clause: as long as
the noun phrase consisted solely of a determiner + noun, there was no problem. But
asked to insert an adjective (or any other extra element), and the whole sentence structure
broke down. To appreciate the nature of this diﬃculty requires the analyst not only to make
an appropriate syntactic analysis but also to appreciate the implications of a syntactic
hierarchy for mental processing. Both syntactic and psycholinguistic perspectives are
essential.
(Crystal 2001: 675)
It is clear from Crystal’s example that, while a reasonably ﬁne-grained analysis is valuable for
the clinical linguist, it needs to stay relatively close to the surface of the language. A more
abstract analysis – perhaps of greater value to a generative grammarian – might be more dif-
ﬁcult to apply and less directly illuminating. (For further discussion in the area of clinical lin-
guistics, see Perkins and Howard, this volume.) This is likely to be the case for many other
applications of grammatical models to real-world problems, such as forensic linguistics (Rock,
this volume), stylistics (Semino, this volume) or language teaching (see discussion below).
Computational linguistics, in contrast, is an area where more complex models may be indis-
pensable. Attempts to create analogues to the human language faculty, for such purposes as
machine translation or machine reading, depend crucially on parsing algorithms, which can
perhaps only operate successfully on the basis of relatively sophisticated grammatical analyses.
Grammar as a window on the world
Languages are used to convey messages about the world, so it seems reasonable to suppose
that their structure must in one way or another reﬂect that of the world, at least as this is
perceived by human beings. Given that we analyze our experience in terms of situations and
events, and that we identify participants in these, it is not surprising that language structure
distinguishes ways of referring to situations and events (prototypically verbs), from ways of
identifying participants (prototypically nouns). Cognitive grammarians, indeed (e.g. Langacker
2008), see language structure as reﬂecting in quite detailed respects, albeit at an abstracted and
metaphorical level, our conceptual and perceptual engagement with the physical world.
For classical Western philosophers like Aristotle and Plato, the relationship between lan-
guage and the world was such that linguistic structure could in fact be taken as a key to the
organization of reality: the categories into which Aristotle analyzed the physical world coin-
cided with the grammatical categories of the Greek language (Allan 2007: 44). Grammar was,
so to speak, a window on the world. The structure of language and the structure of logic were
also seen as being closely linked, so that a proper understanding of Greek and Latin grammar
was taken to provide a basis for sound argument (Allan 2007: chs 3, 4). These ideas continued
through later history. The ‘speculative’ grammarians of the late Middle Ages saw grammatical
Michael Swan
560

structure as mirroring the structure of God’s creation – Latin speculum means ‘mirror’ –
(Allan 2007: 155–7), while the rationalist philosophers of the seventeenth and eighteenth cen-
turies saw grammar as reﬂecting the structure of the human mind, as do present-day
generative grammarians. Leibniz believed that a tidied-up language, in which meanings could
be expressed without ambiguity, would allow for precise and conclusive logical argument, a
view echoed 300 years later by Bertrand Russell (Russell 2004: 540, 1919: 172).
A variant of the belief that language is a window on the world is found in the notion of
linguistic relativity. In this view, any language gives us information not about an objective
outside world, but about the subjective reality perceived by its speakers – indeed, it shapes
that reality through the kinds of meaning encoded in its grammar. Indo-European lan-
guages, to take one example, typically use the verbal system to express certain kinds of time
relation, whereas native American or Australian languages may not conceptualize time in the
grammar at all. On the other hand, the choice of verb forms in some languages (e.g. Bulgar-
ian, Turkish, some native American languages) may indicate evidentiality, showing, for
instance, whether a speaker was an eyewitness to what he/she is reporting. The view that dif-
ferences of this kind may entail diﬀerent perspectives on external reality goes back to philo-
sophers
such
as
von
Humboldt
in
the
early
nineteenth
century,
and was
pursued
energetically by American anthropological linguists, notably Sapir and Whorf (see, for exam-
ple, Sapir 1921), 100 years later. For some recent discussions in this ﬁeld, see Gentner and
Goldin-Meadow (2003).
Grammar, the mind and the brain
Many grammarians claim that the characteristics of language structure must tell us something
about the mental organ responsible for it. While there is considerable controversy in this area,
it certainly seems highly possible that the organization of language can provide clues to the
structure and operation of the mind and brain. A much-debated question concerns mod-
ularity: does the human mind have a special module, or modules, for handling language, dis-
tinct from the faculties involved in other aspects of cognition? There is evidence that language
learning, storage and use are at least partly independent of other cognitive functions. For
example, there seems to be a ‘critical period’ related speciﬁcally to language acquisition: after
a certain age, most people do not achieve native-like command of all aspects of a new lan-
guage. And in some recorded cases where young children have been deprived of linguistic
input and only started learning their mother tongue when older, their output has remained
defective and ungrammatical. Conﬁrmatory evidence for modularity comes from brain-
damaged patients. Strokes or accidents sometimes cause people to lose some or all of their
ability to use language, while leaving their other mental faculties apparently unimpaired.
Conversely, it is possible for people with severe mental handicap to exhibit normal or even
exceptional linguistic competence.
Knowledge of how language works can feed into investigations of the mind and brain, while
information can also ﬂow in the other direction, with the results of brain research conﬁrming
or extending our understanding of linguistic structure (Perkins and Howard, this volume).
Studies of brain-damaged patients have long since demonstrated associations between speciﬁc
parts of the brain and particular aspects of language behaviour, with lesions in one or other
area being found to correlate with problems of comprehension, ﬂuent production, control of
syntactic and lexical categories, or handling of meaning. Our knowledge of such associations
has been greatly extended and reﬁned by modern functional neuro-imaging techniques, which
make it possible to monitor changes in blood ﬂow and electrical activity during language use,
Grammar
561

and thus to link patterns of excitation in speciﬁc areas with diﬀerent categories of linguistic
activity. However, the data that are being collected are complex and diﬃcult to analyze, and
while knowledge is growing very rapidly, much more work will be necessary before a clear
picture emerges. For the moment, we still understand little about the physical correlates of our
mental and linguistic representations of the world. (For detailed discussion, see Ahlsén, this
volume.)
Grammar in society; standardization and education
For most people, perhaps, linguistics and everyday life intersect primarily in the area of edu-
cation. Most societies have one language that is the principal vehicle of cultural transmission.
This may be a high-status classical or foreign language (like Sumerian in ancient Mesopotamia,
Latin in the European Middle Ages, Classical Arabic in the Islamic world, or the former
colonial languages in some African countries); it may be one of several languages that are
spoken in a country (like English in the United States); or it may be the single language of a
mainly monolingual culture (like Icelandic or Hungarian). Whatever the situation, the study of
that language necessarily features centrally in school curricula. Education and language study
can indeed sometimes become almost synonymous. A large part of the mediaeval European
educational syllabus, the ‘trivium’, was made up of grammar (correct language use), dialectic
(language for valid argument) and rhetoric (language for eﬀective public communication).
Although the link between language, logic and the world later became less generally accepted,
classical languages enjoyed continuing prestige in European education up to comparatively
recently. Indeed, the study of their grammar is still often seen as having a special if ill-deﬁned
value as a training for the mind, and they may continue to feature in some educational curri-
cula out of inertia long after outliving their original purpose, as Latin does in some British
schools.
Even where a single local language is spoken and carries the culture of the community,
diﬀerent regional or social groups are likely to speak diﬀerent varieties, and these diﬀerences
may cause communication problems. This creates a need for language standardization, which
is typically met by the emergence or designation of one variety as the national standard; this
variety then becomes the main vehicle of administration, legislation, business, education and
publishing. The favoured variety may simply be the dialect spoken by that section of the
population which, through historical accident, has come to be socially and politically domi-
nant, as in Britain and many other countries. Or it may be a deliberate creation, codiﬁed out
of a need to facilitate communication in a country where no single standard has arisen, as
happened for instance in Norway after it gained independence from Denmark (Foley 1997:
405). (See also Wee, this volume.)
The prestige and utility of a standard variety generates social and institutional pressure to
master its conventions. Non-standard speakers must learn a new dialect in order to achieve
literacy and operate eﬀectively in society. Educational systems may use language as a social
ﬁlter, putting such a premium on linguistic correctness that higher education and many career
paths are eﬀectively closed to those who fail to master the prestige variety, whatever their
strengths in other areas. Grammar often has a starring role in this connection. Grammatical
correctness, after all, has a powerful symbolic value: getting your language right implies that
you can obey rules and respect authority. All of this can mean that a substantial part of an
educational curriculum may be given up to study of the standard language. Even those who
already speak this variety can have to work hard to master the written code: this is in a sense
a foreign language for everyone, and may not be at all easy to learn. In French, to take a
Michael Swan
562

somewhat bizarre instance, the spelling of the written language preserves a number of gram-
matical distinctions which have long since disappeared from speech because of changes in
pronunciation; so that French-speaking schoolchildren actually have to develop an explicit
knowledge of older French grammar in order to be able to spell correctly. Without this
knowledge, they cannot know whether to write, for instance, [aÐte] as acheter, acheté, achetés,
achetée, achetées, achetai, achetais, achetait or achetaient – various forms of the verb for ‘to
buy’ which are pronounced identically by most younger speakers of standard European
French.
Unfortunately, elevating one variety of a language to standard status easily entails the deva-
luation of others, which may be stigmatized as ‘incorrect’ forms of speech, used by ignorant or
uneducated people who have ‘not learnt correct grammar’, or who ‘cannot be troubled to get
things right’. This attitude is common in Britain, although all dialects of English have their
own history, going back to the distinct forms of speech of the various early mediaeval Ger-
manic and Scandinavian invaders, and although all well-preserved dialects have their own rich
and systematic grammars, however much these may diverge from that of their standard
counterpart. Interestingly, this is generally easier to accept for ‘remote’ dialects. Someone from
Oxfordshire who says ‘I wants them papers what I give you yesterday’ may well be criticized
for ‘failing’ to produce standard grammar. In contrast, a Scot who says ‘He’ll can tell us the
morn’ (‘He’ll be able to tell us tomorrow’) is more easily seen as speaking an independent
variety with its own rule system. In fact, though, the Oxfordshire speaker, just like the Scot, is
using forms which are historically rooted and regular and correct in his or her dialect, however
much they may upset the standard speaker next door.
Standard languages often acquire a body of prescriptive rules which are devised by indivi-
duals in the belief that their languages need regulating, tidying up or protecting against
change, and which are frequently codiﬁed in ‘usage guides’. Where one form is prescribed
at the expense of another, the favoured alternative is often the more formal, written variant, or
the older form: people in literate societies tend to give more prestige to the written language
than to speech, and to regard language change as evidence of falling standards (Aitchison
2001). Many English prescriptive rules were laid down by eighteenth- and nineteenth-century
grammarians, often because they believed that English grammar should imitate Latin, a lan-
guage with higher prestige. Typical examples are the old condemnation of ‘split inﬁnitives’ like to
boldly go (a Latin inﬁnitive is a single word, so cannot be split), or the lingering superstition
that a preposition is a bad word to end a sentence with (Latin clauses do not end in preposi-
tions, and anyway, it was felt, a preposition should logically precede). Logic is often invoked to
condemn sentences like It’s me or John and me saw a good ﬁlm (both typical of informal
standard British English): a nominative (subject) form is said to be ‘logically’ required in both
cases. However, the choice between I and me depends in complex ways on syntactic environ-
ment and level of formality, and is not determined by a simple rule of the kind that works for
pronouns in, say, Latin, Russian or German. Grammatical case systems actually vary con-
siderably across languages, and many languages organize themselves in ways that cut right
across typical European subject-object categories. To condemn John and me saw on the ‘logi-
cal’ grounds that ‘subjects are nominative’ is rather like insisting that penguins should get up
in the air because ‘birds ﬂy’.
As Pinker points out (1994: 374), many prescriptive rules are so psychologically unnatural
that only those with access to the right kind of education can learn to observe them. Once
acquired they can serve as shibboleths, diﬀerentiating the elite from the rest (‘I’m better than
you because I get my pronouns right.’). To admit that these rules are mistaken or unimportant
would mean abandoning such easy claims to superiority, as well as accepting that the eﬀort
Grammar
563

expended on learning the rules was wasted. Not surprisingly, therefore, prescriptive rules have
long lives.
It is unfortunate that a good deal of time is lost, in some educational systems, by insistence
on a command of the standard variety at a level of correctness which goes far beyond any
practical value that standardization may have. Uncertainty as to the eﬀectiveness of explicit
language instruction can also contribute to ineﬃciency, as educational philosophy swings from
one extreme (‘Kids today can’t write a correct sentence – bring back grammar!’) to the other
(‘This grammar teaching isn’t doing a bit of good – kids today can’t write a correct sentence!’).
At the time of writing, it seems that the British National Literacy Strategy, brought in in 1998
to improve literacy through explicit grammar instruction, is about to be abandoned as we
move into the second phase of the cycle.
However this may be, eﬃcient grammar instruction, up to a point, is surely important in
education. If knowledge of a standard language, spoken or written, is advantageous, it is
clearly desirable that children be given accurate information at least about those more impor-
tant aspects of its grammar which they ﬁnd diﬃcult to get right, in the hope that this may feed
into more accurate linguistic performance. Well-informed grammar teaching can have other
advantages. It can counteract the devaluation of non-standard dialects and their speakers by
providing a more accurate view of language variation. It can perhaps help to illuminate the
ways in which public attitudes can be deliberately manipulated by language (Cook 2003), as
did the study of rhetoric in the Middle Ages. And, of course, the study of the workings of the
mother tongue has general educational value in the same way as, for instance, the study of
biology. Perhaps more so. After all, as Walter has put it (2008): while children are taught
about photosynthesis, no child is called on to photosynthesize, but all children use language.
Grammar in foreign language teaching
Foreign languages have always had an important place in many educational systems, for both
cultural and practical reasons. And with the steady growth in international communication,
travel and emigration, more and more people now need to learn other languages – especially
world languages such as English, Mandarin, Arabic or Spanish. However, foreign language
study is time-consuming, expensive and diﬃcult. Any language contains grammatical features
which are hard to master after early childhood, whether because of their structural complexity,
as with Russian noun morphology, or because they signal abstract meanings which are not
easily grasped if the mother tongue does not encode equivalent concepts, as with article sys-
tems in Western European languages. Teaching professionals are therefore faced with ques-
tions of principle to which there are no very clear answers. How much grammatical correctness
should be expected of learners? How much is feasible: can foreign-language learners become as
native-speaker-like as is considered desirable? What type of grammatical model is appropriate?
What kinds of input and practice activity will enable learners to internalize the grammatical
systems of the foreign language most eﬀectively? Opinions in these areas have varied very
widely, and continue to do so. The learning and teaching of grammar, in Larsen-Freeman’s
words, is ‘the vortex around which many controversies in language teaching have swirled’
(2003: 9).
The choice of a grammatical model is perhaps partly a non-question. Granted, theoretical
perspectives on ﬁrst-language acquisition may have some apparent relevance for foreign-
language pedagogy. Views about whether ‘Universal Grammar’ remains available for the learning
of new languages can impact on the question of what is, or is not, regarded as teachable and
learnable (White 2003; Slabakova 2009). Usage-based models, which see grammatical knowledge
Michael Swan
564

as emerging by abstraction from patterns detected in the input (N. Ellis 2003 and this volume),
can be invoked in support of ‘lexical’ approaches. In general, however, foreign language teaching
does not seem to depend on speciﬁc theoretical models, and attempts to import, say, transforma-
tional grammar, cognitive grammar or construction grammar wholesale into the classroom
have not been shown to work well. Theoretical grammarians seek relatively abstract general-
izations which can be applied to languages and language as a whole. Day-to-day teaching, on
the other hand, is directed at people who already have an implicit knowledge of how language
works in general, and who are more concerned with language-speciﬁc details than with ways in
which these details ﬁt into higher-level abstractions.
The most useful kind of grammatical model as a starting-point for teaching, therefore, is
arguably descriptive rather than theoretical – the close-to-the-surface picture oﬀered for
instance for English by Quirk et al. (1985), Huddleston and Pullum (2002), or by the smaller
grammars which teachers and students generally use. In this area, pedagogy owes a very con-
siderable debt to linguistic research, past and present. Much of what we know about English
grammar was established by early twentieth-century scholars from Jespersen (1909) onwards.
More recent work in discourse analysis and related ﬁelds has greatly enriched our under-
standing of grammar above the sentence level. Although language corpora are not new –
Jespersen and his contemporaries based their work on substantial written corpora, and even
spoken corpora are over half a century old – their exploitation has been transformed out of
recognition by our current ability to compile and analyze massive electronic databases of
authentic language in use (see Adolphs and Lin, this volume). This makes it possible not only
to verify and reﬁne our traditional grammatical descriptions, but also to detect previously
unobserved regularities and ongoing changes. Corpus analysis also allows us – in what
amounts to a knowledge explosion – to investigate in detail the frontier between grammar and
lexis, amassing far more complete and reliable information about the structural behaviour and
external relations of individual words and word families than was previously available. In
addition, technological developments have made it easier for structural descriptions to cover
the whole range of spoken, written and signed language and to explore the signiﬁcant ways in
which these diﬀer (see, for example, Biber et al. 1999; Carter and McCarthy 2006; Woll and
Sutton-Spence, this volume).
There are, however, crucial diﬀerences between descriptive and pedagogic grammars. Most
importantly, a pedagogic grammatical description of a language is necessarily fragmentary.
Time constraints do not allow language learners to learn, or their teachers to teach, anything
approaching the whole of a language. The ﬁndings of descriptive grammarians, discourse
analysts, corpus researchers or others cannot therefore be fed directly into teaching pro-
grammes: they only provide menus, from which course designers must select those high-priority
elements that can be taught in the time available. While a descriptive grammar will aim at
complete coverage, a pedagogic grammar will consequently miss out or simplify material of
lesser practical importance. Further, a pedagogic grammar does not describe a language from
a neutral standpoint. Ideally, it provides information which learners do not already possess,
glossing over or leaving out what they already know by courtesy of their mother tongue. This
may be a great deal. No learners need to be told that a new language has nouns and verbs. For
Mandarin speakers, English SVO word order is unproblematic. French-speaking learners take
it for granted that English relative clauses follow their nouns, and that they do not contain
resumptive pronouns (whereas Japanese learners do need to be told where to put relative
clauses, and Farsi-speaking learners do need to learn that, for instance, That’s the man that
he sold me the bike is not grammatical in English). German-speaking students of Italian
(unlike Polish learners) need relatively little information about article usage. The very
Grammar
565

boundaries between grammar and vocabulary may be drawn diﬀerently for diﬀerent learners.
English because-clauses constitute a grammatical topic for students whose mother tongue does
not handle clause structure on the European model; however, speakers of most European lan-
guages only need to learn that because corresponds to perchè, parce que, weil, fordi, jer or
whatever. English prepositions are vocabulary for Swedish speakers, whose language also has
prepositions; for Finnish speakers, whose language expresses the relevant notions mostly by noun-
endings, prepositions are a diﬃcult grammatical category. For these and other reasons (Swan
1994) a pedagogic grammar for a given group of learners may look very diﬀerent indeed from
an academic descriptive grammar.
Methodological questions in this area are especially intractable, and ﬁnd few reliable
answers. (For a detailed survey of past and present views on methodology, see Thornbury, this
volume.) Does grammar teaching have any eﬀect on learning? Most teachers probably think
so, but how can we be sure? If students’ grammar improves, is this because of the teaching, or
would it have improved anyway as a result of unconscious acquisition processes acting on the
input? If grammar teaching does work, how should it be approached? In particular – the key
question – how useful is explicit instruction? When students learnt to read and write classical
languages, this question was less crucial. In the time necessary to write a Latin sentence, a rule
like ‘use the subjunctive in indirect questions’ could easily be recalled, and the appropriate
form of the relevant verb retrieved from a memorized paradigm. Spontaneous speech is a very
diﬀerent matter: structures have to be chosen and forms retrieved far too quickly for conscious
control to be exercised. This being so, is systematic explicit attention to structure a valuable
starting-point nonetheless, on the basis that one can get from declarative to procedural
knowledge of language ‘by engaging in the target behaviour … while temporarily leaning on
declarative crutches’ (DeKeyser 1998: 49), with a progressive reduction of conscious attention
to form (Johnson 2001: 195)? Or is the grammar of a language best learnt incidentally in the
context of communicative activity, as many current SLA theorists believe? Or is it pointless to
pose the question in such general terms – does the answer depend mainly on the nature of the
grammatical feature in question, the personality of the learner, the learning context, or other
factors? While a great deal of valuable research has addressed this problem over the last half
century or so, we are still a long way from a solution.
Successive approaches to language teaching are often described in terms of pendulum
swings between one type of stance and its opposite. Although the metaphor is over-simple
(especially in implying that there is no progress), it does have some validity. As a formal code,
used to convey meaningful messages, a language necessarily has a dual character. Reﬂecting
this, teaching philosophies oscillate between the two poles of form and meaning, control and
freedom, imitation and expression, knowledge and skill, learning and using. At any one time,
theorists and researchers claim that they have, at last, got the balance right, unlike the previous
generation who, it is now clear, were excessively committed to a formal or functional view of
the matter. The role of grammar in all of this – central, marginal or non-existent – depends
largely on the current position of the pendulum.
At the time of writing there is a modest rehabilitation of grammar instruction in second
language acquisition (SLA) theory, and a partial rejection of the earlier claim of Krashen
(1981) and others that explicit grammatical teaching is irrelevant to the acquisition of lin-
guistic competence (see Norris and Ortega 2000; R. Ellis 2006). Theoretically informed atti-
tudes to language teaching are, however, still coloured by the heavily communicative bias of
the last thirty years, and are situated well down towards the meaning-freedom-expression-skill-
using end of the pendulum swing. Language proﬁciency is often measured in ‘can-do’ terms
(as in the speciﬁcations for the Council of Europe’s Common European Framework 2001); with
Michael Swan
566

the danger that doing things with language may assume more importance than systematically
learning the language needed to do the relevant things. Skills and strategies can receive more
attention in teaching programmes than grammar, pronunciation and vocabulary. Grammar
and pragmatics are often yoked together, to their mutual disadvantage (Swan 2007). Naturalistic
‘real-world’ activities are widely favoured, in the belief that classroom experience should
approximate as closely as feasible to mother-tongue acquisition and use. ‘Learner-centred’,
‘meaning-based’, ‘holistic’, ‘discourse’, ‘discovery’, ‘process’, ‘interaction’, ‘negotiation’ and
‘strategy’ are good things to say. ‘Teacher-dominated’, ‘form-based’, ‘discrete’, ‘sentence-level’,
‘transmission model’, ‘product’, ‘memorization’, ‘repetition’ and ‘drill’ are not so good. The view
that ‘now, at last, we have got the balance right’ surfaces in the common claim that language
teaching has moved into a ‘postmethod’ era (e.g. Kumaravadivelu 2006). As Bell (2003) makes
clear, however, postmethod thinking is not at all methodologically neutral. Kumaravadivelu’s
list of ‘macrostrategies’ (2006: 201) for language teaching has a powerful communicative
orientation: while it refers to such things as negotiated interaction, learner autonomy, intuitive
heuristics, social relevance and the raising of cultural consciousness, it has nothing whatever of
substance to say about language and how to teach it.
Current orthodoxies, like earlier attitudes, are heavily dependent on hypotheses, often pro-
moted with more assurance than they merit. To cite one among many: some researchers assert
that linguistic regularities can only be eﬀectively learnt during genuine communication while
learners are carrying out ‘real-world’ tasks: interlanguage restructuring (it is claimed) is trig-
gered by incidental ‘focus on form’ and conscious ‘noticing’ during communicative activity, for
instance while resolving communication breakdowns (see, for example, contributions to
Doughty and Williams 1998). For criticism of this and some other currently inﬂuential
hypotheses, see Swan (2005).
Fashionable research interests can easily bias language-teaching content and methodology.
This has sometimes been the case recently, for instance, with discourse grammar, pragmatics,
the emergence of grammar from lexis, and formulaic language. Some specialists in corpus
linguistics have stepped outside their territory to make powerful pedagogic recommendations
regarding the use of corpora and ‘real’ corpus-attested language in teaching materials and
practice (for a critical discussion, see Carter 1998; Cook 1998; Widdowson 2003). The speciﬁc
research context can also create bias. Many scholars in the ﬁeld have gained the bulk of their
experience in ‘English as a second language’ (ESL) situations, working with university-level
learners studying in English-speaking countries. Such learners typically have rich language
input outside the classroom, and having studied English for many years at school, they may
know far more than they can use eﬀectively. This can naturally encourage a focus on language
use, and away from systematic study of the linguistic basics. Unfortunately, theoretically
sanctioned approaches such as task-based teaching (Willis 1996; R. Ellis 2003), while suitable
for students of this kind, may be far less suitable for many of the world’s language learners,
who are working under very much tighter time constraints in very diﬀerent situations. The
ESL bias also means that researchers work mostly with multilingual groups; this may explain
a baﬄing feature of present-day mainstream SLA theory: the almost complete neglect of
learners’ mother tongues, as if these had no relevance to their learning of new languages.
(Butzkamm and Caldwell 2009; Cook 2010). It is also worth bearing in mind that experiential-
learning models designed for teaching English (a language with few inﬂections) may not work
well for languages which require beginning students to master parts of complex morphological
systems.
Despite decades of research and theorizing, we still know little about the acquisition of
second-language grammar, and pendulum swings will continue. One thing that could perhaps
Grammar
567

reduce their amplitude is a more realistic conception of what we are about. Teachers often
seem to assume – consciously or unconsciously – that learners should aim at a close approx-
imation to native-speaker competence. This is quite unrealistic: language learning and teaching
are diﬃcult, only a relatively small part of a language can be learnt in the time generally
available, and limited success is all that can be hoped for. More general recognition of this fact
might reduce the recurrent tendency to reject a viable language-teaching approach in the dis-
illusioned belief that it has ‘failed’, only to replace it with something else that may work no
better. In this connection the current interest in English as a lingua franca, and the associated
questioning of native-speaker norms as an appropriate target for learners (see, for example,
Kirkpatrick and Deterding, this volume), is an extremely constructive development.
Summary and conclusion
Grammatical analysis may not, as classical philosophers believed, give us information about
the world. Nor, probably, does it give us a direct insight into the nature of cognition. None the
less, the cluster of mechanisms that we call ‘grammar’ is central to language, and it is language
that enables us to conceptualize and theorize about our world, to progressively expand our
knowledge, and to consolidate and pass on our discoveries through cultural transmission. This
being so, the better we understand grammar – what it is, how it operates in language and
languages, how it is acquired, how it is instantiated in the brain – the better our grasp is likely
to be of the many human activities and concerns in which language is implicated: from for-
eign-language teaching at the most practical extreme, through the many other matters that
engage the attention of applied linguists, to the very nature of consciousness itself.
Related topics
Many articles in this volume deal with matters discussed or touched on above: in particular
those on: clinical linguistics; cognitive linguistics; corpus linguistics; forensic linguistics; gen-
erative grammar; key concepts in language learning and education; language emergence; lan-
guage teaching methodology; neurolinguistics; second language acquisition; sign languages;
sociolinguistics; stylistics; systemic functional linguistics; and world Englishes.
Further reading
Aitchison, J. (2001) Language Change: Progress or Decay?, Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press. (Interesting, well-documented and extremely readable study of attitudes to correctness.)
Da˛browska, E. (2004) Language, Mind and Brain, Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press. (Brings
evidence from a wide range of languages to bear on the question of psychological and neurolo-
gical constraints on theories of grammar.)
Johnson, K. (2008) An Introduction to Foreign Language Learning and Teaching, 2nd edn, Harlow:
Pearson Longman. (Excellent survey of the ﬁeld.)
Moravcsik, E. (2006) An Introduction to Syntactic Theory, London: Continuum. (Includes an
interesting and accessible comparison of diﬀerent models.)
Swan, M. (2005) Grammar, Oxford: Oxford University Press. (More extensive discussion of some of
the topics covered in this article.)
References
Aitchison, J. (2001) Language Change: Progress or Decay?, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Allan, K. (2007) The Western Classical Tradition in Linguistics, London: Equinox.
Michael Swan
568

Bell, D. M. (2003) ‘Method and postmethod: are they really so incompatible?’, TESOL Quarterly
37(2): 325–36.
Biber, D., Johanssen, S., Leech, G., Conrad, S. and Finegan, E. (1999) Longman Grammar of
Spoken and Written English, Harlow: Pearson Longman.
Butzkamm, W. and Caldwell, J. (2009) The Bilingual Reform, Tübingen: Gunter Narr.
Carter, R. (1998) ‘Orders of reality: CANCODE, communication and culture’, ELT Journal 52(1): 43–56.
Carter, R. and McCarthy, M. (2006) Cambridge Grammar of English, Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Cook, G. (1998) ‘The uses of reality: a reply to Ronald Carter’, ELT Journal 52(1): 57–63.
——(2003) Applied Linguistics, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
——(2010) Translation, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Council of Europe (2001) Common European Framework of Reference for Languages: Learning,
Teaching, Assessment, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Crystal, D. (2001) ‘Clinical linguistics’, in M. Aronoﬀand J. Rees-Miller (eds) The Handbook of
Linguistics, Oxford: Blackwell.
DeKeyser, R. (1998) ‘Beyond focus on form: cognitive perspectives on learning and practicing
second language grammar’, in C. Doughty and J. Williams (eds) Focus on Form in Classroom
Second Language Acquisition, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Doughty, C. and Williams, J. (eds) (1998) Focus on Form in Classroom Second Language Acquisition,
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Ellis, N. (2003) ‘Constructions, chunking and connectionism: the emergence of second language
structure’, in C. J. Doughty and M. H. Long (eds) The Handbook of Second Language Acquisition,
Oxford: Blackwell.
Ellis, R. (2003) Task-based Language Teaching and Learning, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
——(2006) ‘Current issues in the teaching of grammar: an SLA perspective’, TESOL Quarterly 40:
83–107.
Foley, W. (1997) Anthropological Linguistics, Oxford: Blackwell.
Gentner, D. and Goldin-Meadow, S. (eds) (2003) Language in Mind, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Hawkins, J. (2004) Eﬃciency and Complexity in Grammars, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Huddleston, R. and Pullum, G. (2002) The Cambridge Grammar of the English Language, Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Jespersen, O. (1909) A Modern English Grammar on Historical Principles, Heidelberg: Winter.
Johnson, K. (2001) An Introduction to Foreign Language Learning and Teaching, Harlow:
Pearson Longman.
Krashen, S. (1981) Second Language Acquisition and Second Language Learning, Oxford:
Pergamon.
Kumaravadivelu, B. (2006) Understanding Language Teaching: From Method to Postmethod,
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Langacker, R. (2008) Cognitive Grammar: A Basic Introduction, New York: Oxford University Press.
Larsen-Freeman, D. (2003) Teaching Language: From Grammar to Grammaring, Boston: Thomson
Heinle.
McWhorter, J. (2001) The Power of Babel: A Natural History of Language, London: Heinemann.
Norris, J. and Ortega, L. (2000) ‘Eﬀectiveness of L2 instruction: a research synthesis and quantita-
tive meta-analysis’, Language Learning 50(3): 417–528.
Pinker, S. (1994) The Language Instinct: How the Mind Creates Language, London: Allen Lane/the
Penguin Press.
Quirk, R., Greenbaum, S., Leech, J. and Svartvik, J. (1985) A Comprehensive Grammar of the
English Language, Harlow: Pearson Longman.
Russell, B. (1919) Introduction to Mathematical Philosophy, London: Allen and Unwin.
——([1946] 2004) History of Western Philosophy, London: Routledge.
Sapir, E. (1921) Language: An Introduction to the Study of Speech, New York: Harcourt, Brace.
Slabakova, R. (2009) ‘L2 fundamentals’, in R. Slabakova (ed.) ‘The fundamental diﬀerence
hypothesis twenty years later’, Studies in Second Language Acquisition, special issue, 31(2): 155–73.
Swan, M. (1994) ‘Design criteria for pedagogic language rules’, in M. Bygate, A. Tonkyn, and
E. Williams (eds) Grammar and the Language Teacher, Hemel Hempstead: Prentice Hall.
——(2005) ‘Legislation by hypothesis: the case of task-based instruction’, Applied Linguistics 26(3):
376–401.
Grammar
569

——(2007) ‘Grammar, meaning and pragmatics: sorting out the muddle’, TESL-EJ 11(2): A-3.
Available at: http://tesl-ej.org
Walter, C. (2008) Conference presentation, IATEFL Poland, Łódz´.
White, L. (2003) ‘On the nature of interlanguage representation: universal grammar in the second
language’, in C. J. Doughty and M. H. Long (eds) The Handbook of Second Language Acquisition,
Oxford: Blackwell.
Widdowson, H. G. (2003) Deﬁning Issues in English Language Teaching, Oxford: Oxford University
Press.
Willis, J. (1996) A Framework for Task-based Learning, Harlow: Pearson Longman.
Michael Swan
570

40
Lexis
Joe Barcroft, Gretchen Sunderman and Norbert Schmitt
A history of the area
The term lexis, from the ancient Greek for ‘word’, refers to all the words in a language, the
entire vocabulary of a language. Plato and Aristotle spoke of lexis in terms of how the words
of a language can be used eﬀectively. Plato focused on diﬀerent types of diction and dis-
tinguished between mimesis, speech involving imitation, and diegisis, or simple narration not
involving such imitation (see, for example, Gennette 1979). In his discussion of style in Rhetoric,
Aristotle distinguished between lexis graphikê and lexis agonistikê, the former referring to ‘the
most precise style … to be used in compositions designed for a careful reading’ and the latter,
which consisted of two aspects (êthikê and pathêtikê), referring to ‘the style of plays written for a
full performance on the stage as opposed to those designed for reading’ (Sonkowsky 1959: 260).
In Categories, Aristotle also worked to describe numerous properties of words, including semantic
properties of words (‘A man and an ox are both “animal”’), words that are synonymous,
homonymous, and so forth (see Aristotle 350 BCE).
Many of the important contributions of early Indian linguists, such as Pa-n.ini, Patañjali, and
Bhartrihari, concerned basic properties of words, including the notion of what is invariant
(sphota) and what is variant (na-da) in words and other types of linguistic form. Such work also
had an impact on Saussure, a professor of Sanskrit himself, and the development of structural
linguistics. Consider, for example, the relationship between the notions of sphota and na-da and
Saussure’s distinction between the ‘signiﬁer’, or the (spoken or written) form of a word, and
the ‘signiﬁed’, the mental concept of the word (Saussure 1916).
In the history of modern linguistics, since approximately the middle of the twentieth cen-
tury, the treatment of lexis has evolved substantially by acknowledging to a greater degree the
important and central role of words and lexicalized phrases in the mental representation of
linguistic knowledge and in linguistic processing. Within generative linguistics, individual
words and the syntactic constraints that they project have come to play an increasingly
important role. For example, lexical structure needed to be ‘represented categorically at every
syntactic level’ (Chomsky 1986) in generative-transformational grammar (e.g. the verb ‘throw’
requires a noun phrase, as in She threw the ball, as opposed to the ungrammatical *She threw).
In cognitive linguistics, words and lexicalized chunks play a central role. As a ﬁnal example, in
571

construction grammar, words and lexical phrases have taken center stage completely because
words and lexicalized phrases, as well as syntactic frames in which lexical items can be inserted
(e.g. X causes Y to … ), are viewed as form that can be attached to diﬀerent types of meaning,
blurring previously held distinctions between the domains of lexis and syntax. Linguists and
psycholinguists who study lexis are in a unique position because they focus on the place in
linguistic analysis and language processing where form (phonological or otherwise) meets
meaning at the most basic level.
Key concepts
What is a word?
We often distinguish between what it means to know a word and how we access that infor-
mation. The mental lexicon is the storage repository for words and the information we know
about those words; it is our internal dictionary. Much like a dictionary entry, the mental
representation of a word contains information about the spelling, pronunciation, grammatical
category, and meaning of the word. But what exactly counts as a word? If we think of a word
like builders, there are at least three meaningful parts to the word, or morphemes. The free
morpheme build (a verb) is then combined with a derivational bound morpheme -er, and thus
changes the word to a noun, builder. An inﬂectional plural morpheme -s is then added to
ﬁnally arrive at builders. However, although orthographically an -s is added, phonologically
the sound is /z/, an allomorph for plural morpheme -s. At the most basic level, we know that
builders are people who build things.
Formal properties of words
Words are a type of linguistic form, but the nature of that form and the physical source that
we use to create that form can vary. In spoken languages, we use our vocal tract to produce
units of sound, or phonemes, by contrasting features such as +/-voicing (e.g. ban/pan). In
signed languages, we use hands to produce visual elements that function like phonemes by
contrasting features related to location, movement, and hand shape. For example, location
distinguishes between the words ‘mother’ (thumb on the chin) and ‘father’ (thumb on the
forehead) in American Sign Language. In addition to these sources of lexical form, writing
systems and tactile forms of communication, such as Braille, allow us to produce and perceive
words using alternative means of distinguishing between diﬀerent lexical forms (graphemic for
writing and tactile for Braille).
Semantic properties of words
A basic characteristic of vocabulary is that meaning and form do not always have a one-to-
one correspondence. Consider the following items:

die

expire

pass away

bite the dust

kick the bucket.

give up the ghost
Joe Barcroft, Gretchen Sunderman and Norbert Schmitt
572

The six examples all have the meaning ‘to die’. However, several of the items contain more
than one word. In some languages, and especially in English, meanings can be represented by
multiple words operating as single units. To accommodate the fact that both single and multi-
word units can realize meaning, we use the terms lexeme, lexical unit, and lexical item. These
interchangeable terms are all deﬁned as ‘an item that functions as a single meaning unit,
regardless of the number of words it contains’. Thus, all of the above examples are lexemes
with similar meanings.
Cases where several forms map onto the same meaning are referred to as synonymy. Syno-
nymy is common in languages, but so is the converse, where a single form has several mean-
ings. This can be called either polysemy or homonymy. The distinction usually revolves around
whether the diﬀerent meaning senses are related or not. Chip is usually considered polysemous,
in that a chip of wood, a computer chip, a potato chip, and a poker chip all have the same
underlying concept of being small, thin, and ﬂat(ish). A ﬁnancial bank, a river bank, and the
banking of an airplane when it turns are usually thought of as homonyms, as the meaning
senses are totally unrelated.
Often a general area of meaning is covered by a certain set of related words, and is referred
to as a semantic ﬁeld or semantic category. ‘Food’ is an example, and the names of various
fruits, grains, meats, etc. make up the lexical set of words describing this semantic ﬁeld. In
some cases, the meaning of the words in the lexical set is deﬁned by their relationships to the
other words in the set. This particularly true with gradable adjectives, as warm does not refer
to an absolute temperature, but is cooler than hot but warmer than lukewarm. For instance,
25°C would be considered a warm summer day in Britain, but would be positively cool in a
Saudi Arabian summer!
Lexical characteristics of words
What happens in our minds when we see the string of letters making up the word builders?
Lexical access is the term used to refer to the process of retrieving those words from the lexicon,
our mental store of words. Many factors can speed up or slow down the retrieval process. For
example, word frequency (how often a particular item appears in a corpus of language data) is
highly related to how easily a word can be recognized (see, for example, English Lexicon Project,
Washington University in St Louis, http://elexicon.wustl.edu/, a free database that contains lexical
characteristics, along with reaction time and accuracy measures from two diﬀerent experiments,
visual lexical decision and naming, studies of 40,481 words and 40,481 nonwords, Balota et al.
2007). Based on the data that can be retrieved from the Website, the word builders has a fre-
quency of 2,006 and it takes on average 677ms (with 94 per cent accuracy) to recognize it is a
word in a lexical decision task. Compare this with a low frequency eight-letter word like ﬂau-
tist. Flautist requires an average of 1,000ms (with 38 per cent accuracy) to recognize; its word
frequency is 24. The frequency eﬀect is quite robust in the process of word recognition.
Frequency is only one of many lexical characteristics that can aﬀect lexical access. The
number of derivations a word has (word family size) can also aﬀect speed of processing.
Another is the number of orthographic neighbors a word has. An orthographic neighbor is any
word diﬀering by a single letter from the target word, respecting length and letter position
(Coltheart et al. 1977). The ability to recognize a word can be aﬀected by the number of
neighbors it has. For example, based on the ELP database, the three-letter word ink has a
frequency of 5,593, whereas the three-letter word mad has a higher frequency of 17,811. Based
on frequency alone, we would assume that mad would be recognized faster than ink. However,
the word mad comes from a popular neighborhood (bad, sad, mat, map, etc.). Its orthographic
Lexis
573

neighbor count is 17, compared to ink’s three. Indeed, ink, on average, is recognized slightly
faster than mad, possibly due to the competition the word mad must overcome to be recog-
nized. Interested readers should consult the ELP database, which contains many other lexical
characteristics of words that may aﬀect processing.
Formulaic language
Formulaic language is now recognized as an important component of language learning and
use. Normal discourse, both written and spoken, contains large (but not yet fully determined)
percentages of formulaic language. Erman and Warren (2000) calculated that 52–58 per cent
of the L1 English language they analyzed was formulaic, and Foster (2001) came up with a
ﬁgure of 32 per cent using diﬀerent procedures and criteria. If much discourse is made up
of formulaic language, then this implies that proﬁcient language users know a large number of
formulaic expressions. Pawley and Syder (1983: 213) suggest that the number of ‘sentence-
length expressions familiar to the ordinary, mature English speaker probably amounts, at least,
to several hundreds of thousands’. Jackendoﬀ(1995) concludes from a small corpus study of
spoken language in a TV quiz show that people may know at least as many formulaic
sequences as single words. Mel’cuk (1995: 169) believes that phrasemes are more numerous
than words by a ratio of at least 10 to 1.
Formulaic language is not a homogeneous phenomenon, but is rather quite varied. For-
mulaic sequences can be long (You can lead a horse to water, but you can’t make him drink) or
short (Oh no!), or anything in between. They are commonly used for diﬀerent purposes. They
can be used to express a message or idea (The early bird gets the worm = do not procrastinate),
functions ([I’m] just looking [thanks] = declining an oﬀer of assistance from a shopkeeper),
social solidarity, and to transact speciﬁc information in a precise and understandable way.
They realize many other purposes as well, as formulaic sequences can be used for most things
society requires of communication through language. These sequences can be totally ﬁxed
(Ladies and gentlemen) or have a number of ‘slots’ which can be ﬁlled with appropriate words
or strings of words ([someone/thing, usually with authority] made it plain that [something as
yet unrealized was intended or desired]). Formulaic language also includes the multitude of
collocations which exist in language (blue sky, hard work).
This variety of formulaic language realizes a number of diﬀerent communicative purposes in
language use, including:
Functional use: There are recurring situations in the social world that require language to
deal with them. These are often described as functions, and include such speech acts as apolo-
gizing, making requests, giving directions, and complaining. These functions typically have
conventionalized language attached to them, such as I’m (very) sorry to hear about – to express
sympathy and I’d be happy/glad to – to comply with a request (Nattinger and DeCarrico
1992). Because members of a speech community know these expressions, they serve a quick and
reliable way to achieve the related speech act.
Social interaction (phatic communion): People commonly engage in ‘light’ conversation for
pleasure or to pass the time of day, where the purpose is not really information exchange or to
get someone to do something. Rather, the purpose is social solidarity, and people rely on non-
threatening phrases to keep the conversation ﬂowing, including comments about the weather
(Nice weather today; Cold isn’t it), agreeing with your interlocutor (Oh, I see what you mean;
OK, I’ve got it), providing backchannels and positive feedback to another speaker (Did you
really? How interesting). Research has shown that such phrases are a key element of informal
spoken discourse (McCarthy and Carter 1997).
Joe Barcroft, Gretchen Sunderman and Norbert Schmitt
574

Discourse organization: Formulaic phrases are a common way to signpost the organization
of both written (in other words, in conclusion) and spoken discourse (on the other hand, as I
was saying).
Precise information transfer (technical vocabulary): These are words which have a single
and precise meaning in a particular ﬁeld (scalpel is a speciﬁc type of knife used in medicine).
But this phenomenon is not restricted to individual words. Indeed, ﬁelds often have phrase-
ology to transact information in a way which minimizes any possible misunderstanding. For
example, in aviation language, the phrase Taxi into position and hold clearly and concisely
conveys the instructions to move onto the runway and prepare for departure, but to wait for
ﬁnal clearance for takeoﬀ.
The use of formulaic language also helps speakers be ﬂuent. It is a well-known tenet of
psychology that people have cognitive limitations in how quickly they can process language.
However, Pawley and Syder (1983) suggested that these limitations can be compensated for by
using formulaic language, which is already memorized and stored as single wholes and are, as
such, instantly available for use without the cognitive load of having to assemble them on-line
as one speaks. There is now converging evidence that formulaic language is indeed processed
more quickly than non-formulaic language, at least by native-speakers (Underwood et al.
2004; Jiang and Nekrasova 2007; Schmitt 2008).
Regional variation in words and lexical phrases
Examples of regional variation at the lexical level abound in languages all over the world.
Sometimes the variants may be similar forms, and the number of variants may be limited. In
Spanish, for example, ‘tomato’ is jitomate in Mexican Spanish and tomate in most of the rest
of the Spanish-speaking world. These two variants are clearly related in form. Other variants
may have completely distinct forms. ‘Popcorn’ in Spanish might be expressed as palomitas
(de maíz) (Spain, Mexico), cabritas (de maíz) (Chile), canguil (Ecuador), or cancha (Peru).
Regional lexical variation is also extensive across numerous semantic ﬁelds. For example, the
concept of ‘cool’ (meaning good or interesting in English) might translate as padre in Mexico,
guay in Spain, chévere in Colombia or Ecuador, bacán in Perú, and so forth. Lexical phrases
also have variants. For example, an idiomatic expression such as estoy en el quinto cielo
(literally ‘I am in the ﬁfth heaven’) might be used to express ‘I’m in seventh heaven’ in Spain
but not in Mexico.
In English, regional lexical variants are also widespread. Some fairly well-known British/
American English lexical variants include football/soccer, lorry/truck, lift/elevator, ﬂat/apartment
and biscuit/cookie, but we also ﬁnd other perhaps less well-known variants, such as bonnet/
(car) hood, paraﬃn/kerosene, silencer/muﬄer, dummy/paciﬁer and ﬂyover/overpass. Variants on
multiword phrases are not uncommon either: to faﬀaround/to goof oﬀ; to be chuﬀed/to be psyched;
and to put your skates on/to get a move on. Of course, regional English lexical variants are in
not limited to British/American varieties either. To provide one example, consider the British/
South African/American English variants trainers or pumps/takkies/sneakers or tennis shoes.
Critical discussion of selected current issues
In this section we opt to provide an overview of the development of theory and research and
focus on two of the many lines of research related to lexis: second language (L2) vocabulary
and instruction and the bilingual mental lexicon. We do so based on space limitations and
acknowledge that there are numerous other topics related to lexis that we could have selected.
Lexis
575

L2 vocabulary learning and instruction
Vocabulary learning and vocabulary knowledge are central to both L1 and L2 language
learning. Words are the building blocks of language, and linguists increasingly point to the
inextricable role of words and lexical phrases in the projection and construction of syntax.
Vocabulary is also indispensable when it comes to successful communication. Compared to the
impact of accented speech or minor syntactic violations (e.g. subject-verb or gender agree-
ment), the impact of lexical errors can be a much greater impediment to successful commu-
nication. Consider, as one example, an L2 speaker who wishes to say, in Italian, Io voglio i
gamberetti (‘I want the shrimp’.) With a syntactic error like Io volere i gamberetti, literally
meaning ‘I to want the shrimp’ (and sounding something like ‘Me want shrimp’ in Italian), the
speaker most likely would receive their desired dish. With a lexical error, however, such as Io
voglio le gallete (‘I want the crackers’), the speaker is likely to receive something else.
Vocabulary size and amount of comprehension
One area of L2 vocabulary research has focused on vocabulary size and the relationship
between vocabulary size and varying degrees of text comprehension or spoken discourse
comprehension. For text comprehension, whereas Laufer (1989) found that knowing only 95
per cent of words in an English text was suﬃcient to understand the text adequately, more
recently, Hu and Nation (2000) found the ﬁgure to be a bit higher, with 98 per cent of the
words needing to be known. For spoken discourse, Bonk (2000) found no speciﬁc threshold
was needed for successful listening comprehension, but after including running words and
making other considerations, Schmitt (2008) calculated a ﬁgure of 95 per cent for adequate
listening comprehension in light of the results reported by Bonk.
‘Receptive versus productive’ vocabulary knowledge and methods of testing
Somewhat related to the issue of vocabulary size is the question of how one chooses to test
vocabulary. When testing via translation, should one provide the learners with the L1 word
and ask him or her to produce the L2 word, or vice versa? Traditionally, a distinction has been
made between ‘receptive’ and ‘productive’ vocabulary knowledge in the study of L2 vocabu-
lary, the former being much larger than the latter. Some have maintained that the receptive/
productive distinction may correspond to diﬀerent systems. Melka (1997: 101–2), however,
considered the possibility of a single lexical store being accessed in diﬀerent ways: ‘It is cer-
tainly not clear whether [reception] and [production] ought be considered as two separate
systems dependent on each other, or rather as one unique system (one lexical store) used in
two diﬀerent ways, receptively or productively.’
If the ‘receptive-productive’ distinction concerns a single store being accessed in diﬀerent
ways, this has important implications for L2 vocabulary testing. Performance on a more
receptive vocabulary test may be higher simply because the testee is provided with a greater
amount of the target word form and, in essence, has less to ‘ﬁll in’ regarding the form of
the word in question. Imagine, for example, that the word for ‘circle’ in some (imaginary)
L2 is glinalor but the learner has retained only gl-n–. An L1-to-L2 translation test would
demonstrate that the learner has not reached complete knowledge of the target word form
whereas a more receptively oriented test, such as L2-to-L1 translation, would provide the
entire word form for the learner, making it easier to ‘ﬁll in’ what is missing in word form
knowledge.
Joe Barcroft, Gretchen Sunderman and Norbert Schmitt
576

Word-based determinants of learnability
Studies on word-based determinants of learnability have isolated speciﬁc properties of L2
words that make them more or less diﬃcult to learn. Ellis and Beaton (1995), for example,
found the learnability of L2 words to be aﬀected by word-based factors such as word length
and degree of phonological similarity between L1 and L2 words. Longer words and L2 words
that were less phonologically similar to L1 words were more diﬃcult. In another study, Laufer
(1997) demonstrated that ‘deceptive transparency’ can make it more diﬃcult to learn L2
words. Deceptive transparency refers to when a learner incorrectly thinks s/he knows the
meaning of an expression because they know words with in it, such as if a learner of L2
English were to understand the expression ‘break the ice’ in its literal sense instead of in its
idiomatic sense.
Incidental and intentional vocabulary learning
As attention to the importance of vocabulary increased within the ﬁeld of SLA, one issue and
area of debate that began to emerge during the 1980s and 1990s was that of incidental versus
intentional vocabulary learning and its pedagogical counterpart, indirect versus direct (expli-
cit) vocabulary instruction. Incidental vocabulary learning refers to learning new words from
context without intending to do so, such as when picking up new words during free reading or
during a conversation without intending to do so. Intentional vocabulary learning, on the other
hand, refers to situations in which learners actively and consciously try to learn new words,
such as when looking at word-picture pairs on a screen and attempting to learn them or
completing activities in a workbook in an eﬀort to learn a set of target L2 words.
Indirect vocabulary instruction refers to instructional activities designed to promote inci-
dental vocabulary learning, known as indirect vocabulary instruction, such as when an
instructor asks learners to read for meaning or complete an information-exchange task with-
out asking the learners to attempt to learn new words provided in the text or materials for the
task. Direct vocabulary instruction refers to activities designed to teach new vocabulary expli-
citly, such as using a picture ﬁle, a word-deﬁnition matching task, or picture-labeling task to
teach learners new words. Note also that the incidental-intentional distinction should not be
viewed as a dichotomous concept only, nor should the indirect-direct distinction in instruction
(Haynes 1998, as cited in Wesche and Paribakht 1999).
On the whole, studies have indicated relatively low amounts of new word gain or ‘pick up’
of new words in contexts of purely incidental L2 vocabulary learning (see, for example, Horst
et al. 1998). However, other studies, such as that of Horst (2005) in which learners picked up
over half of the target words after extensive reading, have demonstrated larger gains. Increas-
ing the number of exposures to target words in a text is one way of increasing the amount of
word gain. Rott (1999) demonstrated that six exposures led to improved learning as compared
to four or two exposures. Other studies have used higher numbers of repetitions but have failed
to ensure complete (incidental) learning of target words. Waring and Takaki (2003), for
example, found that eight exposures led to only a 50 per cent chance of the learners being able
to accurately match the word to its meaning a few months later.
Other studies (e.g. Hulstijn 1992) have demonstrated that L2 vocabulary learning during
reading improves if learners are simply instructed to attempt to learn target words and told
that they will be tested on them, pointing to the strong impact of maintaining an intentional
orientation toward L2 vocabulary learning. Other research on intentional L2 vocabulary
learning has isolated variables that lead to improved vocabulary learning in this context.
Lexis
577

Prince (1996) compared translation-based L2 vocabulary learning with presenting L2 vocabu-
lary in the context of sentences and found translation-based learning to be more eﬀective.
Allowing learners opportunities to attempt to retrieve target words on their own also has been
found to increase learning (e.g. Royer 1973). Also, varying talker, speaking style, and speaking
rate during intentional L2 vocabulary learning has been found to substantially improve intentional
L2 vocabulary learning (Barcroft and Sommers 2005; Sommers and Barcroft 2007).
Vocabulary attrition
Vocabulary acquisition is not a tidy linear aﬀair, with only incremental advancement and no
backsliding. All teachers recognize that learners forget material as well. This forgetting (attrition)
is a natural fact of learning. We should view partial vocabulary knowledge as being in a state of
ﬂux, with both learning and forgetting occurring until the word is mastered and ‘ﬁxed’ in memory.
For example, Schmitt (1998) found that advanced L2 university students improved their knowl-
edge of the meaning senses of target words about 2.5 times more than that knowledge was
forgotten (over the course of one year), but this means there was some backsliding as well.
Of course attrition can also occur even if vocabulary is relatively well known, such as when
one does not use a second language for a long time, or one stops a course of language study.
Studies into attrition have produced mixed results, largely due to the use of diﬀerent methods
of measuring vocabulary retention (e.g. Bahrick 1984; Weltens and Grendel 1993; Hansen
et al. 2002). In general though, lexical knowledge seems to be more prone to attrition than
other linguistic aspects, such as phonology or grammar. This is logical because vocabulary is
made up of individual units rather than a series of rules, although we have seen that lexis is
much more patterned than previously thought. It appears that receptive knowledge does not
attrite dramatically, and when it does, it is usually peripheral words, such as low-frequency
noncognates, which are aﬀected (Weltens and Grendel 1993). On the other hand, productive
mastery is more likely to be lost (Cohen 1989; Olshtain 1989), although see Schmitt (1998) for
contrary results. There is some evidence that the rate of attrition is connected to proﬁciency
level, with learners with larger vocabularies retaining more residual knowledge of their voca-
bulary (Hansen et al. 2002). Weltens et al. (1989) found that most of the attrition for the
participants in their study occurred within the ﬁrst two years and then leveled oﬀ. Overall,
once vocabulary is learned, it does not seem to ever completely disappear, as Bahrick (1984)
found residual vocabulary knowledge in his informants even after ﬁfty years of language
disuse. It is therefore probably best to think of attrition in terms of loss of lexical access, rather
than in terms of a complete elimination of lexical knowledge.
The developing bilingual mental lexicon
Second language vocabulary acquisition is a complicated and often error-ridden process. It is
no surprise that second language learners make frequent lexical errors. In fact, most every
language learner can likely recall some type of humorous error that has happened. For exam-
ple, in Spanish the false cognate embarazado/a (meaning ‘pregnant’) sometimes gets sub-
stituted for avergonzado/a (meaning ‘embarrassed’), resulting in, as one could imagine, quite
amusing sentences. Why do errors like this happen? More importantly, what do these errors
tell us about the underlying architecture of the developing bilingual lexicon?
To answer these questions, we turn to one of the most well-known developmental models of
the lexicon, the Revised Hierarchical Model (RHM: Kroll and Stewart 1994). This model
directly addresses the connections between lexical and conceptual links and how they change
Joe Barcroft, Gretchen Sunderman and Norbert Schmitt
578

as an L2 learner becomes more proﬁcient in the L2. We limit ourselves to discussing this one
model and this one speciﬁc claim of the model in particular because its applications to voca-
bulary learning are salient. In the section below, we ﬁrst present and describe the RHM. We
then provide an illustrative example of an empirical test of the model that uses a translation
recognition task, a psycholinguistic task that has recently been quite popular in investigating
the developmental claims of the RHM.
The revised hierarchical model
One of the central claims of the RHM is that second language learners, in beginning stages of
language learning, rely on an L1 translation strategy. In other words, when L2 learners are
trying to link a new lexical form to its corresponding concept, they will initially use the L1
lexical link to access the concept. This translation strategy is depicted in the model below (see
Figure 40.1). First, the model contains two separate lexicons for L1 and L2 words and one
common conceptual store.
The L1 lexicon is represented as larger and containing more words than the L2 lexicon.
Second, the arrows in the model represent the lexical and conceptual links assumed to be
active in bilingual memory. There are both lexical, word-to-word links, and conceptual, word-
to-concept links, in this model. Third, the relative strength of these links, as represented by the
thickness of the arrows, is assumed to be a function of language dominance. For a beginning
learner, the associations between L1 words and concepts will be very strong, whereas the
associations between L2 words and concepts will be weaker. Similarly, the model suggests that
lexical associations from L2 to L1 will be strong, whereas the L1 to L2 lexical links will be
Figure 40.1 Revised hierarchical model
Source: Adapted from Kroll and Stewart 1994.
Lexis
579

weaker. Last, what is striking about this model is that it captures the asymmetry in the inter-
language connections between the lexical representation and the conceptual information in
the developing lexicon. As proﬁciency in the L2 increases, the interlanguage connections
change and shift from lexical processing to semantic processing. In other words, L2 learners
move away from the L1 translation strategy.
One study that is directly related to the idea that L2 learners move away from a trans-
lation strategy with increasing skill in the L2 is Talamas et al. (1999). In their study, Talamas
et al. described evidence from the classroom setting in which learners in a basic level lan-
guage class made errors based on lexical form relations. For example, beginning Spanish
learners would confuse words like mujer (meaning woman) for mejor (meaning best), or cuida
(meaning to take care of) with ciudad (meaning city). Learners, in what they describe as a
more enriched or advanced classroom setting, did not seem to make those types of errors,
and instead made more semantic-based errors. Using this idea that less proﬁcient learners
were tricked more by form-related similarities, Talamas et al. created experimental stimuli
that would reﬂect the nature of L2 vocabulary errors to test this developmental prediction of
the RHM.
Talamas et al. (1999) compared the performance of more and less proﬁcient bilinguals on a
translation recognition task (de Groot 1992). In a translation recognition task, a word is pre-
sented brieﬂy on a computer screen in one of the participant’s two languages and is then fol-
lowed by a word in the other language. The task was to decide as quickly and as accurately as
possible whether the second word was the correct translation of the ﬁrst. In the Talamas et al.
study, the critical focus concerned those trials on which the two words were not translation
equivalents (i.e. the no trials). On half of the no trials, the two words were related by virtue of
word form similarity (e.g. man-hambre where hambre means hunger and looks like the correct
translation hombre) or meaning (e.g. man-mujer where mujer means woman). Thus, the experi-
mental stimuli reﬂected the types of errors that were occurring in the classroom. The logic of
the task was that if a learner had a diﬃcult time (i.e. took longer in terms of reaction time in
milliseconds or was more inaccurate) rejecting these tricky ‘no’ pairs compared to unrelated
‘no’ pairs, then the type of relationship (either form or meaning) was to blame.
Talamas et al. tested English-dominant individuals who diﬀered in their level of proﬁciency
in Spanish. They found that the two types of related trials produced diﬀerent results for the
more and less proﬁcient bilinguals. For less proﬁcient bilinguals, there was signiﬁcant inter-
ference for form-related pairs (man-hambre), but little eﬀect for semantically related pairs
(man-mujer). For more proﬁcient bilinguals, the pattern was reversed; form-related pairs pro-
duced inconsistent eﬀects in performance but semantically related pairs produced signiﬁcant
interference. The overall pattern of results mirrors the anecdotal classroom evidence and pro-
vides support for the hypothesis that early in second language learning, lexical form relations
between L2 and L1 provide the basis of interlanguage connection (see Sunderman and Kroll
2006 for additional evidence also using a translation recognition task).
Thus, the RHM provides valuable insights into answering why L2 learners make the types
of errors they do. Over the years, scholars have challenged aspects of the architecture and the
various claims of the RHM. For example, some have called into question the degree to which
the semantics are shared across languages (e.g. de Groot 1993; Pavlenko 1999). Others have
questioned whether the lexicons are integrated (e.g. Brysbaert 1998; van Heuven et al. 1998).
However, the RHM remains a valuable model for those interested in research on the under-
lying representations of form and meaning in L2 vocabulary acquisition. Readers interested in
learning more about additional claims and research on the RHM, as well as other models of
the bilingual lexicon, should consult Kroll and Sunderman 2003.
Joe Barcroft, Gretchen Sunderman and Norbert Schmitt
580

Chapter summary
This chapter highlighted key points in the history of linguistic research on lexis and clariﬁed
key concepts related to what words are, including the various formal and semantic properties
of words and the lexical characteristics of words such as word frequency and orthographic
neighborhoods. The chapter also emphasized and exempliﬁed the important role of formulaic
language in language learning and language use and the abundant amount of regional varia-
tion that exists in language at the lexical level. In light of the large number of research areas
related to lexis, we selected two areas of research, L2 vocabulary learning and the bilingual
mental lexicon, as our foci for the ﬁnal two sections of the chapter. Among the issues discussed
in these sections were the incidental-intentional distinction in L2 vocabulary learning and the
development of concept mediation over time within the bilingual mental lexicon.
Related topics
cognitive linguistics; corpus linguistics; generative grammar
Further reading
Goulden, R., Nation, P. and Read, J. (1990) ‘How large can a receptive vocabulary be?’, Applied
Linguistics 11(4): 341–63. (An early study into the vocabulary size of English native speakers.)
Kroll, J. F. and Sunderman, G. (2003) ‘Cognitive processes in second language learners and bilinguals:
the development of lexical and conceptual representations’, in C. J. Doughty and M. H. Long (eds)
The Handbook of Second Language Acquisition, Cambridge, MA: Blackwell. (This chapter pre-
sents a comprehensive overview of empirical research on the bilingual lexicon.)
Laufer, B. (1997) ‘What’s in a word that makes it hard or easy? Intralexicalfactors aﬀecting the
diﬃculty of vocabulary acquisition’, in N. Schmitt and M. McCarthy (eds) Vocabulary: Descrip-
tion, Acquisition, and Pedagogy, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. (An overview of some
of the word properties which make lexical items relatively easier or more diﬃcult to learn.)
Nation, I. S. P. (2006) ‘How large a vocabulary is needed for reading and listening?’, Canadian
Modern Language Review 63(1): 59–82. (A key article outlining current thinking on the vocabulary
size requirements for using English.)
Read, J. (2000) Assessing Vocabulary, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. (The standard book
on vocabulary measurement.)
Wray, A. (2002) Formulaic Language and the Lexicon, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
(Still the most comprehensive overview of formulaic language.)
References
Aristotle (350 BCE) Categories, E. M. Edghill (trans.) Available at: http://classics.mit.edu/Aristotle/
categories.html
Bahrick, H. P. (1984) ‘Fifty years of language attrition: implications for programmatic research’,
Modern Language Journal 68: 105–18.
Balota, D. A., Yap, M. J., Cortese, M. J., Hutchison, K. A., Kessler, B., Loftis, B., Neely, J. H.,
Nelson, D. L., Simpson, G. B. and Treiman, R. (2007) ‘The English lexicon project’, Behavior
Research Methods 39: 445–59.
Barcroft, J. and Sommers, M. S. (2005) ‘Eﬀects of acoustic variability on second language vocabu-
lary learning’, Studies in Second Language Acquisition 27: 387–414.
Bonk, W. (2000) ‘Second language lexical knowledge and listening comprehension’, International
Journal of Listening 14: 14–31.
Brysbaert, M. (1998) ‘Word recognition in bilinguals: evidence against the existence of two separate
lexicons’, Psychologica Belgica 38: 163–75.
Chomsky, N. (1986) Knowledge of Language: Its Nature, Origin and Use, New York: Praeger.
Lexis
581

Cohen, A. D. (1989) ‘Attrition in the productive lexicon of two Portuguese third language speakers’,
Studies in Second Language Acquisition 11: 135–49.
Coltheart, M., Davelaar, E., Jonasson, J. T. and Besner, D. (1977) ‘Access to the internal lexicon’, in
S. Dornic (ed.) Attention and Performance VI, New York: Academic Press.
de Groot, A. M. B. (1992) ‘Determinants of word translation’, Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory, and Cognition 18: 1001–18.
——(1993) ‘Word-type eﬀects in bilingual processing tasks: support for a mixed-representational
system’ in R. Schreuder and B. Weltens (eds.) The Bilingual Lexicon, Vol. 6: Studies in Bilingu-
alism, Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Ellis, N. and Beaton, A. (1995) ‘Psycholinguistic determinants of foreign language vocabulary
learning’, in B. Harley (ed.) Lexical Issues in Language Learning, Ann Arbor, MI: John Benjamins.
Erman, B. and Warren, B. (2000) ‘The idiom principle and the open choice principle’, Text 20(1):
29–62.
Foster, P. (2001) ‘Rules and routines: a consideration of their role in the task-based language pro-
duction of native and non-native speakers’, in M. Bygate, P. Skehan and M. Swain (eds)
Researching Pedagogic Tasks: Second Language Learning, Teaching, and Testing, Harlow:
Longman.
Gennette, G. (1979) Narrative Discourse: An Essay in Method, J. E. Lewin (trans.), Ithaca, NY:
Cornell University Press.
Hansen, L., Umeda, Y. and McKinney, M. (2002) ‘Savings in the relearning of second language
vocabulary: the eﬀects of time and proﬁciency’, Language Learning 52: 653–78.
Horst, M. (2005) ‘Learning L2 vocabulary through extensive reading: a measurement study’,
Canadian Modern Language Review 61: 355–82.
Horst, M., Cobb, T. and Meara, P. (1998) ‘Beyond clockwork orange: acquiring second language
vocabulary through reading’, Reading in a Foreign Language 11(2): 207–23.
Hu, M. and Nation, I. S. P. (2000) ‘Vocabulary density and reading comprehension’, Reading in a
Foreign Language 23: 403–30.
Hulstijn, J. (1992) ‘Retention of inferred and given word meanings: experiments in incidental learning’,
in P. J. L. Arnaud and H. Be’joint (eds) Vocabulary and Applied Linguistics, London: Macmillan.
Jackendoﬀ, R. (1995) ‘The boundaries of the lexicon’, in M. Everaert, E.- van der Linden,
A. Schenk and R. Schreuder (eds) Idioms: Structural and Psychological Perspectives, Hillsdale,
NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Jiang, N. and Nekrasova, T. M. (2007) ‘The processing of formulaic sequences by second language
speakers’, Modern Language Journal 91(3): 433–45.
Kroll, J. F. and Stewart, E. (1994) ‘Category interference in translation and picture naming: evi-
dence for asymmetric connections between bilingual memory representations’, Journal of
Memory and Language 33: 149–74.
Kroll, J. F. and Sunderman, G. (2003) ‘Cognitive processes in second language learners and bilin-
guals: the development of lexical and conceptual representations’, in C. J. Doughty and
M. H. Long (eds) The Handbook of Second Language Acquisition, Cambridge, MA: Blackwell.
Laufer, B. (1989) ‘What percentage of text-lexis is essential for comprehension?’, in C. Lauren and
M. Nordman (eds) Special Language: From Humans to Thinking Machines, Clevedon: Multi-
lingual Matters.
——(1997) ‘The lexical plight in second language reading: words you don’t know, words you think
you know, and words you can’t guess’, in J. Coady and T. Huckin (eds) Second Language Voca-
bulary Acquisition, Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
McCarthy, M. and Carter, R. (1997) ‘Written and spoken vocabulary’, in N. Schmitt and
M. McCarthy (eds) Vocabulary: Description, Acquisition, and Pedagogy, Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Mel’cuk, I. A. (1995) ‘Phrasemes in language and phraseology in linguistics’, in M. Everaert,
E.-J. van der Linden, A. Schenk and R. Schreuder (eds) Idioms: Structural and Psychological
Perspectives, Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Melka, F. (1997) ‘Receptive vs. productive aspects of vocabulary’, in N. Schmitt and M. McCarthy
(eds) Vocabulary: Description, Acquisition, and Pedagogy, Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.
Nattinger, J. R. and DeCarrico, J. S. (1992) Lexical Phrases and Language Teaching, Oxford:
Oxford University Press.
Joe Barcroft, Gretchen Sunderman and Norbert Schmitt
582

Olshtain, E. (1989) ‘Is second language attrition the reversal of second language acquisition?’,
Studies in Second Language Acquisition 11: 151–65.
Pavlenko, A. (1999) ‘New approaches to concepts in bilingual memory’, Bilingualism: Language and
Cognition 2: 209–30.
Pawley, A. and Syder, F. H. (1983) ‘Two puzzles for linguistic theory: nativelike selection and nati-
velike ﬂuency’, in J. C. Richards and R. W. Schmidt (eds) Language and Communication,
London: Longman.
Prince, P. (1996) ‘Second language vocabulary learning: the role of context versus translations as a
function of proﬁciency’, The Modern Language Journal 80: 478–93.
Rott, S. (1999) ‘The eﬀect of exposure frequency on intermediate second language learners’ incidental
vocabulary acquisition through reading’, Studies in Second Language Acquisition 21(1): 589–619.
Royer, J. M. (1973) ‘Memory eﬀects for test-like events during acquisition of foreign language
vocabulary’, Psychological Reports 32: 195–8.
de Saussure, F. (1916) Course in General Linguistics, R. Harris (trans.), Peru, IL: Open Court
Publishing.
Schmitt, N. (1998) ‘Tracking the incidental acquisition of second language vocabulary: a longitudinal
study’, Language Learning 48: 281–317.
——(2008) ‘Instructed second language vocabulary learning’, Language Teaching Research 12(3):
329–63.
Sommers, M. and Barcroft, J. (2007) ‘An integrated account of the eﬀects of acoustic variability in
L1 and L2: evidence from amplitude, fundamental frequency, and speaking rate variability’,
Applied Psycholinguistics 28(2): 231–49.
Sonkowsky, R. P. (1959) ‘An aspect of delivery in ancient rhetorical theory’, Transactions and Pro-
ceedings of the American Philological Association 90: 256–74.
Sunderman, G. and Kroll, J. F. (2006) ‘First language activation during second language ﬁrst lan-
guage activation during second language lexical processing: an investigation of lexical form,
meaning, and grammatical class’, Studies in Second Language Acquisition 28: 387–422.
Talamas, A., Kroll, J. F. and Dufour, R. (1999) ‘Form related errors in second language learning: a
preliminary stage in the acquisition of L2 vocabulary’, Bilingualism: Language and Cognition 2:
45–58.
Underwood, G., Schmitt, N. and Galpin, A. (2004) ‘The eyes have it: an eye-movement study into
the processing of formulaic sequences’, in N. Schmitt (ed.) Formulaic Sequences, Amsterdam:
John Benjamins.
van Heuven, W. J. B., Dijkstra, T. and Grainger, J. (1998) ‘Orthographic neighborhood eﬀects in
bilingual word recognition’, Journal of Memory and Language 39: 458–83.
Waring, R. and Takaki, M. (2003) ‘At what rate do learners learn and retain new vocabulary from
reading a graded reader?’, Reading in a Foreign Language, 15: 130–63.
Weltens, B. and Grendel, M. (1993) ‘Attrition of vocabulary knowledge’, in R. Schreuder and
B. Weltens (eds) The Bilingual Lexicon, Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Weltens, B., van Els, T. J. M. and Schils, E. (1989) ‘The long-term retention of French by Dutch
students’, Studies in Second Language Acquisition 11: 205–16.
Wesche, M. and Paribakht, T. S. (1999) ‘Introduction’, Studies in Second Language Acquisition, 21:
175–80.
Zimmerman, C. (1997) ‘Historical trends in second language vocabulary instruction’, in J. Coady
and T. Huckin (eds) Second Language Vocabulary Acquisition, Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Lexis
583

41
Phonetics and phonology
Helen Fraser
Introduction
Phonetics and phonology are among the branches of linguistics with least impact on applied
linguistics. This is unfortunate, as they have a great deal to oﬀer research and teaching in the
many applications that investigate the production, understanding or representation of speech,
especially second language teaching, which will be the focus of this chapter.
One reason for their lack of impact might be that they are often perceived as highly com-
plicated topics, dominated by theoretical issues of limited relevance to practical applications. It
is useful in this regard to invoke a distinction between ‘complicated’ and ‘complex’. A simple
system has few parts, related by a small enough number of rules as to be easily understood
by the average person. A complicated system is quantitatively diﬀerent, with many more
parts, related by more numerous, more inter-related rules. A complex system is qualitatively
diﬀerent, with larger, less clearly deﬁned parts, connected by a smaller number of general,
context-dependent principles (Ellis, this volume).
Working eﬀectively with either kind of system requires recognition of which kind it is.
However, since their products can seem superﬁcially similar, it is possible to confuse them,
with unfortunate results (Westley et al. 2006). The argument of this chapter is that speech is
a complex system, but most current theories of phonetics and phonology model it as a com-
plicated system. While this is appropriate for some applications, for others, a theoretical
framework which recognises the complex nature of speech is needed.
One problem is that understanding speech as a complex system means revising basic ideas
in ways that challenge not just existing academic theories, but apparently obvious facts about
speech. The intention here, however, is not to contradict existing ideas, but to place them in a
wider context, with the aim of encouraging cross-fertilisation between branches of theoretical
and applied research that have had too little contact in recent decades.
The chapter begins by reviewing some well-known observations, and equally well-known
misconceptions, about speech. It then provides a simple analogy as a basis for understanding
and comparing diﬀerent views about speech, and goes on to use the analogy in an interpretive
overview of the historical development of phonetics and phonology in relation to applied lin-
guistics. Discussion then turns to how the knowledge acquired by phonetics and phonology
584

can be framed in a way that allows fruitful, two-way interaction with various branches of
applied linguistics, especially sociocognitive theories of second language teaching.
Foundational observations about speech
It is useful to start by weaving together several pretheoretical observations about speech. First
is the extraordinary skill with which ordinary people use speech. Speech is a highly intricate,
continuous signal (Ladefoged 2005). Much more than just a linguistic message, it incorporates
interlocking systems of meaning conveying subtle distinctions of attitude, personal and social
identity, emotional and physical state, and more (Laver 1994). Despite this, it is produced and
perceived with great rapidity and accuracy, even in the face of severe distortion (Erard 2007).
The second, converse, observation is the extraordinary limitation on speech perception and
production. The skills just mentioned depend greatly on context, without which they are
severely reduced (Warren 1999). For example, a conversation that is perfectly comprehensible
to participants may be diﬃcult to understand when replayed from a decontextualised recording
(Fraser 2003, Fraser 2010b). The third, related, observation is the extraordinary lack of insight
people have into the nature of speech. Though in interpreting speech they clearly take note of
many details, their ability to identify these details accurately is extremely poor (Fraser 2009b).
This pattern, of high-level skill within a meaningful context, coupled with limited ability to
accurately describe the basis of that skill, is typical of complex cognitive systems (Frith 2008;
Macdonald 2008). One eﬀect is that many tasks people assume will be easy, turn out to be
much more diﬃcult than expected. For example, students generally ﬁnd the idea of transcrib-
ing speech with phoneme symbols easy to grasp, and may be keen to learn a representation of
speech that avoids the diﬃculties of spelling. Actually using such as system, however, is sur-
prisingly hard (Scarborough et al. 1998). It is interesting to consider the response to this dif-
ﬁculty. Many attribute it to a failing on their own part: ‘I’m hopeless at phonetics.’ Only rarely
is the question raised: ‘Why would something so hard be expected to be easy?’ Answering this
question points to a widespread misconception about the nature of speech.
The fundamental misconception about speech
Even those who know no theories of phonetics and phonology have an informal theory about
speech: that, despite some obvious irregularities, such as ‘silent-k’ in knee, speech consists of a
sequence of discrete sounds, much like the letters in a printed text. This informal theory is
incorrect – a product of literacy education that teaches that each letter represents a ‘sound’,
and words are formed by ‘sounding out’ letters. Such teaching is a necessary step in literacy
acquisition (Byrne 1998), but it is not how reading actually works. Indeed, to continue the
‘sounding out’ process beyond the earliest stages is to have a serious reading disability. Skilled
literacy depends on contextualised, meaning-based processing (Just and Carpenter 1987).
The problem is that, even after it is understood that reading is not really ‘sounding out’,
there remains the residual sense that speech itself is a sequence of ‘sounds’. This inaccurate
belief can be called a ‘literacy bias’, a bias towards interpreting the continuous ﬂow of speech
as a sequence of sounds equivalent to those represented in one’s writing system. This bias is
deeply ingrained, and rarely challenged unless formal study of linguistics is undertaken.
The reason phonemic transcription is hard is because phonemes are not, as the literacy bias
would have it, objective bits of speech, but products of abstract theoretical analysis, open to
debate. Even when a set of symbols is agreed, choosing the right symbols in particular cases
raises many further questions (Wells 2003). It is natural, in teaching applied linguistics, to
Phonetics and phonology
585

simplify for students by choosing an appropriate system and providing consistent answers to
such questions. Unfortunately, glossing over the complexity can give those who learn phonemes
the impression they have overcome the literacy bias, when really they have only replaced a
simplistic ‘spelling bias’ with a more sophisticated ‘phoneme bias’ – the belief that speech is a
sequence not of letters but of phonemes.
The phoneme bias, too, is incorrect, as shown by the false expectations it gives rise to. For
example, it suggests using phoneme-based pronunciation guides to help poor spellers. These
are certainly useful in particular contexts, but they are hard even for good spellers to interpret,
and harder still for poor spellers (Fraser 1997).
More importantly, the phoneme bias encourages teaching second language pronunciation
by teaching phonemes, an approach known to have many limitations. Before considering these
limitations, however, it is necessary to fully understand the literacy bias, too often glossed over
in both theory and practice.
The nature of speech
The problem with the literacy bias is that it makes it hard to appreciate that speech is really a
continuous stream of sound. At ﬁrst it can seem strange that something appearing so clearly to
be a sequence of discrete units is really continuous, but actually it is quite common. The
rainbow oﬀers a simple example. English speakers think of it as a sequence of seven discrete
colours. In reality, however, it is a continuous gradation of colour. This can be easily pointed
out by observing that each basic colour actually covers a range of colour variants, which
merge into a continuum. It is the same with speech, though it is much harder to notice the
variants in speech. Few English speakers, for example, notice that the phoneme /s/ has quite
diﬀerent variants in the words sue and sea. A phoneme is not ‘a sound’ but a category of
sounds – just as blue is not ‘a colour’ but a category of colours (Schmid and Ungerer, this
volume). Using a computer speech editor, it is easy to demonstrate that phonemes in speech
have internal variation and indistinct boundaries, making a continuous ﬂow (Shockey 2003;
Fraser 2004).
Both colour and speech, then, can be viewed on several distinct levels of analysis: the con-
tinuous ﬂow of reality, basic categories, category variants, and others. This gives an easy way
to understand the distinction between phonetics and phonology: phonetics aims to study what
speech is ‘really like’, while phonology studies how people ‘think about’ speech, often viewed
in terms of systems of mental representations, though as we will see, this view has its limitations.
There is a crucial diﬀerence between speech and colour, however: with speech, people have
very limited awareness of levels other than the basic categories. We will return to consider the
reason for this, but for now the analogy can highlight its practical implications. Recognition
that the rainbow is really a continuous gradation of colour opens the possibility there could be
other ways of dividing it into basic colours – and indeed diﬀerent cultures do divide the colour
spectrum into diﬀerent sets of colours (Hardin and Maﬃ1997). This means the translation of
terms like ‘green’ and ‘blue’ can refer to quite diﬀerent colours in diﬀerent languages, creating
problems for second language learners.
It is the same with speech. Of course it is true that, unlike the rainbow, whose reality
remains the same for all cultures, the phonetic reality of speech is diﬀerent in each language.
More important, however, is the fact that languages provide diﬀerent ways for their speakers
to divide the continuous ﬂow of sound into ‘basic sounds’. This is why people hear a foreign
language, not in terms of its diﬀerent phonetic reality, but in terms of the basic sounds of their
own language – a well-known phenomenon known as perceptual assimilation (Bohn and
Helen Fraser
586

Munro 2007). The key problem for second language learners, then, is similar for colours and
speech: a problem of recategorisation. However, in the case of speech, the problem is much
greater. Due to the lack of awareness just discussed, teaching second language pronunciation is
like teaching colours would be if learners were so strongly focused on their own basic colours,
they could barely notice other levels. Clearly, the ﬁrst step would be for the teacher to help
learners gain awareness of relevant variants.
In such a situation it would clearly be a major problem if teachers themselves were unaware
of the other levels. That is why it is so essential for teachers to know enough phonetics and
phonology to understand the eﬀect of the literacy bias on themselves and their students, and
recognise the task of second language acquisition for what it is. Unfortunately, many do not.
To see why, it is useful to brieﬂy review some relevant aspects the history of phonetics and
phonology.
A brief interpretive history of phonetics and phonology
The scientiﬁc study of speech goes back many centuries (Asher and Henderson 1981), but
perhaps its most important milestone is development of the concept of phoneme.
Around the turn of the twentieth century, though a great deal of knowledge had been
accumulated, especially about the articulation of speech sounds and the sound systems of
Indo-European languages, various problems of analysis had arisen for which, interestingly,
several scholars converged upon a similar solution (Anderson 1985). This exploited the notion
of contrast, now very familiar in the study of semantics. It is well known that the meaning of a
word (its ‘signiﬁed’) cannot be deﬁned purely in terms of its physical reality, but requires
reference to the system of other meanings with which it contrasts (Saussure [1916] 1983). In
just the same way the sound of a word (its ‘signiﬁer’) cannot be deﬁned purely in terms of
phonetic reality, but requires reference to the system of other signiﬁers with which it contrasts.
Thus, to deﬁne the signiﬁer of English sue, it is not enough just to describe the sound. It
is necessary to understand the system of contrasts that distinguishes the large category of
sounds that count as sue from the large category of similar sounds that count as other words.
This is the basis of the deﬁnition of ‘phoneme’: a unit of sound serving to contrast word
meanings in a particular language. It is important to note that the relevant contrasts are
between whole signiﬁers, the carriers of word meanings, which contrast in ‘minimal pairs’.
However, it is hard to talk about the sound of whole signiﬁers. Early phonologists naturally
and unarguedly did so in terms of units of sound similar in size to the letters of their writing
system, already well established as the units of phonetic analysis. Of course, this was no sim-
plistic spelling bias. Saussure and others railed against the inaccurate equation of phonemes
and letters. Nevertheless, it is important to recognise that, crucial and lastingly important as
the deﬁnition of the phoneme is, its roots lie in the literacy bias (Linell 1988).
The phoneme idea was soon put to use in a practical task new to linguistics, when Sapir,
Whorf and other anthropologists undertook the analysis of previously undescribed languages
(Sapir 1949; Carroll 1956). To discover their phonemes, it was necessary not just to describe
their sounds, but to investigate the system of minimal pairs in each language. It was found
that, in any language, every phoneme has a range of variants (‘allophones’), which, though
clearly evident to analysts, were unnoticed by native speakers. The key to providing a writing
system was to represent each phoneme with a single letter, ignoring allophonic variation,
which only confuses native speakers (Pike 1947).
In this work, linguists were strongly and explicitly committed to the role of meaning, culture
and context in the practical description of languages. Although they continued to use the
Phonetics and phonology
587

simple phoneme-allophone model, they did so ﬂexibly, in recognition that all sound systems
‘leak’: there is never a ﬁxed set of phonemes, each with its ﬁxed set of allophones, but always
exceptions and special cases. This can be understood readily by reference to the rainbow ana-
logy introduced earlier. While it is easy to see that basic colours have variants, trying to for-
mally associate every variant with a basic colour would create many uncertainties: is turquoise
blue or green? What about aqua? Maybe the boundary between green and blue should be
redeﬁned? Similar but far more complex questions arise in deﬁning the relationship between
phonemes and allophones. Debating them is useful for developing understanding of the system
as a whole, but it is clear they have no universal, factual answers. Insisting on a single ﬁxed
analysis would surely reduce, rather than increase, understanding.
This, in simple terms, is what happened with the advent of strict behaviourism, and its
refusal to admit ‘unobservable’ entities such as meaning into analysis (Anderson 1985). Flex-
ible phoneme-allophone analysis was formalised into a ‘method’, which insisted allophones be
identiﬁed ‘bottom up’, then organised into a system of phonemes by procedures which made
no reference to ‘higher’ level morphemes or words (Bloomﬁeld [1933] 1984). Unsurprisingly,
this did not work well, and though practical language analysis continued, a good deal of
attention was diverted to theoretical problems arising from the method. One was coarticulation,
specifying how allophones merge into a continuous stream of speech. Another was non-
biuniqueness, where a single allophone appears to associate with diﬀerent phonemes in diﬀerent
contexts. When viewed from the perspective of the colour analogy, the reason for these pro-
blems is clear: the variants are not separate ‘bits of reality’ put together into larger units, but
abstractions derived from analysis of the larger units.
However, this was not the solution oﬀered by Chomsky’s generative grammar, in the next
major theoretical shift, called the cognitive revolution, though a better term would be com-
putational revolution, since its major innovation was modelling the human mind as a com-
puter, as a means of explaining mental processes without recourse to unobservable entities like
concepts. Meaning was restored to respectability by formalising it on its own level of ‘mental
representation’. This allowed non-biuniqueness to be explained via the operation of ‘top-down’
processes in the subconscious computation of mental representations. Coarticulation was
handled by representing the phonetic level not as unitary allophones but as collections of
‘features’, able to inﬂuence one another through computational rules.
These innovations made the model very complicated, so much so that it predicted it
should be impossible for children to learn language in a mere ﬁve years. Since this clearly
conﬂicted with observable facts, it was necessary to postulate a ‘Language Acquisition
Device’, to jump-start the acquisition process. This had the eﬀect of directing a good deal of
attention to discovery of the Universal Grammar embodied in the LAD, and away from the
‘performance’ of real language. Generative theory also predicted it should be impossible for
adults to learn new phonological contrasts. Since this was less clearly in conﬂict with the facts,
it was accepted as the Critical Age Hypothesis, and little attention given to teaching.
Second language speech was studied mainly as a test-bed for theories of Universal Grammar
(Archibald 1995).
The computer model did, however, have the advantage of insisting assumptions and
hypotheses be explicitly tested, and by this means a great deal of new knowledge was generated.
Interestingly, the same two issues that had caused problems for behaviourist theory continued
to dominate generative theory. Developments in speech technology made it impossible to ignore
the fact that speech is genuinely continuous (Perkell and Klatt 1986), and psycholinguistic
evidence showed meaning inﬂuences phonological processing to a much greater degree, and in far
more complex ways, than ﬁrst recognised (Nusbaum and Goodman 1994; Field, this volume).
Helen Fraser
588

Incorporating ﬁndings such as these made the theory more and more complicated. The
original model was overhauled in various ‘post-generative’ developments (Gussenhoven and
Jacobs 2005), most of which require in-depth study of the history of the discipline for their
understanding. This of course is the situation from which this chapter started: highly compli-
cated theory dominated by self-referential issues of limited relevance to most branches of
applied linguistics.
Phonetics, phonology and applied linguistics
With the intention of highlighting issues to be taken up in later discussion, the previous section
has given the impression that twentieth-century speech research was wholly dominated by
abstract theoretical debate. This is certainly not the case. Many researchers used generative
theory ﬂexibly, as a practical framework for the scientiﬁc investigation of speech and speech
processing, and many advances in knowledge of the nature of speech and sound systems of
wide range of languages were achieved (Ladefoged and Maddieson 1996; Hardcastle et al.
2010), though it is fair to say that every area of research uncovered greater complexity than
predicted by the theory.
Some of these advances came through basic research applied to practical tasks, others in the
direct pursuit of practical applications. Topics include, but are by no means limited to: speech
pathology (Ball and Lowry 2001); the description of accents (Collins and Mees 2003); forensic
phonetics (Rose 2002); and social variation in speech (Jannedy and Hay 2006). In some cases,
knowledge gained from applied research has fed back fruitfully into theory (Pennington 2006)
with Laboratory Phonology providing a particularly valuable contribution (Pierrehumbert et al.
1993). There was also considerable research on second language speech, stemming from
interest in disproving the simplistic Critical Age Hypothesis, but broadening to a strong pro-
gramme investigating many aspects of the acquisition of second language pronunciation
(Strange 1995; Bohn and Munro 2007).
What is notable about these applications is that they generally do not require direct com-
munication about speech with ordinary people, especially speakers from diﬀerent language and
literacy backgrounds. Even second language speech research uses methods more akin to
training a computer system than teaching a human being (Fraser 2009a). Viewing speech as a
subconscious computational system is useful in getting a bird’s eye perspective on what is
involved in acquiring new phonological systems. Actually teaching pronunciation, however,
requires understanding speech as conscious processing by a human agent. For this, the generative
framework has proven of less value.
For many years, communicative language teaching tried to ‘go it alone’ with regard to
pronunciation, relying on implicit learning, and phonetics and phonology were largely drop-
ped from teacher education. However, it is rare for adults to learn pronunciation well without
explicit instruction, and these decades are now widely agreed to be a dark period in the history
of language teaching (Celce-Murcia et al. 1996).
Eventually a revival occurred, led by teachers determined to help their students with this
essential aspect of language. Courses and textbooks were designed to give teachers relevant
background in phonetics and phonology (Roach 1991; Yavas 1994; Yallop 1995), and a
growing community of teacher-researchers developed methods and materials for classroom use
(Morley 1994; Underhill 1994; Gilbert 2005). Several studies provided empirical evidence of
the value of an explicit pronunciation programme (Derwing et al. 1998; Couper 2006), with an
important ﬁnding being the need to focus not only on phonemes but also on suprasegmental
aspects of stress, syllable structure and intonation (Hahn 2004; Gilbert 2010).
Phonetics and phonology
589

Most of our knowledge of ‘what works’ in teaching second language pronunciation, as
opposed to training second language contrasts, comes from this work (Kenworthy 1987;
Morley 1991; Venkatagiri and Levis 2007; Henderson 2010), and there is much in it that
supports and extends the view of speech as a complex system. However, there has been rela-
tively little recognition of its theoretical implications. Indeed, there still tends to be relatively
low interest in theory, with many teachers explicitly stating a preference to focus on practical
outcomes, and choose teaching materials in an eclectic manner. This practical orientation
has served well, with enormous strides in pronunciation teaching since the ‘dark ages’ of the
1960s and 1970s. Nevertheless, greater improvement is both necessary and possible, and the
key is greater understanding of relevant aspects of phonetics and phonology.
The problem is that most textbooks, though they do an excellent job of simplifying com-
plicated material to make it accessible to teachers, almost all concentrate almost exclusively on
describing English phonology, with many blurring the distinction between phonetics and
phonology in a way that entrenches, rather than overcoming, the literacy bias. In short, they
simplify for teachers at the expense of missing the crucial information that allows teachers to
simplify for learners. The result is that pronunciation lessons often involve teachers unconﬁdently
passing on information they themselves understand imperfectly (Macdonald 2002).
Understanding the problem
While it is natural to speak of the seven colours as being ‘parts’ of the rainbow, it is clearly
incorrect to think a rainbow is created by putting together separate bands of colour. The idea
that words are created by putting together separate phonemes is equally incorrect. Unfortu-
nately, the literacy bias makes this incorrect idea seem not just right, but self-evident. Questioning
it evokes puzzlement: ‘How else would it be possible to make words?’
But is it really necessary to identify phonemes in order to recognise words? Looking to
experience, rather than to theory, suggests not. Recognising words is easy. Identifying pho-
nemes is hard – even when the words in which they appear are known. Contrary to popular
opinion, even experts cannot make a sensible transcription of an unknown language.
This leaves the question of how people do recognise words in continuous speech. Without
the literacy bias, however, this question has a rather obvious answer: the same way they
recognise anything else. Through embodied experience in meaningful social contexts, people
learn to conceptualise the continuous reality of speech as a sequence of signiﬁers, then project
their signiﬁer-concepts onto continuous speech (Berko-Gleason 2005). In fact, the harder
question is how and why they could recognise meaningless units like phonemes, allophones or
features.
Looking, again, to experience, shows that meaningless units are learned after meaningful
units, through informal analysis of signiﬁers which produces, ﬁrst, the basic units referred to
with everyday metalanguage (Gombert 1992; Vihman 1996), and later, through formal analy-
sis, units referred to with the technical metalanguage of linguistics. All these units are derived
from, not constitutive of, the primary units, meaningful words and phrases (Fraser 2010a).
The relationship between the levels of analysis, then, is the same for speech as for the rain-
bow. First, people learn to recognise the rainbow as a whole, the meaningful aspect of reality
picked out through social experience. Then they analyse it into basic colours, colour variants,
and more technical descriptions.
Speech is far more complex than a rainbow, but the overall relationship among the levels is
the same: people must learn words before they can learn spelling, spelling before phonemes,
phonemes before allophones, and allophones before all the technical units of scientiﬁc
Helen Fraser
590

phonetics and phonology. The crucial diﬀerence is that, with speech, a ‘strange inversion’
occurs, whereby, as they learn each new level, people come to believe its units are real, when in
fact they are merely more abstract ways of conceptualising the same continuous reality that
lies behind them all.
This is the real literacy bias: not the belief that speech is a sequence of letters, but the belief
that speech is a sequence of any kind of meaningless units, put together to create meaningful
words and phrases. An enormous quantity of evidence shows exactly the opposite is true: using
small units of speech involves recognising and producing large meaningful chunks of speech
(Field, this volume). This is why the suprasegmental structure of speech is so vitally impor-
tant – but syllables, feet and other suprasegmental units are not made up of phonemes, as
often thought. Rather phonemes are derived from the larger units (Gillon 2007; Fraser 2010a).
Of course, once the literacy bias is understood, it is quite acceptable to model speech in any
of many diﬀerent ways, depending on the purpose. In particular, structural-generative models
have shown themselves very useful for describing speech ‘at a distance’. But a theory of pho-
nology is not, contra Chomsky, a theory of pronunciation. Teaching, especially of learners
from very diﬀerent language and literacy backgrounds, requires a sound practical theory of the
literacy bias to allow eﬀective communication between teacher and learner. It is well agreed
that generative theory is too complicated for this purpose. Unfortunately, merely simplifying it
is not enough. It is necessary to understand the source of the complication.
The right tool for the job
The rainbow analogy shows that, despite their apparent opposition, generative theory really
addresses the same problem as the behaviourists. The diﬀerence is like replacing the question,
‘How are colour variants transformed into basic colours to allow recognition of the rainbow
without recourse to meaning?’ with ‘How are cyan-yellow-magenta pixels converted to pri-
mary colours to allow recognition of the rainbow using only formalised meaning?’ It is not a
new question, merely a more complicated restatement of the old one.
The problems of generative theory are not caused by Chomsky’s innovations. They are
inherent in any theory that takes too seriously the idea that meaningful words are created by
combining meaningless symbols – the literacy bias. What generative theory has done is push
the literacy bias to its logical extreme. As we have seen, it is scientiﬁc research in the generative
framework that has most clearly demonstrated the continuous nature of speech, and the essen-
tial role of meaning and context in speech processing. Indeed, the foundational observations
with which this chapter began are largely the product of research in the generative tradition.
But generative theory ultimately cannot explain its own discoveries. Computation is essen-
tially about meaningless discrete symbols. The paradox is, the theory that has provided the
greatest evidence against the literacy bias itself remains trapped in the literacy bias (Port 2007;
Ladd 2009), a kind of reductio ad absurdum of the belief that meaningful words and phrases
can be created from meaningless sublexical parts, and a clear demonstration of the dangers of
treating a complex system as a complicated one.
This is still, emphatically, not to discount the value of generative theory, merely to empha-
sise that, like any theory, it is just a theory, useful for some purposes and not for others. Spe-
ciﬁcally, it is inadequate for language teaching, for which a theory is needed that gives
practical understanding of the diﬃculties faced by learners, and how to give the help they
most need – especially one that gives an adequate treatment of the relationship between seg-
mental and suprasegmental levels of analysis (Fraser in press). Fortunately, an entirely suitable
candidate is already available, requiring only minor modiﬁcation.
Phonetics and phonology
591

Speech as a complex system
Complex systems have been a focus of a great deal of research across many disciplines (Ellis,
this volume), and have been deﬁned in a range of ways. Here, we focus just on the aspects most
relevant to the present discussion. What makes speech a complex, as opposed to complicated,
system is the fact that it is organised in the service, not of meaningless bits of sound, but of
meaningful words and phrases, intended for symbolic communication between embodied, socially
situated agents. This view is compatible with current thinking across a range of sociocognitive
theories of language, many of whose key insights are highly relevant to pronunciation teach-
ing. In extending such theories as the basis of a practical theory of pronunciation teaching,
however, several dangers need to be navigated.
One danger is the drift to abstraction. Applied linguistics has now developed theories at
least as abstract as generative grammar. Explaining the complexity of language and culture
in meticulous but distant detail has many uses. However, it does not always answer the ques-
tion, ‘What should I do next with my class?’ Another danger is a tendency to drift from ‘there
are no ultimate rules’ to ‘there are no rules’, which risks a return to the dark ages of learning
by induction and teaching by intuition. While it is true there are no hard and fast rules for
language teaching (Thornbury, this volume), for pronunciation, at least, explicit teaching is
necessary. Since teachers are the conduit between researchers and learners, it is incumbent on
theorists to give teachers a framework and principles they can use to decide quickly,
conﬁdently and accurately what their students need next, and provide it in accessible form.
A further danger is letting the literacy bias creep in the back door. This happens commonly
in discussing categorisation. Many theories recognise that learning to pronounce a new lan-
guage involves learning new phonological categories. But ‘categorisation’ is used in two dis-
tinct senses. Often it is explicitly or implicitly assumed that what is required is recategorisation
of phonetic units, such as allophones, in terms of new phonological units, such as phonemes.
This process is better called classiﬁcation, and is of little relevance to pronunciation teaching.
Even if it is agreed that such classiﬁcation takes place at low levels of consciousness, the fact
that it is inaccessible to awareness makes knowing about it of little use to teachers.
The relevant process is the kind involved in categorising a continuous aspect of reality, such
as a rainbow, in terms of meaningful units, such as basic colours, perhaps better termed con-
ceptualisation. Though very hard to explain with a computer model of mind, this process is
extremely well understood in everyday life (Bandura 1976), and especially in education
(Ramsden 2003). It lies at the heart of sociocognitive theories of language and culture learning
(Thorne and Tasker, this volume), and such theories are indeed entirely suitable for extension
to the domain of pronunciation – so long as the dangers above are navigated appropriately.
Perhaps the most useful approach is to remain as grounded as possible in the original insights
of Saussure and Sapir, but update them as necessary with equally important insights from
twentieth-century phonetics and phonology.
Saussure was quite clear that it was not only the signiﬁed, or meaning of a word, that must
be recognised as a concept (Taylor 2002). The signiﬁer, or sound of a word must also be seen,
not merely as a piece of ‘phonetic reality’, but as a conceptualisation of that reality, deﬁned in
relation to the system of contrasts with other signiﬁers in the language. Indeed, the terms
‘emic’ and ‘etic’, now used broadly to refer to the distinction between the level of discrete,
meaningful, culturally relevant units, as opposed to the level of continuous uninterpreted reality,
derived originally from phonetics and phonology (Pike 1947).
Everything that is true of the signiﬁed, is also true of the signiﬁer, including the principle of
linguistic relativity (Bohn 2000), with the crucial diﬀerence being the lack of awareness
Helen Fraser
592

associated with the signiﬁer. This lack is readily understandable when it is remembered that
the role of the signiﬁer is precisely to direct attention away from itself and towards the sig-
niﬁed. However, it not only makes learning second language pronunciation diﬃcult, but also
makes studying phonetics particularly challenging, as it is very diﬃcult to focus on the signiﬁer
without being distracted by the signiﬁed, and even harder to focus on the continuous reality of
speech without being distracted by presuppositions about its phonological analysis.
On this view, the key to successful pronunciation teaching is recognition that teaching pro-
nunciation is just like teaching anything else, except that far more attention needs to be paid to
ensuring learners understand the basic concepts used in the lessons. In practice, this means
engaging in ongoing metalinguistic dialogue, which in turn requires the recognition that
metalanguage is not merely technical terminology, but a form of language like any other, to be
used in the service of eﬀective metalinguistic communication (Fraser in press).
Conclusion
The notion of a clear divide between ‘theoretical’ and ‘applied’ linguistics is long outdated.
The terms are now used more often to refer more often to the distinction between com-
putational and sociocognitive theories than in their proper senses. Most other branches of
linguistics have by now developed a range of strong alternative theories, allowing choice
of computational, sociocognitive or other approaches, according to the task in hand. It is
time phonetics and phonology created a practical theory appropriate to today’s teaching
applications.
Achieving this requires not just transfer of information in one or both directions, but gen-
uine dialogue and shared experience. Applied linguists need to learn more phonetics and
phonology, and phoneticians and phonologists need to spend more time in the language
classroom, locus of a continuous stream of fascinating data desperately seeking theoretical
interpretation.
Related topics
cognitive linguistics; language and culture; language emergence; language teacher education;
psycholinguistics; sociocultural theory
Further reading
Bohn, O.-S. and Munro, M. J. (eds) (2007) Language Experience in Second Language Speech
Learning, Amsterdam and Philadelphia: John Benjamins. (A key collection of recent papers cov-
ering many aspects of the phonetics, phonology and psycholinguistics of second language speech.)
Celce-Murcia, M., Brinton, D. M., Goodwin, J. M. and Griner, B. (2010) Teaching Pronunciation:
A Course Book and Reference Guide, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. (A thorough text
speciﬁcally designed for teachers, covering many aspects of pronunciation teaching.)
Ladefoged, P. (2005) Vowels and Consonants: An Introduction to the Sounds of Language, 2nd edn,
Oxford: Blackwell. (An accessible introduction to many important aspects of phonetics and
phonology by the world’s pre-eminent phonetician; despite the impression given by the title it
does cover suprasegmentals.)
Sapir, E. (1949) Language: An Introduction to the Study of Speech, London: Harvest Books. (A classic
text setting phonetics and phonology in the context of the broader study of language and culture.)
Shockey, L. (2003) Sound Patterns of Spoken English, Oxford: Blackwell. (A thorough treatment of
the phonetics of spontaneous connected speech, emphasising the diﬀerences between how people
think about speech and what speech is really like.)
Phonetics and phonology
593

References
Anderson, S. R. (1985) Phonology in the Twentieth Century: Theories of Rules and Theories of
Representation, Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Archibald, J. (ed.) (1995) Phonological Acquisition and Phonological Theory, Hillsdale, NJ: Lawr-
ence Erlbaum Associates.
Asher, R. E. and Henderson, J. A. (eds) (1981) Towards a History of Phonetics, Edinburgh: Edin-
burgh University Press.
Ball, M. J. and Lowry, O. (2001) Methods in Clinical Phonetics, London: Whurr.
Bandura, A. (1976) Social Learning Theory, Englewood Cliﬀs, NJ: Prentice Hall.
Berko-Gleason, J. (2005) The Development of Language, 6th edn, Boston: Pearson Education.
Bloomﬁeld, L. ([1933] 1984) Language, Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Bohn, O.-S. (2000) ‘Linguistic relativity in speech perception: an overview of the inﬂuence of lan-
guage experience on the perception of speech sounds from infancy to adulthood’, in S. Niemeier
and R. Dirven (eds.) Evidence for Linguistic Relativity, Amsterdam and Philadelphia: John
Benjamins.
Bohn, O.-S. and Munro, M. J. (eds) (2007) Language Experience in Second Language Speech
Learning, Amsterdam and Philadelphia: John Benjamins.
Byrne, B. (1998) The Foundation of Literacy: The Child’s Acquisition of the Alphabetic Principle,
Hove: Psychology Press.
Carroll, J. B. (ed.) (1956) Language, Thought, and Reality: Selected Writings of Benjamin Lee
Whorf, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Celce-Murcia, M., Brinton, D. M. and Goodwin, J. M. (1996) Teaching Pronunciation: A Reference
for Teachers of English to Speakers of Other Languages, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Collins, B. and Mees, I. M. (2003) Practical Phonetics and Phonology: A Resource Book for
Students, London: Routledge.
Couper, G. (2006) ‘The short and long-term eﬀects of pronunciation instruction’, Prospect 21:
44–64.
Derwing, T., Munro, M. and Wiebe, G. (1998) ‘Evidence in favour of a broad framework for pro-
nunciation instruction’, Language Learning 48: 393–410.
Erard, M. (2007) Um: Slips, Stumbles and Verbal Blunders, and What They Mean, New York:
Random House.
Fraser, H. (1997) ‘Dictionary pronunciation guides for English’, International Journal of Lexico-
graphy 10: 181–208.
——(2003) ‘Issues in transcription: factors aﬀecting the reliability of transcripts as evidence in legal
cases’, International Journal of Speech Language and the Law 10: 203–26.
——(2004) Teaching Pronunciation: A Guide for Teachers of English as a Second Language (CD-
ROM), Canberra: Commonwealth of Australia, Department of Education Training and Youth
Aﬀairs. Available at: http://helenfraser.com.au
——(2009a) ‘Pronunciation as categorization: the role of contrast in teaching English /r/ and /l/’, in
A. Mahboob and C. Lipovsky (eds) Studies in Applied Linguistics and Language Learning,
Newcastle upon Tyne: Cambridge Scholars Publishing.
——(2009b) ‘The role of “educated native speakers” in providing language analysis for the deter-
mination of the origin of asylum seekers’, International Journal of Speech Language and the Law
16: 113–38.
——(2010a) ‘Cognitive phonology as a tool for teaching pronunciation’, in S. de Knop, F. Boers
and T. de Rycker (eds) Fostering Language Teaching Eﬃciency Through Cognitive Linguistics,
Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter.
——(2010b) ‘Transcripts in the legal system’, in I. Freckelton and H. Selby (eds) Expert Evidence,
Sydney, NSW: Thomson Reuters.
——(in press) ‘Speaking of speech: developing metalanguage for eﬀective communication about
pronunciation between English language teachers and learners’, in A. Henderson (ed.) Proceed-
ings of the International Conference on English Pronunciation: Issues and Practices, Chambéry:
Université de Savoie.
Frith, C. (2008) Making up the Mind: How the Brain Creates the Mental World, Oxford: Blackwell.
Gilbert, J. (2005) Clear Speech from the Start: Basic Pronunciation and Listening Comprehension in
North American English, 2nd edn, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Helen Fraser
594

——(2010) ‘Pronunciation as orphan: what can be done’, Speak Out! 43: 3–7.
Gillon, G. (2007) Phonological Awareness: From Research to Practice, New York: Guilford Press.
Gombert, J.-E. (1992) Metalinguistic Development, Hemel Hempstead: Harvester Wheatsheaf.
Gussenhoven, C. and Jacobs, H. (2005) Understanding Phonology, 2nd edn, London: Hodder
Arnold.
Hahn, L. (2004) ‘Primary stress and intelligibility: research to motivate the teaching of supraseg-
mentals’, TESOL Quarterly 38: 201–23.
Hardcastle, W. J., Laver, J. and Gibbon, F. E. (eds) (2010) The Handbook of Phonetic Sciences, 2nd
edn, Oxford: Wiley-Blackwell.
Hardin, C. L. and Maﬃ, L. (eds) (1997) Color Categories in Thought and Language, Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Henderson, A. (ed.) (2010) Proceedings of the International Conference on English Pronunciation:
Issues and Practices, Chambéry: Université de Savoie.
Jannedy, S. and Hay, J. (eds) (2006) ‘Modelling sociophonetic variation’, special issue, Journal of
Phonetics 34(4).
Just, M. and Carpenter, P. A. (1987) The Psychology of Reading and Language Comprehension,
Boston: Allyn and Bacon.
Kenworthy, J. (1987) Teaching English Pronunciation, London: Longman.
Ladd, D. R. (2009) ‘Phonetics in phonology’, in J. Goldsmith, J. Riggle and A. Yu (eds) Handbook
of Phonological Theory, Oxford: Blackwell.
Ladefoged, P. (2005) Vowels and Consonants: An Introduction to the Sounds of Language, 2nd edn,
Oxford: Blackwell.
Ladefoged, P. and Maddieson, I. (1996) The Sounds of the World’s Languages, Oxford: Basil
Blackwell.
Laver, J. (1994) Principles of Phonetics, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Linell, P. (1988) ‘The impact of literacy on the conception of language: the case of linguistics’, in
R. Saljö (ed.) The Written World: Studies in Literate Thought and Action, Berlin: Springer.
Macdonald, M. (2008) Your Brain: The Missing Manual, Sebastopol, CA: O’Reilly.
Macdonald, S. (2002) ‘Pronunciation: views and practices of reluctant teachers’, Prospect 17: 3–15.
Morley, J. (1991) ‘The pronunciation component in teaching English to speakers of other lan-
guages’, TESOL Quarterly 25: 481–520.
——(ed.) (1994) Pronunciation Pedagogy and Theory: New Views, New Directions, Alexandria, VA:
TESOL.
Nusbaum, H. and Goodman, J. (1994) ‘Learning to hear speech as spoken language’, in J. Goodman
and H. Nusbaum (eds) The Development of Speech Perception, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Pennington, M. C. (ed.) (2006) Phonology in Context, New York: Palgrave Macmillan.
Perkell, J. and Klatt, D. (eds) (1986) Invariance and Variability in Speech Processes, Hillsdale, NJ:
Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Pierrehumbert, J., Beckman, M. E. and Ladd, D. R. (1993) ‘Conceptual foundations of phonology
as a laboratory science’, in N. Burton-Roberts, P. Carr and G. Docherty (eds) Phonological
Knowledge: Its Nature and Status, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Pike, K. L. (1947) Phonemics: A Technique for Reducing Languages to Writing, Ann Arbor:
University of Michigan Press.
Port, R. (2007) ‘The graphical basis of phones and phonemes’, in O.-S. Bohn and M. J. Munro (eds)
Second Language Speech Learning: The Role of Language Experience in Speech Perception and
Production, Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Ramsden, P. (2003) Learning to Teach in Higher Education, 2nd edn, Abingdon: Routledge.
Roach, P. (1991) English Phonetics and Phonology: A Practical Course, 2nd edn., Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Rose, P. (2002) Forensic Speaker Identiﬁcation, London: Taylor and Francis.
Sapir, E. (1949) Language: An Introduction to the Study of Speech, London: Harvest Books.
de Saussure, F. ([1916] 1983) Course in General Linguistics, London: Duckworth.
Scarborough, H. S., Ehri, L. C., Olson, R. K. and Fowler, A. E. (1998) ‘The fate of phonemic
awareness beyond the elementary school years’, Scientiﬁc Studies of Reading 2: 115–42.
Shockey, L. (2003) Sound Patterns of Spoken English, Oxford: Blackwell.
Strange, W. (ed.) (1995) Speech Perception and Linguistic Experience: Issues in Cross-language
Research, Baltimore: York Press.
Phonetics and phonology
595

Taylor, J. R. (2002) Cognitive Grammar, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Underhill, A. (1994) Sound Foundations: Living Phonology, Oxford: Heinemann.
Venkatagiri, H. S. and Levis, J. (2007) ‘Metaphonological knowledge and comprehensibility: an
exploratory study’, Language Awareness 16: 263–77.
Vihman, M. (1996) Phonological Development, Oxford: Basil Blackwell.
Warren, R. (1999) Auditory Perception: A New Analysis and Synthesis, 2nd edn, Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Wells, J. C. (2003) ‘Phonetic research by written questionnaire’, International Congress of Phonetic
Sciences, Barcelona.
Westley, F., Zimmerman, B. and Patton, M. (2006) Getting to Maybe: How the World is Changed,
New York: Random House.
Yallop, C. (1995) English Phonology, Sydney, NSW: National Centre for English Language Teach-
ing and Research.
Yavas, M. (ed.) (1994) First and Second Language Phonology, San Diego, CA: Singular Publishing
Group.
Helen Fraser
596

42
Corpus linguistics
Svenja Adolphs and Phoebe M. S. Lin
Introduction
Corpus linguistics most commonly refers to the study of machine-readable spoken and written
language samples that have been assembled in a principled way for the purpose of linguistics
research. At the heart of empirically based linguistics and data-driven description of language,
corpus linguistics is concerned with language use in real contexts. Therefore, it is often con-
trasted with Chomskyan linguistics, which emphasises language competence and often involves
made-up examples as the basis of its exploration of language. Access to ever larger spoken and
written corpora has already revolutionised the description of language in use; however, the
impact of corpus linguistics has reached far beyond the disciplines that are purely concerned
with linguistic descriptions of language. As an approach, corpus linguistics continues to gain
recognition and popularity, with an increasing number of researchers across diﬀerent dis-
ciplines exploring innovative ways of using corpus-based research as part of their methods
toolkit.
This chapter provides a brief overview of some of the diﬀerent types of corpora available
and some of the methods used within the area of corpus linguistics, including the generation of
frequency lists, concordance outputs and keyword analyses. It then moves on to a discussion
of selected current issues in corpus linguistics. We focus here on three issues which we believe
are marked by the persistent attention they have received in the ﬁeld, as well as by their pro-
minent status among researchers and end-users. The issues we will introduce include an area of
language description (phraseology and corpus research), an area of application (English lan-
guage teaching and corpus research), and an area of resource development (the Web as
corpus). The chapter will conclude with a discussion of the impact which technological
developments may have on the discipline. All the corpus resources mentioned in this chapter
can be found after the ‘Further reading’ section.
Corpus as data
Corpora are designed to represent a particular language variety. Common distinctions are
made between specialised and general corpora, where the former includes texts that belong to
597

a particular type, e.g. academic prose, while the latter includes many diﬀerent types of texts,
often assembled with the aim to serve as reference resources for linguistic research or to pro-
duce reference materials such as dictionaries. Other types of corpora include historical and
monitor corpora, parallel corpora and learner corpora. Historical corpora include texts from
diﬀerent periods of time and allow for the study of language change when compared with
corpora from other periods. Monitor corpora can be used for a similar purpose, but tend to
focus on current changes in the language. New texts from the same variety are added to the
existing corpus at regular intervals, thus contributing to a constantly growing text database.
Parallel corpora include texts in at least two languages that have either been directly trans-
lated, or produced in diﬀerent languages for the same purpose. Such corpora are often used in
translation studies. Learner corpora contain collections of texts produced by learners of a
language. They allow the researcher to identify patterns in a particular variety of learner
English, and to compare the language of the learner to that of other users of a language.
In terms of the history of corpus design, a distinction is often made between the early cor-
pora developed in the 1950s, 1960s and 1970s and the larger corpora developed from the late
1980s onwards. Early corpora include the London-Lund Corpus of Spoken English (LLC), the
Brown Corpus based on American written English, and the Lancaster-Oslo/Bergen Corpus
based on written British English. The parallel design of the latter two corpora allowed for a
corpus-based comparison between British and American English. Early corpora were often
limited in size to a one million word threshold, which is partly a reﬂection of the technological
possibilities at the time.
Two of the most substantial corpus projects developed in the 1980s and 1990s are the Collins
and Birmingham University International Language Database (COBUILD) and the British
National Corpus. Both oﬀer a valuable resource for the study of everyday spoken and written
English. The COBUILD corpus, which is also referred to as the Bank of English, was devel-
oped in the 1990s as a monitor corpus. This means that new texts are constantly added to this
database: the size of the corpus stood at 450 million words. One of the main aims of this
project has been to provide a textual database for the compilation of dictionaries and lexico-
graphy research. The corpus contains samples of mainly British written language, as well as
transcribed speech from interviews, broadcast, and conversation. The British National Corpus
(BNC) was compiled in the late 1980s and early 1990s, and is a 100 million word corpus of
modern British English, consisting of 90 per cent written and 10 per cent spoken texts
(including speeches, meetings, lectures, and some casual conversation). Apart from these two
major corpora, many publishing houses have developed their own corpora which serve as a
resource for authors, mainly in the area of lexicography. Examples are the Cambridge Inter-
national Corpus (CIC), the Longman Corpus Network and the Oxford English Corpus.
Another large corpus project is the International Corpus of English (ICE), which was initiated
in 1990 as a resource for comparing diﬀerent varieties of English. At the time of writing, the
ICE consists of 22 one-million-word corpora, each representing a regional variety of English.
More recently, two substantial American English corpora have been developed: the American
National Corpus (ANC) and the Corpus of Contemporary American English (COCA). By
2009 the ANC contained 22 million words of written and spoken texts in American English
produced since 1990. The COCA consists of more than 400 million words of American English,
with 21 per cent spoken and 79 per cent written material. With 20 million words added each
year, the COCA can also be used as a monitor corpus to capture language change.
The corpora above mainly focus on the collection of general English in use. As such they
contrast with specialised corpora which range from those that represent the language of a
particular group of people, such as the Bergen Corpus of London Teenage Language (COLT),
Svenja Adolphs and Phoebe M. S. Lin
598

to those that represent a particular mode of discourse. Some of the major developments of
specialised corpora have taken place in the domain of academic discourse and include, for
example, the Michigan Corpus of Academic Spoken English (MICASE), and its British
counterpart, the British Academic Spoken English corpus (BASE).
Another category of corpora captures the language use of language learners. The analysis of
learner corpora makes it possible to track developmental aspects of learner language, as well
as to highlight particular areas of diﬃculty for the learner. At the same time, learner corpora
can be used as a basis for better descriptions of diﬀerent varieties that emerge from commu-
nication between speakers who communicate in a language other than their ﬁrst language. The
design criteria for learner corpora have a slightly diﬀerent focus to native speaker corpora in
that particular emphasis has to be placed on the level of consistency of the resource in terms of
the language background of the speakers, including their level of proﬁciency and ﬁrst lan-
guage. Examples of learner corpora include the Cambridge Learner Corpus the Longman
Learners’ Corpus and the International Corpus of Learner English (ICLE). Examples of cor-
pora which are used as the basis for exploring the use of English as a lingua franca include the
Vienna-Oxford International Corpus of English (VOICE) and the English as a Lingua Franca
in Academic Settings (ELFA) corpus.
Many of the corpora outlined above come with their own concordancing interface, often
available via the Internet. The next section will consider in more detail the various tools and
methods which may be used to explore the language captured in spoken and written corpora.
Metadata
Apart from the process of assembling written and spoken language samples in a principled way into
a corpus, it is also important to collect and document further information about the collected
discourse itself. Metadata, or ‘data about data’, is the conventional method used to do this. Burnard
(2005) states that ‘without metadata the investigator has nothing but disconnected words of
unknowable provenance or authenticity’. Thus, metadata are critical to a corpus to help achieve
the standards for representativeness, and of balance and homogeneity (see Sinclair 2005).
Burnard (2005) uses the term metadata as an umbrella term which includes editorial, ana-
lytic, descriptive and administrative categories:

Editorial metadata: providing information about the relationship between corpus compo-
nents and their original source.

Analytic metadata: providing information about the way in which corpus components have
been interpreted and analysed.

Descriptive metadata: providing classiﬁcatory information derived from internal or exter-
nal properties of the corpus components.

Administrative metadata: providing documentary information about the corpus itself, such
as its title, its availability, its revision status, etc.
Metadata are particularly important when the corpus is shared and reused by others in a
research community, and they also assist in the preservation of electronic texts. Metadata can
be kept in a separate database or included as a ‘header’ at the start of each document (usually
encoded though mark-up language). A separate database with this information makes it easier
to compare diﬀerent types of documents and has the distinct advantage that it can be further
extended by other users of the same data. The documentation of the design rationale, as well
as the various editorial processes that an individual text has been subjected to during the
collection and archiving stages, facilitates replicability of research and validation of results.
Corpus linguistics
599

Corpus linguistics: tools and methods
A number of user-friendly software packages are available which facilitate the manipulation
and analysis of corpus data. Common functionalities include the generation of frequency
counts according to speciﬁed criteria, comparisons of frequency information in diﬀerent texts,
diﬀerent formats of concordance outputs, including the Key Word In Context (KWIC)
concordance, and the extraction of multiword units or clusters of items in a text. Many of
these programs can be downloaded from the Internet or used directly via an interactive Website
(see, for example, the Compleat Lexical Tutor, BNCWeb and BYU-BNC). Other programs are
distributed commercially, often by publishing houses, and can be purchased for a fee.
Word lists
The frequency of a word or a phrase in diﬀerent contexts is an important part of its descrip-
tion. Various word lists that are based to some degree on word frequency in a corpus exist
especially in the English language teaching (ELT) context, such as the Academic Word List
(Coxhead 2000) and the Academic Formulas List (Simpson-Vlach and Ellis 2010). Word lists
are a good starting point for subsequent searches of individual items at concordance level and
can be useful in the comparison of diﬀerent corpora. Word lists can be generated to account
for individual items or for recurrent sequences of two or more items. Lemmatised frequency
lists group together words from the same lemma. For example, the words ‘say’, ‘said’, ‘saying’,
‘says’ are all part of the lemma SAY. Lemmatisation can be done manually using an alpha-
betical frequency list, or in an automated way which is often based to some degree on lists of
predeﬁned lemmas. Diﬀerent forms of the same lemma tend to vary signiﬁcantly in terms of
their overall frequency, with one particular form tending to be more frequent than others in
the lemma. Previous research has shown that there often are variations in meaning between
diﬀerent variants of the lemma (Stubbs 1996; Tognini-Bonelli 2001). Lemmatised lists also
have a place in more applied contexts, including ELT where it can be beneﬁcial to teach all
forms of one lemma together while giving priority to the most frequently used form.
The kind of basic information that can be gathered from a frequency list is illustrated with
reference to Table 42.1, which shows the ten most frequent items in the spoken Limerick
Corpus of Irish English (LCIE) and in the written component of the British National Corpus
(O’Keeﬀe et al. 2011). LCIE is a corpus of naturally occurring contemporary spoken Irish
Table 42.1 Ten most frequent words in the BNC (written) and LCIE (spoken)
BNC
LCIE
1
the
the
2
of
I
3
and
and
4
a
you
5
in
to
6
to
it
7
is
a
8
was
that
9
it
of
10
for
yeah
Svenja Adolphs and Phoebe M. S. Lin
600

English (for more details see Farr et al. 2004). A comparison of the ten most frequent words in
a spoken and a written corpus highlights some of the key diﬀerences between the two modes of
discourse. Both contain mainly grammatical items, which is expected in terms of the general
distribution of diﬀerent items in the English language. However, the spoken corpus list also
includes the personal pronouns ‘I’ and ‘You’ which shows the interactive nature of the dis-
course that makes up this corpus. In addition, the vocalisation ‘Yeah’ occurs amongst the most
frequent items in the spoken data reﬂecting the pervasive occurrence of listener response
tokens in conversation. These three items are at the heart of spoken interaction and the
frequency list helps to identify those deﬁning items.
Table 42.2 shows the ten most frequent two-word, three-word and four-word n-grams in
LCIE. This type of frequency output highlights the phrasal nature of language. Although the
kinds of sequences generated in this way do not necessarily reﬂect the underlying phraseology
of language fully, the output is strongly suggestive of common phrases of which the sequences
in Table 42.2 form a part. However, a mere frequency-based list of continuous sequences is
limited in its explanatory power when it comes to the study of phraseology. Research in the
area of computational linguistics has introduced new techniques for extracting meaningful
units from corpora, both on the basis of frequency information (see, for example, Danielsson
2003) and on the basis of part-of-speech tagged corpora which include further annotation of
semantic ﬁelds (Rayson 2003).
Keywords and key sequences
Keywords are as words which occur either with a signiﬁcantly higher frequency (positive key-
words) or with a signiﬁcantly lower frequency (negative keywords) in a text or collection of
texts, when they are compared to a reference corpus (Scott 1997). Keywords are identiﬁed
on the basis of statistical comparisons of word frequency lists derived from the target corpus
and the reference corpus. Each item in the target corpus is compared with its equivalent in the
reference corpus, and the statistical signiﬁcance of diﬀerence is calculated using chi-square or
log-likelihood statistics (see Dunning 1993). Both of these statistics compare actual observed
frequencies between two items with their expected frequencies, assuming random distribution.
If the diﬀerence between observed and expected frequency is large then it is likely that the relation-
ship between the two items is not random. The procedure thus generates words that are char-
acteristic, as well as those that are uncharacteristic in a given target corpus. The choice of the
Table 42.2 Ten most frequent 2-word, 3-word and 4-word units in LCIE results per million
words
Frequency rank
2-word units
3-word units
4-word units
1
you know
4406
I don't know
1212
you know what I
230
2
in the
3435
do you know
769
know what I mean
215
3
of the
2354
a lot of
522
do you know what
208
4
do you
2332
you know what
379
I don't know what
134
5
I don't
2200
do you want
373
do you want to
121
6
I think
2003
I don't think
338
are you going to
103
7
It was
1939
you know the
323
you know the way
103
8
I was
1891
you have to
308
I don't know I
91
9
going to
1849
going to be
307
thank you very much
91
10
on the
1801
yeah yeah yeah
297
the end of the
85
Corpus linguistics
601

reference corpus used as the basis for such a comparison is crucial in this context, as it aﬀects
the output of keywords. For example, in a comparison of a transcript of medical consultation
with a reference corpus that consists solely of written texts, the characteristics of spoken versus
written language may interfere with the analysis of keywords in the medical consultation genre.
We can generate keyword lists as well as lists of key sequences. The list below contains key
sequences resulting from a comparison of health communication used as part of a UK tele-
phone health advice service with the CANCODE, a ﬁve-million-word corpus of casual con-
versation in British English. The sequences are the ten most signiﬁcant positive key sequences
in the Nottingham Health Communication Corpus featuring health communication in the
British context (see Adolphs et al. 2004; Adolphs 2006).
1
NHS Direct
2
NHS
3
Just bear with
4
Call you back
5
Bear with me
6
Date of birth
7
Your date of
8
You’re calling from
9
Manage their services
10
However anybody with
As can be expected, quite a few of the recurrent sequences in this list form part of the responses
that typically mark the beginning of telephone interactions with the health advice service NHS
Direct. Other sequences relate to the gathering of basic information about the caller. The most
signiﬁcant negative key sequence, i.e. the one that occurs with a signiﬁcantly lower frequency
in the Health Communication Corpus, in comparison to the corpus of casual conversation, is
‘I don’t know’. This highlights the professional nature of this encounter where the emphasis is
on providing knowledge and advice. ‘I don’t know’ is a common hedge and politeness marker in
casual conversation and does not ﬁt with the more asymmetrical medical exchanges by telephone.
The concordance output
An example of a Key Word in Context (KWIC) concordance of the word ‘corpus’ using the
BNCWeb is shown in Figure 42.1. Corpus users can normally specify the number of words to
the left and to the right of the search word that are displayed as part of the output. If a corpus
is tagged for part-of-speech (POS), then users may also carry out a concordance search based
on word class or grammatical structure.
There are many ways of examining and interpreting concordance data. A concordance
output can be useful in providing a representation of language data which allows the user to
notice patterns relating to the way in which a lexical item or a sequence is used in context.
Sinclair (1996) argues that a new unit of meaning emerges from the analysis of concordance
data that extends beyond the single word and takes into account the properties and patterns
that are revealed by concordance analysis. Such units, as Sinclair points out, are going to be
‘largely phrasal’ (1996: 82). In order to describe the nature of individual units of meaning,
Sinclair (1996) suggests four parameters: collocation, colligation, semantic preference and
semantic prosody. Collocation refers to the habitual co-occurrence of words and will be discussed
in more detail below. Colligation is the co-occurrence of grammatical choices. Grammatical
Svenja Adolphs and Phoebe M. S. Lin
602

patterning around a particular word accounts for the ‘variation’ of a phrase, which ‘gives the
phrase its essential ﬂexibility, so that it can ﬁt into the surrounding co-text’ (Sinclair 1996: 83).
Many of the so-called ‘ﬁxed phrases’ are therefore only ﬁxed if we consider the lexico-grammatical
‘core’. If we extend the units of meaning, however, to patterns in the co-text, the expressions
become more variable. One of the examples Sinclair provides is the phrase ‘true feelings’ which,
in the Bank of English, exhibits the following patterns:
At N-3 position and beyond: ‘will never reveal’, ‘prevents me from expressing’, ‘careful
about expressing’, ‘less open about showing’, ‘guilty about expressing’
At N-2 position: ‘communicate’, ‘show’, ‘reveal’, ‘share’, ‘pour out’, ‘give vent to’,
‘indicate’ and ‘make public’
At N-1 position: possessives such as ‘our’
The collocates of ‘true feelings’ show clear patterns in terms of semantic prosody, semantic
preference and colligation. The semantic preference of a lexical item or expression is a
semantic abstraction of its prominent collocates. In his discussion of the expression ‘the naked
eye’, Sinclair (1996) ﬁnds that most of the verbs and adjectives preceding this expression are
related to the concept of ‘vision’. The verbs ‘see’ and ‘seen’ together occur 25 times within
four words to the left of the expression in a sample of 151 examples of ‘the naked eye’ that he
studies. Sinclair (1996) uses, as his fourth parameter in the description of the units of meaning,
the concept of semantic prosody. First discussed by Sinclair (1987) and Louw (1993), semantic
prosodies are associations that arise from the collocates of a lexical item and are not easily
detected using introspection. Semantic prosodies have mainly been described in terms of their
positive or negative polarity (Sinclair 1991a; Stubbs 1995) but also in terms of their associa-
tion with ‘tentativeness/indirectness/face saving’ (McCarthy 1998: 22). Carter and McCarthy
(1999) ﬁnd, for example, that there is a consistently negative semantic prosody associated with
the get-passive in the corpus data they examine (e.g. ‘get arrested’, ‘get sued’ and ‘get nicked’).
Current issues in corpus linguistics
Phraseology
John Sinclair’s (1991a) contributions relating to lexical patterning have been highly inﬂuential
in the ﬁeld (see Stubbs 2009). One of the most notable aspects of his work is his research on
Figure 42.1 A KWIC concordance of the word ‘corpus’ using the BNCWeb
Source: Extracted from the British National Corpus Online service, managed by Oxford University
Computing Services on behalf of the BNC Consortium. All rights reserved.
Corpus linguistics
603

the prevalence of phraseology or multiword units. The idea that everyday language is full of
highly recurrent sequences of words challenges the traditional perception of language proces-
sing in the brain and the belief that language production (and reception) relies on a completely
rule-based system. Corpus evidence, which highlights the prevalence of highly recurrent
chunks or multiword units, suggests that we have a large store of conventional, preferred
expressions that we use regularly to express meaning. Therefore, Sinclair (1991a) suggests that
highly recurrent chunks are fundamental to the organisation and the production of language,
and proposes that language production is the result of the alternation between the idiom
principle and the open-choice principle. The idiom principle posits that ‘a language user has
available to him or her a large number of semi-preconstructed phrases that constitute single
choices, even though they might appear to be analyzable into segments’ (1991a: 110). The
open-choice principle is also known as the slot-and-ﬁller model, for it sees a text as constituted
by a series of slots to be ﬁlled by lexis which satisﬁes certain grammatical constraints.
According to Sinclair (1991a), for normal texts the idiom principle is the ﬁrst (i.e. the default)
mode to be applied. The switch to the open-choice principle occurs only when there is good
reason for the switch to occur. This explains why multiword units are so prevalent. According
to a study by Erman and Warren (2000), multiword units account for slightly over half of
English speech and writing. Altenberg (1998: 102), who adopts an alternative deﬁnition of
phraseology, estimates that ‘over 80 percent of the words in the [London-Lund] corpus form
part of a recurrent word-combination in one way or another’.
A related major contribution to the ﬁeld relates to the study of word sense and relations
where J. R. Firth’s (1957: 11) idea that ‘you shall know a word by the company it keeps’ has
found support from corpus evidence. A simple example to illustrate the dynamics of word
meanings as a result of collocation is shown in the concordance of the word ‘stand’ (Table 42.3
below), taken from the BNCWeb. We know that the basic meaning of the word ‘stand’ is to
rise to or to maintain an upright position. But when ‘stand’ collocates with other words, it
takes up a metaphorical meaning.
The term multiword unit is often used in this context as an umbrella term for sequences of
interrelated words which are retrieved from memory as single lexical units. They occur with
varying degrees of ﬁxedness, including formulae (e.g. have a nice day), metaphors (e.g. kick the
bucket) and collocations (e.g. rancid butter) (Moon 1998; Wray 2002). The description and
conceptualisation of multiword units are a key concern in many diﬀerent areas of language
study ranging from psycholinguistics to Natural Language Processing (NLP). There are many
diﬀerent ways of identifying multiword units. These include intuitive identiﬁcation, the use
of discourse analytical techniques, and automatic extraction from electronic texts (see
Table 42.3 Concordance of the word ‘stand’, taken from the BNCWeb
up for huge amounts of emotional strain, knowing that their clients
stand
to lose more than their liberty. Since almost all those on
, all modes of thought and life. Certainly Lady Lisa might
stand
as the embodiment of the old fancy, the symbol of the
, or obeyed it only in so far as he took a
stand
against conservative taste. He did not take sides against Abstraction,
any view. Reynolds was a notable conversationalist, well able to
stand
up to his friends, who included Samuel Johnson and Edmund Burke
approach, it must be admitted. In Rome a visitor can
stand
in front of a Baroque church, but a few minutes later
the progress of this mad love – to which he did not
stand
all that close at the time, brother as he was –
to revel in his own discomﬁture here, in his desperate last
stand
for freedom – he clearly enjoys the sensation of falling in love,
of them were particularly concerned with ‘glamour’. What does
stand
out is that everyone believes that the profession, its standards and
number of higher clergy in Ulster and many of its lay intellectuals
stand
a long way off from protestant–loyalist politics and are in
will do now, he wrote. It must be impossible to
stand
up against it, he wrote, impossible to draw breath before
Svenja Adolphs and Phoebe M. S. Lin
604

Wray 2002, 2008). The classiﬁcation into diﬀerent types of multiword units tends to be linked
to particular characteristics. Formulae, for example, are marked by their pragmatic function
(see Aijmer 1996) while collocations are marked by their frequency of co-occurrence in dis-
course. Multiword units are closely linked to the particular genre in which they occur (see, for
example, Biber and Conrad 1999; Biber et al. 2003; Oakey 2002; Schmitt 2004; Simpson 2004;
Biber 2006, 2009 for discussions of multiword units in academic speech and writing).
Corpora and English language teaching
While corpus linguistics has enabled better descriptions of language in use, its real impact lies
in the enhancement of applications based on those descriptions. A key area to highlight in this
context is that of English language teaching, where the latest ﬁndings from corpus research
have led to real innovations in material design and classroom practice. There are two main
areas in which corpora can beneﬁt language teaching and learning: ﬁrst, by incorporating the latest
corpus-based ﬁndings into language syllabuses, teaching materials and dictionaries; second, by
encouraging teachers and learners to examine language patterns in corpus as part of their
(independent) learning activities in and outside classrooms (see Gavioli and Aston 2001).
Corpus linguists and language teaching researchers are often found collaborating in these
two areas and there are now publications on the subject. Some of these (e.g. Meunier and
Granger 2008) provide further corpus-based descriptions of aspects of language which target
the needs of speciﬁc groups of language learners, e.g. ESP/EAP learners or learners of the
same L1 background. Others (e.g. Hunston 2002; Sinclair 2003) aim to equip teachers and
learners with the skills of concordancing and extracting useful information from concordance
lines. Other publications (e.g. Tribble and Jones 1997; O’Keeﬀe et al. 2007) include practical
suggestions on the various ways in which corpus research can be introduced into the language
classroom to enrich the experience of language learners.
Despite the growing interest in the pedagogical applications of corpus linguistics, there have
been a number of debates relating to the place of corpus linguistics in language teaching (see
Sinclair 1991b; Widdowson 1991; Seidlhofer 2003). Widdowson (1991), for instance, argues
that the fact that a language pattern is particularly frequent in a corpus does not necessarily
mean that it should take priority in the language teaching syllabus. Further discussion centres
around the issue of authenticity and whether it is beneﬁcial to present learners with authentic,
real language in use (see McCarthy and Carter 1995; Carter and McCarthy 1996; Prodromou
1996a, 1996b, 1998). According to Prodromou (1996b), it is a ‘fallacy’ to assume that real
language is spontaneously interesting and useful to foreign language learners. He argues
that train timetables, advertisements, letters published in British newspapers and consumer
leaﬂets are only real to members of the speech community that these texts target. When such
data are used as teaching material in a foreign language classroom, they mean very little to the
language learners because they lack the same reality for this speciﬁc audience. Prodromou
(1996a) suggests that an ‘authentic’ discourse has its ‘here and nowness’, and when the discourse
is presented in a context that is detached from the ‘here and now’ it automatically loses its
authenticity. Similarly, Widdowson (2000) argues that the language presented in a corpus is
decontextualised and only partially real. If the decontextualised language in a corpus is to be
presented to learners as language in use, it has to be recontextualised. Yet, the reconstituted
context is not always the same as the original context of the texts (see Prodromou 2008).
Despite these arguments, corpus data are increasingly becoming an accepted and desirable
basis for the development of English language teaching materials, and most major dictionaries
and grammars now advertise the fact that they are based on ‘real’ language from a corpus.
Corpus linguistics
605

The Web as corpus
Today, corpus size has long exceeded the one million word standard set by the Brown Corpus
in the 1960s. The Cambridge International Corpus (CIC), which collects spoken and written
texts of American English, British English and learner English, is currently one of the biggest
corpora of English, with over a billion words. However, with the advent of the world-wide-
Web we now have access to language data which far exceeds even the most substantial corpus.
Kilgarriﬀand Grefenstette (2003) suggest that checking spelling and usage of a word by
typing it into an Internet search engine is a practical example of how the World Wide Web is
already being used as a language corpus on a daily basis by a large number of people. They
give the example of ‘speculater’ and ‘speculator’. A search engine reveals that these two spel-
lings generate, respectively, 67 hits and 82,000 hits on the Web. Therefore, based on the higher
frequency of occurrence of ‘speculator’, one may conclude that this is the preferred spelling.
However, for the Web to provide more than free, instant suggestions on spellings, corpus
linguists have developed Web-based interfaces that allow researchers to use the Web as a
compatible resource for linguistic research. WebCorp, for example, allows users greater control
over the type of texts to be searched. They can specify the register, textual domain, topic
range, date of modiﬁcation and so on. These facilities support investigations into both syn-
chronic and diachronic changes in language (see Renouf 2003; Renouf et al. 2007). Another
advantage of using WebCorp over general Internet search engines in lexical research is that the
former oﬀers basic statistical information, including the collocational proﬁle of search items
and the option to disambiguate polysemous items (Renouf 1993). The WebCorp interface can
also be used to generate frequency lists of Websites speciﬁed by the user. It is clearly a valuable
resource to use in its own right, but it can also be used to complement research on ﬁnite
corpora in terms of the up-to-date evidence of language in use that it oﬀers.
While the World Wide Web is a very large repository of naturally occurring language,
further research is needed as to the type of language that is being used on the Web, what it
represents, and how balanced it is in the context of a particular research question. Given the
ubiquity of Internet-based and Internet-stored discourse, this endeavour becomes particularly
urgent.
The impact of new technologies on corpus linguistics: an example
One of the main impacts of new technology on the area of corpus linguistics is no doubt the
use of the Web as a corpus. In addition, there have been signiﬁcant advances in spoken corpus
linguistics which have been aﬀorded by the alignment of diﬀerent modalities with a transcript. This
development started with the alignment of audio recordings with transcripts, and has recently
been extended to include video data as well. It has long been pointed out by corpus linguists
working with spoken data that the lack of audio and video leads to problems in the analysis of
this kind of corpus data. De Cock (1998), for example, in a discussion of the sequence ‘you
know’, argues that it is virtually impossible to decide whether ‘you know’ has a literal or a
formulaic meaning on the basis of the orthographic transcript alone. Similarly, Lin and
Adolphs (2009) observe that it is not possible to determine the functions of some instances of
‘I don’t know why’ in context unless one can refer to their prosody. Similar concerns arise from a
corpus-based analysis of multimodal written texts, i.e. those containing images and graphics.
Gesture, prosody and kinesics all add meaning to utterances and discourse as a whole, and
recent research in the area of spoken corpus analysis has started to explore the potential
impact of drawing on multimodal corpus resources for our descriptions of spoken language
Svenja Adolphs and Phoebe M. S. Lin
606

(see, for example, Knight et al. 2009). In addition to oﬀering a more comprehensive resource
for describing discourse, multimodal corpora also allow us to reﬂect on and evaluate some of
the methods for analysing textual renderings of spoken discourse established so far. The
representation and analysis of ‘textual’ concordance data thus becomes limited and limiting in
a way that can now be avoided by using one of the tools and interfaces developed for aligning
and searching text, audio and video data, such as ELAN or Transana.
Summary
In this chapter we have provided a brief overview of some of the key methods and current
issues in corpus linguistics. This has included an overview of diﬀerent types of corpora, as well
as an introduction to analytical methods. Key issues that have been highlighted in this chapter
relate to the use of corpus linguistics in phraseology research, English language teaching and
the use of the Web as corpus. We have also discussed the role of new technologies in the
development of multimodal corpus resources. As a discipline, corpus linguistics is gathering
pace with the development of ever larger data-sets and with an increasingly sophisticated suite
of tools that can be used to analyse these data and represent the outputs. One of the main
challenges for the future will be to fully explore the implications of these advances, not only
for language description in its own right, but also crucially for other disciplines, and the
impact that this work may have in applied contexts.
Related topics
critical discourse analysis; discourse; English for academic purposes; ESP and business com-
munication; language learning and language education; lexicography; lexis; medical commu-
nication; SLA; technology and language learning; the media; translation and interpreting;
world Englishes
Further reading
Anderson, W. and Corbett, J. (2009) Exploring English with Online Corpora, Basingstoke: Palgrave
Macmillan. (This volume oﬀers an introduction to how online corpora can be used in the teach-
ing and learning of English.)
Baker, P., Hardie, A. and McEnery, A. (2006) A Glossary of Corpus Linguistics, Edinburgh:
Edinburgh University Press. (This book provides a comprehensive overview of key concepts and
relevant references in corpus linguistics.)
Hoﬀmann, S., Evert, S., Smith, N., Lee, D. and Prytz, Y. B. (2008) Corpus Linguistics with
BNCWeb: A Practical Guide, Frankfurt: Peter Lang. (This book oﬀers a practical, hands-on
introduction to corpus linguistic methods using the BNCWeb corpus interface.)
Sinclair, J. (2004) Trust the Text: Language, Corpus and Discourse, London: Routledge. (This
volume is a collection of some of Sinclair’s most inﬂuential papers in the area of corpus linguistics
and lexico-grammar.)
Resources mentioned in the chapter
Language corpora
American National Corpus: www.americannationalcorpus.org/
Bank of English: www.titania.bham.ac.uk/
Bergen Corpus of London Teenage Language (COLT, now a constituent of the BNC): www.hit.uib.
no/colt/
Corpus linguistics
607

British Academic Spoken English (BASE) corpus: http://www2.warwick.ac.uk/fac/soc/al/research/
collect/base/; www.reading.ac.uk/AcaDepts/ll/base_corpus/
British National Corpus (BNC): www.natcorp.ox.ac.uk/
Brown Corpus: http://khnt.hit.uib.no/icame/manuals/brown/index.htm
Cambridge and Nottingham Corpus of Discourses in English (CANCODE, now a constituent of
the CIC): see McCarthy (1998)
Cambridge International Corpus (CIC): www.cambridge.org/elt/corpus/
Corpus of Contemporary American English: www.americancorpus.org/
English as a Lingua Franca in Academic Settings (ELFA) Corpus: www.uta.ﬁ/laitokset/kielet/engf/
research/elfa/
Health Communication Corpus: see Adolphs et al. (2004)
International Corpus of English (ICE): http://ice-corpora.net/ice/
International Corpus of Learner English (ICLE): see Granger et al. (2009)
Lancaster-Oslo-Bergen Corpus (LOB): see Johansson et al. (1978; 1986)
Limerick Corpus of Irish-English (LCIE) http://www.ul.ie/~lcie/homepage.htm
London Lund Corpus of Spoken English (LLC): http://khnt.hit.uib.no/icame/manuals/londlund/
index.htm
Longman Corpus Network: www.pearsonlongman.com/dictionaries/corpus/index.html
Michigan Corpus of Academic Spoken English (MICASE): http://micase.elicorpora.info/
Oxford English Corpus: www.askoxford.com/oec/
Vienna-Oxford International Corpus of English (VOICE): www.univie.ac.at/voice/page/index.php
Corpus tools/interfaces
BYU-BNC: http://corpus.byu.edu/bnc/
BNCWeb: http://corpora.lancs.ac.uk/BNCWeb/home.html
Compleat Lexical Tutor: www.lextutor.ca/
ELAN: www.lat-mpi.eu/tools/elan
Transana: www.transana.org/
WebCorp: www.Webcorp.org.uk/
References
Adolphs, S. (2006) Introducing Electronic Text Analysis: A Practical Guide for Language and
Literary Studies, Abingdon and New York: Routledge.
Adolphs, S., Brown, B., Carter, R., Crawford, P. and Sahota, O. (2004) ‘Applying corpus linguistics
in a health care context’, Journal of Applied Linguistics 1(1): 9–28.
Aijmer, K. (1996) Conversational Routines in English, London and New York: Longman.
Altenberg, B. (1998) ‘On the phraseology of spoken English: the evidence of recurrent word-
combinations’, in A. P. Cowie (ed.) Phraseology: Theory, Analysis and Applications, Oxford:
Clarendon Press.
Biber, D. (2006) University Language: A Corpus-based Study of Spoken and Written Registers,
Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
——(2009) ‘A corpus-driven approach to formulaic language in English: multi-word patterns in
speech and writing’, International Journal of Corpus Linguistics 14(3): 275–311.
Biber, D. and Conrad, S. (1999) ‘Lexical bundles in conversation and academic prose’, in
H. Hasselgard and S. Oksefjell (eds) Out of Corpora: Studies in Honour of Stig Johansson,
Amsterdam: Rodopi.
Biber, D., Conrad, S. and Cortes, V. (2003) ‘Lexical bundles in speech and writing: an initial
taxonomy’, in A. Wilson, P. Rayson and T. McEnery (eds) Corpus Linguistics by the Lune:
A Festschrift for Geoﬀrey Leech, Frankfurt: Peter Lang.
Biber, D., Johansson, S., Leech, G., Conrad, S. and Finegan, E. (1999) Longman Grammar of
Spoken and Written English, Harlow: Pearson Longman.
Burnard, L. (2005) ‘Metadata for corpus work’, in M. Wynne (ed.) Developing Linguistic Corpora:
A Guide to Good Practice, Oxford: Oxbow Books.
Carter, R. and McCarthy, M. (1996) ‘Correspondence’, ELT Journal 50(4): 369–71.
Svenja Adolphs and Phoebe M. S. Lin
608

——(1999) ‘The English get-passive in spoken discourse: description and implications for an inter-
personal grammar’, English Language and Linguistics 3(1): 41–58.
Coxhead, A. (2000) ‘A new academic word list’, TESOL Quarterly 34(2): 213–38.
Danielsson, P. (2003) ‘Automatic extraction of meaningful units from corpora: a corpus-driven
approach using the word stroke’, International Journal of Corpus Linguistics 8(1): 109–27.
De Cock, S. (1998) ‘A recurrent word combination approach to the study of formulae in the speech
of native and non-native speakers of English’, International Journal of Corpus Linguistics 3(1):
59–80.
Dunning, T. (1993) ‘Accurate methods for the statistics of surprise and coincidence’, Computational
Linguistics 19(1): 61–74.
Erman, B. and Warren, B. (2000) ‘The idiom principle and the open choice principle’, Text 20(1): 29–62.
Farr, F., Murphy, B. and O’Keeﬀe, A. (2004) ‘The Limerick corpus of Irish English: design,
description and application, Teanga 21: 5–30.
Firth, J. R. (1957) ‘A synopsis of linguistic theory, 1930–55’, in Studies in Linguistic Analysis,
Oxford: Blackwell.
Gavioli, L. and Aston, G. (2001) ‘Enriching reality: language corpora in language pedagogy’, ELT
Journal 55(3): 238–46.
Granger, S., Dagneaux, E., Meunier, F. and Paquot, M. (2009) International Corpus of Learner
English, version 2, Louvain: Presses Universitaires de Louvain.
Hunston, S. (2002) Corpora in Applied Linguistics, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Johansson, S., Leech, G. and Goodluck, H. (1978) Manual of Information to Accompany the
Lancaster-Oslo/Bergen Corpus of British English, for Use with Digital Computers, Oslo:
University of Oslo.
Johansson, S., Atwell, E., Garside, R. and Leech, G. (1986) The Tagged LOB Corpus: User’s
Manual, Bergen: Norwegian Computing Centre for the Humanities.
Kilgarriﬀ, A. and Grefenstette, G. (2003) ‘Introduction to the special issue on the Web as corpus’,
Computational Linguistics 29(3): 333–48.
Knight, D., Evans, D., Carter, R., and Adolphs, S. (2009) ‘HeadTalk, HandTalk and the
corpus: towards a framework for multi-modal, multi-media corpus development’, Corpora
4(1): 1–32.
Lin, P. M. S. and Adolphs, S. (2009), ‘Sound evidence: phraseological units in spoken corpora’, in
A. Barﬁeld and H. Gyllstad (eds) Researching Collocations in Another Language: Multiple
Interpretations, Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan.
Louw, B. (1993) ‘Irony in the text or insincerity in the writer? The diagnostic potential of semantic
prosodies’, in M. Baker, G. Francis and E. Tognini-Bonelli (eds) Text and Technology: In Honour
of John Sinclair, Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
McCarthy, M. (1998) Spoken Language and Applied Linguistics, Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.
McCarthy, M. and Carter, R. (1995) ‘Spoken grammar: what is it and how can we teach it?’, ELT
Journal 49(3): 207–18.
Meunier, F. and Granger, S. (eds) (2008) Phraseology in Foreign Language Learning and Teaching,
Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Moon, R. (1998) ‘Frequencies and forms of phrasal lexemes in English’, in A. P. Cowie (ed.)
Phraseology: Theory, Analysis and Applications, Oxford: Clarendon Press.
O’Keeﬀe, A., McCarthy, M. and Carter, R. (2007) From Corpus to Classroom: Language Use and
Language Teaching, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
O’Keeﬀe, A., Clancy, B., and Adolphs, S. (2011) Introducing Pragmatics in Use, London: Routledge.
Oakey, D. (2002) ‘Formulaic language in English academic writing’, in R. Reppen, S. Fitzmaurice and
D. Biber (ed.) Using Corpora to Explore Linguistic Variation, Philadelphia, PA: John Benjamins.
Prodromou, L. (1996a) ‘Correspondence’, ELT Journal 50(4): 371–3.
——(1996b) ‘Correspondence’, ELT Journal 50(1): 88–9.
——(1998) ‘Correspondence’, ELT Journal 52(3): 266–7.
——(2008) English as a Lingua Franca: A Corpus-based Analysis, London: Continuum.
Rayson, P. (2003) ‘Matrix: A Statistical Method and Software Tool for Linguistic Analysis Through
Corpus Comparison’, unpublished thesis, Lancaster University.
Renouf, A. (1993) Making Sense of Text: Automated Approaches to Meaning Extraction, Proceed-
ings of the 17th International Online Information Meeting, 7–9 December 1993.
Corpus linguistics
609

——(2003) ‘WebCorp: providing a renewable data source for corpus linguists’, in S. Granger and
S. Petch-Tyson (eds) Extending the Scope of Corpus-based Research: New Applications, New
Challenges, Amsterdam: Rodopi.
Renouf, A., Kehoe, A. and Banerjee, J. (2007) ‘WebCorp: an integrated system for Web text search’,
in M. Hundt, N. Nesselhauf and C. Biewer (eds) Corpus Linguistics and the Web, Amsterdam:
Rodopi.
Schmitt, N. (ed.) (2004) Formulaic Sequences, Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Scott, M. (1997) ‘PC analysis of key words – and key key words’, System 25(2): 233–45.
Seidlhofer, B. (ed.) (2003) Controversies in Applied Linguistics, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Simpson, R. (2004) ‘Stylistic features of academic speech: the role of formulaic expressions’, in
U. Connor and T. A. Upton (eds) Discourse in the Professions: Perspectives from Corpus Linguistics,
Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Simpson-Vlach, R. and Ellis, N. C. (2010) ‘An academic formulas list: new methods in phraseology
research’, Applied Linguistics [advance access published online 12 January 2010]: 1–26.
Sinclair, J. McH. (1991a) Corpus, Concordance and Collocation, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
——(1991b) ‘Shared knowledge’, in J. E. Alatis (ed.) Linguistics and Language Pedagogy: The State
of the Art, Washington, DC: Georgetown University Press.
——(1996) ‘The search for units of meaning’, Textus 9(1): 75–106.
——(2003) Reading Concordances, Harlow: Longman.
——(2004) Trust the Text: Language, Corpus and Discourse, London: Routledge.
——(2005) ‘Corpus and text: basic principles’, in M. Wynne (ed.) Developing Linguistic Corpora:
A Guide to Good Practice, Oxford: Oxbow Books.
Sinclair, J. McH. (ed.) (1987) Looking Up: An Account of the COBUILD Project in Lexical Computing
and the Development of the Collins COBUILD English Language Dictionary, London: Harper-
Collins.
Stubbs, M. (1995) ‘Collocations and semantic proﬁles: on the cause of the trouble with quantitative
methods’, Functions of Language 2(1): 1–33.
——(1996) Text and Corpus Analysis: Computer-assisted Studies of Language and Culture, Oxford:
Blackwell.
——(2009) ‘Memorial article: John Sinclair (1933–2007): the search for units of meaning: Sinclair
on empirical semantics’, Applied Linguistics 30(1): 115–37.
Tognini-Bonelli, E. (2001) Corpus Linguistics at Work, Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Tribble, C. and Jones, G. (1997) Concordances in the Classroom: A Resource Guide for Teachers,
2nd edn, Harlow: Longman.
Widdowson, H. G. (1991) ‘The description and prescription of language’, in J. E. Alatis (ed.) Lin-
guistics and Language Pedagogy: the State of the Art, Washington, DC: Georgetown University
Press.
——(2000) ‘On the limitations of linguistics applied’, Applied Linguistics 21: 3–25.
Wray, A. (2002) Formulaic Language and the Lexicon, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
——(2008) Formulaic Language: Pushing the Boundaries, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Svenja Adolphs and Phoebe M. S. Lin
610

43
Cognitive linguistics
Hans-Jörg Schmid and Friedrich Ungerer
Introduction
Like many other notions in linguistics, the term cognitive linguistics is used in a number of
ways. What may be special about this notion, however, is that two competing and in many
respects incompatible approaches to the study of language go by the same name. While these
two approaches share the idea that linguists should consider psychological aspects of speakers’
knowledge about language (cf. the Latin cognoscere ‘(get to) know’) rather than merely
describe linguistic behaviour, they diﬀer with regard to how they explain the nature and sources
of this knowledge. The ﬁrst view, very much associated with Chomsky and known as gen-
erative grammar (cf. Wakabayashi, this volume), sees knowledge about language – i.e. linguis-
tic competence – as a very special human ability which is not, or only remotely, related to other
cognitive faculties such as perception, attention or memory. The second view of cognitive lin-
guistics takes a completely diﬀerent perspective and emphasizes the experiential nature of linguistic
competence. It is this approach, and its vision of explaining the cognitive foundations of lin-
guistic structure and usage, that this chapter will be concerned with. In this account, knowl-
edge about linguistic structures is explained with recourse to our knowledge about the world,
and it is assumed that language both reﬂects and contributes to shaping this knowledge.
Introduced by linguists such as Fillmore, Lakoﬀ, Langacker and Talmy in key publications in
the 1980s, this notion of cognitive linguistics is today represented, for example, by the Inter-
national Cognitive Linguistics Association (ICLA) and in the papers published in the journal
Cognitive Linguistics.
History and key issues
Categorization, prototype theory and basic levels
An important starting-point of cognitive-linguistic thinking – which actually predates the term
cognitive linguistics itself, which was not used before the early 1980s – was the empirical
research into the nature of conceptual categories carried out by the anthropologists Berlin and
Kay (1969) and the psychologist Rosch (1973, 1978). Studying the denotational ranges of basic
611

colour terms like red, blue and yellow in a large number of languages, Berlin and Kay found
that there was a surprising degree of agreement on what informants from diﬀerent linguistic
and cultural backgrounds considered as the best examples of red, blue, etc. For the border
areas, e.g. the range of colours from dark red to purple or from a turquoise-like blue to green,
there was much less agreement. Berlin and Kay referred to the areas on the colour spectrum
which represented the best examples of basic colours as focal colours, and Kay and McDaniel
(1978) later demonstrated that physiological aspects of the visual apparatus were responsible
for the observed inter-subjective and cross-cultural commonalities. This is an interesting and
very straightforward example of how properties of linguistic units, in this case the meanings of
basic colour terms, are inﬂuenced by other cognitive abilities, here perception.
Berlin and Kay’s work was taken up by Rosch and extended to other types of categories
including geometrical shapes (SQUARE, TRIANGLE) as well as everyday concepts such as FURNITURE,
VEHICLE, WEAPON and others. What Rosch found was that just like in the case of colour categories,
the members of these object categories could be rated on a goodness-of-example scale by infor-
mants in psychological tests. For example, informants agreed that cars and trucks were very good
examples of the category VEHICLE, but rated skis, skateboards and elevators as very poor ones.
Rosch introduced the term prototype for the best examples of categories and argued that they
served as cognitive reference points for the storage and retrieval of categories. This idea was
complemented by the notion of fuzzy boundaries between categories (cf. Labov 1973), referring to
the observation that conceptual categories such as CUP, MUG and BOWL are not separated by strict
category boundaries, but seem to fade into each other, with objects possibly being named as cup
by some informants and as mug by others. In short, rather than being subject to a checklist of
necessary and suﬃcient features as suggested by structuralist semantics (and Aristotelian philo-
sophy), conceptual categories are internally structured in terms of prototypes, good and less good
members, as well as fuzzy boundaries to ‘neighbouring’ categories. This idea is one of the cor-
nerstones of what is known as prototype theory of categorization and, since these categories are
labelled by words and have conceptual content, as prototype semantics. Prototypes can be shown
to diﬀer from less typical members of categories with regard to the number (and nature) of
attributes associated with them. For example, while cars and trucks are associated with crucial
attributes of the concept VEHICLE such as ‘used to transport people and things’, skis and skate-
boards can indeed be used as a means of transport but are much more strongly linked with
attributes like ‘sports’ or ‘fun’.
Although the idea of prototype theory ﬁrst came up in connection with superordinate
categories such as FURNITURE, VEHICLE and WEAPON, it soon emerged that the notion of proto-
type is even more helpful when it comes to explaining basic level categories or concepts (BED
and TABLE, CAR and TRUCK, GUN and KNIFE rather than FURNITURE, VEHICLE and WEAPON, etc). It is
here that we ﬁnd words which are short, morphologically simple, acquired early in ontogenetic
development and introduced into discourse in unmarked contexts. As shown by Rosch et al.
(1976), the members of basic level categories have a similar shape which lends itself to per-
ception, and possibly representation, as a holistic gestalt. In addition, we interact with similar
motor movements with members of basic level categories; for example, we sit down on all
types of chairs. Superordinate categories, on the other hand, rely on a diﬀerent principle, also
often subsumed under the label prototype theory, the principle of family resemblances. As
Rosch and Mervis (1975) showed, the seemingly diﬀerent members of superordinate categories
such as FURNITURE or VEHICLE, rather than depending on large numbers of category-wide
attributes as basic-level categories do, are held together by clusters of overlapping attributes,
just like the members of one family will usually not all resemble each other but have certain
sets of characteristics in common. Indeed, the notion of family resemblances had been invoked
Hans-Jörg Schmid and Friedrich Ungerer
612

much earlier to explain the internal conceptual coherence of the category
GAME by the
philosopher Wittgenstein (1958).
Frames, cognitive models and conceptual metaphors
Conceptual categories are not only linked in memory with attributes associated with the cate-
gory members, but also embedded in a huge conceptual network of more or less ﬁrmly stored
knowledge structures. One type of these structures is known as frames and deﬁned as ‘cogni-
tive structures [ … ] knowledge of which is presupposed for the concepts encoded by the
words’ (Fillmore and Atkins 1992: 75). A classic and very inﬂuential example from the
pre-cognitive-linguistic era is the so-called commercial transaction frame (Fillmore 1977) pre-
supposed by verbs such as buy, sell, pay or cost. The frame is described in terms of the frame
components BUYER, SELLER, MONEYand GOODS, and it is assumed that even though the verbs do
not require all of these components to occur on the syntactic surface (cf. examples 1 and 2),
mention of any of the verbs will invariably activate the whole frame.
1
The book [GOODS] cost ten pounds [MONEY].
2
Mary [BUYER] bought an expensive book [GOODS].
In addition, depending on the verb chosen, certain components of the frame are highlighted to
various degrees. For example, while the verb cost draws attention to the GOODS and the MONEY
which ﬁll the subject and object slots in the sentence (example 1), the verb buy highlights the
BUYER (subject) and the GOODS (object) (example 2). Obviously, this has to do with putting a
certain perspective on a scene and deploying attention to certain aspects, a cognitive ability
reﬂected in other areas of language we will look at later.
While frames are conceived of as somehow delimitable knowledge structures, other
types of cognitive models are less restricted. Lakoﬀ, for instance, in his treatment of idealized
cognitive models (1987), takes up Fillmore’s discussion of the noun bachelor and argues that
this concept only makes sense within an idealized cognitive model of a society whose members
share certain expectations as to the institution of marriage. Ungerer and Schmid (2006: 49),
who opt for a deliberately comprehensive deﬁnition of cognitive models as ‘stored representa-
tions that belong to a certain ﬁeld’, provide the example ON THE BEACH, which ‘includes’ closely
interrelated person and object categories such as PEOPLE, SAND, SHELLS, BUCKET as well as
action and event categories, for example SWIM, SUNBATHE, BUILDING A SANDCASTLE and others.
While it may be criticized that these descriptions of cognitive models are totally subjective,
open-ended and apparently of a somewhat unscientiﬁc ad-hoc nature, it may well be the case
that this is exactly how our minds work. The psychological reality of these knowledge
structures can be tested with priming experiments and other tests and gleaned from
language use, for example when speakers use deﬁnite noun phrases with anaphoric reference to
components of frames that are not explicitly mentioned but still activated, cf. the NP the sea in
example 3:
3
We spent some time on the beach yesterday. The sea was very rough.
Cognitive models are not individual, purely subjective knowledge structures, but presumably
shared to a large extent by the members of a culture and therefore also seen as cultural models.
It goes without saying that frames and cognitive as well as cultural models are also based on
our experience of the world around us.
Cognitive linguistics
613

One particularly fruitful early ﬁeld in cognitive linguistics which relies on the idea of cog-
nitive models (or domains) is the conceptual theory of metaphor, introduced in the pioneering
book by Lakoﬀand Johnson ([1980] 2003). In a nutshell, this theory claims that con-
ventionalized metaphorical expressions such as examples 4 or 5 are by no means dead meta-
phors but surface manifestations of deeply entrenched underlying mappings of one domain,
the source domain, onto another, the target domain:
4
He got all steamed up.
5
I almost exploded.
In these two examples the cognitive model of a hot ﬂuid in a container is mapped onto the
concept of anger, yielding a conceptual metaphor dubbed ANGER IS A HOT FLUID IN A CONTAINER.
Other examples of conceptual metaphors discussed by Lakoﬀand Johnson include AN ARGUMENT
IS A JOURNEY (cf. 6 and 7), IDEAS ARE OBJECTS (cf. 8 and 9) or COMPANIES ARE PLANTS (cf. 10 and 11):
6
We have arrived at a disturbing conclusion.
7
Do you follow my argument?
8
We dropped the idea.
9
They canvassed a new idea.
10
The company has several branches.
11
We’ve been growing continuously over the past years.
From an experiential point of view, it is important to emphasize that conceptual metaphors
typically use a more tangible and concrete domain as a source, which is mapped onto a more
abstract domain in need of conceptual structure.
Figure and ground, prominence and salience
Another experiential aspect related to the cognitive abilities of perception and attention is the
gestalt psychological principle of ﬁgure and ground. This principle suggests that when viewing
a given scene we will invariably single out certain elements as prominent ﬁgures while rele-
gating others to the less prominent ground. For example, looking up into the dark sky at
night, we inadvertently select the moon as a salient ﬁgure which stands out from the black
ground behind it. Arguably, a reﬂection of this perceptual principle can be identiﬁed in the
structures of linguistic utterances describing such a scene: while example 12 sounds fairly
natural, as it highlights the salient ﬁgure in the more prominent syntactic slot of subject, a
complementary utterance like example 13, although an equally true depiction of the scene,
would be decidedly weird, or at least marked:
12
The moon is in the sky.
13
The sky is around the moon.
Perceptual stimuli which are likely to be selected as ﬁgures tend to be smaller, more movable,
geometrically simpler, more dependent and more prominent (once perceived) than typical
ground entities (Talmy 2000: 315); in addition, ﬁgures tend to be more relevant, and thus both
perceptually and conceptually more salient, for the language user, and this is all reﬂected in
degrees of prominence awarded to the linguistic material referring to these salient entities in
actual utterances.
Hans-Jörg Schmid and Friedrich Ungerer
614

A large part of the early research into ﬁgure-ground phenomena focused on prepositions
(Brugman 1981; cf. Lakoﬀ1987: 416ﬀ.). Central to these and later studies on prepositions is
the notion of image-schema, deﬁned as
relatively simple structures that constantly recur in our everyday bodily experience: con-
tainers, paths, links, forces, balance, and in various orientations and relations: up-down,
front-back, part-whole, center-periphery, etc. These structures [ … ] are directly mean-
ingful, ﬁrst, because they are directly and repeatedly experienced because of the nature of
the body and its mode of functioning in our environment.
(Lakoﬀ1987: 267–8)
It is common practice to refer to the ﬁgure in these schemata as trajector and to the ground as
landmark. Probably the most powerful aspect of these schematic structures is the potential of
schematic mental imagery for speciﬁc context-sensitive elaborations. This explains, for
instance, the wide range of semantic variation for the preposition over illustrated in examples
14 to 18:
14
They have a horseshoe over their door.
15
The dog jumped over the fence.
16
Carl cycled over the bridge.
17
The village clouded over.
18
The wall fell over.
Example 14 describes a stative conﬁguration of a trajector above a landmark, which is con-
sidered as representing the fundamental image schema associated with over in a recent treatment
by Tyler and Evans (2003: 66). Examples 15 and 16 represent dynamic scenes in which the tra-
jector moves through a stage that corresponds to the central schema, with the trajector being
in contact with the landmark in 16. In 17, the trajector is encoded in the verb clouded and
covers the landmark, while in 18, trajector and landmark coincide but perform a movement
similar to the trajector in 15.
Yet image schemas can also be metaphorically extended and then account for the motiva-
tion behind ﬁgurative, non-spatial or non-visual experiences. For example, Tyler and Evans
(2003: 85–9) trace the meaning ‘excess’ encoded by over in example 20 to more concrete
meanings like the one exempliﬁed in 19, and the ‘completion’ sense in 22 to uses of type 21:
19
The arrow flew over the target and landed in the woods.
20
Many students wrote over the word limit.
21
The cat’s jump is over.
22
The film/game/match is over.
Image-schemas and their elaborations and metaphorical extensions thus contribute to
accounting for meaning relation in the complex polysemy networks associated with linguistic
elements such as in, over, out or up, which function, among other things, as prepositions, par-
ticles and preﬁxes in English. Unlike in conventional dictionary entries, which simply list
meanings of lexemes, the motivations and links between the wide range of senses become
plausible – an eﬀect on the internal conceptual coherence of these ‘radial categories’, which is
sometimes considered a further amendment to the prototype theory of meaning introduced in
the section on categorization above.
Cognitive linguistics
615

More recent developments
Prototype theory, basic levels and entrenchment
Though by no means uncontroversial, prototype theory has gained a ﬁrm place in linguistic
theorizing. A substantial part of the recent discussion of the prototype model of categorization
has revolved around the issues of the theoretical status and cognitive reality of prototypes.
This has to do with the question as to whether the results of goodness-of-example ratings are
basically just a superﬁcial eﬀect of the rating task (e.g. with low ratings for an ostrich as a
bird), or whether they reﬂect a marginal membership of the subcategory OSTRICH within the
category BIRD. Croft and Cruse (2004: 79–81) insist on the importance of the distinction,
stressing that while OSTRICH may indeed be a poor example of the category BIRD, it is still
undoubtedly a fully ﬂedged member. Taylor (2003), like Ungerer and Schmid (2006: 55–6),
makes a distinction between folk and expert models of categories and claims that everyday
models corresponding to discrete, hard-and-fast expert categories can still show prototypicality
eﬀects and fuzzy boundaries. Taylor also transfers the notion of prototypicality to technical
categories in linguistics, for example in the area of phonology and morphology.
The notion of basic level has recently come to be viewed as just one manifestation of the
more general cognitive process (and product) of entrenchment (Langacker 1987: 100, 2008a:
16–17; Geeraerts et al. 1994; Schmid 2007). For example, when telling a story of a dog chasing
a cat, the terms that will ﬁrst come to mind are precisely these basic-level terms, dog and cat,
rather than superordinates such as mammal or subordinates like retriever and ginger cat.
Observations of this type are interpreted as evidence of the higher degree of entrenchment of
basic-level terms vis-à-vis words on other levels of categorization. It is assumed that the
entrenchment of linguistic units is facilitated by repeated use, which, due to increasing auto-
matization and routinization of access and retrieval, reduces the cognitive eﬀort required for
processing. Entrenchment is also linked with an increasing conventionality of linguistic units in
the speech community (Langacker 2008a: 21) and diachronic changes such as grammaticali-
zation, which can be explained as a gradual shift from syntactic structures constructed afresh
each time they are used towards the storage of entrenched and conventionalized patterns and
routines (cf. Bybee 2006). For instance, complex prepositions such as with regard to, on behalf
of or in terms of presumably undergo entrenchment and conventionalization processes similar
to those already completed by coalesced prepositions or conjunctions like notwithstanding or
nevertheless.
From speciﬁc frames to universal event-frames
As has been shown above, frames were originally envisaged as linguistically relevant knowl-
edge structures pertaining to fairly restricted conceptual domains, which are abstracted from
similar actual situations. If the mind indeed distils such frames from recurrent experiences that
are perceived as being comparable in their overall structure, it does not seem unlikely that
frames can be stored on several levels, or layers, of speciﬁcity. A highly schematic, i.e. unspe-
ciﬁc, type of knowledge structure has been postulated by Leonard Talmy in his highly inﬂu-
ential work on event-frames (Talmy 1991, 2000). Talmy deﬁnes event-frames as sets ‘of
conceptual elements and interrelationships that [ … ] are evoked together or co-evoke each
other’ (2000, vol. 1: 259). Being related to very fundamental experiences of concrete physical
events such as moving objects or people causing objects to move, event-frames are very likely
universal. While this does not mean that all languages use the same means of encoding certain
Hans-Jörg Schmid and Friedrich Ungerer
616

types of event-frames, Talmy actually manages to show for one type, the so-called motion
event-frame, that there are two basic ways of mapping the components of the frame to lin-
guistic elements to be found in the languages of the world. The two patterns of encoding are
illustrated with equivalent English and Spanish examples in Figure 43.1 taken from Ungerer
and Schmid (2006: 235; based on Talmy 1991):
As the ﬁgure shows, the motion event-frame consists of ﬁve components (plus the optional
CAUSE, not represented in the example sentences): FIGURE, GROUND, MOTION and PATH are the
essential core components, MANNER (and CAUSE) have a less central status. While the mappings
of frame components onto syntactic slots are identical for FIGURE (surfaces as subject), MOTION
(verb) and GROUND (adverbial), the crucial diﬀerence concerns the encoding of PATH and
MANNER. In English, information about the PATH is typically encoded in particles (‘satellites’,
here out) accompanying the verbal form proper (rode), while in Spanish it is conﬂated with the
motion component in the verb (saliò, ‘exited’). On the other hand, the MANNER component is
lexicalized in the verb in English (rode), but must be added by means of an optional adverbial
in Spanish (montando caballo, lit. ‘mounted on horse’). Talmy (2000, vol. 2: 117–18, 221–30)
refers to the two types of encoding, or ‘lexicalization’, patterns as mainly satellite-framed (e.g.
English, German, Russian, Finno-Ugric, Chinese) and verb-framed (e.g. the Romance and
Semitic languages, Japanese, Tamil, Bantu).
From an applied linguistic perspective, the problems that arise from these systematic con-
trasts for translation are particularly interesting (cf. Slobin 1999). Starting from English to
Spanish, although it is no problem to render the MANNER component encoded in the English
verb rode by means of an adverbial such as montando caballo in Spanish, this clearly has an
extra eﬀect: the manner of the action is much more prominent in the translated Spanish than
in the original English version, as it is encoded by a fully ﬂedged clause constituent consisting
of two ‘heavy’ words. Whether the Spanish translation is really conceptually equivalent to
the English is therefore doubtful. Conversely, translators from Spanish to English often face the
problem that translations which sound natural in English are strictly speaking not true to the
original version in the respect that they bring in a MANNER component that is not expressed in
the Spanish original. While this would not be too diﬃcult for El chico saliò del patio, which
Figure 43.1 Illustration of the encoding of motion event-frame components in English and
Spanish
Source: Ungerer and Schmid 2006: 235; based on Talmy 1991.
Cognitive linguistics
617

could quite naturally be rendered as The boy went out of the yard, Slobin (1999: 212) shows
that ‘English translators actually add manner to the Spanish originals in almost a quarter of
their translations’ (ibid., emphasis in original). Spanish translators, on the other hand, omit
information about the manner of motion events in about 50 per cent of their translations.
Conceptual metaphor, metonymy and blending
Ever since it was launched by Lakoﬀand Johnson (1980), conceptual metaphor theory has
aroused massive interest among cognitive linguists. While the paradigm has essentially
remained intact, some theoretical developments, many of which are summarized in the after-
word to the second edition of Metaphors We Live By (Lakoﬀand Johnson 2003), can be
observed. These include the idea that the major part of the metaphorical system has a bodily
basis and that this embodied nature of metaphor and the connections between concrete bodily
and abstract experience is even reﬂected in the structure and workings of the brain (Lakoﬀand
Johnson 1999; Gallese and Lakoﬀ2005). To readers of this Handbook of Applied Linguistics, it
may be of particular interest that conceptual metaphor theory has spawned a huge number of
applications on a wide range of registers, among them advertising, political, media, medical,
religious and sports discourse (cf., for example, Cameron and Deignan 2006; Lakoﬀ2004;
Musolﬀ2006; Nerlich 2010). As a further recent development, metaphor theorists have begun
to search for methods of identifying metaphors in large corpora in a more or less automatic
way (cf. Charteris-Black 2004; Deignan 2005; Stefanowitsch and Gries 2007).
Although Lakoﬀand Johnson did mention metonymy in Metaphors We Live By as a second
basic type of ﬁgurative language, which is based on contiguity rather than similarity, it was
not until much later that cognitive linguists started to see the fundamental role of this lin-
guistic phenomenon for conceptualization. Triggered to a large extent by an important paper
by Zoltan Kövecses and Günter Radden (1998) and the volume edited by Klaus-Uwe Panther
and Günter Radden soon afterwards (1999), linguistic eﬀects of metonymic conceptualizations
such as PART FOR WHOLE, CAUSE FOR EFFECT or AGENT FOR ACTION have been found in many areas
of language. For example, the conversion of tutor from noun to verb illustrated in example 23
can be interpreted as being cognitively motivated by the conceptual metonymy AGENT FOR
ACTION. In the ﬁeld of pragmatics, the functioning of indirect speech acts such as example 24
has been explained with recourse to the metonymy ABILITY FOR ACTION (Panther and Thornburg
1999). That metonymy is a highly productive process in the lexicon creating new meanings for
existing lexemes (cf. example 25) is of course hardly a new insight, but has thus been placed in
a wider cognitive context:
23
She has tutored many students. [AGENT FOR ACTION]
24
Can you step aside, please. [ABILITY FOR ACTION]
25a
wear glasses ‘spectacles’ [SUBSTANCE FOR OBJECT]
b
have another bottle ‘content of a bottle’ [CONTAINER FOR CONTENT]
c
she married money ‘a rich man’ [POSSESSED FOR POSSESSOR]
As pointed out in the section on frames and cognitive models above, the conceptual theory of
metaphor (and metonymy) is mainly interested in highly conventionalized metaphorical
expressions and tries to unveil their conceptual underpinnings. A cognitive-linguistic theory
that focuses on the online combinatorial processes involved in the interpretation of novel and
original ﬁgurative expressions is known as conceptual blending or conceptual integration theory.
This approach, introduced by Fauconnier and Turner (1998; cf. also Fauconnier and Turner
Hans-Jörg Schmid and Friedrich Ungerer
618

2002), works with the notion of mental spaces, that is, ‘small conceptual packets constructed as
we think and talk, for purposes of local understanding and action’, which ‘operate in working
memory but are built up partly by activating structures available from long-term memory’
(Fauconnier and Turner 2002: 40, 102). Conceptual blending theory tries to account for all kinds
of conceptual combinations, not only metaphors and metonymies. For example, a reader not fami-
liar with the recent coinage fridgegoogling (‘using the names of the things in your fridge as
input for a Google search in order to ﬁnd a useful recipe’) will, according to the model, construct
two mental spaces triggered by the familiar constituents fridge and google. These spaces presum-
ably include information retrieved from long-term memory such as ‘cool’, ‘used to store food’,
‘located in the kitchen’ and ‘cook’ for fridge and ‘computer’, ‘search the Internet’ and ‘look for infor-
mation’ for google. Given a facilitating context such as example 26, the reader then tries to
project what seems to be relevant information from these two input spaces and to integrate this
information in the ‘blended space’ in such a way that a sensible conceptual structure can emerge:
26
We couldn’t think of anything nice to cook for dinner last night, but when we switched on the
computer and did some fridgegoogling we came across an excellent recipe for chicken cassava.
Information likely to be projected from the fridge space includes ‘food’ and ‘cook’, and from
the google space ‘search the Internet’ and ‘look for information’. Once these pieces of infor-
mation are brought together by means of basic cognitive relations such as ‘identity’ (what is
searched for in Google is identical to the food found in the fridge) or ‘cause-eﬀect’ (‘the reason
for the googling is the aim of preparing food in the fridge’), a sensible and relevant
interpretation can be arrived at.
Figure and ground, cognitive grammar and construction grammar
The basic principle of ﬁgure and ground lies at the heart of the most detailed and compre-
hensive cognitive-linguistic theory of grammar known as cognitive grammar. Introduced by
Langacker in the 1980s (cf. Langacker 1987, 1991), this approach explains, for example, the
structural properties and conceptual impact of basic sentence patterns as manifestations of the
allocation of diﬀerent degrees of prominence. In simple SVO-sentences, the subject is regarded
as syntactic ﬁgure or trajector and the object as syntactic ground or landmark. From this
perspective, syntactic surface structures are the eﬀect of cognitive processes such as proﬁling,
perspectivizing and focusing, which are subsumed by Langacker under the label construal
(cf. Langacker 2008a: 55–89). To take a very simple example, in 27 Dylan is proﬁled as syn-
tactic ﬁgure and Patrick as syntactic ground. Encoding the identical content from a truth-
conditional point of view, 28 reverses the perspective and allocates complementary degrees of
prominence to the two participants:
27
Dylan resembles Patrick.
28
Patrick resembles Dylan.
Cognitive grammar departs from more formal models of grammar, especially the generative
one, in other fundamental respects. Knowledge of grammar is not modelled as a set of rules
and high-level generalizations based on the linguist’s introspection. Instead, grammar is con-
ceived as a huge network of symbolic units consisting of semantic and phonological poles,
which in a way are reminiscent of the pairing of signiﬁer and signiﬁed in Saussure’s classic
model of the linguistic sign. These symbolic units vary in terms of speciﬁcity and size from
Cognitive linguistics
619

simple lexemes or even derivational morphemes (e.g. suﬃxes such as -er, -ize and -able) to
schematic clause-level constructions (as illustrated in examples 27 and 28), thus bridging the gap
between what has traditionally been strictly separated as (idiosyncratic) lexicon and (rule-
based) grammar. What is also important is that the knowledge of symbolic units including syntactic
structures is claimed to be derivable from the actual use of linguistic structures: it is usage-based.
These basic assumptions are also shared by a range of recent cognitive-linguistic models
commonly subsumed under the label of construction grammar. Protagonists and milestone
publications include Fillmore and Kay (e.g. Fillmore et al. 1988), Goldberg (1995, 2006) and
Croft (2001). As stressed for instance by Goldberg (2006), form-meaning pairings can be
observed on all meaning-bearing linguistic levels, from single morphemes, lexemes and idioms
to abstract argument-structure constructions, such as the caused-motion construction, the
resultative construction or the ditransitive, or better ‘cause-receive’, construction exempliﬁed in
examples 29, 30 and 31. Even more signiﬁcant, constructions acquire a constructional mean-
ing, which does not necessarily depend on the meaning of the lexical items involved. This is
particularly impressive on the syntactic level of argument structure. A well-known case is
Goldberg’s sneeze example rendered in 32. Here, the overall semantic impact is one of caused-
motion, even though, taken by itself, the meaning of the intransitive verb sneeze as such would
not be interpreted as expressing caused motion:
29
Joanna kicked the ball to Sally. [Subject – Verb – Object – Adverbial]
’someone causing someone else to move’
30
Joanna wiped her mouth clean. [Subject – Verb – Object – Object complement]
’someone causing something to change state’
31
Joanna sent a text message to Sally. [Subject – Verb – ind. Object – dir. Object]
’someone causing someone else to receive something’
32
Fred sneezed the tissue off the table.
(Goldberg 1995: 152)
A very productive area of construction grammar relies on the (semi-)automatic retrieval and
advanced statistical analysis of attested uses of constructions from large computer corpora to
study degrees of attraction between schematic constructions and lexical elements ﬁlling slots in
them (cf. Gries and Stefanowitsch 2004; Stefanowitsch and Gries 2003). For example, it has been
shown, perhaps not surprisingly, that the verb attracted most strongly by the cause-receive
construction is give, followed by tell, send, oﬀer and show. Known as collostruction analysis
(a blend from ‘collocation’ and ‘construction’), representatives of this framework have recently
stepped up eﬀorts to bring together quantitative corpus data with results from psychological tests
to produce converging evidence from several sources using diﬀerent methods (Gries et al. 2005).
If collostruction analysis is applied to corpora of carer-child talk, it can also be used to
support a usage-based language acquisition theory, which, to some extent at least, promises to
mediate between the behavourist emphasis on imitative learning and Chomsky’s insistence on
an innate language function based on universal grammar. Following Goldberg (2006), for
example, the extremely frequent and early use of general purpose verbs like go, put or give by
carers encourages the child to use these verbs as item-speciﬁc constructions because they
reﬂect basic patterns of experience and can also be applied to a fairly wide range of arguments
without overgeneralization. The more these speciﬁc constructions are entrenched, the more
generalizations in terms of argument-structure constructions are facilitated, and this can be
taken as a general pattern of grammatical development, as investigated in numerous studies by
Tomasello and Lieven (e.g. Lieven and Tomasello 2008; Tomasello 2000, 2003).
Hans-Jörg Schmid and Friedrich Ungerer
620

Cognitive linguistics and language teaching
Although the implications of cognitive linguistics for language teaching have attracted a great
deal of attention in the last few years, Langacker’s remark (2008b) that his own article has
been ‘long on theory and short on practical recommendations’ applies to many contributions
of recently published collections in this ﬁeld (e.g. Achard and Niemeier 2004; Boers and
Lindstromberg 2008; de Knop and de Rycker 2008; Robinson and Ellis 2008). Against this
background, the following summary is restricted to selected aspects whose regular use in the
second-language classroom is feasible.
The usage-based account of ﬁrst-language acquisition provides support for a number of
well-established teaching principles and methods: Even where rule-based competence is the
goal, as in grammar, it is best derived inductively from practice and explanation of item-speciﬁc
constructions. Lexical items, in turn, should be mainly selected from basic-level categorization,
where frequent and therefore deeply entrenched lexical concepts are readily available in pro-
totypical examples and simple morphology (e.g. girl, boy, pen, paper, book), and they should
be presented in combination with general purpose verbs (e.g. go, put, give) and basic evaluative
adjectives (good, bad, big, small) in frequent collostructions.
Another key notion suggested by cognitive-linguistic thinking is the notion of ‘anchoring’.
New lexical items and item-speciﬁc structures are not only to be represented in suitable situa-
tional contexts. Equally, if not more, important is their embedding in mind maps – the frames,
scripts, scenarios or, more generally, cognitive models through which lexical concepts are
motivated. Care should be taken that, at least in the initial stages of language learning, these
mind maps are based on a grid of part-whole, container-contained or path relationships,
namely links that have been identiﬁed above as being based on our bodily experiences. Con-
cepts like KITCHEN, BEDROOM, BATHROOM, ROOF and CHIMNEY would be shown as parts of houses;
HOUSE, GARAGE, GARDEN, SHOP and CHURCH as parts of villages and VILLAGE, TOWN and CITY as
contained in a country, etc. (Ungerer 2001). Later, the cognitive explanation should be exten-
ded to the motivation of ﬁgurative language, especially where metonymic and metaphorical
extensions of basic conceptual models can be explained both verbally and visually (Boers and
Lindstromberg 2008). An area particularly suitable for the anchoring approach is the acquisi-
tion of prepositions and phrasal verbs, where meaning extension can be related to the ﬁgure-
ground (or trajector-landmark) contrast discussed above (Dirven 2001; Tyler and Evans 2003).
Anchoring can also take the form of ‘grounding’, especially where a deictic perspective is
involved, as in the teaching of articles (Achard 2008) and tense (Niemeier and Reif 2008) as
well as modals; their root meaning can be explained and visually represented as the impact of
external authority-based force or internal will-powered force on the path pursued by an indi-
vidual, while the choice of present and past forms of modals is accounted for by the proximal-distal
metaphor (Tyler 2008: 470–6). In a wider sense, anchoring also applies to clause patterns,
which need no longer be taught as formal conﬁgurations, but should be seen as semantic
constructions ‘anchored’ in human experience (as shown above for the caused-motion con-
struction) or as event frames, as originally suggested by Talmy and developed into a teachable
system by Radden and Dirven (2007).
Finally, focusing on our perceptual access to the world, the principle of gestalt perception
could be used to facilitate learning, for example in the area of noun grammar, where it is
common to distinguish between count nouns and uncountable nouns, although countability is
not easily deﬁned in a grammatical context (nor is its cognitive explanation as boundedness/
unboundedness). Starting from holistic gestalts like ‘person’, ‘group’ and ‘collection of things’
would make it easier for many students to grasp the use of grammatical number and concord.
Cognitive linguistics
621

In the domain of verb grammar, ‘signal’ grammar, such as recommending the use of the simple
form for habitual concepts indicated by adverbs denoting high frequency and of the pro-
gressive form sparked oﬀby simultaneity indicators (e.g. at this moment, at present), can be
understood holistically. In general, the possibilities of the gestalt approach, especially for
young learners, do not seem to be exhausted yet, and this is just one area in which the appli-
cation of cognitive-linguistic ideas to language teaching requires further research and invites
practical recommendations.
Related topics
generative grammar; grammar; psycholinguistics
Further reading
Croft, W. and Cruse, D. A. (2004) Cognitive Linguistics, Cambridge and New York: Cambridge
University Press. (A textbook with a very strong focus on the construction grammar approach.)
Geeraerts, D. and Cuyckens, H. (eds) (2007) The Oxford Handbook of Cognitive Linguistics,
Oxford: Oxford University Press. (A comprehensive overview of cognitive linguistics in ﬁfty
chapters. Useful as a reference work and as a source of detailed accounts of selected areas.)
Kövecses, Z. (2002) Metaphor: A Practical Introduction, Oxford: Oxford University Press. (Acces-
sible and richly illustrated introduction to the conceptual theory of metaphor and metonymy;
includes a chapter on conceptual blending.)
Langacker, R. W. (2008) Cognitive Grammar: A Basic Introduction, Oxford: Oxford University
Press. (Labelled a basic introduction, this textbook gives a very good state-of-the-art account of
Langacker’s cognitive grammar but is still quite demanding.)
Ungerer, F. and Schmid, H.-J. (2006) An Introduction to Cognitive Linguistics, 2nd edn, Harlow:
Pearson Longman. (Accessible introduction covering all major areas of cognitive linguistics.)
References
Achard, M. (2008) ‘Teaching construal: cognitive pedagogical grammar’, in P. Robinson and N. C. Ellis
(eds), Handbook of Cognitive Linguistics and Second Language Acquisition, London: Routledge.
Achard, M. and Niemeier, S. (eds) (2004) Cognitive Linguistics, Second Language Acqusition and
Foreign Language Teaching, Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter.
Berlin, B. and Kay, P. (1969) Basic Color Terms: Their Universality and Evolution, Berkeley and Los
Angeles: University of California Press.
Boers, F. and Lindstromberg, S. (eds) (2008) Cognitive Linguistic Approaches to Teaching Vocabu-
lary and Phraseology, Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter.
Brugman, C. M. (1981) The Story of Over, Trier: LAUT.
Bybee, J. (2006) ‘From usage to grammar: the mind’s response to repetition’, Language 82: 711–33.
Cameron, L. and Deignan, A. (2006) ‘The emergence of metaphor in discourse’, Applied Linguistics
27(4): 671–90.
Charteris-Black, J. (2004) Corpus Approaches to Critical Metaphor Analysis, Basingstoke: Palgrave
Macmillan.
Croft, W. (2001) Radical Construction Grammar: Syntactic Theory in Typological Perspective,
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Croft, W. and Cruse, D. A. (2004) Cognitive linguistics, Cambridge and New York: Cambridge
University Press.
de Knop, S. and de Rycker, T. (eds) (2008) Cognitive Approaches to Pedagogical Grammar: A
Volume in Honour of René Dirven, Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter.
Deignan, A. (2005) Metaphor and Corpus Linguistics, Amsterdam and Philadelphia: John Benjamins.
Dirven, R. (2001) ‘English phrasal verbs: theory and didactic application’, in M. Pütz, S. Niemeier
and R. Dirven (eds) Applied Cognitive Linguistics II: Language Pedagogy, Berlin: Mouton de
Gruyter.
Hans-Jörg Schmid and Friedrich Ungerer
622

Fauconnier, G. and Turner, M. (1998) ‘Conceptual integration networks’, Cognitive Science 22(2):
133–87.
——(2002) The Way We Think: Conceptual Blending and the Mind’s Hidden Complexities, New
York: Basic Books.
Fillmore, C. C. (1977) ‘Topics in lexical semantics’, in R. W. Cole (ed.) Current Issues in Linguistic
Theory, Bloomington and London: Indiana University Press.
Fillmore, C. C. and Atkins, B. T. (1992) ‘Toward a frame-based lexicon: the semantics of RISK and
its neighbors’, in A. Lehrer and E. Kittay (eds) Frames, Fields, and Contrasts, Hillsdale, NJ:
Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Fillmore, C. C., Kay, P. and O’Connor, M. C. (1988) ‘Regularity and idiomaticity in grammatical
constructions: the case of let alone’, Language 64: 501–38.
Gallese, V. and Lakoﬀ, G. (2005) ‘The brain’s concepts: the role of the sensory-motor system in
conceptual knowledge’, Cognitive Neuropsychology 21: 455–79.
Geeraerts, D. and Cuyckens, H. (eds) (2007) The Oxford Handbook of Cognitive Linguistics,
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Geeraerts, D., Grondelaers, S. and Bakema, P. (1994) The Structure of Lexical Variation: A
Descriptive Framework for Cognitive Lexicology, Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter.
Goldberg, A. E. (1995) Constructions: A Construction Grammar Approach to Argument Structure,
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
——(2006) Constructions at Work: The Nature of Generalization in Language, Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Gries, S. T., Hampe, B. and Schönefeld, D. (2005) ‘Converging evidence: bringing together experi-
mental and corpus data on the associations of verbs and constructions’, Cognitive Linguistics 16:
635–76.
Gries, S. T. and Stefanowitsch, A. (2004) ‘Extending collostructional analysis: a corpus-based per-
spective on “alternations”’, International Journal of Corpus Linguistics 9: 97–129.
Kay, P. and McDaniel, C. K. (1978) ‘The linguistic signiﬁcance of the meanings of basic color
terms’, Language 54: 610–46.
Kövecses, Z. and Radden, G. (1998) ‘Metonymy: developing a cognitive linguistic view’, Cognitive
Linguistics 9: 37–77.
Labov, W. (1973) ‘The boundaries of words and their meaning’, in C.-J. N. Bailey and R. W. Shuy
(eds) New Ways of Analyzing Variation in English, Washington, DC: Georgetown University Press.
Lakoﬀ, G. (1987) Women, Fire, and Dangerous Things: What Categories Reveal about the Mind,
Chicago and London: University of Chicago Press.
——(2004) Don’t Think of a White Elephant: Know Your Values and Frame the Debate, White
River Junction, VT: Chelsea Green Publishing.
Lakoﬀ, G. and Johnson, M. ([1980] 2003) Metaphors We Live By (2nd edn with a new afterword),
Chicago and London: University of Chicago Press.
——(1999) Philosophy in the Flesh: The Embodied Mind and its Challenge to Western Thought,
New York: Basic Books.
Langacker, R. W. (1987) Foundations of Cognitive Grammar, vol. 1: Theoretical Prerequisites,
Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press.
——(1991) Foundations of Cognitive Grammar, vol. 2: Descriptive Application, Stanford, CA:
Stanford University Press.
——(2008a) Cognitive Grammar: A Basic Introduction, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
——(2008b) ‘The relevance of cognitive grammar for language pedagogy’, in S. de Knop and T. de
Rycker (eds) Cognitive Approaches to Pedagogical Grammar: A Volume in Honour of René
Dirven, Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter.
Lieven, E. and Tomasello, M. (2008) ‘Children’s ﬁrst language acquisition from a usage-based per-
spective’, in P. Robinson and N. C. Ellis (eds) Handbook of Cognitive Linguistics and Second
Language Acquisition, London: Routledge.
Musolﬀ, A. (2006) ‘Metaphor scenarios in public discourse’, Metaphor and Symbol 2(1): 23–38.
Nerlich, B. (2010) ‘Breakthroughs and disasters: the politics and ethics of metaphor use in the
media’, in H.-J. Schmid and S. Handl (eds) Cognitive Foundations of Linguistic Usage Patterns,
Berlin and New York: Mouton de Gruyter.
Niemeier, S. and Reif, M. (2008) ‘Making progress simpler? Applying cognitive grammar to tense-
aspect teaching in the German EFL classroom’, in S. de Knop and T. de Rycker (eds) Cognitive
Cognitive linguistics
623

Approaches to Pedagogical Grammar: A Volume in Honour of René Dirven, Berlin: Mouton de
Gruyter.
Panther, K.-U. and Radden, G. (eds) (1999) Metonymy in Language and Thought, Amsterdam and
Philadelphia: John Benjamins.
Panther, K.-U. and Thornburg, L. (1999) ‘The potentiality for actuality metonymy in English and
Hungarian’, in K.-U. Panther and G. Radden (eds) Metonymy in Language and Thought,
Amsterdam and Philadelphia: John Benjamins.
Pütz, M., Niemeier, S. and Diven, R. (eds) (2001) Applied Cognitive Linguistics II: Language
Pedagogy, Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter.
Radden, G. and Dirven, R. (2007) Cognitive English Grammar, Amsterdam and Philadelphia: John
Benjamins.
Robinson, P. and Ellis, N. C. (2008) Handbook of Cognitive Linguistics and Second Language
Acquisition, London: Routledge.
Rosch, E. (1973) ‘On the internal structure of perceptual and semantic categories’, in T. E. Moore
(ed.) Cognitive Development and the Acquisition of Language, New York, San Francisco and
London: Academic Press.
——(1978) ‘Principles of categorization’, in E. Rosch and B. B. Lloyd (eds) Cognition and Cate-
gorization, Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Rosch, E. and Mervis, C. B. (1975) ‘Family resemblances: studies in the internal structure of cate-
gories’, Cognitive Psychology 7: 573–605.
Rosch, E., Mervis, C. B., Gray, W. D., Johnson, D. M. and Boyes-Braem, P. (1976) ‘Basic objects in
natural categories’, Cognitive Psychology 8: 382–439.
Schmid, H.-J. (2007) ‘Entrenchment, salience, and basic levels’, in D. Geeraerts and M. Cuyckens
(eds) The Oxford Handbook of Cognitive Linguistics. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Slobin, D. I. (1999) ‘Two ways to travel: verbs of motion in English and Spanish’, in M. Shibatani
and S. A. Thompson (eds) Grammatical Constructions: Their Form and Meaning, Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Stefanowitsch, A. and Gries, S. T. (2003) ‘Collostructions: investigating the interaction of words and
constructions’. International Journal of Corpus Linguistics 8(2): 209–43.
——(eds) (2007) Corpus-based Approaches to Metaphor and Metonymy, Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter.
Talmy, L. (1991) ‘Path to realization: a typology of event conﬂation’, Proceedings of the Seventeenth
Annual Meeting of the Berkeley Linguistics Society, Berkeley, CA: Berkeley Linguistic Society.
——(2000) Toward a Cognitive Semantics, 2 vols, Cambridge, MA and London: MIT Press.
Taylor, J. (2003) Linguistic Categorization, 3rd edn, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Tomasello, M. (2000) ‘First steps in a usage-based theory of ﬁrst language acquisition’, Cognitive
Linguistics 11: 61–82.
——(2003) Constructing a Language: A Usage-based Theory of Language Acquisition, Cambridge,
MA: Harvard University Press.
Tyler, A. (2008) ‘Cognitive linguistics and second language instruction’, in P. Robinson and
N. C. Ellis (eds), Handbook of Cognitive Linguistics and Second Language Acquisition, London:
Routledge.
Tyler, A. and Evans, V. (2003) The Semantics of English Prepositions, Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Ungerer, F. (2001) ‘Basicness and conceptual hierarchies in foreign language learning: a corpus-
based study’, in M. Pütz, S. Niemeier and R. Diven (eds) Applied Cognitive Linguistics II: Lan-
guage Pedagogy, Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter.
Ungerer, F. and Schmid, H.-J. (2006) An Introduction to Cognitive Linguistics, 2nd edn, Harlow:
Pearson Longman.
Wittgenstein, L. (1958) Philosophical Investigations, 2nd edn, G. E. M. Anscombe (trans.), Oxford:
Blackwell.
Hans-Jörg Schmid and Friedrich Ungerer
624

44
Systemic functional linguistics
Lynne Young
Introduction
To fully understand a particular theory about language and communication it is useful to
examine the roots of the theory before going on to discuss the main conceptual base of the
theory itself. Also consistent in introducing a theory is contrasting it with other prominent
approach(es) to language that surface at the same or similar time frames. Such a perspective
oﬀers core contextual information. For that reason I begin by brieﬂy discussing the roots of
Systemic Functional Linguistics (SFL) in the Prague School of Linguistics and in the work of
J. R. Firth, followed by a short explanation of how SFL diﬀers from the Chomskian tradition
of the early 1980s just after Halliday’s central book, Language as Social Semiotic: The Social
Interpretation of Language and Meaning, appeared (1978).
Roots of SFL
Systemic Functional Linguistics (SFL) has particularly strong connections to the Prague
School of Linguistics founded in the 1920s in Czechoslovakia. Four central tenets of this school
provide the roots for early and current SFL and especially the work of Halliday:
1
The view of language as a network of relations which has to do with the fact that different
featuresandaspectsoflanguagearerelatedtoeachotherandthereforedonot existinisolation.
2
The view of language as a system composed of sub-systems which consist of levels or
strata. In other words, every language has different levels and at each level different
aspects of language are prominent. For example, at the lexicogrammatical stratum, the
focus of study is on the structure of the language and the lexical or vocabulary choices. At
the semantic or meaning level, the focus is on the ways in which these grammatical
patterns realize different meanings related to content, attitude, etc.
3
The emphasis is on the functional nature of language, how language reveals the different
meanings of language, and the different purposes it serves.
4
The view that form derives from function, emphasizing that the form or the structure of a
language, is rooted in the meanings that people want to convey as they speak or write to
each other.
625

Vachek (1964, 1966), one of the leading Prague linguists, wrote that the structural concepts of
the Prague School, originating with Russian linguists such as Jakobson and Trubetzkoy
(Young 1990), were based on the idea that no element in a language could be studied in iso-
lation. Rather, each element had to be examined in relation to all others co-existing with it.
Menshikova (Vachek 1964), another Prague linguist, reiterates this point viewing language as
a system of interrelated linguistic values as opposed to the sum total of minute, unconnected
phenomena. This relational view is further maintained by Trinka and others who deﬁned
structuralism, as it applied to the Prague School as a ‘trend which is concerned with analyzing
relations between the segments of language, conceived as a hierarchically arranged whole’
(Vachek 1964).
Not only relational considerations were emphasized, but that of the diﬀerent levels or strata
in the consideration of language, a theoretical concept that ﬁgures largely also in Halliday and
other systemicists today. The Prague School focused on the functional nature of language,
examining how language performs certain functions ‘serving the needs and wants of the
mutual understanding of individual members of the given language community’ (Vachek 1972: 14).
Vachek and other Prague linguists were then the ﬁrst to attempt to build functional
theories into the linguistic description of language to centre the discussion of language around
these.
The Prague framework built on these conceptual views is further expanded in the work of
J. R. Firth, the ﬁrst professor of general linguistics and founder of the London School of
Linguistics. Halliday was one of his early students and followed Firth, who maintained that
language is a network of systems revealing again the focus on the relational nature of lan-
guage. Firth further insisted that meaning is central in linguistic explanation, and that
language expresses central functions in a variety of situational contexts.
Particularly central to Firth’s work was his focus on language as a system of networks, a
system of meanings, which has remained a core concept in current SFL theory. Firth’s interest
in the uses to which people put language led to his early theorizing about the role of functions
in contexts of use. For Firth, function was tied to context in the sense that systems of options
become available in diﬀerent situations. Although there were earlier concerns with context and
how this inﬂuenced language choices, he was the ﬁrst to incorporate contextual inﬂuences into
linguistic considerations, a position Halliday has also taken and expanded on.
Early systemic functional linguistics and generative grammar
Having looked brieﬂy at the roots of SFL, a diﬀerent way to contextualize the theory is to
contrast it with early generative grammar, which was emerging as a major paradigm around
the same time as Halliday’s Language as Social Semiotic (1978). In this volume, Halliday
outlines his views of language as functionally organized and as accounting for language use in
diﬀerent contexts. This is one of the core early works of Halliday’s in which he sets out his
view of language as a social phenomenon.
The two theories raise diﬀerent questions, one about how the mind of an individual in the
abstract sense works, and the other, on how people carry out their daily lives in interaction
with each other in a variety of social settings.
Considering uses and contexts derives from the view that language, a social phenomenon
(Halliday 1994), leads to social rather than psychological explanations of language; further,
the social view involves examination of the functional nature of language as it occurs in dif-
ferent situational constructs. Since the functions of language are inﬂuenced by diﬀerent situa-
tions, there has been extensive study of context and register in SFL.
Lynne Young
626

Chomsky (1980: 27), on the other hand, wrote that the ‘Generative Grammar of a language
provides the systematic deﬁnition of a sentence. Grammatical sentences are those generated
by the grammar.’ The object of study is an idealized language divorced from context. He
maintained early on that he did not see any proof that the study of language function con-
tributed to the study of language form, a point in direct contrast to the SFL model. Linguistics
for Chomsky consisted of a psychological view focusing on the faculty of mind: it adopts, in
other words, an intraorganism approach, looking within organisms rather than outward between
organisms focusing on mental representations as a set of abstract properties.
For Chomsky, to know a language is to be in a mental state; the state consists of a system
of rules, representations, and principles generating mental representations, which produce the
grammar, a system of rules for the representations of sound and meaning. In contrast, for
systemicists, knowing a language means being able to select the appropriate resources to
accomplish various tasks, from the set of resources available in each situation needed to carry
out diﬀerent purposes.
In terms of language development, Chomsky adopts the nativist’s view, maintaining that
humans possess a speciﬁc language learning faculty distinct from other learning faculties. This
provides the infant with a ready-made blueprint for the structure of language. Learning the
mother tongue means ﬁtting patterns into the framework with which a child comes equipped.
In what is known as the environmentalist view, a child learns and uses language in diﬀerent
environments which inﬂuence their learning and use of that language, a Hallidayan perspec-
tive. Halliday and other systemicists further maintain that language learning is not distinct
from other kinds of learning; rather, it depends on the same sort of mental faculties involved
in all aspects of a child’s learning. The speciﬁc properties of a language that are learned ori-
ginate in the environment, consistent with the view of language as a social construct.
The focal point for systemicists is that language is seen as a resource, not a set of rules.
Further, SFL is designed to show the ways in which language serves and realizes certain social
functions using diﬀerent resources that each situation engenders. For this reason SFL is an
inter-organism approach. Because of the need to function in diﬀerent settings, the set of
resources varies from situation to situation, which necessitates a theory about context (Martin
1992).
The orientation of functional grammar, then, is social rather than biological as it is in early
generative grammar.
An in-depth look at SFL
SFL is a perspective for describing language both externally as a social and cultural phenom-
enon and internally as a formal system for expressing meanings. It does so through a theory
designed not only to explain how people interact with each other through language, but to
provide a methodology for the analysis of many types of discourse. Theoretically, SFL views
language as organized functionally; these functions (technically referred to as metafunctions)
underlie and generate the structures of language. The functional focus allows researchers to
examine any text – verbal or visual – and be able to analyse it and explain why texts mean
what and how they do so. SFL researchers view language as a system of choices, which allows
them to explain choices made in a particular instance of language use, such as giving a talk in
a seminar classroom. The emphasis in SFL, then, on functions and systems of choice is
responsible for the name of the approach: systemic functional linguistics. Systemicists study
what language does, not what it is; showing what it does better illustrates what it is. Language
is a form of activity, a form of meaningful human behaviour. The focus is on how language
Systemic functional linguistics
627

performs a variety of tasks in a situation and is inﬂuenced by and in turn inﬂuences the set-
tings in which it is being used; inherent in this perspective of language is that language both
realizes and creates the culture of which it is a part. This view of the instrumental nature of
language underlies the theory; language is the way it is because of the uses it has evolved to
serve. Language results, then, from an ongoing act of choices that occurs in and is fashioned
by diﬀerent social and cultural situations. Inherent in the theory is the view that language
acts as a bridge between the cultural meanings that exist in society and the grammar of
the code.
For Halliday (1994), the concept of function has two meanings. First, function equals use;
and second, it is a fundamental property of language, basic to the evolution of the semantic or
meaning system: every natural language can be interpreted in terms of a functional theory.
In terms of the meanings we exchange, there are three general functions or metafunctions of
language, which are simultaneously expressed in instances of language use. Butt et al. (2000: 5)
explain that language is used to: talk about what is happening at any given moment, what will
happen at some future time and what has been happening (the ideational metafunction, and
more speciﬁcally the experiential sub-function of the ideational metafunction); interact
through language expressing a point of view or an opinion on the present or future happening
(the interpersonal metafunction); and make the output of the previous two functions into a
coherent whole (the textual metafunction).
These functions of language are built into the language code, allowing users to combine
diﬀerent functions into each utterance. When people speak they not only share some experi-
ence but also express their stance towards it, their opinion of it and attitude towards it; and
they also seek to relate the experience to what has gone before; they seek to make their inter-
action cohere to what has already been said, not only in this language event but also in pre-
vious ones. The grammar of a language is there to connect the selections in meaning derived
from the metafunctions of language and realize them in a uniﬁed structural form (Halliday
1978). Each utterance then simultaneously expresses three metafunctions, making the language
code tri-functionally organized.
Looking further at the metafunctions and their structural realization, the ideational meta-
function has two sub-categories: the experiential and the logical; the experiential function is
responsible, as suggested above, for expressing the happenings, the content – real or unreal – of
experiences, and can be initially understood through questions such as, who is doing what to
whom, where and when. At a more delicate level researchers examine diﬀerent types of
meanings that are achieved through what is called the transitivity system, a structural term to
account for how processes, participants and circumstances, which make up the experiential
sub-function, are realized. It permits a speaker or writer to express the ways in which the
world of experience is represented and is conveyed through diﬀerent process types: material or
action, mental and relational, and the diﬀerent participants and circumstances involved in
each (Halliday 1994: 107).
For example, in a statement such as ‘Tom killed the intruder’, a researcher would identify
the process realized by the verbal group ‘killed’ as a material or action process, with two par-
ticipants, one realizing the actor – the being who carries out the action – and realized by one
of the nominal groups that precedes the verbal one, and the second nominal group which
realizes the participant role receiving the action, known as the goal. So, experientially there is
an action process, involving an actor and a goal. The logical sub-system deals mainly with
ways in which clauses are connected to each other. First, they are connected through ‘a system
that describes the type of interdependency between clauses’. Second, ‘the logico-semantic
system describes the type of meaning relationship between linked clauses’ (Eggins 2004: 258–9).
Lynne Young
628

To illustrate the combined metafunctional realizations, another related statement can be added
to our original one: ‘But, unfortunately after he did so he did not call the police.’ Here the
relationship of expansion – one that adds information to the original – is evident through the
choice of the word ‘but’ realizing the logical sub-function.
The interpersonal metafunction accounts for a diﬀerent set of meanings which focus on
speakers’ and listeners’ interactions with each other and with the material being conveyed in
terms of attitudes and stances expressed in the discourse. The realizations of these meanings
occur in terms of mood choices: statement, question, command; and modality realized by
modal operators (Eggins 2004: 172) such as ‘might’, ‘could’, ‘should’. They are also realized
by adjuncts like ‘probably’, ‘usually’ or diﬀerent sentence adjuncts which relate to the whole of
the sentence; examples include ‘frankly’, ‘unfortunately’.
In addition to the interpersonal realizations above there has been recent work on appraisal
theory, which is an extension of SFL’s interpersonal metafunction. It has many sub-categories,
only three of which will be mentioned brieﬂy here (adapted from Eggins and Slade 1997: 125).
Appreciation covers the ways in which speakers or writers express their likes and dislikes and
personal evaluations of people and events through either lexical choices or whole clauses. The
focus is on evaluation of an item or idea. The second form of appraisal, labelled aﬀect,
expresses emotions and feelings. Aﬀective appraisals are typically expressed through adjectives,
which express attitudes towards some event, person or object. The last sub-category, judgment,
accounts for people’s judgments in terms of social values and ethics.
But, to return to the two statements above, there is avery clear indication of the speaker’s attitude
or stance expressed through the adjunct ‘unfortunately’, which expresses a particular judgment.
The last metafunction, the textual, serves to ensure that the utterance achieves relevance in
a context. Resources for doing so include cohesive features such as ellipsis, reference, repeti-
tion, conjunction, collocation and thematic development, which connect diﬀerent parts of
texts to each other structurally or lexically. Coherence, also a part of the textual metafunction,
accounts for how speakers and writers create coherent texts, texts that ‘hang’ together through
exophoric reference, reference outside the text to the immediate context or to the broader
cultural one.
And so, once again we return to the two statements above to identify the role of the textual
metafunction. ‘Tom killed the intruder. But unfortunately he did not call the police.’ Cohe-
sively, there are three features that show how the statements are connected to each other and
to the situation. First, the use of what is called ‘anaphoric reference’, is realized by the word
‘he’ which connects the second statement to the previous nominal group realized by ‘Tom’ in
the ﬁrst sentence. Second, the logical factor realized by the connector ‘but’ also plays a role in
cohesion, indicating to the listeners or readers the contrast posited here. And ﬁnally, coherence
is achieved through the judgment expressed by ‘unfortunately’, based on cultural assumptions
that one is supposed to call the police after a killing.
As brieﬂy illustrated above, each of the metafunctional strands is realized in quite dis-
tinctive structures of the clause complex. Ideational content is realized by nominal and verbal
groups as well as conjunctions. Interpersonally, the content is presented through a sentence
adjunct above. Textual realizations are achieved through lexical and grammatical choice of
reference.
SFL, concerned with how users exchange meanings in diﬀerent socially situated contexts, is a
theory of meanings represented as sets of choices. System networks identify those choices and
are designed to show how language is made up of sets of interrelated options. The systems
represent the choices available in a given situation from which language users make selections
appropriate to the context of situation. A system network reﬂects, in other words, a theory of
Systemic functional linguistics
629

language as choice where language expresses meanings by choosing between alternatives.
Eggins (2004: 198) provides a clear and simple system involving dinner choices:
Each point in the network speciﬁes two things about the possibility of choices:
1
The environment consisting of choices that have already been made; that is, every time a
choice is made it is not made in isolation but in the context of other choices that have
previously been selected.
2
It is a set of possibilities of which one has to be chosen. Both of these points taken together
constitute a system such as the one by Eggins above.
First, there is the environment of the choices – dinner. There are two sets of simultaneous
choices to be made: in the steak or ﬁsh category and in the salad or vegetable one indicated by
the curlicued line. Once these choices have been made in each set there are further choices. If
Figure 44.1 A system network
Source: Eggins 2004: 198.
Lynne Young
630

ﬁsh is selected, then the curlicued line again oﬀers choices about the type of ﬁsh and how it is
to be prepared; a choice from each set has to be simultaneously made before one can make
further choices. The same applies to the choice of steak. In terms of the salad, the choice is
simple, between French or Greek; if a vegetable is selected then there are again two simulta-
neous sets of choices – potatoes or chips and courgettes or carrots; if potatoes, a further choice
again is between types of potatoes.
Of particular importance to note is how systems reﬂect increased delicacy or detail in
choices in the progression from left to right. Systems and system networks are designed to
indicate the categories of the choices and the more speciﬁc choices that arise after initial
selections have been made.
Systems are further designed to show how meanings are presented as sets of choices from
which speakers and writers choose; distinct sets of resources are available in diﬀerent situations;
that is, they do not occur in vacuums but in the situational and linguistic contexts.
Contexts of situation and register
In SFL as described by Halliday (1978), the semiotic structure of the situation in which lan-
guage occurs is formed out of three sociosematic variables of ﬁeld, tenor and mode. These
components of a situation are viewed as part of a social semiotic system of meanings that
together constitute a culture. They both derive from and in turn inﬂuence the social and
cultural structures of diﬀerent types of context.
SFL rooted in a social view of language necessitates a focus on how people communicate
and interact with each other using language ‘to get on with life’, as Martin suggests. The inter-
play of the dialectical relationship between language and society becomes clearer in the discussion
of these features that follows.
Each context is described in term of these three situational constructs:
1
Field accounts for what is happening discursively – the role that language plays in a par-
ticular happening or event. It accounts for the experience or the content that receives focus
in the situation. One way to understand field is to ask, what activity is taking place?
2
Tenor accounts for the types of interactions between the addressers and the addressees
and between the addressers and the content, the position that speakers and writers adopt
both in terms of information being conveyed as well as interactions shared with au-
diences. In examining the nature of tenor, the following questions help to identify the
realizations in the code (Butt et al. 2000: 18): what is the relationship between the inter-
actants? Is there a social distance between them? Is the relationship between them equal
or not?
3
Mode concerns the nature of language itself, whether it is spoken or written or sponta-
neous or planned language; further, whether the information is presented in a newspaper,
or on television, in a lecture or a recipe.
Functional variation or register produces determines diﬀerent metafunctional choices; but the
context is in turn inﬂuenced by the language choices, creating a bi-directional inﬂuence
between language and contexts of situation.
The ﬁeld of discourse is realized through the experiential sub-function of the ideational
metafunction, in processes, participants and circumstances in language. The tenor, accounting
for the role relationships between interactants, is expressed through interpersonal meanings
through mood, attitudinal and modality choices as well as in appraisals. Mode accounts for
Systemic functional linguistics
631

whether the interaction is spoken or written, and inﬂuences textual selections through
cohesion, coherence and thematic patterns.
Halliday (1994) suggests that each type of meaning is related in a predictable, systematic
way to each situational variable. The status of the three constructs derives from the fact that
they are linked to the three types of meaning language is structured to make: the experiential
(the ideational), the textual and the interpersonal. When a set of texts share the same context
of situation to a greater or lesser extent, they will share the same experiential, interpersonal
and textual meanings since they belong to the same register (Butt et al. 2000).
Register delineates diﬀerent functional varieties that every society has, ranging from a recipe
to a lecture, a novel to a speciﬁc set of instructions; each is a particular discursive realization
in diﬀerent situations, a realization in terms of choices available in that situation.
The situational contexts themselves arise and are determined by the broader context of
culture in which they are found. Cultural contexts are those that account for and ‘allow’ spe-
ciﬁc situations to exist; the latter being determined by what is culturally acceptable. For
example, in some cultures like those in Western societies, letters to advice columnists exist,
whereas in some Asian cultures this is not so. Cultures determine the nature of the situational
contexts that can and do exist in particular societies.
Context of culture/genres
The analysis of any text within the functional model of language then, involves not only a
clausal explanation of lexicogrammatical patterns realizing semantic metafunctional choices,
but also an explanation of how the text is inﬂuenced by the immediate situation in terms of
ﬁeld, tenor and mode.
Further, SFL description focuses on the staged structure of the discourse as a whole to show
‘how … we use language to live; it tries to describe the ways in which we mobilize language’
(Martin 2009: 13). Genres and generic analysis are designed to focus on the overall purpose of
the text, the ways in which we get things done through language. Generic considerations
broaden ﬁndings available in the SFL framework by making explicit the purposeful activity
which a text accomplishes.
Genres develop as ways of dealing linguistically with recurrent conﬁgurations of reg-
ister variables. In other words, as certain contextual combinations become stable, ways
of interacting within those contexts also become habitualized and, eventually institu-
tionalized as genres. There come to be preferred, typical ways of negotiating such
contexts.
(Eggins 2004: 58)
Eggins also suggests that genres tell us the cultural purpose of texts, which are realized by
register conﬁgurations. The schematic structure of a text then is the generic structure and gives
it its generic identity (ibid.).
To further understand the distinction between register and genre, Couture suggests that:
While registers impose explicitness constraints at the level of vocabulary and syntax,
genres impose additional explicitness constraints at the discourse level. They deﬁne
conventional patterns of linguistic structure for the complete discourse, and they are
intertextual – that is, they are deﬁned by their capacity to evoke other texts. … Rhet-
oricians traditionally associate genre with a complete, uniﬁed textual structure. Unlike
Lynne Young
632

register, genre can only be realized in completed texts or texts that can be projected as
complete.
(Couture 1986: 82)
The staging of a particular genre will diﬀer from other genres because the overall purpose
diﬀers, so if we examine narratives, we might expect the generic structure to include at least
the following stages: orientation, complication, evaluation, resolution. If we were examining,
on the other hand, a lecture, the stages would be very diﬀerent and might include: introduc-
tion, explanation(s), exempliﬁcations, conclusion. Genres, then, can be deﬁned as a ‘recurrent
conﬁguration of meanings and a culture as a system of genres’ (Martin 2009: 13).
Genre analysis together with register analysis provides the contextual information for a
lexicogrammatical and semantic analysis, providing a complete framework for discourse analysis.
Whatever genre we are involved in, and whatever the register of the situation, our use of
language will also be inﬂuenced by our ideological positions: the values we hold (con-
sciously or unconsciously) the perspectives acquired through our particular path through
the culture.
(Eggins 2004: 10)
Applications and extensions of SFL
Having discussed SFL in terms of its roots and the theory itself, it is important to sketch,
however brieﬂy, two closely related applications of SFL to highlight how the examination of
discourse from a functional perspective can contribute to analysis and even more importantly
to social action and the resolution of real-world problems – in areas such as education,
translation, speech pathology, etc.
SFL has never been simply a theory of language; it has always been designed to be applied
to an understanding of how people make and exchange meanings in a broad range of contexts.
The aim of the functional grammar of Halliday ‘has been to construct a grammar for purposes
of text analysis: one that would make it possible to say sensible and useful things about the
text, spoken or written’ (Halliday 1994: xv) and one might extend this easily to include
visuals – still and moving.
SFL is meant to answer questions such as why a text means what it does and why it is
valued (Halliday 1994: xxix). By so doing it oﬀers the researcher a theory that provides a set of
methodological tools for discourse analysis. Two approaches inﬂuenced by SFL have become
particularly prominent. The ﬁrst is critical discourse analysis (CDA) and the second, social
and visual semiotics, or what is now also known as multimodality. Iedema explains the origins
of these diﬀerent but related analytical directions:
On the one hand, there is the critical theoretical work inspired by Fairclough’s ‘reworking’
of Foucault and Bakhtin (Fairclough 1992; Fairclough and Wodak 1997). On the other
hand, there is the work of Kress and Van Leeuwen (1996) [and] Van Leeuwen (1999)
which is becoming increasingly deﬁnitive of approaches to text analysis and meaning
making, and where the discourse analytical term ‘multimodality’ originates.
(Iedema 2003: 82)
The set of methodological tools provided by SFL is central in the work of both CDA and
multimodality. Linguists interested in the relationships between language and ideology began
Systemic functional linguistics
633

extending discourse analysis to include and to cover more critical considerations. Kress (1995)
has suggested that linguistics itself needed to be moved into the domain of social and political
relevance and that it provide a social critique by documenting linguistic structures of inequal-
ity. SFL is ideally suited to explain why certain selections are made and others not, and how
inequalities are expressed discursively.
Discourse analysists, particularly those trained as systemicists, began in the late 1970s
and early 1980s to look more critically at uses of language and the meanings that get
exchanged in diﬀerent situations, focusing on how positions and interrelationships among
interactants have been encoded and how this is accomplished linguistically. One of the
strengths of SFL realized early on in the work of critical linguists from the University of East
Anglia such as Kress, Hodge, Trew and Fowler was, as Martin was to comment much later
(2000), to ground concerns about power and ideology in the detailed analyses of texts as they
unfold clause by clause and in real contexts of language. In Martin’s terms (2000), SFL pro-
vides a technical language to talk about language. This is one of the main reasons for the close
connection to and reliance on SFL in much of the work of linguists such as Fowler and Kress
(Fowler et al. 1979). The connection between SFL and CDA is also evident in the seminal
work of Fairclough, Language and Power ([1989] 2001), in which he sets out methods of
analysis again extending the SFL metafunctional approach to the critical study of discourse.
The inﬂuence of SFL is equally evident in applications in the research of Lemke (1995, 2002).
More currently, in the collection by Young and Harrison, Systemic Functional Linguistics
and Critical Discourse Analysis: Studies in Social Change (2004), the connection between the
two areas of research was made more explicit than it had perhaps been before. As suggested in
the introduction, many researchers
have focused to diﬀering degrees on SFL elements in their frameworks and analyses.
Early researchers examined the connections between language and the social structure
though SFL analysis of metafunctional components. … As CDA matured as a ﬁeld of
study, however some analysis developed in areas of CDA outside of SFL; nevertheless, all
researchers in CDA acknowledge that SFL is centrally important to the critical study of
situated language events.
(Young and Harrison 2004: 2–3)
Since SFL from the beginning was designed for text analysis, it is not surprising that is has
been so prominent in CDA studies (see, for example, Fairclough 1989, 1992, 1993, 2001, 2004;
Lemke 1995, 1998; Martin 2000; Wodak and Meyer 2001). In this volume, the relationship
between SFL and CDA is treated in detail in the chapter on CDA (O’Halloran, this volume).
The second extension of SFL, into visual semiotics/multimodality, also has its origins in
early Hallidayan theory that maintains that language is only one of many semiotic resources
for making meaning. Recently, non-verbal semiotic resources have been taken up by current
research into other semiotic resources because meaning-making in most situations rarely
involves only one mode of communication; much more frequent is the interplay of visual and
verbal modes in current discursive events. And as Kress and Van Leeuwen (1996) suggest, in
order to fully understand the meanings that each mode contributes to the totality of meanings
in any given situation we need to examine the role of each mode and the contributions each
makes to the totality of meaning.
One of the most concise and complete answers to how to do this and to establish the
questions about the connection between SFL, discourse analysis, and multimodality has been
supplied recently by O’Toole (2006). He is particularly well placed to discuss this since he is
Lynne Young
634

perhaps the ﬁrst to apply SFL to visual analysis, showing how the metafunctional approach to
language could be adapted to the study of art. He carried out the earliest complete analysis
based on the metafunctional approach of Halliday in his work The Language of Displayed Art
(1994), showing how the metafunctional considerations of verbal texts could be adapted and
extended to non-verbal discourse.
He has more recently (2006) suggested that multimodality, discourse analysis and CDA all
share a commitment to close SFL analysis of the text itself and to understanding it in its socio-
political context. The core of his argument is that Halliday’s theory about metafunctions and
systems for language can be adapted, with changes appropriate for diﬀerent modalities, as a
basis for the analysis of visual texts. As with language texts, he maintains, it is not the labelling
of particular components of the visual text as such, but the recognition of areas of semantic/
semiotic convergence and divergence between the realizations of the functions that provides a
focus for interpretation. A current adaptation for visual analysis of O’Toole’s original pre-
sentation, along with Kress and van Leeuwen, and Lemke can be found in Young and
Fitzgerald (2006: 172–3, 177).
Multimodality, then, is a term to make explicit semiotic complexity, a complexity that is
revealed in the exchange of meanings across semiotic boundaries such as image and verbal texts
(Iedema 2003: 39). Research in this area has also been carried out by Lemke (2002) in his work
on traversals, in which he studies how meanings are made across semiotic boundaries on the
Internet and other settings. In addition, the work of Kress and van Leeuwen (2006) has become
central to the study of multimodal meanings through extensions of SFL. Van Leeuwen’s (2005)
examination of social semiotics indicates clearly how to apply SFL to visual means of com-
munication. Recent work of O’Halloran also illustrates applications of SFL in the multimodal
world through her examination of mathematics taught at the tertiary level ([2005] 2008).
Once again the chapter in this volume by van Leeuwen covers these connections more
thoroughly. This brief discussion of CDA and multimodality is intended to make explicit
the connections among CDA, SFL and multimodality to illustrate the role SFL has played
in the research of these two discursive ﬁelds.
Summary
We have examined the major features of SFL, situated its origins and then compared it to the
other major paradigm of language study that was also prominent when Halliday’s early work
appeared. The in-depth examination of SFL covered the major metafunctions that form the
organizational basis of language and how each metafunction is realized by diﬀerent structural
resources or choices realized through systems.
Looking at language from a functional perspective means that we can begin to understand
how language selections in a given situation are made, which allows us to suggest why they
were made and why others were not, and how a set of choices contributes to the meaning of a
particular text.
In addition, the original conceptualizing of Halliday in his early writing on SFL suggested
that language should be viewed as a social semiotic, as a system of meaning-making in diﬀerent
social contexts, and that the theory could be applied to non-verbal resources as much as verbal
ones. This conceptualizing also led to descriptions of how meanings are made, and why some
meanings were selected over others in diﬀerent situations. These questions led to others, such
as who is advantaged by certain selections and who is disadvantaged by them. This led to further
questions about issues of language and power and the relationships between the two in public
discourse expressed visually and verbally in the media, in politics and in everyday uses of language.
Systemic functional linguistics
635

These are natural extensions of questions about language that originate in a social view in
which researchers ask and answer questions about how we use language to survive in daily,
familiar situations as well as in the new and broader contexts of current life.
Related topics
critical discourse analysis; multimodality
Further reading
Butt, D., Fahey, R., Feez, S., Spinks, S. and Yallop, C. (2000) Using Functional Grammar: An
Explorer’s Guide, Sydney, Australia: National Centre for English Language Teaching and
research, Macquarie University. (A very accessible introduction to SFL.)
Eggins, S. (2004) An Introduction to Systemic Functional Linguistics, London: Frances Pinter.
(A thorough presentation of SFL.)
Martin, J. R. (2000) ‘Close reading: functional linguistics as a tool for critical discourse analysis’, in
L. Unsworth (ed.) Researching Language in Schools and Communities: Functional Linguistic
Perspectives, London: Cassell. (A chapter which illustrates the ways in which SFL can be applied
to CDA questions.)
Young, L. and Fitzgerald, B. (2006) The Power of Language: How Discourse Inﬂuences Society,
London: Equinox. (A book designed to connect SFL and CDA; intended to provide practice in
critical discourse analysis based on SFL.)
References
Butt, D., Fahey, R., Feez, S., Spinks, S. and Yallop, C. (2000) Using Functional Grammar: An
Explorer’s Guide, Sydney, Australia: National Centre for English Language Teaching and
Research, Macquarie University.
Chomsky, N. (1980) ‘Rules and representations’, The Behavioural and Brain Sciences, 3: 1–61.
Couture, B. (ed.) (1986) ‘Eﬀective ideation in written text: a functional approach to clarity and
exigence’, Functional Approaches to Writing: Research Perspectives, London: Frances Pinter.
Eggins, S and Slade, D. (1997) Analysing Casual Conversation, London: Continuum.
Eggins, S. (2004) An Introduction to Systemic Functional Linguistics, London: Frances Pinter.
Fairclough, N. and Wodak, R. (1997) ‘Critical discourse analysis’, in T. van Dijk (ed.) Discourse as
Social Interaction. Discourse Studies: A Multidisciplinary Introduction, Vol. 2, London: Sage.
Fairclough, N. ([1989] 2001) Language and Power, London: Longman.
——(1992) Discourse and Social Change, Cambridge: Polity Press.
——(1993) ‘Critical discourse analysis and the marketization of public discourse’, Discourse and
Society, 4(2): 133–68.
——(2004) ‘Critical discourse analysis in researching language in the new capitalism: over-
determination, transdisciplinarity, and textual analysis’, in L. Young and C. Harrison (eds) Sys-
temic Functional Linguistics and Critical Discourse Analysis: Studies in Social Change. New York
and London: Continuum.
Fowler, R., Hodge, R., Kress, G. and Trew, T. (eds) (1979) Language and Control, London: Routledge/
Kegan Paul.
Halliday, M. A. K. ([1978] 1979) Language as Social Semiotic: The Social Interpretation of Lan-
guage and Meaning, London: Edward Arnold.
——(1994) An Introduction to Functional Grammar, 2nd edn, London: Edward Arnold.
Iedema, R. (2003) ‘Multimodality, resemiotization: extending the analysis of discourse as multi-
semiotic practice’, Visual Communication, 2(1): 29–57.
Kress, G. (1995) ‘The social production of language: history and structures of domination’, in
P. Fries and M. Gregory, Discourse in Society: Systemic Functional Perspectives. Meaning and
Choice in Language: Studies for Michael Halliday, Norwood, NJ: Ablex.
Kress, G. and van Leeuwen, T. ([1996] 2006) Reading Images, London: Routledge.
Lynne Young
636

Lemke, J. (1995) Textual Politics: Discourse and Social Dynamics, London: Taylor & Francis.
——(1998) ‘Multiplying meaning: visual and verbal semiotics in scientiﬁc text’, in J. R. Martin and
R. Veel (eds) Reading Science: Critical and Functional Perspectives on Discourses of Science,
London: Routledge.
——(2002) ‘Travels in hypermodality’, Visual Communications, 1(3): 299–325.
Martin, J. R. (1992) English Text: System and Structure, Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
——(2000) ‘Close reading: functional linguistics as a tool for critical discourse analysis in
researching language’, in L. Unsworth (ed.) Schools and Communities: Functional Linguistic
Perspectives, London: Cassell.
——(2009) ‘Genre and language learning: a social semiotic perspective’, Linguistics and Education,
20: 10–21.
Martin, J. R., Matthiessen, C. M. I. M and Painter, C. (1997) Working With Functional Grammar,
London: Edward Arnold.
Mensikova, A. (1972) ‘Sentence patterns in the theory and practice of teaching French as a foreign
language’, in V. Fried (ed.) The Prague School of Linguistics and Language Teaching, London:
Oxford University Press.
O’Halloran, K. ([2005] 2008) Mathematical Discourse: Language Symbolism and Visual Images,
London and New York: Continuum.
O’Toole, M. (1994) The Language of Displayed Art, London: Leicester University Press.
——(2006) From an email sent on 9 October 2006 to Sysﬂing-L@listserv.uam.es
Trinka, B. (1964) ‘Prague school of linguistics’, in J. Vachek (ed.) A Prague School Reader in Lin-
guistics, 2nd edn, Bloomington: Indiana University Press.
Vachek, J. ([1964] 1982) A Prague School Reader in Linguistics, Bloomington: Indiana University
Press.
——(1966) The Linguistic School of Prague: An Introduction to its Theory and Practice,
Bloomington: Indiana University Press.
——(1972) ‘The linguistic theory of the Prague school’, in V. Fried (ed.) The Prague School of
Linguistics and Language Teaching, London: Oxford University Press.
van Leeuwen, T. (1999) Speech, Sound, Music, London: Macmillan.
——(2005) Introducing Social Semiotics, London: Routledge.
van Leeuwen, T. and Jewitt, C. (eds) (2001) Handbook of Visual Analysis, London: Sage.
Wodak, R. (1996) Disorders of Discourse, London: Longman.
Wodak, R. and M. Meyer (eds) (2001) Methods of Critical Discourse Analysis, London: Sage.
Young, L. (1990) Language as Behaviour, Language as Code: A Study of Academic English,
Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Young, L. and Fitzgerald, B. (2006) The Power of Language: How Discourse Inﬂuences Society,
London: Equinox.
Young, L. and Harrison, C. (eds) (2004) Systemic Functional Linguistics and Critical Discourse
Analysis: Studies in Social Change, London: Continuum.
Systemic functional linguistics
637

45
Generative grammar
Shigenori Wakabayashi
Introduction
One of the major contributions of generative grammar to our understanding of human lan-
guage has been to foreground facts about language that previously went unrecognized, or were
considered unimportant, such as the fact that who and he can refer to the same person in (1a),
but not in (1b), and that every native speaker of English knows this without ever having been
taught it:
(1a)
Who said he didn’t vote?
(1b)
Who did he say didn’t vote?
Another fact that every native speaker of English knows without instruction is that he and
John can be the same person in (2a), whereas in (2b) they must be diﬀerent people:
(2a)
When he arrived, John was wearing a fur coat.
(2b)
He was wearing a fur coat when John arrived.
In (1) and (2) the linear ordering of the relevant constituents, who … he, he … John, is the
same in both pairs of sentences. The diﬀerence in meaning derives from structural diﬀerences
in the organization of the sentences that are not immediately obvious from their surface forms.
It has been one of the strengths of generative grammar to highlight the abstract organizational
properties of sentences that give rise to such diﬀerences, which play a major role in our
ordinary use of language.
Those who undertake applied linguistics research have often misunderstood the goals, scope
and limits of generative grammar. It is the aim of this chapter to try to clarify what generative
grammar is, and how it oﬀers insights into some important areas of applied linguistic research.
It will be made clear that generative grammar provides a reliable base for research in applied
linguistics.
638

General background: assumptions in generative linguistics
Context free grammar
Generative grammar adopts certain approaches to language. First, it deals with sentences
independent of discourse and context, despite the fact that we typically use our language in
context. In fact, it is usually impossible to understand the intention of a speaker without any
reference to the context. Consider the ‘meaning’ of the following sentence:
(3)
Mike occasionally drinks tea around this time of the day.
This sentence can be interpreted in a number of ways: e.g. an answer to a question uttered by a
person who is looking for Mike; or a complaint uttered by Mike’s brother who works for their
family business with Mike (Mike always disappears around late afternoon, which is the busiest
time for their business); or something else. However, this does not mean sentences have to be
studied in context. Why are such interpretations possible in the ﬁrst place? The answer is
because the sentence (3) is grammatical and meaningful. This is not a trivial matter. Consider
the following sentences:
(4a)
Occasionally Mike drinks tea around this time of the day.
(4b)
Mike drinks tea around this time of the day occasionally.
(4c)
*Mike drinks occasionally tea around this time of day
(4d)
*Mike drinks tea around this time occasionally of day
(3, 4a, b) are ‘good’, while (4c, d) are ‘bad’ whatever the contexts are, despite the fact that all
the words are identical in (3) and (4) and that it is easy to work out what (4c, d) mean.
Furthermore, even when a sentence is not ‘meaningful’, it can be grammatical. The famous
contrast between ‘colorless green ideas sleep furiously’ and ‘*furiously sleep ideas green colorless’
tells us this fact (Chomsky 1957: 15). The former is meaningless yet sounds English (i.e. gramma-
tical), but the latter does not follow the form of English. Speakers of a language can distinguish
grammatical sentences in their language from those that are not, independent of what they mean.
This leads us to conclude that certain context-free rules distinguish grammatical sentences
from ungrammatical ones. What makes this possible should be the knowledge of English as
represented in a native speaker’s brain. ‘What is knowledge of language?’ is one of the
questions that generative linguists try to answer.
Productivity, the poverty of stimulus, and the purpose of generative grammar
Human languages are unique in many respects. One of their most striking characteristics is
productivity. Every day we use sentences that we have never encountered. The innovation of
generative grammar in Chomsky (1955, 1957) was its emphasis on trying to develop an
explicit theory of how language learners can, on the basis of encountering ﬁnite examples of
language, come to understand and produce novel combinations in a potentially inﬁnite
number of sentences. This system not only allows for the production of grammatical sentences
but also disallows ungrammatical sentences.
Every human being acquires a mother tongue. The acquisition of the system despite limited
input is known as the issue of the poverty of the stimulus (or the logical problem of language
acquisition, or Plato’s problem). Now consider the following sentences:
Generative grammar
639

(5a)
Jack dislikes himself.
(5b)
Jack admires a picture of himself.
(5c)
*Himself dislikes Jack.
In (5a, b), the referent of himself is Jack, while it is not so in (5c), which is in fact ungramma-
tical. The reason for the diﬀerence appears to be the diﬀerences in word order: Jack precedes
himself in (5a, b) but himself precedes Jack in (5c). If this is correct, all sentences in which
himself comes before Jack should be ungrammatical, but this is not the case, as shown in (6):
(6)
That picture of himself surprised Jack.
How do we know that himself can refer to Jack in (6) but not in (5c)? It is unlikely that we
have received any instruction from someone around us. In fact, it is very unlikely that we
gained the rule by external means. Instead, the source must, logically speaking, come from
inside ourselves. That is, we know this contrast because the rule exists tacitly in our mind. This
tacit knowledge is likely to be derived from the psychological device used for ﬁrst language
acquisition (L1A). If such a system exists, it should be used in L1A regardless of the language
to be acquired. In other words, this device – the Language Acquisition Device (for grammar),
or Universal Grammar (UG) – is universal. In fact, Chomsky considered human languages
(e.g. English, Japanese, Hindu, etc.) to be variations of one human language UG. The main
inquiry of generative grammar is to describe what UG is.
Modularity, I-language (competence) and E-language (performance)
In generative grammar, linguistic knowledge is considered to be independent of other cognitive
systems. This is supported by physiological data (see Obler and Gjerlow 1999), especially by
the existence of developmental and pathological cases where linguistic knowledge is dis-
sociated from other cognitive capacities. On the one hand there are people whose linguistic
abilities are normal or even enhanced, while their non-linguistic capacities are impaired, such
as the polyglot savant Christopher, described by Smith and Tsimpli (1995). On the other hand,
there are people whose linguistic knowledge is deviant but other cognitive abilities are normal
(e.g. people suﬀering from aphasia).
As illustrated above, the grammaticality of a sentence is usually independent of its meaning.
This implies that the grammar consists of a ‘syntactic module’ which is independent of
meaning (the ‘semantic module’). Traditionally, linguistics is divided into subﬁelds, including
phonology, morphology, syntax, semantics, and pragmatics, each of which can be considered
to constitute a module, with the rules of each ﬁeld existing independently of the others.
Modules are connected with one another through interfaces.
When a speaker produces non-target-like linguistic output, the causes are likely to lie in this
‘connecting’ system. Positing a multi-layered system makes it possible to investigate the cause
of deviance. Hence, it is possible to suggest that, for example, second language learners’ syn-
tactic knowledge is native-like but their morphophonological system is not (Hazneder and
Schwartz 1997; Prévost and White 2000).
In generative grammar, what is directly observable is referred to as E-language (perfor-
mance: E stands for External). Linguistic knowledge (I-language, i.e. competence: I stands for
Internal) is the object of research (Chomsky 1965, 1986, 1995). In order to investigate
I-language, we need to use E-language data (cf. chapters in this volume on clinical linguistics
and on neurolinguistics).
Shigenori Wakabayashi
640

The development of generative grammar
Changes of theoretical frameworks
There have been several radical changes in the framework of generative grammar: the Standard
Theory in Chomsky (1955, 1957), the Extended Standard Theory (Chomsky 1965), the Princi-
ples and Parameters framework (Chomsky 1981, 1986a) and the Minimalist Program (Chomsky
1995, 1999). I will brieﬂy illustrate the main changes below, following Lasnik (2005).
The earliest model in Chomsky (1955) oﬀered a phrase structure grammar, where the
structure of a sentence can be depicted in tree diagrams, which consist of sets of strings. An
important assumption in this model, as well as subsequently, is that any sentence has more
than one structure, each at a diﬀerent level: the structure that reﬂects almost completely the way
the sentence is pronounced, as well as an additional abstract structure, and intermediate
structures between the two. In the Extended Standard Model (Chomsky 1965), by inserting
items from the lexicon into the structure, a ‘deep structure’ is constructed, and then transfor-
mations apply. When all transformations have been applied, the ‘surface structure’ is con-
structed. Chomsky (1973) introduced the notion of a ‘trace’, which an item leaves behind when
it moves. This allows the deep structure to be represented in the surface structure and indicates
where an item should be interpreted. So, semantic interpretation does not have to be associated
with deep structure. Later, it was assumed that additional transformations take place between
surface structure and logical form (cf. May 1977). All transformations were subsequently
reduced to only one operation (move α), as illustrated in (7) (Figure 45.1):
The theory associated with the schema in Figure 45.1 is called Government and Binding
Theory or the Principles and Parameters framework. In this theory, it was assumed that all
natural languages have common abstract rules, called Principles, and vary along a limited
number of choices among values (mostly binary) associated with parameters. In later versions
of Principles and Parameters, parameters are considered to be associated with functional
categories, such as C(omplementizer), I(nﬂection) or T(ense), and D(eterminer), and the dif-
ferences in the syntax of diﬀerent languages are attributed to formal features associated with
these categories (e.g. Chomsky 1993).
In the mid-1990s, a new framework called the Minimalist Program was proposed (Chomsky
1995), where the concepts of deep and surface structure were abandoned. Instead, all operations
are based on the demands at the interfaces where ‘sounds’ and ‘meaning’ are interpreted. The
schema of this model is shown in Figure 45.2.
Constructing a syntactic object starts from the Lexicon, where all lexical items are taken
into a lexical array called Numeration. A structure is constructed by Merge, which merges one
object with another, and other operations, such as Agree, take place where necessary.
Figure 45.1 Derivation in Government and Binding Theory
Generative grammar
641

Now let us look at a syntactic computation in the Minimalist Program. In the construction
of (7), at some point of the derivation, the structure in Figure 45.3 is constructed:
(7)
Which book will the student buy?
At this point, the argument structure is constructed, and the syntactic object has propositional
content. Then, T(ense) merges with this object (Figure 45.4):
Figure 45.2 Derivation in the Minimalist Program
Figure 45.3 VP Structure
Figure 45.4 T’ Structure
Shigenori Wakabayashi
642

English T has a feature (EPP: Extended Projection Principle), which requires its speciﬁer
position to be ﬁlled by a DP. So, the DP closest to this position is attracted and moved into
the position. A copy is left at the original position and deleted, as shown by strikethrough
(Figure 45.5):
Then, C merges with TP, and the aﬃx feature [+Q] attracts and moves the tense feature
associated with T. The auxiliary will is moved as a whole to C (Figure 45.6).
C has a [+wh] and an EPP feature, which attracts and moves an element that also has a
[+wh] feature. Hence, the DP which book is moved to the speciﬁer position of CP (Figure 45.7).
At this point, the syntactic operations needed for presentation to the ‘sound’ module
are completed, and hence the aspects of the structure relevant for phonology are ‘spelled out’
to the PF interface. No further syntactic operation is required for semantic interpretation
either; hence the structure is also sent to the LF interface. (When a sentence requires some
operations after spell-out, they take place after spell-out but before the syntactic object is
interpreted at LF.)
Research strategy behind generative grammar
Certain research strategies have been adopted in diﬀerent frameworks within generative
grammar. From the beginning, unlike traditional grammars, generative grammar tried to
explain why certain structures are not allowed in a grammar as well as why others are allowed
(Smith
2005).
Before
the
Principles
and
Parameters
approach,
researchers
were
mainly interested in ﬁnding new ‘facts’ of this kind, by investigating natural languages inten-
sively and deeply, to ﬁnd relevant evidence for discussing the human mind (Reibel and
Schane 1969). If a rule is too abstract to be learned from input, it is inferred to be present
innately as part of UG.
Figure 45.5 TP Structure
Generative grammar
643

Figure 45.6 C’ Structure
Figure 45.7 CP Structure
Shigenori Wakabayashi
644

Given the new tools (i.e. phrase structure rules and transformation rules), researchers
argued for a number of new rules. As the theory developed, it became clear that these
rules were inadequately constrained, resulting in the transition from phrase structure and
transformations to Principles and Parameters (Newmeyer 1986).
The Principles and Parameters (Chomsky 1981, 1986a) provided researchers with a theoretical
framework to account for similarities and diﬀerences among languages. Given this framework,
generative linguists try to account for the diﬀerences among adult languages (e.g. Haegeman
1997), historical changes (e.g. Roberts 1993), L1A, and SLA. Principles include, for example,
X-bar theory (all phrase structure constituents in human language have an identical structure);
the Subjacency Condition (see below); Principle of Structure Dependency (all syntactic
operations are governed by the structure of the syntactic object), and so on. If these are
innately given, they will reduce the burden on children in L1A because they do not have to
entertain those logical possibilities that violate these principles. Parameters are oﬀered to
capture variation among languages. For example, the ‘wh-parameter’ says that wh-phrases
have to move to the speciﬁer position of CP between deep and surface structures in some
languages (e.g. English), while they may stay in the original position in other languages (e.g.
Japanese). This diﬀerence is determined by parametric values: English has the value [+ wh-
movement] and Japanese has the value [-wh-movement]. Other parameters include the
Bounding Node Parameter (see below), the Null Subject Parameter (whether a sentential
subject without sound [i.e. null subject] is allowed or not), and so on. Parameters tell us not
only that languages may vary in accordance with their values but also that no other possibi-
lities are allowed. For example, the wh-parameter says that there is no language that allows
(or requires) wh-phrases to move somewhere other than the speciﬁer position of CP.
A large number of phenomena were described and explained in the Principles and Para-
meters framework. Subsequently, Chomsky (1995) advanced a new approach, the Minimalist
Program, where cross-linguistic diﬀerences are attributed to formal features associated with
functional categories.
Generative grammar and applied linguistics
Theoretical linguistics and applied linguistics
Although generative grammar is mainly considered a theoretical enterprise, studies in the area
that describe the linguistic competence of speakers other than adult native speakers are of
relevance to this volume. Such studies rely on performance data collected through recordings
in natural settings or through experimental tasks (see below). Moreover, although the main
goal is to describe and explain learners’/acquirers’ linguistic knowledge (and ultimately the
human mind), these studies may serve as a foundation for establishing how to help learners
develop their linguistic knowledge. Of all the possible areas of applied linguistics to which
generative grammar relates (e.g. clinical linguistics, neurolinguistics, psycholinguistics), I focus
on studies of child grammar and L2 grammar (i.e. interlanguage) here.
Generative approaches to L1A
For its whole history, a central line of inquiry for generative grammar has been how a ﬁrst
language (L1) is acquired. Researchers who study child language have shown that child
grammar develops very quickly and rather uniformly (e.g. Brown 1973). The Principles and
Parameters perspective promoted a large number of theory-based studies of child grammar
Generative grammar
645

and provided a theoretical framework to describe it in terms of what is given innately and
what must be acquired. Since Hyams’ (1983) study on the acquisition of overt sentential
subjects by child learners of English, a large number of such studies have been carried out.
In the 1990s two competing hypotheses were oﬀered. Radford (1990) proposed a uniﬁed
account for the diﬀerences between child and adult English: children’s grammars lack func-
tional categories, which makes their utterances diﬀerent from those of adults. For example, the
lack of I(NFL) ( = T in Figures 45.4–7 above) results in the absence of tense or agreement
morphemes on verbs, modals, do-support, copula be, progressive be, perfective have, inﬁnitival
to and in the use of default case forms. Functional categories are assumed to ‘mature’ biolo-
gically in the same way as wisdom teeth do. Because the sentential structure extends (from
VP to TP, and from TP to CP) in accordance with children’s knowledge of language, this
hypothesis is called the structure-building hypothesis. Hyams (1994) (and Hyams and Wexler
1993, among others) argued against Radford, suggesting that functional categories are pro-
jected from the beginning of L1A but their relevant features must mature. They considered the
structure [CP [TP [VP … ]]] to be present in child grammar from the beginning. This is called
the structural continuity hypothesis.
Under both hypotheses, children proceed by acquiring the properties associated with func-
tional categories. This ﬁts well with the view that the parametric diﬀerences among languages
are attributable to the features associated with functional categories.
Applying generative grammar to SLA
The advent of the Principles and Parameters framework brought about a large body of
research adopting a generative approach to SLA. This framework oﬀered an explicit descrip-
tion and explanation of cross-linguistic diﬀerences between natural languages. The theoretical
assumptions of generative grammar – for example, the claim that knowledge of language
constitutes a modular system (Towell and Hawkins 1994) – are also appropriate for SLA
research. In fact, early studies in SLA research suggested that the nature of SLA is similar to
L1A, involving processes of rule construction based not only on input but also on learners’
innate knowledge (Corder 1967), with diﬀerences in input or environment being unlikely to
alter the path by which second language learners (L2ers) progress in advancing their knowledge
of a second language (see, for example, Larsen-Freeman and Long 1991).
However, a number of researchers considered L1A and SLA to be fundamentally diﬀerent:
UG works as a language acquisition device in the former case, but not in the latter. Bley-
Vroman (1989, 1990) pointed out a number of diﬀerences between L1A and SLA and insisted
that they should be seen as fundamentally diﬀerent (see also Bley-Vroman 2009). Clahsen and
Muysken (1986) found that non-target-like sentence types produced by children acquiring
German as their L1 and those produced by L2ers were diﬀerent, and attributed this diﬀerence
to diﬀerent systems underlying the acquisition processes. Namely, L1A is guided by UG while
SLA is not. DuPlessis et al. (1987) proposed a UG-based account for the development of
these non-target-like productions by L2ers.
The ‘UG or not UG’ question was intensely debated during the 1980s. One property used to
address this debate involved the availability of a constraint on wh-movement in SLA by L2ers
whose L1s do not have wh-movement. The movement of wh-phrases is constrained by struc-
ture, rather than by the linear distance between the position where the wh-phrase is base
generated and the surface position where it is pronounced (Ross 1967). In (8), the linear dis-
tance between the wh-word (what) and its trace is longer in (8a) than in (8b), but only (8a) is
grammatical:
Shigenori Wakabayashi
646

(8a)
What did Tom believe that John said that Mike hoped that Jack bought t?
"____________________________________________________________"
(8b)
* What did Tom reject the claim that he wrote t ?
"_____________________________________"
cf. Tom rejected the claim that he wrote this document.
To explain such cases, the Subjacency Condition (Chomsky 1973) was proposed, according to
which a wh-word cannot move beyond two ‘bounding nodes’ at once. What constitutes a
‘bounding node’ diﬀers across languages: IP and NP are bounding nodes in English, whereas
CP and NP are bounding nodes in French.
Let us see how the Subjacency Condition excludes the sentence (8b) above. First of all,
wh-phrases move cyclically via the speciﬁer positions of CPs such that none of the movements
in (8a), shown in Figure 45.8, violates the Subjacency condition. On the other hand, the
second wh-movement in Figure 45.9 goes beyond two bounding nodes. Bounding nodes are
identiﬁed by ‘|’.
Whether L2ers know this constraint was used to examine whether UG operates in SLA (see
Belikova and White (2009) for a recent overview). The logic behind it is as follows: Some
languages have wh-movement while others do not. When wh-phrases do not move, the constraints
related to wh-movement are irrelevant. Suppose a learner’s L1 is this type but the target lan-
guage has wh-movement. If UG, including the Subjacency Condition, operates in SLA, such a
learner should have access to the constraint. Hence, he or she should reject sentences like (8b).
In contrast, if UG does not operate and acquisition proceeds solely based on the L1 grammar
and/or general problem solving mechanisms, then learners should be unaware of such a con-
straint and accept those sentences. A number of studies were carried out following this logic.
The results were inconclusive to a large extent as to whether UG operates in SLA.
Martohardjono’s (1993) ﬁndings were much more compelling than those reported earlier.
She adopted Chomsky’s (1986b) theory and suggested that some ungrammatical sentences are
worse than others. Compare the sentences in (9) with (8b):
(9a) *What did the picture of t surprise you?
cf. The picture of my brother’s house surprised me.
(9b) *What did Mike meet the man who was wearing t?
cf. Mike met the man who was wearing a red jacket.
Figure 45.9 wh-movement in (8b)
Figure 45.8 wh-movement in (8a)
Generative grammar
647

Even though these three sentences are all ungrammatical, native speakers of English judge
(9a, b) much worse than (8b). If this diﬀerence were observed among L2ers’ judgments, this
would strongly suggest that learners’ intuitions come from the same kind of knowledge that
native speakers have, that is, a grammar of English constructed on the basis of UG. The cru-
cial point is that this diﬀerence cannot be learned from input because none of these sentences
(or similar structures) would be included in input as they are ungrammatical. Martohardjono
(1993) carried out an experiment with three groups of L2ers and a native-speaker control
group. All learner groups’ results, including those whose L1 does not have wh-movement,
showed diﬀerences among sentence types similar to those in the native speakers’ responses.
Hence, it is plausible that UG constrains L2ers’ grammar.
Another interesting ﬁnding related to wh-movement in the discussion of UG operation is
that L2ers may produce a kind of wh-question that is not found in adult speakers’ production
but resembles the non-adult-like performance observed in children’s production. Wakabayashi
and Okawara (2003) used the same experimental procedure as Crain and Thornton (1998) and
found that Japanese learners of English produce sentences similar to children’s non-adult-like
production as in (10). This again strongly supports the argument that children’s grammars and
L2ers’ grammars are based on the same innate system:
(10)
What do you think what is in the bag?
Hence, we have strong evidence that UG operates in SLA. However, some may argue as fol-
lows: if UG operates in SLA, L2ers should be able to acquire native-like competence (because
UG makes children native-speakers of a language) (e.g. Akiyama 2002). This argument is
ﬂawed: the availability of UG is a necessary condition for L1A (and probably for SLA) but is
not a suﬃcient condition. In other words, without UG, a language cannot be acquired, but
UG alone does not guarantee the success of language acquisition.
Topics in generative approaches to SLA: brief historical review
As mentioned above, the central issue in the 1980s was whether UG is available or not in SLA.
For example, papers in Eubank (1991) argued for and against UG operation in SLA. In that
volume, several researchers provide data that show L2ers’ grammars to be much more
restricted than the range of logically plausible grammars; in particular, they fall within the
range of natural languages (e.g. Thomas 1991).
To explain L2ers’ performance, several UG-based models/hypotheses have been oﬀered
since the mid-1990s. The Full Transfer/Full Access Model (Schwartz and Sprouse 1994) pro-
poses that learners’ L1 knowledge serves as the initial state for a developing grammar in SLA
and the interlanguage grammar changes through parameter resetting under the sanction of
UG. The Minimal Trees Model (Vainikka and Young-Scholten 1994) suggests that the initial
grammar in SLA lacks functional categories and that L1 transfer is limited to the headedness
of VP. Functional categories are added in the course of development, triggered by free mor-
phemes associated with these categories. Another model similarly assumes that the initial
grammar lacks functional categories and functional categories are acquired in the course of
development, but when a functional category comes to be used, its behaviour in L1A may
appear as well (i.e. transfer gradually emerges in the course of development) (Hawkins 2001;
Wakabayashi 1997, 2002). There are a few more models: the initial grammar has the L1 set-
tings and parameter resetting cannot take place (Hawkins and Chan 1997; Tsimpli and
Roussou 1991); the initial grammar has full CP structure but lacks some features (Eubank
Shigenori Wakabayashi
648

1994); the initial grammar has full CP and relevant features are present from the beginning
exactly as in L1A (Epstein et al. 1996).
Since the late 1990s, researchers have focused especially on learners’ diﬃculties in the con-
sistent use of certain syntactic operations and certain grammatical morphemes, and two types
of explanations have been oﬀered. One is the Failed Functional Features Hypothesis (Hawkins
and Chan 1997; Tsimpli and Roussou 1991), the current version of which is called the Inte-
pretability Hypothesis (Hawkins and Hattori 2006; Tsimpli and Dimitrakopoulou 2007),
according to which L2ers are unable to acquire certain kinds of formal features if they are
not instantiated in their L1. The other suggests that formal features are acquirable but that
learners have diﬃculties in mapping the syntactic object onto phonological structure. This is
called the Missing Surface Inﬂection Hypothesis (Hazneder and Schwartz 1997; Prévost and
White 2000).
L2ers’ diﬃculty in the use of morphemes has evoked a number of explanations for their
behaviour and of the underlying system. The Interface Hypothesis (Tsimpli and Sorace 2006;
Sorace 2007) suggests that L2ers’ linguistic knowledge is a native-like system within each
module; their non-native behaviour is due to problems lying at the interfaces between modules
and at the interface between linguistic knowledge and other knowledge systems. The Fluc-
tuation Hypothesis (Ionin et al. 2004) suggests that L2ers have diﬃculty in associating certain
features with a relevant functional category, but because their L2 grammars are restricted by
UG, L2ers do not ‘invent’ any non-UG features; rather, they ‘ﬂuctuate’ in selecting one among
a few UG-based features. The Feature Assembly Hypothesis (Lardiere 2008) suggests that
L2ers have to re-assemble formal features to diﬀerent functional categories in the process of
language acquisition when their ﬁrst and second languages have features assembled in a dif-
ferent way. Wakabayashi (1997, 2002) suggests that development in the use of target-like (and
non-target-like) morphosyntax in SLA arises through improved consistency in the inclusion of
relevant features in the lexicon. All of these hypotheses assume (in accordance with the
Minimalist Program) that the computational system is uniform in all natural languages,
including interlanguage grammars, and that this system is given innately.
The shift from the Principles and Parameters perspective to the Minimalist Program forces
L2 researchers to reconsider the relationship between parameters and features in the context of
SLA, as well as the nature of formal features. Although the argument is highly technical, such
a level of abstraction and technicality is inevitable given the complexity of SLA and the goal
of describing and explaining the knowledge underlying L2ers’ behaviour.
Experimental data and generative grammar
In the studies of L1A and SLA, studies of I-language are carried out with E-language data.
Researchers often rely on production data in a natural setting. However, such data are not
adequate when we want to investigate whether learners have knowledge that certain structures
are not allowed in language. Production data can tell us what forms a speaker produces, but
cannot tell us what forms they do not produce: It is impossible to tell whether they do not
produce a type of sentence even though they would consider it ‘possible’; or whether they do
not do so because their linguistic system disallows such sentences.
In order to investigate whether L2ers’ knowledge goes beyond the input to which they are
exposed, a grammaticality judgment task (where learners judge whether or not a given sen-
tence is acceptable, or indicate how good it sounds) is a useful way to collect relevant data.
However, it is also true that meta-linguistic knowledge may be brought to bear on such tasks,
making them less reliable as indicators of underlying linguistic competence. Hence, researchers
Generative grammar
649

recently have begun to make greater use of psycholinguistic tools, such as the measurement of
reaction time, to avoid the eﬀects of non-linguistic knowledge.
For example, the third person singular -s in English is notoriously diﬃcult for L2ers to use
consistently. In, for example, Japanese junior and senior high schools, the rule underlying this
morpheme is explicitly taught in a traditional grammatical instruction and frequently appears
in textbooks. However, students still make errors in using it. Hence, this is a case of what
Chomsky (1986a) refers to as “Orwell’s problem”, i.e. why a property is diﬃcult to acquire
even when evidence for it in the input is plentiful.
In order to investigate causes for this problem, Wakabayashi (1997) used reading time
measurement in a task of self-paced reading with moving-windows, and found that inter-
mediate Japanese learners of English are sensitive to [person] disagreement but insensitive to
[number] disagreement in the overuse of the third person singular -s. That is, learners are
sensitive to the ungrammaticality in sentences such as (11a) but not necessarily to (11b):
(11a)
You speaks English.
(11b)
The students speaks English.
Similar ﬁndings were obtained in an experiment where Event Related Potentials (ERP) were
measured (Wakabayashi et al. 2007). Hence, it is plausible that the [number] feature is likely to
be the cause. This feature is obligatorily associated with noun phrases in English but not with
noun phrases in Japanese, while the [person] feature is inherently associated with noun phrases
in all languages.
Note that the experimental methods used in these studies made it possible to investigate
the diﬀerence between learners’ knowledge of [person] and [number]. When data were col-
lected for the sentence types in Wakabayashi (1997) in a pencil-and-paper grammaticality
judgment task, participants answered 100 per cent correctly even though their general
proﬁciency was lower than that of the participants in the reading time measurement in
Wakabayashi (1997). Hence, without psycholinguistic experimental methods, the diﬀerence
between features could not be found.
The important point is that we need to describe speakers’ grammars and/or L2ers’
interlanguage grammars, as well as those of their processing mechanisms, no matter what
experimental methods are used. The descriptions of the sentence structures in the experi-
mental materials are based on their analysis in generative grammar, and it would be
impossible to discuss the results or even the predictions of learners’ behaviour without
them.
Summary
Every day we use new sentences. Our knowledge of language is the system that makes it pos-
sible for us to produce and interpret sentences that we have never come across in our life. This
system is constrained in a certain way, as illustrated by the examples with reﬂexive pronouns
and wh-phrases earlier in this chapter. The sentences we produce and interpret are not merely
strings of words, but they have structures.
As shown in the examples throughout this chapter, learners’ behaviour shows that their
use of language reﬂects what is (far) beyond memorization of chunks; rather, what they
have is a system which generates target-like and non-target-like linguistic behaviours and
which is sanctioned by the constraints common to all human languages, that is, Universal
Grammar.
Shigenori Wakabayashi
650

In applied linguistics, it is certainly a main issue to investigate what learners’ knowledge of
language is, how it is acquired and how it is used. With regard to native speakers’ knowledge
of syntax (and other aspects of language), generative grammar has tried to answer these
questions (Chomsky 1986a). As described in the ﬁrst part of this chapter, there have been a
few radical changes of the theoretical paradigm in generative grammar, but the purpose of the
research has been retained throughout its history: now we have reliable tools to examine what
is going on in learners’ minds, and insights obtained through generative grammar will surely
continue to play important roles in applied linguistics, especially studies of ﬁrst and second
language acquisition.
There are a number of interesting questions waiting for us to investigate, including whether,
how, and what kinds of instruction inﬂuence learners’ linguistic knowledge; whether and how
learners’ linguistic knowledge is inﬂuenced by environmental factors; and whether and how
learners’ non-linguistic psychological factors aﬀect their use of linguistic knowledge. Investi-
gation of these questions is possible only when learners’ linguistic knowledge is described in a
reliable theoretical framework. In this sense, generative grammar will play an important role in
these interdisciplinary areas, as a framework for applied linguistics in the future.
Related topics
grammar; psycholiguistics
Further reading
Hawkins, R. (2001) Second Language Syntax: A Generative Introduction, Oxford: Blackwell. (An
accessible introduction to UG-based SLA.)
Lardiere, D. (2009) ‘Some thoughts on the contrastive analysis of features in second language
acquisition’, Second Language Research 25, 173–227. (This paper, with commentaries from lead-
ing experts in the same volume of the journal, discusses issues in generative approaches to SLA.)
Slabakova, R., Montrul, S. A. and Prévost, R. (eds) (2009) Inquiries in Linguistic Development: In
honor of Lydia White, Amsterdam: John Benjamins. (A collection of papers by leading ﬁgures in
generative approaches to SLA.)
Towell, R. and Hawkins, R. (1994) Approaches to Second Language Acquisition, Clevedon: Multi-
lingual Matters. (This book compares UG-based approaches to SLAwith other approaches to SLA.)
White, L. (2003) Second Language Acquisition and Universal Grammar, Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press. (This book discusses developments in generative approaches to SLA since 1990.)
References
Akiyama, Y. (2002) ‘Japanese adult learners’ development of the locality condition of English
reﬂexives’, Studies in Second Language Acquisition 24, 27–54.
Belikova, A. and White, L. (2009) ‘Evidence for the fundamental diﬀerence hypothesis or not?
Island constraints revisited’, Studies in Second Language Acquisition 31, 1–24.
Bley-Vroman, R. (1989) ‘What is the logical problem of foreign language learning?’ in S. Gass and
J. Schachter (eds) Linguistic Perspectives on Second Language Learning, Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
——(1990) ‘The logical problem of foreign language learning’, Linguistic Analysis 20, 3–49.
——(2009) ‘The evolving context of the fundamental diﬀerence hypothesis’, Studies in Second
Language Acquisition 31, 175–98.
Brown, R. (1973) A First Language: The Early Stages, London: George Allen and Unwin.
Chomsky, N. (1955) The Logical Structure of Linguistic Theory, manuscript, Harvard University
(Published in part by New York: Plenum, 1975; Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1985).
——(1957) Syntactic Structures, The Hague: Mouton.
Generative grammar
651

——(1965) Aspects of the Theory of Syntax, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
——(1973) ‘Conditions on transformations’, in S. Anderson and P. Kiprasky (eds) A Festschrift for
Morris Halle, New York: Holt, Rinehart and Winston.
——(1981) Lectures on Government and Binding, Dordrecht: Foris.
——(1986a) Knowledge of Language: Its Nature, Origin, and Use, New York: Praeger.
——(1986b) Barriers, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
——(1993) ‘A minimalist program for linguistic theory’, in K. Hale and S. J. Keyser (eds) The View
from Building 20: Essays in Linguistics in Honor of Syvain Bromberger, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
——(1995) The Minimalist Program, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
——(1999) ‘Derivation by phase’, MIT Occasional Papers in Linguistics 18 (also published in
M. Kenstowicz (ed.) Hen Hale: A Life in Language, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press).
Clahsen, H. and Muysken, P. (1986), ‘The availability of universal grammar to adult and child
learners: a study of the acquisition of German word order’, Second Language Research 2, 93–119.
Corder, S. P. (1967) ‘The signiﬁcance of learners’ errors’, International Review of Applied Linguistics
5, 161–9.
Crain, S. and Thornton, R. (1998) Investigations in Universal Grammar: A Guide to Experiments on
the Acquisition of Syntax and Semantics, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
duPlessis, J., Solin, D, Travis, L. and White, L. (1987) ‘UG or not UG, that is the question: a reply
to Clahsen and Muysken’, Second Language Research 3, 56–75.
Epstein, S. D., Flynn, S. and Martohardjono, G. (1996) ‘Second language acquisition: theoretical
and experimental issues in contemporary research’, Behavioral and Brain Science 19, 677–758.
Eubank, L. (1994) ‘Optionality and the “initial state” in L2 development’, in T. Hoesktra and
B. D. Schwartz (eds) Language Acquisition Studies in Generative Grammar, Amsterdam: John
Benjamins.
Eubank, L. (ed.) (1991) Point Counterpoint: Universal Grammar in the Second Language, Amsterdam:
John Benjamins.
Haegeman, L. (ed.) (1997) The New Comparative Syntax, Harlow: Longman.
Hawkins, R. (2001) Second Language Syntax: A Generative Introduction, Oxford: Blackwell.
Hawkins, R. and Chan, C. Y. (1997) ‘The partial availability of Universal Grammar in second lan-
guage acquisition: the “failed functional features hypothesis”’, Second Language Research 13, 187–226.
Hawkins, R. and Hattori, H. (2006) ‘Interpretation of multiple wh-questions by Japanese speakers:
a missing uninterpretable feature account’, Second Language Research 22, 269–301.
Hazneder, D. and Schwartz, B. D. (1997) ‘Are there optional inﬁnitives in child L2 acquisition?’, in
E. Hughes, M. Hughes and A. Greenhill (eds) Proceedings of the 21st Annual Boston University
Conference on Language Development, Somerville, MA: Cascadilla Press.
Hyams, N. (1983) ‘The Acquisition of Parameterized Grammars’, Ph.D. thesis, City University of
New York.
——(1994) ‘V2, null arguments and COMP projections’, in T. Hoekstra and B. D. Schwartz (eds)
Language Acquisition: Studies in Generative Grammar, Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Hyams, N. and Wexler, K. (1993) ‘On the grammatical basis of null subjects in child language’,
Linguistic Inquiry 24, 421–59.
Ionin, T., Ko, H. and Wexler, K. (2004) ‘Article semantics in L2-acquisition: the role of speciﬁcity’,
Language Acquisition 12, 3–69.
Lardiere, D. (2008) ‘Feature assembly in second language acquistion’, in J. M. Liceras, H. Zobl and
H. Goodluck (eds) The Role of Formal Features in Second Language Acquisition, New York:
Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Larsen-Freeman, D. and Long, M. H. (1991) An Introduction to Second Language Acquisition
Research, London: Longman.
Lasnik, H. (2005) ‘Grammar, levels, and biology’, in J. McGilvray (ed.) The Cambridge Companion
to Chomsky, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Martohardjono, G. (1993) ‘Wh-movement in the Acquisition of a Second Language: A Cross-linguistic
Study of 3 Languages With and Without Overt Movement’, Ph.D. thesis, Cornell University.
May, R. C. (1977) ‘The Grammar of Quantiﬁcation’, Ph.D. Dissertation, Massachusetts Institute of
Technology. Published 1990 (New York: Garland).
Newmeyer, F. J. (1986) Linguistic Theory in America, 2nd edn, Orlando, FL: Academic Press.
Obler, L. K. and Gjerlow, K. (1999) Language and the Brain, Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.
Shigenori Wakabayashi
652

Prévost, P. and White, L. (2000) ‘Missing surface inﬂection or impairment in second language
acquisition? Evidence from tense and agreement’, Second Language Research 16: 103–33.
Radford, A. (1990). Syntactic Theory and the Acquisition of English Syntax: The Nature of Early
Child Grammars of English, Oxford: Blackwell.
Reibel, D. A. and Schane, S. A. (1969) ‘Preface’, in D. A. Reibel, and S. A. Schane (eds) Modern
Studies in English: Readings in Transformational Grammar, Englewood Cliﬀs, NJ: Prentice Hall.
Roberts, I. (1993) Verbs and Diachronic Syntax, Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic.
Ross, J. R. (1967) ‘Constraints on Variables in Syntax’, Ph.D. thesis, MIT. Published (1986) as
Inﬁnite Syntax! Norwood, NJ: Ablex.
Schwartz, B. and Sprouse, R. (1994) ‘Word order and nominative case in nonnative language
acquisition: a longitudinal study of (L1 Turkish) German interlanguage’, in T. Hoesktra and
B. D. Schwartz (eds) Language Acquisition: Studies in Generative Grammar, Amsterdam: John
Benjamins.
Selinker, L. (1972) ‘Interlanguage’, International Review of Applied Linguistics 10, 209–31.
Smith, N. (2005) ‘Chomsky’s science of language’, in J. McGilvray (ed.) The Cambridge Companion
to Chomsky, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Smith, N. and Tsimpli, I. M. (1995) The Mind of a Savant, Oxford: Basil Blackwell.
Sorace, A. (2007) ‘Optionality at the syntax-discourse interface in near-native L2 speakers’, Second
Language 6, 3–15.
Thomas, M. (1991) ‘Do second language learners have “rogue” grammars of anaphora?’ in
L. Eubank (ed.) Point Counterpoint: Universal Grammar in the Second Language, Amsterdam:
John Benjamins.
Tsimpli, I.-M. and Dimitrakopoulou, M. (2007) ‘The interpretability hypothesis: evidence from wh-
interrotagives in second language acquisition’, Second Language Research 23, 215–42.
Tsimpli, I.-M. and Roussou, A. (1991) ‘Parameter resetting in L2?’ UCL Working Papers in Lin-
guistics 3, 149–69.
Tsimpli, I. M. and Sorace, A. (2006) ‘Diﬀerentiating interfaces: L2 performance in syntax-semantics
and syntax-discourse phenomena’, BUCLD Proceedings 30: 653–64.
Vainikka, A. and Young-Scholten, M. (1994) ‘“Direct access to X”-theory: evidence from Korean
and Turkish adults learning German’, in T. Hoekstra and B. D. Schwartz (eds) Language
Acquisition: Studies in Generative Grammar, Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Wakabayashi, S. (1997) ‘The Acquisition of Functional Categories by Learners of English’, Ph.D.
thesis, University of Cambridge.
——(2002) ‘Why free morphemes are acquired earlier than bound morphemes: a minimalist
account’, in M. Swanson, D. McMurray and K. Lane (eds) The Proceedings of PAC3 at
JALT2001: A Language Odyssey, Japan Association of Applied Linguistics.
Wakabayashi, S., Bannai, M., Fukuda, K. and Asaoka, S. (2007) ‘Japanese speakers’ sensitivity to
third person singular -s in English based on ERP data’, Second Language 6, 19–46.
Wakabayashi, S. and Okawara, I. (2003) ‘Japanese learners’ errors on long distance wh-questions’,
in S. Wakabayashi (ed.) Generative Approaches to the Acquisition of English by Native Speakers of
Japanese, Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter.
White, L. (1991) ‘Second language competence versus second language performance: UG or pro-
cessing strategies?’ in L. Eubank (ed.) Point Counterpoint: Universal Grammar in the Second
Language, Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Generative grammar
653

46
The emergence of language as a
complex adaptive system
Nick C. Ellis
History: the mysterious process
Saussure (1916) characterized the units of language as linguistic signs, the signiﬁers of lin-
guistic form and their associated signiﬁed functions, concepts or meanings. In Saussure’s view
linguistic signs arise from the dynamic interactions of thought and sound – from patterns of
usage:
what happens is neither a transformation of thought into matter, nor a transformation of
sound into ideas. What takes place is a somewhat mysterious process by which ‘thought-
sound’ evolves divisions, and a language takes place with its linguistic units in between
these two amorphous masses.
(Saussure 1916: 110–11)
Thus began structuralist linguistics, the study of language as a relational structure, whose ele-
mental constructions derive their forms and functions from their distributions in texts and
discourse. This approach had a signiﬁcant impact upon applied linguistics too. Fries, the founder
of the English Language Institute at the University of Michigan, distinguished between lexical
and structural meaning, with structural meaning concerning the patterns relating a particular
arrangement of form classes to particular structural meanings. In this view, language acquisi-
tion is the learning of an inventory of patterns, as arrangements of words, with their associated
structural meanings. Fries’ (1952) The Structure of English presented an analysis of these pat-
terns, and Roberts’ (1956) Patterns of English was a textbook presentation of this system for
classroom use. Harris (1955), founder of the ﬁrst US linguistics department at the University
of Pennsylvania, developed rigorous discovery procedures for phonemes and morphemes based
on the distributional properties of these units. For Harris, form and information (grammar
and semantics) were inseparable. He proposed that each human language is a self-organizing
system in which both the syntactic and semantic properties of a word are established purely
in relation to other words, and that the patterns of a language are learned through exposure to
usage in social participation (Harris 1982, 1991). Structuralism, the dominant approach in
linguistics for the earlier part of the twentieth century, was overtaken in the 1960s in the US by
654

generative approaches. Harris’ student, Chomsky (1965, 1981), abandoned structure-speciﬁc
rules and developed the Principles-and-Parameters approach, the general grammatical rules
and principles of that is assumed to an innate Universal Grammar. Grammar became top-
down and rule-governed, rather than bottom-up and emergent. It was modularized, encapsulated,
and divorced from performance, lexis, social usage, and the rest of cognition. The analysis of
linguistic structures as functional patterns and their ‘somewhat mysterious’ emergence from
usage was no longer pursued within generative linguistics.
Language and cognition, however, are mutually inextricable; they determine each other.
Language has come to represent the world as we know it; it is grounded in our perceptual
experience. Language is used to organize, process, and communicate information, from one
person to another, from one embodied mind to another. Learning language involves deter-
mining linguistic structures from usage and this, like learning about all other aspects of the world,
involves the full scope of cognition: the remembering of utterances and episodes, the categor-
ization of experience, the determination of patterns among and between stimuli, the generalization
of conceptual schema and prototypes from exemplars, and the use of cognitive models, meta-
phors, analogies, and images in thinking. Language is used to focus the listener’s attention to
the world; it can foreground diﬀerent elements in the theater of consciousness to potentially
relate many diﬀerent stories and perspectives about the same scene. What is attended is
learned, and so attention aﬀects the acquisition of language itself. The functions of language
in discourse determine its usage and learning. Language usage, language change, language
acquisition, and language structure are similarly inseparable. There is nothing that so well
characterizes human social action as language. Cognition, consciousness, experience, embodi-
ment, brain, self, and human interaction, society, culture, and history are all inextricably
intertwined in rich, complex, and dynamic ways.
Despite this complexity and despite its lack of overt government, instead of anarchy and
chaos, patterning pervades the complex system of language. The patterns are not pre-ordained
by God, by genes, by school curriculum, or by other human policy, but instead they are emergent
from the interactions of the agents involved – synchronic patterns of linguistic organization at
diﬀerent scales (phonology, lexis, syntax, semantics, pragmatics, discourse genre, etc.),
dynamic patterns of usage, diachronic patterns of language change (linguistic cycles of gram-
maticization, pidginization, creolization, etc.), ontogenetic developmental patterns in child
language acquisition, global geopolitical patterns of language growth and decline, dominance
and loss, need and education, etc.
Various disciplines within cognitive science (including cognitive psychology, child language
studies, cognitive linguistics, corpus linguistics, and connectionism) focus upon their own local
patterns of interest to try to understand the processes by which they come about. But above
and beyond these particular investigations, other approaches (under banners such as emer-
gentism, complex adaptive systems, and dynamic systems theory) recognize that there are
general principles which characterize the emergence of patterns in complex systems whatever
their content or scale. In what follows in this chapter I will ﬁrst consider some of the speciﬁc
disciplines focusing upon the patterning of information and its creation in human mind, brain,
culture and society, before I then introduce the study of emergence itself. The chapter
concludes with a view of language as a complex adaptive system (CAS).
Local perspectives on the mysterious process
An overview of the ways in which relevant disciplines are studying the origins of patterns in
language can be conveniently organized by ﬁrst focusing upon Saussure’s linguistic sign.
Language emergence
655

However convenient, this does not imply that the structure of language is primary; far from
it – we should look to meaning and social communication for that.
Usage-based theories of language acquisition hold that we learn language incidentally while
engaging in communication (Barlow and Kemmer 2000; Hopper 1998), the ‘interpersonal
communicative and cognitive processes that everywhere and always shape language’ (Slobin
1997). Within these approaches, the modern parallel to the sign as a basic unit of language
representation is the construction. Constructions are the fundamental units of language
acquisition and reﬂect the most direct embodiment of learners’ communicative intentions.
Some of the basic tenets of usage-based approaches to language and its acquisition, many of
them explicitly addressed by Saussure (1916), are:

Language is intrinsically linked to human cognition and processes of perception, attention,
learning, categorization, schematization, and memory.

Language is intrinsically symbolic, constituted by a structured inventory of constructions
as conventionalized form-meaning pairings used for communicative purposes.

Adult language knowledge consists of a continuum of linguistic constructions of diﬀerent
levels of complexity and abstraction. Constructions can comprise concrete and particular
items (as in words and idioms), more abstract classes of items (as in word classes and
abstract constructions), or complex combinations of concrete and abstract pieces of lan-
guage (as mixed constructions). Consequently, no rigid separation is postulated to exist
between lexis and grammar.

Constructions may be simultaneously represented and stored in multiple forms, at various
levels of abstraction (e.g. concrete item: table + s = tables and [Noun] + (morpheme +s) =
plural things).

Linguistic constructions can thus be meaningful linguistic symbols in their own right,
existing independently of particular lexical items. Nevertheless, constructions and the par-
ticular lexical tokens that occupy them attract each other, and grammar and lexis are
inseparable.

Language structure emerges ontogenetically from usage in particular contexts. Development is
slow and gradual, moving from an initial heavy reliance on concrete items to more abstract
linguistic schemata. This process is crucially dependent on the type and token frequencies
with which particular constructions appear in the input. Storage of wholes depends on
token frequency; the development of abstract linguistic schema depends on type frequency.
Particular approaches to language and cognition within the language sciences, psychology, and
cognitive science concentrate upon diﬀerent facets of patterning. The linguistic approaches
analyze the units of language, the psychological approaches their learning and usage:
Functional analyses of language catalogue the inventory of constructions, investigating the
ways in which constructions are symbolic, their deﬁning properties of morphological, syntac-
tic, and lexical form being associated with particular semantic, pragmatic, and discourse
functions (Croft 2001; Croft and Cruse 2004; Halliday 1994; Taylor 2002).
Corpus linguistic analyses of large collections of language show how there are recurrent
patterns of words, collocations, phrases, and constructions, that syntax and semantics are
inextricably linked, and that grammar cannot be described without lexis, nor lexis without
grammar (Biber et al. 1998, 1999, Hoey 2005; McEnery and Wilson 1996; Sinclair
1991, 2004).
Construction grammar and phraseological analyses of language show that much of commu-
nication makes use of ﬁxed expressions memorized as formulaic chunks, that language is rich
Nick C. Ellis
656

in collocational and colligational restrictions and semantic prosodies, and that the phrase is
the basic level of language representation where form and meaning come together with great-
est reliability (Ellis 1996, 2008b; Fillmore 1988; Goldberg 1995, 2003; Granger and Meunier
2008; Pawley and Syder 1983; Sinclair 1991, 2004; Wray 2002).
Child language acquisition researchers gather dense longitudinal corpora in order to chart
the emergence of creative linguistic competence in children’s analyses of the utterances in their
usage history and their abstraction of regularities within them (Goldberg 2006; Tomasello
1998, 2003).
Psycholinguistic theories of the mental representation of language show that ﬂuent language
users are sensitive to the relative probabilities of occurrence of diﬀerent constructions in the
language input and to the contingencies of their mappings to meaning (Ellis 2002a; Gaskell
2007; Gernsbacher 1994).
Psychological analyses of perception and attention investigate the ways in which human
embodiment and our perceptuo-motor systems govern our representation of the world and the
ways that language can guide our attention to these representations (Barsalou 1999, 2008;
Mandler 2004; Talmy 1988, 2000a, 2000b).
Associative learning theory analyses how the learning of stimulus-outcome contingencies is
aﬀected by: factors relating to the form such as frequency and salience; factors relating to the
interpretation such as signiﬁcance in the comprehension of the overall utterance, proto-
typicality, generality, redundancy, and surprise value; factors relating to the contingency of
form and function; and factors relating to learner attention, such as automaticity, transfer,
overshadowing, and blocking. Selective attention, salience, expectation, and surprise are key
elements in the analysis of all learning, animal and human alike (Shanks 1995). These
principles pervade language acquisition too (Ellis 2002a, 2003, 2006, 2008c).
Learning theory recognizes three major experiential factors that aﬀect cognition: frequency,
recency, and context (e.g. Anderson 2000; Bartlett [1932] 1967; Ebbinghaus 1885). Learning,
memory and perception are all aﬀected by frequency of usage: the more times we experience
something, the stronger our memory for it, and the more ﬂuently it is accessed. The more
recently we have experienced something, the stronger our memory for it, and the more ﬂuently
it is accessed. The more times we experience conjunctions of features, the more they become
associated in our minds and the more these subsequently aﬀect perception and categorization;
so a stimulus becomes associated to a context and we become more likely to perceive it in that
context. The power law of learning (Anderson 1982; Ellis and Schmidt 1998; Newell 1990)
describes the relationships between practice and performance in the acquisition of a wide
range of cognitive skills – the greater the practice, the greater the performance, although
eﬀects of practice are largest at early stages of leaning, thereafter diminishing and eventually
reaching asymptote. The power function relating probability of recall (or recall latency)
and recency is known as the forgetting curve (Baddeley 1997; Ebbinghaus 1885). These three
factors pervade the acquisition, form, access, and processing of constructions (Ellis and
Cadierno 2009).
Cognitive theories of categorization and generalization analyze how schematic constructions
are inferred inductively by the learner in acquisition (Barsalou 2008; Harnad 1987; Lakoﬀ
1987; Schank and Abelson 1977; Taylor 1998). Prototypes, exemplars which are most typical
of a category, are those which are similar to many members of that category and not similar to
members of other categories. The operationalization of this criterion predicts human categor-
ization performance – people more quickly classify as birds sparrows (or other average sized,
average colored, average beaked, average featured specimens) than they do birds with less
common features or feature combinations like geese or albatrosses (Rosch and Mervis 1975;
Language emergence
657

Rosch et al. 1976). Prototypes are judged faster and more accurately, even if they themselves
have never been seen before – someone who has never seen a sparrow, yet who has experienced
the rest of birds, will still be fast and accurate in judging it to be a bird (Posner and Keele
1970). Such eﬀects make it very clear that although people don’t go around consciously
counting features, they nevertheless have very accurate knowledge of the underlying frequency
distributions and their central tendencies. The prototype emerges from the conspiracy of
memorized exemplars (Rogers and McClelland 2008).
Connectionist, competition model, and rational analyses of language demonstrate the ways in
which generalizations emerge from the conspiracy of memorized instances, the ways in which
diﬀerent cues and their cue reliabilities compete for activation, and the ways in which these
representations provide the best model of language that is available from the learner’s sample
of experience, one that is optimized in its organization for usage (Anderson 1989; Anderson
and Schooler 2000; Bates and MacWhinney 1987; Chater and Manning 2006; Christiansen
and Chater 2001; Ellis 2006; Elman et al. 1996; MacWhinney 1987, 1997).
Probabilistic and frequency-based theories of language analyze how frequency and repetition
aﬀect and ultimately bring about form in language and how probabilistic knowledge drives
language comprehension and production (Bod et al. 2003; Bybee and Hopper 2001; Ellis
2002a, 2000b; Jurafsky 2002; Jurafsky and Martin 2000). Distributional analyses of language
also show the importance of Zipf’s law at all levels in determining the structure and network
characteristics of linguistic systems and the eﬀects of these properties on learning (Ferrer i
Cancho and Solé 2001).
Sociocultural theory analyzes how language learning takes place in a social context, invol-
ving action, reaction, collaborative interaction, intersubjectivity, and mutually assisted perfor-
mance, and how individual language learning is an emergent, holistic property of a dynamic
system comprising many dialectic inﬂuences, both social, individual, and contextual, involving
the learner in a conscious tension between the conﬂicting forces of their current interlanguage
productions and the evidence of feedback, either linguistic, pragmatic, or metalinguistic, that
allows socially scaﬀolded development (Ellis 2008b; Kramsch 2002; Lantolf and Pavlenko
1995; Lantolf and Thorne 2006; Vygotsky 1980, 1986). Current child language acquisition
research emphasizes how language learning is ‘socially gated’ (Kuhl 2007) in the same way
that the Interaction Approach (Gass 1997) to second language acquisition shows how inter-
action is not simply language usage, but negotiation, with participants’ attention being focused
on resolving a communication problem and thus ‘connecting input, internal learner capacities,
particularly selective attention, and output in productive ways’ (Long 1996).
The scientiﬁc study of consciousness, its neural correlates, and its involvement in learning
and memory (Baars 1997; Koch 2004) show there are diﬀerent forms of language learning,
broadly, the implicit tallying and chunking that take place during usage (Ellis 2002a, 2002b)
and explicit learning in the classroom, sometimes a consequence of communication break-
down (Ellis 1994, 2005: sections 3–4). Implicit learning from usage occurs largely within
modality and involves the priming or chunking of representations or routines within a module,
with abstract schema and constructions emerging from the conspiracy of memorized instances.
It is the means of tuning our zombie agents, the menagerie of specialized sensori-motor pro-
cessors that carry out routine operations in the absence of direct conscious sensation or con-
trol. It is largely automatized. It operates in parallel. In contrast, conscious processing is
spread wide over the brain and uniﬁes otherwise disparate areas in a synchronized focus of
activity. Conscious activity aﬀords much more scope for focused long-range association and
inﬂuence than does implicit learning. It brings about a whole new level of potential associations.
It operates serially.
Nick C. Ellis
658

Consciousness too is dynamic; it is perhaps the prototype example of an emergent phe-
nomenon: the stream of consciousness is one of ever-changing states, each cued by prior state
and perceptual context, the units of consciousness being identiﬁable as patterns of brain syn-
chrony in time. The dynamics of language learning are inextricably linked to the dynamics of
consciousness, in neural activity and in the social world as well.
As these diverse research eﬀorts illustrate, language usage involves agents and their pro-
cesses at many levels, and we need to try to understand language emergence as a function of
interactions within and between them. This is a tall order. Hence, Saussure’s ‘mysterious
process’ and his observations that
to speak of a ‘linguistic law’ in general is like trying to lay hands on a ghost …
Synchronic laws are general, but not imperative. [They] are imposed upon speakers by the
constraints of common usage … In short, when one speaks of a synchronic law, one is
speaking of an arrangement, or a principle of regularity.
(Saussure 1916: 90–1)
Nevertheless, a century of subsequent work within the disciplines introduced above has put
substantial ﬂesh on the bone, as you will see if you follow up on the readings. And more
recently, work within emergentism, CAS, and dynamic systems theory (DST) has started to
describe a number of scale-free, domain-general processes which characterize the emergence of
pattern across the physical, natural, and social world. Next, I consider language in this light.
Common mysteries of emergence
Emergentism and complexity theory (Ellis 1998; Ellis and Larsen-Freeman 2006a; Elman et al.
1996; Larsen-Freeman 1997; Larsen-Freeman and Cameron 2008; MacWhinney 1999) analyze
how complex patterns emerge from the interactions of many agents, how each emergent level
cannot come into being except by involving the levels that lie below it, and how at each higher
level there are new and emergent kinds of relatedness not found below: ‘More is diﬀerent’
(Anderson 1972). Emergentism and complexity theory align well with DST which considers
how cognitive, social and environmental factors are in continuous interactions, where ﬂux and
individual variation abound, and where cause-eﬀect relationships are non-linear, multivariate
and interactive in time (de Bot et al. 2007; Ellis 2008a; Ellis and Larsen-Freeman 2006a,
2006b; Port and van Gelder 1995; Spencer et al. 2009; Spivey 2006; van Geert 1991).
Emergentists believe that simple learning mechanisms, operating in and across the human
systems for perception, motor-action and cognition as they are exposed to language data
as part of a communicatively-rich human social environment by an organism eager to
exploit the functionality of language, suﬃce to drive the emergence of complex language
representations.
(Ellis 1998: 657)
Language cannot be understood in neurological or physical terms alone, nevertheless, neuro-
biology and physics play essential roles in the complex interrelations; equally from the top
down, though language cannot be understood purely in experiential terms, nevertheless, conscious
experience is an essential part too.
Language considered as a CAS of dynamic usage and its experience involves the following
key features:
Language emergence
659


The system consists of multiple agents (the speakers in the speech community) interacting
with one another.

The system is adaptive, that is, speakers’ behavior is based on their past interactions, and
current and past interactions together feed forward into future behavior.

A speaker’s behavior is the consequence of competing factors ranging from perceptual
mechanics to social motivations.

The structures of language emerge from interrelated patterns of experience, social interac-
tion, and cognitive processes.
The advantage of viewing language in these ways is that it provides a uniﬁed account of see-
mingly unrelated linguistic phenomena (Holland 1995, 1998; Beckner et al. 2009). These phe-
nomena include: variation at all levels of linguistic organization; the probabilistic nature of
linguistic behavior; continuous change within agents and across speech communities; the
emergence of grammatical regularities from the interaction of agents in language use; and
stage-like transitions due to underlying non-linear processes.
Characteristics of language as a CAS
The following are seven major characteristics of language as a CAS, which are consistent with
studies in language change, language use, language acquisition, and with the computer
modeling of these aspects which is a core component of CAS research (Beckner et al. 2009).
Distributed control, and collective emergence
Language exists both in individuals (as idiolect) as well as in the community of users
(as communal language). Language is emergent at these two distinctive but inter-dependent
levels: an idiolect is emergent from an individual’s language use through social interactions
with other individuals in the communal language, while a communal language is emergent as
the result of the interaction of the idiolects. Distinction and connection between these two
levels is a common feature in CASs. Patterns at the collective level (such as bird ﬂocks, ﬁsh
schools, or economies) cannot be attributed to global coordination among individuals; the
global pattern is emergent, resulting from long-term local interactions between individuals.
Intrinsic diversity
In a CAS, there is no ideal representing agent for the system. Just as in an economy, there is
no ideal representative consumer, similarly, there is no ideal speaker-hearer for language use,
language representation, or language development. Each idiolect is the product of the indivi-
dual’s unique exposure and experiences of language use (Bybee 2006). Sociolinguistics studies
have revealed the large degree of orderly heterogeneity among idiolects (Weinreich et al. 1968),
not only in their language use, but also in their internal organization and representation
(Da˛browska 1997). Mindfulness of intrinsic diversity is helpful for theory construction.
Perpetual dynamics
Both communal language and idiolects are in constant change and reorganization. Languages
are in constant ﬂux, and language change is ubiquitous (Hopper 1987). At the individual level,
every instance of language use changes an idiolect’s internal organization (Bybee 2006). As we
Nick C. Ellis
660

deﬁne language primarily through dynamical rules, rather than by forces designed to pull it to
a static equilibrium, it shares, along with almost all complex systems, a fundamentally
far-from-equilibrium nature (Holland 1995).
Adaptation through ampliﬁcation and competition of factors
CASs generally consist of multiple interacting elements, which may amplify and/or compete
with one another’s eﬀects. Structure in complex systems tends to arise via positive feedback, in
which certain factors perpetuate themselves, in conjunction with negative feedback, in which
some constraint is imposed (for instance, due to limited space or resources) (Camazine et al.
2001; Steels 2006). Likewise in language, all factors interact and feed into one another.
Non-linearity and phase transitions
In complex systems, small quantitative changes in certain parameters often lead to phase
transitions, i.e. qualitative diﬀerences. Elman (2005) points out that multiple small phenotypic
diﬀerences between humans and other primates (such as in degree of sociability, shared
attention, memory capacity, rapid sequencing ability, vocal tract control, etc.) may in combi-
nation result in profound consequences, allowing means of communication of a totally diﬀer-
ent nature. Also, in a dynamic system, even when there is no parametric change, at a certain
point in a continuous dynamic, system behavior can change dramatically and go through a
phase transition. For example, constant heating of water leads to a transition from liquid to
gas, without having any parametric change. In language development, such phase transitions
are often observed, for example developmental ‘lexical spurts’ which often lead to rapid
grammatical development (Bates and Goodman 1997).
Sensitivity to and dependence on network structure
Network studies of complex systems have shown that real-world networks are not random, as
was initially assumed (Barabási 2002; Barabási and Albert 1999; Watts and Strogatz 1998),
and that the internal structure and connectivity of the system can have a profound impact
upon system dynamics (Newman et al. 2006). Similarly, linguistic interactions are not via
random contacts; they are constrained by social networks. The social structure of language use
and interaction has a crucial eﬀect in the process of language change (Milroy 1980) and lan-
guage variation (Eckert 2000), and the social structure of early humans must also have played
important roles in language origin and evolution.
Change is local
Complexity arises in systems via incremental changes, based on locally available resources,
rather than via top-down direction or deliberate movement toward some goal (see, for example,
Dawkins 1985). Similarly, in a complex systems framework, language is viewed as an extension
of numerous domain-general cognitive capacities such as shared attention, imitation, sequen-
tial learning, chunking, and categorization (Bybee 1998; Ellis 1996). Language is emergent
from ongoing human social interactions, and its structure is fundamentally molded by the pre-
existing cognitive abilities, processing idiosyncrasies and limitations, and general and speciﬁc
conceptual circuitry of the human brain. Because this has been true in every generation of
language users from its very origin, in some formulations language is said to be a form of
Language emergence
661

cultural adaptation to the human mind, rather than the result of the brain adapting to
process natural language grammar (Christiansen and Chater 2008; Deacon 1997; Schoene-
mann 2005). These perspectives have consequences for an understanding of how language is
processed in the brain. Speciﬁcally, language will depend heavily on brain areas fundamentally
linked to various types of conceptual understanding, the processing of social interactions,
and pattern recognition and memory. It also predicts that so-called ‘language areas’ should
have more general, pre-linguistic processing functions even in modern humans, and further,
that the homologous areas of our closest primate relatives should also process information in
ways that makes them predictable substrates for incipient language. Further, it predicts that
the complexity of communication is to some important extent a function of social complexity.
Given that social complexity is in turn correlated with brain size across primates, brain size
evolution in early humans should give us some general clues about the evolution of language
(Schoenemann 2006). Recognizing language as a CAS allows us to understand change at
all levels.
Future directions: dynamic structure
As the diverse research cited in this chapter illustrates, understanding the emergence of lan-
guage requires the full range of techniques of cognitive, social and natural science. But more
than that, it requires the overarching frameworks of emergentism, CAS, and DST.
A common counterpoint within linguistics is the contrast between Saussure and Vygotsky,
between structuralist approaches to language and those that emphasize the processes of lan-
guage use in social interaction, between thin and thick descriptions (Geertz 1973). Vygotsky’s
([1935] 1986) Thinking and Speaking addresses that same mystery as Saussure’s, and makes
equal resort to metaphor, for example: ‘A thought may be compared to a cloud shedding a
shower of words’ (1986: 150), and
Consciousness is reﬂected in the word like the sun is reﬂected in a droplet of water. The
word is a microcosm of consciousness, related to consciousness like a living cell is related
to an organism, like an atom is related to the cosmos. The meaningful word is a microcosm
of human consciousness.
(Vygotsky 1986: 285)
While we remember Saussure more for his analysis of linguistic signs, we remember Vygotsky
more for his emphasis on process and context:
A word acquires its sense from the context in which it appears; in diﬀerent contexts, it
changes its sense. Meaning remains stable throughout the changes of sense. The dic-
tionary meaning of a word is no more than a stone in the ediﬁce of sense, no more than a
potentiality that ﬁnds diversiﬁed realisation in speech.
(Vygotsky 1986: 245)
The relation of thought to word is not a thing but a process, a continual movement back
and forth from thought to word and from word to thought. In that process the relation of
thought to word undergoes changes which themselves may be regarded as development
in the functional sense. Thought is not merely expressed in words; it comes into existence
through them. Every thought tends to connect something with something else, to establish
a relationship between things. Every thought moves, grows and develops, fulﬁls a function,
Nick C. Ellis
662

solves a problem. This ﬂow of thought occurs as an inner movement through a series of
planes.
(Vygotsky 1986: 218)
The relation between thought and word is a living process; thought is born through words.
A word devoid of thought is a dead thing, and a thought unembodied in words remains a
shadow. The connection between them, however, is not a preformed and constant one. It
emerges in the course of development, and itself evolves.
(Vygotsky 1986: 255)
Language emerges in both the Saussurian sign and the Vygotskian process.
Related topics
cognitive
linguistics;
corpus
linguistics;
language
learning
and
language
education;
psycholinguistics; SLA
Further reading
Collins, L. and Ellis, N. C. (2009) ‘Input and second language construction learning: frequency,
form, and function’, special issue, Modern Language Journal, 93(2). (SLA has always emphasized
input. This special issue presents new ways of analyzing its latent properties.)
Ellis, N. C. and Larsen-Freeman, D. (eds) (2006) ‘Language emergence: Implications for applied
linguistics’, special issue, Applied Linguistics, 27(4). (A special issue considering implications of
emergentism for applied linguistics.)
——(2009)
‘Language
as
a
complex
adaptive
system’,
special
issue,
Language
Learning,
59(Suppl. 1). (A special issue gathering experts from various language domains who share the
CAS perspective.)
Ellis, N. C. and Cadierno, T. (2009) ‘Constructing a second language’, Annual Review of Cognitive
Linguistics 7. (A special issue of new research over the bridge.)
Elman, J. L., Bates, E. A., Johnson, M. H., Karmiloﬀ-Smith, A., Parisi, D. and Plunkett, K. (1996)
Rethinking Innateness: A Connectionist Perspective on Development, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
(A paradigm-shifting work.)
Robinson, P. and Ellis, N. C. (eds) (2008) Handbook of Cognitive Linguistics and Second Language
Acquisition, London: Routledge. (A bridge.)
References
Anderson, J. R. (1982) ‘Acquisition of cognitive skill’, Psychological Review 89(4): 369–406.
——(1989) ‘A rational analysis of human memory’, in H. L. Roediger and F. I. M. Craik (eds)
Varieties of Memory and Consciousness: Essays in Honour of Endel Tulving, Hillsdale, NJ:
Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
——(2000) Cognitive Psychology and Its Implications, 5th edn, New York: Worth Publications.
Anderson, J. R. and Schooler, L. J. (2000) ‘The adaptive nature of memory’, in E. Tulving and
F. I. M. Craik (eds) The Oxford Handbook of Memory, London: Oxford University Press.
Anderson, P. W. (1972) ‘More is diﬀerent’, Science 177: 393–6.
Baars, B. J. (1997) In the Theater of Consciousness: The Workspace of the Mind, Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Baddeley, A. D. (1997) Human Memory: Theory and Practice, revised edn, Hove: Psychology Press.
Barabási, A-L. (2002) Linked: The New Science of Networks, Cambridge, MA: Perseus Books.
Barabási, A.-L. and Albert, R. (1999) ‘Emergence of scaling in random networks’, Science 286: 509–11.
Barlow, M. and Kemmer, S. (eds) (2000) Usage Based Models of Language, Stanford, CA: CSLI
Publications.
Language emergence
663

Barsalou, L. W. (1999) ‘Perceptual symbol systems’, Behavioral and Brain Sciences 22: 577–660.
——(2008) ‘Grounded cognition’, Annual Review of Psychology 59: 617–45.
Bartlett, F. C. ([1932] 1967) Remembering: A Study in Experimental and Social Psychology,
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Bates, E. and Goodman, J. C. (1997) ‘On the inseparability of grammar and the lexicon: evidence
from acquisition, aphasia and real-time processing’, Language and Cognitive Processes 12: 507–86.
Bates, E. and MacWhinney, B. (1987) ‘Competition, variation, and language learning’, in
B. MacWhinney (ed.) Mechanisms of Language Acquisition, Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum
Associates.
Beckner, C., Blythe, R., Bybee, J., Christiansen, M. H., Croft, W., Ellis, N. C., et al. (2009) ‘Language
is a complex adaptive system’, position paper, Language Learning 59(Suppl. 1): 1–26.
Biber, D., Conrad, S. and Reppen, R. (1998) Corpus Linguistics: Investigating Language Structure
and Use, New York: Cambridge University Press.
Biber, D., Johansson, S., Leech, G., Conrad, S. and Finegan, E. (1999) Longman Grammar of
Spoken and Written English, Harlow: Pearson Education.
Bod, R., Hay, J. and Jannedy, S. (eds) (2003) Probabilistic Linguistics, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Bybee, J. (1998) ‘A functionalist approach to grammar and its evolution’, Evolution of Commu-
nication 2: 249–78.
——(2006) ‘From usage to grammar: the mind’s response to repetition’, Language 82: 711–33.
Bybee, J. and Hopper, P. (eds) (2001) Frequency and the Emergence of Linguistic Structure,
Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Camazine, S., Deneubourg, J-L., Franks, N. R., Sneyd, J., Theraulaz, G. and Bonabeau, E. (2001)
Self-organization in Biological Systems, Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Chater, N. and Manning, C. (2006) ‘Probabilistic models of language processing and acquisition’,
Trends in Cognitive Science 10: 335–44.
Chomsky, N. (1965) Aspects of the Theory of Syntax, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
——(1981) Lectures on Government and Binding, Dordrecht: Foris.
Christiansen, M. H. and Chater, N. (2008) ‘Language as shaped by the brain’, Behavioral and Brain
Sciences [target article for multiple peer commentary] 31: 489–509.
Christiansen, M. H. and Chater, N. (eds) (2001) Connectionist Psycholinguistics, Westport, CT: Ablex.
Collins, L. and Ellis, N. C. (2009) ‘Input and second language construction learning: frequency,
form, and function’, Modern Language Journal 93(2): whole issue.
Croft, W. (2001) Radical Construction Grammar: Syntactic Theory in Typological Perspective,
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Croft, W. and Cruse, A. (2004) Cognitive Linguistics, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Da˛browska, E. (1997) ‘The LAD goes to school: a cautionary tale for nativists’, Linguistics 35: 735–66.
Dawkins, R. (1985) The Blind Watchmaker, New York: Norton.
de Bot, K., Lowie, W. and Verspoor, M. (2007) ‘A dynamic systems theory to second language
acquisition’, Bilingualism: Language and Cognition 10: 7–21.
Deacon, T. W. (1997) The Symbolic Species: The Co-evolution of Language and the Brain,
New York: W. W. Norton.
Ebbinghaus, H. (1885) Memory: A Contribution to Experimental Psychology, New York: Teachers
College, Columbia University.
Eckert, P. (2000) Linguistic Variation as Social Practice: The Linguistic Construction of Identity in
Belten High, Oxford: Blackwell.
Ellis, N. C. (1996) ‘Sequencing in SLA: phonological memory, chunking, and points of order’,
Studies in Second Language Acquisition 18(1): 91–126.
——(1998) ‘Emergentism, connectionism and language learning’, Language Learning 48(4): 631–64.
——(2002a) ‘Frequency eﬀects in language processing: a review with implications for theories of
implicit and explicit language acquisition’, Studies in Second Language Acquisition 24(2): 143–88.
——(2002b) ‘Reﬂections on frequency eﬀects in language processing’, Studies in Second Language
Acquisition 24(2): 297–339.
——(2003) ‘Constructions, chunking, and connectionism: the emergence of second language structure’,
in C. J. Doughty and M. H. Long (eds) The Handbook of Second Language Acquisition, Oxford:
Blackwell.
——(2005) ‘At the interface: dynamic interactions of explicit and implicit language knowledge’,
Studies in Second Language Acquisition 27: 305–52.
Nick C. Ellis
664

——(2006) ‘Language acquisition as rational contingency learning’, Applied Linguistics 27(1): 1–24.
——(2008a) ‘The dynamics of language use, language change, and ﬁrst and second language
acquisition’, Modern Language Journal 41(3): 232–49.
——(2008b) ‘The psycholinguistics of the interaction hypothesis’, in A. Mackey and C. Polio (eds)
Multiple Perspectives on Interaction in SLA: Second Language Research in Honor of Susan
M. Gass, New York: Routledge.
——(2008c) ‘Usage-based and form-focused language acquisition: the associative learning of con-
structions, learned-attention, and the limited L2 endstate’, in P. Robinson and N. C. Ellis (eds)
Handbook of Cognitive Linguistics and Second Language Acquisition, London: Routledge.
Ellis, N. C. (ed.) (1994) Implicit and Explicit Learning of Languages, San Diego, CA: Academic
Press.
Ellis, N. C. and Cadierno, T. (2009) ‘Constructing a second language’, Annual Review of Cognitive
Linguistics 7 (special section).
Ellis, N. C. and Larsen-Freeman, D. (2006a) ‘Language emergence: implications for applied lin-
guistics’, Applied Linguistics 27(4): whole issue.
——(2006b) ‘Language emergence: implications for applied linguistics (introduction to the special
issue)’, Applied Linguistics 27(4): 558–89.
Ellis, N. C. and Schmidt, R. (1998) ‘Rules or associations in the acquisition of morphology? The
frequency by regularity interaction in human and PDP learning of morphosyntax’, Language and
Cognitive Processes 13(2–3): 307–36.
Elman, J. L. (2005) ‘Connectionist views of cognitive development: where next?’, Trends in Cognitive
Science 9: 111–17.
Elman, J. L., Bates, E. A., Johnson, M. H., Karmiloﬀ-Smith, A., Parisi, D. and Plunkett, K. (1996)
Rethinking Innateness: A Connectionist Perspective on Development, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Ferrer i Cancho, R. and Solé, R. V. (2001) ‘The small world of human language’, Proceedings of the
Royal Society of London, B. 268: 2261–5.
Fillmore, C. (1988) ‘The mechanisms of construction grammar’, Berkeley Linguistics Society 14:
35–55.
Fries, C. C. (1952) The Structure of English, New York: Harcourt, Brace and Co.
Gaskell, G. (ed.) (2007) Oxford Handbook of Psycholinguistics, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Gass, S. (1997) Input, Interaction, and the Development of Second Languages, Mahwah, NJ:
Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Geertz, C. (1973) ‘Thick description: toward an interpretive theory of culture’, in C. Geertz (ed.)
The Interpretation of Cultures: Selected Essays, New York: Basic Books.
Gernsbacher, M. A. (1994) A Handbook of Psycholinguistics, San Diego, CA: Academic Press.
Goldberg, A. E. (1995) Constructions: A Construction Grammar Approach to Argument Structure,
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
——(2003) ‘Constructions: a new theoretical approach to language’, Trends in Cognitive Science 7:
219–24.
——(2006) Constructions at Work: The Nature of Generalization in Language, Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Granger, S. and Meunier, F. (eds) (2008) Phraseology: An Interdisciplinary Perspective, Amsterdam:
John Benjamins.
Halliday, M. A. K. (1994) An Introduction to Functional Grammar, 2nd edn, London: Edward Arnold.
Harnad, S. (ed.) (1987) Categorical Perception: The Groundwork of Cognition, New York: Cambridge
University Press.
Harris, Z. (1955) ‘From phoneme to morpheme’, Language 31: 190–222.
——(1982) A Grammar of English on Mathematical Principles, New York: John Wiley and Sons.
——(1991) A Theory of Language and Information: A Mathematical Approach, Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Hoey, M. P. (2005) Lexical Priming: A New Theory of Words and Language, London: Routledge.
Holland,
J.
H.
(1995)
Hidden
Order:
How
Adaption
Builds
Complexity,
Reading,
MA:
Addison-Wesley.
——(1998) Emergence: From Chaos to Order, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Hopper, P. J. (1987) ‘Emergent grammar’, Berkeley Linguistics Society 13: 139–57.
——(1998) ‘Emergent grammar’, in M. Tomasello (ed.) The New Psychology of Language: Cognitive
and Functional Approaches to Language Structure, Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Language emergence
665

Jurafsky, D. (2002) ‘Probabilistic modeling in psycholinguistics: linguistic comprehension and produc-
tion’, in R. Bod, J. Hay and S. Jannedy (eds) Probabilistic Linguistics, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Jurafsky, D. and Martin, J. H. (2000) Speech and Language Processing: An Introduction to Natural
Language Processing, Speech Recognition, and Computational Linguistics, Englewood Cliﬀs, NJ:
Prentice Hall.
Koch, C. (2004) The Quest for Consciousness: A Neurobiological Approach, Englewood, CO:
Roberts and Company.
Kramsch, C. (ed.) (2002) Language Acquisition and Language Socialization: Ecological Perspectives,
London: Continuum.
Kuhl, P. K. (2007) ‘Is speech-learning gated by the “social brain”?’, Developmental Science 10: 110–20.
Lakoﬀ, G. (1987) Women, Fire, and Dangerous Things: What Categories Reveal About the Mind,
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Lantolf, J. and Pavlenko, A. (1995) ‘Sociocultural theory and second language acquisition’, Annual
Review of Applied Linguistics 15: 38–53.
Lantolf, J. and Thorne, S. (2006) Sociocultural Theory and the Genesis of Second Language Development,
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Larsen-Freeman, D. (1997) ‘Chaos/complexity science and second language acquisition’, Applied
Linguistics 18: 141–65.
Larsen-Freeman, D. and Cameron, L. (2008) Complex Systems and Applied Linguistics, Oxford:
Oxford University Press.
Long, M. H. (1996) ‘The role of linguistic environment in second language acquisition’, in
W. C. Ritchie and T. K. Bhatia (eds) Handbook of Second Language Acquisitiom, San Diego, CA:
Academic Press.
McEnery, T. and Wilson, A. (1996) Corpus Linguistics, Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press.
MacWhinney, B. (1987) ‘The competition model’, in B. MacWhinney (ed) Mechanisms of Language
Acquisition, Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
——(1997) ‘Second language acquisition and the competition model’, in A. M. B. de Groot and
J. F. Kroll (eds) Tutorials in Bilingualism: Psycholinguistic Perspectives, Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence
Erlbaum Associates.
MacWhinney, B. (ed.) (1999) The Emergence of Language, Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Mandler, J. (2004) The Foundations of Mind: Origins of Conceptual Thought, Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Milroy, J. (1980) Language and Social Networks, Oxford: Blackwell.
Newell, A. (1990) Uniﬁed Theories of Cognition, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Newman, M. E. J., Barabási, A-L. and Watts, D. J. (eds) (2006) The Structure and Dynamics of
Networks, Princeton, NJ and Oxford: Princeton University Press.
Pawley, A. and Syder, F. H. (1983) ‘Two puzzles for linguistic theory: nativelike selection and nativelike
ﬂuency’, in J. C. Richards and R. W. Schmidt (eds) Language and Communication, London: Longman.
Port, R. F. and van Gelder, T. (1995) Mind as Motion: Explorations in the Dynamics of Cognition,
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Posner, M. I. and Keele, S. W. (1970) ‘Retention of abstract ideas’, Journal of Experimental
Psychology 83: 304–8.
Roberts, P. (1956) Patterns of English, New York: Harcourt, Brace and World.
Robinson, P. and Ellis, N. C. (eds) (2008) A Handbook of Cognitive Linguistics and Second
Language Acquisition, London: Routledge.
Rogers, T. T. and McClelland, J. L. (2008) ‘Precis of semantic cognition: a parallel distributed processing
approach’, Behavioral and Brain Sciences 31: 689–749.
Rosch, E. and Mervis, C. B. (1975) ‘Cognitive representations of semantic categories’, Journal of
Experimental Psychology: General 104: 192–233.
Rosch, E., Mervis, C. B., Gray, W. D., Johnson, D. M. and Boyes-Braem, P. (1976) ‘Basic objects in
natural categories’, Cognitive Psychology 8: 382–439.
de Saussure, F. (1916) Cours de linguistique générale, London: Duckworth.
Schank, R. C. and Abelson, R. P. (1977) Scripts, Plans, Goals, and Understanding: An Inquiry into
Human Knowledge Structures, Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Schoenemann, P. T. (2005) ‘Conceptual complexity and the brain: understanding language origins’,
in W. S.-Y. Wang and J. W. Minett (eds) Language Acquisition, Change and Emergence: Essays in
Evolutionary Linguistics, Hong Kong: City University of Hong Kong Press.
Nick C. Ellis
666

——(2006) ‘Evolution of the size and functional areas of the human brain’, Annual Review of
Anthropology 35: 379–406.
Shanks, D. R. (1995) The Psychology of Associative Learning, New York: Cambridge University
Press.
Sinclair, J. (1991) Corpus, Concordance, Collocation, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
——(2004) Trust the Text: Language, Corpus and Discourse, London: Routledge.
Slobin, D. I. (1997) ‘The origins of grammaticizable notions: beyond the individual mind’, in
D. I. Slobin (ed.) The Crosslinguistic Study of Language Acquisition, Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence
Erlbaum Associates.
Spencer, J. P., Thomas, M. S. C. and McClelland, J. L. (eds) (2009) Toward a Uniﬁed Theory of
Development: Connectionism and Dynamic Systems Theory Re-considered, New York: Oxford.
Spivey, M. (2006) The Continuity of Mind, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Steels, L. (2006) ‘How to do experiments in artiﬁcial language evolution and why’, Proceedings of
the 6th International Conference on the Evolution of Language.
Talmy, L. (1988) ‘The relation of grammar to cognition’, in B. Rudzka-Ostyn (ed.) Topics in Cognitive
Linguistics, Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
——(2000a) Toward a Cognitive Semantics: Concept Structuring Systems, Cambridge MA: MIT
Press.
——(2000b) Toward a Cognitive Semantics: Typology and Process in Concept Structuring, Cambridge,
MA: MIT Press.
Taylor, J. R. (1998) ‘Syntactic constructions as prototype categories’, in M. Tomasello (ed.) The
New Psychology of Language: Cognitive and Functional Approaches to Language Structure,
Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
——(2002) Cognitive Grammar, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
The Five Graces Group (Beckner, C., Blythe, R., Bybee, J., Christiansen, M. H., Croft, W., Ellis, N. C.,
Holland, J., Ke, J., Larsen-Freeman, D. and Schoenemann, T.) (2009) ‘Language is a complex
adaptive system’, position paper, Language Learning 59(Suppl. 1).
Tomasello, M. (2003) Constructing a Language, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Tomasello, M. (ed.) (1998) The New Psychology of Language: Cognitive and Functional Approaches
to Language Structure, Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
van Geert, P. (1991) ‘A dynamic systems model of cognitive and language growth’, Psychological
Review 98: 3–53.
Vygotsky, L. S. ([1935] 1986) Thought and Language, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
——(1980) Mind in Society: The Development of Higher Mental Processes, Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press.
Watts, D. J. and Strogatz, S. H. (1998) ‘Collective dynamics of “small-world” networks’, Nature
393: 440–2.
Weinreich, U., Labov, W. and Herzog, M. I. (1968) ‘Empirical foundations for a theory of language
change’, in W. P. Lehmann and Y. Malkiel (eds) Directions for Historical Linguistics, Austin:
University of Texas Press.
Wray, A. (2002) Formulaic Language and the Lexicon, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Language emergence
667

47
Multimodality
Theo van Leeuwen
Multimodality
The term ‘multimodality’ dates from the 1920s. It was a technical term in the then relatively
new ﬁeld of the psychology of perception, denoting the eﬀect diﬀerent sensory perceptions
have on each other. An example of this is the so-called McGurk eﬀect: if people are shown a
video of someone articulating a particular syllable, e.g. /ga/, while hearing another syllable,
e.g. /ba/, they perceive neither /ga/, nor /ba/, but /da/ (Stork 1997: 239). In other words,
perception is multimodal. It integrates information received by diﬀerent senses.
More recently, linguists and discourse analysts have taken up the term, broadening it to
denote the integrated use of diﬀerent communicative resources, such as language, image, sound
and music in multimodal texts and communicative events. As soon as they had begun to study
texts and communicative events rather than isolated sentences, they realized what they should
have known all along: that communication is multimodal; that spoken language cannot be
adequately understood without taking non-verbal communication into account; and that many
forms of contemporary written language cannot be adequately understood unless we look, not
just at language, but also at images, layout, typography and colour. In the past twenty or so
years this led to the development of multimodality as a ﬁeld of study investigating the
common as well as the distinct properties of the diﬀerent modes in the multimodal mix and
the way they integrate in multimodal texts and communicative events.
It is not diﬃcult to see why such a ﬁeld of study should have developed. From the 1920s
onwards, public communication had become increasingly multimodal. Film had changed
acting, enlarging subtle aspects of non-verbal communication, and so inﬂuencing how people
talk and move and smile the world over. Later, television had made non-verbal communica-
tion a decisive factor in politics, most famously in the televised debate between Nixon and
Kennedy. Writing, too, had become multimodal, as illustrations and layout elements such as
boxes and sidebars broke up and reshaped the pages of books and magazines. Like scholars in
other ﬁelds of study, linguists took notice. In the course of the twentieth century, several
schools of linguistics engaged with communicative modes other than language. The ﬁrst was
the Prague School, which, in the 1930s and 1940s, extended linguistics into the visual arts and
the non-verbal aspects of theatre, and which included studies of folklore, and collaborations
668

with avant-garde artists (see, for example, Matejka and Titunik 1976). Paris School structuralist
semiotics of the 1960s also used concepts and methods from linguistics to understand com-
municative modes other than language. Largely inspired by the work of Roland Barthes, it
mostly focused on analyses of popular culture and the mass media, rather than on folklore or
avant-garde art (e.g. Barthes 1967, 1977, 1983). In roughly the same period, American lin-
guists began to take an interest in the multimodal analysis of spoken language and non-verbal
communication. Birdwhistell (e.g. 1973) developed an intricate set of tools for analyzing body
motion, and Pittenger et al. (1960) published a highly detailed and groundbreaking multi-
modal analysis of the ﬁrst ﬁve minutes of a psychiatric interview. In the late 1960s, conversa-
tion analysis replaced the 16mm ﬁlm sound camera with the cassette recorder as the research
tool of choice, which diminished attention to non-verbal communication, although some
scholars in this tradition have, more recently, re-introduced it (Ochs 1979; Goodwin 2001). A
fourth school emerged in the 1990s. Inspired by the linguistics of M. A. K. Halliday (1978,
1985), it was this school which adopted and broadened the term ‘multimodality’, and intro-
duced it into applied linguistics, and especially into the study of language and literacy in
education. More recently a further approach, mediated discourse analysis, inspired by the
work of Ron and Suzie Scollon (2003, 2004), returned to American micro-analysis of social
interaction, but in a new way, linking it to the wider social and political context, and adding a
new emphasis on technological mediation (see, for example, Jones 2009).
By now, multimodality has its own bi-annual conference and a range of edited books
(e.g. O’Halloran 2004; Ventola et al. 2004; Levine and Scollon 2004; Norris and Jones 2005;
Unsworth 2008; Jewitt 2009), and it is regularly included in handbooks and encyclopedias of
linguistics, discourse analysis, visual communication and so on. Although it encompasses a
number of distinct theoretical and methodological approaches, it has nevertheless remained a
united ﬁeld of study, with productive dialogue and mutual inﬂuence between the diﬀerent ‘schools’
(cf. Jewitt 2009, for a more extensive overview of the diﬀerent approaches in the ﬁeld).
Educational applications
The New London Group (Gunther Kress, James Gee, Allan Luke, Mary Kalantzis and
others) stimulated an interest in applying multimodal analysis to education (New London
Group 1996). This led to three kinds of studies: studies of the development of multimodal
literacy in young children, often connected to a call for integrating multimodal literacy
into the curriculum; studies of multimodal learning resources, including textbooks, toys,
CD-ROMs, and the Internet; and studies of multimodal classroom interaction. Below, I will
brieﬂy deal with all three.
Gunther Kress’ Before Writing (1997) initiated the study of the development of multimodal
literacy, investigating how very young children use the aﬀordances of whatever materials are at
hand, or whatever techniques they have mastered, on the basis of ‘interest’, of what is of
crucial importance to them at the given moment. In one of his key examples, a three-year-old
child draws a car as a series of circles (‘wheels’). Having mastered the drawing of circles, the
child now uses circles as a means of expressing what, to him, is a crucial characteristic of cars.
As a semiotic resource, the circle has many possible meanings, but the one the child selects is
motivated by his interest of the moment, his interest in thinking about cars. Thus, learning to
draw and learning to understand the world around him go hand in hand. But, Kress said,
As children are drawn into culture, ‘what is to hand’ becomes more and more that which
the culture values and therefore makes readily available. The child’s active, transformative
Multimodality
669

practice remains, but it is more and more applied to materials which are already
culturally formed. In this way children become the agents of their own cultural and social
making.
(Kress 1997: 13)
Kress’ work has inspired many other studies of the way young children use a range of mate-
rials and techniques to create representations of the world around them (e.g. Ormerod and
Ivanovic 2002).
Closely related is the study of the aﬀordances and learning potentials of diﬀerent commu-
nicative modes. In Literacy in the New Media Age (2003: 52–7), Kress studied the use of dif-
ferent modes by junior high school students learning about blood circulation. One used
language, writing a kind of travel diary, with a red blood cell as its protagonist, making a
voyage through the body. Another drew a concept map, with boxes representing the heart, the
arteries, the lungs, and so on, and arrows representing the movement of blood from one ‘box’
to another. The linearity of the story, Kress said, was an apt signiﬁer for the blood moving
from organ to organ, and language allowed the expression of causality, but the use of many
diﬀerent words for the idea of movement (‘leave’, ‘come’, ‘squeeze’, ‘drop oﬀ’, ‘enter’, etc.),
while stylistically desirable, diminished the generality scientiﬁc discourse normally requires.
The diagrammatic elements of the concept map (boxes and arrows), on the other hand, did
provide scientiﬁc generality, but as the arrows in the student’s concept map radiated from the
central ‘blood’ box, the concept of ‘circularity’ was less clearly expressed, and the idea of
causality remained unexpressed, as drawings do not, or not yet, lend themselves to the
expression of causality. Each mode, Kress concluded, has its own epistemological aﬀordances
and limitations, and understanding these is fundamental for creating eﬀective multimodal
representations.
This applies not only to student work, but also to textbooks and other learning resources,
which have all become increasingly multimodal in recent years. Jewitt (2006) studied how
children use computer games to learn science, struggling to match the rules of the game with
their everyday experience of the phenomena the game recontextualizes. When learning to
understand ‘bouncing’ through a game called Playground, for instance, children can choose a
behaviour (a particular kind of bounce, represented by pictures of a spring, a ball, etc.) and
attach it to an object, a bullet, which can then bounce oﬀbars. But this is confusing. Can
bullets be bouncy? And isn’t the ‘behaviour’ of ‘bouncing’ the property of the bars the bullets
bounce against rather than of the bullets? Everyday experience can seem at odds with the
constraints of the computer program. Nevertheless, games of this kind do allow children to
explore the rules of mechanics systematically, interactively, and multimodally, practically
without any verbal input. Jewitt’s transcriptions of the conversations children engage in as they
are working with the program threw light on the active nature of this kind of learning. ‘I want
there to be little bars where if you hit it, it goes another way and another way’, said one of the
children, and then proceeded to do exactly that. Many other studies of this kind, too, combine
analysis of the meaning potential of multimodal resources with ethnographic accounts of their
use in concrete situations, thus documenting the learning process as an active ‘transformative
practice’, to use Kress’ term again.
Studies of classroom interaction, ﬁnally, have also moved from the traditional emphasis on
linguistic exchange structures to strong contextualization and detailed attendance to non-
verbal communication and setting, e.g. to the way classrooms are arranged, to what is hung on
the walls, the technological resources available, and so on. Kress et al. (2005), for instance,
described one classroom as realizing a ‘transmission’ pedagogy, with individual student tables
Theo van Leeuwen
670

lined up in rows; another as realizing a ‘participatory/authoritarian’ pedagogy: tables were put
together to create teams of four or ﬁve students facing each other (‘participation’), yet these
groups of tables were angled to allow the teacher total visual control from the front of the
classroom, and the arrangement constrained the postures of the students, at least if they
wanted to see the teacher and follow the lesson (‘authoritarian’).
In all this work, multimodality is seen as a key way towards better learning, with diﬀerent
modes enabling the representation of diﬀerent aspects of, and perspectives on, the objects of
learning, and they stress that the learning potential of diﬀerent modes needs to be better
understood by teachers, and that multimodal literacy needs to be more fully integrated into
the curriculum, in ways based on what we can learn from studying the spontaneous learning
of very young children, and from studying other forms of informal learning, such as playing
with toys or computer games.
Multimodality and (critical) discourse analysis
Multimodal analysis has also been applied to the critical analysis of media discourses (e.g.
Kress and van Leeuwen 1998; Knox 2007; Machin 2007). In Global Media Discourse (2007),
Machin and van Leeuwen analyzed how, in the Internet image bank Getty Creative Images,
photographic images can be searched for the concepts they express, rather than for the people,
places and events they record and document. The visual expression of concepts by means of
staged photographs, has of course long existed in advertising, but now, Machin and van
Leeuwen show, it also extends to the editorial content of newspapers and magazines, where we
traditionally expect ‘records of reality’. Conceptual images of this kind are produced to ﬁt into
multimodal designs, using restricted colour palettes that will easily harmonize with page layout
and leaving space for words, and they are generic rather than speciﬁc, using a range of
decontextualizing devices, and a restricted vocabulary of attributes to indicate the identity of
people and places (e.g. hard hat and rolled-up blueprint means ‘architect’; ‘laptop’ means
oﬃce; nondescript skyscraper means ‘city’). Such generic images are deliberately designed to
be used in multiple contexts, and hence sold over and over, and cheaply so. Finally, Machin
and van Leeuwen explored the kinds of concepts that can be expressed with this new visual
‘language’ (as Getty Images explicitly calls itself [Machin and van Leeuwen 2007: 151]), and
found that the positive values of contemporary corporate discourse dominate: freedom, creativity,
innovation, determination, concentration, spirituality, well-being, and so on.
van Leeuwen (2008) developed a framework for analyzing how the identity of ‘social actors’
can be signiﬁed verbally, visually, and with the ‘Playmobil’ toy system. Social actors can, for
instance, be represented as individuals or as ‘types’, and individually or collectively, and they
can be ‘functionalized’, categorized by what they do (e.g. their profession or some other kind
of activity) or classiﬁed, categorized by what they are deemed to be (e.g. gender, class, ethni-
city, nationality). His analysis demonstrated that many identity categories can be expressed
verbally as well as visually. But not every category can be expressed in every mode, and the
ways in which the same categories are expressed in diﬀerent modes make a diﬀerence and add
further meanings and values. Individual identity, for instance, is linguistically expressed by
names, visually by pictures that have to be detailed enough to show individual characteristics,
and in which these details should not be overwhelmed by attributes with group identity con-
notations (e.g. hair styles or hats, turbans, scarves, etc.). Playmobil, ﬁnally, does not allow the
expression of individual identity at all. Its minimalistic characters oﬀer children a range of
social roles and types, a microcosm of the social world, diﬀerentiated by skin colour, hair style,
and dress.
Multimodality
671

van Leeuwen stresses the importance of analysing the expression of identity in images in
relation to racist discourse:
Visually communicated racism can be much more easily denied, much more easily dis-
missed as ‘in the eye of the beholder’ than verbal racism [ … ] It is for this reason that a
consideration of images should have pride of place in any inquiry into racist discourse. If
images seem to just show ‘what is’, we need to show that that may not always be so. If
images seem to just allude to things and never ‘say them explicitly’, we need to make these
allusions explicit.
(van Leeuwen 2000: 335)
The critical multimodal analysis of speech and non-verbal communication in media discourse,
on the other hand, remains underdeveloped, despite Norman Fairclough’s call for including it
in the critical analysis of political discourse:
Communicative style is a matter of language in the broadest sense – certainly verbal lan-
guage (words), but also all other aspects of the complex bodily performance that con-
stitutes political style (gestures, facial expressions, how people hold themselves and move,
dress and hairstyle, and so forth) A successful leader’s communicative style is not simply
what makes him attractive to voters in a general way, it conveys certain values which can
powerfully enhance the political message.
(Fairclough 2000: 4)
Multimodality and everyday interaction
Ron and Suzie Scollon (e.g. 2003, 2004) pioneered a new approach to the multimodal analysis
of everyday situated interactions. Many of their studies departed from a simple everyday
action such as having a cup of coﬀee (Scollon 2001), making a physical object (e.g. a
paper coﬀee cup, and the printed messages on it) the centre of a set of converging lines of
inquiry – interaction analysis, down to the micro-level of conversational and non-verbal
rhythms; semiotic analysis of the setting of the interaction; and critical analysis of the broader
social, cultural and political setting (for instance, contemporary corporate social responsibility
practices).
Sigrid Norris (2005) analyzed one of her ethnographic interviews in this vein, including in
her analysis not just the interview itself, but also the activity in which the interviewee was
engaged while talking to her (ironing clothes), the soap opera that was running on television in
the background, the game played by her daughter on the ﬂoor of the room, and at a larger
scale, the interviewee’s life story and the discourses she invoked to represent it – discourses
about women as professionals and housewives, about mothering, about the power relations
between men and women, and so on. Thus, the interview became one of the strands in a
complex multimodal texture that wove several practices together – conversing, ironing, play-
ing, watching television, as well as larger scale practices and their attendant identities – being
the subject of an interview, mothering, being a housewife – all this in diﬀerent densities, and
with shifting foregroundings and backgroundings of the various strands of the multimodal
texture. The results of the analysis then led to theoretical reﬂections on issues of social theory
such as agency, identity and habitus. Norris makes the complexities of analyses of this kind
visible by means of diﬀerent techniques of transcription (cf. also Norris 2002), including ele-
ments of traditional conversation analysis as well as photographs on which lines spoken by the
Theo van Leeuwen
672

characters, complete with intonation transcription, and relevant television or computer screen
images that would otherwise be invisible, are superimposed.
Describing modes
Multimodal analysis has two main concerns: investigating the similarities and diﬀerences
between diﬀerent semiotic modes; and studying how diﬀerent semiotic modes are integrated
into multimodal texts and communicative events. Both require attending to the semiotic
resources and their communicative potential, as well as to the way they are taken up in con-
crete settings. In other words, multimodal analysis is concerned with structure as well as
agency, and needs to pay close attention to their mutual inﬂuence on each other. Below I will
deal with the ﬁrst of these two concerns.
A key question for linguists turning to the study of non-linguistic modes is the question of
whether, or to which degree, non-linguistic modes are like language, and to what degree they
can be studied with the concepts and methods of linguistic analysis. Christian Metz (1974a,
1974b), investigating the ‘language of cinema’, came to a negative conclusion: cinema does not
have equivalents to the key units of language, to phonemes, words, clauses, and so on. Kress
and van Leeuwen ([1996] 2006) came to a diﬀerent conclusion. They agreed that there is no
point in making formal comparisons, in asking whether a shot in a ﬁlm is like a word, or like a
sentence. The forms of visual communication are radically diﬀerent from those of language.
But this does not mean that both cannot fulﬁl the same communicative functions, and, at
some level, express the same meanings. Kress and van Leeuwen therefore combined functional
concepts and methods from the linguistic theory of Halliday (1978, 1985) with formal con-
cepts and methods from the art theory of Arnheim (1969, 1974, 1982) and others. They
assumed that, like language, visual communication can realize Halliday’s ‘metafunctions’ – the
‘ideational’ function of constructing representations of the world; the ‘interpersonal’ function
of constituting interactions; and the ‘textual’ function of bringing combined representations-
embedded-in-interactions together into the kind of larger wholes we recognize as coherent
texts or communicative events. And they assumed that, like the grammar of language, the
‘grammar’ of visual communication can be described as a system of functional-semantic
choices. But they took care to point out that not all meanings that can be realized verbally can
be also realized visually, and vice versa, and that, even when two modes can realize the same
meaning, each will add its own overtones and resonances.
To take a relatively simple example, both language and image can realize ‘social distance’,
but they do so in diﬀerent ways. In language social distance can be realized through degrees in
formality of style and mode of address, or through pronoun systems, with one form for the
second person indicating ‘far’ distance – respect, deference and so on (e.g. French vous),
another ‘close’ distance – intimacy, familiarity, equality, etc. (e.g. French tu). In images, social
distance is realized by means of ‘size of frame’. The close shot, showing only head and
shoulders, realizes close social distance, the long shot, showing people at full length, far social
distance, and the medium shot something in between (Figure 47.1 represents this as a Hallidayan
‘system network’).
This, in turn, relates closely to the way Edward Hall (e.g. 1966) has described the distances
we keep from each other in everyday interaction. Normally, only people with whom we have a
personal relationship may come close enough to allow easy touching, while we ‘keep our dis-
tance’ from others, for instance, but just where each ‘zone’ begins and ends will diﬀer from
culture to culture. In other words, within a given culture, a single social system of ‘social dis-
tance’ regulates interpersonal relations, but this can be expressed in diﬀerent modes – through
Multimodality
673

language, through proxemic behaviour, through images, and so on. At the same time, linguis-
tically expressed ‘close distance’ does not mean quite the same thing as visually expressed
‘close distance’, and visual and verbal realizations can combine in diﬀerent ways. Formality is
not quite the same as social distance, for instance, you can use informal language, yet keep
your distance, or vice versa.
In their book Reading Images ([1996] 2006), Kress and van Leeuwen presented a range of
system networks detailing the ‘ideational’, ‘interpersonal’ and ‘textual’ meanings that can be
realized by images. Their account of visual ‘ideation’ broke with earlier traditions which saw
only the symbolic or ‘connotative’ meanings of the people, places and things in images as
semiotic, but not the way these combined into larger compositional wholes, which tended to
be discussed only from a formal aesthetic point of view. Kress and van Leeuwen, however,
argued that, just as linguistic grammar connects nominal groups and verbal groups into clau-
ses, so visual ‘grammar’ can connect, for instance, ‘volumes’ and ‘vectors’ (the terms come
from Arnheim 1982) into larger compositional syntagms. A vector is a line, usually oblique,
formed by some element of the image, e.g. an arrow or an outstretched arm, and pointing at
another element. This structure (element a ! element b) serves to represent actions in which
one element acts upon another, or moves towards another, or transforms into another. In a
concept map of blood circulation, for instance, the arrows between the boxes represent the
movement of blood from one part of the body to another.
Diﬀerent multimodal theories may diﬀer as to which linguistic concepts and methods they
see as relevant for multimodal analysis. For Kress and van Leeuwen, visual syntagms can
combine together or be embedded into each other in a number of diﬀerent ways. For O’Toole
(1994), on the other hand, analyzing visual art should take place at clearly deﬁned ranks that
are analogous to the ranks in linguistic analysis (word, word group, clause, clause complex) –
the rank of the ‘work’ as a whole; the rank of the ‘episode’ (deﬁned as a conﬁguration of ﬁg-
ures involved in a common action or situation); the rank of the ‘ﬁgures’; and the rank of the
‘parts of the ﬁgures’. At each rank there are speciﬁc systems related to each of the three meta-
functions. The ‘ﬁgure’, for instance, will ideationally have speciﬁc ‘attributes’, interpersonally a
certain degree of ‘prominence’, and textually certain ‘stylistic features’.
Kress and van Leeuwen’s (2001) distinction between ‘modes’ and ‘media’ should also be
mentioned. Modes are meaning-making resources of the kind I have just discussed. They can
be described as a set of ‘systems’ for the expression of ideational, interpersonal and textual
meanings that are relatively abstract, that is, not tied to a particular material means of
expression – language, for instance, can be materialized as speech or as writing, and close
shots can be materialized in still as well as in moving images, in photographs as well as in
paintings, and so on. Media, on the other hand, are the concrete and material substances or
physical actions in and through which modes can be realized, and they add meanings and
emotive resonances of their own. To put it another way, modes are resources for designing
semiotic artifacts or events, e.g. for composing a piece of music or writing a play; media are
Figure 47.1 Social distance (system network)
Theo van Leeuwen
674

resources for materializing them, e.g. for performing the music or the play – and as we know, a
good performance can add meanings and values that the composer or playwright may not
even have foreseen. In some cases, e.g. everyday speech, or improvised music, the distinction
will not be felt by the speakers or musicians, but it can still have analytical value for multimodal
analysis.
van Leeuwen (2009) has studied the voice as ‘medium’, discussing the meanings and values
that can be communicated by the timbral qualities of actors’ or singers’ voices. A voice can be
rough, for instance, and this can be used, by an actor or singer, to express a range of things
that all relate to what that voice literally is – rough. Roughness can mean ‘wear and tear’, for
instance, indicating, perhaps, that a character has had a hard life, or it can indicate harshness,
suggesting that an actor is voicing the ‘unvarnished truth’. In the course of the history of
the sound ﬁlm, iconic actors such as Marilyn Monroe, Lauren Bacall, Marlon Brando and
James Stewart, have created unique voice qualities that are now recognized the world over, all
on the basis of the aﬀordances of speciﬁc aspects of vocal timbre and delivery. Today, these
voices have become a repertoire for actors to draw on. As Michel Chion has said, in ﬁlm:
The voice is ceasing to be identiﬁed with a speciﬁc face. It appears much less stable,
identiﬁed. [ … ] Compare two roughly contemporaneous Dustin Hoﬀman movies. In
Barry Levinson’s Rain Man, he has a metallic and nasal voice and in Stephen Frears’
Hero it is coarser. If you listen to both ﬁlms without the picture, it is quite diﬃcult to
identify both voices as coming from the same actor.
(Chion 1999: 174)
After Kress and van Leeuwen and O’Toole wrote their ‘grammars’ of visual communication, a
number of other ‘grammars’ of non-linguistic modes have been written, sometimes in outline,
sometimes in detail – colour (Kress and van Leeuwen 2002; van Leeuwen 2010), typography
(van Leeuwen 2006), gesture and movement (Kress et al. 2001, 2005; Martinec 2000; 2001)
voice and music (van Leeuwen 1999), and space (Stenglin 2009), to name just a few. They have
been used, not just in the educational studies already mentioned, but also in analyzing furni-
ture, museum exhibitions, buildings, ﬁlms, hypermedia, computer games, and more, as can be
gleaned from the edited collections I have already cited. But describing semiotic resources by
themselves, or analyzing the work of the modes separately, does not begin to show what
happens when they are put together and integrated in multimodal texts and communicative
events, and this is what I will turn to in the next section.
Word and image
In the 1960s, Roland Barthes distinguished between three types of image-text relation. In the
ﬁrst two, ‘illustration’ and ‘anchorage’, image and text convey essentially the same content,
though, of course, in diﬀerent ways, but the order in which they are read and understood
creates a subtle diﬀerence. In the case of ‘illustration’, the text is primary, and the image
interprets it in a particular context and for a particular audience. In the Middle Ages, Barthes
said, ‘illustration’ was the dominant text-image relation. The most highly valued images illu-
strated the key stories and key concepts of the time – stories from the Bible and ancient
mythology, and theological concepts. In the case of ‘anchorage’, images are not understood
with reference to a text but seen as naturalistic representations of the world. Therefore, they do
not come already impregnated with cultural meaning, but are potentially open to a variety of
readings, so that they need linguistic interpretation, linguistic closure, both in terms of their
Multimodality
675

denotation, of who or what they represent, and in terms of their connotation, of their more
abstract, conceptual signiﬁcance. ‘Anchorage’, Barthes said, began to take over as the domi-
nant form of image-text relation in the Renaissance, when science and exploration encouraged
images that could document the world, so making it amenable to scientiﬁc labelling, classiﬁ-
cation and interpretation. In the case of ‘relay’, Barthes’ third category, there is no redundancy
between text and image. Text and image do not ‘say the same thing’ but convey diﬀerent,
complementary content. In the case of ‘dialogue scenes’ in ﬁlms and comic strips, for instance,
the image shows the speakers while what they say is conveyed linguistically. Text and image
therefore depend on each other to convey the whole of the content, a relation which, today, is
becoming increasingly signiﬁcant.
Martinec and Salway (2005) have provided the most detailed Barthes-inspired account of
the semantics of text-image relations. The core of their approach was a distinction between the
relative status of text and image and their logico-semantic relationship. When image and text
are equal in status, they said, the whole of the image connects to the whole of the text. An
image may, for instance, show a group of people walking to a courthouse while the text says
‘Janklow walks up to the courthouse with his legal team’. Image and text can be equal in both
‘independent’ (‘anchorage’ and ‘illustration’) and ‘complementary’ (‘relay’) image-text rela-
tions. If a newspaper article about the actions of a politician is illustrated by a photographic
portrait of that politician, then that image relates only to part of the text, only to the politi-
cian, not to his or her actions. The status of the image can therefore be likened to that of a
subordinate clause in a sentence.
Martinec and Salway’s account of the logico-semantic relationships was based on Halliday’s
theory of conjunction (1985). They ﬁrst of all distinguished diﬀerent types of ‘elaboration’,
instances where the text ‘rephrases’ the image in some way (as in Barthes’ anchorage), or the
image the text (as in Barthes’ ‘illustration’). In the case of ‘exposition’ image and text are at
the same level of generality; in the case of ‘exempliﬁcation’ either the text is more general than
the image, or the image more general than the text, as in a skull-and-crossbone icon accom-
panied by the words ‘high voltage’. ‘Extension’ is then the addition of new, related information
(as in Barthes’ ‘relay’). The captions of paintings in art books, for instance, may ‘extend’ the
image by adding details that cannot be seen, such as the year in which the painting was cre-
ated, and the museum that owns it. They also introduced the possibility of ‘enhancement’,
where the text may add a ‘circumstantial’ element to the image, or vice versa – for instance the
location or timing of an event, or its reason or result. And ﬁnally they included the relation of
‘projection’ – the relation between the image of a speaker and his or her words (this may also
include the relation between a ‘thinker’ and his or her thoughts, as indicated by thought bubbles
in comic strips).
Martinec and Salway’s approach took its cues from the linguistics of conjunction and
complex clause construction. But it is also possible to approach text-image relations from the
other, visual, end, using theories of visual composition to explain the relation between text and
image. These two approaches do not contradict each other. People are perfectly capable of
understanding multimodal texts at two or more levels simultaneously. Kress and van Leeuwen
([1996] 2006) have suggested that the spatial ‘zones’ of pictures, pages and screens (left and
right; top and bottom; centre and margins) interrelate textual elements, regardless of whether
they are visual (e.g. images) or textual (e.g. text boxes), by providing them with speciﬁc
‘information values’. To start with left and right, if there is polarization (some kind of diﬀer-
ence or contrast) between an element placed on the left and an element placed on the right,
then the left element will be understood as the Given, as a departure point for the message
that is, or should be, already familiar to the reader or viewer, while the right element will be
Theo van Leeuwen
676

understood as the New, the element that contains the information the message is trying to get
across. This left-right information ﬂow clearly corresponds to the left-right mode of writing
and reading in Western culture, and is indeed reversed in cultures that write from right to left.
When there is vertical polarization, polarization between an element placed in the upper
and an element placed in the lower section of a picture, page or screen, the top element is the
Ideal, the idealized or generalized essence of the message, and the bottom element the Real,
contrasting with the Ideal in presenting factual details, or documentary evidence, or practical
consequences. In single-page magazine advertisements, for instance, the Ideal usually depicts
the ‘promise’ of the product, the glamour or success it will bring to consumers, or of the sen-
sual satisfaction it will give them, while the Real shows the product itself and provides factual
information about it.
The Centre, ﬁnally, is another key compositional zone. Instead of polarizing the elements of
the composition, the Centre uniﬁes them, providing the Margins that surround it with a
common meaning or purpose. In a Rank Xerox company brochure, for instance, the Centre
represented a happy, indeed overjoyous, Rank Xerox employee, and the words that surrounded
him suggested the various ways in which Xerox makes its employees happy by ‘recognizing
and rewarding’ their eﬀorts.
Such compositional schemas are multimodal for two reasons. They can apply to any kind of
spatial conﬁguration, whatever its mode – image, text, museum display, stage design, archi-
tectural facade – and they can integrate diﬀerent kinds of element (e.g. text and image) into a
multimodal whole. But it is a diﬀerent kind of integration from that described by Martinec
and Salway. The connections it establishes between elements are visual rather than verbal,
informational rather than semantic, and geared towards hierarchies of importance and atten-
tion rather than to internal, logical coherence. Again, verbal integration and visual integration
have their own logics, their own epistemologies.
Rhythm
Kress and van Leeuwen’s account of visual composition describes a spatially based form of
integrating diﬀerent modes. Its time-based counterpart is rhythm (van Leeuwen 2005).
Rhythm provides cohesion, bundling speech, action and music together, and segmenting the
resulting multimodal whole into the communicative moves that propel it forward. And rhythm
is also the physical substratum, the sine qua non of all human action. Everything we do has to
be rhythmical and in all our interactions we synchronize with others as ﬁnely as musical
instruments in an orchestra. Without rhythm we fall over and trip each other up.
Analyzing multimodality in ﬁlms brings out how it is now the rhythm of speech, now the
rhythm of action, now the rhythm of music, which provides the framework with which the
signs of other semiotic modes are aligned. Figure 47.2 analyzes a short excerpt from Hitchcock’s
North by Northwest in which the rhythm is carried by the dialogue. The rhythmic accents that
provide the ‘beat’ are in italics. The rhythmic phrases are enclosed in brackets and the ‘nuclear
accent’, the key moment of each phrase, is capitalized as well as italicized. Double brackets
enclose larger rhythmic units which are also, and at the same time, larger narrative moves.
Note the increase in tempo and tension at the start of the second of these units, where Eve
says ‘Wait a minute.’ Elements other than speech – the edits of the ﬁlm, the gestures of
Thornhill and Eve – ﬁnd their place within the temporal order of the speech rhythm. The cuts
(indicated by a vertical line across all the rows) coincide with stressed syllables, the gestures
with the boundaries between rhythmic phrases. Even when there is no speech, towards the end
of the excerpt, the timing of the cuts still follows the rhythm initiated by the preceding speech.
Multimodality
677

Rhythm not only integrates the diﬀerent modes but also frames and delineates the commu-
nicative moves of the unfolding text, here the moves of the narrative. The excerpt immediately
precedes the famous scene in which Thornhill (Cary Grant) is attacked by a cropduster plane. Eve
Kendall (Eva Marie Saint) has just told Thornhill when and where to meet a mysterious man called
Kaplan. What Eva knows, and what Thornhill does not know, is that the meeting is a trap and that
Thornhill will be attacked. After some perfunctory lines of dialogue, during which the audience is
left to wonder whether Eve will intervene, there is a change of pace. Tension rises. At the last minute
Eve seems to have second thoughts. ‘Wait a minute’, she says, ‘Please.’ A tense silence hangs
between them. But the moment passes, and Thornhill leaves to board his train.
Figure 47.3 shows a brief scene from an anonymous travel documentary called Latin American
Rhapsody. The shots of mothers and babies have neither continuity of action, nor continuity of
commentary or dialogue. It is the musical rhythm which provides cohesion here – edits and gestures
are aligned to the musical accents and the boundaries of musical phrases, underlining the expository
structure of the short scene, which forms a mini-catalogue of ethnic variety in Latin America.
In sum, the diﬀerent modes in the multimodal texture – actors’ movements, dialogue, music –
are integrated in a time-based structure, just like the parts of the diﬀerent instruments in an
Figure 47.2 Rhythmic analysis of an excerpt from North by Northwest (Alfred Hitchcock 1959)
Theo van Leeuwen
678

orchestral composition. Any one of them can carry the main ‘beat’, or the more incidental
percussive accents, and the role division between the modes can shift as the text unfolds. What
unites them is an element they all possess: rhythm.
Future developments
Multimodality analysis is a relatively new enterprise. There is much room for further devel-
opment of the approaches discussed in this chapter, and for new applications. It is nevertheless
possible to list a few desirables for the future development of multimodality as a branch of
applied linguistics. I will focus on three: the need for self-reﬂexivity; the need for attending to
cultural diversity; and the need for engaging with technology.
To start with self-reﬂexivity: as my examples have shown, multimodality is a multi-
disciplinary ﬁeld. It needs to draw on diﬀerent disciplines, for instance, in the case of the visual
mode, on functional linguistics as well as on art and design theory. To be eﬀective, it needs to
combine diﬀerent methods, for instance discourse analysis and ethnography. And to be able to
not just describe, but also explain multimodal practices, it requires detailed cultural-historical
contextualization, both in the study of semiotic resources, and in the study of their uses
in speciﬁc institutional settings. But there has perhaps not been enough discussion of just how
these various disciplines should interact – what each can and cannot achieve, and how they are
best combined. The eagerness of multimodal analysts to rush into new territories and explore
new data, is understandable, but needs to be balanced by moments of critical self-reﬂection.
As for the need to focus on cultural diversity, to date multimodality has predominantly
looked at ‘Western’ modes and ‘Western’ ways of using them. But just as linguistics has been
immensely enriched by the study of languages which express radically diﬀerent meaning sys-
tems in radically diﬀerent ways, multimodality would also be much enriched by engaging with
cultural diversity, and by mining the rich resources of anthropological literature.
Finally, there is a need to engage with technology. In the past, technology has often been
seen as a means for recording and/or distributing communicative artefacts and events which
does not aﬀect them semiotically. However, today’s multimodal technologies – ubiquitous
Figure 47.3 Rhythmic structure of Latin American Rhapsody
Multimodality
679

writing softwares such as Word, Excel, PowerPoint, etc., and Internet-based social media – are
themselves semiotic resources which build in constraints and aﬀordances that deeply inﬂuence,
not only what can be ‘said’ and how in these media, but also how the diﬀerent semiotic modes
they include can combine. A multimodal approach to studying technologically mediated
communication, combining close attention to their built-in resources and structuring devices,
as well as to the way these are used in diﬀerent settings, would have much to contribute to our
understanding of contemporary mediated communication.
With so much work still to be done, multimodality is certain to play an important role in
helping to build the applied linguistics of the future and enabling it to face the tasks ahead.
Related topics
critical discourse analysis; discourse analysis; linguistic ethnography; media; systemic functional
linguistics
Further reading:
Jewitt, C. (ed.) (2009) The Routledge Handbook of Multimodality, London, Routledge. (A repre-
sentative and up-to-date collection of approaches to and applications of multimodal analysis.)
Kress, G. (2010) Multimodality, London, Routledge. (This book brings together Kress’ inﬂuential
work on the development of multimodal literacy in young children, on multimodality in educa-
tion, and on the social semiotics which underlies this work.)
Kress, G. and van Leeuwen, T. (2006) Reading Images: The Grammar of Visual Design, 2nd edn,
London, Routledge. (An extended and widely used Halliday-inspired account of the ‘language’ of
visual communication.)
Norris, S. and Jones, R. (eds) (2005) Discourse in Action: Introducing Mediated Discourse Analysis,
London, Routledge. (Many of the papers in this book build on Ron and Suzie Scollon’s approach
to the multimodal analysis of face-to-face interaction.)
van Leeuwen, T. (2005) Introducing Social Semiotics, London, Routledge. (The third part of this
book deals extensively with the ways diﬀerent modes can be integrated into multimodal texts.)
References
Arnheim, R. (1969) Visual Thinking, Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of California Press.
——(1974) Art and Visual Perception, Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of California Press.
——(1982) The Power of the Centre, Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of California Press.
Barthes, R. (1967) Elements of Semiology, S. Heath (trans.) London: Jonathan Cape.
——(1977) Image, Music, Text, S. Heath (trans.) London: Fontana.
——(1983) The System of Fashion, New York: Hill and Wang.
Birdwhistell, R. (1973) Kinesics in Context: Essays on Body Motion Communication Harmondsworth:
Penguin.
Chion, M. (1999) The Voice in Cinema, New York: Columbia University Press.
Fairclough, N. (2000) New Labour, New Language? London: Routledge.
Goodwin, C. (2001) ‘Practices of seeing visual analysis: an ethnomethodological approach’, in
T. van Leeuwen and C. Jewitt (eds) Handbook of Visual Analysis, London: Sage.
Hall, E. (1966) The Hidden Dimension, New York: Doubleday.
Halliday, M. A. K. (1978) Language as Social Semiotic: The Social Interpretation of Language and
Meaning, London: Edward Arnold.
——(1985) An Introduction to Functional Grammar, London: Edward Arnold.
Jewitt, C. (2006) Technology, Literacy and Learning: A Multimodal Approach, London: Routledge.
Jewitt, C. (ed.) (2009) The Routledge Handbook of Multimodality. London: Routledge.
Jones, R. (2009) ‘Technology and sites of display’, in C. Jewitt (ed.) The Routledge Handbook of
Multimodal Analysis, London: Routledge.
Theo van Leeuwen
680

Knox, J. (2007) ‘Visual-verbal communication on online newspaper home pages’, Visual Communication
6(1): 19–55.
Kress, G. (1997) Before Writing: Rethinking the Paths to Literacy, London: Routledge.
——(2003) Literacy in the New Media Age, London, Routledge.
Kress, G., Jewitt, C., Bourne, J., Franks, A., Hardcastle, J., Jones, K. and Reid, E. (2005) English in
Urban Classrooms: A Multimodal Perspective on Teaching and Learning, London: Routledge.
Kress, G., Jewitt, C., Ogborn, J. and Tsatsarelis, C. (2001) Multimodal Teaching and Learning: The
Rhetorics of the Science Classroom, London: Continuum.
Kress, G. and van Leeuwen, T. (1998) ‘Front pages: the (critical) analysis of newspaper layout’, in
A. Bell and P. Garrett (eds) Approaches to Media Discourse, Oxford: Blackwell.
——(2001) Multimodal Discourse: The Modes and Media of Contemporary Communication,
London: Arnold.
——(2002) ‘Colour as a semiotic mode: notes for a grammar of colour’, Visual Communication
1(3): 343–68.
——([1996] 2006) Reading Images: The Grammar of Visual Design, 2nd edn, London: Routledge.
Levine, P. and Scollon, R. (eds) (2004) Discourse and Technology: Multimodal Discourse Analysis,
Washington, DC: Georgetown University Press.
Lupton, E. (2004) Thinking with Type: A Critical Guide for Designers, Writers, Editors and Stu-
dents, New York: Princeton Architectural Press.
Martinec, R. (2000) ‘Types of processes in action’, Semiotica 130(3–4): 243–68.
——(2001) ‘Interpersonal resources in action’, Semiotica 135(1–4): 117–45.
Martinec, R. and Salway, A. (2005) ‘A system for image-text relations in new (and old) media’,
Visual Communication 4(3): 337–72.
Matejka, L. and Titunik, I. R. (eds) (1976) Semiotics of Art: Prague School Contributions, Cambridge:
MA, MIT press.
Metz, C. (1974a) Film Language, New York: Oxford University Press.
——(1974b) Language and Cinema, The Hague: Mouton.
New London Group (1996) ‘A pedagogy of multiliteracies: designing social futures’, Harvard
Educational Review 66: 60–92.
Norris, S. (2002) ‘The implication of visual research for discourse analysis: transcription beyond
language’, Visual Communication 1(1): 97–121.
——(2005) ‘Habitus, social identity, the perception of male dominations – and agency?’, in
S. Norris and R. Jones (eds) Discourse in Action: Introducing Mediated Discourse Analysis,
London: Routledge.
Norris, S. and Jones, R. (eds) (2005) Discourse in Action: Introducing Mediated Discourse Analysis,
London: Routledge.
Ochs, E. (1979) ‘Transcription as theory’, in E. Ochs and B. B. Schieﬄin (eds) Developmental
Pragmatics, New York: Academic Press.
O’Halloran, K. (ed.) (2004) Multimodal Discourse Analysis: Systemic-Functional Perspectives,
London: Continuum.
Ormerod, F. and Ivanovic, R. (2002) ‘Materiality in children’s meaning-making practices’, Visual
Communication 1(1): 65–92.
O’Toole, M. (1994) The Language of Displayed Art, Leicester: Leicester University Press.
Pittenger, R. E., Hockett, C. F. and Danehy, J. J. (1960) The First Five Minutes, Ithaca, NY: Cornell
University Press.
Scollon, R. (2001) Mediated Discourse: The Nexus of Practice, London: Routledge.
Scollon, R. and Scollon, S. (2003) Discourses in Place-Language in the Material World, London:
Routledge.
——(2004) Nexus Analysis: Discourse and the Emerging Internet, London: Routledge.
Stenglin, M. (2009) ‘Space odyssey: towards a social semiotic model of 3D space’, Visual Communication
8(1): 35–64.
Stork, D. G. (ed.) (1997) HAL’s Legacy, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Unsworth, L. (ed.) (2008) Multimodal Semiotics, London: Continuum.
van Leeuwen, T. (1999) Speech, Music, Sound, London: Macmillan.
——(2000) ‘Visual racism’ in M. Reisigl and R. Wodak (eds) The Semiotics of Racism: Approaches
in Critical Discourse Analysis, Vienna: Passagen Verlag.
——(2005) Introducing Social Semiotics, London: Routledge.
Multimodality
681

——(2006) ‘Towards a semiotics of typography’, Information Design Journal 14(2): 139–55.
——(2008) Discourse and Social Practice: New Tools for Critical Discourse Analysis, New York:
Oxford University Press.
——(2009) ‘Parametric systems: the case of voice quality’, in C. Jewitt (ed.) The Routledge Hand-
book of Multimodal Analysis, London: Routledge.
——(2010) The Language of Colour: An Introduction, London: Routledge.
van Leeuwen, T. and Caldas-Coulthard, C. (2004) ‘The semiotics of kinetic design’, in D. Banks
(ed.) Text and Texture: Systemic Functional Viewpoints on the Nature and Structure of Texts,
Paris: L’Harmattan.
Ventola, E., Charles, C. and Kaltenbacher, M. (eds) (2004) Perspectives on Multimodality, London:
Continuum.
Theo van Leeuwen
682

Index
Aarons, D. and Akach, P. 367
Abad Florescano, A. 265
Abberton, E, and Fourcin, A. 114
Abbs, B. et al. 189
Abdous, M. et al. 201
Abercrombie, D. 377
Abrahamsson, N. and Hyltenstam, K. 176
Achard, M. and Niemeier, S. 621
acoustic analysis 511
acquisition: acquisition research, language
socialization and 290–91; additional
languages, multilingualism and 407–8, 409;
alternative theories of language acquisition
481; child language acquisition 657;
language, psycholinguistics and 480–83; of
linguistic forms 290; modal expressions,
acquisition of 290–91; sign languages 366;
see also SLA (Second Language
Acquisition)
activity theory 279
additive bilingualism 235
additive multilingualism 403
Ädel, A. 249
A’Dhahab, S.M. 220
Adolphs, S. xi, 543, 547, 597–610
Adolphs, S. and Carter, R. 438
Adolphs, S. and Lin, P.M.S. 7, 75, 164, 201,
440, 455, 565
Adolphs, S. et al. 602
affective disposition 288–89
Agar, M. 84–86
ageing, language and 124–34; bilingualism,
executive control functions and 128–29;
bilingualism in ageing 127–30, 133–34;
cognitive advantages of bilingualism in
ageing 127–30; cognitive processes, potential
for change in 130; CR (Cognitive Reserve)
127, 128; debates in 131–32, 134; dynamic
systems perspective 126; dynamic systems
theory 126, 134; elderspeak 130–31;
electronic media 133, 134;
electrophysiological techniques 132;
historical perspective 124–25; identity,
language and ageing 130–31; inﬂuence of
new technology 132–33; labour migration
and 126–27; Le langage des déments
(Irigaray, L.) 124; Language, Society and the
Elderly (Coupland, N. et al.) 131; life-span
developmental psychology 124–25; main
issues, critical discussion of 125–27; MMSE
(Mini Mental State Examination) 129;
multilingualism and 129, 405–6;
neuroimaging 132–33, 134; synaptic
pruning 130
Ageing and Society (Coupland, J.) 131
Agnihotri, R.K. 233
Ahlsén, E. xi, 5, 112, 406, 460–71, 562
Aijmer, K. 605
Aitchison, J. 475, 563
Akbari, R. 194, 220
Akiyama, Y. 648
Alderson, J.C. 265
Alderson, J.C. et al. 266
Aldridge, M. 147
Alemán, A.M.M. and Wartman, K.L. 201
Alexander, N. 229
Alim, H.S. 519
Alim, H.S. et al. 356
Allan, K. 560, 561
Allen, I.E. and Seaman, J. 206
Allison, D. and Carey, J. 221
Allwood, J. 467
Allwright, D. 163, 189, 194, 195, 275, 276, 277
Allwright, D. and Bailey, K. 276, 277
Allwright, D. and Hanks, J. 194
Alo, M.A. and Mesthrie, R. 378
Altenberg, B. 604
alternative medicine 99–100
American National Corpus (ANC) 598
American Sign Language: lexis 572; sign
languages 360
Amunts, K. et al. 130
683

anchoring, notion of 621
Andema, S. 325
Anderson, B. 323
Anderson, D. and Reilly, J. 366
Anderson, J.R. 190, 657, 658, 659
Anderson, J.R. and Schooler, L.J. 658
Anderson, S.R. 587, 588
Andrews, S. 219, 223
Androutsopoulos, J. 523
Angelelli, C. 43
Ann Arbor, Michigan 353, 354
Annamalai, E. 396
Antenos-Conforti, E. 217
anthropology: linguistic ethnography and 517;
see also linguistic anthropology
aphasic syndromes 461, 462, 463, 465, 466,
467, 469
Appadurai, A. 395
applied linguistic practice 311–13
applied linguistic research 309–11; into
migration and language, framework for
416–23; in SCT and CHAT 495–96
applied linguistics 1–2; Brumﬁt’s deﬁnition of
2; culture and 306; in discourse analysis
431–32; emergence of 215; ethnicity and
344–45, 348, 355–56; generative grammar
and 638, 645–48; identity of 1; language
socialization and 289–91; literacy and 529;
multimodality and 669; origins of 1;
phonetics and phonology and 589–90, 593;
problem orientation 2; real-world
problems 2
appreciation in SFL 629
Arbib, M. 463, 466
Archer, D. 547
Archibald, J. 588
Ardila, A. et al. 126
Aristotle 115, 472, 560, 571
Arkoudis, S. and Davison, C. 322
Armstrong, D. 365
Arnheim, R. 673, 674
artiﬁcial neural network (ANN) modelling
464–65, 469
Ashburner, J. and Friston, K. 130
Ashcroft, B. 347
Asher, J. 187
Asher, R.E. and Henderson, J.A. 587
assessment literacy 265–66
assessment practice in language testing 267–68
associationism 175
associative learning theory 657
Atkins, B.T.S. and Duval, A. 63
Atkins, B.T.S. and Rundell, M. 53, 61
Atkinson, D. 288, 289, 318
Atkinson, M. and Drew, P. 84, 85
Atkinson, P. 88
Atkinson, R.C. and Shiffrin, R.M. 474
attention, psychological analyses of 657
atypical speech output, systems and patterns in
115–16
audiovisuals 48
Auer, P. 239
Auer, P. and Kern, F. 91
Auer, P. and Li, W. 401
Auerbach, E. 392
Austin, J.L. 188, 434
authenticity, methodology in language teaching
188–89
authority: and authenticity, ethnicity and
struggle over 351–52; institutional discourse
and 83, 85
authorship investigation 140–42
Axelrod, M. et al. 365
Baars, B.J. 658
Babcock, R.D. and Du-Babcock, B. 35
Bacall, Lauren. 675
Bachman, L. 261, 270
Bachman, L.F. et al. 260
Backhaus, P. 408
Baddeley, A. 474, 657
Baden-Powell, Lord 543
Bahrick, H.P. 578
Bailey, F. et al. 165
Bailey, G. 374
Bailey, K. and Nunan, D. 276
Bailey, K.M. 163, 196, 216, 221
Baker, C. 291, 402, 404, 422
Baker, M. xi, 3, 39–52, 40, 41, 42, 46, 48, 49,
50, 51, 52
Baker, P. et al. 418, 422, 455
Bakhtin, M. 281, 319, 434, 516, 518, 519, 633
Balint, M. 96
Ball, M.J. and Kent, R.D. 113
Ball, M.J. and Lowry, O. 589
Ball, M.J. et al. 111, 120
Bally, C. 542
Baltaxe, C.A.M. 112
Baltes, P. 124
Baltes, P. and Lindenberger, U. 133
Baltes, P. et al. 125
Bamgbose, A. 349
Bandia, P. 49
Bandura, A. 592
Bank of English 598
Bannink, A. and van Dam, J. 280
Barabási, A.-L. 661
Barabási, A.-L. and Albert, R. 661
Barbieri, F. et al. 470
Barcroft, J. xi, 571–83
Barcroft, J. and Sommers, M.S. 578
Barcroft, J. et al. 405
Barcroft, J., Schmitt, N. and Sunderman, G. 7
Bargiela-Chiappini, F. and Nickerson, C. 32
Index
684

Barkowski, H. and Faistauer, R. 307
Barlow, M. and Kemmer, S. 656
Barnes, D. 275, 277
Barnes, J. 407
Baron, N.S. 203
Barron, C. 246
Barry, C.A. et al. 103
Barsalou, L.W. 657
Barsky, R. 43
Bartels, N. 219
Barthes, R. 438, 669, 675
Bartlett, F.C. 435, 657
Bartlett, L. 531, 534, 535
Bartlett, T. 451, 455
Barton, D. 521, 533, 536
Barton, D. and Hamilton, M. 521
Barton, D. et al. 437, 521
Baskaran, L. 376, 379
Basturkmen, H. 243, 246, 247, 252
Bateman, B.E. 217
Bates, E. and Goodman, J.C. 661
Bates, E. and MacWhinney, B. 658
Bates, E. et al. 464
Bateson, G. 281
Baudrillard, J. 19
Baugh, J. 354
Bauman, R. 516
Bauman, R. and Briggs, C. 516, 523
Bauman, Z. 19, 89
Baxter, J. xi, 5, 320, 331–43, 510, 516
Bayley, R. and Preston, D.R. 289
Bayley, R. and Schecter, S. 288, 291
Baynham, M. xi, 5, 413–27, 509, 520, 533, 537
Baynham, M. and de Fina, A. 418
Baynham, M. and Prinsloo, M. 531, 533, 536
Baynham, M. and Simpson, J. 422
Bazerman, C. 30, 31, 34
Becker, A.L. 156
Beckner, C. et al. 660
Bednarek, M. 75
Before Writing (Kress, G.) 669–70
behaviourism: language learning and education
159; phonetics and phonology 588;
psycholinguistics 472
Behrns, I. et al. 467
Béjoint, H. and Thoiron, P. 63
Belcher, D.D. 243, 246, 251, 252
Belﬁore, M.E. et al. 520
Belikova, A. and White, L. 647
Bell, A. 69, 70, 507
Bell, D.M. 194, 567
Bell, K. 102
Bell, T.R. 217
Bellack, A. et al. 275
Belz, J.A. 207
Belz, J.A. and Müller-Hartmann, A. 207
Belz, J.A. and Vyatkina, N. 201
Ben Rafael, E. 408
Ben Rafael, E. et al. 408
Ben Said, S. xi, 388–400
Benesch, S. 247
Benhabib, S. 18
Bennett, K. 47
Benneworth, K. 142, 148
Beresford, B. and Sloper, P. 99
Bergen Corpus of London Teenage Language
(COLT) 598–99
Berger, P. and Luckman, T. 81
Bergvall, V. 332
Bergvall, V. et al. 335
Berk-Seligson, S. 42, 89, 147
Berko, J. 482
Berko-Gleason, J. 590
Berlin, B. and Kay, P. 612
Bernhardt, B. and Stemberger, J. 115
Berry, V. 267
Besnier, N. 340
Betancourt, J.R. et al. 104
BFLA see Bilingual First Language
Acquisition 171–72
Bhaskar, Roy 450
Bhatia, A. xii, 3, 24–38
Bhatia, V.K. xii, 3, 24–38, 69
Bhatia, V.K. and Candlin, C.N. 28, 29
Bhatia, V.K. et al. 432, 435
Bhatt, R.M. 379
Bialystok, E. 127, 129, 130, 239, 404
Bialystok, E. et al. 128, 129, 404
Biber, D. and Conrad, S. 605
Biber, D. et al. 69, 250, 565, 605, 656
Biber, Douglas 249, 543, 605
Bielsa, E. 46
Bigelow, M. and Ranney, M. 219
Bilbow, G.T. 27
bilingual education 229–40; additive
bilingualism 235; Belgian model 233;
bilingualism, ambivalence of notion of
229–30; bilingualism controversy 237, 239;
Canadian model 233, 234; CLIL (Content
and Language Integrated Learning) 236;
design of programmes for 235; Diesterweg’s
method 235–36; dual immersion models 234;
effects and effectiveness of 237–39;
Encyclopedia of Pedagogy (Rein, W.) 231;
foreign language teaching 233; future
prospects 239–40; historical perspective
229–32; immersion models 233–34;
immigration and 234–35; interrelatedness of
languages 236; language and power,
intersection of 231–32; language
maintenance programmes 235; meta-analysis
237–38; minorities and 234–35; monolingual
habitus 230; monolingualism, classical
concept of 230; monolingualism, nation
Index
685

state and 229–32, 233; multilingualism 232,
239–40; nation and language, bonds between
230–32; organization of programmes for
235; paired bilingual models 237–38; power
relations and 234; Social Science Research
Centre, Berlin 237; subtractive bilingualism
235; subtractive bilingualism, notion of 231;
Swiss model 233; threshold hypothesis 235,
236; traditional bilingual education 237;
transitional bilingual education 234, 235,
236, 237, 239; transitional models 235;
trilingual schooling 233; two-way immersion
models 236; types of 232–37
Bilingual First Language Acquisition (BFLA)
171–72
bilingualism: in ageing 127–30, 133–34;
ambivalence of notion of 229–30; bilingual
dictionaries 62–63; bilingual mental lexicon,
development of 578–79; bimodal
bilingualism 364; in call work 90; context in
sign languages 362–69; in courtroom
proceedings 42; executive control functions
and 128–29; multilingualism and 402
biliterate composition 536
Billig, M. 455
Birch, D. 435
Birdwhistell, R. 669
Birkner, K. 91
Bisong, J. 394
Black, E. 546
Black, M. and Chiat, S. 117
Black, R. 533, 534, 536
Blackledge, A. and Creese, A. 406, 422, 423
Blackledge, A.J. 406, 417
Blair, Tony 71, 75, 76
Blake, R. 206
Blake, R. and Delforge, A. 206
blended learning 206; cognitive linguistics and
618–19
Bley-Vroman, R. 177, 646
Bloch, J. 204, 212, 396
Blocher, Eduard 230, 231
Block, D. 175, 289, 306, 318, 319
Block, D. and Cameron, D. 325
blogs 203, 205–6
Blommaert, J. 13, 15, 18, 90, 141, 308, 309,
311, 325, 396, 397, 417, 437, 455, 523, 524
Blommaert, J. and Verschueren, J. 392
Blommaert, J. et al. 90, 419, 520
Bloome, D. et al. 519
Bloomﬁeld, L. 159, 402, 588
Blue, G. 245
Blum-Kulka, S. 71
Blum-Kulka, S. et al. 157, 307
Boas, Franz 515
Bod, R. et al. 658
Boden, D. 72, 86
body motion 669
Boers, F. and Lindstromberg, S. 621
Bohannon, J.N.I. and Bonvillian, J.D. 174
Bohn, O.-S. 592
Bohn, O.-S. and Munro, M.J. 586, 587, 589
Bokamba, E.G. 379
Bokhorst-Heng, W. 350
Bolden, G.B. 42, 100
Bolton, K. 374
Bonding Node Parameters 645
Bonk, W. 576
Borba, R. and Ostermann, A. 337
Borg, S. xii, 4, 162, 215–28
Boston Diagnostic Aphasia Examination
(BDAE) 465
Boswood, T. and Marriott, A. 252
Bouillaud, J.-B. and Auburtin, S.A.E. 461
Bourdieu, P. and Passeron, J.-C. 393
Bourdieu, Pierre 17, 45, 82, 83, 85, 87, 88, 89,
90, 232, 233, 234, 281, 319, 322, 392, 518
Bourne, J. 352
Bowerman, M. and Choi, S. 491
Braddock, C.H. et al. 99
Braet, C. and Verhofstadt-Denève, L. 125
brain: activity, measurement and visualization
of 464; damage and language disorders
462–63; evolution of language and 463–64;
mind and 561–62, 568; RHD (Right
Hemisphere Brain Damage) 117–18; TBI
(Traumatic Brain Injury) 117–18
Braine, G. 391
Brando, Marlon 675
Brandt, D. 534
Brannan, R.L. 260
Branson, J. et al. 363
Braun, S. et al. 201
Bredella, L. and Delanoy, W. 307
Bremner, S. 34
Brennan, M. and Brown, R. 368–69
Brett, P. 27
Britain, D. 510
British Academic Spoken English Corpus
(BASE) 599
British National Corpus (BNC): corpus
linguistics 598, 600, 604; language testing
268
British National Literacy Strategy 564
Britten, N. et al. 98, 103
broadcast interviews, style of 70–72
Broca, Paul 113, 461–63, 472
Brock-Utne, B. 396
Brouwer, C.E. and Wagner, J. 177
Brown, A. and Jaquith, P. 269
Brown, A.V. 218
Brown, G. and Yule, G. 433, 480
Brown, J. 462
Brown, J.D. 266
Index
686

Brown, M and Ganguly, S. 17
Brown, R. 172, 482, 645
Brown Corpus 598
Brugman, C.M. 615
Brumﬁt, C.J. 2, 529
Brumﬁt, C.J. and Johnson, K. 187
Bruner, J.S. 190, 494
Brysbaert, M. 580
Budach, G. et al. 18, 89, 90
Bulwer, J. 364
Bunton, D. 247
Bunyi, G. 396
Burbules, N.C. 205
Burke, D. and Shafto, M. 132
Burkert, A. and Schweinhorst, K. 220
Burnard, L. 599
Burnett, S. 41
Burns, A. and Burton, J. 221
Burns, A. and Richards, J.C. 216
Burns, S. 367
Burrough-Boenisch, J. 251
Burrows, J. 547
Burton, D. 546
Burton, J. 220
business communication 24–36; business
communication 31–34; business discourse,
variations in 28–31; communication studies
24; communicative efﬁciency 27;
computer-mediated communications 26;
cross-cultural business negotiations 33–34;
dynamics of 25; English for business
purposes (EBP) 24, 25–28; English for
speciﬁc purposes (ESP) 24; functional
analysis 26; future of 35; genre analysis,
advances in 34–35; genre sets 30, 31; genre
systems 30–31; genre theory 27;
globalization 26; impact 27; intercultural
variables 35; interdisciplinarity 28–29, 30,
32; interdisciplinary study area 34–35;
interdiscursivity 34, 35; intertextuality 34,
35; IRAL (International Review of Applied
Linguistics) 32; Management
Communication Quarterly 32; national
agendas, key concerns on 33; needs analysis
27–28; socio-political boundaries 26;
sub-disciplinary framing 31; sub-disciplinary
variation 28–30; task demands 29–30;
text-task relationships 26–27; user-based
analytical tools 33
Butler, J. 332, 335, 336
Butt, D. et al. 628, 631, 632
Butzkamm, W. and Caldwell, J. 567
Bybee, J.L. 475, 616, 660, 661
Bybee, J.L. and Hopper, P. 474, 658
Bygate, M. et al. 195
Bygate, M. 2
Byram, M. and Fleming, M. 307
Byram, M. and Zarate, G. 307
Byram, M. 307–8
Byrne, B. 585
Byrne, D. 188
Byrne, P.S. and Long, B.E.L. 96, 97
CA (Conversation Analysis): classroom
discourse 276; gender and 337–38;
institutional discourse 82, 88; language and
culture 306–7; media discourse 69, 71,
72–74; medical communication 97
Caldas-Coulthard, C. and Coulthard, M. 89
Camazine, S. et al. 661
Cambridge ESOL 215, 217, 261, 265–66, 267
Cambridge International Corpus (CIC) 598, 606
Cambridge International Dictionary of English
(Proctor, P.) 63
Cameron, D. 15, 89, 311, 320, 334, 335, 337,
338, 339, 502
Cameron, D. and Kulick, D. 336
Cameron, L. and Deignan, A. 618
Campbell, S. and Roberts, C. 421
Campion, P. et al. 104
Canadian model of bilingual education 233, 234
Canagarajah, S. xii, 193, 196, 247, 251,
324–25, 355, 388–400, 534
Canagarajah, S. and Ben Said, S. 5, 166, 194,
383
Canale, M. and Swain, M. 188
CANCODE (Cambridge and Nottingham
Corpus of Discourse in English) 602
Candlin, C. and Candlin, S. 105, 157, 421
Cane, G. 378
Caramazza, A. 117
Carkin, S. 246
Carroll, J.B. 161, 187, 587
Carson, Johnny 67, 68
Carter, R. 543, 550, 567
Carter, R. and Adolphs, S. 438
Carter, R. and Nash, W. 543, 550
Carter, R. and Simpson, P. 545
Carter, R.A. and McCarthy, M.J. 71, 75, 267,
379, 565, 605
Carter-Thomas, S. and Rowley-Jolivet, E. 249
Casanave, C.P. 252
Casanave, C.P. and Li, X. 252
Casanova, P. 44
Castañeda-Peña, H. 341
Castells, M. 413
Categories (Aristotle) 571
categorization: categories of identity 320–21;
cognitive linguistics 611–12, 615, 616, 621
Cauldwell, R. 377
Cawdrey, Robert 53
Cazden, C. 282
CDA (Critical Discourse Analysis) 439,
445–57; analysis 447–48; approaches
Index
687

448–51; cognitive theory and 450;
conceptual metaphor theory and 450;
conversationalisation 450; corpus linguistics
and 451; critical, meaning of 445–46; critical
linguistics 448–49, 452; demonstration of
451–55; description 452–54; discourse,
concept of 446; discourse analysis 439;
discourse-historical approach 449–50;
empirically driven CDA 455; evolutionary
psychology and 450; explanation 447–48,
454–55; gender 450; institutional discourse
88–89; interpretation 454; media discourse
68, 69, 74–75, 76; misrepresentation 447;
multidisciplinarity 448–51; multimodality and
671–72; nominalisation 448; positive discourse
analysis 451; sexism 450; SFL (Systemic
Functional Linguistics) and 447, 448, 450,
452–53, 455, 456–57; socio-cognitive
analysis 449; socio-cultural change 450; text
and image, relationship between 450
Cedergren, H. 503
CEFR (Common European Framework
Reference for Languages) 265, 266, 270
Celce-Murcia, M. et al. 589
Cenoz, J. xii, 401–12
Cenoz, J. and Gorter, D. 5, 232, 406, 408
Chaiklin, S. 492, 493
Chalhoub-Deville, M. 261
Chambers, F. 27
Chang, P. 69
Chang, Y. 145
Chapelle, C.A. and Douglas, D. 201
Chapelle, C.A. et al. 261
Charles, M. 33
Charteris-Black, J. 450, 455, 618
Chaski, C. 139, 140
chat: in language learning 203, 205; radio chat
shows 72
CHAT (Cultural-Historical Activity Theory)
487–88, 495, 496
Chater, N. and Manning, C. 658
Chaudron, C. 195, 277
Chaudron, C. and Richards, J.C. 251
Chechik, G. et al. 130
Chen, C.-F.E. 210
Chen, T.-Y. 252
Cheng, H.Y. et al. 114
Cheng, M. and Warren, M. 379
Cherny, L. 523
Cheshire, J. 505
Chesterﬁeld, Lord 53, 54
Cheung, M. 49
Chew-Graham, C. et al. 101
child directed speech 483
child language: acquisition 657; children’s
conversations, multimodality and 670;
development 482–83
Child Language, Aphasia and Phonological
Universals (Jakobson, R.) 112
The CHILDES Project: Tools for Analyzing
Talk (MacWhinney, B.) 113
Childs, B. and Wolfram, W. 376
Chilton, P. 445, 450
Chion, M. 675
CHL (Chinese as a Heritage Language)
292–98
Chomsky, N. and Lasnik, H. 481
Chomsky, Noam 159, 160, 173, 187, 188, 305,
434, 463, 472–73, 480, 483, 545, 571, 588,
591, 611, 620, 626, 639, 640, 641, 645, 647,
650, 651, 655
Chouliaraki, L. and Fairclough, N. 447–48, 450
Christensen, A.-L. 465
Christiansen, M.H. and Chater, N. 658, 662
Chun, D. 206
Church, K. and Hanks, P. 59
Church, K. et al. 59
Cicero 40
Cicourel, A. 84, 88
Clahsen, H. 113
Clahsen, H. and Muysken, P. 646
Clark, E.V. 171, 482–83
Clarke, M. 319, 325
classroom discourse 274–84; activity theory
279; CA (Conversation Analysis) 276;
challenges for research 282–83; classroom
interaction, Ballack et al.’s conception 275;
collaboration, interaction and 279–80;
community of practice 280, 282; conﬁdence,
control and 281; critical approaches to
280–81; data collection and analysis 283;
ecological perspective 279; emic (participant)
perspective 276; exchange in 275–76; FIAC
(Flanders’ Interaction Analysis Categories)
274, 275; FOCUS (Foci for Observing
Communications Used in Settings) 275–76;
follow-up moves 275; future developments
281–82; historical perspective 274–77;
holistic view 280; information-processing
approach 277–78; initiation moves 275;
interaction hypothesis 278; language across
the curriculum 275; legitimate peripheral
participation 280; Modern Language Journal
278; moves in 275; multimodality and
classroom interaction 670–71; NNS
(Non-Native Speakers) 277; output
hypothesis 278–79; Pennsylvania Project
274–75; referential questions 277–78;
research issues 277–81; response moves 275;
sociocultural perspectives 278–80; tools for
teacher training 275–76; unobservable
dimensions, importance of 276; ZPD (Zone
of Proximal Development) 278–79
Clayman, S. 71, 74
Index
688

Clayman, S. and Heritage, J. 71
Clemente, A. and Higgins, M. 321
CLIL (Content and Language Integrated
Learning) 236
clinical linguistics 111–21; achievements 121;
atypical speech output, systems and patterns
in 115–16; Child Language, Aphasia and
Phonological Universals (Jakobson, R.) 112;
The CHILDES Project: Tools for Analyzing
Talk (MacWhinney, B.) 113; Clinical
Linguistics and Phonetics Journal 113;
Clinical Linguistics (Crystal, D.) 112–13;
clinical phonetic transcription 115; discourse
117–19; EMA (Electro-Magnetic
Articulography) 114; grammar 116–17, 560;
Handbook (International Phonetic
Association) 113; historical perspective
112–13, 120; International Clinical
Phonetics and Linguistics Association
(ICPLA) 113; IPA (International Phonetic
Alphabet) 113; key issues 114–19; LARSP
(Language assessment, Remediation and
Screening procedure) 112; laryngography
114–15; linguistics tradition 113, 121;
medical sciences 114; multidisciplinarity
120–21; phonetics 114–16; phonology
114–16; pragmatic impairment, neurological
bases for 117–19; pragmatics 117–19; Quirk
Report (1972) 112; research methods
113–14; RHD (Right Hemisphere Brain
Damage) 117–18; scope of 111–12;
semantics 116–17; SLI (Speciﬁc Language
Impairment) 111–12, 113, 116–17; social
sciences 114; sub-specialisms 111; TalkBank
113; TBI (Traumatic Brain Injury) 117–18;
trends in 119–20
Clyne, M. 127, 307
coarticulation 588
Coates, J. 334–35
COBUILD (Collins Birmingham University
International Language Database) 58, 59,
62, 598
Cochran-Smith, M. and Zeichner, K. 223
Cochran-Smith, M. et al. 223
Cofﬁn, C. and O’Halloran, K.A. 448
cognition: code learning 187; cognitive
advantages of bilingualism in ageing 127–30;
contribution to SLA 173–74, 175, 177–78,
181; sociocultural and cultural-historical
theories of language development 490–92
cognitive grammar: cognitive linguistics
619–20; grammar 558, 565
cognitive learning theory: language learning
and education 161–62; methodology in
language teaching 190
cognitive linguistics 611–22; anchoring, notion
of 621; basic cognitive relations 619; basic
colour terms 611–12; basic level categories
612–13, 621; blending 618–19;
categorization 611–12, 615, 616, 621;
cognitive grammar 619–20; cognitive models
613, 614; collostruction analysis 620;
commercial transaction frame 613;
conceptual integration theory 618–19;
conceptual metaphors 613–14, 618–19;
construction grammar 619–20;
developments 616–20; domains 614;
encoding 617–18; entrenchment 616;
event-frames 616–17; ﬁgure and ground
614–15, 619–20; frames 613, 616–18;
fridgegoogling 619; fuzzy boundaries 612;
gestalt perception 621; grounding, notion of
621; history 611–15; ICLA (International
Cognitive Linguistics Association) 611;
idealized cognitive models 613; issues
611–15; landmark ﬁgures 615; language
teaching and 621–22; lexicalization 617;
linguistic competence 611; mental spaces,
notion of 619; metonymy 618–19;
prominance 614–15; prototype semantics
612; prototype theory of categorization 612,
615–16; salience 614–15; satellite-frames
617; signal grammar 622; source domains
614; speciﬁc to universal event-frames
616–18; stylistics and 547; target domains
614; trajector ﬁgures 615; universal
event-frames 616–18; verb-frames 617
Cohen, A.D. 578
Cohen, R. 355
Cole, M. 489, 492
Coleman, H. 27
Coleman, J.A. 245
collaboration, interaction and 279–80
Collins, B. and Mees, I.M. 589
Collins, J. 84, 530, 531
Collins, J. and Blot, R. 530, 532
Collins, J. and La Santa, A. 356
Collins, J. and Slembrouck, S. 90, 419, 422,
520
Collins, J. et al. 415
Collins, S. xii, 3, 96–110
Collins, S. et al. 99
collocation 55, 57, 58, 59, 60, 62
collostruction analysis 620
Coltheart, M. 479
Coltheart, M. et al. 468, 573
Colzato, L. et al. 128
Common European Framework (Council of
Europe, 2001) 566–67
communication: communicative approach to
methodology in language teaching 188;
communicative competence 403;
communicative learning theory 189–90;
communicative methodology 188–89; effects
Index
689

on health outcomes 103–4, 106; efﬁciency in,
business communication and 27; processes
of, multimodality and integrative use of 668;
studies in business communication 24
community: community language learning 187;
concept of 20–21; goals, LLP and 16;
linguistic ethnography in workplace and
community 520; participation in technology
and language learning 208–10, 211
community of practice: classroom discourse
280, 282; sociolinguistics 505
Compleat Lexical Tutor (Cobb, T.) 268–69
complementary medicine 99–100
complexity theory: language as complex
adaptive system, emergence of 659–60;
language learning and education 160;
psycholinguistics and derivational theory 473
computer-aided stylistics 547–48
computer-mediated communication 26
computer-mediated games 209
conceptual integration theory 618–19
conceptual metaphor theory 450; conceptual
metaphors 613–14, 618–19
concordance output 602–3
conﬁdence, control and 281
Confucian teachings 289
Coniam, D. 201
conjunction, linguistics of 676–77
Conley, J. et al. 146
Connor, U. 248, 252
consciousness: language and 491; scientiﬁc
study of 658–59
construction grammar: cognitive linguistics
619–20; grammar 558, 565; language as
complex adaptive system, emergence of
656–57
constructivism 44, 81, 162, 190, 216, 218, 305,
308; constructivist epistemology 521–22;
social constructivism 87–88
Contemporary Stylistics (Lambrou, M. and
Stockwell, P.) 548
context: context free grammar 639; context
variables 186, 188, 189, 191, 193, 194, 196;
and culture, relationship to language 290;
role in language education 156, 164–65,
167–68
contrastive rhetoric 248
conversation analysis: conversationalisation
450; discourse analysis 435–36;
multimodality 669
Cook, G. xii, 5, 6, 39, 185, 431–44, 446, 529,
537, 548, 550, 564, 567
Cook, G. and Seidlhofer, B. 3, 156, 157, 158
Cook, V. 164, 176, 180, 391, 407
Cook-Gumperz, J. and Messerman, L. 89
Cooke, M. 422
Cooke, M. and Simpson, J. 353, 415, 417, 422
Cope, B. and Klantzis, M. 409
Corballis, M. 469
Corbett, J. 45
Corder, S.P. 172, 187, 190, 646
Corner, J. 70
corpus-based research 267
corpus-based stylistics 547–48
corpus linguistics 597–608; American National
Corpus (ANC) 598; analyses, language as
complex adaptive system 656; Bank of
English 598; Bergen Corpus of London
Teenage Language (COLT) 598–99; British
Academic Spoken English Corpus (BASE)
599; British National Corpus (BNC) 598,
600, 604; Brown Corpus 598; Cambridge
International Corpus (CIC) 598, 606;
CANCODE 602; CDA (Critical Discourse
Analysis) and 451; COBUILD Corpus 598;
concordance output 602–3; corpus as data
597–99; Corpus of Contemporary American
English (COCA) 598; corpus tools and
interfaces 608; English as a Lingua Franca
in Academic Settings (ELFA) 599; English
language teaching, corpora and 605; general
corpora 597–98; historical corpora 598;
International Corpus of English (ICE) 598;
International Corpus of Learner English
(ICLE) 599; issues 603–6, 607; Key Word in
Context (KWIC) 602, 603; key words and
sequences 601–2; Lancaster-Oslo/Bergen
Corpus 598; language corpora 607–8;
learner corpora 598; and lexicography
58–61, 64; Limerick Corpus of Irish English
(LVIE) 600–601; London-Lund Corpus of
Spoken English (LLC) 598; Longman
Corpus Network 598; media discourse and
69, 75–76; metadata 599; Michigan Corpus
of Academic Spoken English (MICASE)
599; monitor corpora 598; multiword units
604–5; NLP (Natural Language Processing)
604; Nottingham Health Communication
Corpus 602; Oxford English Corpus 598;
parallel corpora 598; phraseology 603–5,
607; resources 607–8; semantic prosody 603;
specialised corpora 597–98; and stylistics
543; technologies, impact of new 606–7;
tools and methods 600, 607; and translating
and interpreting 41–42; Vienna-Oxford
International Corpus of English (VOICE)
599; Web as corpus 606; WebCorp 606;
word lists 600–601
Corpus of Contemporary American English
(COCA) 598
Corson, D. 15
Cortes, V. 250
Cortes, V. and Hyland, K. 250
Costa, A. et al. 128
Index
690

Cotterill, J. 145
Coulter, A. 98
Coulthard, R.M. 139, 140, 433;
Coulthard, R.M. and Johnson, A. 139
Coulthard, R.M. and Montgomery, M. 435
Couper, G. 589
Coupland, J. 131
Coupland, J. et al. 99
Coupland, N. 309, 311, 312, 507, 542
Coupland, N. et al. 131
Couture, B. 633
Cowie, A.P. 53, 54
Coxhead, A. 250, 600
Coxhead, A. and Nation, P. 250
CR (Cognitive Reserve) 127, 128
Crago, B.M. 288
Crain, S. and Thornton, R. 648
Crandall, J.A. 216, 217
Crawford, J. 354
Crawford, M. 335
Crawford Camiciottoli, B. 251
Creese, A. 436, 517, 519
Creese, A. and Martin, P. 291, 406, 407
Creese, A. et al. 519
Critical Age Hypothesis 588, 589
critical discussion 575–81
critical linguistics 448–49, 452
Croft, W. 620, 656
Croft, W. and Cruise, D.A. 616, 656
Cronbach, L.J. and Meehl, P.E. 260
Cronin, M. 45–47
cross-cultural business negotiations 33–34
cross-cultural pragmatics 307, 314
cross-linguistic inﬂuences in SLA 176–77
Cruickshank, K. 422
Cruttenden, A. 376
Crystal, D. 111, 112, 113, 119, 120, 204, 375,
377, 379, 384, 409, 560
Crystal, D. et al. 112
Cucchiarini, C. 115
Cukor-Avila, P. 374
Culpeper, J. 548
Culpeper, J. et al. 545, 546, 547
Cultura Project 202, 207
cultural-historical theories see sociocultural
and cultural-historical theories of language
development
culture: bias in language tests 310; CHAT
(Cultural-Historical Activity Theory)
487–88, 495, 496; cultural difference theory,
gender and 334–35; dimensions in literacy
532; diversity in medical communication
100–101; interactions with, in technology
and language learning 201, 203, 204, 205,
206, 208, 209, 210, 211; language
development and, symbiosis of 287, 290,
298; language learning and education
155–59; models in medical communication
102; SLF and context of 632–33;
sociocultural and cultural-historical theories
of language development 490–92; systems of
understanding, meaning and 290
Cummins, J. 234, 235, 236, 322, 392
Cureton, E.E. 260
Curran, C.A.C. 187
Curry, M.J. and Lillis, T. 534
Curtin, M.L. 408
Cutler, A. 478
Dagenais, D. et al. 324
Dancygier, B. 548
Danet, B. 139, 147
Danet, B. and Herring, S.C. 201
Daniels, H. 495
Daniels, H. et al. 496
Danielsson, P. 601
Darling-Hammond, L. and Bransford, J. 223
Das Gupta, J. and Ferguson, C.A. 12
data: classroom discourse data, collection and
analysis 283; COBUILD (Collins
Birmingham University International
Language Database) 58, 59, 62; corpus as
597–99; experimental data and generative
grammar 649–50; metadata in corpus
linguistics 599; speech data, naturally
occurring 501–2
Dauer, R.M. 377
Davey, T. and Pitoniak, M.J. 269
Davidson, B. 43, 100, 421
Davies, A. 6
Davies, A. and Elder, C. 344
Davies, J. 523
Davies, J. and Merchant, G. 523
Davies, P. et al. 221
Davis, K. and Skilton-Sylvester, E. 320
Dawkins, R. 661
Day, E.M. 319
Day, R. 70
Dbrowska, E. 660
De Angelis, G. 405
de Beaugrande, R. and Dressler, W. 433
de Bot, K. xii, 124–37, 404, 405
de Bot, K. and Clyne, M. 127
de Bot, K. and Makoni, S. 126
de Bot, K. and van der Hoeven, N. 404, 510
de Bot, K. et al. 659
de Certeau, M. 205, 419
De Cock, S. 606
De Costa, P. 422
de Fina, A. 418
de Fina, A. et al. 418
De Groot, A.M.B. 580
De Houwer, A. 171
de Knop, S. and de Rycker, T. 621
Index
691

Deacon, T.W. 481, 489, 662
deaf: communities, case studies of
‘non-Western’ sign languages 362–63; and
hard-of-hearing, translating and
interpreting 45
death and dying, hospital practices in 97
debates: ageing, language and 131–32, 134;
forensic linguistics 139; gender 339–41;
identity 322–24, 326; language and culture
313–14; language testing 265–68, 270;
linguistic ethnography 524; linguistic
imperialism 392–94; literacy 532–35;
medical communication 104–5;
sociolinguistics 510–12; stylistics 549–50
deﬁcit theory, gender and 333
deﬁnitions: English for Academic Purposes
(EAP) 243–44; grammar 557–58;
lexicography 61–62; multilingualism, elusive
nature of deﬁnition of 402–3;
neurolinguistics 460
DeFrancisco, V. 334
Deignan, A. 618
DeKeyser, R. 566
DeKeyser, R. and Larson-Hall, J. 405
Demetriou, A. et al. 125
dental fricatives 376
dependency grammar 558
Derwing, T. et al. 589
Descartes, René 461, 472
Deterding, D. xii, 373–87
Deterding, D. and Kirkpatrick, A. 382
Deterding, D. et al. 376
Deumert, A. 509
Deutschmann, M. et al. 209, 210
developments: cognitive linguistics 616–20;
developmental bilingualism 311; DWR
(Developmental Work Research) 495–96;
English for Academic Purposes (EAP) 244;
ethnicity, applied linguistics and 348;
generative grammar 641–45; institutional
discourse 89–92; language policy and
planning (LPP) 11, 12–13; New Englishes,
stages in World Englishes 381–82
Develotte, C. et al. 208
Devitt, A. 30, 34
Dewey, John 162, 220
diasporic spaces 419–20
Dickens, Charles 547
dictionaries: lexicography 53, 55–57; sign
languages 364–66
Diesterweg, A. 236
Diesterweg’s method, bilingual education
235–36
digital literacies 529, 536
digital research, linguistic ethnography and 523
digital technology 200–201
Dijkstra, A. 405
Dimbleby, J. 70
direct vocabulary instruction 577
Diriker, E. 43
Dirven, R. 621
Disconnection Syndromes in Animals and Man
(Geschwind, N.) 461
discourse analysis 431–41; applied linguistics in
431–32; clinical linguistics and 117–19;
conversation analysis 435–36; discourse,
concept of 446; English for Academic
Purposes (EAP) 244; ethnography 436–37;
genre analysis 439; grammar and 565;
history 432–33; institutional discourse
88–89; language and culture 306; language
ecology 436–37; linguistic ethnography
436–37; medical communication and studies
of 97–98; multimodality 437–38;
organisation discourse analysis 83;
paralanguage 437–38; positive discourse
analysis 451; pragmatics 434–35; schema
theory 435; scope of applied linguistics in
432; semiotics 437–38; separate identity for
432, 440; SFL (Systemic Functional
Linguistics) and 634–35; text, context and
discourse 433–34; top-down working from
larger structures 438–39; see also CDA
(Critical Discourse Analysis)
discourse-historical approach to CDA 449–50
distance learning 206
distinctiveness, determination of 542
Docherty, G.J. and Foulkes, P. 511
Docherty, G.J. and Watt, D. 509
Docherty, G.J. et al. 505
doctor-patient relationship 106
Dodd, B. 115
Dodson, M.S. 45
Doff, S. et al. 313
dominance theory, gender and 333–34
Donato, R. 177, 279, 280, 282, 283, 493
Dong, J. and Blommaert, J. 419, 420
Dörnyei, Z. 161, 178, 179, 322
Doughty, C. and Pica, T. 278
Doughty, C. and Williams, J. 278, 567
Douglas, M. 81
Dowell, J. et al. 103
Drew, P. and Chilton, K. 72
Drew, P. and Heritage, J. 72, 82, 83, 85, 88
dual immersion models 234
dualism in stylistics 541
Duckworth, M. et al. 113
Dudley-Evans, T. 246
Dudley-Evans, T. and St John, M.-J. 26, 243,
244, 245, 246
Duff, P. and Hornberger, N. 288, 291
Duff, P. and Uchida, Y. 318
Duff, P.A. 180, 276, 280, 288
Dumas, B. 147
Index
692

Dunning, T. 601
DuPlessis, J. et al. 646
Duranti, A. 515, 516
Duranti, A. and Goodwin, C. 288, 516
Durrant, P. 250
Duval, A. 63
Duxa, S. et al. 307
Dyer, J. 510
dynamic assessment: language testing 265;
sociocultural and cultural-historical theories
of language development 492–95
dynamic systems: business communication 25;
language as complex adaptive system,
emergence of 662–63; literacy processes and
practices 529; neurolinguistics 470;
perspective, ageing, language and 126;
theory, ageing, language and 126, 134
dysfunctional consultations 96–97
Eades, D. 84, 141, 148
Eades, D. and Arends, J. 141
Eagleson, R. 140
EAL (English as an Additional Language) 217
EALTA (European Association for Language
Testing and Assessment) 262
EAP (English for Academic Purposes) 243–53;
academic lectures 251; academic literacies
252; academic speech and writing, studies of
249; academic vocabulary 250;
contemporary approaches to 245; contexts,
deeper understanding of 252; contrastive
rhetoric 248; cooperation with subject
teachers 246; corpora and 248, 250; critical
EAP movement 247; deﬁnition of 243–44;
development of 244; dialogue with other
ﬁelds 253; discourse analysis 244; efﬁcacy of
251–52; EGAP (English for General
Academic Purposes) 245–46; English for
Occupational Purposes (EOP) 243–44;
ESAP (English for Speciﬁc Academic
Purposes) 245–46; ethnographies 252;
general vs speciﬁc 245–46; genre analysis
247–48; historical perspective 243–45;
inter-disciplinary differences 248–49;
international publication, writing for 251;
intra-disciplinary differences 249; issues in
245–51; Journal of English for Academic
Purposes 243; language use descriptions 252;
learner corpora 249; lexical bundles 250–51;
needs analysis 245; needs analysis, rights
analysis and 246–47; register analysis 244;
rhetorical analysis 244; rights analysis
246–47; second language acquisition and
252; study skills 244–45; subject teachers,
cooperation with 246; teacher training 252;
teaching materials and 252; textbooks and
teaching materials, corpora and 250
early theories: institutional discourse 81–83;
SLA (Second Language Acquisition) 173
Ebbinghaus, H. 657
EBP (English for Business Purposes) 24, 25–28
Eckert, P. 332–33, 505, 506, 518, 519, 523, 661
Eckert, P. and McConnell-Ginet, S. 340
Edgeworth, F.Y. 260
Edmondson, W. and House, J. 308, 310
education: educational counselling 86; grammar
562–64; language change, sociolinguistics
and 509; linguistic ethnography in
educational settings 518–20; migration and
language 422–23; multilingualism and 403–4,
406; multimodality and 669–71; sign
languages and 366–68
Edwards, J. 402
efﬁcacy of: bilingual education 237–39; English
for Academic Purposes (EAP) 251–52
EFL (English as a Foreign Language) 189,
194, 196, 215, 373
EGAP (English for General Academic
Purposes) 245–46
Eggins, S. 628, 629, 630, 632, 633
Eggins, S. and Slade, D. 629
Ehrlich, S. 145, 146
E-language (performance) 640
elderspeak 130–31
Eldridge, M. 115
electronic media 133, 134
electrophysiological techniques 132
ELF (English as a Lingua Franca): linguistic
imperialism 396; World Englishes 373, 375,
382, 383, 384
Ellis, N.C. xiii, 7, 174, 175, 178, 179, 492, 558,
565, 654–67
Ellis, N.C. and Beaton, A. 577
Ellis, N.C. and Cadierno, T. 657
Ellis, N.C. and Ferreira-Junior, F. 178
Ellis, N.C. and Larsen-Freeman, D. 160, 659
Ellis, N.C. and Schmidt, R. 657
Ellis, R. 189, 195, 566, 567, 584, 591
Ellis, R. and Sheen, Y. 180
Ellis, R. et al. 283
Ellis, V. 496
Elman, J.L. 126, 661
Elman, J.L. et al. 658, 659
Elwyn, G. et al. 98
EMA (Electro-Magnetic Articulography) 114
embodiment trend in neurolinguistics 469–70
EMC (Electronically Mediated
Communication) 202–6, 211
emergentism: language as complex adaptive
system, emergence of 659–60; linguistic
ethnography 523–24; Second Language
Acquisition (SLA) 174–75
emic (participant) perspective 6, 276–77, 282,
408, 413, 436, 517, 522, 592
Index
693

Emmott, C. 548
Emmott, C. et al. 549
Emmoyer, K. et al. 362, 364
empiricism: LTE (Language Teacher
Education) 222–23; SLA (Second Language
Acquisition) 175
empowerment and language 158–59
encoding in cognitive linguistics 617–18
Encyclopedia of Pedagogy (Rein, W.) 231
Engberg-Pedersen, E. 362
Engel, G.L. 96
Engeström, Y. 279, 488, 495
English: ambiguities and ironies in spread of
392–93; forensic English 139; ironies in
spread of 392–93; Johnson’s Dictionary of
the English Language 53, 61; language
teaching, corpora and 605; as a Lingua
Franca in Academic Settings (ELFA) 599;
as a lingua franca in translation and
interpretation 47; spread and decline of 397
English Language Institute, University of
Michigan 245, 305
EnglishLexicon Project 573
Enkvist, N.E. 542, 543
enterprise, migration and language 420–21
entrenchment 616
Entwistle, V. et al. 99
environment, contribution in SLA 177–78, 181
EOP (English for Occupational Purposes)
243–44
EPP (English Proﬁle Project) 266
EPP (Extended Projection Principle) 643
Epstein, R.M. et al. 101
Epstein, S.D. et al. 649
equivalence in translating and interpreting
40–41
Erard, M. 585
Erickson, F. and Schultz, J. 86, 91
Erickson, T. 203
Erman, B. and Warren, B. 574, 604
ERP (Event Related Potentials) 650
ESAP (English for Speciﬁc Academic
Purposes) 245–46
ESP (English for Speciﬁc Purposes) 24
Esser, H. 239
Esteban, A.A. and Cañado, M.L.P. 28
ethnicity 344–57; applied linguistics and
344–45, 348, 355–56; authority and
authenticity, struggle over 351–52; concept
of 345; conceptualisation of, interpretive
frame for 345–46; consolidation of applied
linguistics and 348; development of applied
linguistics and 348; disparities in care
quality 101–2; ethnic prejudice 310–11;
inter-ethnic tensions in LPP 12;
minority-majority relations 352–55;
modernity and late modernity, applied
linguistics and 355–56; modernity and late
modernity, tensions between 346–48; native
speaker intervention 351–52; postcolonial
language planning and 349; Quirk-Kachru
debate 351; Singapore 350; Sub-Saharan
Africa 349–50; tradition and modernity,
tensions between 346; traditional notions of
19; United Kingdom, minority-majority
relations 352–53; United States,
minority-majority relations 353–55
ethnography: in context of linguistic
ethnography 517; discourse analysis 436–37;
English for Academic Purposes (EAP) 252;
ethnographic studies, institutional discourse
88; sociolinguistics 505–6; of speaking 516;
see also linguistic ethnography
ETUCE (European Trade Union Committee
for Education) 223
Eubank, L. 648, 649
euphemised talk 85
European Union (EU) 44, 76, 234, 308, 347,
416, 419
Evans, N. and Levinson, S.C. 489
event-frames 616–18
event related potentials 483
everyday life: culture of (1970s-1990s) 306–8;
multimodality and 672–73
Evison, J. 75
experiential sub-functions in SFL 628
Extended Standard Theory 641
Fabb, N. and Halle, M. 545
face-to-face encounters 142
Facebook: language and culture 309;
technology and language learning 202
Failed Functional Features Hypothesis 648
Fairclough, N. and Wodak, R. 439, 633
Fairclough, N. et al. 450
Fairclough, Norman 67, 74, 84, 85, 89, 158,
445, 446, 447, 449, 450, 633, 634, 672
Faltis, C. and Hudelson, S. 392
Fanselow, J. 275
fansubbers 48
Faraco, M. et al. 251
Farr, F. et al. 601
Farrell, L. 89, 520, 531, 536
Farrell, T.S.C. 216, 220, 221, 222
Fauconnier, G. and Turner, M. 548, 618
Faulkner, William 546
Feak, C.B. et al. 250
Feature Assembly Hypothesis 648
Felix, S. 165
feminism: feminist linguistics 331; FPDA
(Feminist Poststructuralist Discourse
Analysis) 340, 341; post-structuralist
theories of language and 319–20
Feng, H. 248
Index
694

Ferguson, G. 20
Fernandino, L. and Iacoboni, M. 469
Ferreira-Brito, L. 362
Ferrer i Cancho, R. and Solé, R.V. 658
Feyereisen, P. 467
FIAC (Flanders’ Interaction Analysis
Categories) 274, 275
Fichte, J.G. 230
ﬁctional interactions, stylistics and 546–47
Field, J. xiii, 6, 202, 465, 472–86, 588
Field, K. and Ziebland, S. 105
ﬁgure and ground 614–15, 619–20
Fillmore, C.C. 611, 613, 657
Fillmore, C.C. and Atkins, B.T. 613
Fillmore, C.C. and Kay, P. 620
Fillmore, C.C. et al. 620
ﬁlm, cinema and multimodality 668, 673, 675
Filpulla, M. et al. 375
ﬁnal consonant clusters 376–77
Fine, J. 101
Finnegan, R. 438
Firth, A. and Wagner, J. 175
Firth, J.R. 188, 517, 604, 625, 626
Fischer, S.D. 360
Fish, S. 545, 549
Fisher, R. and Larkin, S. 281
Fisher, S. and Todd, A. 84, 85
Fishman, J.A. 291
Fishman, P. 331, 333
FLA (First Language Acquisition): SLA
(Second Language Acquisition) and 171–72
Flanders, N.A. 275
Flege, J.E. 176
Flewitt, R. 524
Flowerdew, J. 251
Flowerdew, J. and Peacock, M. 243, 244
Flowerdew, J. and Tauroza, S. 251
Flowerdew, J. et al. 216
Fluctuation Hypothesis 648
ﬂuency 188–89
FOCUS (Foci for Observing Communications
Used in Settings) 275–76
Fogel, J. and Carlson, M.C. 133
Foley, W. 562
Foltz, P.W. 268
Fontenelle, T. xiii, 3, 53–66
Ford, R.T. 18
foreign language teaching: bilingual education
233; grammar in 564–68; MFL (Modern
Foreign Languages) 216; see also LTE
(Language Teacher Education)
forensic discourse analysis 139
forensic linguistics 138–49; anonymisation of
names 148; audio-recorded interviews
144–45; authorship investigation 140–42;
connections within 148; debate about term
139; discoursal complexity 147; diversity of
activities 149; expert testimony 141;
face-to-face encounters 142; forensic
discourse analysis 139; forensic English 139;
forensic language 145–48; information,
presentation by expert witnesses 141;
interviews, not audio-recorded 142–44;
language and expertise 139–42; language
and law 139; language in police custody 145;
law, language and everyday life 138; legal
language 138; legally sanctioned activities
138–39; lexical complexity 147; linguistic
identiﬁcation 141; linguistic naivety 141–42;
main issues 139–48; miscommunication
147–48; modes of discourse 147; policing
142–45; question form 144–45; recording
technologies, inﬂuences of 142–44; syntactic
complexity 147
forensic phonetics 501
formal-functional divide in grammar 559
formulaic language 574–75
Foster, Andrew 368
Foster, P. 574
Foster, P. and Ohta, A.S. 283
Foucault, M. 82, 84, 88, 89, 280, 319, 338, 431,
446, 518, 633
Foulkes, P. and French, J. 139
Fowler, R. 448, 545, 546, 549
Fowler, R. et al. 448, 634
fragmentation: language testing 264–65, 270;
psycholinguistics 484
frames in cognitive linguistics 613, 616–18
Franceschini, R. 401
Francis, W. 127
Frank, A.G. 390
Frankel, R. 85
Franklin, S. 464
Franson, C. 217
Fraser, H. xiii, 7, 584–96
Fraser, M. 140
Frawley, W. 41, 490
Frears, S. 675
Freedle, R.O. 310
Freeman, D. 217
Freeman, D. and Johnson, K.E. 219, 223
Freeman, D. and Richards, J.C. 216
Freeman, D.C. 548
Freeman, Y.S. and Freeman, D.E. 189
Freinet, Célestin 206
Freire, Paulo 158, 162, 247
French, P. and Harrison, P. 140, 141
frequency-based theories of language 658
frequency in lexis 573–74
fridgegoogling 619
Friel, Brian 45
Fries, C. 159, 186, 188, 654
Frith, C. 585
Frith, C. and Wolpert, D. 469
Index
695

Frith, C. et al. 469
Fromkin, V 475
Fuertes-Olivera, P.A. 27
Full Transfer/Full Access Model 648
function, concept of 628
functional analysis: business communication
26; language as complex adaptive system,
emergence of 656; language socialization 291
functional grammar 558
functional tradition in language teaching 188
functional use in lexis 574
functional view of language 157–58
Furstenberg, G. 202, 207
Furstenberg, G. and Levet, S. 202
Furstenberg, G. et al. 202, 207
The Future of Literacy Studies (Baynham, M.
and Prinsloo, M.) 536
fuzzy boundaries 612
Gabrielatos, C. and Baker, P. 418
Gaies, S. 277
Gal, S. 332, 516
Galantucci, B. and Fowler, C. 469
Galasin´ska, A. and Koslowska, O. 419
Gall, F. 461
Gall, F. and Spurzheim, G. 461
Gallaudet, Thomas and Edward 365
Gallese, V. and Lakoff, G. 467, 618
Gal’perin, P. 495
Galton, F 472
Galton, F. 260
Garciá, O. 354
Garciá, O. et al. 325
Gardner, H. 188
Gardner, R. 161
Gardner, R. and Lambert, W. 161
Garﬁnkel, H. 84, 306, 435, 491
Garner, M. and Johnson, E. 148
Garret, P.B. and Baquedano-Lopez, P. 290
Garrido, C. and Alvarez, I. 217
Gaskell, G. 657
Gass, S. 159, 658
Gass, S.M. and Makoni, S. 325
Gatbonton, E. and Segalowitz, N. 158
gatekeeping 86–87
Gathercole, S. and Baddeley, A. 474
Gattegno, C. 187
Gavins, J. 548
Gavioli, L. 250
Gavioli, L. and Aston, G. 605
Gebhard, G. 220
Gee, J.P. 209, 432, 531, 669
Gee, J.P. et al. 15, 89, 91
Geeraerts, D. 616
Geertz, C. 313, 662
gender 331–42; CA (Conversation Analysis)
and 337–38; CDA (Critical Discourse
Analysis) and 450; cultural difference theory
334–35; debates 339–41; deﬁcit theory 333;
dominance theory 333–34; feminist
linguistics 331; FPDA (Feminist
Poststructuralist Discourse Analysis) 340,
341; history 332–35, 341; interactional
studies 333; issues 335–39; and language,
intersection between 320; Language and
Woman’s Place (Lakoff, R.) 331; The Myth
of Mars and Venus (Cameron, D.) 338;
postmodernism 335–36; salience of 337–39;
sex and, contestation of terms 332, 341;
sexuality and 336–37; social constructionism
335–36; variationist studies 332–33
Gender and Language 337
general corpora 597–98
general practice consultation 97–99
general stylistics 542–44
generalisation: grammar 558; language
learning and education 161; SLA (Second
Language Acquisition) 175
generative grammar 638–51; application to
SLA 646–48; applied linguistics and 638,
645–48; background 639–40; Bonding Node
Parameters 645; context free grammar 639;
development 641–45; E-language
(performance) 640; EPP (Extended
Projection Principle) 643; ERP (Event
Related Potentials) 650; experimental data
and 649–50; Extended Standard Theory 641;
Failed Functional Features Hypothesis 648;
Feature Assembly Hypothesis 648;
Fluctuation Hypothesis 648; Full Transfer/
Full Access Model 648; generative
approaches to L1A 645–46; generative
approaches to SLA 648–50; generative
linguistics, assumptions in 639–40;
Government and Binding Theory 641;
I-language (competence) 640; Interface
Hypothesis 648; Interpretability Hypothesis
648; language, foregrounding of facts about
638; learners’ behaviour (and knowledge)
650–51; Lexicon 641–42; linear ordering
638; Minimal Trees Model 648; Minimalist
Program 641–42, 649; Missing Surface
Inﬂection Hypothesis 648; modularity 640;
multi-layering 640; native speakers’ syntax
651; Null Subject Parameters 645;
Numeration 641–42; phonetics and
phonology and 588; Principles and
Parameters framework 641, 645, 646, 649;
productivity 639–40; purpose of 639–40;
research strategy 643–45; sentences,
production and interpretation of 650; SFL
(Systemic Functional Linguistics) and
626–27; Standard Theory 641; stimulus,
poverty of 639–40; Structure Dependency,
Index
696

Principle of 645; stylistics and 545;
Subjacency Condition 645; theoretical
frameworks, change in 641–43; theoretical
linguistics and applied linguistics 645; UG
(Universal Grammar) 640, 650
generative theory in phonetics and phonology
591
Gennette, G. 571
genre analysis: business communication and
advances in 34–35; discourse analysis 439;
EAP (English for Academic Purposes)
247–48
genres: business communication, genre theory
in 27; context in SFL 632–33; in EMC
203–4, 211; genre systems 30–31; sets in
business communication 30, 31
Gentner, D. and Goldin-Meadow, S. 491, 561
Gernsbacher, M.A. 480, 657
Geschwind, N. 461–62
gestalt perception 621
Geyer, N. 217
Ghadessy, M. 69
Ghio, M. and Tettamanti, M. 469
Gibbon, F.E. 114
Gibbons, J. 145, 147
Gibbons, J. and Ramirez, E. 291
Gibson, J.J. 205, 213, 281
Giddens, Anthony 415
Gierut, J. and Morrisette, M. 115
Gilbert, J. 589
Gillen, J. 523
Gillon, G. 591
Gimenez, J.C. 27
Giroux, H.A. 247
Global Media Discourses (Machin, D. and Van
Leeuwen, T.) 671
globalisation: business communication and 26;
global migration, challenge of 19; global
mobility, institutional discourse and 89;
information society, translating, interpreting
and 46–49; institutional discourse and 91;
linguistic imperialism and 396–97;
translating and interpreting and 39, 42,
47–48; work practices and institutional
discourse 89, 90, 91, 92
goal-orientation 85–86
Goatly, A. 450
Goffman, Erving 43, 76, 83, 84, 85, 88, 281,
306, 502, 516, 519
Goffman’s ‘participation framework’ 43
Gogolin, I. xiii, 4, 229–42, 307, 406
Gogolin, I. and Neumann, U. 239
Goldberg, A.E. 160, 620, 657
Goldenberg, G. 469
Golding, William 545, 547
Goldstein, T. 89
Gombert, J.-E. 590
Gonzalez, N. 527
Goodglass, H. and Kaplan, E. 462, 465
Goodman, K.S. 480
Goodwin, C. 89, 669
Goodwin, M.H. 287, 516, 524
Goody, J. 532
Gordon, M.J. 509
Gorter, D. xiii, 401–12
Gough, P.B. and Wren, S. 480
Goulbourne, H. 352
Government and Binding Theory 641
Graddol, D. 165, 190, 383, 397
Grady, K. 194
grammar 557–68; applications and models
559–60; British National Literacy Strategy
564; clinical linguistics 116–17, 560;
cognitive grammar 558, 565; Common
European Framework (Council of Europe,
2001) 566–67; construction grammar 558,
565; deﬁnition of 557–58; dependency
grammar 558; descriptive models 565;
discourse analysis and 565; education
562–64; in foreign language teaching
564–68; formal-functional divide 559;
functional grammar 558; generalised models
of 558; grammatical correctness 562–63;
instruction in, efﬁciency of 563–64; island
constraints 559; lexical approaches to 558,
561, 565, 571; linguistic relativity 561;
methodological questions 566; mind, brain
and 561–62, 568; models of 558–59;
morphology 558; neurolinguistics 466;
pedagogic models 565; phrase structure
grammar 558; pragmatics and 567;
prescriptive rules 563; psycholinguistics 476;
research interests 567–68; SLA (Second
Language Acquisition) 175, 566; in society
562–64, 568; standardization and education
562–64; syntax 558; systemic grammar 558;
transformational grammar 558, 565; UG
(Universal Grammar) 559, 564; usage-based
associative learning 559, 564–65; as window
on world 560–61; word grammar 558; world
and 559–60, 568
Grammar of Contemporary English (Quirk, R.
et al.) 56
Grammar of English Words (Palmer, H.) 56
grammars, dictionaries combining with 55–57
grammatical abbreviations 299
grammatical correctness 562–63
grammatical form 158
Gramsci, Antonio 230
Granger, S. 180, 249
Granger, S. and Meunier, F. 657
Granger, S. et al. 60
Grant, D. and Iedema, R. 83
Grant, G. 678
Index
697

Grant, T. 140
Graves, K. 218
Gray, John 333, 338
Greatbatch, D. 74
Greatbatch, D. et al. 89
Green, D.W. et al. 130
Green, M.W. 200
Greenberg, M. and Kusché, C. 367
Greene, J.P. 238
Greenhalgh, T. and Hurwitz, B. 98
Gregg, K. 173
Gregory, E. and Williams, A. 419, 422, 519,
521
Grenfell, M. 216
Grenoble, L.A. and Whaley, L.J. 16
Grice, H.P. 434
Grierson, Sir George Abraham 20
Gries, S.Th. and Stefanowitsch, A. 620
Gries, S.Th. et al. 620
Griswold, O. 422
Grodzinsky, Y. 113
Grosjean, F. 407
Grosvenor, I. 352
grounding, notion of 621
Grunwell, P. 115
Guilherme, M. 307
Guk, I. and Kellogg, D. 493
Gumperz, J. 86, 88, 89–91, 306, 318, 334,
436–37, 502, 516, 517, 520
Gumperz, J. and Levinson, S. 491
Gumperz, J et al. 520
Gunnarsson, B. 83, 91
Gussenhoven, C. and Jacobs, H. 589
Gut, U. 376, 377
Gutierrez, K.D. et al. 519
Guy, G.R. 377
Habermas, Jürgen 83, 89, 281, 446, 518
Haegeman, L. 645
Hahn, L. 589
Hakuta, K. 176
Hale, S. 42, 148
Hale, S. and Gibbons, J. 147
Hall, C. 84
Hall, G. 247, 518, 548
Hall, J. et al. 103
Hall, K. 336
Hall, S. 67, 319, 345, 395
Hall, S. et al. 355
Halliday, M. and Matthiessen, C. 452
Halliday, M.A.K. 7, 40, 69, 157, 188, 204, 275,
439, 545, 546, 625, 626, 628, 631, 632, 633,
656, 669, 673, 676
Halliday, M.A.K. and Hasan, R. 433
Halliday, M.A.K. et al. 25, 26, 191, 434
Halliday’s early writing on SFL 635–36
Hammersley, M. 436, 439, 517, 522
Hammersley, M. and Atkinson, P. 276, 436
Handbook (International Phonetic Association)
113
Haneda, M. 322, 323
Hanks, P. 57, 62
Hanks, P. and Pustejovsky, J. 57
Hanks, William 309
Hanna, B.E. and de Nooy, J. 204, 209
Hansen, L. et al. 578
Hansen-Thomas, H. 417
Hardcastle, W.J. et al. 589
Hardin, C.L. and Mafﬁ, L. 586
Harmer, J. 190
Harnad, S. 657
Harper, C. 390
Harrington, K. et al. 340
Harris, M. 366
Harris, R. xiii, 5, 344–58, 516, 520
Harris, R. and Rampton, B. 346, 347, 348, 355
Harris, R. et al. 355, 356
Harris, S. 71, 145
Harris, Z. 432, 654, 655
Hart, C. and Lukeš, D. 450
Harvey, D. 415, 419
Harvey, K.J. et al. 102, 103
Harwood, J. 133
Harwood, N. xiii, 4, 243–58
Harwood, N. and Hadley, G. 247
Hasan, R. 69
Hasselgren, A. 267
Hatch, E. 289, 433
Hatim, B. and Mason, I. 41
Hauck, M. and Stickler, U. 206
Haugen, E. 12, 13
Haviland, J. 415
Hawkins, J. 558
Hawkins, J.A. and Buttery, P. 266
Hawkins, M. and Norton, B. 325
Hawkins, R. 173, 648
Hawkins, R. and Chan, C.Y. 648, 649
Hawkins, R. and Hattori, H. 649
Haworth, K. 144
Haycraft, J. 215
Hayes, J.R. and Flower, L.S. 478
Haynes, 577
Haznedar, B. and Gavruseva, E. 179, 180
Hazneder, D. and Schwartz, B.D. 640, 649
He, A.W. xiii, 4, 175, 202, 287–302
He, A.W. and Xiao, Y. 291
Headway Intermediate (Soars, J. and Soars, L.)
189
health, migration and language 421–22
hearing and deaf communities, encounters
between 363
Heath, C. 85
Heath, C. and vom Lehn, D. 89, 91
Heath, S.B. 288, 521, 530, 531, 532
Index
698

Heath, S.B. and Street, B.V. 522
Heffer, C. 145, 147
Hegel, G.W.F. 488
hegemony, linguistic imperialism and 389
Heller, M. 15, 17, 20, 88, 89, 319, 321, 355,
356, 407, 413, 518
Heller, M. and Martin-Jones, M. 391, 407, 518
Hellermann, J. 175
Henderson, A. 590
Herdina, P. and Jessner, U. 126, 407
Heritage, J. 73, 76, 435
Heritage, J. and Maynard, D.W. 84, 88, 102
Heritage, J. and Seﬁ, S.W. 85
Heritage, J. and Stivers, T. 97
Heritage, J. et al. 102, 104, 105
heritage speakers 161
Herman, R. and Roy, P. 367
Herman, V. 545, 546, 548
Hermans, T. 41
Herring, S.C. 201, 203, 204, 438
Hervey, S. and Higgins, I. 40
Heugh, K. 233
Hewings, M. and Nickerson, C. 28
Heydon, G. 85, 144
Hickey, L. 545
Hidalgo Tenorio, E. 455
Hillegas, M.B. 259
Hindmarsh, J. et al. 89, 91
Hinkel, E. 249
Hinton, Leanne 16
Hintzman, D.L. 482
historical corpora 598
historical dictionaries 54
historical-structural approach to LPP 14
historicity, culture as portable 309
Hitchcock, A. 677, 678
Ho, M.L. and Platt, J. 377
Hobbs, P. 141, 147
Hobsbawm, Eric J. 229, 230
Hobson, A.J. et al. 221
Hockett, C.F. 503
Hodge, R. 69, 634
Hodson, S. and Jardine, B. 115
Hoey, M. 58, 656
Hoffman, D. 675
Hogan-Brun, G. and Wolff, S. 232
Holec, H. 187
Holland, J.H. 660, 661
Holland, V.M. and Fisher, F.P. 201
Holliday, A. 161, 193
Holmberg, B. et al. 206
Holmes, J. 250, 332, 335, 337, 338, 340, 341
Holmes, J. and Meyerhoff, M. 337, 338
homonymy 573
Hoover, D.L. 547
Hopper, P.J. 491, 492, 656, 660
Hopper, R. and Drummond, K. 73
Horace 40
Horkheimer, M. 446
Hornberger, H. and Chick, J.K. 518, 519
Hornberger, N.H. 525, 526
Hornberger, N.H. and Corson, D. 233
Hornby, A.S. 54, 56, 188
Hornby, A.S. et al. 56
Horner, B. and Trimbur, J. 390
Horst, M. et al. 577
Horton, D. and Wohl, R.R. 67, 68
Hosoda, Y. 438
hospital consultations 99–100
Hotopf, W.N. 478
Houck, C.L. 507
House, J. 40, 47, 394, 396
House, J. et al. 307
Houston, Whitney 76
Howard, R. and Brown, G. 252
Howard, S.J. xiii–xiv, 3, 111–23
Howard, S.J. and Heselwood, B.C. 115
Howatt, A.P.R. and Widdowson, H.G. 215, 348
Hsu, J. et al. 102
Hu, A. 307, 308
Hu, M. and Nation, I.S.P. 576
Hubbard, P. and Siskin, C.B, 201
Hubbell, A.F. 503
Huber, M. 376
Huber, M. and Dako, K. 379
Huddleston, R. and Pullum, G. 565
Huebner, T. 408
Hufeisen, B. and Prokop, M. 307
Hull, G. 89, 520
Hull, G. and Nelson, M. 533, 536
Hull, G. and Schultz, K. 533, 534
Hulstijn, J. 577
humanist approaches 187–88
Humboldt, Wilhelm von 305
Hume, David 472
Humphris, G.M. and Kaney, S. 104
Hung, E. and Wakabayashi, J. 49
Hunston, S. 605
Hunt, M. et al. 217
Hussein, Violet 140
Hutchby, I. 72, 73, 205
Hutchby, I. and Woofﬁtt, R. 72, 73, 435
Hutchinson, J. and Smith, A.D. 345
Hutchinson, T. and Waters, A. 244, 246
Hyams, N. 646
Hyams, N. and Wexler, K. 646
Hyland, K. 28, 243, 246, 247, 248, 250, 252–53
Hyland, K. and Anan, E. 218
Hyland, K. and Milton, J. 249
Hyland, K. and Tse, P. 250
Hyltenstamm, K. and Stroud, C. 127
Hymes, D. 157, 188, 436, 515, 516, 517
Hymes, D. and Gumperz, J. 309
Hymes, inﬂuence of 517
Index
699

Ibrahim, A.E.K.M. 320, 395
IC (Intercultural Communication) 307–8
ICE (International Corpus of English) 598
ICLA (International Cognitive Linguistics
Association) 611
ICLE (International Corpus of Learner
English) 60, 599
ICPLA (International Clinical Phonetics and
Linguistics Association) 113
idealized cognitive models 613
ideational metafunctions in SFL 628
identity 318–27; categories, multimodality and
expression of 671; categories of 320–21;
concept of 20–21; cultural identity 318;
debates 322–24, 326; feminist post-
structuralist theories of language 319–20;
gender and language, intersection between
320; history 318–19, 326; imagined
communities and 323–24; investment and
322–23; issues 319–21, 326; Journal of Asian
Paciﬁc Communication 322; Journal of
Language, Identity, and Education 319, 323;
language and ageing 130–31; Language and
Education 318–19; language teaching and
321; Linguistics and Education 318–19;
neighbourhood language and 324; post-
structuralist theories of language 319;
resistance and 324; separate identity for
discourse analysis 432, 440; sexual
orientation 320; SLA (second Language
Acquisition) 318; social change and
categories of 320–21; social identity 318;
structuralist theories of language 319;
technology 325–26; TESOL Quarterly
318–19, 320–21, 325; theories of language
319–20
ideology: importance in media discourse 67,
68; language practices, ideological basis of
16–17; linguistic imperialism and 389;
literacy, ideological consequences of 535;
and power in shaping behaviour 42
Idiomatic and Syntactic English Dictionary
(Hornby, A.S. et al.) 56
Iedema, R. 84, 87, 102, 633, 635
Iedema, R. and Scheeres, H. 89
Iedema, R. and Wodak, R. 89
IELTS (International English Language
Testing System) 264, 265, 266
Ihalainen, O. 374
ILA (International Language Assessment) 268
I-language (competence) 640
ILTA (International Association of Language
Testers) 262
ILTS (Industrial Language Training Service)
520
imagined communities, identity and 323–24
immersion models 233–34
immigration 19, 126–27, 234–35; see also
migration and language
incidental vocabulary learning 577–78
indexicality, notion of 288–89
Indian linguistics 571
indirect vocabulary instruction 577
individual differences research 178
Indo-European languages, sound systems of
587
inert knowledge, problem of 158
information: globalized information society
46–49; information-gap 188–89;
information-processing 277–78; information
society, translating, interpreting and 46–49;
precise information transfer 575;
presentation by expert witnesses 141; social
information, indexing of 512; syntactic
information, representation of 53–54
Inghilleri, M. 43, 46, 421
Ingram, D. 115
innatism 159
institutional discourse 81–92; analytic
frameworks 87–89; authority and 83, 85;
bilingual call work 90; CA (Conversation
Analysis) 82, 88; CDA (Critical Discourse
Analysis) 88–89; classiﬁcation 87; coding 87;
developments 89–92; discourse analysis
88–89; early theories 81–83; educational
counselling 86; equality, simulation of 85;
ethnographic studies 88; euphemised talk 85;
evidence-based practice 82; gatekeeping
86–87; global mobility 89; globalisation and
91; globalized work practices and 89, 90, 91,
92; goal-oriented encounters 85–86; idea of,
development of 81–84; institutional
interaction 82–83; institutional process,
notion of 82; institutional settings 83–84; IS
(Interactional Sociolonguistics) 88; job
interviews 90–91; labelling 86–87; linguistic
ethnography 88; major themes 84–87;
market economy discourses 84|;
methodologies 87–89; migration and 91;
multilingual practices 90; The Order of
Discourse (Foucault, M.) 82; organisation
discourse analysis 83; politics of
representation 87; postmodernity 89; power
and abstract forms of 87; power and
asymmetry 84–85; professional settings
83–84; realization of 92; social order 81–82;
socio-cultural order, language and 86–87;
sociolinguistics 88; technical jargon 87;
technological innovation 89, 91; total
institutions 83; truth, knowledge and 82;
work, changes in nature of 89–90
intentional vocabulary learning 577–78
inter-speaker difference, patterns of 503–4
interaction hypothesis 278
Index
700

interactional sociolinguistics 502
interactional studies in gender 333
interactions within multilingualism 402–3
intercultural competence, development of
207–8
intercultural learning, criticism of 310
intercultural variables in business
communication 35
interdisciplinarity: business communication
28–29, 30, 32, 34–35; language policy and
planning (LPP) 17
interdiscursivity 34, 35
Interface Hypothesis 648
interlanguage 172–73
Internet: language and culture 309;
lexicography 59; linguistic imperialism
395–96
interpersonal realizations in SFL 629
Interpretability Hypothesis 648
interpretation: CDA (Critical Discourse
Analysis) 454; interpretive history in
phonetics 587–89; latitude for, limits on
42–43, 44; sign languages 368–69; see also
translating and interpreting
intertextuality: business communication 34, 35;
media discourse 76
interventionist activism 48–49
intrinsic diversity 660
introspection 13–15
invariant tags 378–79
Investigating English Style (Crystal, D. and
Davy, D.) 542–43
investment and identity 322–23
Ionin, T. et al. 649
IPA (International Phonetic Alphabet) 113
IRAL (International Review of Applied
Linguistics) 32
Irigaray, L. 124
Irvine, J.T. and Gal, S. 16, 417
IS (Interactional Sociolonguistics) 88
island constraints 559
Ivanicˇ, R. 536
Ivanicˇ, R. et al. 524
Jackendoff, R. 574
Jackson, B. 147
Jackson, J. 252
Jackson, J.H. 461, 462
Jackson, M.H. 26
Jacobson, W.H. 27
Jacquemet, M. 42, 43, 46
Jaffe, A. 45, 518
Jakobson, R. 112, 113, 544, 626
Jakobson, R. and Lévi-Strauss, C. 544
James, Henry 548
Jameson, F. and Miyoshi, M. 395
Janks, H. 319
Jannedy, S. and Hay, J. 589
Jaquith, P. 269
Jarvis, J. and Robinson, M. 195
Jarvis, S. and Pavlenko, A. 177, 180
Jauregi, K. and Bañados, E. 208
Jefferson, G. 72, 74
Jenkins, J. 166, 374, 376, 382, 396
Jerome 40
Jespersen, O. 186, 347, 565
Jessner, U. 404
Jewitt, C. 89, 669, 670
Jewitt, C. and Kress, G. 206
Jiang, N. and Nekrasova, T.M. 575
job interviews 90–91
Johns, A.M. 247
Johns, A.M. and Snow, M.A. 243
Johns, A.M. et al. 247
Johnson, A. 144, 190, 195
Johnson, D. 511
Johnson, F.L. 438
Johnson, K. 276, 566
Johnson, K. and Johnson, H. 344
Johnson, K. and Mullenix, J.W. 479
Johnson, K.E. 216, 218, 219, 221
Johnson, K.E. and Golombek, P.R. 216
Johnson, R.E. 362
Johnson, Samuel 53, 58, 61
Johnson’s Dictionary of the English Language
53, 61
Johnston, B. 247
Johnstone, B. 432
Johnstone, B. and Bean, M. 510
Johnstone, B. et al. 510
Joiner, Judge 353
joint problemtization 15–16, 21
Jones, J.F. 221
Jones, M. and Haywood, S. 251
Jones, M. and Llamas, C. 511
Jones, R.H. 205, 669
Jones, William 46
Jönsson, L. and Linell, P. 142
Jordan, R.R. 244, 246
Journal of Asian Paciﬁc Communication 322
Journal of English for Academic Purposes 243
Journal of Language, Identity, and Education
319, 323
Jucker, A. 71
Jung, E.H. 251
Jurafsky, D. 658
Jurafsky, D. and Martin, J.H. 658
Just, M. and Carpenter, P.A. 585
Kabanova, O.Ya. 495
Kabilan, M.K. 220
Kachru, B. 351, 373, 374, 376, 377, 379, 381,
384, 390, 391
Kahane, E. 43
Index
701

Kalantzis, M. 669
Kalantzis, M. and Cope, B. 409
Kamada, L. 341
Kamberelis, G. 520
Kanagy, R. 288
Kane, M.T. 261
Kang, J.-H. 44
Kanno, Y. 319, 323
Kanno, Y. and Norton, B. 323, 422
Kanoksilapatham, B. 247
Kantarcioglu, E. et al. 270
Kaplan, R.B. 344
Kaptchuk, T.J. et al. 99
Kaptelinin, V. and Nardi, B. 495
Karmiloff-Smith, A. 117
Karmiloff-Smith, A. et al. 117
Kasper, G. 289
Kavé, G. et al. 129
Kay, P. 611
Kay, P. et al. 463
Keating, C. 420, 421
Kegl, J.A. et al. 360
Keijzer, M. 127
Kell, C. 536
Kellogg, R.T. 478
Kelly, F.J. 259
Kelly, L.G. 191, 200
Kelly, M. and Grenfell, M. 217
Kemper, S. and Harden, T. 131
Kemper, S. et al. 127, 131
Kendon, A. 363
Kendrick, M. et al. 321
Kennedy, J.F. 668
Kent, R. 113, 115
Kenworthy, J. 590
Kern, R. xiv, 4, 166, 200–214
Kern, R. et al. 206, 308
Kerswill, P. 508
Khalifa, H. et al. 267
KhosraviNik, M. 418
Kiesling, S. 336
Kiesling, S.F. and Bratt Paulston, C. 307
Kilgarriff, A. 57, 60
Kilgarriff, A. and Grefenstette, G. 61, 606
Kilgarriff, A. et al. 59
kindergarten classroom 292–93
King, A.D. 395
King, B. 320
Kinginger, C. 177, 207, 492–94
Kiran, S. et al. 466
Kirkpatrick, A. xiv, 373–87
Kirkpatrick, A. and Deterding, D. 5, 166, 568
Kirmayer, L.J. and Robbins, J.M. 101
Kirmayer, L.J. and Young, A. 100
Kisch, S. 363
Kitzinger, C. 338
Kleifgen, J. 89
Klein, W. and Dimroth, C. 239
Kloss, H. 12
Kniffka, H. 140
Knight, D. et al. 607
knowledge: inert knowledge, problem of 158;
integrated base for LTE 218–19; language,
knowledge about 219–20; language
knowledge, socialization and 289–90; learners’
behaviour (and knowledge) 650–51; memory
and nature of 474–75; nature of 474–75;
textbook knowledge 194; transmission in
language learning 162; truth, knowledge and
institutional discourse 82; vocabulary
knowledge and testing methods 576
Knox, J. 671
Koch, C. 658
Koller, V. 450
Koller, V. and Davidson, P. 455
Komter, M. 91, 144
Korthagen, F.A.J. 220
Kortmann, B. et al. 375
Koskinen, K. 42, 44
Kövecses, Z. and Radden, G. 618
Kraljic, T. et al. 509
Kramer, A. et al. 127, 128, 132
Kramsch, C. xiv, 4, 5, 156, 161, 195, 202, 261,
281, 289, 297, 305–17, 318–19, 437, 495,
516, 658
Kramsch, C. and Andersen, R. 308
Kramsch, C. and Boner, E. 312
Kramsch, C. and Lam, W.S.E. 394
Kramsch, C. and Sullivan, P. 193
Kramsch, C. and Thorne, S. 204, 207, 325
Kramsch, C. and Whiteside, A. 309, 437
Krashen, S.D. 159, 173, 174, 189, 566
Krashen, S.D. and Seliger, H. 191, 192
Krashen, S.D. and Terrell, T.D. 187
Krebs, Emil 130
Krentz, C. 364
Kress, G. 252, 438, 634, 669, 670
Kress, G. and Hodge, R. 448
Kress, G. and Street, B. 409
Kress, G. and Van Leeuwen, T. 438, 450, 633,
634, 635, 671, 673, 674, 675, 676
Kress, G. et al. 524, 675
Krishnamurthy, R. 455
Kristeva, J. 434
Kroeber, Alfred 515
Kroll, J.F. and Stewart, E. 578, 579
Kroll, J.F. and Sunderman, G. 581
Krüger-Potratz, M. 232
Krumm, H.-J. 307
Kubota, R. 320
Kubota, R. and Lin, A. 320
Kuhl, P.K. 658
Kulick, D. and Schieffelin, B.B. 290
Kumaravadivelu, B. 162, 185, 194, 280, 325, 567
Index
702

Kurtz, S. et al. 104
Kusters, A. 363
Kwang, S.Y. et al. 223
KWIC (Key Word in Context) 58–59, 602, 603
Kymlicka, W. 18
Kymlicka, W. and Patten, A. 17
labelling 86–87
Labov, W. 139, 188, 332, 353, 502, 503, 504,
505, 507, 510, 512, 612
Ladd, D.R. 591
Ladefoged, P. 585
Ladefoged, P. and Maddieson, I. 589
LADs (Language Acquisition Devices) 159,
588
Lafford, B. 162
Lakoff, G. 17, 307, 450, 491, 611, 615, 618,
657
Lakoff, G. and Johnson, M. 450, 548, 618
Lakoff, R. 141, 146, 331, 333, 341
Lam, W.S.E. 204, 325, 396, 423, 533, 534, 536
Lam, W.S.E. and Kramsch, C. 202
Lam, W.S.E. and Rosario-Ramos, E. 534
Lamb, L. and Wilcox, P. 368
Lambert, W.E. 508
Lambrou, M. and Stockwell, P. 548
Lamy, M.-N. and Hampel, R. 205, 206
Lancaster-Oslo/Bergen Corpus 598
Landauer, T.K. et al. 268
Lane, H. 367
Lane, H. et al. 368
Langacker, R.W. 156, 560, 611, 616, 619, 621
Le langage des déments (Irigaray, L.) 124
language: across the curriculum 275; change,
sociolinguistics and 508–9; development,
sociocultural and cultural-historical theories
of 487–97; and expertise in forensic
linguistics 139–42; foregrounding of facts
about 638; functions and loss, simulation of
464–65; knowledge, socialization and
289–90; knowledge about, LTE and 219–20;
language ecology 436–37; language ideology
416–17; language learning and education
155–59; language-related decision-making
501; and law in forensic linguistics 139;
maintenance programmes 235; and
migration studies, development of ﬁeld 414;
nature of 191, 192; neurolinguistics and
465–68; planning in multilingualism 406;
planning in sociolinguistics 501; in police
custody 145; and power, intersection of
231–32; practical description of 587–88;
processing in multilinguals 405; rights,
challenge of 18–19; sociocultural and
cultural-historical theories of language
development 490–92; storage and retrieval
474–76; therapy sociolinguistics and 501; use
of, descriptions of 252; use of, effects on
health outcomes 103–4, 106; use of,
variation in 502
Language, Society and the Elderly (Coupland,
N. et al.) 131
language and culture 305–14; applied linguistic
practice 311–13; applied linguistic research
309–11; applied linguistics, culture and 306;
CA (Conversation Analysis) 306–7;
computer technology and 308; cross-cultural
pragmatics 307, 314; cultural bias in
language tests 310; debates 313–14;
developmental bilingualism 311; discourse,
construction of culture through (2000–
present) 309, 314; discourse analysis 306;
English Language Institute, University of
Michigan 245, 305; ethnic prejudice 310–11;
everyday life, culture of (1970s-1990s) 306–8;
expectations of applied linguistics 310;
Facebook 309; historical perspective 305–9;
historicity, culture as portable 309; IC
(Intercultural Communication) 307–8;
intercultural learning, criticism of 310;
Internet 309; issues 309–13; local and global,
clash between 309; poststructural thought
311; practice, debates and future for 313–14;
pragmatics 307; public life 312; real-world
problems 311; research future 313;
Sapir-Whorf hypothesis 305; School of
Applied Linguistics, University of
Edinburgh 305; Second Life 309; separate
areas of enquiry (pre-1970s) 305–6; SLA
(Second Language Acquisition) 305;
Sprachlehr-und lernforschung 307;
structuralist and post-structuralist views 313;
subjectivity, culture as portable 309;
technology, role of 312–13; Twitter 309;
virtual worlds 309; Zeitschrift für
interkulturellen Fremdsprachenunterricht
307–8
Language and Education 318–19
Language and Literature 549
Language and Woman’s Place (Lakoff, R.) 331
language as complex adaptive system,
emergence of 654–63; adaptation through
ampliﬁcation 661; associative learning
theory 657; attention, psychological analyses
of 657; change, local nature of 661–62;
characteristics of language as CAS 660–62;
child language acquisition 657; cognitive
theories 657–58; collective emergence 660;
competition model 658; competition of
factors, adaptation through 661; complexity
theory 659–60; connectionist analyses 658;
consciousness, scientiﬁc study of 658–59;
construction grammar 656–57; corpus
linguistic analyses 656; dependence on
Index
703

network structure 661; distributed control
660; dynamic structure 662–63; emergentism
659–60; frequency-based theories 658;
functional analyses 656; history 654–55;
intrinsic diversity 660; learning theory 657;
mysteries of emergence 659–60; network
structure 661; nonlinearity 661; perception,
psychological analyses of 657; perpetual
dynamics 660–61; perspectives on 655–59;
phrase translations 661; phraseological
analyses 656–57; probablistic theories 658;
psycholinguistic theories 657; rational analyses
658; Saussure’s analysis of linguistic signs
662–63; sensitivity to network structure 661;
sociocultural theory 658; Thinking and
Speaking (Vygotsky, L.) 662; usage-based
theories of language acquisition 656; Vygotsky’s
emphasis on process and content 662–63
Language as Social Semiotic (Halliday, M.A.K.)
625, 626
language corpora: corpus linguistics 607–8;
stylistics and 543–44
language learning and education 155–68;
analytical form 158; behaviourism 159;
cognitive learning 161–62; complexity theory
160; constructivism 162; context, role in
language education 156, 164–65, 167–68;
culture 155–59; disjointed perspective on
language education 163; empowerment and
language 158–59; functional view of
language 157–58; generalisation 161;
grammatical form 158; heritage speakers
161; historical perspective 155–65; inert
knowledge, problem of 158; innatism 159;
knowledge transmission 162; LADs
(Language Acquisition Devices) 159;
language 155–59; language education
160–61; learners 159–62; learners and
language 164, 167; learning and language
159–62, 163–64, 167; native language 160;
political pressures, context and 165;
rule-governed discrete combinatory system,
language as 157; SLA (Second Language
Acquisition) 161; social enterprise, learning
as 161–62; social fact, language as 157;
socioculturalism 162; teachers and 161–63;
teaching and language 161–63, 164, 167;
technology 166–67; ZPD (Zone of Proximal
Development) 162
Language Policy and Planning (LPP) 11–21;
academic concerns and political interests,
dynamic interplay between 11, 21;
challenges for 17–20, 21; codiﬁcation 13;
community, concept of 20–21; community
goals 16; critical orientation, absence of 13;
development of 11, 12–13; discourse
planning 17; elaboration 13; ethnicity,
traditional notions of 19; future of 20–21;
global migration, challenge of 19;
historical-structural approach 14; history 11,
12–17; identity, concept of 20–21;
ideological basis of language practices
16–17; implementation 13; inter-ethnic
tensions 12; interdisciplinarity 17;
introspection 13–15; invention and naming
of new objects 20; joint problemtization
15–16, 21; language rights, challenge of
18–19; master-apprentice programme 16;
monolingualism, effect of ideology of 19–20;
multiculturalism, challenge of 18–19; nation-
states and 12–13; neoclassical approach
14–15; policy-makers, need for engagement
with 21; practice, concept of 20–21; public,
need for engagement with 21; rational model
12; renewal of 15–17; scientiﬁc objectivity
15; selection 13; sociolinguistic surveys 13;
status and corpus planning, distinction
between 12; strategic orientation, need for
21; Survey of India (Grierson, G.A.) 20;
variability, context and 16–17
language socialization 287–99; acquisition
research 290–91; affective disposition
288–89; applied linguistics and 289–91;
central concerns 287–88; Chinese language
school 293–94; CHL (Chinese as a Heritage
Language) 292–98; Confucian teachings
289; context and culture, relationship to
language 290; cultural and language
development, symbiosis of 287, 290, 298;
cultural systems of understanding, meaning
and 290; dinner table interaction (6th grade)
294–95; evidence of learning 290–91; formal
aspects 291; functional aspects 291;
grammatical abbreviations 299; growth
avenues 291; high school (others’
perceptions) 295; indexicality, notion of
288–89; kindergarten classroom 292–93;
language knowledge 289–90; linguistic
anthropology and 287; linguistic forms,
acquisition of 290; modal expressions,
acquisition of 290–91; research tradition
287; social identity 288–89; teachers,
communicative practices of 289;
temporal-spatial speciﬁcation 292–98;
university interaction 295–97
Language Teacher Education (LTE) 215–24;
applied linguistics, emergence of 215;
cross-sector links, enhancement of 222; EAL
(English as an Additional Language) 217;
EFL (English as a Foreign Language) 215;
empirical base, strengthening of 222–23;
ETUCE (European Trade Union Committee
for Education) 223; expertise of teachers
222; historical perspective 215–17; integrated
Index
704

knowledge base for 219; issues 218–21;
knowledge base for 218–19; language,
knowledge about 219–20; Language
Teaching Research 223; literature 216–17,
218, 223; MFL (Modern Foreign
Languages) 216; Modern Language Journal
215; novice teachers 222; OECD
(Organization for Economic Cooperation
and Development) 223; practicum in LTE
settings 220–21; qualitative and quantitative
research, need for systematic programmes of
223; reﬂective practice 220; research 217,
223–24; TALIS (Teaching and Learning
International Survey) 223; teacher cognition
218; teacher educator development 222;
teacher research 221; TESOL (Teaching
English to Speakers of Other Languages)
215, 217, 218, 223; TLA (Teacher Language
Awareness) 219; websites 228
language teaching: cognitive linguistics and
621–22; identity and 321
Language Teaching Research 223
language testing 259–71; assessment literacy
265–66; assessment practice 267–68; British
National Corpus (BNC) 268; Cambridge
ESOL 215, 217, 261, 265–66, 267; CEFR
(Common European Framework Reference
for Languages) 265, 266, 270; Compleat
Lexical Tutor (Cobb, T.) 268–69;
corpus-based research 267; debates 265–68,
270; dynamic assessment 265; EALTA
(European Association for Language Testing
and Assessment) 262; EPP (English Proﬁle
Project) 266; fragmentation 264–65, 270;
future prospects 269–70; historical
perspective 259–60; IELTS (International
English Language Testing System) 264, 265,
266; ILA (International Language
Assessment) 268; ILTA (International
Association of Language Testers) 262; issues
260–65, 270; localisation 262, 264; LSA
(Latent Semantic Analysis) 268; paired
format 267–68; PEG (Project Essay Grader)
268; The Practical Study of Languages
(Sweet, H.) 259; professionalisation 262,
270; QCDA (Qualiﬁcations and Curriculum
Development Agency) 265; technical aspects
266–67; technology 268–70; test delivery
269; test design 268; test development
268–69; test validation 260–62, 263; TOEFL
(Test for English as a Foreign Language)
260, 264; TOEIC (Test of English for
International Communication) 266; UCLES
(University of Cambridge Local
Examinations Syndicate) 259–60; validation
framework 263; validity, nature of 260, 261;
Weir’s socio-cognitive framework 261–62
Languages at War Project 46
Lantolf, J.P. 162, 174, 190, 219, 278, 281, 289,
490, 495
Lantolf, J.P. and Appel, G. 278, 279
Lantolf, J.P. and Pavlenko, A. 658
Lantolf, J.P. and Poehner, M.E. 494
Lantolf, J.P. and Thorne, S.L. 174, 180, 289,
308, 489, 491–92, 658
Lardiere, D. 649
Larkin, Philip 547
Larsen-Freeman, D. xiv, 4, 126, 155–70, 172,
174, 190, 194, 564, 659
Larsen-Freeman, D. and Cameron, L. 126,
160, 178, 181, 309, 659
Larsen-Freeman, D. and Freeman, D. 158
Larsen-Freeman, D. and Long, M.H. 173, 174,
646
Larson, M. 40
LARSP (Language Assessment, Remediation
and Screening Procedure) 112
laryngography 114–15
Lasnik, H. 641
Lassen, I. et al. 450
Latour, B. 203
Laufer, B. 61, 576
Lave, J. and Wenger, E. 279, 280, 282, 323
Laver, J. 585
Laviosa, S. 41
law: activities sanctioned by 138–39; language
and everyday life 138; legal language and
138
Lazar, M. 450
Leander, K. and Sheehy, M. 535
learner corpora: corpus linguistics 598; English
for Academic Purposes (EAP) 249
learners: behaviour (and knowledge) of
650–51; dictionaries, advent of 54–57; and
language 164, 167; language learning and
education 159–62
learning: distance learning 206; and language
163–64, 167; language learning and
education 159–62; learning theory 657;
resources, textbooks and 670; sign language
as a ﬁrst language 366; sign language as a
second language 368
Leckie-Tarry, H. 69
Lee, D. and Swales, J.M. 250
Lee, E. 321
Leech, G.N. 545, 547
Leech, G.N. and Short, M.H. 541, 545, 546,
547
Leibniz, G.W. 561
Leki, I. 252
Lemke, J. 94, 309, 634, 635
Lenneberg, E. 160
Leonard, L.B. 116
Leont’ev, A.N. 279, 487–88
Index
705

L’Epée, Abbé de 365
Lesser, R. 69
Leung, C. et al. 355
Levelt, W.J.M. 475, 477, 478
Levi, J. 139
Lévi-Strauss, P. 305, 306
Levine, P. and Scollon, R. 669
Levinson, B. 675
Levinson, C. 43
Levinson, S. 85, 86, 491
Lewis, M. 189
lexemes 573
lexical approaches to grammar 558, 561, 565,
571
lexical bundles 250–51
lexical characteristics of words 573–74
lexical complexity 147
lexical semantics 466–67
lexical sets (and items and units) 573
lexicalization 617
lexicography 53–64; bilingual dictionaries
62–63; Cambridge International Dictionary
of English (Proctor, P.) 63; COBUILD
(Collins Birmingham University
International Language Database) 58, 59,
62; collocation 55, 57, 58, 59, 60, 62;
computational linguistics 59; corpus
linguistics and 58–61, 64; deﬁnitions 61–62;
dictionaries 53, 55–57; examples, role of 61;
Grammar of Contemporary English (Quirk,
R. et al.) 56; Grammar of English Words
(Palmer, H.) 56; grammars, combining with
dictionaries 55–57; historical dictionaries 54;
ICLE (International Corpus of Learner
English) 60; Idiomatic and Syntactic English
Dictionary (Hornby, A.S. et al.) 56; Internet
and 59; Johnson’s Dictionary of the English
Language 53, 61; KWIC (Key-Word In
Context) 58–59; learners’ dictionaries,
advent of 54–57; Longman Dictionary of
Contemporary English (LDOCE) 55, 56, 57,
64; Longman Language Activator 64;
lumping vs splitting 57–58;
machine-readable dictionaries 64;
MacMillan English Dictionary for Advanced
Learners (MEDAL) 55, 59, 60; MacMillan
Thesaurus 64; Murray’s Oxford English
Dictionary (OED) 54, 61; New Method
English Dictionary (West, M.P. and
Endicott, J.G.) 54; NLP (Natural Language
Processing) 64; oversimpliﬁcation 57–58;
Oxford Advanced Learners’ Dictionary
(Hornby, A.S.) 56; practical lexicography 53;
syntactic information, representation of
53–54; A Table Alphabetical (Cawdrey, R.)
53; theoretical lexicography 53;
Thousand-Word English (Palmer, H. and
Hornby, A.S.) 54; vocabulary control
movement 54–55; Word Routes (Cambridge
University Press) 64; word sketches 59–60;
WordNet 64
Lexicon 641–42
lexis 571–81; American Sign Language 572;
bilingual mental lexicon, development of
578–79; Categories (Aristotle) 571; critical
discussion 575–81; direct vocabulary
instruction 577; discourse organisation 575;
English Lexican Project 573; formal
properties of words 572; formulaic language
574–75; frequency 573–74; functional use
574; history 571–72; homonymy 573;
incidental and intentional vocabulary
learning 577–78; Indian linguistics 571;
indirect vocabulary instruction 577; issues
575–81; key concepts 572–75, 581; lexemes
573; lexical characteristics of words 573–74;
lexical items 573; lexical sets 573; lexical
units 573; mental lexicon, words and 572;
modern linguistics 571–72; phatic
communion 574; polysemy 573; precise
information transfer 575; psycholinguistics
475–76; receptive-productive distinction 576;
regional variations 575; revised hierarchical
model (RHM) 579–11; Rhetoric (Aristotle)
571; second language (L2) learning 575–79;
semantic ﬁelds 573; semantic properties of
words 572–73; social interaction 574;
technical vocabulary 575; vocabulary
attrition 578; vocabulary knowledge and
testing methods (L2) 576; vocabulary
learning and instruction (L2) 576;
vocabulary size and comprehension (L2)
576; word-based determinants of learnability
577; words 572
Li, D. 161
Li, J. and Schmitt, N. 250
Li, Wei 289, 403–4
Li, Y. and Flowerdew, J. 251
Lichtheim, Ludwig 461
Liddicoat, A.J. 435
Lieberman, P. 463
Liebscher, G. and Dailey-O’Cain, J. 419
Lieven, E. and Tomasello, M. 620
life-span developmental psychology 124–25
life worlds, literacy worlds and 534
Lightbown, P. 278
Lightbown, P.M. and Spada, N. 179
Lillis, T. 521, 523
Lillis, T. and Curry, M.J. 251
Lillis, T. and Scott, M. 252
Limerick Corpus of Irish English (LCIE)
600–601
Lin, A. and Martin, P. 325
Lin, P.M.S. xiv, 597–610
Index
706

Lin, P.M.S. and Adolphs, S. 606
Lindemann, S. and Mauranen, A. 251
Lindstrom, H.A. et al. 133
linear ordering 638
Linell, P. 34, 587
Linell, P. and Thunquist, D. 91
linguicism 390–91
linguistic accommodation 394
linguistic analysis: as diagnostic resource 101;
stylistics 544–45
linguistic anthropology: language socialization
and 287; linguistic ethnography and 515–17
linguistic behaviour, methods for study of 465
linguistic competence 611
linguistic diversity 100–101
linguistic emphasis of SLA 173–74
linguistic ethnography 515–25; anthropological
perspectives 520; contexts of situation 516,
517; debates 524; digital research 523;
disciplinary framework, anthropology and
517; discourse analysis 436–37; in
educational settings 518–20; emerging areas
of focus 523–24; ethnography in context of
517; ethnography of speaking 516; focus,
areas of 518–21, 523–24; focus, role on
researcher 522–23; history 515–18; Hymes,
inﬂuence of 517; Industrial Language
Training Service (ILTS) 520; institutional
discourse 88; linguistic anthropology
515–17; multi-user domains (MUDs) 523; in
multilingual settings 520; multimodality
research 523–24; negative stereotypes 520;
new literacy studies 521; online research 523;
productive tensions 521–23; realist and
constructivist epistemologies 521–22; social
constructionism, inﬂuence of 516; theoretical
directions, inﬂuences on 518; United
Kingdom context 517–18; virtual literacy
ethnography 523; in workplace and
community 520
linguistic features: examples of 375–81; general
trends in 380–81
linguistic forms, acquisition of 290
linguistic identiﬁcation 141
linguistic imperialism 388–98; ambiguities in
spread of English 392–93; appropriation
393–94; central constructs 389–92; debates,
controversies and 392–94; discourses 389;
ELF (English as a Lingua Franca) 396;
English, ambiguities and ironies in spread of
392–93; English, spread and decline of 397;
expanding circle 390; globalization from
below 396–97; hegemony 389; history
388–89; ideologies 389; inner circle 390;
Internet 395–96; ironies in spread of English
392–93; linguicism 390–91; linguistic
accommodation 394; linguistic resistance
393–94; monolingualism 392;
multilingualism 394; native speakerism 391;
outer circle 390; periphery, center and 390;
power, issues of 397–98; reproduction
orientation 393; resistance perspective 393;
spread and decline of English language 397;
transnational ﬂows 394–95
linguistic landscape, multilingualism and 408,
409
linguistic motivations 374–75
linguistic naivety 141–42
linguistic relativity 561
linguistic resistance 393–94
linguistic schools and multimodality 668–69
linguistic structure of signed languages 360–62
Linguistic Stylistics (Enkvist, N.E.) 542–43
linguistic variables in sociolinguistics 503,
507–8
Linguistics and Education 318–19
linguistics tradition in clinical linguistics 113, 121
Lipowski, Z.J. 101
Lippi-Green, R. 165
listening in psycholinguistics 478–79
literacy 529–38; advances in study of 531–32;
applied linguistics and 529; autonomous
approaches to 531–32; bias in phonetics and
phonology 590–91; biliterate composition
536; central role 537; ‘common sense’
assumptions in studies of 530; cultural
dimensions and 532; debates 532–35; digital
literacies 529, 536; dynamic inﬂuences on
processes and practices 529; The Future of
Literacy Studies (Baynham, M. and
Prinsloo, M.) 536; history 530–31;
ideological consequences of 535; issues
532–35; life worlds, literacy worlds and 534;
literacy events 532; literacy practices 532;
literate identities 534; literate society 530;
local contexts of practices 534; multilingual
literacies 529, 535; myths about 530–31; new
directions 535–36; New Literacy Studies
531–32; orality and 530, 537; out-of-school
and in-school literacies 533; real literacy bias
591, 592; social-cultural-historical-practice
perspective 533–34; transnationalism and
535; universalist approaches to 531–32
Literacy in the New Media Age (Kress, G.) 670
literary language see stylistics
literature: literate society 530; in LTE 216–17,
218, 223
Litosseliti, L. 450
Little, P. et al. 98, 102
Littlewood, W. 189
Livesey,S.M. 26, 27
Llamas, C. xiv, 6, 501–14
LLC (London-Lund Corpus of Spoken
English) 598
Index
707

Lo, A. 288, 290
Lo Bianco, J. 16, 17, 354, 407
Lo Bianco, J. and Wickert, R. 416–17
Lo Bianco, J. et al. 308
local and global, clash between 309
local contexts of practices 534
localisation: of language function 463; of
language testing 262, 264
Locke, John 472
Locker, K.O. 27
Loevinger, J. 260
logical sub-systems in SFL 628
logico-semantic relationships 676
Long, M. 158, 159, 177, 189, 277, 658
Long, M.H. and Doughty, C.J. 179, 180
Long, M.H. and Sato, C. 277
Long, M.L. 246
Longman Corpus Network 598
Longman Dictionary of Contemporary English
(LDOCE) 55, 56, 57, 64
Longman Language Activator 64
Lord, G. and Lomicka, L. 220
Lorente, B. 421
Lorey, C. et al. 307
Lott, P. 467
Louhiala-Salminen, L. 27, 34
Louw, B. 547, 603
Low, E.L. et al. 377
Low, S. and Lawrence-Zuñiga, D. 423
Lozanov, G. 187
LSA (Latent Semantic Analysis) 268
LTM (Long Term Memory) 474
Lucas, C. 365
Lucas, T. and Grinberg, J. 217
Luk, J.C.M. 221, 397
Luke, A. 531, 533, 535, 669
Luke, A. et al. 14
Lumley, T. 268
lumping vs splitting 57–58
Luntz, F. 312
Luria, A.R. 462, 465, 487–88, 492
Lytra, V. 520
McArthur, T. 373
Macaulay, R.K.S. 508
McCafferty, K. 374
McCafferty, S. 490
McCall, C. 90
McCarthy, M.J. 74, 267, 433, 492, 603
McCarthy, M.J. and Carter, R.A. 74, 574, 605
McCarthy, M.J. and Walter, E. 64
McCormick, D.E. and Donato, R. 195
McCormick, K. 418
Macdonald, M. 585
Macdonald, S. 590
McDonough, K. and Chaikitmongkol, W. 196
McElhinny, B. 145
McElhinny, B. and Mills, S. 337
McElhinny, B. et al. 418
McEnery, T. and Wilson, A. 656
McGinnis, T. et al. 423, 536
McGrath, J.M. et al. 102
Machin, D. 671
Machin, D. and Van Leeuwen, T. 671
machine-readable dictionaries 64
McIntyre, D. 547
Mackay, R. 549
McKay, S.L. and Wong, S.-L.C. 179, 322
McKee, D. and Kennedy, G. 365
McKee, R. 45
Mackey, W.F. 191
McKinney, C. and Van Pletzen, E. 324
McLaughlin, B. 173, 190
McMenamin, G. 140, 141
MacMillan English Dictionary for Advanced
Learners (MEDAL) 55, 59, 60
MacMillan Thesaurus 64
McNamara, T. 261, 267, 310
McNeill, D. 467
McQuail, D. 70
macrostrategies 194
MacWhinney, B. 113, 160, 658, 659
McWhorter, J. 558
Magnan, S. 409
Magusson, D. 125
Mahboob, A. and Ahmar, N.H. 376
Mahlberg, M. 547
Maier, C. 46
Makitalo, A. and Saljo, R. 91
Makoni, S. and Meinhof, U. 325
Makoni, S. and Pennycook, A. 18, 20
Malderez, A. and Wedell, M. 216, 222
Malinowski, Bronislaw 305, 517
Maltz, D. and Borker, R. 334, 335
Management Communication Quarterly 32
Mandela, Nelson 451
Mandler, J. 657
Maneva, B. 407
manual quantiﬁcation 547
Margalit, R.S. et al. 102
Markee, N. 276, 282, 289, 291, 325
market economy discourses 84
Markman, E.M. 483
Marslen-Wilson, W. and Tyler, L.K. 479
Martin, J.R. 439, 451, 627, 632, 633, 634
Martin, P.W. 396
Martin-Jones, M. 406, 408, 420
Martin-Jones, M. and Heller, M. 318
Martin-Jones, M. and Jones, K. 521, 534, 535
Martin-Jones, M. and Saxena, M. 519
Martin-Jones, M. et al. 531, 534
Martín-Martín, P. and Burgess, S. 248
Martinec, R. 675
Martinec, R. and Salway, A. 676, 677
Index
708

Martohardjono, G. 647, 648
Marton, F. and Tsui, A.B.M. 281
Marx, Karl 488
Maryns, K. 19, 87, 142, 415, 418
Marzocchi, C. 44
Maslow, Abraham 187
Mason, I. 43, 44
Mason, I. and Stewart, M. 43
Master, P. 251
master-apprentice programme in LPP 16
Matejka, L and Titunik, I.R. 669
Mathur, G. and Rathman, C. 367
Matoesian, G. 145, 146
Matsumoto, Y. 307
Mauranen, A. 248, 382
Mautner, G. 84, 455
May, S. 18, 321
Mayberry, R.I. and Squires, B. 366
Maybin, J. xiv, 515–28
Maybin, J. and Tusting, K. 6, 103, 436, 455
Mayer, R.E. 206
Mayr, A. 84, 85
Mazrui, A. 350
meaning: construction in psycholinguistics 480;
negotiation for SLA 174
Mechelli, A. et al. 130
Meddings, L. and Thornbury, S. 195
media discourse 67–77; audiences 76–77;
broadcast interviews, style of 70–72; CA
(Conversation Analysis) 69, 71, 72–74; CDA
(Critical Discourse Analysis) 68, 69, 74–75,
76; corpus linguistics (CL) 69, 75–76; future
of 77; historical overview 67–69; ideology,
importance of 67, 68; intertextuality 76;
language change and sociolinguistics 509;
mediated (pseudo-)relations 67–68; medical
communication and 102; migration and
language and 417–18; multimodality 672;
new media 76–77; newspapers 69–70;
political interviews 71–72; radio chat shows
72; research methods and paradigms in
72–76; social domination, discourse and 68;
spoken media 70–72; studies in, written vs
spoken 69–72; television 70; variation and
context in language 69–70
mediation: in EMC 204–6, 211; in SLA 174;
sociocultural and cultural-historical theories
of language development 489–90
medical communication 96–106; adolescents’
communication with doctors 99; alternative
medicine 99–100; CA (Conversation
Analysis) 97; communication, effects on
health outcomes 103–4, 106; complementary
medicine 99–100; consultation phases 96–97;
cultural diversity 100–101; cultural models
102; death and dying, hospital practices in
97; debates in 104–5; discourse analytic
studies 97–98; discourse extension 102;
doctor-patient relationship 106;
dysfunctional consultations 96–97; ethnic
disparities in care quality 101–2; general
practice consultation 97–99; historical
background 96–97; hospital consultations
99–100; inﬂuences of new technology 102;
language use, effects on health outcomes
103–4, 106; linguistic analysis as diagnostic
resource 101; linguistic diversity 100–101;
main current issues 97–102; media
representations 102; medical education 104;
misunderstanding, categories of 98; MUS
(Medically Unexplained Symptoms) 101;
patient-centered approaches 106;
patient-centredness 98–99; patient
participation 98–99; patient’s illness
experience 101; pharmacists’ home visits to
elderly patients 99–100; racial disparities in
care quality 101–2; research methods 102–3;
shared decision-making 98–99; verbal and
nonverbal elements, relationship between 98
Mehan, H. 84, 87, 88
Meier, R. et al. 360
Meinhof, U. 419
Mel’cuk, I.A. 574
Melka, F. 576
Mellinkoff, D. 138
Memmi, A. 392
memory: LTM (Long Term Memory) 474;
nature of knowledge 474–75; WM (Working
Memory) 474
Menard-Warwick, J. 280, 321
Mendoza-Denton, N. 519
Menshikova, A. 626
mental lexicon, words and 572
mental spaces, notion of 619
Mercer, N. 494
Mercer, S.W. and Howie, J.G. 103
Meskill, C. and Ranglova, K. 207
Messick, S. 260, 261, 265
Mesthrie, R. 379
Mesthrie, R. and Bhatt, R.M. 375, 378
meta-analysis 237–38
metadata 599
metafunctions 628–29
methodology in language teaching 185–97;
activities 191, 192; appropriate methodology
193–95; authenticity 188–89; basic options
191; beliefs and practices 191–93; central
issues 192; CLIL (Content and Language
Integrated Learning) 190; cognitive code
learning 187; cognitive learning theory 190;
communicative approach (and functions)
188; communicative learning theory 189–90;
communicative methodology 188–89;
community language learning 187;
Index
709

comprehensible input 187; context variables
186, 188, 189, 191, 193, 194, 196; creative
compromise 189; cyclical adoption of
methods 191; dimensions of method 191–93;
ﬂuency 188–89; functional tradition 188;
Headway Intermediate (Soars, J. and Soars,
L.) 189; historical perspective 186–90;
humanist approaches 187–88;
information-gap 188–89; issues and options
190–93; language, nature of 191, 192;
macrostrategies 194; method 185–86,
190–93; method construct, critique of 191;
methodological blending 190–91; natural
approaches 187–88; parallel methodologies
190; postmethod condition 194; procedures
191, 192; reformers 186; research 195–96;
role plays 188–89; roles of teachers, learners
and instructional materials 191, 192; second
language learning, nature of 191, 192; silent
way 187; simulations 188–89; situational
language teaching 188; structuralists 186–87;
suggestopedia 187; syllabus type 191, 192;
TBLT (Task-Based Language Teaching) 189;
teaching, goals and objectives in 191, 192;
techniques 191, 192; textbook knowledge
194; total physical response 187; whole
language movement 189
metonymy 618–19
Metz, C. 672
Metzger, M. 43
Meumann, E. 492
Meunier, F. and Granger, S. 605
Meurers, W.D. 201
Mezzofanti, Giuseppe Casper 401
Michaels, S. 519
Michigan Corpus of Academic Spoken English
(MICASE) 599
Mignolo, W. 394
migration and language 413–24; applied
linguistic research into, framework for
416–23; diasporic spaces 419–20; education
422–23; enterprise 420–21; health 421–22;
insider perspectives on migration 418–19;
institutional discourse 91; labour migration
and ageing 126–27; language and migration
studies, development of ﬁeld 414; language
ideology 416–17; media discourse and
417–18; migration narratives 418–19; public
policy 416–17; training 422–23;
transnationalism 423; virtual space 423;
work 420–21
Milani, T.M. 17, 415, 417
Milic, L.T. 547
Miller, D. and Slater, D. 210
Miller, George 472
Miller, J. 319
Mills, S. 334, 338, 546
Milroy, J. 661
Milroy, J. and Milroy, L. 15, 509
Milroy, L. 332, 505
mind: brain and 561–62, 568; sociogenesis of
mind 488–89
Minimal Trees Model 648
Minimalist Program in generative grammar
641–42, 649
minorities: bilingual education and 234–35;
groups, translating and interpreting 45;
minority-majority relations, ethnicity and
352–55
miscommunication in forensic linguistics
147–48
Mishler, E. 85, 88
Mislevy, R.J. et al. 261
misrepresentation in CDA 447
Missing Surface Inﬂection Hypothesis 648
misunderstanding, categories of 98
Mitchell, T. 395, 433
Mitchell, W.J. 309
Mitchell-Schuitevoerder, R. and Mourão, S. 221
MMOG (Massively Multiplayer Online
Games) 209
MMSE (Mini Mental State Examination) 129
modality: modal expressions, acquisition of
290–91; sign languages 360
Modern Language Journal: classroom
discourse 278; language teacher education
(LTE) 215
modes: description of 673–75; of discourse in
forensic linguistics 147; and media,
distinction between 674–75; mode concerns
in SFL 631; multimodal analysis 674
modularity: generative grammar 640; Second
Language Acquisition (SLA) 175
Moerman, M. 307
Moffatt, L. and Norton, B. 320
Moll, L. 494
Moll, L. et al. 519
Monaco, A.P. 114
monism 541
monitor corpora 598
monolingual habitus 230
monolingualism: classical concept of 230;
effect of ideology of 19–20; linguistic
imperialism and 392; nation state and
229–32, 233
Monroe, Marilyn 675
Montgomery, M. 76
Montrul, S.A. 180
Moon, J.A. and Boullón, R. 220
Moon, R. 604
Moore, E. 507
Morgan, B. 318
Morgan, B. and Ramanathan, V. 325
Morgan, G. 366
Index
710

Morgan, G. et al. 366
Morley, J. 589, 590
morphology: grammar 558; sign languages
360–61
Morris, R. et al. 101
Morton, T. et al. 217, 219
Moskowitz, G. 187, 275
Mossop, B. 44
Mossop, J. 376
Moyes, S. 452
Mudraya, O. 250
MUDs (Multi-User Domains) in linguistic
ethnography 523
Mufwene, S. 381
Muir, F. 104
Mukarˇovsk, J. 544
Müller, N. 115
multi-layering in generative grammar 640
multiculturalism, challenge of 18–19
multidisciplinarity: CDA (Critical Discourse
Analysis) 448–51; clinical linguistics 120–21;
psycholinguistics 473
multilingual identities 406–7
multilingual literacies 529, 535
multilingual practices: institutional discourse
90; multilingualism 406–7
multilingualism 401–10; acquisition of
additional languages 407–8, 409; additive
and subtractive multilingualism, distinction
between 403; age and 405–6; ageing,
language and 129; bilingual education 232,
239–40; bilingualism and 402;
communicative competence 403; dimensions
of 402–3; education and 403–4, 406; elusive
nature of deﬁnition of 402–3; interactions
within 402–3; language planning, education
and 406; language processing in
multilinguals 405; linguistic imperialism 394;
linguistic landscape 408, 409; multilingual
identities 406–7; multilingual practices
406–7; multimodality 408–9; multiple
languages 402; neuroimaging techniques
406; neurolinguistics 468; outcomes of
bilingualism and 404–5; perspectives on
401–4; productive and receptive abilities,
distinction between 403; psycholinguistics
and 403; receptive multilingualism 403;
research areas 404–7; SLA (second language
acquisition) 402; social dimension of 402;
sociolinguistics and 403–4, 501; subtractive
multilingualism 403; trends in study of
407–8; variations in use of term 401–2
multimedia: environments 209; language
courses 206
multimodality 668–80; applied linguistics and
669; bi-annual conference on 669; body
motion 669; the Centre 677; children’s
conversations 670; classroom interaction
670–71; communicative processes,
integrative use of 668; conjunction,
linguistics of 676–77; conversation analysis
669; discourse analysis 437–38; discourse
analysis (critical) and 671–72; educational
applications 669–71; everyday interaction
and 672–73; ﬁlm, cinema and 668, 673, 675;
future developments 678–80; Global Media
Discourses (Machin, D. and Van Leeuwen,
T.) 671; identity categories, expression of
671; learning resources, textbooks and 670;
linguistic schools and 668–69; Literacy in the
New Media Age (Kress, G.) 670;
logico-semantic relationships 676; media
discourse 672; modes, description of 673–75;
modes and media, distinction between
674–75; multilingualism 408–9; multimodal
analysis 674; neurolinguistics and
multimodal communication 467; New
London Group 669; non-linguistic modes
673; Paris School 669; perception,
multimodal nature of 668; polarization
676–77; Prague School 668–69; racist
discourse 672; Reading Images (Kress, G.
and Van Leeuwen, T.) 674; research in
linguistic ethnography 523–24; rhythm
677–78, 679; self-reﬂexivity 679; SFL
(Systemic Functional Linguistics) and
634–35; social actors 671; social distance
673–74; study ﬁeld, emergence of 668–69;
technology, engagement with 679–80;
television 668; text-image relations 675–76;
text-image relations, semantics of 676; visual
communications 673, 675; voice as ‘medium’
675; word and image 675–77; writing 668;
Before Writing (Kress, G.) 669–70
multiword units in corpus linguistics 604–5
Mumby, D. and Clair, R. 81
Mumby, D.K. and Stohl, C. 32
Munby, J. 27, 37, 245–46
Muñoz, C. 176, 405
Murata, K. 455
Murray, J.A.H. et al 54
Murray’s Oxford English Dictionary (OED) 54, 61
Murre, J. and Goebel, R. 464
MUS (Medically Unexplained Symptoms) 101
Muskett, T. et al. 118
Musolff, A. 618
Mutonyi, H. and Norton, B. 326
Myers, G. 2, 438
MySpace 202
The Myth of Mars and Venus (Cameron, D.) 338
myths about literacy 530–31
Naik, M.K. and Narayan, S.A. 382
narrative theory 46
Index
711

Nassaji, H. and Wells, G. 279, 282
nation-states: language and, bonds between
230–32; language policy and planning (LPP)
and 12–13; national agendas, business
communications and 33
native speakers: intervention by 351–52;
language learning and education 160; native
speakerism 391; syntax of 651
nativism: nativist theory of language acquisition
472, 480–81; nativist view of SLF (Systemic
Functional Linguistics) 627; SLA (Second
Language Acquisition) and 175
Nattinger, J.R. and DeCarrico, J.S. 574
needs analysis: business communication 27–28;
English for Academic Purposes (EAP) 245;
rights analysis and 246–47
negative feedback on SLA 174
negative stereotypes in linguistic ethnography
520
Negueruela, E. 494, 495
neighbourhood language, identity and 324
Nelson, C. 319, 320
Nelson, G. et al. 384
Nelson, M. 27
neoclassical approach to language policy and
planning 14–15
Nerlich, B. 618
Nesi, H. and Basturkmen, H. 250
network structure 661
networks: artiﬁcial neural network (ANN)
modelling 464–65, 469; Longman Corpus
Network 598; network structure 661; system
networks 629–31
Neuner, G. 308
neuroimaging: ageing, language and 132–33,
134; techniques, multilingualism and 406
neurolinguistics 460–70; aphasic syndromes
461, 462, 463, 465, 466, 467, 469; artiﬁcial
neural network (ANN) modelling 464–65,
469; BDAE (Boston Diagnostic Aphasia
Examination) 465; brain activity,
measurement and visualization of 464; brain
damage and language disorders 462–63;
classical frameworks in 462; clinical
methods and technologies 465; deﬁnition of
460; Disconnection Syndromes in Animals
and Man (Geschwind, N.) 461; dynamic
development in 470; embodiment trend in
469–70; evolution of language and brain
463–64; evolutionary trend in 469–70;
grammar 466; historical overview 460–62;
language and 465–68; language functions
and loss, simulation of 464–65; lexical
semantics 466–67; linguistic behaviour,
methods for study of 465; localisation of
language function 463; methods and
technology in research 464–65;
multilingualism 468; multimodal
communication 467; PALPA
(Psycholinguistic Assessment of Language
Processing in Aphasia) 465; phonology
465–66; pragmatics 467; reading 467–68;
research areas in 462–64; scope of,
developments in 469–70; semantics 467;
Studies in Neurolinguistics (Whitaker, H. et
al., eds.) 460; technology in research 464–65;
trends and developments 468–69, 470;
writing 467–68
Nevile, M. 436
New Literacy Studies 521, 531–32
New London Group 669
New Method English Dictionary (West, M.P.
and Endicott, J.G.) 54
Newbury, P. and Johnson, A. 145
Newell, A. 657
Newman, M. and Hanauer, D. 228
Newman, M.E.J. et al. 661
Newmeyer, F.J. 645
Newport, E.L. and Meier, R.P. 366
newspapers 69–70
Ngo-Metzger, Q. et al. 100
Ngugi wa Thiong’o 349
Nichols, J. 361
Nickerson, C. 27, 33
Nida, E.A. 40
Nida, E.A. and Taber, C. 40
Niedzielski, N. 511
Niemeier, S. and Reif, M. 621
Nikander, P. 131
Niranjana, T. 45, 46
Nixon, R. 668
NLP (Natural Language Processing) 64, 604
NNS (Non-Native Speakers) 277
nominalisation 448
non-biuniqueness 588
non-instructional applications of technology
206, 211
non-linguistic modes, multimodality and 673
non-linguistic perspective on translation and
interpretation 41
nonlinearity in language 661
Nord, C. 41
Norris, J.M. and Ortega, L. 180, 566
Norris, S. 438, 672
Norris, S. and Jones, R. 669
Norton, B. xiv, 4, 5, 158, 280, 281, 289, 297,
318–30, 331, 335, 338, 355, 407, 516
Norton, B. and Pavlenko, A. 320, 336
Norton, B. and Toohey, K. 179, 318, 321
Norton Peirce, B. 179, 322
Nottingham Health Communication Corpus
602
novice teachers 222
Null Subject Parameters 645
Index
712

Numeration 641–42
Numrich, C. 221
Nunan, D. 185, 221
Nusbaum, H. and Goodman, J. 588
Nwogu, K.N. 247
Oakey, D. 605
object permanence 481
Obler, L.K. and Gjerlow, K. 640
O’Brien, M.G. and Levy, R.M. 209
Ochs, E. 287, 288, 290, 291, 307, 336, 338, 438,
669
Ochs, E. and Schieffelin, B.B. 202, 287, 290,
516
Oda, M. 390
O’Dowd, R. 208
O’Dowd, R. and Ritter, M. 207
OECD (Organization for Economic
Cooperation and Development) 223
O’Halloran, K.A. xiv–xv, 5, 68, 69, 74, 76, 77,
79, 439, 440, 445–59, 635, 669
Ohta, A.S. 288, 490
O’Keeffe, A. xv, 67–80, 600
O’Keeffe, A. et al. 605
Olohan, M. 41, 42
Olohan, M. and Baker, M. 41
O’Loughlin, K. 267
Olshtain, E. 578
Ong, L.M.L. et al. 97
Ong, W. 530, 532
Ong’Ondo, C.O. and Borg, S. 221
online discourse 204
online intercultural encounters 206–10
online research 523; see also Internet
ontogenesis of individuals 489
oral interjection 175
orality and literacy 530, 537
The Order of Discourse (Foucault, M.) 82
O’Riordan, M. et al. 103
Ortega, L. xv, 4, 171–84, 277, 298, 402
Ostermann, A. 145
O’Sullivan, B, xv, 4, 164, 259–73
O’Sullivan, B. and de Jong, J. 265, 266
O’Sullivan, B. et al. 267
O’Toole, M. 634, 674, 675
out-of-school and in-school literacies 533
Output Hypothesis 278–79
oversimpliﬁcation in lexicography 57–58
Oxford, R. 170
Oxford Advanced Learners’ Dictionary
(Hornby, A.S.) 56
Oxford English Corpus 598
Ozolins, U. 417
Ozturk, I. 249
Pachler, N. et al. 201
Packer, G. 43, 44
Pahl, K. 519
paired bilingual models 237–38
paired format language testing 267–68
Palmer, A. 548
Palmer, H.E. 54, 56, 186
Palmer, H.E. and Hornby, A.S. 54
Palmer, J. 46
PALPA (Psycholinguistic Assessment of
Language Processing in Aphasia) 465
Paltridge, B. 250, 432
Panther, K.-U. and Radden, G. 618
Panther, K.-U. and Thornburg, L. 618
Paradis, M. 406
Parakrama, A. 397
paralanguage 437–38
parallel corpora 598
Paris School 669
patient-centredness 98–99, 106
Paul, P.V. and Quigley, S.P. 367
Pavlenko, A. 320, 408, 580
Pavlenko, A. and Blackledge, A. 308, 407
Pavlenko, A. and Dewaele, J.M. 408
Pavlenko, A. and Lantolf, J.P. 175, 179, 308
Pavlenko, A. and Norton, B. 323
Pawley, A. and Syder, F.H. 574, 575, 657
Paxman, Jeremy 71, 76
Peal, E. and Lambert, W.E. 404
Pearson, L. et al. 217
pedagogy: pedagogic models in grammar 565;
in SCT and CHAT 495–96
PEG (Project Essay Grader) 268
Peirce, C.S. 491Pelissier, M. 364
Pellerin, M. 220
Pennington, M.C. 589
Pennington, M.C. and Richards, J.C. 222
Pennsylvania Project 274–75
Pennycook, A. 15, 17, 191, 194, 196, 247, 309,
325, 349, 356, 380, 383, 395, 397
Pennycook, A. and Fairclough, N. 308
perception: multimodal nature of 668;
perceptual dialectological studies 508;
psychological analyses of 657
Perdue, C. 415
Pérez-González, L. xv, 3, 39–52
Perfetti, C. 479
Perkell, J. and Klatt, D. 588
Perkins, M. xv, 3, 111–23
Perkins, M.R. and Howard, S.J. 101, 113, 560,
561
Perkins, M.R. and Varley, R. 116
Perkins, M.R. et al. 118
perpetual dynamics 660–61
perspectives on: language as complex adaptive
system, emergence of 655–59;
multilingualism 401–4
pervasiveness of translating and interpreting
39–40, 49
Index
713

Peters, S. xv, 3, 96–110
Peters, S. et al. 101
Petric´, B. xv, 4, 243–58
phatic communion 574
Philbrick, F. 139, 145
Philips, S.U. 17, 516, 519
Phillips, C.E. et al. 117
Phillipson, R. 165, 349, 383, 388, 390, 392,
393, 394
Phillipson, R. and Skutnabb-Kangas, T. 18
phonemes 587; phoneme-allophone model 588
phonetics and phonology 114–16, 584–93;
applied linguistics and 589–90, 593;
behaviourism and 588; coarticulation 588;
complex nature of 584; Critical Age
Hypothesis 588, 589; generative grammar
and 588; generative theory 591; Indo-
European languages, sound systems of 587;
interpretive history 587–89; LADs
(Language Acquisition Devices) 588;
languages, practical description of 587–88;
literacy bias 590–91; nature of speech
586–87; non-biuniqueness 588;
phoneme-allophone model 588; phonemes
587; post-generative developments 589; real
literacy bias 591, 592; speech, foundational
observations about 585; speech,
fundamental misconception about 585–86;
speech, suprasegmental structure of 591;
speech as complex system 592–93;
theoretical linguistics 593; UG (Universal
Grammar) 588
phonology: clinical linguistics 114–16;
neurolinguistics 465–66; psycholinguistics
475; sign languages 360–61
phrase structure grammar 558
phrase translations 661
phraseology: corpus linguistics 603–5, 607;
phraseological analyses 656–57
Piaget, Jean 173, 174, 481
Piatelli-Palmerini, M. 481
Pica, T. 165, 289
Pica, T. et al. 289
Pierrehumbert, J. et al. 589
Pike, K.L. 587, 592
Pilkington, A. 548
Piller, I. 408, 417
Piller, I. and Lorente, B. 423
Pinker, S. 117, 305, 463, 563
Pinto dos Santos, V.B.M. 27
Pittaway, D. 322
Pittenger, R.E. er al. 669
Planken, B. 27, 33
Plath, Sylvia 546
Plato 460, 560, 571, 639
Plough, I. and Gass, S. 278
Podesva, R.J. 506
Poehner, M.E. 265, 494
polarization in multimodality 676–77
policing 142–45
political interviews 71–72
political pressures, context and 165
politics of representation 87
Pollitt, K. 368
polysemy 573
Poole, D. 288
Popova, Y. 548
Port, R. 591
Port, R.F. and Van Gelder, T. 659
positive discourse analysis 451
Posner, M.I. and Keele, S.W. 658
post-structuralism: poststructural thought 311;
theories of language 319
postcolonial language planning, ethnicity and 349
Poster, M. 309
postmethod condition 194
postmodernism: gender and 335–36;
institutional discourse and 89
Potowski, K. 319, 322, 323
Powell, T.W. and Ball, M.J. 120
power: and abstract forms of institutional
discourse 87; and asymmetry in institutional
discourse 84–85; imbalance in translating
and interpreting 43; linguistic imperialism
and issues of 397–98; power relations and
bilingual education 234; power structures
and translating and interpreting 44–45
Prabhu, N.S. 159, 163, 189, 193
practical lexicography 53
The Practical Study of Languages (Sweet, H.) 259
practice: debates and future for language and
culture 313–14; in LPP, concept of 20–21
practicum in LTE settings 220–21
pragmatic impairment, neurological bases for
117–19
pragmatics: clinical linguistics 117–19;
discourse analysis 434–35; grammar and
567; language and culture 307;
neurolinguistics 467
Prague School of Linguistics: multimodality
and 668–69; SFL (Systemic Functional
Linguistics) and 625–26; stylistics and 544
Prator, C.H. 391
Pratt, M.-L. 414, 420
Prawat, R. 490, 495
prescriptive rules in grammar 563
Preston, D.R. 508
Prévost, P. and White, L. 649
Prince, P. 578
Principles and Parameters framework 641, 645,
646, 649
Prinsloo, M. 326
Prinsloo, M. and Baynham, M. 325
Prior, P.A. 252, 495
Index
714

private speech 174
Probyn, M.J. 396
Procter, P. 55, 63
Prodromou, L. 605
professionalism: discursive activities and
professional practices, relationship between
35; professional settings for institutional
discourse 83–84; professionalisation of
language testing 262, 270
prominance 614–15
prototype semantics 612
prototype theory of categorization 612, 615–16
psycholinguistics 472–84; acquisition of
language 480–83; alternative theories of
language acquisition 481; behaviourism and
472; child directed speech 483; child
language development 482–83; complexity,
derivational theory of 473; dissemination of
ﬁndings, failures in 484; diverse nature of
ﬁeld 472–73, 474; event related potentials
483; as ﬁeld of study 472–73; fragmented
nature of ﬁeld 484; grammar 476; growth of
ﬁeld 484; knowledge, nature of 474–75;
language storage and retrieval 474–76; lexis
475–76; listening 478–79; LTM (Long Term
Memory) 474; meaning construction 480;
memory and nature of knowledge 474–75;
multidisciplinarity 473; multilingualism and
403; nativist theory of language acquisition
472, 480–81; object permanence 481;
phonology 475; psycholinguistic theories of
language 657; psychological reality 473;
reading 479–80; research assumptions 473;
simulations of language acquisition 481;
speaking 477–78, 483; use of language
476–80; WM (Working Memory) 474;
writing 478
public life: language and culture 312; LPP and
need for engagement with 21; migration,
language and public policy 416–17
Pujolar, J. 179
Pulvermüller, F. 467
Purpura, J. 267
QCDA (Qualiﬁcations and Curriculum
Development Agency) 265
qualitative perspective on SLA 179
qualitative research 223
quantitative research 223
quantitative sociolinguistics 505
Quay, S. 407
question form in forensic linguistics 144–45
questions concerning SLA 171
Quirk, R. 351, 391
Quirk, R. et al. 56, 565
Quirk-Kachru debate 351
Quirk Report (1972) 112
Rabin, C. 40
racial disparities in care quality 101–2
racist discourse, multimodality and 672
Radden, G. and Dirven, R. 621
Radford, A. 646
radio chat shows 72
Rafael, V.L. 46
Raley, R. 47, 48
Rama Martínez, M.E. 72
Ramachandran, V.S. 549
Ramanathan, V. 321
Ramanathan, V. and Morgan, B. 325
Rampton, B. et al. 88, 356, 436, 517
Rampton, M.B.H. 89, 289, 312, 321, 351, 355,
391, 516, 517, 519, 523
Ramsden, P. 592
Ramsey, C. 367
Rand, D. and Sankoff, D. 511
Rappa, A.L. and Wee, L. 17
Rassool, N. 325
Rastle, K. 475
rational analyses 658
rational model, LPP and 12
Ratner, C. 488
Rayner, K. and Pollatsek, A. 479
Rayson, P. 601
reading: neurolinguistics 467–68;
psycholinguistics 479–80
Reading Images (Kress, G. and Van Leeuwen,
T.) 674
real literacy bias 591, 592
real-world problems 311
realist epistemology 521–22
receptive multilingualism 403
receptive-productive distinction in lexis 576
recording signs 364
recording technologies, inﬂuences of 142–44
referential questions 277–78
reﬂective practice 220
register: analysis in EAP 244; in EMC 204, 205
regulation 489–90
Rehbein, J. 307
Reibel, D.A., and Schane, S.A. 643
Rein, W. 231
Reinsch, N.L.Jr. and Lewis, P.V. 32
Reis-Jorge, J.M. 221
Reisigl, M. and Wodak, R. 413, 418
Reiss, K. 40
Relaño Pastor, M. 418
Relaño Pastor, M. and de Fina, A. 418, 422
Renouf, A. 606
Renouf, A. et al. 606
reproduction orientation 393
research: areas in multilingualism 404–7; areas
in neurolinguistics 462–64; assumptions in
psycholinguistics 473; future for language
and culture 313; interests in grammar
Index
715

567–68; language teacher education (LTE)
217, 223–24; methodology in language
teaching 195–96; strategy for generative
grammar 643–45; themes in SLA 175–80;
tradition in language socialization 287
research issues: classroom discourse 277–81;
translating and interpreting 42–49
research methods: clinical linguistics 113–14;
medical communication 102–3; and
paradigms in media discourse 72–76
resistance: identity and 324; perspective on
linguistic imperialism 393
Reuter-Lorenz, A. 130
RHD (Right Hemisphere Brain Damage) 117–18
Rhetoric (Aristotle) 571
rhetorical analysis in EAP 244
RHM (Revised Hierarchical Model) 579–11
rhoticity 504
rhythm: multimodality 677–78, 679; World
Englishes 377
Rice, M.L. et al. 113
Ricento, T. 11, 237, 318
Ricento, T and Wiley, J. 319
Richards, I.A. 544
Richards, J. and Rodgers, T. 191
Richards, J. and Schmidt, R. 191, 192
Richards, J.C. 185, 195, 215, 217, 219
Richards, J.C. and Lockhart, C. 163, 216
Richards, J.C. and Nunan, D. 216, 217
Richards, J.C. et al. 72, 382
Richards, K. 280, 281
Richardson, J. 84
Richardson Bruna, K. 535
Rickford, J.R. and McNair-Knox, F. 507
rights analysis in EAP 246–47
Riley, P. 433
Ringbom, H. 405
Rings, G. and Ife, A. 417
Risager, K. 307
Rivandeneyra, R.M.A. et al. 100
Rivers, W. 187
Rizza, C. 438
Rizzolatti, G. et al. 463
Roach, P. 589
Robbins, D. 495
Roberts, C. xv, 3, 81–95, 100
Roberts, C. and Campbell, S. 90, 91, 421
Roberts, C. and Sarangi, S. 15, 21, 84, 90, 103,
104, 105
Roberts, C. et al. 98, 102, 104, 422, 520, 524
Roberts, I. 645
Roberts, P. 654
Robinson, P. and Ellis, N.C. 621
Robinson, P. et al. 251
Roche, J. 307
Rock, F. xvi, 3, 85, 138–52, 560
Rogers, Carl 187
Rogers, P.S. 27, 32, 33
Rogers, T.T. and McClelland, J.L. 658
Rogoff, B. and Wertsch, J.V. 494
role-play: focused role-play tasks 209–10;
methodology in language teaching 188–89
Römer, U. 250
Rommeveit, R. 281
Rosch, E. 476, 611, 612
Rosch, E. and Mervis, C.B. 612, 657, 658
Rosch, E. et al. 612, 658
Rose, P. 589
Rosenshine, B. 275
Ross, J.R. 646
Rossell, C.H. and Kuder, J. 237, 238, 239
Roter, D. and Larson, S. 102
Rott, S. 577
Roy, C. 43
Royer, J.M. 578
Rubin, J. and Jernudd, B.H. 12
Ruiz, E.M. 217
rule-based representation 175
rule-governed discrete combinatory system,
language as 157
Rumelhart, D.E. and McClelland, J.L. 481
Rundell, M. 55, 59, 60, 62, 64
Ruohotie-Lyhty, M. and Kaikkonen, P. 222
Russell, Bertrand 561
Russian formalism 544
Ruusuvuori, J. 98, 105
Ryan, E. et al. 131
Sacks, H. et al. 72, 74, 157, 306, 435
Sacks, Harvey 88
Saeed, J. et al. 362
Said, E.W. 280
Sailaja, P. 379
Saint, Eva Marie 678
Salager-Meyer, F. et al. 248
Salama-Carr, M. 46
Saldanha, G. 41, 42
salience: cognitive linguistics 614–15; of gender
337–39
Salmon, P. et al. 101, 103
Salter, C. et al. 99
Samraj, B. 247, 248
Sánchez, P. 535
Sanderson, T. 248
Sandwall, K. 422
Sapir, E. and Whorf, B. 561
Sapir, Edward 305, 515, 587
Sapir-Whorf hypothesis 305
Sarangi, S. and Baynham, M. 319
Sarangi, S. and Coulthard, M. 311
Sarangi, S. and Roberts, C. 83, 307, 421
Sarangi, S. and Slembrouck, S. 83, 84, 89, 415,
421
Saro-Wiwa, Ken 382
Index
716

Sassen, S. 413, 423
satellite-frames 617
Saussure, F. de 157, 305–6, 319, 434, 438, 571,
587, 619, 654, 656, 659, 662
Saussure’s analysis of linguistic signs 662–63
Saville, N. and Hargreaves, P. 261
Saville-Troike, M. 402
Sawchuk P. et al. 495
Scarborough, H.S. et al. 585
Schaie, K.W. 124
Schank, R.C. and Abelson, R.P. 435, 657
Schecter, S.E. and Bayley, R. 288
Schegloff, E.A. 74, 118, 306, 340
Schegloff, E.A. et al. 72
schema theory 435
Schembri, A. 362
Schembri, A. et al. 369
Schermer, G. 367
Schick, B. 366
Schieffelin, B. 288
Schieffelin, B. and Ochs, E. 287
Schieffelin, B. et al. 417
Schiffrin, R.M. and Schneider, W. 474
Schleef, E. 248
Schmaling, C. 368
Schmenk, B. 307
Schmid, H.-J. xvi, 611–24
Schmid, H.-J. and Ungerer, F. 7, 586
Schmid, M. 127
Schmidt, J. 201
Schmidt, R. 178
Schmied, J. 377
Schmitt, D. and Schmitt, N. 250
Schmitt, N. xvi, 167, 571–83, 605
Schneider, B.A. and Pichora-Fuller, M.K. 133
Schneider, E.W. 381
Schneider, E.W. et al. 375
Schoenemann, P.T. 662
Schön, D.A. 17, 163, 220
School of Applied Linguistics, University of
Edinburgh 305
Schrauf, R. 126
Schreier, D. 377
Schubert, Friedrich Wilhelm 230
Schultz, K. 533
Schultz, K. and Hull, G. 533
Schultz, R.A. 161, 215, 223
Schulz, M.R. 334
Schumann, J.H. 161, 289, 322, 415
De Schutter, H. 17, 18
Schwabe, M. et al. 101
Schwartz, B. and Sprouse, R. 648
Schwerdtfeger, C. 307
scientiﬁc objectivity 15
Scollon, R. 438, 672
Scollon, R. and Scollon, S. 306, 307, 308, 669, 672
Scollon, R. and Wong-Scollon, S. 438
Scott, M. 75, 601
Scribner, S. and Cole, M. 489, 521, 531
Scripture, E.W. 112
SCT (Sociocultural Theory) of language
487–88, 495, 496, 658
Seale, C. et al. 103
Sealey, A. and Carter, B. 344, 522
Searle, J.R. 434
Second Life: language and culture 309;
technology and language learning 202, 209
Seedhouse, P. 276, 435, 436
Seidel, T. and Shavelson, R.J. 234
Seidlhofer, B. 166, 382, 396, 605
self: self-reﬂexivity 679; sense of 175
Seliger, H.W. 278
Selim, S. 49
Selinker, L. 172, 187
semantic prosody: corpus linguistics 603;
stylistics 547
semantics: clinical linguistics and 116–17;
neurolinguistics and 467; properties of words
572–73; prototype semantics 612; semantic
ﬁelds 573; syntactic and semantic
equivalence, lack of between languages 43;
text-image relations, semantics of 676; see
also LSA (Latent Semantic Analysis)
Semino, E. xvi, 6, 435, 440, 541–53
Semino, E. and Culpeper, J. 545, 548
Semino, E. and Short, M. 543, 545
semiotics 437–38
sentences, production and interpretation of 650
sex and gender, contestation of terms 332, 341
sexism 450
sexual orientation 320
sexuality and gender 336–37
SFL and CDA: Studies in Social Change
(Young, L. and Harrison, C.) 634
SFL (Systemic Functional Linguistics) 625–36;
applications of 633–35; appreciation 629;
CDA (Critical Discourse Analysis) and 447,
448, 450, 452–53, 455, 456–57; culture,
context of 632–33; discourse analysis and
634–35; early SFL and generative grammar
626–27; experiential sub-functions 628;
extensions of 633–35; function, concept of
628; generative grammar 626–27; genres,
context of 632–33; Halliday’s early writing
on 635–36; ideational metafunctions 628;
in-depth view of 627–31, 635–36;
interpersonal realizations 629; Language as
Social Semiotic (Halliday, M.A.K.) 625,
626; logical sub-systems 628; metafunctions
628–29; multimodality and 634–35; nativist
view 627; Prague School of Linguistics
625–26; roots of 625–26; SFL and CDA:
Studies in Social Change (Young, L. and
Harrison, C.) 634; situation and register,
Index
717

contexts of 631–32; situational variables 632;
stylistics and 545–46; system networks
629–31; systemicist view 627; textual
metafunctions 628
Sha, G. 201
Shakespeare, William 546, 547, 548
Shanks, D.R. 657
shared decision-making 98–99
Sharp, C. 221
Shaw, A. and Ahmed, M. 105
Shaw, S. and Greenhalgh, T. 102
Shelby, A.N. 32
Shin, S.J. 291
Shiri, S. 206
Shklovsky, V. 544
Shockey, L. 586
Shohamy, E. 17, 310, 409
Shohamy, E. and Gorter, D. 419
Short, M. 543, 544, 546, 547
Short, M. et al. 549
Shriberg, L.D. et al. 115
Shulman, L.S. 218
Shuy, R. 139, 141, 148
Sidhwa, B. 382
Sidnell, J. 338
sign languages 359–70; acquisition of 366;
American Sign Language 360; bilingual
context in 362–69; bimodal bilingualism
364; deaf communities, case studies of
‘non-Western’ 362–63; dictionaries 364–66;
education and 366–68; hearing and deaf
communities, encounters between 363;
history 369; interpreters 368–69; learning
sign language as a ﬁrst language 366;
learning sign language as a second language
368; linguistic structure of signed languages
360–62; modality 360; morphology 360–61;
phonology 360–61; recording signs 364;
standardisation 364–66; structures 360;
syntax 360–61; technological change 369;
visually motivated signs 361–62
signal grammar 622
silent way 187
Silverman, D. 88
Silverstein, M. 510, 516, 517, 523
Silverstein, M. and Urban, G. 516, 517
Simmons-Mackie, N. and Damico, J. 119
Simpson, J. 1–7, 208
Simpson, P. 543, 549
Simpson, R. 605
Simpson-Vlach, R. 249, 251
Simpson-Vlach, R. and Ellis, N.C. 600
simulations: of language acquisition in
psycholinguistics 481; methodology in
language teaching 188–89
Sinclair, J. 58, 59, 60, 62, 248, 599, 602, 603,
604, 605, 656, 657
Sinclair, J.M. and Coulthard, R.M. 195, 275,
433, 435, 437
Singapore 350
Singleton, D. 405
Singleton, D. and Ryan, L. 405
situational language teaching 188
situational variables in SFL 632
Skehan, P. 190
Skilton-Sylvester, E. 322
Skinner, B.F. 159, 187
Skuse, D.H. 481
Skutnabb-Kangas, T. 231, 394
Skutnabb-Kangas, T. and McCarthy, T.L. 402,
403
Skutnabb-Kangas, T. and Phillipson, R. 390, 392
Skype 202
SLA (Second Language Acquisition) 171–82;
associationism 175; BFLA (Bilingual First
Language Acquisition) and 171–72;
cognition, contribution of 175, 177–78, 181;
cognitive emphasis 173–74; critical
perspective 179; crosslinguistic inﬂuences
176–77; EAP (English for Academic
Purposes) and 252; early starts, effects of
176, 181; early theories 173; emergentism
174–75; empiricism 175; environment,
contribution of 177–78, 181; FLA (First
Language Acquisition) and 171–72; formal
instruction 181; generalism 175; grammar
566; grammar and language 175; historical
perspective, theories in 172–75, 181; identity
and 318; individual differences research 178;
individual variability 181; instruction, role of
179–80; interlanguage 172–73; language and
culture 305; language learning and
education 161; late starts, effects of 176, 181;
linguistic emphasis 173–74; meaning,
negotiation for 174; mediation 174;
modularity 175; multilingualism and 402;
nativism 175; negative feedback 174;
noticing 174; oral interjection 175; private
speech 174; qualitative perspective 179;
questions concerning 171; research themes
175–80; rule-based representation 175;
second language (L2) learning 575–79;
second language learning, nature of 191,
192; self, sense of 175; social turn, wider
effects 175; socio-dynamic variability
178–79; socioculturalism 174–75, 179;
variability across individuals 178–79,
181–82; ZPD (Zone of Proximal
Development) 174–75
Slabakova, R. 564
Slavin, R. 234, 237
Slavin, R.E. and Cheung, A. 237–39
Slembrouck, S. 432
Slembrouck, S. and Collins, J. 422
Index
718

SLI (Speciﬁc Language Impairment) 111–12,
113, 116–17
Slobin, D. 160, 361, 491, 617, 618, 656
Smart, G. 27
Smith, D. 521
Smith, M. 82, 83
Smith, M.K. and Lewis, M. 221
Smith, N. 643
Smith, N. and Tsimpli, I.M. 640
Smith, N.V. 483
Smith, William Kennedy 145
Snow, C.E. 159
Snowdon, D. 127
Snyder, I. 536
Snyder, I. and Prinsloo, M. 325
Soars, J. and Soars, L. 189
social actors 671
social change and categories of identity 320–21
social constructionism: gender and 335–36;
inﬂuence on linguistic ethnography 516
social-cultural-historical-practice perspective
533–34
social dimension of multilingualism 402
social distance in multimodality 673–74
social domination, discourse and 68
social enterprise, learning as 161–62
social fact, language as 157
social identity: identity in general and 318;
language socialization and 288–89
social information, indexing of 512
social interaction 574
social meaning of variability 510
social mobility, language change and 509
social order 81–82
Social Science Research Centre, Berlin 237
socio-cognitive analysis 449
socio-cultural change 450
socio-cultural order, language and 86–87
socio-dynamic variability 178–79
socio-political boundaries 26
sociocultural and cultural-historical theories of
language development 487–97; applied
research in SCT and CHAT 495–96; biology
490–02; CHAT (Cultural-Historical Activity
Theory) 487–88, 495, 496; cognition 490–92;
consciousness, language and 491; culture
490–92; DWR (Developmental Work
Research) 495–96; dynamic assessment
492–95; internalization 489–90; language
490–92; mediation 489–90; ontogenesis of
individuals 489; pedagogy in SCT and
CHAT 495–96; regulation 489–90;
relationship between 488; SCT
(SocioCultural Theory) 487–88, 495, 496;
sociocultural domain 489; sociocultural
theorization 487, 488–89; sociogenesis of
mind 488–89; usage-based approaches
491–92; ZPD (Zone of Proximal
Development) 492–95
socioculturalism: language learning and
education 162; SLA (Second Language
Acquisition) and 174–75, 179; sociocultural
perspectives in classroom discourse 278–80
sociogenesis of mind 488–89
sociolinguistics 501–12; acoustic analysis 511;
community of practice 505; debates, new
methods and 510–12; education, language
change and 509; ethnography 505–6; forensic
phonetics 501; historical perspective 503–6,
512; institutional discourse 88; inter-speaker
difference, patterns of 503–4; interactional
sociolinguistics 502; issues 508–10; language
change 508–9; language planning 501;
language-related decision-making 501;
language therapy 501; language use,
variation in 502; linguistic variables 503,
507–8; media, language change and 509;
methods 506–8, 510–12; multilingualism and
403–4, 501; perceptual dialectological studies
508; quantitative sociolinguistics 505; rhoticity
504; social information, indexing of 512;
social meaning of variability 510; social
mobility, language change and 509;
sociolinguistic research 501; sociolinguistic
surveys in LPP 13; sociophonics 502; speech
data, naturally occurring 501–2; speech
therapy 501; variability, production and
perception of 511–12; variationist
sociolinguistics 502, 503; wave studies 505–6;
wide-ranging nature of 501
Söhn, J. 237–40
Solomon, N. 147
Sommers, M. and Barcroft, J. 578
Sonkowsky, R.P. 571
Sorace, A. 649
Sosa, A.V. and Bybee, J. 115
source domains in cognitive linguistics 614
Spack, R. 246, 252
Spada, N. and Massey, M. 221
speaking 477–78, 483; spoken media 70–72;
studies in media discourse, written vs spoken
69–72; see also speech
Spearman, C. 260
specialised corpora 597–98
speech: as complex system 592–93; data on,
natural occurrence of 501–2; foundational
observations about 585; fundamental
misconception about 585–86; nature of
586–87; speech therapy 501; suprasegmental
structure of 591
Spencer, J. and Dales, J. 104
Spencer, J.P. et al. 659
Spencer, P.E. 366
Spender, D. 331, 334
Index
719

Spivey, M. 659
Spolsky, B. 16, 161, 260
Sprachlehr-und lernforschung 307
Stahuljak, Z. 46
Standard Theory 641
standardisation: and education in grammar
562–64; of sign languages 364–66
Stanet, P. and Christensen, G. 235
Steels, L. 661
Stefanowitsch, A. and Gries, S.Th. 618, 620
Stein, P. 319, 321
Stemmer, B. 118
Stenglin, M. 675
Stern, H.H. 191, 193, 305
Stevick, E. 187
Stewart, James 675
Stewart, M.A. 98
Stewart, M.A. et al. 97, 103, 104, 105
stimulus, poverty of 639–40
Stivers, T. 97, 98
Stivers, T. and Majid, A. 100
Stockwell, P. 548
Stojanovik, V. et al. 117
Stokoe, E. 338, 438
Stokoe, E. and Edwards, D. 144
Stokoe, W.C. 360
Stone, C.A. 494
Storch, N. and Tapper, J. 251
Storey-White, K. 141
Stork, D.G. 668
Strange, W. 589
Stratman, J. and Dahl, P. 147
Street, B. 437, 521, 530, 531, 532, 533, 536
Street, B. and Lefstein, A. 531
Stroud, C. 18
Stroud, C. and Wee, L. 19
structuralism: methodology in language teaching
186–87; post-structuralist and structuralist
views on language 313; structuralist theories
of language 319
Structure Dependency, Principle of 645
Stuart-Smith, J. 509, 510
Stubbs, M. 69, 433, 439, 440, 451, 455, 543,
600, 603
Studies in Neurolinguistics (Whitaker, H. et al.,
eds.) 460
stylistics 541–51; challenges 547–50; cognitive
linguistics and 547; cognitive stylistics
548–49; computer-aided stylistics 547–48;
Contemporary Stylistics (Lambrou, M. and
Stockwell, P.) 548; corpus-based stylistics
547–48; corpus linguistics and 543;
distinctiveness, determination of 542;
dualism 541; ﬁctional interactions 546–47;
general stylistics 542–44; generative
grammar and 545; history 542–47;
Investigating English Style (Crystal, D. and
Davy, D.) 542–43; Language and Literature
549; language corpora and 543–44; linguistic
analysis 544–45; Linguistic Stylistics
(Enkvist, N.E.) 542–43; literary language,
status of 550; literary stylistics 542, 544–47;
literary stylistics, rise and development of
545; manual quantiﬁcation 547; monism
541; practical criticism, inﬂuence of 544;
Prague Linguistic Circle, inﬂuence of 544;
Russian formalism, inﬂuence of 544;
semantic prosody 547; style and 541–42;
systemic-functional approach to language
and 545–46; transitivity patterns 546
sub-disciplinary framing 31
sub-disciplinary variation 28–30
Sub-Saharan Africa 349–50
sub-specialisms in clinical linguistics 111
Subjacency Condition 645
subtractive bilingualism 235; notion of 231
subtractive multilingualism 403
Suchan, J. and Charles, M. 32
Suchman, L. 89
Sudnow, D. 96, 97, 102
suggestopedia 187
Summers, D. 64
Sunderland, J. 320, 332, 339
Sunderman, G. xvi, 571–83
Sunderman, G. and Kroll, J.F. 580
Supalla, T. 362
supraterritorial audiences 46
Survey of India (Grierson, G.A.) 20
Sutton-Spence, R. xvi, 359–72
Swain, M. 278, 279, 494
Swain, M. and Lapkin, S. 495
Swain, M. et al. 494, 495
Swales, J. 24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 69, 157, 244, 245,
247, 249, 260, 439
Swales, J. et al. 249
Swales, J.M. and Feak, C.B. 250
Swan, M. xvi, 7, 557–70
Swan, M. and Walter, C. 189
Swann, J. 339, 438
Sweet, H. 186
Sweetser, E. 548
Swidler, A. 312, 313
Swiss model of bilingual education 233
syllabus type 191, 192
synaptic pruning 130
syntactic complexity 147
syntactic information, representation of 53–54
syntax: grammar 558; sign languages 360–61
system networks 629–31
systemic grammar 558
A Table Alphabetical (Cawdrey, R.) 53
Tagliamonte, S. 508
Takeda, K. 46
Index
720

Talamas, A. et al. 580
Talbot, M. 335, 438
TALIS (Teaching and Learning International
Survey) 223
TalkBank 113
Tallal, P. and Piercy, M. 117
Talmy, L. 611, 614, 616, 617, 621, 657
Talmy, S. 291, 324
Tannen, D. 335
target domains in cognitive linguistics 614
Tarone, E. 172, 174
Tarone, E. et al. 180, 239
task demands in business communication
29–30
Tasker, T. xvi, 6, 487–500
Taub, S. 360
Tayao, M.L.G. 376, 377
Taylor, C. 18
Taylor, J.R. 592, 616, 656, 657
TBI (Traumatic Brain Injury) 117–18
TBLT (Task-Based Language Teaching) 189
teachers: communicative practices of 289;
language learning and education 161–63;
teacher cognition 218
teaching: goals and objectives in 191, 192;
language and 164, 167; language learning
and education 161–63; materials, EAP and
252; novice teachers 222; roles of teachers,
learners and instructional materials 191,
192; situational language teaching 188;
subject teachers, cooperation with 246;
teacher training, EAP and 252; see also
foreign language teaching; LTE (Language
Teacher Education); methodology in
language teaching
technology: advances in translating and
interpreting 48; change in sign languages
and 369; engagement with, multimodality
and 679–80; identity 325–26; impact on
corpus linguistics 606–7; inﬂuence of new
technology on ageing, language and 132–33;
inﬂuence of World Englishes 383–84;
inﬂuences of new technology in medical
communication 102; innovation in
institutional discourse 89, 91; institutional
discourse, technical jargon 87; language
learning and education 166–67; language
testing 268–70; language testing, technical
aspects 266–67; in neurolinguistics research
464–65; role in language and culture 312–13;
technical vocabulary 575
technology and language learning 200–212;
blended learning 206; blogs 203, 205–6; chat
203, 205; communicative motivation 203;
community participation 208–10, 211;
computer-mediated games 209; Cultura
Project 202, 207; cultural interactions 201,
203, 204, 205, 206, 208, 209, 210, 211;
digital technology 200–201; discussion
forums 208–9; distance learning 206;
electronically mediated communication
(EMC) 202–6, 211; Facebook 202; focused
role-play tasks 209–10; genre in EMC
203–4, 211; instructional applications 206,
211; intercultural competence, development
of 207–8; massively multiplayer online
games (MMOG) 209; mediation in EMC
204–6, 211; ‘medium’ metaphor 201–2;
metaphors of 201–2; multimedia
environments 209; multimedia language
courses 206; MySpace 202; non-instructional
applications 206, 211; online discourse 204;
online intercultural encounters 206–10;
projects 202; register in EMC 204, 205;
Second Life 202, 209; Skype 202; ‘tool’
metaphor 201, 202; ‘tutor’ metaphor 201,
202; virtual reality games 209; wikis 203
Tedick, D. 216, 219
television: media discourse 70; multimodality
668
Tembe, J. and Norton, B. 325
temporal-spatial speciﬁcation 292–98
ten Have, P. 72
Ten Thije, J.D. and Zeevaert, L. 403
TESOL Quarterly 318–19, 320–21, 325
TESOL (Teaching English to Speakers of
Other Languages) 215, 217, 218, 223
test delivery 269
test design 268
test development 268–69
test validation 260–62, 263; see also language
testing
text: context and discourse in discourse
analysis 433–34; and image, relationship
between 450, 675–76; text-task relationships
in business communication 26–27; textual
metafunctions 628
textbooks: and teaching materials, corpora and
250; textbook knowledge 194
theoretical directions in linguistic ethnography
518
theoretical frameworks in generative grammar
641–43
theoretical lexicography 53
theoretical linguistics: applied linguistics,
generative grammar and 645; phonetics,
phonology and 593
theoretical strands in translating and
interpreting 41
theories of language, identity and 319–20
Thinking and Speaking (Vygotsky, L.) 662
Thomas, M. 648
Thompson, P. 249, 251
Thornborrow, J. 72, 85, 144
Index
721

Thornbury, S. xvi, 4, 168, 185–99, 236, 566, 592
Thorndike, E.L. 259
Thorne, J.P. 545
Thorne, S.L. xvi, 6, 209, 487–500
Thorne, S.L. and Lantolf, J.P. 491, 492
Thorne, S.L. and Tasker, T. 175, 190, 278, 279,
592
Thorne, S.L. et al. 495
Thousand-Word English (Palmer, H. and
Hornby, A.S.) 54
threshold hypothesis 235, 236
Tiersma, P. 138, 139, 147
Tiersma, P. and Curtis, M. 147
Tiersma, P. and Solan, L. 141
TLA (Teacher Language Awareness) 219
Todeva, E. and Cenoz, J. 408
TOEFL (Test for English as a Foreign
Language) 260, 264
TOEIC (Test of English for International
Communication) 266
Tognini-Bonelli, E. 600
Tollefson, J.W. 14, 15
Tomasello, M. 160, 464, 489, 491, 492, 620, 657
Tomasello, M. and Lieven, E. 620
Toohey, K. 196, 319
Toolan, M.J. 69, 451, 455, 543, 549
tools: and methods in corpus linguistics 600,
607; for teacher training 275–76
top-down working 438–39
topic prominence 379–80
Torgersen, E. et al. 508
Tottie, G. 74
Towell, R. and Hawkins, R. 646
Towle, A. and Godolphin, W. 98–99
Tracy, K. and Anderson,D. 145
transformational grammar 558, 565
transitional bilingual education 234, 235, 236,
237, 239
transitivity patterns 546
translating and interpreting 39–49;
audiovisuals 48; bilingual courtroom
proceedings 42; corpus linguistics and 41–42;
deaf and hard-of-hearing 45; English as
lingua franca 47; equivalence 40–41;
equivalence of function 40–41; European
Union (EU) 44; fansubbers 48; globalization
and 39, 42, 47–48; globalized information
society and 46–49; Goffman’s ‘participation
framework’ 43; historical overview 40–42;
ideology and power in shaping behaviour 42;
inequality issues, interest in 45; as
institution-building practices 42–44; as
institutionalized practices 42–44;
interventionist activism 48–49; latitude for
interpretation, limits on 42–43, 44; minority
groups and 45; narrative theory 46;
non-linguistic perspective 41; pervasiveness
of 39–40, 49; power imbalance 43; power
structures and 44–45; research issues 42–49;
supraterritorial audiences 46; syntactic and
semantic equivalence, lack of between
languages 43; technological advances 48;
theoretical strands in, expansion of 41;
United Nations (UN) 44; in war zone 45–46
Translations (Brian Friel play) 45
transnationalism: linguistic imperialism and
transnational ﬂows 394–95; literacy and 535;
migration and language 423
Trechter, S. and Bucholtz, M. 516
Trew, T. 448
Trew, T. and Fowler, R. 634
Tribble, C. and Jones, G. 605
trilingual schooling 233
Trinch, S. 145, 415
Trinka, B 626
Trubetzkoy, N. 626
Trudgill, P. 332, 503, 505, 507, 509
Trudgill, P. and Hannah, J. 377, 379
truth, knowledge and 82
Tsimpli, I.-M. and Dimitrakopoulou, M. 649
Tsimpli, I.-M. and Roussou, A. 648, 649
Tsimpli, I.-M. and Sorace, A. 649
Tsui, A.B.M. xvii, 4, 195, 216, 222, 274–86, 436
Tsur, R. 548
Tuckett, D. et al. 99
Tusting, K. xvii, 515–28
Tutu, Desmond 451
Twitter 309
two-way immersion models 236
Tyler, A. 621
Tyler, A. and Evans, V. 615, 621
Tymoczko, M. 41
UCLES (University of Cambridge Local
Examinations Syndicate) 259–60
UG (Universal Grammar) 559, 564; generative
grammar 640, 650; phonetics and phonology
588
Ulijn, J. et al. 32
Ullman, M.T. and Pierpont, E.I. 117
Underhill, A. 589
Underwood, G. et al. 575
Ungerer, F. xvii, 611–24
United Kingdom: assessment literacy and
entry to 265–66; context in linguistic
ethnography 517–18; deferential
interviewing in 70; foreign language teaching
in 166; identity and language teaching 321;
linguistic ethnography in 517–18; medical
education 104; minority-majority relations
352–53; national security and immigration
in 417; NHS (National Health Service) 102;
Quirk Report (1972) 112
United Nations (UN) 44
Index
722

United States: ethnicity and language in 354;
grammar in society 388, 389; language and
culture 305; linguistic imperialism 388, 389;
Michigan University English Language
Institute 245, 305; minority-majority
relations 353–55; SLA (Second Language
Acquisition) 173, 179; Strategic Languages
Initiative 166
universal event-frames 616–18
universalist approaches to literacy 531–32
Unsworth, L. 669
Unz, R. 354
Upshur, J.A. and Turner, C. 268
usage-based approaches: analytical tools in
business communication 33; associative
learning, grammar and 559, 564–65;
sociocultural and cultural-historical theories
of language development 491–92; theories of
language acquisition 656
Uzuner, S. 251
Vachek, J. 625, 626
Vainikka, A. and Young-Scholten, M. 648
Valdés, G. 179, 180
Valdés, G. and Angelelli, C. 421
Valdes, J.M. 318
Vale, D. 268
validity in language testing 260, 261, 263
Valsiner, J. 488, 489
Van der Hoeven, N. xvii, 3, 124–37
Van der Hoeven, N. and de Bot, K. 132
van der Veer, R. 488, 489
Van Deusen-Scholl, N. 210
van Dijk, T. 68, 74, 390, 417, 433, 445, 446,
449, 450
Van Geert, P. 126, 659
van Gompel, R.P.G. and Pickering, M.J. 479
Van Herreweghe, M. and Vermeerbergen, M. 365
Van Heuven, W.J.B. 580
Van Lancker, D. 116
van Leeuwen, T. xvii, 7, 409, 438, 450, 633,
668–82
van Leeuwen, T. and Wodak, R. 418
van Lier, L. 190, 195, 196, 202, 276, 277, 281,
309, 437, 495
Van Moere, A. 267
van Peer, W 549
van Ryn, M. and Burke, J. 100
Vanhecke, E. and De Weerdt, K. 367
Varghese, M. et al. 325
variability and variations: across individuals in
Second Language Acquisition (SLA)
178–79, 181–82; context and, language
policy and planning (LPP) 16–17; context
variables 186, 188, 189, 191, 193, 194, 196;
multilingualism, variations in use of term
401–2; production and perception of,
sociolinguistics 511–12; variation and
context in language 69–70; variationist
sociolinguistics 502, 503; variationist studies
in gender 332–33
Varner, I.I. 33, 34
Varonis, E.M. and Gass, S. 277
Venkatagiri, H.S. and Levis, J. 590
Ventola, E. et al. 669
Venuti, L. 41
verb-frames 617
Vergaro, C. 27, 33
Vermeer, Hans J. 41
Vermeerbergen, M. 362
Verspoor, M. et al. 179, 181
Vertovec, S. 89, 239, 413
Vienna-Oxford International Corpus of
English (VOICE) 599
Vigouroux, C. 424
Vihman, M. 590
virtual literacy ethnography 523
virtual reality games 209
virtual space 423
virtual worlds 309
visual communications 673, 675
visually motivated signs 361–62
Vlugter, P. et al. 201
vocabulary attrition 578
vocabulary control movement 54–55
vocabulary knowledge and testing methods 576
voice as ‘medium’ 675
Vološinov, V.N. 434, 491, 516, 518
von der Emde, S. and Schneider, J. 207
Vuorela, T. 27
Vygotsky, L.S. 162, 174, 190, 279, 281, 483,
488, 489, 490, 492, 493, 495, 496, 658, 662
Wadensjö, C. 43
Wakabayashi, J. 49, Wakabayashi, S. xvii, 7,
175, 177, 638–53
Wakabayashi, S. and Okawara, I. 648
Wakabayashi, S. et al. 650
Wales, K. 541, 542, 549
Walker, S. 438
Wallace, C. 321
Wallace, M.J. 216, 220
Wallace, W.D. 69
Wallerstein, I. 390
Walsh, S. 195
Walter, C. 564
Wang, J. et al. 250
war zone translating 45–46
Warde, A. 19
Ware, P. and Kramsch, C. 308
Ware, P.D. 207
Waring, R. and Takaki, M. 577
Warner, C.N. 204
Warnes, A.M. et al. 126
Index
723

Warren, R. 585
Warriner, D.S. xvii, 6, 325, 423, 529–40
Warschauer, M. 325, 423, 531, 536
Warschauer, M. and Grimes, D. 201
Warschauer, M. and Kern, R. 202, 308
Washabaugh, W. 362
Waters, A. 222
Watson, G. and Zyngier, S. 547
Watson-Gegeo, K.A. and Gegeo, D.W. 288
Watson-Gegeo, K.A. and Nielsen, S. 288
Watt, D. 509
Watt, D. and Milroy, L. 508
Watt, I. xvii, 3, 96–110
Watts, D.J. and Strogatz, S.H. 661
Watts, J.H. 102
wave studies 505–6
Weatherall, A. 337
WebCorp 606
Weber, J.-J. 545, 546, 548
Weber, Max 83, 86
Wedell, E.G. 70
Wee, L. xvii, 11–23, 19, 406, 562
Weedon, C. 311, 319
Weinreich, U. et al. 508, 660
Weir, C.J. 266
Weir, C.J. and O’Sullivan, B. 261, 262
Weir’s socio-cognitive framework 261–62
Weismer, G. et al. 115
Wells, G. 491, 494
Wells, J.C. 585
Weltens, B. and Grendel, M. 578
Weltens, B. et al. 578
Wenger, E. 279, 282, 323, 331, 340
Werker, J.F. and Tees, R.C. 483
Werlich, E. 433
Wernicke, Carl 461, 462
Werth, P. 548
Wertsch, J. et al. 487
Wertsch, J.V. 488
Wesche, M. and Paribakht, T.S. 577
West, C. 84, 85
West, M. 54
West, M.P. and Endicott, J.G. 55
West, R. 245, 246
Westerﬁeld, K. 28
Westley, F. et al. 584
Wetherell, M. 340
Whale, J. 70
Whalen, M.R. and Zimmerman, D.H. 73
Whitaker, H. et al. 460
White, C. 206, 325
White, L. 173, 564
White, P. 68, 70
White, P.R.R. 448
Whitehill, T.L. and Lee, A. 114
whole language movement 189
Whorf, B. 305, 491
Widdowson, H.G. 3, 6, 25. 27, 157, 188, 306, 431,
432, 433, 439, 440, 455, 529, 546, 547, 567, 605
Wierzbicka, A. 307
wikis 203
Wilcox, S. 364
Wiley, T.G. 14, 15
Wilkins, D.A. 158, 188
Wilkinson, R. 114
Williams, A. 356
WIlliams, A. and Kerswill, P. 508
Williams, R. et al. 31
Willis, J. 159, 189, 461
Willis, J. and Willis, D. 189
Winitz, H. 187
Wittgenstein, Ludwig 54, 491, 613
WM (Working Memory) 474
Wodak, R. 89, 308, 445, 446, 449, 450
Wodak, R. and Reisigl, M. 450
Wolfram, W. 501, 503
Woll, B. xviii, 359–72
Woll, B. and Sutton-Spence, R. 5, 565
Wong Fillmore, L. 294
Wood, D. et al. 494
Woodbury,H. 145
Woods, D. 162, 216
Woodward, J. 367
Woolls, D. 140
Word Routes (Cambridge University Press) 64
WordNet 64
words: lexical characteristics of 573–74; lexis and
572; mental lexicon, words and 572; word
and image 675–77; word-based determinants
of learnability 577; word grammar 558;
word lists 600–601; word sketches 59–60
World Englishes 373–84; absence of tense
marking 377–78; count/noncount nouns 378;
dental fricatives 376; development of New
Englishes, stages in 381–82; ELF (English as
a Lingua Franca) 373, 375, 382, 383, 384;
ﬁnal consonant clusters 376–77; invariant
tags 378–79; linguistic features, examples of
375–81; linguistic features, general trends in
380–81; linguistic motivations 374–75;
models of 373–74; recent developments
382–83; rhythm 377; technology, inﬂuence of
383–84; tense marking, absence of 377–78;
topic prominence 379–80
Wortham, S. 291, 516
Wortham, S. and Rymes, B. 517
Wray, A. 476, 604, 605, 657
Wright, E.B. et al. 98, 102
Wright, M.W. 396
Wright, S. 11
Wright, T. and Bolitho, R. 222
writing: multimodality 668; neurolinguistics
467–68; psycholinguistics 478; studies in
media discourse, written vs spoken 69–72
Index
724

Yallop, C. 589
Yang, R. and Alisson, D. 247
Yavas, M. 589
Yi, Y. 534, 536
Young, A. et al. 363
Young, L. xviii, 7, 439, 447, 625–37
Young, L. and Fitzgerald, B. 635
Young, L. and Harrison, C. 448, 634
Young, R.F. 175, 180, 261, 282, 289, 439
Young, R.F. and He, A.W. 289
Young, R.F. and Miller, E.R. 280, 289
Zarate, G. 308
Zeevaert, L. and Ten Thije, J.D. 403
Zeitschrift für interkulturellen
Fremdsprachenunterricht 307–8
Zentella, A. 291, 356
Zhang, Q. 506
Zhang, Z. 27
Zimmerman, D. 85, 145
ZPD (Zone of Proximal Development):
classroom discourse 278–79; language
learning and education 162; Second
Language Acquisition (SLA) and 174–75;
sociocultural and cultural-historical theories
of language development 492–95
Zuengler, J. and Cole, K.M. 288
Zuengler, J. and Miller, E. 318
Zuengler, J. and Mori, J. 282–83
Zwaan, R.A. 549
Zykik, E. 492
Index
725

